//.  ^5:  oS".


Srom  t^e  feifimri?  of
(profe06or  ^amuef  (Qliffer

in  (gftemoti?  of

3ubge  ^amuef  (gttffer  QSrecftinribge

^tesenteb  fi|?

^amuef  (ttliffer  QBrecftinribge  feong

to  f  ^  feifirati?  of

(princefon  C^eofogicaf  ^eminarj


Sc8

V.  1


Digitized  by  tine  Internet  Arciiive

in  2011  witii  funding  from

Princeton  Tiieoiogicai  Seminary  Library


Iittp://www.arcliive.org/details/plutarclislivestr01plu


FLUTAUCH


PLUTARCH'S  LIVES,


TRANSLATED  JROM

THE  ORIGINAL  GREEK;

WITH

NOTES  CRITICAL  AND  HISTORICAL,

AND    A

NEW  LIFE  OF  PLUTARCK

IN  SIX  VOLUMES.


BY  JOHN  LANGHORNE,  D.  D,

AND

WILLIAM  LANGHORNE,  M.  A,


THE    FIRST    AMERICAN,    FROM    THE

EIGHTH   LONDON   EDITION,    IMPROVED    AND    ACCURATEIT

REVISED    THROUGHOUT.


VOL.  I.


PHILADELPHIA  :


PRINTED  AND  PUBLISHED  BY  J.  HOFP,  48   CHERRY  STREET;
ANDW.  r.  M'LAUGHLIN,  34  NORTH  SECOND  STREET.

'isoi*.'


CONTENTS.


VOLUME  I.

Page

,iFE  OF  Plutarch, ^^

i,  49

^HESEUS,

81

llOMULUSi

loMULUS  JND  Theseus  Compared, 120

j.  125

LrCURGUS,

165

N^lJMA,

■VUMA    AND  LrCURGUS  COMPARED, 197

\  204

iOLON,

1-,  ,  ,  240

PuBLICOLAj

\SOLON  AND  PUBLICOLA   COMPARED, 265

270
THEMISfOCLES,

Vamillus, ^

^Pericles, ^^^


PREFACE.


If  the  merit  of  a  Work  maybe  estimated  from
the  universality  of  its  reception,  Plutarch's  Lives
have  a  claim  to  the  first  honours  of  Literature.  No
book  has  been  more  generally  sought  after,  or  read
with  greater  avidity.^  It  was  one  of  the  first  that
were  brought  out  of  the  retreats  of  the  learned,
and  translated  into  the  modern  languages.  Amiot,
Abbe  of  Bellozane,  published  a  French  translation
of  it  in  the  reign  of  Henry  the  Second  ;  and  from
that  work  it  was  translated  into  English,  in  the  time
of  Queen  Elizabeth.

It  is  said  bv  those  who  are  not  willing  to  allow
Shakespear  much  learning,  that  he  availed  himself
of  the  last-mentioned  translation  ;  but  they  seem
to  forget  that,  in  order  to  support  their  arguments
of  this  kind,  it  is  necessary  for  them  to  prove  that
Plato  too  was  translated  into  English  at  the  same
time;  for  the  celebrated  soliloquy,  "To  be,  or  not
"  to  be,"  is  taken,  almost  verbatim,  from  that  philo-
sopher ;  yet  we  have  never  found  that  Plato  was
translated  in  those  times.

Amiot  was  a  man  of  great  industry  and  considera-
ble learning.  He  sought  diligently  in  the  libraries  of
Rome  and  Venice  for  those  Lives  of  Plutarch  which
are  lost;  and  though  his  search  was  unsuccessful,
it  had  this  good  eifect,  that,  by  meeting  with  a  vari-
ety of  manuscripts,  and  comparing  them  with  the
printed  copies,  he  was  enabled  in  many  places  to  rcc-

B


VI  PREFACE.

tify  the  text.  This  was  a  very  essential  circum-
stance ;  for  a  few  ancient  writers  have  suffered
more  than  Plutarch  from  the  carelessness  of  prin-
ters and  transcribers  ;  and,  with  all  his  merit,  it
was  his  fate,  for  a  long  time,  to  find  no  able  restorer.
The  Schoolmen  despised  his  Greek,  because  it  had
not  the  purity  of  Xenophon,  nor  the  Attic  terseness
of  Aristophanes  ;  and,  on  that  account,  very  unrea-
sonably bestowed  their  labours  on  those  that  wanted
them  less.  Amoit's  Translation  was  published  in
the  year  1558  ;  but  no  reputable  edition  of  the
Greek  text  of  Plutarch  appeared  till  that  of  Paris
in  1624.  The  above-mentioned  translation,  how-
ever, though  drawn  from  an  imperfect  text,  passed
through  many  editions,  and  was  still  read,  till
Dacier,  under  better  auspices,  and  in  better  times,
attempted  a  new  one  ;  which  he  executed  with  great
elegance,  and  tolerable  accuracy.  The  text  he  fol-
lowed was  not  so  correct  as  might  have  been  wished;
for  the  London  edition  of  Plutarch  was  not  then
published.  However  the  French  language  being  at
that  time  in  great  perfection,  and  the  fashionable
language  of  almost  every  court  in  Europe,  Dacier's
translation  came  not  only  into  the  libraries,  but
into  the  hands  of  men.  Plutarch  vv^as  universally
read,  and  no  book  in  those  times  had  a  more  exten-
sive sale,  or  went  through  a  greater  number  of  im-
pressions. The  translator  had,  indeed,  acquitted
himself  in  one  respect  v/ith  great  happiness.  His
book  vv'as  not  found  to  be  French  Greek.  He  had
carefully  followed  that  rule,  which  no  translator
ought  ever  to  loose  sight  of,  the  great  rule  of  hu-
mouring the  genius,  and  maintaining  the  structure
oF  his  own  language.  For  this  purpose  he  frequently
broke  the  long  and  embarrassed  periods  of  the  Greek;
and  by  d-ividing  and  shortening  them  in  his  transla-
tion, he  gave  them  greater  perspicuity  and  a  more
easy  movement.  Yet  still  he  v/as  faithful  to  his  ori-
ginal ;  and  where  he  did  not  mistake  him,  which  in-
deed he  seldom  did,  conveyed  his  ideas  with  clear-


PREFACE  Vil

ncss,  thougli  not  without  verbosity.  His  translation
had  another  distinguished  advantage.  He  enriched
it  with  a  variety  of  explanatory  notes.  There  are  so
many  readers  who  have  no  competent  acquaintance
with  the  customs  of  antiquity,  the  laws  of  the  an-
cient states,  the  ceremonies  of  their  religion,  and  the
remoter  and  minuter  parts  of  their  history  and  ge-
nealogy, that  to  have  an  account  of  these  matters
ever  before  the  eye,  and  to  travel  with  a  guide  who
is  ready  to  describe  to  us  every  object  we  are  unac-
quainted with,  is  a  privilege  equally  convenient  and
agreeable.  But  here  the  annotator  ought  to  have
stopped.  Satisfied  with  removing  the  difficulties
usually  arising  in  the  circumstances  above-mention-
ed, he  should  not  have  swelledhis  pages  with  idle  de-
clamations on  trite  morals  and  obvious  sentiments.
Amiot's  margins,  indeed,  are  every  were  crowded
with  such.  In  those  times  they  foUow^ed  the  me-
thod of  the  old  Divines,  which  was,  to  make  practi-
cal improvements  of  every  matter  ;  but  it  is  some-
what strange  that  Dacier,  who  wrote  in  a  more  en-
lightened age,  should  fall  into  that  beaten  track  of  in*
eipid  moralizing,  and  be  at  pains  to  say  what  every
one  must  know.  Perhaps  as  the  commentator  of  Plu-
tarch, he  considered  himself  as  a  kind  of  travelling
companion  to  the  reader  ;  and,  agreeably  to  the
manners  of  his  country  he  meant  to  shew  his  polite-
ness by  never  holding  his  peace.  The  apology  he
makes  for  deducing  and  detailing  these  fiat  precepts,
is  the  view  of  instructing  younger  minds.  He  had
not  philosophy  enough  to  consider,  that  to  anticipate
the  conclusions  of  such  minds,  in  their  pursuit  of
history  and  characters,  is  to  prevent  their  proper  ef-
fect. When  examples  are  })laced  before  them,  they
will  not  iiiil  to  make  right  inferences  ;  but  if  those
are  made  for  them  the  dictatic  air  of  information
destroys  their  influence.

After  the  old  English  translation  of  Plutarch,
which  was  professedly  taken  from  Amiot's  French,
no  other  appeared  till  the  time  of  Drydeu.     That


Vlll  PREFACE.

great  man,  'wlio  is  never  to  be  mentioned  without
pity  and  admiration,  was  prevailed  upon,  by  his  ne-
cessities, to  head  a  company  of  translators  ;  and  to
lend  the  sanction  of  his  glorious  name  to  a  transla-
tion of  Plutarch,  written,  as  he  himself  acknow-
ledges, by  almost  as  many  hands  as  there  were  lives.
That  this  motley  work  was  full  of  errors,  inequali-
ties, and  inconsistencies,  is  not  in  the  least  to  be
wondered  at.  Of  such  a  variety  of  translators,  it
would  have  been  very  singular  if  some  had  not  failed
in  learning,  and  some  in  language.  The  truth  is,
that  the  greatest  part  of  them  were  deficient  in  both.
Indeed,  their  task  was  not  easy.  To  translate  Plutarch
under  any  circumstances  would  require  no  ordinary
skill  in  the  language  and  antiquities  of  Greece  :  But
to  attempt  it  whilst  the  text  was  in  a  depraved  state ;
unsettled  and  unrectified  ;  abounding  with  errors,
misnomers,  and  transpositions  ;  this  required  much
greater  abilities  than  fell  to  the  lot  of  that  body  of
translators  in  general.  It  appears,  however,  from
the  execution  of  their  undertaking,  that  they  gave
themselves  no  great  concern  about  the  difficulties
that  attended  it.  Some  few  blundered  at  the  Greek  ;
some  drew  from  the  Scholist's  Latin;  and  others,
more  humble,  trode  scrupulously  in  the  paces  of
Amiot.  Thus  copying  the  idioms  of  different  lan-
guages, they  proceeded  like  the  workmen  of  Babel,
and  fell  into  a  confusion  of  tongues,  while  they  at-
tempted to  speak  the  same.  But  the  diversities  of
style  were  not  the  greatest  fault  of  this  strange
translation.  It  was  full  of  the  grossest  errors.  Ig-
norance on  the  one  hand,  and  hastiness  or  negligence
on  the  other,  had  filled  it  with  absurdities  in  every
life,  and  inaccuracies  in  almost  every  page.  The
language,  in  general,  was  insupportably  tame,  tedi-
ous, and  em.barrassed.  The  periods  had  no  har-
.  mony  ;  the  phraseology  had  no  elegance,  no  spirit,
or  precision.

Yet  this  is  the  last  translation  of  Plutarch's  Lives
that  has  appeared  in  the  English  language,  and  the
only  one  that  is  now  read.


PREFACE.  IX

It  must  be  owned,  that  when  Dacier's  translations
came  abroad,  the  proprietor  of  Dryden's  copy  en-
deavoured to  repair  it.  But  how  was  this  done  ?
Not  by  the  application  of  learned  men,  who  might
have  rectified  the  errors  by  consulting  the  original,
but  by  a  mean  resource  to  the  labours  of  Dacier»
Where  the  French  translator  had  differed  from  the
English,  the  opinions  of  the  latter  were  religiously
given  up  ;  and  sometimes  a  period,  and  sometimes  a
page,  were  translated  anew  from  Dacier  ;  while,  in
due  compliment  to  him,  the  idium  of  his  language,
and  every  tour  d"* expression  were  most  scrupulously
preserved.  Nay,  the  editors  of  the  edition,  which
was  published  in  1727,  did  more.  They  not  only-
paid  Dacier  the  compliment  of  mixing  his  French
with  their  English,  but  whilst  they  borrowed  his
notes,  they  adopted  even  the  most  frivolous  and  su-
perfluous comments  that  escaped  his  pen.

Thus  the  English  Plutarch's  Lives,  at  first  so  he-
terogeneous and  absurd,  received  but  little  benefit
from  this  whimsical  reparation.  Dacier's  best  notes
were,  indeed,  of  some  value  ;  but  the  patch-work
alterations  the  editors  had  drawn  from  his  transla-
tion, made  their  book  appear  still  more  like  Otway's
Old  Woman,  whose  gown  of  many  colours  spoke
variety  of  wretchedness.

This  translation  continued  in  the  same  form  up-
wards of  thirty  years.  But  in  the  year  1758  the
proprietor  engaged  a  gentleman  of  abilities,  very  dif-
ferent from  those  who  had  formerly  been  employed,
to  give  it  a  second  purgation.  He  succeeded  as  well
as  it  was  possible  for  any  man  of  the  best  judgment
and  learning  to  succeed,  in  an  attempt  of  that  na-
ture. That  is  to  say,  he  rectified  a  multitude  of
errors,  and  in  many  places  endeavoured  to  mend  the
miserable  language.  Two  of  the  lives  he  translated
anew ;  and  this  he  executed  in  such  a  manner,  that,
had  he  done  the  whole,  the  present  translators
would  never  have  thought  of  the  undertaking.  But
two  Livt-s  out  of  fifty  made  a  verj^  small  part  of  this

B  2


X  PREPACE.


great  work  ;  and  though  he  rectified  many  errors  In
the  old  translation,  yet,  where  almost  every  thing
was  error,  it  was  no  wonder  if  many  escaped  him.
This  was,  indeed,  the  case.  In  the  course  of  our
Notes  we  had  remarked  a  great  number ;  but,  appre-
hensive that  such  a  continual  attention  to  the  faults
of  a  former  translation  might  appear  invidious,  we
expunged  the  greatest  parts  of  the  remarks,  and  suf-
fered such  only  to  remain  as  might  testify  the  pro-
priety of  our  pi  esent  undertaking.  Besides,  though
the  ingenious  reviserof  the  edition  of  1758  mightre-
pair  the  language  where  it  was  most  palpably  defi-
cient, it  was  impossible  for  him  to  alter  the  cast  and
complexion  of  the  w^hole.  It  would  still  retain  its
inequalities,  its  tameness,  and  heavy  march;  its  mix-
ture of  idioms,  and  the  irksome  train  of  far-connected
periods.  These  it  still  retains  ;  and,  after  all  the
operations  it  has  gone  through,  remains

Like  some  patch'd  dog-hole,  eked  with  ends  of  wall  ?

In  this  view  of  things,  the  necessity  of  a  new  tran-
slation is  obvious  ;  and  the  hazard  does  not  appear
to  be  great.  With  such  competitors  for  the  public
favour,  the  contest  has  neither  glory  nor  danger  at-
tending it.  But  the  labour  and  attention  necessary.
as  vrell  to  secure  as  to  obtain  that  favour,  neither  are,
nor  ought  to  be  less ;  And  with  w^hatever  success
the  present  translators  may  be  thought  to  have  exe-
cuted their  undertaking,  they  will  always  at  least
have  the  merit  of  a  diligent  desire  to  discharge  this
public  duty  faithfully.

Where  the  text  of  Plutarch  appeared  to  them  er-
roneous, they  have  spared  no  pains,  and  neglected  no
means  in  their  power,  to  rectify  it.

Sensible  that  the  great  art  of  a  translator  is  to  pre-
vent the  peculiarities  of  his  author's  laguage  from
stealing  into  his  own,  they  have  been  particularly
attentive  to  this  point,  and  have  generally  endea-
Toured  to  keep  their  English  unmixed  with  Greek.


PREFACE.  XI

At  the  same  time  it  must  be  observed,  that  there  is
frequently  a  great  similarity  in  the  structure  of  the
two  languages  ;  yet  that  resemblance  in  some  in-
stances, makes  it  the  more  necessary  to  guard  against
it  on  the  whole.  This  care  is  of  the  greatest  conse-
quence, because  Plutarch's  Lives  generally  pass
through  the  hands  of  young  people,  who  ought  to
read  their  own  language  in  its  native  purity,  unmix-
ed and  untainted  with  the  idioms  of  differenttongues.
For  their  sakes  too,  as  well  as  for  the  sake  of  readers
of  a  different  class,  we  have  omitted  some  passages
in  the  text,  and  have  only  signified  the  omission  by
asterisms.  Some,  perhaps,  may  censurs  us  for  taking
too  great  a  liberty  with  our  Author,  in  this  circum-
stance: However,  we  mustbeg  leave  inthat  instance
to  abide  bv  our  own  opinion  ;  and  sure  we  are,  that
we  should  have  censured  no  translator  for  the  same.
Could  every  thing  of  that  kind  have  been  omitted,
we  should  have  been  still  less  dissatisfied ;  but  some-
times the  chain  of  the  narrative  would  not  admit  of
it,  and  the  disagreeable  parts  were  to  be  got  over
with  as  mucli  decency  as  possible.

In  the  description  of  battles,  camps,  and  sieges,  it
is  more  than  probable  that  we  may  sometimes  be
mistaken  in  tlie  military  terms.  We  have  endea-
voured, however,  to  be  as  accurate  in  this  respect  as
possible,  and  to  acquaint  ourselves  with  this  kind  of
knowledge  as  well  as  our  situations  would  permit ;
but  we  will  not  promise  the  reader  that  we  have  al-
ways succeeded.  Where  something  seemed  to  have
fallen  out  of  the  text,  or  where  the  ellipsis  was  too
violent  for  the  forms  of  our  language,  we  have  not
scrupled  to  maintain  the  tenor  of  the  narrative,  or
the  chain  of  reason,  by  such  little  insertions  as  ap-
peardtobe  necessary  for  the  purpose.  These  short
insertions  we  at  first  put  between  hooks  ;  but  as  that
deformed  the  page,  v.  ithout  answering  any  material
purpose,  we  soon  rejected  it.

Such  are  the  liberties  we  have  taken  with  Plutarch;
and  the  learned,  wc  flatter  ourselves,  will  not  think


Xll  PREFACE.

them  too  great.  Yet  there  is  one  more,  which,  if
we  could  have  presumed  upon  it,  would  have  made
his  book  infinitely  more  uniform  and  agreeable.  We
often  v/ished  to  throw  out  of  the  text  into  the  notes
those  tedious  and  digressive  comments  that  spoil  the
beauty  and  order  of  his  narrativej  mortify  the  ex-
pectation, frequently,  when  it  is  most  essentially  in-
terested, and  destroy  the  natural  influence  of  his
story,  by  turning  the  attention  into  a  different  chan-
nel. What,  for  instance,  can  be  more  irksom  eand
impertinent,  than  a  long  dissertation  on  a  point  of
natural  philosophy  starting  up  at  the  very  crisis  of
sorre  important  action  ?  Every  reader  of  Plutarch
must  have  felt  the  pain  of  these  unseasonable  digres-
sions ;  but  v/e  could  not  upon  our  own  pleasure  or
authority,  remove  them.

In  the  notes  we  have  prosecuted  these  several  in-
tentions. We  have  endeavoured  to  bring  the  English
reader  acquainted  with  the  Greek  and  Roman  Anti-
quities ;  where  Plutarch  had  omitted  any  thing  re-
markable in  the  lives,  to  supply  it  from  other  authors,
and  to  make  his  book  in  some  measure  a  general
history  of  the  periods  under  his  pen.  In  the  Notes
too  we  have  assigned  reasons  for  it,  where  we  have
differed  from  the  former  translators.

This  part  of  our  work  is  neither  wholly  borrow-
ed, nor  altogether  original.  Where  Dacier  or  other
annotators  offered  us  any  thing  to  the  purpose,  we
have  not  scrupled  to  make  use  of  it ;  and,  to  avoid
the  endless  trouble  of  citations,  we  make  this  ac-
knowledgement once  for  all.  The  number  of  origi-
nal notes  the  learned  reader  will  find  to  be  veiy  con-
siderable :  But  there  are  not  so  many  notes  of  any
kind  in  the  latter  part  of  the  work  ;  because  the
manners  and  customs,  the  religious  ceremonies, laws,
state-offices,  and  forms  of  government,  among  the
ancients,  being  explained  in  the  first  lives,  much  did
not  remain  for  the  business  of  information.

Four  of  Plutarch's  parallels  are  supposed  to  be
lost :  those  of  Themistocles  ami  Camillus  ;  Pyrrhus


PREFACE.  Xlil

and  Marius  ;  Phocion  and  Cato  ;  Alexander  and
Csesar.  These  Dacier  supplies  by  others  of  his  own
composition ;  but  so  different  from  those  of  Plutarch,
that  they  have  little  right  to  be  incorporated  with
his  works.

The  necessary  Chronological  Tables,  together
with  tables  of  money,  weights,  and  measures,  and  a
copious  Index,  have  been  provided  for  this  transla-
tion :  of  which  we  may  truly  say,  that  it  wants  no
other  advantages  than  such  as  the  translators  had
not  power  to  give.


THK


LIFE  OF  PLUTARCH.


A.


.S,  in  the  progress  of  life,  we  first  pass  through  scenes
of  innocence,  peace,  and  fancy,  and  afterwards  encoun-
ter the  vices  and  disorders  of  society  ;  so  we  shall  here
amuse  ourselves  awhile  in  the  peaceful  solitude  of  the
philosopher,  before  we  proceed  to  those  more  animated,
but  less  pleasing  objects  he  describes.

Nor  will  the  view  of  a  philosopher's  life  be  less  in-
structive than  his  labours.  If  the  latter  teach  us  how
great  vices,  accompanied  with  great  abilities,  may  tend
to  the  ruin  of  a  state  ;...,if  they  inform  us  hov/  ambition
attended  with  magnanimity,  how  avarice  directed  by  po-
litical sagacity,  how  envy  and  revenge  armed  with  per-
sonal valour  and  popular  support,  will  destroy  the  most
sacred  establishments,  and  break  through  every  barrier  of
human  repose  and  safety  ;  the  former  vrill  convince  us  that
equanimity  is  more  desirable  than  the  highest  privileges
of  mind,  and  that  the  most  distinguished  situations  in  life,
are  less  to  be  envied  than  those  quiet  allotments,  where
science  is  the  support  of  virtue.

Pindaj  and  Epaniinondas  had,  long  before  Plutarch's
time,  redeemed,  in  some  measure,  the  credit  of  Boeotia,
and  rescued  the  inhabitants  of  that  country  from  the  pro  j
verbi.il  imputation  of  stupidity.  When  Plutdrch  ap-
peared, he  confirmed  the  reputation  it  had  recovered.  He
shewed  that  genius  is  not  the  growth  of  any  particular
soil ;  and,  that  its  cultivation  requires  no  peculiar  quali-
ties of  climate.

Chreronea,  a  town  in  Boeotia,  between  Phocis  and  Atti-
ca, had  the  honour  to  give  him  birth.  This  place  was
remarkable  for  nothing  but  the  tameness  and  servility  of
its  inhabitants,  wliom  Anthony's  soldiers  made  beasts  of
burthen,  and  obliged  to  carry  their  corn  upon  their  shoul-


XYl  LIFE    OF    PLUTARCH.

ders  to  the  coast.  As  it  lay  between  two  seas,  and  was
partly  shut  up  by  mountains,  the  air,  of  course,  was
heavy,  and  truly  Boeotian.  But  situations  as  little  favour-
ed by  nature  as  Chseronea,  have  given  birth  to  the  greatest
men  ;  of  which  the  celebrated  Locke  and  many  other
are  instances.

Plutarch  himself  acknowledges  the  stupidity  of  the
Boeotians  in  general ;  but  he  imputes  it  rather  to  their
diet  than  their  air  ;  for,  in  his  Treatise  on  Animal  Food,
he  intimates,  that  a  gross  indulgence  in  that  article,
which  was  usual  with  his  countrymen,  contributes  great-
ly to  obscure  the  intellectual  faculties.

It  is  not  easy  to  ascertain  in  what  year  he  was  born.
Ruauld  places  it  about  the  middle  of  the  reign  of  Clau-
dius ;  others,  towards  the  end  of  it.  The  following  cir-
cumstance is  the  only  foundation  they  have  for  their  con-
jectures.

Plutarch  says,  that  he  studied  philosophy  under  Am-
monius,  at  Delphi,  when  Nero  made  his  progress  into
Greece.  This,  we  know,  was  in  the  twefth  year  of  that
Emperor's  reign,  in  the  consulship  of  Paulinus  Suetonius
and  Pontius  Telesinus,  the  second  year  of  the  Olympiad
211,  and  the  sixtv-sixth  of  the  christian  sera.  Dacier
observes,  that  Plutarch  must  have  been  seventeen  or
eighteen  at  least,  when  he  was  engaged  in  the  abstruse
studies  of  philosophy  ;  and  he,  therefore,  fixes  his  birth
about  five  or  six  years  before  the  death  of  Claudius,  This,
however,  is  bare  suspicion  ;  and  that,  in  our  opinion,  not
of  the  most  probable  kind.  The  youth  of  Greece  studied
under  the  philosophers  very  early  ;  for  their  works,  M'ith
those  of  the  poets  and  rhetoricians,  formed  their  chief
course  of  discipline.

But  to  determine  whether  he  was  born  under  the  reign
of  Claudius,  or  in  the  early  part  of  Nero's  reign  (which
we  the  rather  believe,  as  he  says  himself,  that  he  was  very
young  when  Nero  entered  Greece  ;)  to  make  it  clearly
understood,  whether  he  studied  at  Delphi  at  ten,  or  at
eighteen  years  of  age,  is  of  much  less  consequence,  than
it  is  to  know  by  what  means,  and  under  wJiat  auspices,  he
acquired  that  humane  and  rational  philosophy  which  is
distinguished  in  his  works.

Ammonius  was  his  preceptor  ;  but  of  him  we  know
little  more  than  what  his  scholar  has  accidentally  let  fall


LIFE    or    PLUTARCH.  XVll

concerning  him.  He  mentions  a  singular  instance  of  his
manner  of  correcting  his  pupils.  "  Our  master,"  says  he,
"  having  one  day  observed  that  we  had  indulged  ourselves
"  too  luxuriously  at  dinner,  at  his  afternoon  lecture,  or-
"  dered  his  fretdman  to  give  his  own  son  the  discipline  of
"  the  whip,  in  our  presence  ;  signifying,  at  the  same
"  time, that  he  suffered  this  punishment,  because  he  could
**  not  eat  his  victuals  without  sauce.  The  philosopher
"  all  the  while  had  his  eye  upon  us,  and  we  knew  well  for
"  whom  this  example  of  punishment  was  intended."
This  circumstance  shews,  at  least,  that  Ammonius  was
not  of  the  school  of  Epicurus.  The  severity  of  his  dis-
cipline, indeed,  seems  rather  of  the  stoic  cast ;  but  it  is
most  probable,  that  he  belonged  to  the  academicians  ;
for  their  schools,  at  that  time,  had  the  greatest  reputcction
in  Greece.

It  was  a  happy  circumstance  in  the  discipline  of  those
schools,  that  the  parent  only  had  the  power  of  corporal
punishment :  the  rod  and  the  ferula  were  snatched  from
the  hand  of  the  petty  tyrant :  his  ofBxe  alone  was  to  inform
the  mind  :  he  had  no  authority  to  dastardize  the  spirit  ;
he  had  no  power  to   extinguish  the   generous  flame   of
freedom,  or  to  break  down  the  noble  independency  of  soul,
by  the  slavish,  debasing,  and  degrading  application  of  the
rod.     This  mode  of  punishment  in  our  public  schools  is
one  of  the  worst  remains  of  barbarism  that  prevails  among
us.     Sensible  minds,  however  volatile  and  inattentive  in
early  years,  may  be  drawn  to  their  duty  by  many  means,
which  shame,  and  fears  of  a   more  liberal  nature  than
those  of  corporal  punishment,  "will  supply.     Where  there
is  but  little  sensibility,  the  effect  which  that  mode  of  pun-
ishment produces  is  not  more  happy.     It  destroys  that
little,  though  it  should  be  the  first  care  and  labour  of  the
preceptor  to  increase  it.     To  beat  the  body,  is  to  debase
the  mind.     Nothing  so  soon,  or  so  totally  abolishes  the
sense  of  shame  ;  and  yet  that  sense  is  at  once  ihe  best
preservative  of  virtue,  and  the  greatest  incentive  to  every
species  of  excellence.

Another  principal  advantage,  which  tlie  ancient  mode
of  the  Greek  educiition  gave  its  pupils,  was  their  early
access  to  every  branch  of  philosophical  learning.  They
did  not,  like  us,  employ  their  youth  in  the  acquisition  of
words  :  they  were  engaged  in  pursuits  of  a  higher  nature  :

c


XVIU  LIFE   OF    PLUTARCH.

ill  acquiring  the  knowledge  of  things.  They  did  not,
like  us,  spend  seven  or  ten  years  of  scholastic  laboui ,  in
making  a  general  acquaintance  with  two  dead  languages.
Those  years  were  employed  in  the  study  of  nature,  and
in  gaining  the  elements  of  philosophical  knovv  ledge  from
her  original  ceconomy  and  laws,  Hence  all  that  Dacier
has  observed  concerning  the  probability  of  Plutarch's  be-
ing seventeen  or  eighteen  years  of  age  when  he  studied
under  Animonius,  is  without  the  least  weight.

The  way  to  mathematical  and  philosophical  knowledge
was,  indeed,  much  more  easy  among  the  ancient  Greeks
than  it  can  ever  be  with  us.  Those,  and  every  other
science,  are  bound  up  in  terms,  which  we  can  never  un-
derstand precisely,  till  we  become  acquainted  with  the
languages  from  which  they  are  derived.  Plutarch,  when
he  learnt  the  Roman  language,  which  was  not  till  he  was
somewhat  advanced  in  life,  observed,  that  he  got  the
knovv'ledge  of  words  from  his  knowledge  of  things.  But
we  lie  vinder  the  necessity  of  reversing  his  method  :  and
before  we  can  arrive  at  the  knowledge  of  things,  we  must
first  labour  to  obtain  the  loiowledge  of  v/ords.

However,  though  the  Greeks  'had  access  to  science
without  the  acquisition  of  other  languages,  they  were,
nevertheless,  sufficiently  attentive  to  the  cultivation  of  their
ow^n.  Philology,  after  the  mathematics  and  philosophy,
was  one  of  their  principal  studies  ;  and  they  applied  them-
selves considerably  to  critical  investigation.

A  proof  of  this  v>^e  find  in  that  Dissertation  which  Plu-
tarch hath  given  us  on  the  word  «,  engraved  on  the  tem-
ple of  Apollo  at  Delphi.  In  this  tract  he  introduces  the
scholastic  disputes,  wherein  he  makes  a  principal  figure.
After  giving  us  the  various  significations  v.'hich  others  as-
signed to  this  word,  he  adds  his  own  idea  of  it ;  and  that
is  of  vSome  consequence  to  us,  because  it  shews  us  that  he
was  not  a  polytheist.  "  si.  says  he,  T/wu  art  ;  as  if  it
'*  were  li  e*,  Thou  art  one,  I  mean  not  in  the  aggregate
"  sense,  as  we  say,  one  army,  or  one  body  of  nren  com-
*' posed  of  many  individuals  ;  but  that  which  exists  dis-
*'  tinctly  must  necessarily  be  one  ;  and  the  very  idea  of
<'  being  implies  individually.  One  is  that  which  i^  a
*'  simple  being,  free  from  mixture  and  composition.  To
"  be  one,  therefore,  in  this  sense,  is  consistent  only  with
*'  a  nature  entire  in  its  first  principle,  and  incapa))le  of
*'  alteration  or  decay."


LIFE    OF    PLUTARCH.  XIX

So  far  we  are  perfectly  satisfied  with  Plutarch's  creed,
but  not  w'th  his  criticism.  To  suppose  that  the  word  si
should  signify  the  existence  of  one  God  only,  is  to  hazard
too  much  upon  conjecture  ;  and  the  whole  tenor  of  the
Heathen  theology  makes  against  it.

Nor  can  we  be  better  pleased  with  the  other  interpre-
tations of  this  celebrated  word.  We  can  never  suppose,
that  it  barely  signified  zy,-  intimating  thereby,  that  the
business  of  those  who  visited  the  temple  was  inquiry,  and
that  they  came  to  ask  the  Deity,  if  such  events  should
come  to  pass.  This  construction  is  too  much  forced  ;
and  it  would  do  as  well,  or  even  better,  were  the  £/  inter-
preted, if  you  make  large  presents  to  the  God,  if  you  pay
the  priest.

Were  not  this  inscription  an  object  of  attention  among
the  learned,  we  should  not,  at  this  distant  period  of  time,
have  thought  it  worth  mentioning,  othenvise  than  as  it
gives  us  an  idea  of  one  branch  of  Plutarch's  education.
But,  as  a  single  word,  inscribed  on  the  temple  of  Apollo
at  Delphi,  cannot  but  be  matter  of  curiosity  with  those
who  carry  their  enquiries  into  remote  antiquity,  we  shall
not  scruple  to  add  one  more  to  the  other  conjectures  con-
cerning it.

We  will  suppose  then,  that  the  words/  was  here  used,
in  the  Ionic  dialect,  for  h9b,  I  tuish.  This  perfectly  ex-
pressed the  state  of  mind  of  all  that  entered  the  temple  on
business  of  consultation  ;  and  it  might  be  no  less  em-
phatical  in  the  Greek  than  Virgil's  Quajiqucnn  O  !  was  in
the  Latin.  If  we  carry  this  conjecture  farther,  and  think
it  probable,  that  this  word  might,  as  the  initial  word  of  a
celebrated  line  in  the  third  book  of  the  Odyssey,  stand
there  to  signify  the  whole  line,  we  shall  reach  a  degree  of
probability  almost  bordering  on  certainty.  The  ve.'se  we
allude  to  is  this  ;

•*  O  that  the  Gods  would  empower  m.e  to  obtain  my
"  wishes  1"  What  prayer  more  proper  on  entering  tlie
temples  of  the  Gods,  particularly  Avith  the  view  of  con-
sulting them  on  the  events  of  life.

If  it  sliould  be  thought,  that  the  initial  word  is  insuffi-
cient to  rtprcsent  a  whole  verse,  we  have  to  answer,  that
it  was  agreeable  to  the  custom  of  the  ancieiits.     Thtj-


XX  LIFE    OF    PLUTARCH.

not  only  conveyed  the  sense  of  particular  verses  by  their
initial  words,  but  frequently  of  large  passages  by  the  quo-
tation of  a  single  line,  or  even  of  half  a  line  ;  some  in-
stances of  which  occur  in  the  following  Lives.  The  rea-
son of  this  is  obvious.  The  works  of  their  best  poets  were
almost  universally  committed  to  memory  ;  and  the  small-
est quotation  was  sufficient  to  convey  the  sense  of  a  whole
passage.

These  observations  are  matters  of  mere  curiosity,  in-
deed;  but  they  have  had  their  use  :  for  they  have  natu-
rally pointed  out  to  us  another  instance  of  the  excellence
of  that  education  which  formed  our  young  philosopher.

This  was  the  improvement  of  the  memory,  by  means
of  exercise.

Mr.  Locke  has  justly,  though  obviously  enough,  ob-
served, that  nothing  so  much  strengthens  this  faculty  a?
the  employment  of  it.

The  Greek  mode  of  education  must  have  had  a  won-
derful effect  in  this  case.  The  conlinuai  exercise  of  the
memory,  in  laying  vip  the  treasures  of  their  poets,  the
precepts  of  their  philosophers,  and  the  problems  of  their
mathematicians,  must  have  given  it  that  mechanical
po"^ver  of  retention,  which  nothing  could  easily  escape.
Thus  Pliny  *  tells  us  of  a  Greek  called  Charmidas,  who
could  repeat  from  memory  the  contents  of  the  largest
libraiy.

T^he  adv^antages  Plutarch  derived  from  this  exercise,
appear  in  every  part  of  his  works.  As  the  writings  of
poets  lived  in  his  memory,  they  were  ready  for  use  and .
application  on  every  apposite  occasion.  They  were  al-
v/ays  at  liand,  either  to  confirm  the  sentiments,  and  justi-
fy the  principles  of  his  heroes,  to  support  his  own,  or  to
illustrate  both.

By  the  aid  of  a  cultivated  memory  too,  he  was  enabled
to  write  a  number  of  cotemporary  Lives,  and  to  assign  to
each  such  a  poition  of  business  in  the  gen.^ral  transactions
of  the  times,  as  might  be  sufficient  to  delineate  the  cha-
racter, v/ithoat  repeated  details  of  tiie  same  actions  and
negociations.  This  made  a  very  difficult  part  of  his  vv^ork  ;
and  he  acquitted  himself  here  with  great  management  and
address.     Sometimes,  indeed,  he  has  repeated  tlie  same

*  Hist.  Nat.  lib.  vii.  cap.  24.


LIFE    OF    PLUTARCH.  XXI

eircumstanccs  in  cotemporary  lives  ;  but  it  was  hardly
, avoidable.  The  great  wonder  is,  that  he  has  done  it  so
seldom.

But  though  an  improved  memory  might,  in  this'respect,
be  of  service  to  him,  as  undoubtedly  it  was,  there  were
others  in  which  it  was  rather  a  disadvantage.  By  trusting
too  much  to  it,  he  has  fallen  into  inaccuracies  and  incon-
sistencies, where  h^  was  professedly  drawing  from  prece-
ding writers ;  and  we  have  often  been  obliged  to  rectify
his  mistakes,  by  consulting  those  authors,  because  he
would  not  be  at  the  pains  to  consult  them  himself.

If  Plutarch  might  properly  be  said  to  belong  to  any  sect
of  philosophers,  his  education,  the  rationality  of  his  prin-
ciples, and  the  modesty  of  his  doctrines,  would  incline  us
to  place  him  with  the  latter  academy.  At  least,  when  he
left  his  master  Ammonius,  and  came  into  society,  it  is
more  than  probable,  that  he  ranked  particularly  with  tiiat
sect.

His  writings,  however,  furnish  us  with  many  reasons
for  thinking,  that  he  afterwards  became  a  citizen  of  the
philosophical  world.  Re  appears  to  have  examined  every
sect  with  a  calm  and  unprejudiced  attention  ;  to  have  se-
lected what  he  found  of  use  for  the  purposes  of  virtue  and
happiness  ;  and  to  have  left  the  rest  for  the  portion  of
those  whose  narrowness  of  mind  could  think  either  science
or  felicity  confined  to  any  denomination  of  men.

P'rom  the  academicians  he  took  their  modesty  of  opin-
ion, and  left  them  their  original  scepticism  :  he  bon-ow-
ed  their  rational  theology,  and  gave  up  to  them,  in  a  great
measure,  their  metaphysical  refinements,  together  with
their  vain,  though  seductive,  enthusiasm.

^Vith  the  peripatetics,  he  walked  in  search  of  natural
science,  and  of  logic  ;  but,  satisfied  with  whatever  prac-
tical knowledge  might  be  acquired,  he  Ifeft  them  to  dream
over  the  hypothetical  part  of  the  former,  and  to  chase
the  shadows  of  reason  through  the  mazes  of  the  latter.

To  the  stoics,  he  was  indebted  for  the  behef  of  a  par-
ticular Providence  ;  but  he  could  not  enter  into  their  idea
of  future  rewards  and  punishments.  He  knew  not  how
to  reconcile  the  present  agency  of  the  Supreme  Being
v/ith  his  judicial  character  hereafter  ;  though  Thcodoret
tells  us,  tiiat  he  had  heard  of  the  christian  religion,  and

c2


Xxii       -  LIFE    OF    PLUTARCH.

insartetl  several  of  its  mysteries  m  his  works.*     From
the-  Stoics  too,  he  borrowed  the  doctrine  of  fortitude  :  but ,
he  rejected  the  unnatural  foundatioii  on  which  they  erec-
ted that  virtue.     H:  v/ent  back  to  Socrates  for  principles
whereon  to  rest  it.

With  the  Epicureans  he  does  not  seem  to  have  had
much  intercourse,  though  the  accommodating  philosophy
of  Aristippus  entered  frequently  into  his  politic?,  and
sometimes  into  the  general  economy  of  his  life.  In  the
little  'iitates  of  Greece  that  philosophy  had  not  much  to
do  ;  but  had  it  been  adopted  in  the  more  violent  measures
of  the  Roman  administration,  our  celebrated  biographer
would  not  have  had  such  scenes  of  blood  and  ruin  to  de«
scribe  ;  for  emulation,  prejudice,  and  opposition,  upon
whatever  principles  they  might  plead  their  apology,
first  struck  out  the  fire  that  laid  the  comm-on wealth  in
ashes.  If  Plutarch  borrowed  any  thing  more  from  Epi-
curus, it  was  his  rational  idea  of  enjoyment.  That  such
Vv'as  his  idea,  it  is  more  than  probable  :  for  it  is  impossi-
ble to  believe  the  tales  that  the  Heathen  bigots  have
told  of  him,  or  to  suppose  that  the  cultivated  mind  of  a
philosopher  should  pursue  its  happiness  out  of  the  tem-
perate order  of  nature.  His  irreligious  opinions  he  left
to  him,  as  he  had  left  to  the  other  sects  their  vanities  and
absurdities.

B\it  Vviien  vre  bring  him  to  the  school  of  Pythagoras,
v/hat  idea  shall  we  entertain  of  him  ?  Shall  we  consider
jiira  any  longer  as  an  academician,  or  as  a  citizen  of  the
piiilosophical  world  ?  Na.turally  benevolent  and  humane,
he  finds  a  system  of  divinity  and  philosophy  perfectly
adapted  to  his  natural  sentiments.  The  whole  animal
crecition  he  had  originally  looked  upon  with  an  instinctive
tenderness  ;  but  when  the  amiable  Pythagoras,  the  priest
of  nature,  in  defence  of  the  common  privileges  of  her
■  creatures,  had  called  religion  into  their  cause  ;....when  he
sought  to  soften  the  cruelty  that  man  had  exercised  against
them,  by  the  honest  art  of  insinuating  the  doctrine  of
transmigration,  how  could  the  humane  and  benevolent
Plutarch  refuse  to  serve  under  this  priest  of  nature  ?  It
was  impossible.  He  adopted  the  doctrine  of  the  me-
tempsychosis.    He  entered  into  the  merciful  scheme  of

*  Nothing  of  Plutarch's  is  now  extant,  from  which  we  can  in-
fer, that  he  was  acquainted  with  the  christian  religion.


LIFE    OF    PLUTARCH.  XXlU

Pythagoras,  and,  like  him,  diverted  the  cruelty  of  the
human  species,  by  appealing  to  the  selfish  qualities  of
their  nature,  by  subduing  their  pride,  and  exciting  their
sympathy,  while  he  shewed  them  that  their  future  exist-
tence  might  be  the  condition  of  a  reptile.

This  spirit  and  disposition  brake  strongly  from  him  in
his  observations  on  the  elder  Cato.     And  as  nothing  can
exhibit  a  more  lively  picture  of  him  than  these  paintings
of  his  own,  we  shall  not  scruple  to  introduce  them  here  :
'<  For  my  part,  I  cannot  but  charge  his  using  his  servants
"  like  so  many  beasts  of  burthen,  and  turning  them  off,
"  or  selling  them  when  they  grow  old,  to  the  account  of  a
"  mean  and  ungenerous  spirit,  which  thinks  that  the  sole
*'  tie  between  man  and  man  is  interest  or  necessity.    But
<^  goodness  moves  in  a  larger  sphere  than  justice.     The
"  obligations  of  law  and  equity  reach  only  to  mankind,
"  but  kindness  and  beneficence  should  be  extended  to
"  creatures  of  every  species;  and  these  still  flow  from
"  thebreiiSt  of  a  well-natured  man,  as  streams  that  issue
"  from  the  living  fountain.     A  good  man  will  take  care
"  of  his  horses  and  dogs,  not  only  while  they  are  young,
"  but  when  old  and  past  service.     Thus  the  people  of
*'  Athens,  when  they   had  finished  the  Temple  called
"  Hecatompedon,  set  at  liberty  the  beasts  of  burthen  that
<'  had  been  chiefly  employed  in  the  work,  suffering  them
"  to  pasture  at  large,  free  from  any  other  service.     It  is
"  said,  that  one  of  these  afterwards  came  of  its  own  ac-
"  cord  to  work,  and  putting  itself  at  the  head  of  the  la-
"  bouring  cattle,  marched  before  them  to  the  citadel.
"  This  pleased  the  people,  and  they  made  a  decree,  that
"  it  should  be  kept  at  the  public  charge  so  long  as  it
"  lived.     The  graves  of  Simon's  mares,  with  wdiich  he
"  thrice  conquered  at  the  Olympic  games,  are  still  to  be
"  seen  near  his  own  tomb.     Many  have  shown  particular
"  marks  of  regard,  in  burying  the  dogs  which  they  had
"  cherished  and  been  fond  of;    and  amongst  the  rest,
"  Xantippus  of  old,  whose  dog  swam  by  the  side  of  his
*'  galley  to  Salamis,  when  the  Atiienians  were  forced  to
''  abandon  their  city,  and  w^as  afterwards  buried  by  him
"  upon  a  promontory,  which  to  this  day  is  called  the
"  Dog's  Grave.     We  certainly  ought  not  to  treat  living
"  creatures  like  shoes  or  household  goods,  which,  when
''  worn  out  with  use  we  throw  away  ;  and  were  it  only


XXIV  LIFE    OF    PLUTARCH.

"  to  learn  benevolence  to  human  kind,  we  should  be
"  merciful  to  other  creatures.  For  my  own  part,  I  would
"  not  sell  even  an  old  ox  that  had  laboured  for  me  ;  much
"  less  v.'ould  I  remove,  for  the  sake  of  a  little  money,  a  man
"  grown  old  in  my  service,  from  his  usual  lodgings  and
*'  diet :  for  to  him,  poor  man  !  it  would  be  as  bad  as
"  banishment,  since  he  could  be  of  no  more  service  to  the
"  buyer  than  he  was  to  the  seller.  But  Cato,  as  if  he
"  took  a  pride  in  these  things,  tells  us,  that  when  consul
"  he  left  his  v/ar-horsc  in  Spain,  to  save  the  public  the
"  charge  of  his  conveyance.  Whether  such  things  as
"  these  are  instances  of  greatness  or  littleness  of  soul,  let
"  the  reader  judge  for  himself."

Wha.t  an  amiable  idea  of  our  benevolent  philosopher !
Hov,^  worthy  the  instmctions  of  the"  priest  of  Nature  \
How  honourable  to  that  great  master  of  truth  and  univer-
sal science,  whose  sentiments  were  decisive  in  every  doubt-
ful m.atter,  and  whose  maxims  were  received  with  silent
conviction!*

Wherefore  should  we  wonder  to  find  Plutarch  more
particularly  attached  to  the  opinions  of  this  great  man  ?
Whether  we  consider  the  immensity  of  his  erudition,  or
the  benevolence  of  his  system,  the  motives  for  that  at-
tachment were  equally  powerful.  Pythagoras  had  collected
all  the  stores  of  human  learning,  and  had  reduced  them
into  one  rational  and  useful  body  of  science.  Like  our
glorious  Bacon,  he  led  philosophy  forth  from  the  jargon
of  schools,  and  the  fopperies  of  sects.  He  made  her  what
she  was  originally  designed  to  be,  the  handmaid  of  Na-
ture ;  friendly  to  her  creatures,  and  faithful  to  her  laws.
Whatever  knowledge  could  be  gained  by  human  industry,
by  the  most  extensive  inquiry  and  observation,  he  had
every  means  and  opportimity  to  obtain.  The  priests  of
Egypt  unfolded  to  him  their  mysteries  and  their  learning,
they  led  him  through  the  records  of  the  remotest  antiqui-
ty, and  opened  ail  those  stores  of  science  that  had  been
amassing  through  a  multitude  of  ages.  The  Magi  of  Per-
sia co-operated  with  the  priests  of  Egypt  in  the  instruction
of  this  wonderful  philosopher.  They  taught  him  those
higher  parts  of  science,  by  which  they  were  themselves
so  much  distinguished,  astronomy  and  the  system  of  the
universe.  The  laws  of  moral  life,  and  the  institutions  of
*  Val.  Max.  lib.  yiii.  Cap.  15,


LIFE    OF    PLUTARCH.  XXV

civil  societies  with  their  several  excellencies  and  defects
he  learnt  from  the  various  states  and  establishments  of
Greece.  Thus  accomplished,  when  he  came  to  dispute
in  the  Olympic  contests,  he  was  considered  as  a  prodigy
of  wisdom  and  learning  ;  but  when  the  choice  of  his  title
was  left  to  him,  he  modestly  declined  the  appellation  of  a
ivise  7nan  and  was  contented  only  to  be  called  a  lover  of
luzsdom**

Shall  not  Plutarch  then  meet  with  all  imaginable  indul-
gence, if,  in  his  veneration  for  this  great  man,  he  not  only
adopted  the  nobler  parts  of  his  philosophy,  but  (what  he
had  avoided  with  regard  to  the  other  sects)  followed  him
too  in  his  errors  ?  Such,  in  particular,  was  his  doctrine  of
dreams ,  to  v/hich  our  biographer,  we  must  confess,  has
paid  too  much  attention.  Yet  absolutely  to  condemn  him
for  this,  would,  perhaps,  be  hazarding  as  much  as  totally
to  defend  him.  We  must  acknowledge,  with  the  elder
Pliny,  Si  exemplisy  agatur^profecto  hariajiant\  ;  or,  in  the
language  of  Sir  Roger  de  Coverley ,  "Much  may  be  said  on
both  sides*"  However,  if  Pliny,  whose  complaisance  for
the  credit  of  the  marvellous  in  particular  was  very  great,
could  be  doubtful  about  this  matter,  we  of  little  faith  may
be  allowed  to  be  more  so.  Yet  Plutarch,  in  his  Treatise
on  Oracles,  has  maintained  his  doctrine  by  such  powerful
Testimonies,  that  if  any  regard  is  to  be  paid  to  his  vera-
city, some  attention  should  be  given  to  his  opinion.  We
shall  therefore  leave  the  point,  where  Mr.  Addison  thought
proper  to  leave  a  more  improbable  doctrine,  in  suspence.

When  Zeno  consulted  the  oracle  in  what  ma.nner  he
should  live,  the  answer  was,  that  he  should  inr[uire  of  the
dead.  Assiduous  and  indelutigiibie  application  to  reading
made  a  considerable  part  of  the  Greek,  education  ;  and  in
this,  our  biogrripher  seems  to  have  exerted  the  greatest
industry.  The  number  of  boolis  he  has  quoted,  to  which
he  has  referred,  and  from  which  he  has  written,  seems
almost  incredible,  when  it  is  considered,  that  the  art  of
■j^rinting  was  net  known  in  his  time,  and  that  the  pur-
chase of  manuscripts  was  difficult  and  dear.

His  family,  indeed,  was  not  without  wealth.  In  his
Symposiacs,  he  tells  us,  that  it  was  ancient  in  Chxronea  ;
and  that  his  ancestors  had  been  invested  with  the  most
considerable  offices  in  the  magistracy.     He  mentions  in

*  Val.  Max.  lib.  viii.  cap.  7,         f  Hist.  Nat.  lib.  x.  cap.  75,


XXVI  LIFE    OF    PXUTARCH.

particular  his  great-grandfather  Nicarchus,  whom  he  had
the  happiness  of  knowing  ;  and  relates,  from  his  authori-
ty, the  misfortunes  of  his  fellow-citizens,  under  the  se*
vere  discipline  of  Anthony's  soldiers.

His  grandfather  Lamprias,  he  tells  us,  was  a  man  of
great  eloquence,  and  of  a  brilliant  imagination.  He  was
distinguished  by  his  merit  as  a  convivial  companion  ;  and
was  one  of  those  happy  mortals,  who,  when  they  sacrifice
to  Bacchus,  are  favoured  by  Mercury.  His  good-humor
and  pleasantry  increased  with  his  cups  ;  and  he  used  to
say,  that  wine  had  the  same  effect  upon  him  that  fire  has
on  incense,  which  causes  the  finest  and  richest  essences
to  evaporate.

Plutarch  has  mentioned  his  father  likewise ;  but  haS
not  given  us  his  name  in  any  of  those  writings  that  are
come  down  to  us.  However,  he  has  borne  honourable
testimony  to  his  memory  ;  for  he  tells  us,  that  he  was  a
learned  and  a  virtuous  man,  well  acquainted  with  the
philosophy  and  theology  of  his  time,  and  conversant  with
the  works  of  the  poets.  Plutarch,  in  his  political  pre-
cepts, mentions  an  instance  of  his  father's  discretion,
which  does  him  great  honour.  "  I  remember,"  says  he,
"  that  I  was  sent,  when  a  very  young  man,  along  with
another  citizen  of  Chasronea,  on  an  embassy  to  the  pro-
consul. JNIy  colleague  being,  by  some  accident,  obliged
to  stop  on  the  way,  I  proceeded  without  him,  and  execu-
ted our  commission.  Upon  my  return  to  Chaeronea,  when
I  was  to  give,  an  account  in  public  of  my  negociation,  my
father  took  me  aside  and  said.  My  son,  take  care  that  in
the  account  you  are  about  to  give,  you  do  not  mention
yourself  distinctly,  but  jointly  with  your  colleague.  Say
not,  I  went ^  I  sfioke^  I  executed  ;  but  we  went^  \ve  apakcy
vje  executed.  Thus  though  your  colleague  was  incapa-
ble of  attending  you,  he  will  share  in  the  honour  of  your
success,  as  well  as  in  that  of  your  appointment ;  and  you
will  avoid  that  envy  which  necessarily  follows  all  arrogat-
ed merit."

Plutarch  had  two  brothers,  whose  names  were  Timon
and  Lamprias.  These  were  his  associates  in  study  and
amusement ;  and  he  always  speaks  of  them  with  pleasure
and  affection.  Of  Timon  in  particular  he  says,  'Tliough
Fortune  has,  in  many  occasions,  been  favourable  to  me,
yet  I  have  no  obligation  to  her  so  great  as  the  enjoyment


LIFE    OF    PLUTARCH.  XXVll

ofmy  brother  TImon's  invariable  friendship  and  kindness."
Lamprias  too  he  mentions  as  inheriting  the  Hvely  disposi-
tion and  good-humour  of  his  grandfather,  who  bore  the
same  name.

Some  writers  have  asserted,  that  Plutarch  passed  into
Egypt.  Otiiers  allege^  that  there  is  no  authority  for  that
assertion :  and  it  is  true  that  we  have  no  written  record
concerning  its  Nevertheless,  we  incline  to  believe,  that
he  did  not  travel  into  that  country  ;  and  we  found  our
opinion  on  the  following  reasons.  In  the  first  place,  this
tour  was  a  part  of  liberal  education  among  the  Greeks;
and  Plutarch,  being  descended  from  a  family  of  distinc-
tion, was  therefore  likely  to  enjoy  such  a  privilege.  In
the  next  place,  his  treatise  of  Isis  and  Osiris,  shews  that
he  had  a  more  than  common  knowledge  of  the  religious
mysteries  of  the  Egyptians  ;  and  it  is  therefore  highly-
probable,  that  he  obtained  this  knowledge  by  being  con-
versant amongst  them.  To  have  written  a  treatise  on
so  abstruse  a  subject,  without  some  more  eminent  advan-
tages than  other  writers  might  afford  him,  could  not
have  been  agreeable  to  the  genius,  or  consistent  with  the
modesty  of  Plutarch.

However,  supposing  it  doubtful  whether  he  passed  in-
to Egypt,  there  is  no  doubt  at  all  that  he  travelled  into
Italy,  Upon  wiiat  occasion  he  visited  that  country,  it  is
not  quite  so  certain ;  but  he  probably  went  to  Rome,  in  a
public  capacity,  on  the  business  of  the  Chieroneans.  For,  in
the  life  of  Demosthenes,  he  tells  us,  that  he  Lad  no  lei-
sure in  his  journey  to  Italy,  to  learn  the  Latin  language,
on  the  account  of  public  business.

As  the  passage  here  referred  to  affords  us  further  mat-
ter of  speculation  for  the  life  of  Plutarch,  we  shall  give
it  as  we  find  it.  "  An  tiuthor  who  would  v/rite  a  history
of  events  wliich  happened  in  a  foreign  country,  and  can-
not be  come  at  in  his  own,  as  he  has  his  materials  to  col-
lect from  a  variety  of  books,  dispersed  in  different  libra-
ries, his  first  care  should  be  to  take  up  his  residence  in
some  populous  town  which  has  an  ambition  for  literature.
There  he  will  meet  with  many  curious  and  valuable  books,
and  the  particulars  tliat  are  wanting  in  writers  he  may;
upon  enquiry,  be  supplied  with,  by  those  who  have  laid
them  up  In  the  faithful  repository  of  memory.  This
wiil  prevent  his  work  from  being  defective  in  any  mate-


3CXV1U  LIFE    OF    PLUTARCH.

rial  point.  As  to  myself,  I  live  in  a  little  town ;  and  I
choose  to  live  there,  lest  it  should  become  still  less.
When  I  was  in  Rome,  and  other  parts  of  Italy,  I  had
not  leisure  to  study  the  Latin  tongue,  on  account  of  the
public  commissions  with  which  I  was  charged,  and  the
number  of  people  who  came  to  be  instructed  by  me  in
philosophy.  It  was  not,  therefore,  till  a  late  period  in
life  that  I  began  to  read  the  Roman  authors."

From  this  short  account  we  may  collect,  with  tolerable
certainty,  the  following  circumstances  :

In  the  first  place,  Plutarch  tells  us,  that  while  he  was
resident  in  Rome,  public  business  and  lectures  in  philoso-
phy left  him  no  time  for  learning  the  Latin  language ;
and  yet,  a  little  before,  he  had  observed,  that  those  who
"Write  a  history  of  foreign  characters  and  events,  ought  to
be  conversant  with  the  historians  of  that  country  where
the  character  existed,  and  the  scene  is  laid :  but  he  ac-
knowledges, that  he  did  not  learn  the  Latin  language  till
he  was  late  in  life,  because,  when  at  Rome,  he  had  not
time  for  that  purpose.

We  may,  therefore,  conclude,  that  he  wrote  his  Mo-
rals at  Rome,  and  his  Lives  at  Chzeronea.  For  the  com-'
position  of  the  former,  the  knowledge  of  the  Roman  lan-
guage was  not  necessary :  the  Greek  tongue  was  then
generally  understood  in  Rome ;  and  he  had  no  necessity
for  making  use  of  any  other,  when  he  delivered  his  lec-
tures of  Philosophy  to  the  people.  Those  lectures,  it  is
more  than  probable,  made  up  that  collection  of  Morals
which  is  come  down  to  us.

Though  he  could  not  avail  himself  of  the  Roman  his-
torians, in  the  great  purpose  of  writing  his  Lives,  for
want  of  a  competent  acquaintance  with  the  languap;e  in
which  they  wrote  ;  yet  by  conversing  with  the  principal
citizens  in  the  Greek  tongue,  he  must  have  collected  ma-
ny essential  circumstances,  and  anecdotes  of  characters
and  events,  that  promoted  his  design,  and  enriched  the
plan  of  his  work.  The  treasures  he  acquired  of  this  kind
he  secured  by  means  of  a  common-piace  book,  which  he
constantly  carried  about  with  him :  and  it  appears  that
he  v/as  at  Rome,  and  in  other  parts  of  Italy,  from  the
befrinninp-  of  Vespasian's  reiorn  to  the  end  of  Trajan's,  he
must  have  had  sufficient  time  and  opportunity  to  procure
materials  of  every  kind  ;  for  this  was  a  period  of  almost
forty  years.


LIFE    OF    PLUTARCH.  XXIX

We  sliall  the  more  readily  enter  into  the  belief  that
Plutarch  collected  his  materials  chiefly  from  conversa-
tion, when  we  consider  in  what  manner,  and  on  what
subjects,  the  ancients  used  to  converse.  The  discourse
of  people  of  education  and  distinction  in  those  days  was
somewhat  different  from  that  of  ours.  It  was  not  on  the
powers  or  pedigree  of  a  horse  :  it  was  not  on  a  match  of
travelling  between  geese  and  turkies :  it  was  not  on  a
race  of  maggots,  started  against  each  other  on  the  tiible,
when  they  first  came  to  day-light  from  the  shell  of  a  fil-
bert :  it  was  not  by  what  part  you  may  suspend  a  spaniel
the  longest  without  making  him  whine  :  it  was  not  on
the  exquisite  finesse,  and  the  highest  manceuvres  of  play.
The  old  Romans  had  no  ambition  for  attainm^ents  of  this
nature.  They  had  no  such  masters  in  science  as  Heber
and  Hoyle.  The  taste  of  their  day  did  not  run  so  high.
The  powers  of  poetry  and  philosophy,  the  oeconomy  of
human  life  and  manners,  the  cultivation  of  the  intellec-
tual faculties,  the  enlargement  of  the  mind,  historical
and  political  discussions  on  the  events  of  their  country  ;
....these,  and  such  subjects  as  these,  made  the  principal
part  of  their  conversation.  Of  this  Plutarch  has  given
us  at  once  a  proof  and  specimen,  in  what  he  calls  his
Symposiacs,  or,  as  our  Selden  calls  it,  his  Table-Talk.
From  such  conversations  as  these,  then,  we  cannot  won-
der that  he  was  able  to  collect  .such  treasures  as  were
necessary  for  the  maintenance  of  his  biographical  un-
dertaking.

In  the  sequel  of  the  last  quoted  passage,  we  find  a.no-
ther  argument  which  confirms  us  in  the  opinion  that
Plutarch's  knov/lcdgc  of  the  Roman  history  Avas  chiefly
of  colloquial  acquisition.  "  My  method  of  learning  the
Roman  language,  says  he,  may  seem  strange  ;  and  }-er
it  is  very  true.  I  did  not  so  much  gain  the  knowledge  of
things  by  words,  as  words  by  the  kno^'/ledge  I  had  of
things."  This  plainly  implies,  tliat  he  was  previously
acquainted  with  the  events  described  in  the  language  he
was  learning.

It  must  be  oviaicd  tliat  the  Roman  Plistcry  had  been
already  written  in  Greek  by  polybius ;  and  that,  indeed,
somewhat  invalidates  the  last-mentioned  argument.  Ne-
vertheless, it  has  still  suflicient  evidence  for  its  support.

VOL.    I.  D


XXX  LIFE    or    PLUTARCH.

There  are  a  thousand  circumstances  in  Phitarch's  Lives,
which  could  not  be  collected  from  Polybius;  and  it  is  clear
to  us,  that  he  did  not  make  much  use  of  his  Latin  reading:.

He  acknowleges  that  he  did  not  apply  himself  to  the
acquisition  of  that  language  till  he  was  far  advanced  in
life :  possibly  it  might  be  a.bout  the  latter  part  of  the  reign
of  Trajan,  whose  kind  disposition  towards  his  country,
rendered  the  weight  of  public  and  political  business  easy
to  him

But  whenever  he  might  begin  to  learn  the  language  of
Rome,  it  is  certain  that  he  made  no  great  progress  in  it.
This  appears  as  well  from  the  little  comments  he  has  oc-
casionally given  us  on  certain  Latin  words,  as  from  some
passages  in  his  Lives,  where  he  has  professedly  follow-
ed the  Latin  historians,  and  yet  followed  them  in  an  un-
certain an  erroneous  manner.

That  he  wrote  the  life  of  Demosthenes  and  Cicero  at
Chaeronea,  it  is  clear  from  his  own  account  ;  and  it  is
more  than  probable  too,  that  the  rest  of  his  Lives  were
written  in  that  retirement';  for  if,  while  he  was  at  Rome,
he  could  scarcely  find  time  to  learn  the  language,  it  is
hardly  to  be  supposed  that  he  could  do  more  than  lay  up
materials  for  composition.

A  circumstance  arises  here,  v/hich  confirms  to  us  an
opinion  we  have  long  entertained,  that  the  Book  of
Apophthegms,  which  is  said  to  have  been  written  by  Plu-
tarch, is  really  not  his  work.  This  book  is  dedicated  to
Trajan  ;  and  the  dedicator,  assuming  the  nam.e  and  cha-
racter of  Plutarch,  says,  he  had,  before  this,  written  the
Lives  of  illustrious  men  :  but  Plutarch  wrote  those  Lives
at  Ch?£ronea ;  and  he  did  not  retire  to  Chxronea  till  af-
ter the  death  of  Trajan.

There  are  other  proofs,  if  others  v/ere  necessary,  to
sliew  that  this  work  w^as  suppositious.  For  in  this  dedi-
cation to  Traja^n,  not  the  least  mention  is  made  of  Plu-
tarch's having  been  his  preceptor,  of  his  being  raised  by
him  to  the  consular  dignity,  or  of  his  beir.g  appointed
governor  of  Illyria.  Dacier,  observing  this,  has  drawn
a  wrong  conclusion  from  it,  and,  contrary  to  the  asser-
tion of  Suidas,  will  have  it,  that  Hutarch  was  neither
preceptor  to  Trajan,  nor  hono]-e<:l  v/ith  any  appointm-ents
under  him.  Had  it  occu^'red  to  him  that  the  Book  of  Apoph-
thegms could  not  be  Plutarch's  book,  but  that  it  vras
merely  an  extract  made  from  his  real  works,  by  some  in-


LIFE    or   PLUTARCH.  X.XXI

dustrious  j^ramniarian,  he  would  not  have  been  nnderthe
necessity  of  iiuiLardhi^  so  much  a;jainst  the  received  opin-
ion of  his  connections  with  Trajan;  nor  would  he  haAC
found  it  necessary  to  allow  so  little  credit  to  liis  letter  ad-
dressed to  that  emperor,  which  we  have  upon  record.
Tile  letter  is  as  follows  :

PLUTARCH  TO  TRAJAN.

*'  I  am  sensible  that  you  sought  not  the  empire.  Your
natural  modesty  woidd  not  suiier  you  to  apply  for  a  dis-
tinction to  which  you  were  always  entitled  by  the  excel-
lency of  your  manners.  That  modesty,  however,  makes
you  still  more  worthy  of  those  honours  you  had  no  ambi-
tion to  solicit.  Should  your  future  government  prove  in
any  degree  answerable  to  your  former  merit,  I  shall  have
reason  to  congratulate  both  your  virtue  and  my  own  good
fortune  on  tliis  great  event.  But  if  otherwise,  you  have
exposed  yourself  to  danger,  and  me  to  obloquy  ,  for  Rome
will  never  endure  an  emperor  unworthy  of  her  ;  and  the
faults  of  the  scholar  will  be  imputed  to  the  master.  Se-
neca is  reproached,  and  his  fame  still  suffers  for  the  vices
ofXero:  the  reputation  of  Quintilian  is  hurt  by  the  ill
coFiduct  of  his  scholars  ;  and  even  Socrates  is  accused  of
negligence  in  the  education  of  Alcibiades.  Cfyou,  how-
ever, I  have  better  hopes,  and  flatter  myself  that  your
admiriistration  will  do  honour  to  your  virtues.  Only  con-
tinue to  be  what  you  are.  Let  your  government  com-
nicuce  in  your  breast ,  and  lay  the  foundation  of  it  in  the
command  of  your  passions.  If  you  make  virtue  the  rule
of  your  conduct,  and  the  end  of  your  actions,  every  thing
will  proceed  in  harmony  and  order.  I  have  expLaned  to
you  the  spirit  of  those  laws  and  constitutions  that  were  es-
tablished by  your  predecessors  ;  and  you  have  nothmg  to
do  but  to  carry  them  hUo  execution.  If  this  should  bi
the  case,  I  shall  h^ve  the  glory  of  having  formed  an  em-
peror to  vn'tue  ;  but  if  otherwise,  let  this  letter  remain  a
testimony  with  succeeding  ages,  that  you  did  not  ruin  the
Roman  empire  under  pretence  of  the  counsels  or  tlie  au-
thority of  i  lutaiJ^h."

Why  Dacier  should  think  that  this  letter  is  neither
worthy  of  the  pen,  nor  written  in  the  manner  of  Plutarch,
it  is  not  easy  to  conceive ;  for  it  hui*   ail  tiie  spii-il,   the


^iXXll  LIFE   OF   PLUTARCH.

manly  freedom,  and  the  sentimental  turn  of  that  philo-
sopher.

We  shall  find  it  no  very  difficult  matter  to  account  for
his  connections  with  Trajan,  if  we  attend  to  the  manner
in  which  he  lived,  and  to  the  reception  he  met  with  in
Rome.  During  his  residence  in  that  city,  his  house  was
the  resort  of  the  principal  citizens.  All  that  were  dis-
tinguished by  their  rank,  taste,  learning,  or  politeness,
sought  his  conversation,  and  attended  his  lectures.  The
study  of  the  Greek  language  and  philosophy  was,  at  that
time,  the  greatest  pursuits  of  the  Roman  nobility,  and
even  the  emperors  honoured  the  most  celebrated  pro-
fessors Y/ith  their  presence  and  support.  Plutarch,  in  his
Treatise  on  Curiosity,  has  introduced  a  circumstance,
which  places  the  attention  that  was  paid  to  his  lectures  in
a  very  strong  light.  "  It  once  happened,"  says  he,  *'  that
when  I  was  speaking  in  public  at  Rome,  Arulenus  Rusti-
cus,  the  same  whom  Domitian,  through  envy  of  his  grow-
ing reputation,  afterwards  put  to  death,  was  one  of  my
hearers.  When  I  was  in  the  middle  of  my  discourse,  a
soldier  came  in,  and  brought  him  a  letter  from  the  em-
peror. Upon  this,  there  was  a  general  silence  through
the  audience,  and  I  stopped  to  give  him  time  to  peruse
this  letter  ;  but  he  would  not  suffer  it ;  nor  did  he  open
the  letter  till  I  had  finished  my  lecture,  a.nd  the  audience
was  dispersed."

To  understand  the  importance  of  this  compliment,  it
v/ill  be  necessary  to  consider  the  quality  and  character  of
the  person  who  paid  it.  Arulenus  was  one  of  the  greatest
men  hi  Rome  ;  distinguished  as  well  by  the  lustre  of  his
fpdiiily,  as  by  an  honourable  ambition  and  thirst  of  glory.
He  was  tribune  of  the  people  when  Nero  caused  Fastus
and  Soranus  to  be  capitally  condemned  by  a  decree  of  the
senate.  When  Soranus  was  deliberating  with  his  friends,
whether  he  should  attempt  or  give  up  his  defence,  Arule-
nus had  the  spirit  to  propose  an  opposition  to  the  decree  of
the  senate,  in  his  capacity  of  tribune  ;  and  he  would  have
carried  it  into  execution,  had  he  not  been  over-ruled  by
Psctus,  who  rem.onstrated,  that  by  such  a  measure  he
would  destroy  himself,  without  the  satisfcrction  of  serving
his  friend.  He  was  afterwards  praetor  under  Vitellius,
whose  interests  he  followed  with  the  greatest  fidelity.
But  his  spirit  and  magnanimity  do  him  the  greatest  ho-


LIFJE    OF    PLUTARCH.  XXXiU

nour,  in  that  eulogy  which  he  wrote  on  Paetus  and  Helvi-
dius  Prisciis.  His  whole  conduct  was  reguhited  by  the
precepts  of  philosophy  ;  and  the  respect  he  shewed  to
Plutarch  on  this  occasion  was  a  proof  of  his  attachment
to  it.  Such  was  the  man  who  postponed  the  letter  of  a
prince  to  the  lecture  of  a  philosopher.

But  Plutarch  was  not  only  treated  with  general  marks
of  distinction  by  the  superior  people  in  liome ;  he  had
particular  and  very  respectable  friendships.  Sossius  Se-
necio,  who  was  four  times  consul,  once  under  Nerva,  and
thrice  under  Trajan,  was  his  most  intimate  friend.  To
him  headdresses  his  Lives,  except  thatof  Aratus,Vvdiich
is  inscribed  to  Polycrates  of  Sycion,  the  grandson  of  Ara-
tus.  With  Senecio  he  not  only  lived  in  the  strictest
friendship  whilst  he  was  in  Rome,  but  corresponded  with
him  after  he  retired  to  Greece.  And  it  is  not  easy  to  be-
lieve, that  through  the  interest  of  this  zealcus  and  power-
ful friend,  Plutarch  migh|  not  only  be  appointed  tutor  to
Trajan,  but  be  advanced  likewise  to  the  consular  digni-
ty ?  When  we  consider  1  lutarch's  eminence  in  Heme
as  a  teacher  of  philosophy,  nothing  can  be  more  probable
than  the  fonner....when  Ave  remember  the  consular  in-
terest of  Senecio  under  Trajan,  and  his  distinguished  re-
gard for  Plutarch,  nothing  can  be  more  likely  than  the
latter.

The  honour  of  being  preceptor  to  such  a  virtuous
prince  as  Trajan,  is  so  important  a  point  in  the  life  of
Plutarch,  that  it  must  not  hastily  be  given  up.  Suidas
has  asserted  it.  The  letter  above  quoted,  if  it  be,  as  we
have  no  doubt  of  its  being,  the  genuine  composition  of
Plutarch,  has  confirmed  it.  Petrarch  has  maintained  it.
Dacier  only  has  doubted,  or  i-ather  denied  it.  But  upon
v/hat  evidence  has  he  grounded  his  opinion  ?  Plutarch,
he  says,  v/as  but  three  or  four  years  older  than  Trajan,
and  therefore  was  unht  to  be  his  preceptor  in  philosophy.
Now  let  us  enquire  into  the  force  of  this  argument.'
Trajan  spent  the  early  part  of  his  life  in  arms  :  Plutarch
in  the  study  of  the  sciences.  When  that  prince  applied
himself  to  literary  pursuits,  he  was  somewhat  advanced
in  life  :  Plutarch  mubt  have  been  more  so.  And  why  a
man  of  science  should  be  an  unfit  preceptor  in  philosophy
to  a  mili^^ry  man,  though  no  more  than  four  years  older

d3


XXXIY  LIFE    OF    PLUTARCH.

the  reason,  wc  apppeliend,  will  be  somewhat  difficult  to
discover.

Dacier,  moreover,  is  reduced  to  a  jittitio  priiicijiii,
when  he  says  that  Plutarch  was  only  four  years  older  than
Trajan  :  for  we  have  seen  that  it  is  impossible  to  ascer-
tain the  time  of  Plutarch's  birth  ;  and  that  the  date  which
Dacier  assigns  it  is  purely  conjectural  :  We  will  there-
fore conclude,  with  those  learned  men  who  have  formerly
allowed  Plutarch  the  honour  of  being  preceptor  to  Tra-
jan, that  he  certainly  Vv^as  so.  There  is  little  doubt  that
they  grounded  their  assertions  upon  proper  authority,
and^  indeed,  the  internal  evidence  arising  from  the  na-
ture and  eiiccts  of  that  education,  which  did  equal  honour
to  the  scholar  a.nd  to  the  master,  comes  in  aid  of  the  ar-
i^ument.

Some  chronologers  have  taken  upon  them  to  ascertain
the  lime  when  Plutarch's  reputation  was  established  in
Pvome.  Peter  of  Alexandria  fixes  it  in  the  thirteenth
year  of  the  reign  of  Nero,  in  the  consulate  ofCapito  and
Rufus  :  "  Lucian,"  says  he,  "  was,  at  this  time,  in  great
reputation  amongst  the  Romans  ;  and  Musonius  and
Plutarch  were  well  known."  Eusebius  brings  it  one  year
lower,  and  tells  us,  that,  in  the  fourteenth  year  of  Nero's
reign,  Musonius  and  Plutarch  were  in  great  reputation,
lioth  these  w^riters  are  palpably  mistaken.  We  have
seen,  that,  in  the  twelfth  year  of  Nero,  Plutarch  was  yet
at  school  under  Ammonius  ;  and  it  is  not  very  probable
that  a  school-boy  should  be  celebrated  as  a  philosopher
in  Pvome,  w^ithin  a  year  or  tv'o  after.  Indeed,  Eusebius
contradicts  himself  ;  for,  on  another  occasion,  he  places
him  in  the  reign  of  Adrian,  the  third  year  of  the  Olym-
piad 224,  of  the  christian  ?.ira  120:  "In  this  year,"  says
he,  "  the  philosophers  Plutarch  of  Chscronea,  Sextus,  and
Agathobulus,  flourished. ' '  Thus  he  carries  him  as  much
too  low,  as  he  had  before  placed  him  too  high.  It  is  cer-
tain, that  he  first  grew  into  reputation  under  the  reign
of  Vespasian,  and  that  his  philosophical  fame  was  estab-
lished in  the  time  of  Trajan.

It  seems  that  the  Greek  and  L?.tin  writers  of  those
times  were  either  little  acquainted  w^ith  each  other's
works,  or  that  there  wxre  some  literary  jealousies  and
animosities  betw^een  them.  When  Plutarch  flourished,
there  were  several  cotemporary  writers  of  distinguished


LITE    OF    PLUTARCH.  XXXV

abilities  ;  Perseus,  Lucan,  Silius  Italicus,  Valerius  Flac-
cus,  the  youni^er  Pliny,  Solinus,  Martial,  Quintilian,  and
many  more.  Yet  none  of  those  have  made  the  least
mention  of  him.  Was  this  envy  ?  or  was  it  Roman
pride  ?  Possibly,  they  could  not  bear  that  a  Greek  so-
phist, a  native  of  such  a  contemptible  town  as  Chaironea,
should  enjoy  the  palm  of  literary  praise  in  Rome.  It
must  be  observed,  at  the  same  time,  that  the  principal
Roman  writers  had  conceived  a  jealousy  of  the  Greek
philosophers,  which  was  very  prevailing  in  that  age.  Of
this  we  fmd  a  strong  testimony  in  the  elder  Pliny,  where
speaking  of  Cato  the  Censor's  disapproving  and  dis-
missing the  Grecian  orators,  and  of  the  younger  Cato's
bringing  in  triumph  a  sophist  from  Greece,  he  exclaims
in  terms  that  signified  contempt,  quanta  morum  commu-
tatio  !

However,  to  be  undistinguished  by  the  encomiums  of
cotemporary  writers,  was  by  no  means  a  thing  peculiar
to  Plutarch.  It  has  been,  and  stili  is,  the  fate  of  superior
genius,  to  be  beheld  either  with  the  silent  or  abusive  en-
vy. It  makes  its  way  like  the  sun,  w^hich  we  look  upon
with  pain,  unless  something  passes  over  him  that  ob-
scures his  glory.  We  then  view  with  eagerness  the
shadow,  the  cloud,  or  the  spot,  and  are  pleased  with
what  eclipses  the  brightness  we  otherwise  cannot  bear.

Yet,  if  Plutarch,  like  other  great  men,  found  "  envy
never  conquered  but  by  death,"  his  manes  have  been  ap-
peased by  the  amplest  atonements.  Amongst  the  many
that  have  done  honour  to  his  memory,  the  following  eu-
logiums  deserve  to  be  recorded.

AuLus  Gellius  compliments  him  with  the  highest
distmction  in  science,*

Taurus,  quoted  by  Gellius,  calls  him  a  man  of  the
most  consummate  learning  and  wisdom, t

EusEBius  places  him  at  the  head  of  the  Greek  philo-
sophers. |

Sard  I  ANUS,  in  his  preface  to  the  Lives  of  the  Philoso-
phers, calls  him  the  most  divine  Plutarch,  the  beauty  and
harmony  of  philosophy,

Petrakch,  in  his  moral  writings,  frequently  distin-
guishes him  by  the  title  of  the  great  Plutarch,

»  A.  Gcll?us,  lib.  iv.  cap.  7.  \  Gcll.  lib.  i.  cap.  26.  \  Euseb.
Pjsep,  lib.  iii.  init.


XXXVl  LIFE    OF    PLUTARCH.

Honour  has  been  done  to  him  likewise  by  Origen,  Hi-
merius  the  Sophist,  Cyrillus,  Theodoret,  Suidas,  Pho-
tius,  XiphiUnus,  Joannes,  SaUsberiensis,  Victorius,  Lip-
sius,  and  Agathias,  in  the  epigram  which  is  tiius  trans-
lated by  Dry  den  : —

Ch^eronean  Plutarch,  to  thy  deathless  praise
Does  mariial  Rome  this  graceful  statue  raise  ;
Becaur^e  both  Greece  and  she  thy  fame  have  shar'd:
Their  heroes  writien,  and  their  lives  conipar'd.
But  thou  ihyself  could'st  never  write  thy  own  :
Their  lives  have  parallels,  but  thine  has  none.

But  this  is  perfectly  extravagant.  We  are  much  better
pleased  with  the  Greek  verses  of  the  honest  metropolitan
under  Constantine  Monomachus.  They  deserve  to  be
translated —

Lord  of  that  light,  that  living  power,  to  save
Whicli  her  lost  sons  no  Heathen  Science  gave;
If  aught  of  these  thy  mercy  means  to  spare,
Yield  Pi^ATo,  Lord,  yield  Plui  arch  to  my  prayer.
Led  by  no  grace,  no  new  conversion  wrought,
They  felt  thy  own  divinity  of  thought.
That  grace  exerteil,  spare  the  partial  rod  :
The  last,  best  v/ivness,  that  thou  art  their  God !

Theodore  Gaza,  who  was  a  man  of  considerable  learn-
ing, and  a  great  reviver  of  letters,  had  a  particular  attach-
ment to  our  biographer.  When  he  v/as  asked,  in  case  of
a  general  destruction  of  books,  what  author  he  would  wish
to  save  from  the  ruin,  he  answered  Plutarch  He  con-
sidered his  historical  and  philosophical  writings  as  the
most  beneficial  to  society,  and,  of  course,  the  best  sub-
stitute for  ail  other  books.

Were  it  necessary  to  produce  further  suTrages  for  the
merit  of  Plutarch,  it  would  be  suiTicient  to  say,  that  he
has  been  praised  by  Montaign,  St.  Evremond  and  Mon-
tesquieu, the  best  critics  and  ,the  ablest  writers  of  their
time.

After  receiving  the  most  distinguished  honours  that  a
philosopher  could  enjoy  ;  after  the  god-like  office  of
teaching  wisdom  and  goodness  to  the  metropolis  of  the
world  ;  after  having  formed  an  emperor  to  virtue  ;  and
jtfter  beholding  the  effects  of  his  precepts  in  the  happi-
ness of  human  kind  ;  Plutarch  retired  to  his  native  coun-
try.    The  death  of  his  illustrious  prince  and  pupil,   to   a


LIFE    OF    PLUTARCH.  XXXVU

man  of  his  sensibility,  must  have  rendered  Rome  even
painful  :  for  whatever  influence  philosophy  may  have  on
the  cultivation  of  the  mind,  we  find  that  it  has  very  little,
power  over  the  interests  of  the  heart.

It  must  have  been  in  the  decline  of  life  that  Plutarch
retired  to  Chaeronea.  But  though  he  withdrew  from  the
busier  scenes  of  the  world,  he  fled  not  to  an  unprofitable
or  inactive  solitude.  In  that  retirement  he  formed  the
great  work  for  which  he  had  been  so  long  preparing  ma-
terials, his  lives  of  illustrious  men  ;  a  work  which,  as
Scaliger  says,  non  solum  fuit  in  manibus  hominum^  at  ttiatn
humani  generis  memoriani  occupavit.

To  recommend  by  encomiums  what  has  been  received
with  universal  approbation,  would  be  superfluous.  But
to  observe  where  the  biographer  has  excelled,  and  in  what
he  has  failed  ;  to  make  a  due  estimate  as  well  of  the  de-
fects as  of  the  merits  of  his  work ;  may  have  its  use.

Lipsius  has  observed,  that  he  does  not  write  history,
but  scraps  of  history;  '}ion  historiam^  sedparticulas  historic.
This  is  said  of  his  lives,  and,  in  one  sense,  it  is  true.  No
single  life  that  he  has  written  will  afford  a  sufficient  history
of  its  proper  period  ;  neither  was  it  possible  that  it  should
do  so.  As  his  plan  comprized  a  number  of  cotemporary
lives,  most  of  v/hich  were  in  public  characters,  the  business
of  their  period  was  to  be  divided  amongst  them.  The
genera,!  history  of  the  time  vi^as  to  be  thrown  into  separate
portions ;  and  those  portions  were  to  be  allotted  to  such
characters  as  had  the  principal  interest  in  the  several
events.

This  was  in  some  measure,  done  by  Plutarch;  but  it
was  not  done  with  great  art  or  accuracy.  At  the  same
time,  as  we  have  already  observed,  it  is  not  to  be  wondered,
if  tliere  were  some  repetitions,  when  the  part  which  the
several  characters  bore  in  the  principal  events,  was  neces-
sary to  be  pointed  out.

Yet  these  scraps  of  history,  thus  divided  and  dispersed,
when  seen  in  a  collective  form,  make  no  very  imperfect
narrative  of  the  times  within  their  view.  Their  biogra-
pher's attention  to  the  minuter  circumstances  of  character,
his  dispositions  of  principals  and  manners,  and  his  poli-
tical and  philosophical  discussions,  lead  us  in  an  easy  and
intelligent  manner,  to  the  events  he  describes.

It  is  i^ot  to  be  denied,  that  his  narratives  are  some-
times disorderly,  and  too  often  encumbered  with  imper-


XXXViil  LITE    or    PLUTARCH.

tinent  digressions.  By  pursuing  with  too  much  indul-
gence the  train  of  ideas,  he  has  frequently  destroyed  the
order  of  facts,  brought  together  events  that  lay  at  a  dis-
tance from  each  other,  called  forward  those. circumstan-
ces to  v/hich  he  should  have  made  a  regular  progress,  and
made  no  other  apology  for  these  idle  excursions,  but  by-
telling  us  that  he  is  out  of  the  order  of  time.

Notes,  in  the  time  of  Plutarch,  were  not  in  use.  Had
he  known  the  convenience  of  marginal  writing,  he  M^ould
certainly  have  thrown  the  greatest  part  of  his  digressions
into  that  form.  They  are,  undoubtedly,  tedious  and
disgustful ;  and  all  we  can  do  to  reconcile  ourselves  to
them,  is  to  remember,  tiiat,  in  the  first  place,  marginal
writing  was  a  thing  unknown ;  and  that  the  benevolent
desire  of  conveying  instruction,  was  the  greatest  mv?dve
v/ith  the  biographer  for  introducing  them.  This  appears
at  least  from  the  nature  of  them  ;  for  they  are  chiefly,
disquisitions  in  natural  history  and  philosophy.

In  painting  the  manners  of  men,  Plutarch  is  truly  ex-
cellent. Nothing  ciui  be  more  clear  than  his  moral  dis-
tmctions;  nothiiig  finer  than  his  delineations  of  the  mind.

The  spirit  of  philosophical  observation  and  inquiry,
which,  when  propsrjy  directed,  is  the  great  oriic..nent
and  excellence  of  hisiorical  composition,  Plutarch  pos-
sessed in  an  emhient  degree.  His  biographical  writings
teach  phiiosopiiy  at  once  by  precept  and  by  example.
His  morals  and  his  characters  limtually  expliiinand  give
force  to  each  oL-ier.

His  sentiments  of  the  duty  of  a  biographer  v/ere  pecu-
liarly just  a  id  djiicate.  This  v/ili  appear  from  his  itiic-
tures  on  those  historians  who  wrote  o"f  Phiiistus.  *'it  is
plain,  says  he,  tha.t  Timscus  takes  every  occasion,  from
Phiiistus's  known  adherence  to  arbitrary  power,  to  load
him  with  the  heaviest  reproaches.  Those  whom  iie  in-
jured are  in  some  degree  excusable,  if,  in  their  resencment,
they  treated  him  with  indignities  after,  death.  But  where-
fore should  his  biographers,  whom  he  never  injured,  and
who  have  had  the  benefit  of  his  works  ;  wherefore  shoidd
they  exhibit  him  v/ith  all  the  exaggerations  of  scurrillity
in  those  scenes  of  distress  to  which  fortune  sometimes  re-
duces the  best  of  men  ?  On  the  other  hand  Ephorus  is
no  less  extravaticant  in  his  encomiums  on  Phiiistus.  He
knows  well  how  to  throw  into  shades  the  foibles  ox  the


LIFE    OF    PLtTTARCH.  XXXIX

Imman  character,  and  to  give  an  air  of  plausibility  to  the
most  indeftns'ble  conduct :  but  with  all  his  elei^ance,  with
all  his  art  he  cannot  rescue  Fhilistus  from  the  imputation
of  being  the  most  strenuous  supporter  of  arbitrary  pow-
er, of  being  the  fondest  follower  and  admirer  of  the
luxury,  the  magnificence,  the  alliance  of  tyiants.  Upon
the  whole  he  who  neither  defends  the  principles  of  Fhilis-
tus, nor  insults  over  his  misfortunes,  will  best  discharge
the  duty  of  the  historian.

There  is  such  a  thing  as  constitutional  religion.  There
is  a  certain  temper  and  frame  of  mind  naturally  produc-
tive of  devotion.  There  are  men  who  are  born  with
the  original  principles  of  piety  ;  and  in  this  class  we  need
not  hesitate  to  place  Plutarch.

If  this  disposition  has  sometimes  made  him  too  indul-
gent to  superstition,  and  too  attentive  to  the  less  rational
circumstances  of  the  heathen  theology,  it  is  not  to  be
wondered.  But,  upon  the  whole,  he  had  consistent  and
honourable  notions  of  the  Supreme  Being.

That  he  believed  the  unity  of  the  divine  nature,  we
have  already  seen  in  his  observations  on  the  word  £/,  en-
graved on  Apollo's  temple.  The  same  opinion  too  is
found  in  his  Treatise  on  the  cessation  of  oracles  ;  where,
in  the  character  of  a  PIatonist,he  argues  against  the  Stoics,
who  denied  the  plurality  of  worlds.  "  If  there  are  many
worlds,  said  the  Stoics,  why  then  is  there  only  one  fate,  and
one  Providence  to  guide  them  ?  for  the  Platonists  allovr
that  there  is  but  one,. ...Why  should  not  many  Jupiters  or
gods,  be  necessary  for  the  government  of  many  worlds?"
To  this  Plutarch  answers,  "Where  is  the  necessity  of
6\ipposing  many  Jupiters  for  this  plurality  of  worlds  ?  Is
not  one  excellent  Being,  endued  v/ith  reason  and  intelli-
gence, such  as  he  is  whom  we  acknowledge  to  be  the  Fa-
ther and  Lord  of  all  things,  sufficient  to  direct  and  rule
these  worlds  ?  If  there  were  more  supreme  agents,  their
decrees  would  be  vain,  and  contradictory  to  each  other  ?

But  though  Plutarch  acknowledged  the  individuality
of  the  supreme  being,  he  believed,  nevertheless,  in  the
existence  of  intermediate  biiings  of  an  inferior  order,  be-
tween the  divine  and  the  human  nature.  These  beings
he  calls  genii,  or  dccmons.  It  is  impossible,  he  thinks,
from  the  general  order  and  principles  of  creation,  that
there  should  be  no  mean  betwixt  the  two  extremes  of  a


Xl  LIFE    OF    PLUTARCH.

mortal  and  immortal  being  ;  that  there  cannot  be  in  na-
ture so  g-reat  a  vacuum,  without  some  intermediate  species
of  life,  which  might  in  some  measure  partake  of  both.
And  as  we  find  the  connection  between  soul  and  body
to  be  made  by  means  of  the  animal  spirits,  so  these  dae-
mons are  intelligences  betwen  divinity  and  humanity.
Their  nature,  however,  is  believed  to  be  progressive.  At
first  they  are  supposed  to  have  been  virtuous  men,  whose
souls  being  resigned  from  the  gross  parts  of  their  former
existence,  are  admitted  into  the  higher  order  of  genii,
and  are  from  thence  either  raised  to  a  more  exalted  mode
ofsetherial  being,  or  degraded  to  mortal  forms,  according
to  their  merit  or  their  degenersicy.  One  order  of  these
genii,  he  supposes,  presided  over  oracles  ;  others  admi-
nistex^ed,  under  the  supreme  Being,  the  affairs  and  the
fortunes  of  men,  supporting  the  virtuous,  punishing  the
bad,  and  sometimes  even  communicating  with  the  best  and
purest  natures.  Thus  the  genius  of  Socrates  still  warned
him  of  approaching  danger,  and  taught  him  to  avoid  it.
It  is  this  order  of  beings  which  the  late  Mr.  Thomson,
who  in  enthusiasm  was  a  Platonist,  and  in  benevolence  a
Pythagorean,  has  so  beautifully  described,  in  his  Seasons:
and,  as  if  the  good  bard  had  believed  the  doctrine,  he
pathetically  invokes  a  favourite  spirit  which  had  lately
forsaked  its  former  mansion  :

And  art  thou,  Stanly,  of  that  sacred  band?
Alas  !  for  us  too  soon  !

Such  were  Plutarch's  religious  principles ;  and  a.s  a
proof  that  he  thought  them  of  consequence,  he  entered,
after  his  retirement,  into  a  sacred  character,  and  was  con-
secrated priest  of  Apollo.

This  was  not  his  sole  appointment,  when  he  returned
to  Chreronea.  He  united  the  sacerdotal  with  the  magi-
stratial  character,  and  devoted  himself  at  once  to  the  ser-
vice of  the  gods,  and  to  the  duties  of  society.  He  did  not
think  that  philosophy,  or  the  pursuit  of  letters,  ought  to
to  exempt  any  man  from  personal  service  in  the  commu-
nity to  which  he  belonged  ;  and  though  his  literary  la-
bours were  of  the  greatest  importance  to  the  world,  he
sought  no  excuse  in  those  from  discharging  ofiices  of  pub-
lic trust  in  his  little  city  of  Chseronea.

It  appears  that  he  passed  through  several  of  these  offi-
ces, and  that  he  was,  at  last,   appointed  archoii,  or  chief


tIFE    CF    PLUTAllCir.  Xil

magistrate  of  tlic  city.  Whether  he  rcti-Inecl  his  siiper-
intenckncy  of  Illyria  after  the  death  cf  Trajan,  v/e  do
not  certainly  know  :  birt,  in  this  humble  sphere,  it  will
he  worth  our  while  to  inquire  in  what  manner  a  philo-
sopher vrould  admirir;ter  justice.

With  regard  to  the  inferior  ofTir.es  that  he  bore,  ht
looked  upon  tiiem  in  the  same  lii^ht  as  the  great  Epa-
luinondas  had  done,  who,  vvhen  he  was  ap'jjointed  to  a
commission  beneath  his  rank,  cbsc^wed,  "  th'it  no  oHic*
could  give  dignity  to  liim  that  held  it  ;  but  thi-.t  he  who
held  it  might  give  dignity  to  any  ofTice."  It  isnotuncn
tertaining  to  hear  our  philosopher  apologize  for  his  em-
ployment when  he  discharges  the  ofiice  of  commissioner
of  sewers  and  public  buildings.  "  I  make  no  doubt,"
says  he,  "  that  the  citizens  of  Cha:rcnea  often  smile,
when  they  see  me  employed  in  such  offices  as  these.  On
such  occasions,  I  generally  call  to  mind  what  is  said  of
Antisthenes.  When  he  was  bringing  home,  in  his  own
hands,  a  dirty  fish  from  the  market,  some,  who  observed
it,  expressed  their  surprise  :  It  is  for  myself,  said  An-
tisthenes, that  I  carry  this  fish.  On  the  contrary,  for
my  own  part,  when  I  am  rallied  for  measuring  tiles,  or
for  calculating  a  quantity  of  stones  or  mortar,  I  answer,
that  it  is  not  for  myself  I  do  these  things,  but  for  my
country.  For,  in  all  things  of  this  nature  the  public
utility  takes  off  the  disgrace  ;  and  the  meaner  the  office
you  sustain  may  be,  the  greater  is  the  compliment  that
you  pay  to  the  public-"

Plutarch,  in  the  capacity  of  a  public  magistrate,  was  in-
defatigable in  recommending  unanimity  to  the  citizens.
To  carry  this  point  more  icffectually,  he  lays  it  dov/n  as  a
first  principle,  that  a  magistrate  should  be  affable  and
easy  of  access  ;  that  his  house  should  always  be  open  as
a  place  of  refuge  for  those  who  sought  for  justice;  and
that  he  should  not  satisfy  himself  merely  with  allotting
certam  hours  of  the  day  to  sit  for  the  dispatch  of  business,
but  that  he  should  employ  a  part  of  his  time  in  private
negociations,  in  making  up  domestic  quarrels,  and  recon-
cihng  divided  friends.  This  employment  he  regarded  as
one  of  the  principal  parts  of  his  office;  and,  indeed,  he
might  properly  consid(,'r  it  in  a  political  light;  for  it  too
frequently  hapnens,  that  the  most  dangerous  public  fac-
tions arc  fit  first  kindled  by  private  misunderstandings.

VOL.    I.  E


Xlii  LIFK    OF    PLUTAHCH.

Thus,  in  one  part  of  his  works,  he  falls  into  the  same
sentiment :  "  As  public  conflagrations,  says  he,  do  not
always  begin  in  public  edifices,  biit  are  caused  more  fre-
quently by  some  lamp  neglected  in  a  private  house  ;  so
in  the  administration  of  states,  it  does  not  always  happen
that  the  flame  of  sedition  arises  from  political  diiTerences,
but  from  private  dissentions,  which  running  through  a
long  chain  of  connections,  at  length  affect  the  whole  body
of  the  people.  For  this  reason,  it  is  one  of  the  principal
duties  of  a  minister  of  state  or  magistrette,  to  heal  these
private  animosities,  and  to  prevent  them  from  growing
into  public  divisions.".... After  these  observations,  he
mentions  several  states  and  cities  which  had  ov/ed  their
ruin  to  the  same  little  causes  :  and  then  adds,  that  we
ought  not  by  any  means  to  be  inattentive  to  the  misun-
derstandings of  private  men,  but  apply  to  them  tlie  most
timely  remedies  ;  for,  by  proper  care,  as  Cato  observes,
what  is  great  becomes  little,  and  what  is  little  is  reduced
to  nothing.  Of  the  truth  of  these  observations,  the  an-
nals of  our  own  country,  we  wish  we  had  no  reason  to  say
our  own  times,  have  presented  us  with  many  melancholy
instances^

As  Plutarch  observed  that  it  was  a  fashionable  fault
amongst  men  of  fortune  to  refuse  apropcL'  respect  to  ma-
gistrates pf  inferior  rank,  he  endeavoured  to  remove  this
impolitic  evil  as  well  by  precept  as  by  example.  "  To
learn  obedience  and  deference  to  the  magistrate,  says  he,
is  one  of  the  first  and  best  principles  of  discipline  ;  nor
ought  these  by  any  means  to  be  dispensed  v/ith,  though
tliat  magistrate  should  be  inferior  to  us  in  figure  or  in
fortune.  Tor  bov/  absurd  is  it,  if,  in  theatrical  exhibitions,
the  meanest  jictor,  tliat  wears  a  mornentar}'  diadem.,  shall
receive  his  due  respect  from  superior  players  ;  and  yet,
in  civil  life,  men  of  greater  pov/er  or  wealth  shall  M-ith-
lioldthe  deference  that  is  due  to  the  magistrate  1  In  this
case,  however,  they  shculd  remember,  that  while  they
consult  their  own  importance,  they  detract  from  the
lionour  of  the  state.  Private  disunity  ought  always  to  give
place  to  public  authority  ;  as,  in  liparta,  it  was  usual  for
tht  kings  to  rise  in  compliment  to  the  ephori."

Witih  regard  to  Plutarch's  political  principles,  it  is
clear  that  he  was,  even  whilst  at  Rome,  *•.  republican  in
heart,  and  a  friend  to  liberty  :  But  this  does  him  no  pecu-


LIFE    OF    PLUTARCH.  xllli

liar  honour.  Such  privileges  are  the  birth-right  of  man-
kind ;  and  they  are  never  parted  Avith  but  through  fear  or
favour.  At  Ronne,  he  acted  like  a  philosopher  of  the
world.  Quando  not  siajiio  i:i  Rcma,  noi  faclav.io  conic  Eg-
Unofanno  in  Roma,  He  found  a  constitution  which  he  had
not  power  to  alter  ;  yet,  though  he  could  not  make  man-
kind free,  he  made  them  comparatively  happy,  by  teach-
ing clemency  to  their  temporary  ruler.

At  Chrcronea  we  find  him  more  opqnly  avowing  the
principles  of  liberty.  During  his  residence  at  Rome,  ht
had  reni^u'ked  an  essential  error  in  the  police.  In  all  com-
plaints and  processes,  hov/ever  trifling,  the  people  had
recourse  to  thefirst  officers  of  state.  By  this  means  they
supposed  that  their  interest  would  be  promoted  ;  but  it
had  a  certain  tendency  to  enslave  them  still  mere,  and  to
render  them  the  tools  and  dependents  of  ccuit  pG"\/ei'.
Of  tl  e:ie  measures  the  arciion  of  Choeronea  tlius  expi-es-
ses  his  disapprobation  :  "  At  tlrc  same  time,  ssys  hc,thiit
we  endeavour  to  render  a  city  obedient  to  its  magistrates
we  irAist  bcM'CU'e  of  reducing  it  to  a  servile  or  too  humili-
ating a  condition.  Those  who  carry  every  tiille  to  the
cognizance  of  the  supreme  magistrate,  are  contributinp;
ull  they  can  to  the  servitude  of  their  country."  And  it
is  undoubtedly  true,  that  the  habitual  and  universal  exer-
tion of  authority  has  a  na.tund  tendency  to  arbitrary  do-
minie n.

We  have  now  considered  Plutarch  in  the  light  of  a  phi-
losopher, a  biographer,  and  a  magistrate  ;  we  have  en-
tered into  his  moral,  religious,  and  political  character,  as
well  as  the  informations  we  could  obtain  vi  ouid  enable  us.
It  only  remains  that  we  view  him  in  the  domestic  sphere
gf  life. ...that  little,  but  trying  sphere,  where  Vv'e  act  wholly
fi'om  ourselves,  and  assume  no  character  but  that  whicJi
nature  and  education  has  i^iven  us.

Dacier,  on  falling  into  this  part  of  Plutarch's  history,
has  made  a  whimsical  observation.  '*  There  are  two  car-
dinal points,  says  he,  in  a  man's  life,  which  determine  his
liappiness  or  his  misery.  These  are  his  birth  and  his
marriage.  It  is  in  vain  for  a  man  to  be  born  fortunate,
if  he  be  unfortunate  in  his  marriage."  How  Dacier  could
reconcile  the  astrologers  to  this  new  doctrine,  it  is  not
easy  to  say  :  for,  upon  this  principle,  a  man  must  at  least
have  Uyo  gacd  starii,  one  for  his  birth-day,  the  other  for


XnV  LIFE    OF    PLUTARCH.

his  v/edding'-day  ;  as  it  seems  that  the  iiifliience  of  the
natal  star  cov.Id  not  extend  beyond  the  bridal  morn,  but
thsit  a  man  then  falls  under  a  different  dominion.

At  what  time  rlutarch  entered  into  this  state,  we  are
r.ot  quite  certain  ;  but  as  it  is  not  probable  that  a  man  of
his  wisdom  would  marry  at  an  advanced  time  of  life,  and
as  his  wife  was  a  na,tive  of  Chxronea,  we  may  conclude
ti:iathe  married  before  he  went  to  Rome.  However  that
might  be,  it  appears  tha.t  he  was  fortunate  in  his  choice  ;
for  his  wife  was  not  only  well-born  and  well-bred,  but  a
Avoman  of  distinguished  sense  and  virtue.  Pier  name  was?
Timoxena.

Plutarch  appears  to  have  had  at  least  five  children  by"
her,  four  sons,  and  a  daughter,  v/hom,  out  of  regard  for
Iier  mother,  he  called  I'imoxena.  He  has  given  us  a
proof  that  he  had  all  the  tenderness  of  an  affectionate  fa-
ther for  these  children,  by  recording  a  little  instance  of
his  daughter's,  natural  benevolence.  "  When  she  v/as
very  young,"  says  he,  '•'  she  would  frequently  beg  of  her
nurse  to  give  the  breast  not  only  to  the  other  children,  but
to  her  babies  and  dolls,  which  slie  considered  as  her  de-
pendents, and  under  her  protection."  Who  does  not  see,
in  this  simple  circumstance,  at  once  the  fondness  of  the
parent,  and  the  benevolent  disposition  of  the  man  ?

But  the  philosopher  scon  lost  his  little  blossom  of  hu-
manity. His  Timoxena  died  in  her  infancy  ;  and  if  v/e
may  judge  from  the  consolatory  letter  he  wrote  to  her
mother  on  the  occasion,  he  bore  the  loss  as  became  a  phi-
losopher. '••  ConUder,  says  he,  that  death  has  deprived
your  Timoxena  only  of  small  enjoyments.  The  things
she  knev/  were  but  of  little  consequence,  and  she  could
be  delighted  only  with  tiifies."  In  this  letter  we  find  a
portrait  of  his  wife,  which  does  her  the  greatest  honour.
From  the  testimony  given  by  her  husband,  it  appears
that  she  was  far  above  the  general  weakness  and  affectation
of  her  sex.  She  had  no  passion  for  the  expensiveness  of
dress,  or  the  parade  of  public  appearances.  She  thought
every  kind  of  extravagai:iGe  blameable  ;  and  her  ambition
went  not  beyond  the  decencies  and  propneties  of  life.

Plutarch  had  before  this  buried  two  of  his  sons,  his
eldest  son,  and  a  younger  named  Charon  ;  and  it  appears
from  the  above-mennoned  letter,  that  the  conduct  of  Ti-
moxena, on  these  events,  was  worthy  the  wife  of  a  philo-


LIFE    OF    PLUTARCH.  xlv

sopher.  She  did  not  disfigure  herself  by  change  of
apparel,  or  give  way  to  the  extravagance  of  grief,  as  Wo-
men in  general  do  on  such  occasions,  but  supported  the
dispensations  of  Providence  with  a  solemn  and  rational
submission,  even  when  they  seemed  to  be  most  severe.
She  had  taken  unwearied  pains,  and  undergone  the  great-
est  sufferings,  to  nui*se  her  son  Charon  at  her  own  breast,
at  a  time  when  an  abscess  formed  near  the  part  had
obliged  her  to  undergo  an  incision.  Yet,  when  the  child,
reared  with  so  much  tender  pain  and  difficulty,  died,  those
Avho  Avent  to  visit  her  on  the  melancholy  occasion,  found
her  house  in  no  more  disorder  than  if  nothing  distressflil
had  happened.  She  received  her  friends  as  Adrnetus
entertained  Hercules,  v/ho,  the  same  day  that  he  buried
Alceste,  betrayed  not  the  least  confusion  before  his  heroic
guest.

With  a  woman  of  so  much  dignity  of  mind  and  excel-
lence of  disposition,  a  man  of  Plutarch's  wisdom  and  hu-
manity must  have  been  infinitely  happy  :  and,  indeed,  it
r.ppecirs  from  those  precepts  of  conjugal  happiness  and
affection  which  he  has  left  us,  that  he  has  drav/n  his  ob-
servations from  experience,  and  that  the  rules  he  recom-
mended had  been  previously  exemplified  in  his  own  fa-
mily.

It  is  said  that  Plutarch  had  some  misunderstanding  with
his  wife's  relations;  upon  which  Timoxena,  fearing  that
it  might  affect  their  union,  had  duty  and  religion  enough
to  go  as  far  as  Mount  Helicon  and  sacrifice  to  Love,  mTio
had  a  celebrated  temple  there.

He  left  two  sons,  Plutarch  and  Lamprius.  The  latter
appears  to  have  been  a  philosopher,  and  it  is  to  him  we
are  indebted  for  a  catalogue  of  his  father's  writings  ;
which,  however,  one  cannot  look  upon,  as  INIr.  Dryden
says,  without  the  same  emotions  that  a  merchant  must
feel  in  perusing  a  bill  of  freight  after  he  has  lost  his  veS'
sel.     The  writings  no  longer  extant  are  these  :

Four  books  of  Commentaries  on  Homer.

Four  books  of  Commentaries  on  liesiod.

Five  books  to  Empedocles,  on  tlie  Quintessence*

Five  books  of  Essays.

Xhrce  books  of  Fables.

Three  boofis  of  Rhetoric.

£  2


Xlvi  LITE    OF    PLUTARCH.

Three  books  on  the  Introduction  of  the  SouL

Two  books  of  Extracts  from  the  Philosophers.

Three  books  on  Sense.

Three  books  on  the  great  Actions  of  Cities.

Two  books  on  Politics.

An  Essay  on  Opportunity,  to  Theophrastus.

Four  books  on  the  Obsolete  Parts  of  History.

Two  books  of  Proverbs.

Eight  books  on  the  Topics  of  Aristotle.

Three  books  on  Justice,  to  Chrysippus.

An  Essay  on  Poetry.

A  Dissertation  on  the  difference  between  the  Pyrrhanians

and  the  Academicians.
A  Trealise  to  prove  that  there  was  but  one  Academy  of
Plato.

"Hercules,

Hesiod,

Pindar,

Crates  and  Daiphantus,  with  a  parallel,

Leonidas,

Aristomenes,

Scipio  Africanus  Junior,  and  Meiitellus,
The  Lives  of<j  Augustus,.

I  Tiberius,
.  Claudius,
,  Nero,
Caligula,
Vitellius,

Epaminondas  and  the  elder  Scipio,  with  m
paralleh

Aulus  Gellius  has  taken  a  long  story  from  TauruS)
about  Plutarch's  method  of  correcting  a  slave,  in  which
there  is  nothing  more  than  this,  that  he  punished  him
like  a  philosopher,  and  gave  him  his  discipline  without  be-
ing out  of  temper.

Plutarch  had  a  nephew  named  Sextus,  who  bore  a  con-
siderable reputation  in  the  world  of  letters,  and  taught
the  Greek  language  and  learaing  to  Marcus  Antonius*
The  character  which  that  philosopher  has  given  him,  in
his  First  Bookof  Reflections,  may,  with  great  proprietji,
be  applied  to  his  uncle.  "  Sextus,  by  his  example,  taught
Hie  mildness  and  humanity  j  to  govern,  my  house  like  a


LIFE    OF    PLUTARCH.  xlVil

good  father  of  a  family  ;  to  fall  into  an  easy  and  imafTected
gravity  of  manners  ;  to  live  agreeably  to  nature  ;  to  find
out  the  art  of  discovering  and  preventing  the  wants  of  mj
friends  ;  to  connive  at  the  noisy  follies  of  the  ignorant  and
impertinent  ;  and  to  comply  with  the  understandings  and
tlie  humours  of  men."

One  of  the  rewards  of  philosophy  is  long  life  ;  and  it
is  clear  that  Plutarch  enjoyed  this  ;  but  of  the  time,  or  the
circumstances  of  his  death,  we  have  no  satisfactory  ac-
*oimt»


PLUTARCH'S  LIVES.


f:o:w


THESEUS.


A=


.S  geographers  thrust  into  the  extremities  cf  their
maps  those  coihitries  that  are  unknown  to  them,  remark-
ing at  the  same  time,  that  all  beyond  is  h^illi  of  sand  and
haunts  of  wild  beasts,  frozen  seas,  marshes,  and  moun-
tains that  are  inaccessible  to  human  courage  or  industry ;
so,  in  comparing  the  lives  of  ilUistrious  men,  wlien  I  have
past  through  tiiose  periods  of  time  which  may  be  descri-
bed with  probability,  and  where  histoiy  may  find  firm
footing  in  facts,  I  may  say,  m^y  Senecio  *,  of  the  remot-
er ages,  that  all  beyond  is  full  of  prodigy  and  fiction,  the
regions  of  poets  and  fabulists,  wrapt  in  clouds,  and  un-
worthy of  belief  t-  Yet  since  I  had  given  an  account  of
Lycurgus  and  Numa,  I  thought  I  might  without  im.pro-
priety  ascend  to  Romulus,  as  I  had  approached  his  times.
But  considering

o
Who,  for  the  pabn,  in  contes*-  h*gh  shall  join  ?
Or  who  in  equal  ranks  shall  stand  ?

(as  ^Eschylus  expresses  it)  it  appeared  to  ine,  that  he  who
peopled  the  beautiful  and  famed  city  of  Athens,  might
be  best  contrasted  and  compared  with  the  father  of  the
magnificent  and  invincible  Rome.     Peimit   us  then  to

•  Sossius  Senecio,  a  man  of  consular  dignity,  who  flourished  un-
der Nerva  and  Trajan,  and  to  -whom  I'liav  addressed  some  of  his
Epistles  ;  not  the  Senecio  put  to  death  by  Domitian.

f  The  wild  fictions  of  the  fabulous  ages  may  partly  be  account-
ed for  from  the  genius  of  the  writers,  who  (as  Plutarch  observeo)
were  chiefly  poets ;  and  partly  from  an  aiYcctation  of  something
extraordinary  or  preternatural  in  antiquity,  which  has  geueially
prevailed,  both  in  nations  and  familiec.


so  plutatch's  lives.

take  from  Fable  her  extravagance,  and  mrJ;e  her  yield  to,
and  accept  the  form  of,  History  :  but  where  she  obsti-
nately despises  probability,  and  refuses  to  mix  with  what
is  credible;  we  must  implore  the  candour  of  our  readers,
and  their  kind  allowance  for  the  tales  of  Antiquity.

Theseus,  then,  appeared  to  answer  to  Romulus  in
many  particulars.  Both  were  of  uncertain  parentage,
born  out  of  wedlock  ;  and  both  had  the  repute  of  being
sprung-  from  the  gods.  Both  stood  in  the  first  rank  of
warriors  ;  for  both  had  great  powers  of  mind,  with  great
strength  of  body.  One  was  the  founder  of  Rome,  and
one  peopled  Athens,  the  most  illustrious  cities  in  the
world.  Both  carried  off  vv'omen  by  violence.  Both  werci
involved  in  domestic  miseries,  and  exposed  to  family  re-
sentment :  and  both,  towards  the  end  of  their  lives,  are
said  to  have  offended  their  respective  citizens,  if  v/e  may
believe  what  seems  to  be  delivered  with  the  least  mixture
of  poetical  fiction*

The  lineage  of  Theseus,  by  his  father's  side,  stretches
to  Erectheus  and  the  first  inhabitants  of  his  country  *  ;  by
his  TxiOther's  side  to  Pelcps  f,  vv^ho  v/as  the  most  pov/erful
of  all  the  Pelopennesian  kings,  not  only  on  account  of  his
great  opulence,  but  the  number  of  his  children  ;  for  he
married  his  daughters  to  persons  of  the  first  dignity,  and
found  means  to  place  his  sons  at  the  head  of  the  chief
states.  One  of  them  named  Fittheus,  grandfather  to
Theseus,  founded  the  small  city  of  Troezene,  and  was
esteemed  the  most  learned,  and  the  wisest  man  of  his  age:

*  Theseus  was  the  sixth  in  descent  from  Erectheus,  or  Eiictho-
nius,  said  to  be  the  son  of  Vulcan  and  Minerva,  or  Cranae,  grand-
daughter of  Cranus,  the  second  king  of  Athens  ;  so  tliac  Plutarch
very  justly  says,  that  Theseus  was  descended  from  the  Autccthores,
or  fir;t  inhabitants  of  Attica,  who  were  so  called  because  they  pre-
tended to  be  bom  in  that  very  country.  It  is  generally  allowed,
however,  that  this  kingdom  wa.s  founded  by  Cecrops  an  Egyptian,
who  brought  hither  a  colony  of  Saites,  about  the  year  of  the  world
2448,  before  Christ  1556.  The  inhabitants  of  Attica  were  indeed
a  more  ancient  people  than  those  of  many  other  districts  of  Greece,
which  being  of  a  more  fertile  soil,  often  changed  iheir  masters,  while
few  were  ambitions  of  settling  in  a  barren  country.

t  Pelops  was  the  son  of  Tantalus,  and  of  Phrygian  extraction.
He  carried  with  him  immense  riches  into  Peloponnesus,  which  he
had  d\^g  out  of  the  mines  of  mount  Sypilus.  By  means  of  this
wealth,  he  got  the  government  of  the  m.ost  considerable  towns  for
his  sons,  and  married  his  daughters  to  princes.


THESEUS.  51

The  essence  of  the  "wisdom  of  those  days  consisted  in
such  moral  sentences  as  Hesiod  *  is  ceUbrated  for  in  his
Book  of  V.  orks.     One  of  these  is  ascribed  to  Pittheus  ;

Blast  not  the  hope  whicl'.  friendship  has  conceiv'd
But  fill  its  measure  high.

This  is  confirmed  by  Aristotle  :  and  Euripides,  in  say-
ing that  Hippolytus  was  taught  by  *'  the  sage  and  vene-
rable Pittheus,"  gives  him  a  very  honourable  testimony.

^gcu6,  wantmg  to  have  children,  is  said  to  have  re-
ceived from  the  Oracle  at  Delphi,  that  celebrated  an-
swer, which  commanded  him  not  to  approach  any  wo-
man before  he  returned  to  Athens.  But  as  the  Oracle
seemed  not  to  give  him  clear  instruction,  he  came  to
Troezenc,  and  communicated  it  to  Pittheus  in  the  follow-
ing terms.

"  The  mystic  vessel  shall  untouch 'd  remain,'*
Till  in  thy  native  realm

It  is  uncertain  what  Pittheus  saw  in  this  Oracle.  How-
ever, either  by  persuasion  or  deceit,  he  drew  j^geus  into
conversation  with  his  daughter  ilLthra.  ^^geus  after-
wards coming  to  know  that  she  whom  he  had  laid  v/ith
M'as  Pittheus's  daughter,  and  suspecting  her  to  be  v/ith
child,  hid  a  sword  and  a  pair  of  sandals  under  a  large
stone,  which  hed  a  cavity  for  the  purpose.  Before  his
departure,  he  told  the  secret  to  the  princess  only,  and  left
orders,  that  if  she  brought  forth  a  son,  who,  when  he
came  to  a  man's  estate,  should  be  able  to  remove  the  stone,
tr.d  take  awav  the  thin&s  left  under  it,  she  should  send
liim  v/ith  those  tokens  to  him,  with  all  imaginable  priva-
cy ;  for  he  was  very  much  afraid  that  some  plot  would
be  formed  against  him  by  the  Pallantidrc,  who  despised
him  for  his  want  of  children.  These  were  fifty  brothers,
the  sons  of  Pallasf.

*  Hesiod  flourished  about  500  years  after  Pittheus.  Solomon  wrote
his  Moral  Sentences  two  or  tliree  hundred  years  after  Pittheus.

f  Pallas  was  brother  to  >^igeus  ;  ard  as  Aip^cus  was  supposed  to
have  no  childrep,  the  Pallantidx  considered  the  kipgdom  of  Athens
Rs  tlieir  undnui)t(d  inheritance.  It  was  natural,  therefore,  for  JiL-
pcxiR  to  conclude,  tl  at  if  they  came  to  Know  he  had  a  son,  they
T.-culd  avicmplto  assassinate  cither  him  or  his  rcn.  *


52  Plutarch's  lives.

^thra  was  delivered  of  a  son  ;  and  some  say  he  wai»
ianmediately  named  Theseus  *,  because  of  the  laying-  up
of  the  tokens  ;  otliers,  that  he  received  his  name  after,
wards  at  Athens,  when  ^geus  acknowledged  him  for  his
son.  He  was  brought  up  by  Pittheus,  and  had  a  tutor
named  Connidas,  to  Avhom  the  Athenians,  even  in  our
times,  sacrince  a  ram^  on  the  day  preceeding  the  Tnesean
Feasts,  •  giving  this  honour  to  Ms  memory  upon  a  much
jus'ter  account  than  that  which  they  pay  to  Silanion  and
Farrhasius,  who  only  made  statues  and  pictures  of  The-
-seus.

As  it  was  then  the  custom  for  such  as  had  arrived  at
man's  estate,  to  go  to  Delphi  to  offer  the  first-fruits  of
their  hair  to  Apollo,  Theseus  went  thither,  and  the  place
where  this  ceremony  is  perfonT^ed,  from  him,  is  said  to
be  yet  called  Thesea.  He  shaved,  hovv'ever,  only  the  fore
part  of  his  head,  as  Homer  tells  us  the-Abantes  did  t ;
and  this  kind  of  tonsure,  on  his  account,  was  called  The-
seis.  The  Abantes  first  cut  their  hair  in  this  manner,
not  in  imitation  of  the  Arabians,  as  some  imagine,  nor
yet  of  the  Mysians,  but  because  they  were  a  warlike  peo-
ple, who  loved  close  fighting,  and  were  more  expert  in  it
than  any  other  nation.     Thus  Archilocus  |  :

Tliese  twang  not  bows,  nor  sling  the  hissing  stone,
When  Mars  exults,  and  fields  with  armies  groan.:
Par  nobler  skill  Eubcea's  son's  display,
And  with  the  thundering  sword  decide  tbe  fray.

That  they  might  not,  therefore,  give  advantage  to
their  enemies  by  their  hair,  they  took  care  to  cut  it  ofi'.
And  we  are  infonned  that  Alexander  of  Macedon,  hav-
ing made  the  same  observation,  ordered  his  Macedonian
troops  to  cut  off  their  beards,  these  being  a  ready  han-
dle in  battle.

*  The  Greeks,  as  well  as  the  Hebrews,  gave  names  both  to  per-
sons  and  things  from  some  event  or  circumstance  attending  that
which  they  were  to  name.  The  Greek  word  Thesis  signifies  laying
up,  and  thesthai  uion,  to  achio^volecige,  or  rather  to  adopt  a  son.  .T.geus
did  both  ;  the  ceremony  of  adoption  being  necessary  to  enable  The-
seus, who  v/as  not    a  legitimate  son,  to  inherit  the  crown.

t  The  Aban'^es  were  the  inhabitants  of  Euboea,  but  originally  of
Abae,  a  town  in  Thrace

:j:  Archilochus  was  a  Greek  poet,  who  lived  about  the  time  of  Ro-
mulus. Homer  had  given  the  same  account  of  the  Abantes  above
three  hundred  years  before  For,  in  the  second  book  of  the  Iliad,  he
tells  us,  the  Abantes  pierced  the  breast-})! ates  of  their  enemies  with
extended  spears  cv  pikes  ;  that  is  to  say,  they  fought  hand  to  hand.


THESEUS.  55

For  some  time  jEthra  declared  not  the  real  father  of
Theseus;  but  the  report  propagated  by  Pittheus  was,  that
he  was  the  son  of  Neptune :  for  the  Troezenians  princi-
ppJly  worship  that  god :  he  is  the  patron  of  their  city  ;
to  him  they  offer  their  first-fruits  ;  and  their  money  bears
the  impression  of  a  trident.  Theseus,  in  his  youth,  dis-
covering not  only  great  streiigth  of  body,  but  firmness
and  solidity  of  mind,  together  with  a  large  share  of  un-
derstanding and  prudence,  ^thra  led  him  to  the  stone
and  having  told  him  the  truth  concerning  his  origin,  or-
dered him  to  take  up  his  father's  tokens,  and  sail  to  A-
thens.  He  easily  removed  the  stone,  but  refused  to  go  by
sea,  though  he  might  have  done  it  with  great  safety,  and
though  he  wasprestto  it  by  the  entreaties  of  his  grand-
father and  his  mother  ;  w^hile  it  was  hazardous,  at  that
time,  to  go  by  land  to  Athens,  because  no  part  was  free
from  the  danger  of  ruffians  and  robbers.  Those  times,
indeed,  produced  men  of  strong  and  indefatigable  powers
of  body,  of  extraordinary  swiftness  and  agility;  but  they
applied  those  powers  to  nothing  just  or  useful.  On  the
contrary,  their  genius,  their  disposition,  their  pleasures
tended  only  to  insolence,  to  violence^  and  to  rapine.  As
for  inodesty,  justice,  equity,  and  humanity,  they  looked
upon  them  as  qualities  in  which  those  who  had  it  in  their
power  to  add  to  their  possessions,  had  no  manner  of  con-
cern ;  virtues  praised  only  by  such  as  were  afraid  of  being
injured,  and  who  abstained  from  injuring  others  out  of
the  same  principle  of  fear.  Some  of  these  ruffians  were
cut  off  by  Hercules  in  his  peregrinations,  while  others
escaped  to  their  lurking-holes,  and  were  spared  by  the
hero  in  contempt  of  their  cowardice.  But  when  Hercules
had  unfortunately  killed  Iphitus,  he  retired  to  Lydia,  where,
for  a  long  time,  he  was  a  slave  to  Omphale,*  a  punish-
ment which  he  imposed  upon  himself  for  the  murder.
The  Lydians  then  enjoyed  great  quiet  and  security  ;  but
in  Greece  the  same  kind  of  enormities  broke  out  anew,
there  being  no  one  to  restrain  or  quell  them.  It  was
therefore  extremely  dangerous  to  travel  by  land  from  Pe-
loponnesus to  Athens  ;  and  Pittheus,  acquainting  The-
seus with  the  number  of  these  ruffians,   and   with   their

*  Those  who  had  been  guility  of  murder  became  voluntary  exiles,
and  imposed  on  themselves  a  certain  penance,  which  they  continued
till  they  thought  their  crime  expiated,
VOL.    I  F


54  Plutarch's  lives.

cruel  treatment  of  strangers,  advised  him  to  go  by  sea.
But  he  had  long  secretly  been  fired  with  the  glory  of
Hercules,  whom  he  held  in  the  hiehest  esteem,  Hstenins:
witn  great  attention  to  such  as  related  his  achievements-,
particularly  to  those  that  had  seen  him,  conversed  with
Jiim,  and  had  been  witnesses  to  his  prowess.  He  was
affected  in  the  same  manner  as  Themistocles  afterwards
vv^as,  when  he  declared  that  the  trophies  of  Miltiades
would  not  suffer  him  to  sleep.  The  A'irtues  of  Hercules
were  his  dream  by  night,  and  by  day  emulation  led  him
cut,  and  spurred  him  on  to  perform  some  exploits  like
his.  Besides,  they  were  nearly  related,  being  born  of
cousin-germans  ;  for  iEthra  was  the  daughter  of  Pittheus
and  Alcmena  of  Lysidice,  and  Pittheus  and  Lysidice  were
brother  and  sister  by  Pelops  and  Hippodamia.  He  con-
sidered it,  therefore,  as  an  insupportable  dishonour,  that
Hercules  should  traverse  both  sea  and  land  to  clear  them
of  these  villians,  while  he  himself  declined  such  adven-
tures as  occurred  to  him  ;  disgracing  his  reputed  father,,
if  he  took  his  voyage,  or  rather  flight,  by  sea  ;  and  carry-
ing to  his  real  fa.ther  a  p?ar  of  sandals  and  a  sv/ord  un-
stained with  blood,  instead  of  the  ornament  of  great  and
good  actions,  to  assert  and  add  lustre  to  his  noble  birth.
With  such  thoughts  and  resolutions  as  these  he  set  for-
ward, determined  to  injure  no  one,  but  to  take  vengeance
of  such  as  should  offer  him  any  violence.

He  was  first  attacked  by  Periphetes,  in  Epidauria,
whose  weapon  was  a  club,  and  who,  on  that  account,  was
called  Corynetes,  or  the  Club-bearer.  He  engaged  with
him,  and  slew  him.  Delighted  with  the  club,  he  took  it
for  his  weapon,  and  used  it  as  Hercules  did  the  lion's  skin.
The  skin  was  a  proof  of  the  vast  size  of  the  wild  beast
which  that  hero  had  slain ;  and  Theseus  carried  about
with  him  this  club,  v/hose  stroke  he  had  been  able  to  par-
ry, but  which,  in  his  hand,  was  irresistible.  In  the  Isth-
mus he  slew  Sinnis  the  pine-bender,*  in  the  same  manner
as  he  had  destroyed  many  others :  and  this  he  did,  not
as  having  learned  or  practised  the  bending  of  those  trees,
but  tft  shew  that  natural  strength  is  above  all  art.  Sinnis
had  a  daughter  remarkable  for   her  beauty  and  stature,

*  Sinnis  was  so  called  from  his  bending  the  heads  of  two  pines,
and  tying  passengers  between  the  opposite  branches,  which,  by
their  sudden  return,  tore  them  to  pieces.


THESEUS.  55

named  Pcrigvme,  who  had  concealed  herself  when  her
father  was  killed.  Theseus  made  diligent  search  for  her,
and  found,  at  last,  that  she  had  retired  into  a  place  over-
groAvn  with  shrubs,  and  rushes,  and  wild  aspa-rac^us.  In
Iier  childish  simplicity  she  addressed  her  prayers  and
vows  to  these  plants  and  bushes,  as  if  they  could  have  a
sense  of  her  misfortune,  promising,  if  they  would  save
and  hide  her,  that  she  would  never  burn  or  destroy  them..
But  when  Theseus  pledged  his  honour  for  treating  her
politely,  she  came  to  him,  and  in  due  time  brought  him  a
son  named  IMelanippus.  Afterwards,  by  Theseus 's  per-
mission, she  married  Deioneus,  the  son  of  Eurytus  the
Oechalian.  Melanippus  had  a  son  named  loxus,  v/ho
joined  with  Ornytus  in  planting  a  colony  in  Caira :  whence
the  loxides  ;  with  whom  it  is  an  inviolable  rule,  not  to
burn  either  rushes  or  wild  asparagus,  but  to  honour  and
worship  them.

About  this  time  Crommyon  was  infested  by  a  wild  sow
named  Phxa,  a  fierce  and  formidable  creature.  This
savage  he  attacked  and  killed,*  gcing  out  of  his  way  to
engage  her,  and  thereby  shev/ing  an  act  of  voluntary  va-
lour :  for  he  believed  it  equally  became  a  brave  man  to
stand  upon  his  defence  against  abandoned  rufhans,  and  to
seek  out,  and  begin  the  combat  with  strong  and  savage
animals.  But  some  say,  that  Phzea  v/as  an  abandoned
female  robber,  who  dv/elt  in  Crommyon  ;  that  she  had
the  name  of  sow  from  her  life  and  marners  ;  and  was  af-
terv/ards  slain  by  Theseus.

In  the  borders  of  Ivlegara  he  destroyed  Sciron,  a  rob-
ber, by  casting  him  headlong  fi'om  a  precipice,  as  the  story
generally  goes  :  and  it  is  added,  that,  in  vranton  villainv,
this  Sciron  used  to  make  strangers  wash  his  feet,  and  to
take  those  opportunities  to  push  them  into  the  sea.  But
the  writers  of  Megara  in  contradiction  to  this  report,  and
as  Simonides  expresses  it,  fighting  with  all  antiquity,  as-
sert, that  Sciron  was  neither  a  robber  nor  a  ruffian,  but,
on  the  contrary,  a  destroyer  of  robbers,  and  a  man  whose
heart  and  house  were  ever  open  to  the  good  and  the  honest.
For  ^acus,  say  they,  was  looked  upon  as  the  justest  man
in  Greece,  Cychreus  of  Salamis  had  di^^ne  honours  paid

*  In  this  instance  our  hero  deviated  from  the  principle  he  set  out
upon,  which  was  never  to  be  the  aggresor  in  any  engagement.  The
wild  sow  w^  certainly  no  less  respectable  an  anini;d  than  the  pine-
bender.


56  PLUTAllCH^S  LtVES.

him  at  Athens,  and  the  virtue  of  Peleus  ?cad  Telamon  to<y
v/as  universally  known.  Now  Sciron  was  son-in-law  to
Cychreus,  father-in-law^  to  jEaciis,  and  grandfather  to  Pe-
leus and  Telamcn,  who  were  both  of  them  sonsof  Endeis,
the  daughter  of  Sciron  and  Charicio  :  therefore  it  was
not  probable  that  the  best  of  men  should  make  such  aili-
i.nces  with  one  of  so  vile  a  character,  giving  and  receiving
the  greatest  and  dearest  pledges*  Besides,  they  tell  us,
that  Theseus  did  not  slay  Sciron  in  his  first  journey  to
Athens,  but  afterwards,  when  he  took  Eleusis  from  the
Megarensians,  having  expelled  Diodes,  its  chief  magis-
trate, by  a  stratagem.  In  t;uch  contradictions  are  these
things  involved.

At  Eleusis  he  engaged  in  wrestling  with  Ccrcyon  the
Arpadian,  and  killed  him  on  the  spot.  Proceeding  to  Her-
Inione,*  he  put  a  period  to  the  cruelties  of  Damastes,  sur-
named  Procrustes,  makinp:  his  bodv  fit  the  size  of  his  own
beds,  as  he  had  served  strangers.  These  things  he  did
in  imitation  of  Hercules,  who  ahvays  returned  upon  the
aggressors  the  same  sort  of  treatment  which  they  intend-
ed for  him  ;  for  that  hero  sacrificed  Busnis,  killed  An-
txus  in  wrestling,  Cygnus  in  single  combat,  and  broke  the
fckull  of  Tcrmerus  ;  whence  this  is  called  the  Termerian
mischief  ;  for  Termerus,  it  seems,  destroyed  the  pas-
sengei  s  he  met  by  dashing  his  head  against  theirs.  Thus
Theseus  pursued  his  travels  to  punish  abandoned  wretches
who  suffered  the  same  kind  of  death  from  him  that  they
inflicted  on  others,  and  were  requited  wdth  vengeance
suitable  to  their  crimes.

In  his  progress  he  came  to  the  Cephisus,  where  he
vras  first  saluted  by  some  of  the  PhytaUds:.!  Upon  his
desire  to  have  the  customary  purifications,  they  gave  him
them  in  due  form,  and  having  offered  propitiatory  sacri-
fices, invited  him  to  their  houses.  This  was  the  first  hos-
pitable treatment  he  met  with  on  the  road.     He  is  said

*  Tliis  seems  to  be  a  mistake  ;  for  we  know  of  no  place  called
Ilarmoine,  or  Hermoine,  between  Eleusis  and  Athens.  Pausanias
calls  it  Erione  ;  and  the  authors  of  the  Universal  History,  after
rhilocliorus,  call  it  Termione.

•j-  These  were  the  descendants  of  Phytalus,  with  whom  Ceres
entrusted  the  superintendance  of  her  holy  mysteries,  in  reccmpence
for  the  hospitality  with  which  she  had  been  treated  at  his  house.
Theseus  thought  himself  unfit  to  be  admitted  to  those  mysteries
without  expiation,  because  he  had  dijjped  his  hands  in  blood,  thougk
it  was  only  that  of  thieves  and  robbers.


THESEUS.  57

to  have  arrived  at  Athens  on  the  eight  day  of  the  month
Cronius,  which  now  they  call  Hccatomboeon  [July.]
There  he  found  the  state  full  of  troubles  and  distraction,
and  the  family  of  jEgeus  in  great  disorder  :  for  Medea,
Avho  had  fled  from  Corinth,  promised  by  her  art  to  ena-
ble ^geustohave  children,  and  was  admitted  to  his  bed.
She  first  discovering  Theseus,  whom  as  yet  -/Egeus  did
not  know,  persuaded  him,  now  in  years,  and  full  of  jea-
lousies and  suspicions,  on  account  of  the  faction  that  pre-
vailed in  the  city,  to  prepare  an  entertainment  for  him  as
a  stranger,  and  take  him  off  by  poison.  Theseus,  com-
ing to  the  banquet,  did  not  intend  to  declare  himself  first,
but,  willing  to  give  his  father  occasion  to  find  him  out,
when  the  meat  was  served  up,  he  drew  his  sword,*  as  if
he  designed, to  carve  v/ith  it,  and  took  care  it  should  at-
tract his  notice,  ^geus  quickly  perceiving  it,  dashed
down  the  cup  of  poison,  and  after  some  questions,  em-
braced him  as  his  son  :  then  assembling  the  people,  he
acknowledged  him  also  before  them,  who  received  him
with  great  satisfaction  on  account  of  his  valour.  The
cup  is  said  to  have  fallen,  and  the  poison  to  have  been
spilt,  where  the  inclosure  now  is,  in  the  place  called  Del-
phinium ;  for  there  it  was  that  ^Egeus  dwelt ;  and  the
Mercury  which  stands  on  the  east  side  of  the  temple,  is
yet  called  the  Mercury  of  ^geus's  gate.

The  Pallantidre,  who  hoped  to  recover  the  kingdom,  if
^geus  died  childless,  lost  all  patience  when  Theseus  was
declared  his  successor.  Exasperated  at  the  thought  that
^geus,  who  was  not  in  the  least  allied  to  the  Erecthidrc,
but  only  adopted  by  Pandion,t  should  first  gain  the  crown^
and  afterwards  Theseus,  who  was  an  emigrant  and  a
stranger,  they  prepared  for  war  ;  and  dividing  their  for-
ces, one  party  marched  openly,  with  their  father,  from
Sphettus  to  the  city  ;  and  the  other,  concealing  them-
selves in  Gargettus,  lay  in  ambush,  with  a  design  to  at-

*  Some  needless  learning  has  "been  adduced  to  shew,  that  in  the
heroic  times  they  carved  with  a  cutJass  or  large  knife,  and  not  with
a  sword  ;  and  that  consequently  Plutarch  here  must  certainly  be
mistaken  ;  but  as  fxu^xi^x,  signifies  either  a  cutlass  or  a  sword^
how  do  we  know  that  it  was  a  sword,  and  not  a  cudass,  which
iEgcusbid  under  the  stone  ?

•j-  It  had  not  been  actually  reported,  that  .Cgeus  was  not  the  son.
of  Pandion^ut  of  Scyrias.

1-2.


58  i^LUTARGH'S    LrVXS.

tack  the  enemy  from  two  several  quarters.  They  had
with  them  an  herald  named  Leos,  of  the  tribe  of  Agnus.
This  man  carried  to  Theseus  an  account  of  all  the  designs
of  the  Paliantidse  ;  and  he  immediately  fell  upon  those
that  lay  in  ambush,  and  destroyed  them.  Pallas  and  his
company  being  informed  of  this,  thought  lit  to  disperse.
Hence  it  is  said  to  be,  that  the  tribe  of  Pallene  never  in-
termarry with  the  Agnusians,  nor  suffer  any  proclama-
tion to  begin  w^ith  these  words,  Akouete  Led  [Hear,  O  ye
people  ;]  for  they  hate  the  very  name  of  Leos,  on  account
of  the  treachery  of  that  herald.

Theseus,  desirous  to  keep  himself  in  action,  and  at  the
same  time  courting  the  favourof  the  people,  went  against
the  Marathonian  bull,  which  did  no  small  mischief  to  the
inhabitants  of  Tetrapolis.  When  he  had  taken  him,  he
brought  him  alive  in  triumph  through  the  city,  and  af-
terwards sacrificed  him  to  the  Delphinian  Apollo.  He-
cale  also,  and  the  story  of  her  receiving  and  entertaining
Theseus,  does  not  appear  destitute  of  ail  foundation  ;  for
Tjie  people  in  that  neighbourhood  assemible  to  perform  the
Hecalesian  rites  to  Jupiter  Hecalus  :  they  honour  Hecalc
too,  calling  her  by  the  diminutive,  Hecalene,  because
Avhen  she  entertained  Theseus,  while  he  was  but  a  youth,
she  caressed  him  as  persons  in  years  use  to  do  children,
and  called  him  by  such  tender  diminutive  names.  She
vowed,  moreover,  when  he  went  to  battle,  to  cffer  sacri-
fices to  Jupiter,  if  he  returned  safe  ;  but  as  she  died  be-
fore the  end  of  the  expedition,  Theseus  performed  those-
holy  rites  in  testimony  of  the  grateful  sense  he  had  of  he?
hospitality.     So  Phiiochorus  relates  the  story.*

Not  long  after,  there  came  the  third  time,  from  Crete,
the  collectors  of  the  tribute,  exacted  on  the  following  oc-
casion. Androgeusf  being  treacherously  slain  in  Attica,
a  very  fatal  war  was  carried  on  against  that  country  by
Minos,  and  Divine  Vengeance  laid  it  waste  ;  for  it  was-
visited  by  famine  and  pestilence,  and  want  of  water  in-

*  Phiiochorus  was  an  Athenian  historian,  who  flourished  in  the
reign  of  Ptolomy  Philopater,  about  two  hundred  years  before  the
birth  of  our  Saviour.  He  wrote  many  valuable  pieces,  cf  which
nothing  remains,  but  some  fragments  presei-\'ed  by  other  writers.

f  Some  say  iEgeus  caused  him  to  be  murdered,  because  he  was-
in  the  interest  cf  the  Pallantidx  ;  ethers,  that  he  was  killed  by  the
Marathonian  bull.


THESEUS^.  59-

creased  their  misery.  The  remedy  that  Apollo  proposed
was,  that  they  should  appease  Minos,  and  be  reconciled-,
to  him  ,  whereupon  the  wrath  of  Heaven  would  cease,
and  their  calamities  come  to  a  period.  In  consequence
of  this,  they  sent  ambassadors  with  their  submission  ;
and,  as  most  writers  agree,  engaged  themselves  by  treaty,
to  send  every  ninth  year  a  tribute  of  seven  young  men
and.  as  many  virgins.  When  these  Were  brought  into
Crete,  the  fabulous  account  informs  us,  that  they  were
destroyed  by  the  Minotaur,*  in  the  Labyrinth,  or
that,  lost  in  its  nmazes,  and  unable  to  find  the  way  out,
they  perished  there.  The  Minotaur  was,  as  Euripide&
tells  us,

A  mingled  form  prodigious  to  behold,
Half  bull,  half  man  !

But  Philochorus  says  the  Cretans  deny  this,  and  will  not
allow  the  labyrinth  to  have  been  any  thing  but  a  prison,
which  had  no  other  inconvenience  than  this,  that  those
who  were  confined  there  could  not  escape  :  And  IMinos
having  instituted  games  in  honour  of  Androgens,  the  prize
for  the  victors  v/as  those  youths,  who  had  been  kept  till
that  time  in  the  labyrinth.  He  that  first  won  the  prizes
in  those  games,  was  a  person  of  great  authority  in  the
court  of  Minos,  and  general  of  his  armies,  named  Taurus,
who  being  unmerciful  and  savage  in  his  nature,  had
treated  the  Athenian  youths  with  great  insolence  and
cruelty.  And  it  is  plain  that  Aristotle  himself,  in  his  ac-
count of  the  Bottioean  Government,  does  not  suppose  that
the  young  men  were  put  to  death  by  Minos,  but  that  they
lived,  some  of  them  to  old  age,  ia  servile  employments  in
Crete.  He  adds,  that  the  Cretans,  in  pursuance  of  an
ancient  vow,  once  sent  a  number  of  their  first-born  to  Del-
phi, among  whom  were  some  of  the  descendants  of  these
Athenian  slaves,  who  not  being  able  to  support  them-
selves there,  first  passed  from  thence  into  Italy,  where
they  settled  about  Japygia;  and  from  thence  they  re-
moved again  into  Thrace,  and  were  called  Botticeans..
Wherefore  the  Bottioean  virgins,  in  some  solemnities  of

*  Feigned  by  the  poets  to  have  been  begot  by  a  bull  upon  Pasi-
phse,  Minos's  queen,  who  was  insj)ired,  it  seems,  with  this  horrid
passion  by  Neptune,  in  revenge  for  Minos's  refusing  him  a  heaudful
bull,  whiclijie  expected  as  an  oiTerJng.


60  '         Plutarch's  lives.

religion,  sing,  "  To  Athens  let  us  go,"  And,  indeed,  it
seems  dangerous  to  be  at  enmity  with  a  city  which  is  the
seat  of  eloquence  and  learning  :  For  Minos  always  was
satirized  on  the  Athenian  stage  ;  nor  was  his  fame  suffi-
ciently rescued  hy  KPesiod's  calling  him  "  Supreme  of
Kings,"  or  Homer's  saying  that  he  '*^  conversed  with
Jove  ;"  for  the  writers  of  tragedy  pre vaiHng,  represented
him  as  a  man  of  vicious  character,*  violent  and  implaca^
ble  ;  yet,  inconsistently  enough,  they  say  that  Minos  was
a  king  and  a  lawgiver,  and  that  Rhadamanthus  was  an
upright  judge,  and  guardian  of  the  laws  which  Minos  had.
made.

When  the  time  of  the  third  tribute  came,  and  those
parents  who  had  sons  not  arrived  at  full  maturity,  were
obliged  to  resign  them  to  the  lot,  complaints  against
jEgeus  sprung  up  again  among  the  people,  who  expres-
sed their  grief  and  resentment,  that  he  who  was  the  cause
of  all  their  misfortunes  bore  no  part  of  the  punishment,
and  while  he  was  adopting,  and  raising  to  the  succession,
a  stranger  of  spurious  birth,  took  no  thought  for  them
v/ho  lost  their  legitimate  children.  Those  things  were
matter  of  great  concern  to  Theseus,  who,  to  express  his
regard  for  justice,  and  take  his  share  in  the  common  for-
tune, voluntarily  offered  himself  as  one  of  the  seven,
without  lot.  The  citizens  were  charmed  with  this  proof
of  his  magnanimity  and  public  spirit ;  and  iEgeus  him-
self, when  he  saw  that  no  entreaties  or  persuasions  avail-
ed to  turn  him  from  it,  gave  out  the  lots  for  the  rest  of  the
young  men.  But  Hellancius  says,  that  the  youths  and
virgins  v*^hich  the  city  furnished  were  not  chosen  by  lot,
but  that  Minos  came  in  person  and  selected  them,  and
Theseus  before  the  rest,  upon  these  conditions  :  That  the
Athenians  should  furnish  a  vessel,  and  the  young  men
embark  and  sail  along  with  him,  but  carry  no  arms  ;  and
that  if  they  could  kill  the  Minotaur,  there  should  be  an
end  of  the  tribute.  There  appearing  no  hopes  of  safety
for  the  youths  in  the  two  former  tributes,  they  sent  out  a
ship  with  the  black  sail,  as  carrying  them  to  certain  ruin.

*  This  is  a  mistake  into  which  Plutarch  and  several  other  vvriters
have  fallen.  There  were  two  of  the  name  of  Minos.  One  was  the
son  of  Jupiter  ar-d  Europa,  and  a  just  and  excellent  prince  ;  the
other,  his  grandson,  and  son  of  Lycaster,  was  a  tyrant.


THESEUS.  61

But  when  Theseus  encouraged  his  father  by  his  confidence
of  success  against  the  INIinotaur,  he  gave  another  sail,  a
white  one,  to  the  pilot,  ordering  him,  if  he  brought
Theseus  safe  back,  to  hoist  the  white  ;  but  if  not,  to  sail
with  the  black  one  in  token  of  his  misfortune.  Simonides,
hov/ever,  tells  us,  that  it  was  not  a  white  sail  which  -^Ege-
us  gave,  but  a  scarlet  one  dyed  with  the  juice  of  the  flower
of  a  very  flourishing  holm-oak,*  and  that  this  waS'  to  be
the  signal  that  all  was  well.  He  adds,  that  Phereclus,
the  son  of  Amarsyas,  was  pilot  of  the  ship  :  but  Philochc-
rus  says,  that  Theseus  had  a  pilot  sent  him  by  Sciras,
from  Salamis,  named  Nausitheus,  and  one  Phreax  to  be
at  the  prow,  because  as  yet  the  Athenians  had  not  ap-
plied themselves  to  n'avigationf  ;  and  that  Sciras  did  this
because  one  of  the  young,  men,  named  Menesthcs,  was
his  daughter's  son.  This  is  confirmed  by  the  monuments
of  Nausitheus  and  Phieax,  built  by  Theseus,  at  Phalerum,
near  the  temple  of  Sciron  ;  and  the  feast  called  Cyber-
nesia,  or  the  Pilot's  Feast,  is  said  to  be  kept  in  honour
of  them.

V/hen  the  lots  were  cast,  Theseus  taking  with  him,
out  of  the  Prytaneum,  those  upon  whom  they  fell,  went
to  the  Delphinian  temple,  and  made  an  offering  to  Apollo
for  them.  This  offering  was  a  branch  of  consecrated
olive  bound  about  with  white  wool.  Having  paid  his  de-
votions, he  embarked  on  the  sixth  of  April ;  at  which
time  they  still  send  the  virgins  to  Delphinium  to  propiti-
ate the  god.  It  is  reported  tliat  the  oracle  at  Delphi  com-
manded him  to  take  Venus  for  his  guide,  and  entreat  her
to  be  his  companion  in  the  voyage  ;  and  when  he  sacri-
ficed to  her  a  she-goat  on  the  sea-shore,  its  sex  was  im-
mediately changed  :  hence  the  goddess  had  the  name  of
Epitragia.

When  he  arrived  in  Crete,  according  to  most  historians
and  poets,  Ariadne,  falling  in  love  with  him,  gave  him  a

*  It  is  not  the  flo\ver,butthe  fruit  of  the  Ilex,  full  of  little  worms
which  the  Arabians  call  Kermes,  from  which  a  scarlet  dye  is  pro-
cured.

t  The  Athenians,  according  to  Homer,  sent  fifty  ships  to  Troy  ;
but  those  were  only  transport  ships.  Thucydides  assures  us,  tliat
they  di,d  not  begin  to  make  any  figure  at  sea  till  ten  or  twelve  years
alter  the  battle  of  Marathon,  near  seven  hundred  years  after  the
siege  of  Troy,


62  plutaPwCh's  lives.

clue  of  thread,  and  instructed  hnn  how  to  pass  with  it
through  the  intricacies  of  the  Ia.byrinth.  Thus  assisted,
he  killed  the  Minotaur,  and  then  set  sail,  carrying  off
Ariadne,  together  with  the  young  men,  Plierecydes  says
that  Theseus  broke  up  the  keels  of  the  Cretan  ships,  to
prevent  their  pursuit.  But,  as  Demon  has  it,  he  killed
Taurus,  "Alinos's  commander,  who  engaged  him  in  the
harbour,  just  as  he  was  ready  to  sail  out.  Again,  ac-
cording to  Philochorus,  when  Minos  celebrated  the  games
in  honour  of  his  son,  it  was  believed  that  Taurus  would
bear  away  the  prizes  in  them  as  formerly,  and  every  one
grudged  hiin  that  honour  ;  for  his  excessive  pov/er  and
haughty  beh-wiour  v»^ere  intolerable  ;  and,  besides,  he  v/as
accused  of  too  great  a  familiarity  v/ith  Pasiphas  :  t'lere-
fore,  v/hen  Theseus  desired  the  combat,  MJnos  permiltcd
it.  In  Crete  it  v/as  the  custom  for  the  wom^^n  as  v/eli  as
the  men  to  see  the  games  ;  and  Ariadne,  being  present,
was  struck  with  the  person  of  Theseus,  and  v/ith  his  su-
perior vigour  and  address  in  the  wre 3tling-ring.  Minos
too  was  greatly  delighted,  especially  when  he  saw  Taurus-
vanquished  and  disgraced  ;  and  this  induced  him  to  give
up  the  young  men  to  Theseus,  and  to  remit  t]ie  tribute.
Ciidemus  beginning  higher,  gives  a  prolix  account  of
these  matters,  according  to  his  manner.  There  was,  it
seems,  a  decree  tiiroughout  all  Greece,  that  no  vessel
should  sail  with  more  than  five  hands,  except  the  Argo
commanded  by  Ja.3on,  who  was  appointed  to  clear  the  sea
of  pirates.  But  when  Dsdalus  escaped  by  sea  to  Athens,
Minos  pursuing  him  with  his  men  of  war,  contrary  to  the
decree,  was  driven  by  a  storm  to  Sicily,  and  there  ended
his  life-  And  when  Deucalion  his  successor,  pursuing
his  father's  quarrels  with  the  Athenians,  demanded  that
they  should  deliver  up  Dsedalus,  and  threatened,  if  they
did  not,  to  make  away  with  the  hostages  that  Minos  had
received,  Theseus  gave  him  a  mild  answer,  alleging  that
Dsedalus  was  his  relation,  nearly  allied  in  blood,  being  son
to  Merope  the  daughter  of  Erectheus,  But  privately  he
prepared  a  fleet,  part  of  it  among  the  Thymajtadac,  a;:  a
distance  from  any  public  road,  and  part  under  the  direc-
tion of  Pittheus,  at  Troezene.  When  it  was  ready,  he
set  sail,  taking  Daedalus,  and  the  rest  of  the  fugitives  from
Crete,  for  his  guide.  The  Cretans  receiving  no  informa-
tion of  the   matter,  and  when  they  saw  his  fleet,  taking


THESEUS.  63

them  for  friends,  he  easily  gained  the  harbour,  and
muking  a  descent,  proceeded  immediately  to  Gnossus.
There  he  engaged  with  Deucalion  and  his  guards,  before
the  gates  of  the  labyrinth,  and  slew  them.  The  govern-
ment by  this  means  falling  to  Ariadne,  he  entered  into  an
agreement  with  her,  by  which  he  receiAcd  the  young  cap-
tives, and  made  a  perpetual  league  between  the  Atheni-
ans and  the  Cretans,  both  sides  swearing  to  proceed  to
hostilities  no  more.

There  are  many  other  reports  about  these  things,  and
as  many  concerning  Ariadne,  but  none  of  any  certainty.
For  some  say,  that  being  deserted  by  Theseus,  she  hanged
herself;  others,  that  she  was  carried  by  the  mariners  to
Naxos,  and  there  married  Onarus  the  priest  of  Bacchus,
Tiieseus  having  left  her  for  another  mistress  :

For  iEgle's  charms  had  pierc'd  the  hero's  heart,

Whereas  the  Megarensian  tells  us,  that  Pisistratus  struck
the  line  out  of  Hesiod ;  and  as,  on  the  contrary,  to  gratify
the  Athenians,  he  added  this  other  to  Homer's  descrip-
tion of  the  state  of  the  dead  :

The  godlike  Theseus  and  the  great  Pirithous.

Some  say  Ariadne  had  tv?Fo  sons  by  Theseus,  Oenopion
and  Staphylus.  With  these  agrees  Ion  of  Chios,  who
says  of  his  native  city,  that  it  was  built  by  Oenopion
the  son  of  Theseus.

But  the  most  striking  passages  of  the  poets,  relative  to
these  things,  are  in  every  body's  mouth.  Something
more  particular  is  delivered  by  Paeon  the  Amathusian.
He  relates,  that  Theseus,  being  driven  by  a  storm  to  Cy-
prus, and  having  with  him  Ariadne,  who  was  big  with
child,  and  extremely  discomposed  with  the  agitation  of
the  sea,  he  set  her  on  shore,  and  left  her  alone,  while  he
returned  to  take  care  of  the  ship  ;  but  by  a  violent  wind
was  forced  out  again  to  sea :  that  the  T^omen  of  the  coun-
try received  Ariadne  kindly,  consoled  her  under  her^ss,
and  brought  her  feigned  letters  as  from  Theseus :  that
they  attended  and  assisted  h?r  when  she  fell  in  labour  ;
and,  as  she  died  in  child-bed,  paid  her  the  funeral  ho-
nours :  that  Theseus,  on  his  return,  greatly  atHicted  at
the  news,  left  money  with  the  inhabitants  ordering  them
to  pay  divine  honours  to  Ariadne ;  and  that  he  caused


64  Plutarch's  lives.

two  little  statues  of  her  to  be  made,  one  of  silver,  and
the  other  of  brass  :  that  they  celebrate  her  festival  on  the
second  of  September,  when  a  young  man  lies  doAvn,  and
imitates  the  cries  and  gesture  of  a  woman  in  travail :  and
that  the  Amathusians  call  the  grove  in  which  they  shew
her  tomb,  the  Grove  of  Venus  Ariadne.

Some  of  the  Naxian  writers  relate,  that  there  were  two
Minos's,  and  two  Ariadnes  ;  one  of  v/hich  was  married
to  Bacchus  in  Naxos,  and  had  a  son  named  Staphylus ;
the  other,  of  a  later  age,  being  carried  off  by  Theseus,
and  aftei'wards  deserted,  came  to  Naxos,  with  her  nurse
Corcyne,  whose  tomb  is  still  shewn.  That  this  Ariadne
died  there,  and  had  different  honours  paid  her  from  the
former  ;  for  the  feasts  of  one  were  celebrated  with  mirth
and  revels,  while  the  sacrifices  of  the  other  were  mixed
with  sorrow  and  mourning*.

Theseus,  in  his  retun  from  Crete,  put  in  at  Delos  t  ;
and  having  sacrificed  to  Apollo,  and  dedicated  a  statue  of
Venus  which  he  received  from  Ariadne,  he  joined  with
the  young  men  in  a  dance,  which  the  Delians  are  said  to
practise  at  this  day.  It  consists  in  an  imitation  of  the
mazes  and  outlets  of  the  labyrinth,  and,  with  various  in-
volutions and  evolutions,  is  performed  in  regular  time.
This  kind  of  dance,  as  Dicsearchus  informs  us,  is  called
by  the  Delians  the  Crane  |  He  danced  it  round  the
altar  Keraton,  which  was  built  entirely  of  the  left-side
horns  of  beasts.  He  is  also  said  to  have  instituted  games
in  Delos,  where  he  began  the  custom  of  giving  a  palm
to  the  victors.

When  they  drew  neai'  to  Attica,  both  Theseus  and  the
pilot  were  so  transported  with  joy,  that  they  forgot  to
hoist  the  sail  which  was  to  be  the  signal  to  iEgeus  of  their
safety,  who,  therefore,  in  despair,  threw  himself  from
the  rock  and  was  dashed  to  pieces.  Theseus  disembark-
ed, and  performed  those  sacrifices  to  the  gods  which  he

*  The  Feasts  of  Ariadne,  the  wife  of  Bacchus,  were  celebrated
with  joy,  to  denote  that  she  was  become  a  divinity;  those  of  the
other  Ariadne  signified  that  she  fell  like  a  mere  mortal.

t  Hence  came  the  custom  of  sending  aimually  a  deputation  from
Athens  to  Delos,  to  sacrifice  to  Apollo.

I  This  dance,  Callimachus  tells  u?,  v'as  a  particular  one ;  and
probably  it  was  called  the  Crane,  because  cranes  commonly  fly  in
the  f  gure  of  a  circle.


TIIF.SEUS.  65

had  vowed  at  Phalerum,  when  he  set  sail,  and  sent  a
herald  to  the  city,  with  an  account  of  his  safe  return.
The  messenger  met  with  numbers  himenting  the  fate  of
the  king,  and  others  rejoicing,  as  it  was  natural  to  expect,
at  the  return  of  Theseus,  welcoming  him  with  the  greatest
kindness,  and  ready  to  crown  him  with  flowers  for  his
good  news.  He  received  the  chaplets,  and  twined  them
round  his  herald's  staff.  Returning  to  the  sea-shore,  and
finding  that  Theseus  had  not  yet  finished  his  libations,  he
stopped  without,  not  choosing  to  disturb  the  sacrifice.
When  the  libations  were  over,  he  announced  the  death  of
^geus.  Upon  this,  they  hastend,  with  sorrow  and  tu-
multuous lamentations,  to  the  city.  Hence,  they  tell  us,
it  is,  that,  in  the  Oschophoria,  or  Feast  of  Boughs,  to
this  day  the  herald  is  not  crowned,  but  his  staft' ;  and
those  that  are  present  at  the  libations  cry  out,  Eldeu  !
Jou^jou  I*  The  former  is  the  exclamation  of  haste  and
triumph,  and  the  latter  of  trouble  and  confusion.  The-
seus, having  buried  his  fa.ther,  paid  his  vows  to  Apollo  on
the  seventh  of  October  :  for  on  that  day  they  arrived  safe
at  Athens,  The  boiling  of  all  sorts  of  pulse  at  that  time
is  said  to  take  its  rise  from  their  mixing  the  remains  of
their  provisions,  when  tb.ey  found  themselves  safe  ashore,
boiling  them  in  one  pot,  and  feasting  upon  IheTn  ail  to-
gether. In  that  least  they  also  carry  a  branch  bound
about  with  wool,  such  as  they  then  made  use  of  in  their
supplications,  which  they  call  Eiresione,  laden  with  all
.sorts  of  fruits  ;  and  to  signify  the  ceasing  of  scarcity  at
tliattinie,  they  sing  this  strain  :

The  golden  ear,  th'  ambrosial  hive,
In  lair  Eiresione  thrive.
See  the  juicy  tigs  appear  !
Olives  crown  the  weal  hy  year!
See  the  cluster-bei  d'ng  vine  !
See,  and  drink,  and  drop  supine  !

Some  pretend  that  this  ceremony  is  retained  in  memo-
ry of  the  Heruclidx,t  who  were  entertained  in  that  man-
ner by  the  Athenians  ;  but  the  greater  part  relate  it  as
above  delivered.

*  Eleleu  denotes  the  joy  and  precipi'^aiion  with  which  Theseus
marched  towards  Athens  ;  and  'Jou,  joii,  his  sorrow  for  the  death
of  his  fa  her.

t  Ihe  descendants  of  Hercules,  being  driven  out  cf  Peloponne-
sus and  all  ftreece,  applied  to  the  Athenians  for  their  protection,

▼  OL.    I.  G


66  Plutarch's  lives.

The  vessel  in  which  Theseus  sailed,  and  returned
safe,  with  those  young  men,  went  with  thirty  oars.  It
was  preserved  by  the  Athenians  to  the  times  of  Deme-
trius i'halereus  ;*  being  so  pieced  and  new  framed  Avith
strong  plank,  that  it  afforded  an  example  to  the  philoso-
phers, in  their  disputations  concerning  the  identity  of
things  that  are  changed  by  growth ,  some  contending
that  it  was  the  same,  and  others  that  it  was  not.

The  feast  called  Oschophoria,t  which  the  Athenians
still  celebrate,  was  then  first  instituted  by  Theseus.  For
he  did  not  take  with  him  all  the  virgins  upon  whom  the
lot  had  fallen,  but  selected  two  young  men  of  his  ac-
quaintance vv'ho  had  feminine  and  florid  aspects,  but  were
not  wanting  in  spirit  and  presence  of  mind.  These,  by
warm  bathing,  and  keeping  them  out  of  the  sun,  by  pro-
viding unguents  for  their  hair  and  complexions,  and  every
thing  necessary  for  then^  dress,  by  forming  their  voice,
the-r  manner,  and  their  step,  he  so  effectually  altered,
that  they  passed  among  the  virgins  designed  for  Crete,
and  no  one  could  discern  the  difference.

At  his  return,  he  walked  in  procession  with  the  same
young  men,  drest  in  the  inanner  of  those  who  now  carry
the  branches.  These  are  ceirried  in  honour  of  iiacchus
and  Ariadne,  on  account  of  the  story  before  related  ;  or
rather  because  they  returned  at  the  time  of  gathering  ripe
fruits.     The  Deipnophorsc,  women  who  ca,rry  the  provi-

^vuich  was  granted  :  and  as  they  went  as  sujipliants,  they  went
with  branches  in  their  hands.  This  subject  istrea-cd  by  Euripides
jn  his  Heraclidse

*  That  is  near  1000  years.  For  Theseus  returned  from  Crete
about  the  year  before  Christ  1235,  and  Callimachus,  who  was  co-
temporary  with  D erne u">us,  and  who  tells  us  the  Athenians  continu-
ed to  send  this  ship  to  Delos  in  his  time,  flourished  about  the  year
before  Christ  280,

t  This  ceremony  was  performed  in  the  following  manner  :  They
made  choice  of  a  certain  number  of  youths  of  rhe  most  noble  fam.ilies
in  each  tribe,  whose  fathers  ard  mothers  bo"h  were  living  They
bore  vine-branches  in  their  hands,  with  grapes  upon  them,  and  ran
from  the  temple  of  Bacchus  to  that  of  Minerva  Sciradia,  which  was
near  the  Phalerean  gate.  He  tha*-  arrived  there  first  drank  oft  a  cvp
of  wine,  mingled  with  honey,  cheese,  meal,  and  oiL  They  were
followed  by  a  chorus  conducted  by  two  young  men  dressed  in  wo-
men's apparel,  the  chorus  singing  a  song  in  praise  of  those  yourg
men.  Cer'ain  women,  with  baskets  on  their  heads,  attended  them,
and  were  chrsen  for  that  office  from  among  the  most  weahhy  of  the
civi/ens.  I'lie  whole  ])rocesbion  was  headed  by  a  herald,  bearing  a
;Siaff  encircled  with  boughs.


THESEI^S.  67

sions,  bear  a  part  in  the  solemnity,  and  have  a  share  in
the  sacriiice,  to  represent  the  mothers  of  those  upon  whom
the  lots  fell,  who  brought  their  children  provisions  for  the
voyage.  Fables  and  tales  are  the  chief  discourse,  because
the  women  then  told  their  children  stories  to  comfort
them  and  keep  up  their  spirits.  These  particulars  are
taken  from  the  history  of  Demon.  There  was  a  pUice
consecrated,  and  a  temple  erected  to  Theseus  ;  and  those
families  which  would  have  been  liable  to  the  tribute,  in
case  it  had  continued,  were  obliged  to  pay  a  tax  to  the
temple  for  sacrifices.  These  were  committed  to  the  care
of  the  Phytalidae,  Theseus  doing  them  that  honour  in  re-
compence  of  their  hospitality.

After  the  death  of  ^^geus,  he  undertook  and  effected  a
prodigious  work.  He  settled  all  the  inhabitants  of  At-
tica in  Athens,  and  made  ihem  one  people  in  one  city,  who
before  were  scattered  up  and  do-wn,  and  could  wllh  diifi-
culty  be  assembled  on  any  pressing  occasion  for  the  pub-
lic good.  Nay,  often  such  differences  had  happened  be-
tween them,  as  ended  in  bloodshed.  The  method  he
took  was  to  apply  to  them  in  particular  by  their  tribes  and
families.  Private  persons  and  the  poor  easily  listened  to
his  summons.  To  the  rich  and  great  he  represented  the
advantage  of  a  government  v/ithout  a  king,  where  the
chief  power  should  be  in  the  people,  while  he  hiniselFonly
desired  to  command  in  war,  and  to  be  the  guardian  of  the
laws  ;  in  all  the  rest,  every  one  would  be  upon  an  equal
footing-.  Part  of  them  hearkened  to  his  persuasions  ;  and
others,  fearing  his  power,  which  was  already  very  great,
as  well  as  his  enterprising  spirit,  chose  rather  to  be  per-
suaded, than  to  be  forced  to  submit.  Dissolving,  there-
fore, the  corporations,  the  councils,  and  courts  in  each
particular  town,  he  built  one  common  Prytaneum  and
court-hall,  where  it  stands  to  this  day.  The  citadel,  with
its  dependencies,  and  the  city,  or  the  old  and  new  town,
he  united  under  the  common  name  of  Athens,  and  insti-
tuted the  PiJiatheniea  as  a  common  sacrifice.*     He  ap


•1-


*  The  Athensea  were  celebrated  before,  inhoncurof  he  Goddess
Minerva  ;  bu  as  that  was  a  feast  peculiar  to  the  city  of  Athens,  The-
seus enlarged  it,  aiid  made  it  common  to  all  the  inhabitams  of  At-
tica; and  therefore  it  was  called  Pana^hena-a.  There  were  the
g^-eater  and  ■  he  less  Pana'hena:a  The  less  were  kept  annually,  and
the  greater  every  lifth  \  ear.  In  the  latter  they  carried  in  procession
the  mysieriots  pepiuin  or  veil  of  Mintrva,  on  which  wer^;  embroider-


68  Plutarch's  lives.

pointed  also  the  Metoecia,  or  Feast  of  Migration,*  and
fixed  it  to  the  sixteenth  of  July,  and  so  it  still  continues.
Giving  up  the  kingly  power,  as  he  had  promised,  he  set-
tled the  commonwealth  under  the  auspices  of  the  gods  ;
for  he  consulted  the  oracle  at  Delphi  concerning  his  new
government,  and  received  this  answer  :

From  royal  stems  thy  honour,  Theseus,  springs  ;

By  Jove  beloved,  the  sire  supreme  o£  kings.

See  rising  towns    see  wide-extended  s:aes,

On  thee  dependent,  ask  tbeir  future  fates  !

Hence,  hence  with  fear  !  Thy  favoured  bark  shall  ride

Safe  o'er  the  surges  of  the  foamy  tide.f

With  this  agrees  the  Sibyl's  prophecy,  which,  we  are
told,  she  delivered  long  after,  concerning  Athens  :
The  bladder  may  be  dipp'd,  but  never  drown'd.

Desiiing  yet  farther  to  enlarge  the  city,  he  invited  all
strangers  to  equal  privileges  in  it  ;  and  the  words  still  in
use,  ^'  Come  hither,  all  ye  people,"  are  said  to  be  the  be-
ginning of  a  proclamation,  which  Theseus  ordered  to  be
made  when  he  composed  a  commonwealth,  as  it  were,  of
all  nations.  Yet  he  left  it  not  in  the  confusion  and  disor-
der likely  to  ensue  from  the  confluence  and  strange  mix-
ture of  people,  but  distinguished  them  into  noblemen,
husbandmen,  and  mechanics.  The  nobility  were  to  have
the  care  of  religion,  to  supply  the  city  Mith  magistrates,
to  explain  the  laws,  and  to  interpret  whatever  related  to
the  worship  of  the  gods.  As  to  the  rest,  he  balanced  the
citizens  against  each  other  as  nearly  as  possible  ;  the  no-
bles excelling  in  dignity,  the  husbandmen  in  usefulness,
and  the  artificers  in  number.  It  appears  from  Aristotle^
that  Theseus  was  the  first  who  inclined  to  a  democracy,

cd  the  victory  of  the  gods  over  the  giants,  and  the  most  remarkable
achievements  of  their  heroes.

*  In  memory  of  their  quitting  the  boroughs,  and  uniting  in  one  city.

On  this  occasion,  he  iikewise  instiiured,  or  at  least  restored,  the
famous  Isthmian  games,  in  honour  of  Neptune.  All  these  were
chietiy  designed  to  draw  a  concourse  of  strangers  ;  and  as  a  farther
enccuragem.ent  for  them  to  come  and  settle  in  Atheus,  he  gave  them
the  privileges  of  natives.

t  In  the  original  iris,  "  Safe,  like  a  bladder,  isfc  "  When  Sylla
had  taken  Athens,  ar.d  exercised  all  mangier  of  cruel' ies  there,  some
Athenians  went  to  Delphi,  to  inquire  of  the  oracle.  Whether  the
last  hour  of  their  city  was  come  ?  and  ihe  priestess,  according  to
I'ausanias,  made  answer,  tx  a/r  ro\i  ^xx^jy  i)^'vrci^  7'h.it  v-'hich  be-
longs 1 1  the  blad'er  noAV  has  an  end,  plainly  referring-  to  the  old  pre*
phecy  here  delivered.


THESEUS.  69

and  gave  up  the  regal  power  ;  and  Homer  also  seems  to
bear  witness  to  the  sam^;  in  his  catalogue  of  ships,  where
he  gives  the  name  of  People  to  the  Athenians  only.  To
his  money  he  gave  the  impression  of  an  ox,  either  on  ac-
count of  the  Marathonian  bull,  or  because  of  Minos 's
general  Taurus,  or  because  he  would  encourage  the  citi-
zens in  agriculture.  Hence  came  the  expression  of  a
thing  being  worth  ten  or  an  hundred  oxen.  Having  also
made  a  secure  acquisition  of  the  country  about  Megara  to
the  territory  of  Athens,  he  set  up  the  famed  pillar  in  the
Isthmus,*  and  inscribed  it  with  two  verses  to  distinguish
the  boundaries.     That  on  the  east  side  ran  thus  ;

This  is  not  Peloponnesus,  but  Ionia:
and  that  on  the  west  was,  ^

This  is  Peloponnesus,  not  Ionia.

He  likewise  instituted  games  in  imitation  of  Hercules,
being  ambitious  that  as  the  Greeks,  in  pursuance  of  that
hero's  appointment,  celebrated  the  Olympic  games  in
honour  of  Jupiter,  so  they  should  celebrate  the  Isthmian
in  honour  of  Neptune  :  for  the  rites  performed  there  be-
fore in  memory  of  Melicertes,  were  observed  in  die  night,
and  had  more  the  air  of  mysteries,  than  of  a  public  spec-
tacle and  assembly.  But  some  say  the  Isthmian  games
were  dedicated  to  Scirion,  Theseus  inclining  to  expiate
his  untimely  fate,  by  reason  of  their  being  so  nearly  re-
lated ;  for  Scirion  was  the  son  of  Canethus  and  Heni-
oche,  the  daughter  of  Pittheus.  Others  will  have  it,  that
Sinnis  was  their  son,  and  that  to  him,  and  not  to  Sciron,
the  games  were  dedicated.  He  made  an  agreement  too
v/ith  the  Corinthians,  that  they  should  give  the  place  of
honour  to  the  Athenians  who  came  to  the  Isthmian  games,
as  far  as  the  ground  could  be  covered  with  the  sail  of  the
public  ship  that  brought  them,  when  stretched  to  its  full
extent.  This  particular  we  learn  from  Hellanicus  and
Andron  of  Halicarnassus.

Philochorus  and  some  others  relate,  that  he  sailed,  in
company  with  Hercules,  into  the  Euxine  sea,  to  carrv  on

*  This  pillar  was  erected  by  the  common  consen  of  che  lonians  and
Pelopounesians,  to  put  an  end  to  the  disputes  ab  ;ut  their  bounda-
ries ;  and  it  continued  to  the  reign  of  Codrus,  during  which  it  was
demolished  by  the  Heraclidae,  who  had  made  themselves  masters  of
the  territory  of  Megara,  which  thereby  passed  from  the  lonians  to
the  Dorian*     Straboy  lib.  ix.

r    '^


70  Plutarch's  lives.

war  "W^th  the  Amazons  *,  and  that  he  received  Antiope  f
as  the  reward  of  his  valour :  but  the  greater  number,  a-
mong'  whom  are  Pherecydes,  Hellanicus,  and  Herodorus,
tell  us,  that  Theseus  made  that  voyage,  v/ith  his  own  fleet
only,  some  time  after  Hercules,  and  took  that  Amazon
captive,  which  is  indeed  the  more  probable  account;  for
we  do  not  read  that  any  other  of  his  fellow-warriors  made
any  Amazon  prisoner.  But  Bion  says,  he  took  and  car-
ried her  off  by  a  stratagem.  The  Amazons,  being  natu-
rally lovers  of  men,  w^ere  so  far  from  avoiding  Tlieseus,
when  he  touched  upon  their  coasts,  that  they  sent  him
presents.  Theseus  invited  Antiope,  who  brought  them
into  his  ship,  and  as  soon  as  she  was  aboard,  set  sail.
But  the  account  of  one  Menecrates,  who  published  a
History  of  Nice,  in  Bithynia,  is,  that,  Theseus,  having
Antiope  aboard  his  vessel,  remained  in  those  parts  some
time ;  and  that  he  was  attended  in  that  expedition  by
three  young  men  of  Athens,  who  were  brothers,  Eunos,
Thoas,  and  Soioon.  'I'he  last  of  these,  unknown  to  the
rest,  fell  in  love  with  Antiope,  and  communicated  his
passion  to  one  of  his  companions,  who  applied  to  An-
tiope about  the  affair.  She  firmly  rejected  his  preten-
sions, but  treated  him  v/ith  civility,  and  prudently  con-
cealed the  matter  from  Theseus.  But  Soioon,  in  despair,
having  leaped  into  a  river,  and  drowned  himself,  The-
seus, then  sensible  of  the  cause,  and  the  young  man's
passion,  lamented  his  fate,  and,  in  his  sorrow,  recollected
an  oracle  which  he  had  formerly  received  at  Delphi.
The  priestess  had  ordered,  that  when,  in  some  foreign
country  he  should  labour  under  the  greatest  aruiction,
he  should  build  a  city  there,  and  leave  some  of  his  fol-
lowers to  govern  it.  Hence  he  called  the  city  which  he
built  Pythopolis,  after  the  Fythian  God,  and  the  neigh-
bouring river  Soioon,  in  honour  of  the  young  man.  He
left  the  two  surviving  brothers  to  govern  it,  and  give  it
I;iws;  and  along  with  them  Hermus,  who  was  of  one  of
the  best  families  in  Athens.  From  him  the  inhabitants
of  Pythopolis  call  a  certain  place  in  their  city  Hermes's

*  Nothing  can  be  more  fabulous  than  the  whole  history  of  the  A-
mazons.  Strabo  observes,  that  the  most  credible  of  Alexander's
historians  have  not  so  much  as  menLicned  them  ;  and  indeed,  if  they
■were  a  Scyth  an  nation,  how  came  they  all  to  have  Greek  names  ?

I  Justin  says  Hercules  gave  Hippclyte  to  Theseus,  and  kept  An-
tiope for  himself.


THESEUS.  7A

House,  \^H€rmou  oikia'}^  and  by  misplacing  an  accent,
transfer  the  honour  from  the  hero  to  the  God  Mercury.

Hence  the  war  with  the  Amazons  took  its  rise.  And
it  appears  to  hare  been  no  slight  or  womanish  enterprize ;
/for  they  could  not  have  encamped  in  the  town,  or  joined
battle  on  the  ground  about  the  Pynx  *  and  the  Museum  t^
or  fallen  in  so  intrepid  a  manner  upon  the  city  of  Athens,
.unless  they  had  first  reduced  the  country  about  it.  It  is
difficult,  indeed,  to  believe  (though  Hellanicus  has  re-
lated it;  that  they  crossed  the  Cimmerian  Bosphorus  upon
the  ice  :  but  that  they  encamped  almost  in  the  heart  of
the  city  is  confirmed  Ijy  the  names  of  places,  and  by  the
tombs  of  those  that  fell.

There  was  a  long  pause  and  delay  before  either  araiy
would  begin  the  attack.  At  last,  Theseus,  by  the  direc-
tion of  some  oracle,  offered  a  sacrifice  to  Fear  |,  and  af-
ter that  immediately  engaged.  The  battle  was  fought
in  the  month  Boedromion,  [September]  the  day  on  Avhich
the  Atheniiins  still  celebrate  the  feast  called  Boedromia.
Clidemus,  who  is  willing  to  be  very  particular,  writes,
that  the  left  wing  of  the  Amazons  moved  towards  what
is  now  called  the  Amozonium  ;  and  that  the  right  ex-
tended as  far  as  the  Pynx,  near  Chrysa  :  That  the  Athe-
nians first  engaged  with  the  left  wing  of  the  Amazons,
falling  upon  them  from  the  Museiuii ;  and  that  the  tombs
of  those  who  fell  in  the  battle  are  in  the  street  which  leads
to  the  gate  called  Piraica,  which  is  by  the  monument
erected  in  honour  of  Chalcodon,  where  the  Athenians
were  routed  by  the  Amazons,  and  fied  as  far  as  the  Tem-
ple of  the  Furies  :  but  that  the  left  wing  of  the  Atheni-
ans, which  charged  from  the  i  aJladium,  Ardettus,  and
Lyceum,  drove  the  right  wing  of  the  enemy  to  their  camp,
and  slew  many  of  them  :  That  after  four  months,  a  peace
was  concluded  by  means  of  Hippolyte  ;  for  so  this  au-
thor calls  the  Amazon  that  attended  with  Theseus,  not
Antiope-  But  some  say  this  heroine  fell  fighting  by
Theseus's   side,   being  pierced  with  a  dart  by  Molpadia,

*  The  Pynx  was  a  place  (near  the  citadel)  where  the  people  of
Athens  used  to  assemble,  and  where  the  ora:ors  sj)oke  to  them  a-
bout  public  atiairs.

t  The  Museum  was  upon  a  little  hill  over-agalnst  the  citadel,  a.nd
pr^^bably  sd  called  frtm  a  ttrm,ile  cf  he  Muses  there.

I  '1  he  heahens  considered  not  only  the  passions,  but  even  dis-
tempers, stui-ms,  and  tempests,  as  divinities,  and  worshipped  them,
that  they  might  do  them  no  harm.


72  Plutarch's  lives.

and  that  a  pillar,  by  the  Temple  of  the  Olympian  earth  *,
was  set  up  over  her  grave.  Nor  is  it  to  be  wondered,  that,
in  the  account  of  things  so  very  ancient,  history  should
be  thus  uncertain,  since  they  tell  us  that  some  Amazons,
wounded  by  Antiope,  were  privately  sent  to  Chalcistobe
cured,  and  that  some  were  buried  there,  at  a  place  now
called  Amazonium.  But  that  the  war  was  ended  by  a
league,  we  may  assuredly  gather  from  a  place  called  Hor-
comosium,  near  the  temple  of  Theseus,  where  it  was
sworn  to,  as  well  as  from  an  ancient  sacrifice,  which  is
offered  to  the  Amazons  the  day  before  the  feast  of  The-
seus. The  people  of  Megara  too  shew  a  place,  in  the  fi-
gure of  a  lozenge,  where  some  Amazons  were  buried,  as
you  go  from  the  market-place  to  the  place  called  Rhus,
Others  also  are  said  to  have  died  by  Chseronea,  and  to
have  been  buried  by  the  rivulet,  which,  it  seems,  was  for-
merly called  Thermodon,  but  now  Haemon ;  of  which  I
have  given  a  farther  account  in  the  Life  of  Demosthenes.
It  appears  likewise,  that  the  Amazons  traversed  Thessa-
ly,  not  without  opposition  ;  for  their  sepulchres  are  shewn
to  this  day,  between  Scotusssea  and  Cynoscephalse.

This  is  all  that  is  memorable  in  the  story  of  the  Ama-
zons :  for  as  to  what  the  author  of  the  Theseid  relates
of  the  Amazons  rising  to  take  vengeance  for  Antiope,
when  Theseus  quitted  her,  and  married  Phxdra,  and  of
their  being  slain  by  Hercules,  it  has  plainly  the  air  of
fable.  Indeed  he  married  Phaedra  after  the  death  of  An-
tiope, having  by  the  Amazon  a  son  named  Hippolytus  f,,

*  By  this  is  meant  the  moon,  so  called  (as  Plutarch  supposes  in
his  Treatise  on  the  cessation  of  Oracles)  because  like  the  Genii  or
Demons,  she  is  neither  so  perfect  as  the  gods,  nor  so  imperfect  as
hum.an  kind  But  as  some  of  the  philosophers,  we  mean  the  Pytha-
goreans, had  astronomy  enough  afterwards  to  conclude  that  the  sun
is  the  centre  of  this  system,  we  presume  it  might  occur  to  thinking
men  in  the  more  early  ages,  that  the  moon  was  an  opaque,  and,
therefore,  probably  a  terrene  body

f  Theseus  had  a  son,  by  the  Amazonian  queen,  named  Hippo-
lytus, having  socn  after  married  Phaedra,  'he  sister  of  Deucalion,
the  sen  and  successor  of  Minos,  by  whom  he  had  two  sons  ;  he  sent
Hippolytus  to  be  brought  up  by  his  own  mother  i^^hra,  queen  of
Troezene:  but  he  coming  afterwards  to  be  preten  at  some  Athe-
nian games,  Ph«edra  fell  in  love  with  hmi,  and  having  solicited  him
in  vain  to  a  compliance,  in  a  fit  of  resentment,  accused  him  to  The-
seus of  having  made  an  a  tempt  uj)on  her  chastity.  The  fable  says,
that  Theseus  prayed  to  Neptune  to  punish  him  by  some  violent


THESRUS.  7$

or,  according  to  Pindar,  Demophon.  As  to  the  calami-
ties which  befel  Phaedra  and  Hyppolytus,  since  the  histo-
rians do  not  differ  from  what  the  writers  of  tragedy  have
said  of  them,  we  may  look  upon  them  as  matters  of  fact.

Some  other  marriages  of  Theseus  are  spoken  of,  but
have  not  been  represented  on  the  stage,  which  had  neither
an  honourable  beginning,  nor  a  happy  conclusion.  He
is  said  aho  to  have  forcibly  carried  off  Anaxo  of  Troe-
zene,  and  having  slain  Sinnis  and  Cercyon,  to  have  com-
mitted rapes  upon  their  daughters  :  to  have  married  Pe-
riboea,  the  mother  of  Ajax,  too,  and  Pheroboea,  and  lope
the  daughter  of  Iphicles.  Besides  they  charge  him  with
being  enamoured  of  -(Egle,  the  daughter  of  Fanopeus,  (as
above  related)  and,  for  her,  leaving  Ariadne,  contrary  to
the  rules  both  of  justice  and  honour  ;  but  above  all,  with
the  rape  of  Helen,  which  involved  Attica  in  war,  and  end-
ed in'his  banishment  and  death,  of  which  we  shall  speak
more  at  large  by  and  by.

Though  there  were  many  expeditions  undertaken  by
the  heroes  of  those  times,  Herodorus  thinks  that  1  heseus
was  not  concerned  in  any  of  them,  except  in  assisting  the
Lapithse  against  the  Centaurs.  Others  write,  that  he
attended  Jason  to  Colchos,  and  Meleager  in  killing  the
boar ,  and  that  hence  came  the  proverb,  *'  Notiiing  with-
out Theseus."  It  is  allowed,  however,  that  Theseus,
without  any  assistance,  did  himself  perform  many  great
exploits  ;  and  that  the  extraordinary  instances  of  his
valour  gave  occasion  to  the  saying,  *'  This  man  is  another
Hercules."  Theseus  was  likewise  assisting  to  Adrastus,
in  recovering  the  bodies  of  those  thaticil  before  Thebes,
not  by  defeating  the  Thebans  in  battle,  as  Euripides
lias  it  in  his  tragedy,  but  by  persuading  them  to  a  truce  ;
for  so  most  writers  agree  :  and  Philochorus  is  of  opinion
that  this  was  the  lirst  truce  ever  known  for  burying  the
dead.  But  Hercules  was,  indeed,  the  first  who  gave  up
their  dead  to   the  enemy,  as  we  have  shewn  in  his   life.

death  ;  and  all  ">olemn  execrations,  according  to  the  notions  of  the
hea  hens,  cerair.ly  laUing  eiiec  ,  Hippcly  us  was  riding  al  ng  the
sea-sh(^re,  Nep  u  e  sent  two  sea-calves,  who  frightened  ihe  horses,
ovenurncd  the  chariot,  and  tore  him  to  pieces,  i  he  ]);  ets  add,  ihat
the  lusttiil  queen  hanged  herself  for  grief;  but  as  i  r  Hippcl\tus,
Diana  being  ra'  en  with  his  chasti')  ,  and  pirving  the  sad  faie  it  liad
l)rought  upon  him,  pvevuiltd  up  :n  /^sculapius  to  restore  him  to  life,
to  be  a  cui^jpaniou  of  her  aiveriioiis.


Y4t  Plutarch's  lives.

The  burylng-place  of  the  common  soldier?  is  to  be  seen
at  Eleutherx,  and  of  the  officers  at  Eleusis  ;  in  which
particular  Theseus  gratiiied  Adrastus.  -£,schylus,  in
-whose  tragedy  of  the  Eleusinians,  Theseus  is  introduced
relating  the  matter  as  above,  contradicts  what  Euripides
has  delivered  in  his  Suppliants.

The  friendship  between  Theseus  and  Pirithous  is  said
to  have  commenced  on  this  occasion.  Theseus  being-
much  celebrated  for  his  strength  and  valour,  Pirithous
was  desirous  to  prove  it,  and  therefore  drove  away  his
oxen  from  Marathon.  When  he  heard  that  Theseus  pur-
sued him  in  arms,  he  did  not  fly,  but  turned  back  to  meet
him.  But,  as  soon  as  they  beheld  one  another,  each  was
so  struck  with  admiration  of  the  other's  person  and  cour-
age, that  they  laid  aside  all  thoughts  of  fighting  ;  and
Pirithous  first  giving  Theseus  his  hand,  bade  him  be
judge  in  this  cause  himself,  and  he  would  willingly  abide
by  his  sentence.  Theseus,  in  his  turn,  left  the  cause  to
him,  and  desired  him  to  be  his  friend  and  fellow-warrior.
Then  they  confirmed  their  friendship  with  an  oath.  Pi-
rithous afterwards  marrying  Deidamia,*  intreated  The--
seus  to  visit  his  country,  and  to  become  acquainted  with
the  Lapitlis&.f  He  had  also  invited  the  Centaurs  to  the
entertamment.  These,^  in  their  cups  behaving  with  inso-
lence and  indecency,  and  not  ever  '-efraining  from  the
women,  the  Lapithse  rose  up  in  their  defence,  killed  some
of  the  Centaurs  upon  the  spot,  and  soon  after  beating
them  in  a  set  battle,  drove  them  out  of  the  country  with
the  assistance  of  Theseus.  Herodorus  relates  the  mat-
ter differently.  He  says,  that  hostilities  being  already
begun,  Theseus  came  in  aid  to  the  Lapiths,  and  then
had  the  first  sight  of  Hercules,  having  made  it  his  busi-
ness to  find  him  out  at  Trachin,  where  he  reposed  himself
after  all  his  v/anderings  and  labours  ;  and  that  this  inter-
vicv/  passed  in  marks  of  great  respect,  civility,  and  mutual
ccmpliments.  But  we  are  rather  to  follow  those  histo-
rians who  v/rite,  that  they  had  very  frequent  interviews;
and  that  by  means  of  Theseus,  Hercules  was  initiated  into

*  All  other  writers  call  her  Hippodamia,  except  Propertius,  who
calls  her  Ischomacha.     f  he  was  the  daughter  of  Adrastus

t  Homer  calls  the  Lapithae  heroes  'I'he  Centaurs  are  feigned  to
have  been  half  man  half  horse,  either  from  their  brurality,  or  because
(if  not  the  inventors  of  horsemanship,  yet)  they  generally  appeai^eA
®n  horseback.


\


•THESEUS.  YS

the  mysteries  of  Ceres,  leaving  first  obtained  lustration,
as  he  desired,  on  account  of  several  involuntary  poiiu-
tions.

Theseus  was  new  fifty  years  old,  according  to  Hellani-
cus,  when  he  wtis  concerhed  in  the  raf-C  oi  *  xicicn,  who
had  not  yet  arrived  at  years  of  maturity.  Some  writers,
thinking:  this  one  of  the  heaviest  changes  against  him,  en-
deavour lo  corri-ct  it,  by  saying  that  it  wu!i  not  I'heseus
that  carried  off  HeltU;  but  Idas  and  Lynccus,  who  com-
mitted her  to  his  care,  and  that  therefore  he  refused  to
give  her  up,  when  demanded  by  Castor  and  Poilux  ;  or
rather  that  she  was  delivered  to  him  by  Tyndarus  him-
self, to  keep  her  from  Enarsphorus,  the  sonof  Hippocoon,
who  endeavoured  to  possess  himself  by  violtnce  of  Helen,
that  was  yet  b»U  a  cliild.  But  what  authors  generally
agree  in,  as  most  probable  is  as  follows  :  The  two  friends
went  together  to  Sparta,  and  having  seen  the  girl  dancing
in  the  temple  of  Diiuia  Orthia,  carried  her  off,  and  fled.
The  pursuers  that  were  sent  after  them  following  no  far-
ther than  Tegea,  they  thought  themselves  secure  ;  and
having  traversed  Peloponnesus,  they  entered  into  an  agree-
ment, that  he  v/ho  should  gain  Helen  by  lot  should  have
her  to  wife,  but  be  obliged  to  assist  in  procuring  a  wife
for  the  other.  In  consequence  of  these  terms,  the  lots
being  cast,  she  fell  to  Theseus,  who  received  the  virgin,
and  conveyed  her,  as  she  was  not  yet  marriageable,  to
Aphidnx.  Here  he  placed  his  mother  with  her,  and
committed  them  to  the  care  of  his  friend  Aphidnus,  charg-
ing him  to  keep  them  in  the  utmost  secrecy  and  safety  ;
whilst,  to  pay  his  debt  of  service  to  Pirithous,  himself
travelled  with  him  into  Epirus,  with  a  view  to  the  daugh-
ter of  Aidoneus,  king  of  the  Molossians.  This  prince
named  his  wife  Proserpine,!  his  daughter  Core,  and  his
dog  Cerberus  :  with  this  dog  he  commanded  all  his
daughters  suitors  to  fight,  promising  her  to  him  that

*  This  princess  was  the  reputed  daughter  of  Jupiter,  by  Leda  the
wife  of  Tvndxriis,  king  of  Oebalia,  in  .  eloponnesus  ;  ai^.d  the'  ihen
but  nine  years  old,  was  reckoned  the  grea' est  beauty  in  the  world.

t  Proserpme  andCcre  was  the  ramc  pers<Mi,davg;hierto  Aidrneus,
w  hose  wife  was  named  Ceres,  Plutarch  himself  tells  us  so  in  his  Mo-
ral?,where  he  addsjtha  by  Proserpine  is  meant  the  moon,  whcm  Plu-
to, or  the  God  of  Darkness,  sometimes  carries  oft".  Indeed,  Core  sig-
nifies nothing  more  than^y.w^  ti.'cman  or  ilav^hter  ,•  and  they  might
say  a  daitghui^  of  Epirus,  as  we  bay  a  (iati^hter  of  France,  or  of
Spain.


76  Plutarch's  lives.

should  overcome  him.  But  understanding  that  Pirithous
came  not  with  an  intention  to  court  his  daughter,  but  to
carry  her  off  by  force,  he  seized  both  him  and  his  friend,
destroyed  Pirithous  immedidtely  by  means  of  his  dog-,
and  shut  up  Theseus  in  close  prison.

Meantime  Menestheus,  the  son  of  Feteus,  grandson  of
Orneus,  and  ureat-grandson  of  Erectheus,  is  said  to  be  the
first  of  mankind  that  undertook  to  be  a  demagogue,  and
by  his  eloquence  to  ingratiate  himself  with  the  people.
He  endeavoured  also  to  exasperate  and  inspire  the  nobili-
ty with  sedition,  who  had  but  ill  born  with  Theseus  for
some  time,  reflecting  that  he  had  deprived  every  person  of
family  of  his  government  and  command,  and  shut  them
up  together  in  one  city,  where  he  used  them  as  his  sub-
jects and  slaves.  Among  the  common  people  he  sowed
disturbance  by  telling  them,  that  though  they  pleased
themselves  with  the  dream  of  liberty,  in  fact  they  were
robbed  of  their  country  and  religion  ;  and,  instead  of  many
good  and  native  kings,  were  lorded  over  by  one  man,  who
was  a  new-comer  and  a  stranger.  Whilst  he  was  thus
busily  employed,  the  war  declared  by  the  Tyndaridas
greatly  helped  lorward  the  sedition.  Some  say  plainly,
they  were  invited  by  Menestheus  to  invade  the  country.
At  first  they  proceeded  not  in  a  hostile  manner,  only  de-
manding their  sister  :  but  the  Athenians  answering,  that
they  neither  had  her  among  them,  nor  knew  where  she
was  left,  they  began  their  warlike  operations.  Academus,
however,  finding  it  out  by  some  means  or  other,  told  them
she  was  concealed  at  Aphidnac.  Hence,  not  cnly  the
Tyndaridae  treated  him  hcnouiably  in  his  life-time,  bint
the  Lacedemonians,  v/ho,  in  after  times,  often  made  in-
roads into  Attica,  and  laid  waste  all  the  country  besides,
spared  the  academy  for  his  sake.  But  Dicxarchus  says,
that  Echedemus  and  Marathus,  two  Arcadians  being
allies  to  the  Tyndaridse  in  that  war,  the  place  which  r.cw
goes  by  the  name  of  the  Academ^y,  was  first  called  Eche-
demy,  from  one  of  them  ;  and  tha.t  frcm  the  other  the
district  of  Marathon  had  its  name, because  he  ireely  cffertd
himself,  in  pursuance  of  some  oracle,  to  be  sacrificed  at
the  head  of  the  army.  To  Aphidnss  then  they  came,
where  they  beat  the  enemy  in  a  set  battle,  and  then  took
the  city,  and  razed  it  to  the  ground.  T  here,  they  tell  us,
Alycus,  the  sonof  Sciron,  was  slain,  fighting  for  Castor
and  Pollux ;  and  that  a  certain  plaice,  within  the  territories


THESEUS.  *t1

cf  Mcgara,  is  called  Alycvis,  from  his  being  buried  there  :
■and  Hereas  writes,  that  Alycus  received  his  death  from
The  sens 's  own  hand.  These  verses  also  are  alleged  as  si
proof  in  point :

For  bright-hair'd  Helen  he  was  slain
By  Theseus,  on  Aphidna's  plain.

But  it  is  not  probable  that  Aphidnse  would  have  been  taken
and  his  mother  made  pnsoner,  had  Theseus  been  present,

Aphidnx,  however,  was  taken,  and  Athens  in  danger.
Menestheus  took  this  opportunity  to  persuade  the  people
to  admit  the  Tyndarid?s  into  the  city,  and  to  treat  them
hospitably,  since  they  only  levied  war  against  Theseus,
who  began  with  violence  first,  but  that  they  were  bene-
factors and  deliverers  to  the  rest  of  the  Athenians.  Their
behaviour  also  confirmed  what  was  said  ;  for,  though
conquerors,  they  desired  nothing  but  to  be  admitted  to
the  mysteries,  to  which  they  had  no  less  claim  than  Her-
cules,* since  they  were  equally  allied  to  the  city.  This
request  was  easily  granted  them,  and  they  were  adopted
by  Aphidnus,  as  Hercules  was  by  Pylius.  They  had  also
divine  honours  paid  them,  v/ith  the  title  of  Anakes,  which
was  given  them,  either  on  account  of  the  truce  [aAzocAc]
whicji  theyinade,or  because  of  their  great  care  that  no
one  should  be  injured,  though  there  were  so  many  troops
in  the  city  ;  for  the  phrase  anakos  echein  signifies  to  keep
or  take  care  of  any  thing  ;  and  for  this  reason,  perhaps,
kings  are  called  Anaktes.  Some  again  say,  they  were
called  Anakes,  because  of  the  appearance  of  their  stars;
for  the  Athenians  use  the  words  anekas  and  anekathen,  in-
stead of  aiio  and  anot/umy  that  is,  above  or  on  high.

We  are  told  that  ^Ethra,  the  mother  of  Tlieseus,  who
was  now  a  prisoner,  v/as  carried  to  Lacedxmon,  and  from
thence,  with  Helen,  to  Troy  ;  and  that  Homer  confirms
it  when,  speaking  of  those  that  waited  upon  Helen,  he
mentions


-The  hcauteous  Clymene,


And  iEthra  burn  of  Pittheus.


*  For  Ca-^tor  and  PoUux,  like  him,  were  sons  of  Jupiter,  from
vrhom  the  Athenians  too  pretended  to  derive  their  origin.  It  wa"?
necessary,  however,  that  they  should  be  naturalized  before  they
■were  admit^d  to  the  mysteries,  and  accordingly  they  were  natural-
ized by  adoption.

VOL«    I.  H


^(3  r:t.UTARCli's    LIVES.

Others  reject  this  verse  as  none  of  Homer's  as  they  do
also  that  story  of  Munydius,  who  is  said  to  have  been  th-e
fruit  of  a  secret  commerce  between  Demophoon  and  Lao-
dice,  and  brought  up  by  jEthra  at  Troy.  But  Ister,  in
the  thirteenth  book  of  the  history  of  Attica  gives  an  ac-
count of  jEthra  different  from  all  the  rest.  He  was  in-
formed it  seems,  that  after  the  battle  in  which  Alexander
or  Paris  was  routed  by  Achilles  and  Patroclus,  in  Thessa-
ly  near  the  river  Sperchius,  Hector  took  and  plundered
the  city  of  Troezene,  and  carried  off-Ethra,  who  had  been
left  there.     But  this  is  highly  improbable.

It  happened  that  Hercules,  ni  passing  through  the
country  of  the  Molossians,  was  entertained  by  Aidoneus
the  king,  who  accidentally  made  mention  of  the  bold  at-
tempts of  Theseus  and  Pirithous,  and  of  the  manner  in
which  he  had  punished  them  when  discovered.  Plercu-
les  was  much  disturbed  to  hear  of  the  inglorious  death
of  the  one,  and  the  danger-^of  the  other.  As  to  Pirithous,
he  thought  it  in  vain  to  expostulate  about  him  ;  but  he
begged  to  have  Theseus  released,  and  Aidoneus  granted
it.  Theseus,  thus  set  at  liberty,  returned  to  Athens,
where  his  party  Avas  not  yet  entirely  suppressed  :  and
whatever  temples  and  groves  the  city  had  assigned  him,
he  consecrated  them  all,  but  four,  to  Hercules,  and  crvled
them  (as  Philochorus  relates)  instead  of  Thesea,  Hera-
clea.  But  desiring  to  preside  in  the  commonwealth,  and
direct  it  as  before,  he  found  himself  encompassed  with
faction  and  sedition  ;  for  those  that  were  his  enemies  be-
fore his  departure,  had  now  added  to  their  hatred  a  con-
tempt of  his  authority  ;  and  he  beheld  the  people  so
generally  corrupted,  that  they  wanted  to  be  flattered  into
their  duty,  instead  of  silently  executing  his  commands.
When  he  attempted  to  reduce  them  by  force,  he  v/as  over-
pov/ered  by  the  prevalence  of  faction  ;  and,  in  the  end,
finding  his  affairs  desperate,  he  privately  sent  his  chil-
dren into  Euboea,  to  Elephenor,  the  son  of  Chalcodou-;
and  himself,  havinp- uttered  solemn  execrations  au-ains.t
tiie  Athenians  at  (jiargcttus,  where  there  is  still  a  place
thence  called  Araterioii,  sailed  to  Scyros.*  He  imagined
that  there  he  should  find  hospitable  treatment,  as  ;he  had  u
paternal  estate  in  that  island.     Lycomedes  was  then  king

*  The  ungrateful  Athenians  v/ere  in  process  of  time  made  so  sen-
sible of  the  eHects  of  his  crn^e,  that,  to  appease  his  ghost,  thej
.appointsd  solemn  sacrifices  an(i  divine  hououis  to  be  paid  to  hiiyu


THESEUS.  79

dftheScyrians.  To  him,  therefore,  he  applied,  and  de-
sired to  be  put  in  possession  of  his  lands,  as  intending  t®
settle  there.  Some  say,  he  asked  assistance  of  him  against
the  Athenians.  But  Lycomedes,  either  jealous  of  the
glory  of  Theseus,  or  willing  to  oblige  Menestheus,  having
led  him  to  the  highest  cliHs  of  the  country,  on  pretence
of  shewing  him  from  thence  his  lands,  threw  him  down
headlong  from  the  rocks,  and  killed  him.  Others  say  he
fell  of  himself,  missing  his-  step,  when  he  took  a  walk,  ac-
cording to  his  CListom,  after  supper.  At  that  time  his
death  was  disregarded,  and  Tvlcnestheus  quietly  possessed
the  kingdom  of  Athens,  while  the  sons  of  Theseus  at-
tenaed  Elephenor,  as  private  persons  to  the  Trajan  war.
But  Menestheus  dying  in  the  same  expedition,  they  re-
turned and  recovered  the  kingdom.  In  succeeding  ages
the  Athenians  honoured  Theseus  as  a  demi-eod,  induced
to  it  as  well  by  other  reasons,  as  because,  when  they
were  fighting  the  Medesat  Marathon,  a  considerable  part
of  the  army  thought  they  saw  the  apparition  of  Theseus
completely  armed,  and  bearing  down  before  them  upon
the  barbarians^,

Alter  the  iMedian  w^ar,  wheiiPh.-cdon  was  arclion,*  the
Athenians  consulting  the  oracle  of  Apollo  were  ordered
by  the  priestess  to  take  up  the  bones  of  Theseus,  and  lay
tliemin  an  honourable  place  at  Athens,  where  they  were

*  Cbdrus,  the  seventeenth  king  of  Athens,  cotemporary  with
Saul,  de\'Oted  himself  to  death  f,:r  the  sake  of  his  country,  in  the  year
before  Christ  106;S  ;  having  ledrn*-  tnat  the  oniele  had  promised  its
enemies,  the  Dorians  and  the  Heraclidze,  victory,  if  they  did  not  kill
the  kirgof  the  Athenians.  His  subjects,  on  this  account,  conceiv-
ed such  venerati:  n  for  him,  that  they  esteemed  none  worthy  to  bear
the  royal  tiile  after  him,  and  therefore  committed  the  management
of  the  state  to  elective  magistrates,  to  whom  they  gave  the  title  of
archons,  and  chose  Medon,  the  eldest  son, of  Ccdrus,  to  tlvis  ne\T
dignity.  Thus  ended  the  legal  succession  and  tide  of  kings  of
Athens,  after  it  had  continued,  without  any  interruption,  48r  years,
from  Cecrops  to  Codrus.  The  archon  acted  wi.h  sovereign  au-
thority, but  was  accountable  to  the  people  whenever  ir  was  i-equired.
There  v/ere  thirteen  perpetual  archons  in  the  space  of  325  years.
After  the  death  of  Alcm^eon,  who  was  the  last  of  them,  this  charge
was  continued  to  the  persoii  elected  for  ten  years  only  ;  but  always
in  the  same  family,  till  the  death  of  Eryxias,  or  according  to  others,
of  Tlesias,  the  seventh  and  last  decennial  archon.  For  the  family
of  Codrus,  or  of  tlie  Medontidx,  ending  in  him,  the  Athenians  cre-
ated annual  archons,  and,  instead  of  one,  they  appointed  nine  every
year.  See  a  further  account  of  the  archons  in  the  Notes  on  the
Life  of  Soba.


80  Plutarch's  lives.

to  be  kept  with  the  greatest  care.  But  it  was  difficult  to
take  them  up,  or  even  to  find  out  the  grave,  on  account  of
the  savage  and  inhospitable  disposition  of  the  barbarians
who  dwelt  in  Sevres.  Nevertheless,  Cimon  having  taken
the  island  (as  is  related  in  his  life)  and  being  very  desirous
to  find  out  the  place  where  Theseus  was  buried,  by  chance,
saw  an  eagle,  on  a  certain  eininence,  breaking  the  ground
(as  they  tell  us)  and  scratching  it  up  with  her  talons.  This
•he  considered  as  a  divine  direction,  and,  digging  there,
found  the  coffm  of  a  man  of  extraordinary  size,  with  a
lance  of  brass  and  a  s^^•ord  lying  by  it.  When  these  re-
mains were  brought  to  Athens  in  Cimon's  galley,  the
Athenians  received  thein  with  splendid  processions  and  sa-
crifices, and  were  as  much  transported  as  if  Theseus  him-
self had  returned  to  the  city.  Pie  lies  interred  in  the
jniddle  of  the  towni,  near  the  Gymnasium  :  and  his  oratory-
is  a  place  of  refuge  for  servants  and  all  persons  of  mean
condition,  who  fiy  from  men  in  power,  as  Theseus,  while
he  lived,  was  a  humane  and  benevolent  patron,  who  gra-
ciously received  the  petitions  of  the  poor.  The  chief  sa-
crifice is  ofiered  to  him  on  the  eighth  of  October,  the  day
on  which  he  returned  with  the  young  m.en  from  Crete.
They  sacrifice  to  him  likewise  on  each  eighth  day  of  the
other  months,  either  because  he  first  arrived  from  Trce-
zene  on  the  eighth  of  July,,  as  Diodorus  the  geographer
relates  ;  or  else  thinking  this  number,  above  all  others,  to
be  m.ost  proper  to  him,  because  he  was  said  to  be  the  sen
of  Neptune  ;  the  solemn  feasts  of  Neptune  being  observ-
ed on  the  eighth  day  of  every  month.  For  the  numbei-
eight,  as  the  first  cube  of  an  even  number,  and  the  double
of  the  first  square,  properly  represents  the  firm.ness  and
immoveable  powei  of  this  god,  who  thence  has  the  name*,
wf  Asphaiius  and  Gaieochus,


[81  I


ROMULUS.


Jr  ROIVI  whom,  and  for  what  cause,  the  city  of  Rome  ob-  -
tained  that  name,  whose  glory  has  diffused  itself  over  the
world,  historians  are  not  agreed.*  Some  say  the  Pelas-
gi,  after  they  had  over-rim  great  part  of  the  giobe,  and
conquered  many  nations,  settled  there,  and  gave  their  city
the  nameofRome,t  on  account  of  their  strength  in  war.
Others  tell  us,  that  v/hen  Troy  was  taken^  some  of  the
Trojans  having  escaped  and  gained  their  ships,  put  to
sea,  and  being  driven  by  the  winds  upon  the  coasts  of
Tuscany,  ca.me  ta  an  anchor  in  the  river  Tiber :  that
here,  their  wives  being  much  fatigued,  and  no  longer
able  to  bear  the  hardships  of  the  sea,  one  of  them  supe-
rior to  the  rest  in  birth  and  prudence,  named  Roma,  pro-
posed that  they  should  burn  the  fleet:  that  this  being  ef-
fected, the  men  at  first  were  much  exaspera.ted,  but  after-
wards, through  necessity,  fixed  their  scat  on  the  Palatine
hill,  and  in  a  short  time. things  succeeded  beyond  their
expectation  ;  for  the  country  was  good,|  and  the  people
hospitable  :  that  therefore,  besides  other  honours  paid  to-
Roma,  they  called  their  city^  as  she.  v.^asthe  cause  of  its

*  Such  is  the  uncertainty  of  the  origin  of  imperial  Rome,  and  in-
deed of  most  cities  and  nation.'--,  that  are  of  any  considerable  anti-
quity. That  of  Rome  might  be  the  more  imcertain,  because  its  first
inhabitants  being  a  collection  of  mean  persons,  fugiiives,  and  out-*
laws,  from  other  nations,  could  not  be  supposed  to  leave  histories
behind  them.  Livy,  however,  and  most  cf  the  Latin  historians,
agree  that  Rome  was  built  by  Romu'us,  and  both  the  city  and  peo-
ple named  after  him  ;  while  the  vanity  of  the  Greek  writers  wants
to  ascribe  almost  every  thmg,  and  Rome  among  die  rest,  to  a  Gre-
cian original.

t  Po/xjj,  Romo,  signifies  strergth.

\  Whatever  desirable  things  nature  has  scattered  frugally  in  other
countries  were  formerly  found  in  Italy,  as  in  their  original  semina-
ry. But  there  has  been  so  little  encouragement  given  to  the  culti-
vation of  the  soil  in  the  time  of  the  pontifts,  tliftt  it  ijs  xigw  coopfir*
*l:-.iely  barren.

•  H   3.


82  ?lutarch''s  LrvES^

beinc^  built,  after  her  name.  Hence  too,  we  arc  infornT-
ed,  the  custom  arose  for  the  v/omen  to  sahite  their  rela-
tioriS  and  husbands  v/ith  a  kiss,  because  those  women,
when  they  had  burnt  the  ships,  used  such  kind  of  endear-
ments to  appease  the  resentment  of  their  husbands.

Amouf^  the  vxirious  accounts  of  historians,  it  is  said
that  Roma  was  the  daughter  of  Itakis  and  Leucaria ;  or-
else  the  daughter  of  Telephus  tlie  son  of  Hercules,  and
married  ts  iEneas  ;  or  that  she  was  the  daughter  of  Asca-
liius*,  the  son  of  ^-Eneas  ;  and  gave  name  to  the  city  ;  or.
that  Romanus,  the  son  of  Ulysses  and  Circe,  built  it ;
or  Rcmur,,.  the  son  of  iEmalhicn,  whom  Diomedes  sent,
from  Troy  ;  or  else  Romus,  king  of  the  Latins,  after  he
had  expelled  the  Tuscans,  who  passed  originally   from
Thessaly  into  Lydia,  and  from  Lydia  into  Italy.     Even,
they  Vrdio,  with  the  greatest  probability,  declare  that  the
city  had  its  name  from  Romulus,  do  not  agree  about  his
extraction:  for  some  say  he  was  son  of  JLneasand  Dex-
ithea,  the  daughter  of  Piiorbus,   and  was  brought  an  in-^
fant  into  Italy  with  his  brother  Remus  :  that  all  the  ether-
vessels  v/ere  lost  by  the  violence  of  the  flood,  except  that
in  which  the  children  were,  which  driving  gently  ashore
where  theba.rik  v/as  level,  they  vvere  saved  beyond  expec-
tation, and  the  pl?.ce  from  thence  Vv^as  called  Rome.    Some
''.Till  have  it,  that  Roma,  daughter  of  that  Trojeai  ^^oman
who  v/as  married  to  Liitinus,  the  son  of  Telemachus,  was.
mother  to  Romulus^  Others  say  that  iEmelia  the  daugh-
ter of  jEneas  and  Lavinia,  liad  him  by  ]Ma.rs :  and  others  a-
gain  give  an  accoantof  his  birth,  which  is  entirely  fabulous*-
Therc  appeared,  it  seems  to  Tarchetius  king  of  the  Albans-
who  v/as  the  most  wicked  and  most  cruel  of  men,  a  super-^-
natural  vision  in  his  own  house,  the  figure  of  Priapus  rising-
out  of  the  chimney-hearth,  and  staying  there  many  days-.
The  goddess  Tethys  had  an  oracJe  in  Tuscany,!  which  be-
ing  consulted,   ga.ve  this   answer  to  Tarchetius,  That  it
was  necessary  some  virgin  should  accept  of  the  embraces
of  the  phantom,  the  fruit  whereof  would  be  a  son,  eminent

*   *0;   d'   A(Ty.ayiiii    m  Aims  [ytt^yari^x    SC.  ]    Xzyacri    r^oij.cu

^ia6%t  TW  'TToysi.     The  former  English  translation  and  the  French:
in  this  place  are  erroneous;

t  There  was  no  oracle  of  Tethys,  but  of  Themis  there  wr^s.  The-
mis was  the  same  with  Carmenta,  the  mother  of  Evander,  which-
lasf  name  &he  hftd,  b<^c«vuse  she  delivered  her  orjicle^  hi  Qannhie.  ia.
v*rses..


ROMULUS,  83.

for  valour,  good  fortune,  and  strength  of  body.  Hereupon
Tarchetius  acquainted  one  of  his  daughters  with  the  pre-
diction, and  ordered  her  to  entertain  the  apparition ;  but
she  declining'  it,  sent  her  maid.  When  Tarchetius  came
to  know  it,  he  was  highly  olTended,  and  confined  them,
both,  intending  to  put  them  to  death.  But  Vesta  appear-
ed to  him  in  a  dream,  pnd  forbad  him  to  kill  them;  but
ordered  that  the  young  women  should  weave  a  certain  web
in  their  fetters,  and  vvhen  that  was  done  be  given  in  marri-
age.. They  weaved,  therefore,,  in  the  day-time;  but  o-
tliers,  by  Turchetius's  order,  unrnveiled  it  in  the  night.
I'he  woman  having  twins  by  this  commerce,  Tarchetius
delivered  tlitm  to  one  Teratius,  with  orders  to  destroy
them.  But,  instead  of  that,  he  exposed  them  by  a  river-
aide,  where  a  she-wolf  came  and  gave  tliem  suck,  and  va-
rious sorts  of  birds  brought  food  and  fed  the  infants,  till
at  last  a  herdsman,  who  beheld  these  wonderful  things,
ventured  to  approach  and  take  up  the  children.  Thus  se-
sured  from  clanger,  they  grew  up,  and  then  attacked
Tarchetius,  and  overcame  him.  This  is  the  account  Pro-^
mathion  gives  in  his  History  of  Italy.

Bat  the  principrd  parts  of  that  account,  which  deserves
the  most  credit,  and  has  the  most  vouchers,  were  first  pub-
lished  among  the  Greeks  by  Diodes  the  Peparethian,
M  horn  Fabius  Pictor  commonly  follows ;  and  though  there
are  different  relations  of  the  matter,  yet,  to  dispatch  it  in
a  few  words,  the  story  is  this  :  the  kings  of  Alba  *  de-
scending lineally  from  .^neas,  the  succession  fell  to  two
brothers,  Numitor  and  Amulius.  The  latter  divided  the
whole  inheritance  into  two  parts,  setting  the  treasures
brought  from  Troy  against  the  kingdom ;  and  Numitor
made  choice  of  the  kingdom.  Amulius  then  having  the
treasures,  and  consequently  being  inore  pow^erful  than
Numitor,  easily  possessed  himselfof  the  kingdom  too;  and
fearing  the  daughter  of  Numitor  might  have  children,  he
fi.ppointed  her  priestess  of  Vesta,  in  which  capacity  she  was
always  to  live  unmarried,  and  a.  virgin.     Some  say  her

*  From  ^neas  down  to  Numitor  and  Amulius,  there  were  thir-
teen kings  of  the  same  race,  but  we  scarce  know  any  thing  of  them,
e::cept  their  names,  and  the  years  of  their  respective  reigns.  Amu-
lius, the  last  of  them,  who  surpassed  his  brother  in  courage  and
tnvlerstanding,  drove  him  from  the  throne,  and,  to  secure  it  for  him-
self,  murdered  jf.gestus,  Numitor's  only  son,  and  consecrated  bjs
duu^jhicr  IMiSA  Sjilyiji  to  the  worship  of  Veitji*.


84  PLUTARCH'S    LIVES.

name  was  liia,  some  Rhea,  and  others  Sylvia.     But  she
was  soon  discovered  to  be  with  child,  contrary  to  thelavsr
©f  the   vestals.     Antho,  the  king's  daughter,  by   much
entreaty,  prevailed  v/ith  her  father  that  she  should  not
be  capitally  punished.     She  was  confined,  however,  and
excluded  from  society,  lest  she  should  be  delivered  with-
out  Amulius's  knowledge.     When  her  time   was  com-
pleted, she  was  delivered  of  two  sons  of  uncommon  size
and  beauty;    whereupon  Amulius,  still  more  alarmed,,
ordered  one  of  his  servants  to  destroy  them.     Some  say
the  name  of  thi^  servant  was  Faustulus  :  others,  that,  that
was  the  name  of  a  person  that  took  tiiem  up.     Pursuant
to  his  orders,  he  put  the  children  into  a  small  trough  or
cradle,  and  went  down  towards  the  river,  with  a  design-
to  cast  them  in  ;  but  seeing  it  very  rough,  and  running
with  a  strong  current,  he  was  afraid  to  approach  it.     He
therefore  laid  them  dov^-n  near  the  bank,  and  departed, .
The  flood  increasing  continually  set  the  trough  afloat,  and
carried  it  gently  down  to  a  pleasant  place  now  called.
Cermanum,  but  formerly  (as  it  should  seem)  Germanum,  ,
denoting  that  the  brothers  arrived  there.

Near  this  place  was  a  wild  fig-tree,  which  they  called
Ruminalis,  either  on  account  of  Romxulus,  as  is  generally
supposed,  or  because  the  cattle  there  ruminated,  or  chewed,
the  cud,  during  the  noon-tide,  in  the  shade  ;  or  rather
because  of  the  suckling  of  the  children  there  ;  for  the  an-
cient Latins  called  the  breast  ruma  ;  and.the  goddess  who;
presides  over  the  nursery  Rumilia*,  whose  rites  they  ce-
lebrate without  wine,  and  only  with  libations  of  milk.
The  infants^  as  the  story  goes,  lying  there,  were  suckled
by  a  she-wolf,  and  fed  and  taken  care  of  by  a  wood-
pecker. These  animals  are  sacred  to  Mars;  and  the  wood-
pecker is  held  in  great  honour  and  veneration  by  the  La-
tins. Such  v/onderful  events  contributed  not  a  little  to
gain  credit  to  the  mother's  report,. that  she  had  the  chil-
dren by  Mars ;  though  in  this  they  tell  us  she  was  her-
self deceived,  having  suffered  violence  from.  Amuliusy
who  came  to, her,  and  lay  with  her  in  armour.  Some  say,
the  ambiguity  of  the  nurse's  name  gave  occasion  to  the.
fable  ;  for  the  Latins  call  not  only  she-wolves  but  prosti-
tutes lufice  ;  and  such  v/as  Acca  Larentia,  the  wife  o£
Faustulus,  the  foster-father  of  the  children.     To  her  al-

*  Tlae  Romans  called  that  goddess  »ot  Rumilia,  but  Runiiiia.


ROMULUS.  85

SO  the  Romans  offer  sacrifice,  and  the  priest  of  Mars  ho-
Hours  her  with  libations  in  the  month  of  April  when  they
celebrate  her  feast  Larentialia.

They  wor-ahip  also  another  Larentia  on  the  following
account.  The  keeper  of  the  temple  of  Hercules,  hav-
ing, it  seems,  little  else  to  do,  proposed  to  play  a  game
at  dice  with  the  god,  on  condition  that,  if  he  won,  he
should  have  something  valuable  of  that  deity  ;  but  if  he
lost,  he  should  provide  a  noble  entertainment  for  him,
and  a  beautiful  v/oman  to  lie  with  him.  Then  throw-
ing the  dice,  first  for  the  god,  and  next  for  himself,  it
appeared  that  he  had  lost.  Willing,  however,  to  stand  to
his  bargain,  and  to  perform  the  conditions  agreed  upon,  he
prepared  a  supper,  and  engaging  for  the  purpose  one  La-
rentia, who  was  very  handsome,  but  as  yet  little  knoM^n
he  treated  her  in  the  temple,  where  he  had  provided  a  bed,
and  after  supper,  left  her  for  the  enjoyment  of  tlic  god..
It  is  said  that  the  deity  had  some  conversation  with  her,
and  ordered  her  to  go  early  in  the  morning  to  the  market-
place, salute  the  first  man  she  shouldmeet,  and  make  him
her  friend.  The  man  that  met  her  was  one  far  advanced
in  years,  and  in  opulent  circumsta.nces,  Tarrutius  by  name,
who  had  no  children,  and  never  had  been  married.  This
man  took  Larentia  to  his  bed,  and  loved  her  so  well,  that
at  his  death  he  left  her  heir  to  his  whole  estate,  which,
was  very  considerable  ;  and  she  afterwards  bequeathed  the..
die  greatest  part  of  it  by  will  to  the  people.  It  is  said,
that  at  the  time  when  she  was  in  high  reputation,  and
considered  as  the  favourite  of  a  god,  she  suddenly  disap-
peared about  the  place  where  the  former  Larentia  was
laid.  It  was  now  called  Velabrum,  because  the  river
often  overflov/ing,  tliey  passed  it  at  this  place,  in  ferry-
boats,  to  go  to  the  Forum.  This  kind  of  passage  they
call  vclafura.  Others  derive  the  name  from  velum^  a
sail,  because  they  who  have  tlie  exhibiting  of  the  public
shews,  beginning  at  Velabrum,  overshade  all  the  way
fi'om  the  i'orum  to  the  Hippodrome  Vv ith  canvas ;  for  a
sail  in  Latin  is  velum.  On  tiiese  accounts  is  the  second
Larentia  so  much  honoured  among  the  Romans.

In  the  mean  time  Faustulus,  Amulius's  herdsman,
brought  up  the  children  entire  undiscovered ;  or  rather,
a.3  others  ^vith  greater  probability  assert,  Numitor  kiie-w;


S6  Plutarch's  lives^

it  from  the  first,*  and  privately  supplied  the  necessaries
for  their  maintenance.  It  is  also  said  that  they  were  sent
to  Gabii,  and  there  instructedin  letters,  and  other  branches
of  education  suitable  to  their  birth  :  and  history  informs
us,  that  they  had  the  names  of  Romulus  and  Remus,  from
the  teat  of  the  wild  animal  which  they  were  seen  to  suck.
The  beauty  and  dignity  of  their  persons,  even  in  their
childhood,  promised  a  generous  disposition  ;  and  as  they
grew  up,  they  both  discovered  great  courage  and  bravery,
with  an  inclination  to  hazardous  attempts,  and  a  spirit
which  nothing  could  subdue.  But  Romulus  seemed
more  to  cultivate-  the  powers  of  reason,  and  to  excel  in
poUtical  knowledge  ;  whilst,  by  his  deportment  among  his
neighbours  in  the  employments  of  pasturage  and  hunting,
he  convinced  tham  that  he  was  born  to  command  rather
than  to  obey.  To  their  equals  and  inferiors  they  behaved
very  courteously  ;  but  they  despised  the  king's  bailiffs
and  chief  herdsmen,  as  not  superior  to  themselves  in
courage,  though  they  were  in  authority,  disregarding  at
once  their  threats  and  their  anger.  They  applied  them-
selves to  generous  exercises  and  pursuits,  looking  upon
idleness  and  inactivity  as  illiberal  things,  but  on  huntings
running,  banishing  or  apprehending  robbers,  and  deliver^
ing  such  as  were  oppressed  by  violence,  as  the  employ-
ments of  honour  and  virtue.  By  these  things  they  gained
great  renown-.

A  dispute  arising  between  the  herdsmen  of  Numitop
and  Amulius,  and  the  former  having  driven  away  some
cattle  belonging  to  the  latter,  Romulus  and  Remus  fell
upon  them,  put  them  to  flight,  and  recovered  the  greatest
part  of  the  booty.  At  this  conduct  Numitor  was  highly
offended  ;  but  they  little  regarded  his  resentment.  The
first  steps  they  took  on  this  occasion,  were  to  collect,  and
receive  into  their  coinpany,  persons  of  desps-rate  fortunes^'
and  a  great  number  of  slaves  ;  a  measure  which  gave
alarming  proofs  of  their  bold  and  seditious  inclinations.
It  happened  that  when  Romulus  v/as  employed  in  sacri^
ficing,  for  to  that  and  divination  he  was  much  incUned,
Numitor's  herdsmen  met  with  Remus,  as  he  was  walking

*  Numitor  might  build  upon  this  the  hopes  of  hi^  re-establish-
ment ;  but  his  knowing  the  place  where  the  children  were  brought
up,  and  supplying  them  with  necessaries,  is  quite  inconsistent  wiih
the  manner  of  their  discovery  when  grov/n  up,  which  is  the  most
agreeable  part  of  the  story.


-KOMULUS.  8T

HvJth  a  small  retinue,  and  fell  upon  him.  After  some  blows
exchanged,  and  wounds  given  and  received,  Numitor's
people  prevailed,  and  took  Remus  prisoner.  He  was  car-
ried before  Numitor,  and  had  several  things  laid  to  his
charge  ;  but  Numitor  did  not  choose  to  punish  him  him-
self, for  fear  of  his  brother's  resentment.  To  him,  there-
fore, he  applied  for  justice,  which  he  had  all  the  reason
in  the  world  to  expect ;  since,  though  brother  to  ihe
rjpigning  prince,  he  had  been  injured  by  his  servants,
who  presumed  upon  his  authority.  The  people  of  Alba,
moreover,  expressing  their  uneasiness,  and  thinking  that
Numitor  suffered  great  indignities,  Amulius  moved  with
their  complaints,  delivered  Remus  to  him  to  be  treated
as  he  should  think  proper.  When  the  youth  was  con-
ducted to  his  house,  Numitor  was  greatly  struck  with  his
appearance,  as  he  was  yery  remarkable  for  size  and
strength  ;  he  observed,  too,  his  presence  of  mind,  and
the  steadiness  of  his  looks,  which  had  nothing  servile  ia
them,  nor  were  altered  with  the  sense  of  his  present  dan-
ger ;  and  he  was  informed,  that  his  actions  and  whole
behaviour  were  suitable  to  what  he  saw.  But  above  all,
some  divine  influence,  as  it  seems,  directing  the  beginnings
of  the  great  events  that  were  to  follow,  Numitor,  by  his
sagacity,  or  by  a  fortunate  conjecture,  suspecting  the
truth,  questioned  him  concerning  the  circumstances  of
his  birth  ;  speaking  mildly  at  the  same  time,  and  regard-
ing him  with  a  gracious  eye.  He  boldly  answered,  "  I
will  hide  nothing  from  you,  for  you  behave  in  a  more
princely  manner  than  Amulius,  since  you  hear  and  ex-
amine before  you  punish  :  but  he  has  delivered  us  >*p
without  uiquiring  into  the  matter.  I  have  a  twin-brother,
and  heretofore  we  believed  ourselves  the  sons  of  Faustu-
lus  and  Larentia,  servants  to  the  king.  But  since  we  were
accused  before  you,  and  so  pursued  by  slander  as  to  be  in
danger  of  our  lives,  we  hear  nobler  things  concerning
our  birth.  Whether  they  are  true,  the  present  crisis
will  shew.*  Our  birth  is  said  to  have  been  secret ;  our
support  in  our  infancy  miraculous.  W^e  were  exposed  to
birds  and  wild  beasts,  and  by  them  nourished  ;  suckled
by  a  she-wolf,  and  fed  by  the  attentions  of  a  wood-pecker,
as  Ave  lay  in  a  trough  by  the  great  river.     The  trough  is

*  For  if  thejr  were  true,  the  god  who  miraculously  protected  them
in  tlieir  infancy,  would  deliver  Kemus  from  his  present  danger.


^8  Plutarch's  lives.

still  presel'ved,  bound  about  with  brass  bands,  and  in-
scribed with  letters  partly  faded  ;  which  may  prove,  per-
haps, hereafter  very  useless  tokens  to  our  parents,  when
we  are  destroyed."  Numitor  hearing-  this,  and  compar-
ing the  time  with  the  young  man's  looks,  was  confirmed
in  the  pleasing  hope  he  had  conceived,  and  considered
how  he  might  consult  his  daughter  about  this  affair ;  for
fche  was  still  kept  in  close  custody.

Mean  while  Faustulus,  having  heard  that  Remus  was
taken  and  delivered  up  to  punishment,  desired  Romulus
to  assist  his  brother,  informing  him  then  clearly  of  the
particulars  of  his  birth  ;  for  before  he  had  only  given
dark  hints  about  it,  and  signified  just  so  much  as  might
take  off  the  attention  of  his  wards  from  every  thing  that
was  mean.  He  himself  took  the  trough,  and  in  all  the
tumult  of  concern  and  fear  carried  it  to  Numitor.  His
disorder  raised  some  suspicion  in  the  king's  guards  at  the
gate,  and  that  disorder  increasing  while  they  looked  ear-
nestly upon  him,  and  perplexed  him  with  their  questions,
he  was  discovered  to  have  a  troucrh  under  his  cloak.
There  happened  to  be  among  them  one  of  those  who  had
it  in  charge  to  throw  the  children  into  the  river,  and  who
was  concerned  in  the  exposing  of  them.  This  man  seeing
the  trough,  and  knowing  it  by  its  make  and  inscription,
rightly  guessed  the  business  ;  and  thinking  it  an  affair
not  to  be  neglected,  immediately  acquainted  the  king  with
it,  and  put  him  upon  inquiring  into  it.  In  these  great
and  pressing  difficulties,  Faustulus  did  not  preserve  en-
tirely his  presence  of  mind,  nor  yet  fully  discover  the
maUer.  He  acknowleged  that  the  children  were  saved
indeed,  but  said  that  they  kept  cattle  at  a  great  distance
from  Alba  ;  and  that  he  was  carrying  the  trough  to  Ilia,
who  had  often  desired  to  see  it,  that  she  might  entertain
the  better  hopes  that  her  children  were  alive.  Whatever
persons  perplexed  and  actuated  with  fear  or  anger  use  to
suffer,  Amulius  then  suffered  ;  for  in  his  hurry  he  sent
an  honest  man,  a  friend  of  Numitor's,  to  inquire  of  him
whether  he  had  any  account  that  the  children  were  alive.
When  the  man  was  come,  and  saw  Remus  almost  in  the
embraces  of  Numitor,  he  endeavoured  to  confirm  him  in
the  persuasion  that  the  youth  was  really  his  grandson  ;
begging  him,  at.the  same  time,  immediately  to  take  the
best  measures  that  coukl  be  thought  of,  and  offering  hi*


ROMULUS.  W

best  assistance  to  support  their  party:  The  occasion  ad-
mitted of  no  delay,  if  they  had  been  inclined  to  it  ;  fop
Romulus  was  now  at  hand,  and  a  good  number  of  the
citizens  were  gathered  about  him,  either  out  of  hatred  or
fearof  Amulius.  He  brought  also  a  considerable  force
with  him,  divided  into  companies  of  a  hundred  men  each,
headed  by  an  ofiicer  who  bore  a  handful  of  grass  and
shrubs  upon  a  pole.  These  the  Latins  call  Manipuli  ;
and  hence  it  is,  that  to  this  day  soldiers  of  the  same  com-
pany are  called  Manipulares.  Remus  then,  having  gain-
ed those  within,  and  Romulus  assaulting  the  palace  with-
out, the  tyrant  knew  not  what  to  do,  or  whom  he  should
consult,  but  amidst  his  doubts  and  perplexities,  was  taken
and  slain.  These  particulars,  though  mostly  related  by
Fabius,  and  Dioeles  the  Peparethian,  who  seems  to  have
been  the  first  that  wrote  about  the  founding  of  Rome,  are
yet  suspected  by  some  as  fabulous  and  groundless.  Per-
haps, however,  we  should  not  be  so  incredulous,  when  we
see  what  extraordinary  events  fortune  produces  ;  nor,
when  we  consider  what  height  of  greatness  Rome  attain-
ed to,  can  we  think  that  it  could  ever  have  been  effected
without  some  supernatural  assistance  at  first,  and  an  ori-
t^in  more  than  human.

Amulius  being  dead,  and  the  troubles  composed,  the
two  brothers  were  not  willing  to  live  in  Alba,  without
governing  there  ;  nor  yet  to  take  the  government  upon
them  during  their  grandfather's  life.  Having,  therefore,
invested  him  with  it,  and  paid  due  honours  to  their  mo-
ther, they  determined  to  dwell  in  a  city  of  their  own,  and,
for  that  purpose,  to  build  one  in  the  place  where  they  had
their  first  nourishment.  This  seems,  at  least,  to  be  the
most  plausible  reason  of  their  quitting  Alba  ;  and  per-
liaps  too  it  was  necessary,  as  a  greatnumbcrof  sliives  and
fugitives  was  collected  about  them,  either  to  see  their  af-
fairs entirely  ruined,  if  these  should  disperse,  or  with
them  to  seek  another  habitation  ;  for  the  people  of  Alba
refused  to  pennit  the  fugitives  to  mix  with  them,  or  to
receive  them  as  citizens,  sufficiently  appears  from  the  rape
of  the  women,  which  was  not  undertaken  out  of  a  licen-
tious humour,  but  deliberately,  and  tlirough  necessity,
from  the  want  of  wives  ;  since,  after  they  seized  them,
they  treated  them  very  honourably.

VOL.    f.  I


^0  Plutarch's  lives.

As  scon  a3  the  foundation  of  the  city  was  laid,  they
opened  a  place  of  refuge  for  fugitives^  which  they  called
the  temple  of  the  Asylsan  God.*  Here  they  received  all
that  came,  and  would  neither  deliver  up  the  slave  to  his
master,  the  debtor  to  his  creditor,  nor  the  murderer  to
the  magistrate  ,  declaring,  that  they  were  directed  by  the
oracle  of  Apollo  to  preserve  the  asylum  from  all  viola-
tion. Thus  the  city  was  soon  peopled  ;t  for  it  is  said  that
the  houses  at  first  did  not  exceed  a  thousand.  But  of
that  hereafter.

While  they  were  intent  upon  building,  a  dispute  soon
arose  about  the  place.  Romulus  having  built  a  square,
which  he  called  Rome,  would  have  the  city  there  ;  but
Remus  marked  out  a  more  secure  situation  on  Mount
Aventine,  which,  from  him,  was  called  Remonium,:^  but
now  has  the  name  of  Rignarium.  The  dispute  was  re-
ferred to  the  decision  of  augury  ;  and  for  this  purpose  they
sat  down  in  the  open  air,  when  Remus,  as  they  tell  us,
saw  six  vultures,  and  Romulus  twice  as  many.  Some  say,
Remus's  account  of  the  number  he  had  seen  was  true,
and  that  of  Romulus  not  so  ;  but  v/hen  Remus  ca.me  up
to  him,  he  did  really  see  twelve.  Hence  the  Romans,  in
their  divination  by  the  fiight  of  birds,  chiefly  regard  the
vulture  :  though  Herodorus  of  Pontus  relates,  that  Her-
cules used  to  rejoice  when  a  vulture  appeared  to  him,  as
he  v/as  going  upon  any  great  action.  This  was,  pioba-
bly,  because  it  is  a  creature  the  least  mischievous  of  any,
pernicious  neither  to  corn,   plants,  nor  cattle.     It  only

*  It  is  not  certain  who  this  God  of  refuge  Avas.  Dicnysuis  of
Halicarnassus  tells  us,  that,  in  his  time,  the  place  where  the  as}luni
had  been,  wi's  consecrated  to  Jupiter.  Romulus  did  not  at  first
>'eceive  the  fugitives  and  outlaws  within  the  walis  but  allowed
them  the  hill  ^aturnius,  afterwards  called  Capitclinus,  for  theii-
habitation.

t  Most  of  the  Trojans,  of  whom  there  still  remained  fifty  fami-
lies in  Augustus's  time,  chose  to  follow  the  fortune  of  Romulus  and
Remus,  as  did  also  the  inhabitants  of  Pallantium  and  Saturnia,  two
small  town?.

:j;  We  find  no  mention  either  of  Remonium  or  Rignarium  in  any
ether  writer.  An  anonymous  MS.  reads  Remoria  :  and  Festus
tells  us  (De  Ling.  Latin,  lib.  ii.)  the  summit  of  Mcunt  Aventihe
was  called  Remuria,  from  the  tim.e  Remus  resolved  to  build  the  city
there.  But  Dionysius  of  Halicaniassus  speaks  of  Mount  Aventine
and  Rerauria  as  two  dinerent  places  ;  and  Stephaiuis  will  have  Re-
Riuria  to  ha\e  been  a  city  in  the  lieighbourhocd  cf  Rome.


ROMULUS.  91

feeds  upon  dead  carcases  ;  but  neither  kills  nor  preys
upon  any  thing  that  has  life  As  for  birds,  it  does  not
touch  them  even  when  dead,  because  they  are  of  its  own
natur..  ;  while  eagles,  owls,  and  hawks,  tear  and  kill  their
own  kind  ;  and,  as  Jischylus  has  it,

What  bird  is  clean  that  fellow-birds  devours  ?

Besides,  other  birds  are  frequently  seen,  and  may  be
found  at  any  time  ,  but  a  vulture  is  an  uncommon  sight,
and  we  have  seldom  met  with  any  of  their  young  ;  so
that  the  rarity  of  them  has  occasioned  an  absurd  opinion
in  some,  that  they  come  to  us  from  other  countries  ;  and
soothsayers  judge  every  unusual  appearance  to  be  preter-
natural, and  the  effect  of  a  divine  povTcr.

When  Remus  knew  that  he  was  imposed  upon,  he  was
highly  incensed,  and  as  Romulus  was  opening  a  ditch
round  the  place  where  the  walls  were  to  be  built,  he  ridi-
culed some  parts  of  the  work,  and  obstructed  others.
At  last,  as  he  presumed  to  leap  over  it,  some  say  he  fell
by  the  hand  of  Romulus  ;*  others,  by  that  of  Celer,  one
of  his  compaHions.  FaustuiU3  also  fell  in  the  scufde  ;
and  Plistinus,  who,  being  brother  to  Faustulus,  is  said  to
have  assisted  in  bringing  Romulus  up.  Celer  fled  into
Tuscany  ;  and  from  him  such  a-^  are  swift  of  foot,  or  ex-
peditious in  business,  are  by  the  Romans  called  ctleres.
Thus  when  Quintus  Metellus,  within  a  few  days  after  his
father's  death,  provided  a  show  of  gladiators,  the  people
admiring  his  quick  dispatch,  gave  him  the  name  of
Celer.

Romulus  buried  his  brother  Remus,  together  with  his
foster-fathers,    Remonia,  and  then  built  nis  city,  having

*  The  two  brodiers  first  differed  about  the  place  where  their  new
city  was  to  be  built,  and  referring  the  matter  to  their  grandfather,
ke  advised  them  to  have  it  decided  by  augury.  In  this  augury  Ko-
mulub  imposed  upon  Remus  ;  and  wlien  the  former  prevailed  that
the  city  hhi  uld  be  built  upon  Mount  Palatine,  the  builders  beingdi-
vided  into  two  companies,  were  no  better  than  two  factions.  At
last  Remus  in  contempt  leapt  over  vhe  work,  and  said,  "Just  so
will  the  enemy  leap  over  it :"  whereupon  Celer  gave  him  a  deadly
blow,  and  answered,  "  In  this  manner  will  our  citizens  repulse  the
enemy  "  Some  say,  that  Romulus  v  as  so  alTiictedat  the  dea'h  of
his  brother,  that  he  would  have  laid  violent  hands  upon  himself,  if
ke  had  not  b^en  prevented-


92  Plutarch's  lives.

sent  for  persons  from  Hetiiiria,*  who,  (as  is  usual  in  sa-
cred mysteries)  according  to  stated  ceremonies  and  writ-
ten rules,  were  to  order  and  direct  how  every  thing  y/as  to
he  done.  First,  a  circular  ditch  was  dug  about  v/hat  is
now  called  the  Comitum,  or  Hall  of  Justice,  and  the  first
fmits  of  every  thing  that  is  reckoned  either  good  by  use,
or  necessary  by  nature,  were  cast  into  it ;  and  then  each;
bringing  a  small  quantity  of  the  earth  of  the  country  from
whence  he  came,  threw  it  in  promiscuously.!  This  ditch
had  the  name  of  Mundus,  the  same  with  that  of  the  uni-
verse. In  the  next  place,  they  marked  out  the  city,  like
a  circle  round  this  centre  ;  and  the  founder  having  fitted
to  a  plough  a  brazen  plough-share,  and  yoked  a  bull  and
cov/,  himself  drew  a  deep  furrow  round  the  boundaries*
The  business  of  those  that  followed  was  to  turn  all  the
clods  raised  by  the  plough  inwards  to  the  city,  and  not  to
suffer  any  to  remain  outwai-ds.  This  line  described  the
eompass  of  the  city  ;  and  between  it  and  the  wails  is  a
space  called  by  contraction,  Pomerium,  as  lying  behind  or
beyond  the  wall*.  Where  they  designed  to  have  a  gate,
they  took  the  plough-share  out  of  the  ground,  and  Hfted
up  the  plough,  making  a  break  for  it.  Hence  they  look
upon  the  whole  wallas  sacred,  except  the  gate-ways.  If
they  considered  the  gates  in  the  same  light  as  the  rest,  it
would  be  deemed  unlawful  either  to  receive  the  necessa-
ries of  life  by  them,  or  to  carry  out  what  is  unclean.

They  day  on  which  they  began  to  build  the  city,  is
universally  allowed  to  be  the  twenty-first  of  April  ;  and
is  celebrated  annually  by  the  Romans  as  the  birth-day  of
Rome.       At  first,  we  are  told^  they  sacrificed  nothing

*  The  Hetrurlans  or  Tuscans  liad,  as  Festiis  informs  us,  a  sort
of  ritual,  where.n  were  contained  the  ceremonies  tha'.:  were  to  be
observed  in  bu.lding  cities,  temples,  al  ars,  -walls,  and  ga»^es.  1  hey
were  instructed  in  augury  ard  religious  rites  by  'i  ages,  who  is  said
to  have  been  taught  by  i*lercury.

f  Ovid  does  not  say  it  was  a  handful  of  the  earth  each  had  brought
out  of  his  own  country,  but  of  the  earth  he  had  taisen  from  his
neighbours;  which  was  d- ne  to  signify,  that  Rome  would  sooa
«ubdueihe  neighbnuring  nations,  liut  Ibidorus  (lib.  xxv.  cap.  2.)
is  of  opinion,  that  by  thruwing  the  first-fruits  and  an  handful  of
earth  into  the  trench,  they  admonished  the  heads  of  the  colony,
that  it  ought  to  be  their  chief  saidy  to  procure  their  fellow-citizens
all  ihe  conveniences  of  life,  to  maintain  peace  and  union  amongst  a
people  cotne  toge'.her  from  dilferent  parts  of  the  world,  and  by  tbia
to  form  thsmsclves  into  ii  body  never  to  be  dissolved.


ROMULUS.  $3

that  had  life,  persuaded  that  they  ought  to  keep  the  solem-
nity sacred  to  the  birth  of  their  country  pure,  and  without
bloodshed.  Nevertheless,  before  the  city  was  built,  on
that  same  day,  they  had  kept  a  pastoral  feast  called  Pa-
lilia.*  At  present,  indeed,  there  is  very  little  analogy
between  the  Roman  and  the  Grecian  months  ;  yet  the
day  on  which  Romulus  founded  the  city,  is  strongly  af-
firmed to  be  the  thirtieth  of  the  month.  On  that  day  too,
we  are  informed,  there  was  a  conjunction  of  the  sun  and
moon,  attended  with  an  eclipse,  the  same  that  was  observ-
ed by  Antimachus  the  Teian  poet,  m  the  thii'd  year  of
the  sixth  Olympiad.

Varro  the  philosopher,  who  6f  all  tlie  Romans  was
most  sldlled  in  history,  had  an  acquaintance  named  Ta-
rutius,  who,  beside  his  knowledge  in  philosophy  and  the
mathematics,  to  indulge  his  speculative  turn,  had  applied
himself  to  astrology,  and  was  thought  to  be  a  perfect  -Tias-
ter  of  it.  To  him  Varro  pi'oposed  to  find  out  the  day
and  hour  of  Romulus's  birth,  making  his  calculation  from
the  known  events  of  his  life,  as  problems  in  geometry  are
solved  by  the  analytic  method  ;  for  it  belongs  to  the  same
science,  when  a  man's  nativity  is  given,  to  predict  his  life,
and  when  his  life  is  given,  to  find  out  his  nativity.  Taru-
tius  complied  with  the  request ;  and  when  he  had  consi-
dered the  disposition  and  actions  of  Romulus,  how  long
he  lived,  and  in  what  manner  he  died,  and  had  put  all
these  things  together,  he  affirmed,  without  doubt  or  hesi-
tation, that  his  conception  was  in  the  first  year  of  the  se-
cond Olympiad,  on  the  twenty-third  day  of  the  month
which  the  Egyptians  call  Choeac  [December]  at  the  third
hour,  when  the  sun  was  totally  eclipsed  ;t  and  that  his
birth  w'as  on  tlie  twenty -third  day  of  the  month   Thoth.

*  The  Palilia,  or  Feast  o£  Pales,  is  sometimes  called  Parilia,  from
the  Latin  word,  parere,  to  bring  forth,  because  pra)  ers  were  theiv
made  for  the  fruitfulness  of  the  sheep.  According  to  Ovid  (Fast-
lib,  iv.)  the  shepherds  then  made  a  great  feast  at  night,  and  conclud-
ed the  whole  with  dancing  over  the  fires  they  had  made  in  the  fields
with  heaps  of  si  raw.

\  There  was  no  total  eclipse  of  the  sun  in  the  first  year  of  the  se-
cond Olympiad,  but  in  the  second  year  of  that  Olympiad  there  was*
If  Romulus  was  conceived  in  the  year  last  mentioned,  it  will  agree
•with  the  common  opinion,  that  he  was  18  years  old  when  he  found-
ed Rome,  and  that  Rome  was  founded  in  the  first  yeiw  of  tb*  seventh
Olympiad,

13


94  Plutarch's  lites.

[September]  about  sun-i'ise  ,  and  that  he  founded  Rome
on  the  ninth  of  the  month  Pharmuthi.  [April]  between  the-
second  and  third  hour  ;*  for  it  is  supposed  that  the  for-
tunes of  cities,  as  well  as  men,  have  their  proper  periods,
determined  by  the  positions  of  the  stars  at  the  time  of
their  nativity^.  These,  and  the  like  relations,  may,  per-
haps, rather  please  the  reader,  because  they  are  curiousy
than  disgust  him,  because  they  are  fabulous.

When  the  city  was  built,  Romulus  divided  the  younger
part  of  the  inhabitants  into  battalions.  Each  corps  con-
sisted of  three  thousand  foot,  and  three  hundred  horse,
and  was  called  a  legion,  because  the  most  warlilie  persons
were  selected,  f  The  rest  of  the  multitude  he  called  The
People.  An  hundred  of  the  most  considerable  citizens
he  took  for  his  council,  with  the  title  of  Patricians4  and
the  whole  body  was  called  the  senate,  which  signifies  an.
Assembly  of  Old  Men^  Its  m.embers  were  styled  Pa.-
tricians  ;  because,  as  some  say,  they  wevo,  fathers  of  free-
born  children  ;  or  rather,  according  to  others,  because
they  themselves  had  fathers  to  shew,  which  was  not  the
ease  with  many  of  the  rabble  that  first  flocked  to  tlie  city-

*  There  is  great  disagreement  among  Yiistorians  and  chronclcgers,
2.5  to  the  year  of  the  foundation  of  Rome.  Varro  places  it  m  the
third  year  of  the  sixth  Olympiad,  752  years  before  the  Christian
uEra  ;  and  Fabius  Pictor,  \vho  is  the  most  ancient  of  all  the  Roman,
writers,  and  followed  by  the  learned  Usher,  places  it  in  the  end  of
the  seventh  Olympiad,  which,  accofdingto  that  prelate,  was  in  the
year  of  the  world  3256,  and  748  before  Christ.  But  Dionysius  Ha-
licarnassus,  Solinus,  and  Eusebius  place  it  in  the  first  year  of  the
seventh  Olympiad.

f  Instead  of  this,  Dionysius  of  Haiicavnassus  tells  us  (lib.  ii.  p.
76.)  the  whole  colony  consisted  of  but  3300  men.  These  Romulus
divided  into  three  equal  parts,  w^hich  he  called  tribes  or  thirds,  each
of  which  v/as  to  be  commanded  by  its  prefect  or  tribune.  The
tribes  were  divided  into  ten  curiae,  and  these  subdivided  into  ten  de-
curise.  The  number  of  houses,  or  rather  huts,  v/hich  was  but  a
thousand,  bears  witness  to  the  truth  of  Dionysius's  assertion.  But
it  is  probable  the  mean  rabble,  who  took  the  protection  of  the  asy-
lum, and  who  might  be  very  numerous,  were  not  reckoned  among
the  3300  first  colonists,  though  they  were  afterwards  admitted  to  the
privileges  of  citizens.

I  The  choice  of  these  hundred  persons  was  not  made  by  the  king
himself:  each  tribe  chose  three  senators,  and  each  of  the  thirty
curiye  the  like  number,  which  made  in  all  the  number  of  ninety-nine,
so  that  Romulus  named  only  ths  hundredth,  who  was  the  head,  or
prince  of  the  senate,  and  the  chief  governor  of  the  city,  when  the^
king;,  was  in  the  field.


ROMULUS.  95

Others  derive  the  title  from  Patrocinium^  or  Patronage^
attributing  the  origin  of  the  term  to  one  Patron,  who  came;
over  with  Evandcr,  and  was  remarkable  for  his  humani-
ty and  care  of  the  distressed.     But  we  shall  be  nearer  the
truth,  if  we  conclude  that  Romulus  styledthem  Patricians,
as  expecting  these  respectable  persons  would  watch  over
those  in  humble  stations  with  a  paternal  care  and  regard  ;
and  teaching  the  commonalty  in  their  turn  not  to  fear  or
envy  the  power  of  their  superiors,  but  to  behave  to  thenx
with  love  and  respect,  both  looking  upon  them  as  fathers,
and  honouring  them  with  that  name.     For  at  this  very
time,  foreign   nations   call  the  Senators  Lords,  but   the
Romans  themselves  call  them  Conscript  Fathers,  a  style
of  greater  dignity  and  honour,  and  withal  much  less  in-
vidious.    At  first,  indeed,  they  were  called  Fathers  only  ;
but  afterAvards,  when  more  were  enrolled  in  their  body,
Conscript  Fathers.     With  this  venerable  title,  then,    he
distinguished  the  senate  from  the  people.     He  likewise
made   another  distinction  between  the  nobility  and  the
commons,  calling  the  former   Patrons,*   and   the  others
Clients  ;  which  was  the  source  of  mutual  kindness   and
many  good  offices  betv/een  them-.     For  tlie  Patrons  were
to  those  they  had  taken  under  their  protection,  counsellors
and  advocates  in  their  suits  at  law,  and  advisers  and  as-
sistants on  all  occasions.     On  the  other  hand,  the  Clients
failed  not  in  their  attentions,    whether  they    were  to  be
shev/n  in  deference   and  respect,  or  in  providing  their
daughters  portions,  or  in  satisfying  their  creditors,  if  their
circumstances  happened  to  be  narrcMv.     No  law  or  magis-
trate obliged  the  Patron  to  be  evidence  against  his  Client,
or  the  Client  against  his   Patron,     But  in  after  times,
though  the  other  claims  continued  in  full  force,  it  was

*  This  patronage  was  as  eftectual  as  any  consangulniry  or  alliance^
and  had  a  v/onderful  effect  towards  maintaining;  union  among  the
people,  for  the  space  of  six  hundred  and  twenty  years,  during  which
time  we  find  no  dissensions  or  jealousies  between  the  patrons  and
their  clients,  even  in  the  time  of  the  republic,,  when  the  populace
frequently  mutinied  against  those  who  were  most  powerful  in  the
city.  Ac  last  the  great  sedition,  raised,  by  Caius  Gracchus,  bi-oke  in,
•upon  that  harmony.  Indeed,  a  client  who  was  wanting  in  his  duty
to  his  patron,  was  deemed  a  traitor  and  au  outlaw,  and  liable  to  be
put  to  death  by  any  person  whatever.  It  may  be,proper  to  obser\'e^
that  not  only  plebeans  chose  their  patrons,  but  in  time  cities  and
States  ptit  themselves  under  the  like  protection.


96  PLUTARCn^S    LIVES.

looked  upon  as  ungenerous  for  persons  of  condition  to
take  money  of  those  below  them.

In  the  fourth  month  after  the  building  of  the  city,  *  as
Fabius  informs  us,  the  rape  of  the  Sabine  women  was
put  in  execution.  Some  say,  Romulus  himself  who  was
naturally  warlike,  and  persuaded  by  certain  oracles,  that
the  Fates  had  decreed  Rome  to  obtain  her  greatness  by
military  atchievements,  began  hostilities  against  the  Sa-
bines,  and  seized  only  thirty  virgins,  being  more  desirous
of  war,  than  of  wives  for  his  people.  But  this  is  not
likely.  For,  as  he  saw  his  city  soon  filled  vnth  inhabi-
tants, very  few  of  which  were  married,  the  greatest  part
consisting  of  ^l  mixed  rabble  of  mean  and  obscure  per-
sons, to  whoin  no  regard  was  paid,  and  who  were  not
expecting  to  settle  in  any  place  whatever,  the  enterprize
naturally  took  that  turn  ;  and  he  hoped  that  from  this,
attempt,  though  not  a  just  one,  some  alliance  and  union
with  the  Sabines  would  be  obtained,  when  it  appeared
that  they  treated  the  women  kindly.  In  order  to  this,,
he  first  gave  out  that  he  bad  found  the  altar  of  some  gody
which  had  been  covered  with  earth.-  This  deity  they
called  Census,  i-neaning  either  the  God  of  Counsel,  (for
with  them  the  word  cojisiliiwi  has  that  signification,  and
their  chief  magistrates  afterwards  were  Consuls,  persons
v/ho  were  to  consult  the  fiublic  good)  or  else  the  Equestrian.
Neptune ;  for  the  altar  in  the  Circus  Maximus  t  is  not
visible  at  other  times,  but  during  the  Circensian  games>
it  is  uncovered.  Some  say,  it  was  proper  that  the  altar
of  that  god  shi>uld  be  under  ground^  because  counsel
should  be  as  private  and  secret  as  possible-  Upon  this,
discovery,  Romulus  by  proclamation  appointed  a  day  for
a  splendid  sacrifice,  with  public  games  and  shows.  Mul-
titudes assembled  at  the  time,,  and  he  himself  presided,
sitting  among  his  nobles,  clothed  in  purple.  As  a  sig-
nal for  the  asault,  he  was  to  rise  gather  up  his  robe,
and  fold  it  about  him.  Many  of  his  people  wore  swords
that  day,  and  kept  their  eyes  upon  him,  watching  for
the  signai,  which  was  no  sooner  given  than  they  drew
them,  and  rushing  on  with  a  shout,  seized  the  daughters,
of  the  Sabines,  but  quietly  suffered  the  men  to  escape,

•  Gellius  says,  it  was  in  the  fonrth  year.

t  That  is  to  say,  in  the  place  where  Ancus  Martius  afterward^
built  the  great  Circus  for  horses  and  chariot-races.


ROMULUS,  9f

Some  say  only  thirty  were  carried  off,  who  each  gave
name  to  a  tribe  ;  but  Valerius  Antias  makes  their  num-
ber five  hundred  and  twenty-seven;  and,  according  to
Juba,  *  there  were  six  hundred  and  eighty-three,  all  vir«
gins.  This  was  the  best  apology  for  Romulus  ;  for  they
had  taken  but  one  married  woman,  named  Hersilia,  who
was  afterwards  chiefly  concerned  in  reconciling  them ;
and  her  they  took  by  mistake,  as  they  were  not  incited
to  this  violence  by  lust  or  injustice,  but  by  their  desire
to  conciliate  and  unite  the  two  nations  in  the  strongest
ties.  Some  tell  us  Hersilia  was  married  to  Hostilius
one  of  the  most  eminent  among  the  Romans ;  others,
that  Romulus  himself  married  her,  and  had  two  childrert
by  her ;  a  daughter  named  Prima,  on  account  of  her
being  first-bom,  and  an  only  son,  whom  he  called  Aol-
lius,  because  of  the  great  concourse  of  people  to  him,
but  after-ages,  Abilius.  This  account  we  have  from
Zenodotus  o-f  Troezene,  but  he  is  contradicted  in  it  by
many  other  historians.

Among  those  that  committed  this  rape,  we  are  told,
some  of  the  meaner  sort  happened  to  be  carrying  off  a
virgin  of  uncommon  beauty  and  stature  ;  and  when  some
of  superior  rank  that  met  them  attempted  to  take  her
from  them,  they  cried  out,  they  were  conducting  her  to
Talasius,  a  young  man  of  excellent  character.  Vvhen^
they  heard  this,  they  applauded  their  design  ;  and  some
even  turned  back  and  accompanied  them  with  the  ut-
most satisfaction,  all  the  way  exclaiming  Talasius.  Hence
this  became  a  term  in  the  nuptial  songs  of  the  Romans,,
as  Hymenieus  is  in  those  of  the  Greeks  j  for  Talasius  is
said  to  have  been  very  happy  in  marriage.  But  Sextius
Sylln,  the  Carthaginian,  a  man  beloved  both  by  the
Muses  and  Graces,  told  me  that  this  was  the  word  which
Romulus  gave  as  a  signal  for  the  rape.  All  of  them,
therefore  as  they  were  carrying  of  the  virgins^  cried  out
Talasius  ;  and  thence  it  stiU  continues  the  custom  at  mar-
riages. Most  writers,  however,  and  Juba  in  Particular,
are  of  opinion,  that  it  is  only  an  incitement  to  good
housewif'ry  and  spinning,  which  the  word  Talasia  signi-
fies ;  Italian  terms  being  at  that  time  thus  mixed  with

*  This  was  the  son  of  Juba,  king  of  Mauritania,  who  beingbrought
very  young  a  captive  to  Rome,  was  instructed  in  the  Roman  and
Grecian  ^teraturc,  and  became  an  excellent  historian.  Dionysius  of
Halicarnassvis  lus  followed  hi*  accovau.


93  plutahch's  lives.

Greek.*  If  this  be  right,  and  the  Romans  did  then  use
the  word  Talasia  in  the  same  sense  with  the  Greeks,  an-
other and  more  probable  reason  of  the  custom  may  be
assigned.  For  when  the  Sabincs,  after  the  war  with  the
Romans,  v/ere  reconciled,  conditions  were  obtained  for

*  The  original,  which  runs  thus,  O;  dg  ttXh^oi  V0jt4;^»r*v,  uv
icut  0  I  float?  >lj<,  'TTX^ax.'X-ATiv  nvxi  iig  ^tXtpyiuv  jccti  TxXxcriecv .  air^j
rot  I  roig  EXXtviKcig  cvof^aeri  ratv  IrxXiKufv  t7rix,s^v/!/,ivii)v>  is  mani-
festly corrupted  ;  and  all  the  former  translations,  folio \ving  corrupt
reading,  assert  what  is  utterly  false,  namely  "  that  no  Greek  terms
were  then  mixed  with  the  language  of  Italy."  The  contrary  ap-
pears from  Plutarch's  life  of  Numa,  were  Greek  ccrms  are  men-
tioned as  frequently  used  by  the  Romans,  ruv  KxXriVixcu))  cycf^u.-'
TA>v  roTi  f^xXXov  1)   vvy  roig  Axrivotg  u9X}csxsy.c&}^%iyiuv»

But  not  to  have  recourse  to  facts,  let  us  inquire  into  the  several
former  translations.  The  Latin  runs  thus  :  Fleriqiie  {inter  quos  est
ynba)  adhortationem  et  incitatiojiem  ad  laboris  sedulitaiem  et  lanifi-
ciutn,  quod  Graeci  rxXxa-ixr  dicunt.  censent,  nundiim  id  temporis  Itali-
cis  'verbis  cum  Graecis  corifusis.  The  English  thus  :  "But  most  are
of  opinion,  and  Juba  in  particular,  that  this  word  Ta!asius  was  us-
ed to  new  married  women,  by  way  of  inci^eraen  to  good  housewife-
ry ;  for  the  Greek  word  Talasia  signil^es  spinning  and  the  lan-
guage of  Italy  was  not  yet  mixed  with  the  Greek."  The  French  of
jDacier  thus  :  Cependant  la  plupart  des  auteurs  croienr,  et  juba  est
meme  de  cette  opinion,  que  ce  mot  n'etoit  qu'une  exl^Drtation  qu'oii
faisoit  aux  raariees  d'aimer  le  travail,  qui  cor,sis'"e  a  filer  de  la  laine,.
que  les  Grecs  appellent  Talasia;  car  en  ce  tems-la  langue  Grecque
n'avoit  pas  encore  e  e  corrurapue  par  les  mots  Latins  "  Thus  they
declare  with  the  Greek ;  though  it  appears  from  what  was  said
immediately  before,  that  Talasia,  a  Greek  term,  was  made  use  of
in  that  language.  Instead,  therefore,  of  «^d,  not  yet,  we  should
most  certainly  read  »to,  thus ;  »to  rort  roig  EAAjjxxe*?  ovo^icxcri  rttm
JrxXiKtifv  iTTixz^i^v/aivMff  "  the  language  of  Italy  being  at  that  time
**  thus  mixed  with  Greek  terms  ;  for  instance,  Talasi."  By  this
emendation,  which  consists  only  of  the  small  alteration  of  the  tt  into
T,  the  sense  is  easy ;  the  context  clear ;  Plutarch  is  reconciled  to
himself,  and  freed  from  the  charge  of  contradicting  in  one  breath,
what  he  had  asserted  in  another.

If  this  wanted  any  farther  support,  we  might  alledge  a  passage
from  Plu<-arch's  Marcellus,  which,  as  well  as  that  in  the  life  of  Nu-
jna,  IS  express  and  decisive.  Speaking  there  cf  ihe  derivation  of
the  word  Feretriiis,  an  appellation  which  Jupi'er  probably  first  had
in  the  time  of  Romulus,  on  occasion  of  his  consecrating  to  him  the
spolia  opinia  :  one  account  he  gives  of  the  matter,  is  that  Feretrins
might  be  derived  from  (pi^srpov,  the  vehicle  on  which  the  trophy
was  carried,  tcxrx  rviv  'EXXvivt^x  yXufrcrxv  in  ttoXXyiv  ion  (rvfc-
fiif^iy/^iVYjv  rt,  A<»r<vwv ;  "for  at  that  time  the  Greek  language  wag
much  Ti;ixt  •'  with  the  Latin."


ROMULUS.  99

the  women,  that  they  should  not  be  obliged  by  their  hus-
bands to  do  any  other  work  beside  spinning.  It  was
customary,  therefore,  ever  after,  that  they  who  gave  the
bride,  or  conducted  her  home,  or  were  present  on  the
occasion,  should  cry  out,  amidst  the  mirth  of  the  wed-
ding, Talaaius  ;  intimating  that  she  was  not  to  be  em-
ployed in  any  labour  but  that  of  spinning.  And  it  is  a
custom  still  observed,  for  the  bride  not  to  go  over  the
threshold  of  her  husband's  house  herself,  but  to  be  car-
ried over,  because  the  Sabine  virgins  did  not  go  in  vo-
luntarily, but  were  carried  in  by  violence.  Some  add,
that  the  bride's  hair  is  parted  with  the  point  of  a  spear,  in
memory  of  the  first  marriages  being  brought  about  in  a
warlike  manner  ;  of  which  we  have  spoken  more  fully  in
the  Book  of  Questions.  This  rape  was  committed  on  the
eighteenth  day  of  the  month  then  called  Sextilis,  now
August,  at  which  time  the  feast  of  the  Consualia  is  kept.
The  Sabians  were  a  numerous  and  warlike  people,  but
they  dwelt  in  unwalled  towns  :  thinking  it  became  them,
who  were  a  colony  of  the  Lacedxmonians,  to  be  bold  and
fearless.  But  as  they  saw  themselves  bound  by  such
pledges,  and  were  very  solicitous  for  their  daughters,  they
sent  ambassadors  to  Romulus  with  moderate  and  equita-
ble demands  :  That  he  should  return  them  the  young  wo-
men, and  disavow  the  violence,  and  then  the  two  nations
should  proceed  to  establish  a  correspondence,  and  contract
alliances  in  a  friendly  and  legal  way.  Romulus,  how-
ever, refused  to  part  wilh  the  young  women,  and  intreated
the  Sabines  to  give  their  sanction  to  what  had  been  done  ;
whereupon  some  of  them  lost  time  in  consulting,  and
making  preparations.  But  Acrcn,  king  of  the  Ceninen-
-sians,  a  man  of  spirit,  and  an  able  general,  suspected
the  tendency  of  Romuluss  first  enterprizes ;  and,  when
he  had  behaved  so  boldly  in  the  rape,  looked  upon  liim
as  one  that  would  grow  formidable,  and  ndeed  insuffera-
ble to  his  neighbours,  except  he  were  chastised.  Acron
therefore,  went  to  seek  th.e  enemy,  and  Romulus  prepared
to  receive  him.  When  they  came  in  sight,  and  had  well
viewed  each  other,  a  challenge  Ibr  shigle  combat  wa.s
mutually  given,  their  forces  standing  under  arms  in  si-
lence. Romulus  on  this  occasion  made  a  vow,  that  if  he
conquered  his  enemy,  he  would  himself  dedicate  his  ad~
vcrs^ry's  lirms  to  Jupiter;  in  consequence  of  which,  he
both    overcame    Acron,   and,    after    battle    was   joined.


100  Plutarch's  lives.

routed  his  army,  and  took  his  city.  But  he  did  no  in-
jury to  its  inhabitants,  unless  it  were  such  to  order  them
to  demolish  their  houses,  and  follow  him  to  Rome,  as  ci-
tizens entitled  to  equal  privileges  with  the  rest.  Indeed,
there  was  nothing  that  contributed  more  to  the  greatness
of  Rome,  than  that  she  was  always  uniting  and  incorpo-
.  rating  with  herself  those  whom  she  conquered.  Romulus
having  considered  how  he  should  perform  his  vow  in  the
most  acceptable  manner  to  Jupiter,  and  withal  make  the
procession  most  agreeable  to  his  people,  cut  down  a  great
oak  that  grew  in  the  camp,  and  hewed  it  into  the  figure
of  a  trophy  ;  to  this  he  fastened  Acron's  w  hole  suit  of
armour  disposed  in  its  proper  form.  Then  he  put  on  his
own  robes,  and  wearing  a  crown  of  laurel  on  his  head,
his  hair  gracefully  flowing,  he  took  the  trophy  erect  upon
his  right  shoulder,  and  so  marched  on,  singing  the  song
of  victory  before  his  troops,  wdiich  followed,  completely
armed,  while  the  citizens  received  iiim  with  joy  and  ad-
miration. This  procession  was  the  origin  and  model  of
future  triumphs.  The  tropl  y  was  dedicated  to  Jupiter
Feretrius,  so  called  from  the  Latin  wovd/cn're*,  to  smite;
for  Romulus  had  prayed  that  he  might  have  power  to
smite  his  adversary  and  kill  him.  Varro  says,  ibis  sort
of  spoils  is  termed  cpimai;^  from  opes^  which  signifies
riches  :  But  more  properly  they  are  so  styled  from  opus^
the  meaning  of  which  is  action.  For  when  the  general
of  an  army  kills  the  enemy's  general  witli  his  own  hand,
then  only  he  is  allowed  to  consecrate  the  spoils  called
ojima^  as  the  sole  performer  of  that  action.:):  This  ho-
hour  has  been  conferred  only  on  three  Roman  chiefs  ;

*  Or  from  the  wor^ferre,  to  carry,  because  Romulus  had  himself
carried  to  the  temple  ot  Jupirer,  the  armour  cf  the  king  he  had  kil-
led ;  or,  morepr*  babl; ,  from  the  Greek  word pberetroji,  wh'ch  Livy
calls  in  Laiin  ferculmn,  and  wh  ch  properly  signihes  a  trophy.

t  Fes*^us  derives  the  word  opima  from  ops,  wliich  sig-  ifies  the
earth,  and  the  riches  it  produces  ;  so  that  opima  spolia,  according  to
that  writer,  signifies  rich  spoils.

\  This  is  Livy's  account  of  the  matter  ;  but  VaiTO,  as  quoted  by
Festus,  tells  us,  a  Roman  miglitbe  tx\- vA^d  to  \\\q  spolia  opima ,xh(  wgh.
but  a  private  soldier,  minis  ino7iiptiIarisY>rovided  he  killed  and  despoil-
ed the  enemy's  general.  Accordingly  Cornelius  Cossvs  had  them,
for  killing  Tclumnius,  king  of  the  Tuscans,  though  Crssuswasbut
a  uibune,  v.hr  fcught  urder  the  command  rf  /Emilius  Cossus,
therefore,  in  all  prcbahiliiy,  did  not  enter  Rome  in  a  triumpbalclia-
riot,  but  icUo\s  ed  lUat  of  bis  general,  v/ith  ihe  'rophy  on  his  shor.lder.


ROMULUS.  lOt

first,  on  Romulus,  when  he  slew  Acron  the  Cenlnensian  ;
next,  on  Cornelius  Cossus,  for  killing  Toluninius  the
Tuscan ;  and  lastly,  on  Claudius  Marcellus,  when  Viri-
domarus,  king  of  the  Gauls,  fell  by  his  hand.  Cossus
and  Marcellus  bore,  indeed,  the  trophies  themselves,  but
drove  into  Rome  m  triumphal  chariots.  But  Dionysius
is  mistaken  in  saying  that  Romulus  made  use  of  a  cha-
riot;  for  some  historians  assert,  that  Tarquinius,  the  son
of  Demaratus,  was  the  first  of  the  kings  that  advanced
triumphs  to  this  pomp  and  grandeur :  Others  say,  Publi-
cola  was  the  first  that  led  up  his  triumph  in  a  chariot.
However,  there  are  statues  of  Romulus  bearing  these  tro-
phies, yet  to  be  seen  in  Rome,  which  arc  all  on  foot.

After  the  defeat  of  the  Cenincnses,  while  the  rest  of
the  Sabines  were  busied  in  preparations,  the  people  of
FidenDE,  Crustumenium,  and  Antemnae,  united  against
the  Romans.  A  battle  ensued  in  which  they  were  like-
wise defeated,  and  surrendered  to  Romulus  their  cities  to
be  spoiled,  their  lands  to  be  divided,  and  themselves  to
be  transplanted  to  Rome.  All  the  lands  thus  acquired,
he  distributed  among  the  citizens,  except  what  belonged
to  the  parents  of  the  stolen  virgins  ;  for  those  he  left  in
the  possesion  of  their  former  owners.  The  rest  of  the
Sabines,  enraged  at  this,  appointed  Tatius  their  gene-
ral, and  carried  war  to  the  gates  of  Rome.  The  city
was  difficult  of  access,  having  a  strong  garrison  on  the
hill  where  the  Capitol  now  stands,  commanded  by  Tar-
peius,  not  by  the  virgin  Tarpeia,  as  some  say,  who  in
this  represent  Romulus  as  a  very  weak  man.  However,
this  Tarpeia,  the  governor's  daughter,  charmed  with  the
golden  bracelets  of  the  Sabines,  betrayed  the  fort  into
their  hands  ,  and  asked,  in  return  for  her  treason,  what
they  wore  on  their  left  arms.  Tatius  agreeing  to  the
condition,  she  opened  one  of  the  gates  by  night,  and  let
in  the  Sabines.  It  seems,  it  was  not  the  sentiment  of
Antigonus  alone,  who  said,  "  He  loved  men  while  they
*'  w^ere  betraying,  but  hated  them  when  they  had  be-
"trayed;"  nor  of  Crcsar,  who  said,  in  the  case  of  Rhy-
mitalces  the  Thracian;  '*  He  loved  the  treason,  but  hated
"the  traitor:"  But  men  are  commonly  affected  to-
wards villains,  whom  they  have  occasion  for,  just  as  they
are  towards  venomous  creatures,  which  they  have  need  of
for  their  poison  and  their  gall.     While  they  are  of  use

VOL.    i,^  K


102      -  Plutarch's  lites.

they  love  them,  but  abhor  them  when  their  purpose  is
effected.  Such  were  the  sentiments  of  Tatius  with  re-
gard to  Tarpeia,  when  he  ordered  the  Sabine?  to  remem-
ber their  promise,  and  to  gradge  her  nothing  which  they
had  on  their  left  arms.  He  was  the  first  to  take  off  his
bracelet,  and  throw  it  to  her,  and  with  that  his  shield.*
As  everyone  did  the  sancie,  she  was  overpowered  by  the
gold  and  shields  thrown  upon  her,  and,  sinking  under  the
weight,  expired.  Tarpeius,  too,  was  taken,  and  condemn-
ed by  Romulus  for  treason,  as  Juba  writes  after  Sulpitius
Galba.  As  for  the  account  given  of  Tarpeia  by  other
writers,  among  whom  Antigonus  is  one,  it  is  absurd  and
incredible  :  They  say^  that  she  W£.s  daughter  to  Tatius
the  Sabine  general,  and  being  compelled  to  live  with  Ro-
mulus, she  acted  and  suffered  thus  by  her  fatl^cr's  con-
trivance^ But  the  poet  Simulus  makes  a  most  egregious
blunder,  when  he  says,  Tarpeia  betrayed  the  Capitol,  not
to  the  Sabines,  but  to  the  Gauls,  having  fallen  in  love
with  their  king^     Thus  he  writes  :

From  her  high  dome,  Tarpeia,  wretched  maid,
To  the  fell  Gauls  the  Capitol  betray'd  ;
The  hapless  victim  of  unchaste  desires,
She  lost  the  fortress  of  her  scepter'd  fires.

And  a  little  after,  concerning  her  death,

No  amcrous  Celt,  no  fierce  Bavarian  bore

The  fair  Tarpeia  to  his  stormy  shore  ;

Press'd  by  those  shields,  whose  splendor  she  admired

She  sunk,  and  in  the  shining  death  expir'd.

From  the  place  where  Tarpeia  was  buried,  the  hill  had
the  name  of  the  Tarpeian,  till  Tarquin  consecrated  the
place  to  Jupiter,  at  which  time  her  bones  were  removed,
and  so  it  lost  her  name  ;  except  that  part  of  the  Capitol
from  which  malefactors  are  thrown  down,  which  t^  still
called  the  Tarpeian  rock.  The  Sabines  thus  possessed
of  the  fort,  Romulus  in  great  fury  offered  them  battle,
which  Tatius  did  not  decline,  as  he  saw  he  had  a  place  of
strength  to  retreat  to,  incase  he  was  worsted*  And,  in-
deed,  the  spot  on  which  he  was  to  engage,  being  surroun-
ded vrith  hills,  seemed  to  promise  on  both  sides  a  sharp
and  bloody  contest,   because  it  was  so  confined,  and  the

*  PIso  and  other  historians  say,  that  Tatius  treated  her  in  this
ma.nner,  because  she  acted  a  double  part,  and  endeavoured  to  betray
the  Sabines  to  Puomulus,  while  she  was  pretending  to  betray  the  llo-
nians  to  them.


ROMULUS.  103

outlets  were  so  narrow,  that  it  was  not  easy  either  to  fiy
or  to  pursue.     It  happened  too,  that  a  few  days  before,
the  river  had  overflowed,  and  left  a  deep  mud  on  the  plain,
where  the  Forum  now  stands  ;  which,  as  it  was  covered
with  a  crust,  was  not  easily  discoverable  by  the  eye,  but
at  the  same  time  was  soft  underneath  and  impracticable.
The  Sabines,  ignorant  of  this,  were  pushing  forward  into
it,  but  by  good  fortune  were  prevented :  For  Curtius,   a
man  of  high  distinction  and  spirit,  being  mounted  on  a
good  horse,  advanced  a  considerable  v»'ay  before  the  rest.*
Presently  his  horse  plunged  into  the  slough,  and  for  a
while  he  endeavoured  to  disengage  him,  encouraging  him
with  his  voice,  and  urging  him  vdth  blows  ;  but  finding
all  ineffectual,  he  quitted  him,  and  saved  himself.     From
him  the  place,   to  this  very  time,   is  called  the  Curtian
Lake.      The  Sabines,  having  escaped  this  danger,  began
the  fight  with   great  bravery.     The  victory   inclined  to
neither  side,  though  many  were  slain,  and  among  the
rest  Hostilius ;  who,  they  say,  was  husband  to  Kersilia,
and  grandfather  to  that  Hostilius  who  reigned  after  Numa.
It  is  probable,  there  were  many  other  battles  in  a  short
time  ;  but  the  most  memorable  was  the  last ;  in  which
Romulus  having   received  a  blow  upon  the  head  with  a
stone,  was  almost  beaten  down  to  the  ground,  and  no  lon-
ger able  to  oppose  the  enemy  ;  then  the   Romans  gave
way,  and  were  driven  from  the  plain  as  far  as  the  Pala-
tine hill.     By  this  time  Romulus  recovering  from   the
shock,  endeavoured  by  force  to  stop  his  men    in  their
flight,  and  loudly   called  upon  them  to  stand  and  rene^v
the  engagement.     But  when  he  saw  the  rout  was  general

*  Livy  and  Dionysius  of  Halicamassus  relate  the  matter  other-
wise. They  tell  us,  that  Curtius  at  first  repulsed  the  Romans  ;  but
being  in  his  turn  overpowered  by  Romulus,  and  endeavouring  to
make  good  his  retreat,  he  happened  to  fall  into  the  lake,  which  from
that  time  bore  his  name  :  For  it  was  called  Lacus  Curtius,  even
when  it  was  dried  up,  and  almost  in  the  centre  of  the  Roman  Fo-
rum. Procilius  says,  that  the  earth  having  opened,  tne  Aruspices
declared  it  necessary  for  the  safety  of  the  republic,  that  the  bravest
man  in  the  city  should  throw  himself  into  the  gulph  ;  whereupon
one  Curtms,  mounting  on  horseback,  leaj^ed  armed  into  it,  and  the
gulph  immediately  closed  Before  the  building  of  the  common  sew-
ers, this  pool  was  a  sort  of  sink,  which  received  all  the  filth  of  th«-
city.  Some  writers  think,  that  it  received  its  name  from  Curtics
the  consul,  colleague  to  M.  Genucius,  because  he  caused  it  to  be
v/ ailed  in  by  the  advice  of  the  Arusjiices,  after  it  had  been  stiuck
witk lightning.     Yaero  de  Ling.  Lat.  J.  iv.


iQ4  Plutarch's  lives.

and  that  no  one  had  courage  to  face  about,  he  lifted  up
his  hands  towards  heaven,  and  prayed  to  Jupiter  to  stop
the  army,  and  to  re-establish  and  maintain  the  Roman
cause,  which  was  now  in  extreme  danger.  When  the
prayer  Avas  ended,  many  of  the  fugitives  were  struck
with  reverence  for  their  king,  and  their  fear  was  changed
into  courage.  They  first  stopped  Avhere  now  stands  the
temple  of  Jupiter  Stator,  so  called  from  his  putting  a  stop
to  their  flight.  There  they  engaged  again,  and  repulsed
the  Sabines  as  far  as  the  palace  now  called  Regia,  and  the
temple  of  Vesta.

When  they  were  preparing  here  to  renew  the  combat
v/ith  the  same  animosity  as  at  first,  their  ardour  was  re-
pressed by  an  astonishing  spectacle,  which  the  powers  of
language  are  unable  to  describe.  The  daughters  of  the
Sabines,  that  had  been  forcibly  carried  oif,  appeared  rush-
ing this  way  and  that  with  loud  cries  and  lamentations,
like  persons  distracted,  anoidstthe  drawn  swords,  and  over
the  dead  bodies,  to  come  at  their  husbands  and  fathers  ;
some  carrying  their  infants  in  their  arms,  some  darting
forward  with  dishevelled  hair,  but  all  calling  by  turns
both  upon  the  Sabines  and  the  Romans,  by  the  tenderest
names.  Both  parties  were  extremely  moved,  and  room
v/as  made  for  them  between  the  two  armies.  Their  la-
mentations pierced  to  the  utmost  ranks,  and  all  were
deeply  affected  ;  particularly  when  their  upbraiding  and
complaints  ended  in  supplication  and  intreaty.  "  What
great  injury  have  we  done  you,  said  they,  that  we  have
suffered,  and  do  still  suffer  so  many  miseries  ?  We  were
carried  off,  by  those  who  now  have  us,  violently  and  ille-
gally :  After  this  violence  we  were  so  long  neglected  by
our  brothers,  our  fathers,  and  relations,  that  we  were  ne-
cessitated to  unite  in  the  strongest  ties  with  those  that
were  the  objects  of  our  hatred  ;  and  we  are  now  brought
to  tremble  for  the  men  that  had  injured  us  so  much,  when
we  see  them  in  danger,  and  to  lament  thein  when  they
fall.  For  you  came  not  to  deliver  us  from  violence,  while
virgins,  or  to  avenge  our  cause,  but  now  you  tear  the
v/ives  from  their  husbands,  and  the  mothers  from  their
children  ;  an  assistance  more  grievous  to  us  than  all
your  neglect  and  disregard.  Such  love  we  experienced
from  them,  and  such  compassion  from  you.  Were  the
war  undertaken  in  some  otlier  cause,  yet  surely  you  would


ROMULUS.  105

Stop  its  ravages  for  us,  who  have  made  you  fathers-in-
law  and  grandfathers,  or  otherwise  placed  you  in  some
near  affinity  to  those  whom  you  seek  to  destroy*  But  if
the  war  be  for  us,  take  us,  with  your  sons4n-law  and  their
children,  and  restore  us  to  our  parents  and  kindred  ;  but
do  not,  we  beseech  you,  rob  us  of  our  children  and  hus-
bands, lest  we  become  captives  again."  Hersilia  having
said  a  great  deal  to  this  purpose,  and  others  joining  in  the
same  request,  a  truce  was  agreed  upon,  and  the  generals
proceeded  to  a  conference.  In  the  mean  time  the  wo-
men presented  their  husbands  and  children  to  their  fathers
and  brothers,  brought  refreshments  to  those  that  wanted
them,  and  carried  the  wounded  home  to  be  cured.  Here
they  shewed  them,  that  they  had  the  ordering  of  their
own  houses>  what  attentions  their  husbands  paid  them,
and  with  what  respect  and  indulgence  they  were  treated.
Upon  this  a  peace  was  concluded,  the  conditions  of  which
were,  that  such  of  the  women  as  chose  to  remain  with  their
husbands,  should  be  exempt  from  all  labour  and  drudge-
ry, except  spinning,  as  we  have  mentioned  above  ;  that
the  city  should  be  mhabited  by  the  Romans  and  Sabines
in  common,  with  the  name  of  Rome,  from  Romulus  ;
but  that  all  the  citizens,  from  Cures,  the  capital  of  the
Sabines,  and  the  country  of  Tatius,  should  be  called  Qui-
rites  ;*  and  that  the  regal  power,  and  the  command  of
the  army,  should  be  equally  shared  between  tliem.  The
place  where  ihese  articles  were  ratiiied,  is  still  called  Cg-
mitium,t  from  the  Latin  word  coi re,  which  signifies  to.
as^'cmdle, .

The  city  having  doubled  the  number  of  its  inhabitants,
an  hundred  additional  senators  were  elected  from  among
the  Sabines,  and  the  legions  were  to  consist  of  six
thousand  foot,   and  six    hundred   horse. :j:      The  people,

*  The  word  9hiirh,  in  the  Sabine  lan^iage,  signified  both  adart,
and  a  warlike  dei'.y  armed  with  a  dart.  It  is  uncer  ain  whether
the  god  gave  name  to  the  dart,  or  the  dart  to  the  god  ;  but  however
that  be,  this  god  Quiris  or  Qiiirinus  was  ei  her  Mars,  or  some  other
^od  of  war,  and  was  worshipped. in  Rome  ti  1  Uomultis,.  who  after
his  death  was  honoured  with  ihe  name  Qiiinnus,  took  his  place.

f  The  Cominum  was  at  the  foot  of  ihe  hill  Palatinus,  over^against
the  Capitol.  Not  far  fr^ni  ihencethe  two  kings  builc  ihe  temple  of
Vulcan,  where  they  usually  met  to  ccnsult  ihesenaie  about  the  most
important  a.Tairs.

\  Ruauld, 'n  his  animadversions  upon  Phr-arch,  has  discovered  two
cousidurabll  errors  in  this  place.     The  first  is,  that  Plutarch  aifirnLs,,

K   2


>


fo^S  Plutarch's  lives.

too,  were  divided  into  three  tribes,  called  Rhamnensesy
from  Romulus  ;  Tatienses,  from  Tatius  ;  and  Lucerenses-
from  the  Lucus  or  Grove,  where  the  asylum  stood,  whi-
ther many  had  fled,  and  were  admitted  citizens.  That
they  were  precisely  three,  appears  from  the  very  name  of
Tribes,  and  that  of  their  chief  officers,  who  were  called
Tribunes.  Each  tribe  contained  ten  Curia  or  Wards,
which  some  say  were  called  after  the  Sabine  womeru
But  this  seems  to  be  false  ;  for  many  of  them  have  their
names  from  the  several  quarters  of  the  city  which  were
assigned  to  them.  Many  honourable  privileges,  howev-
er, were  conferred  upon  the  women;  some  of  which  were
these  ;  That  the  loien  should  give  them  tlie  way,  wherev-
er they  met  them  ;  that  they  should  not  mention  an  ob-
scene word,  or  appear  naked  before  them  ;  that,  in  case
of  their  killing  any  person,  they  should  not  be  tried  before
the  ordinary  judges  ;  and  that  their  children  should  wear
an  ornament  about  their  necks,  called  i?w//a*,  from  its
likeness  to  a  bubble,  and  a  garment  bordered  with  pur-
ple. The  two  kings  did  not  presently  unite  their  coun-
cils, each  meeting,  for  some  time,  their  hundred  senators
apart,  but  afterv/ards  they  all  assembled  together.  Ta-
tius dwelt  where  the  temple  of  Moneta  now  stands,  and
Romulus  by  the  steps  of  the  fair  shore,  as  they  are  called,
at  the  descent  of  the  Palatine  Hill  to  the  Great  Circus.
There,  we  are  told,  grew  tjie  sacred  Cornel-tree,  the  fa-
there  were  600  horse  put  by  Romiilus  in  every  legion,  whereas  there
never  were,  at  anytime,  so  many  in  any  of  the  legions.  For  there
'A-ere  at  first  200  horse  in  each  legion;  after  that,  they  rose  to  300,
:j.jid  at  la^t  to  400,  but  never  came  up  to  600.  In  the  second  place
he  tells  us,  that  Romulus  m.ade  the  legion  to  consist  of  6000  foot ;
-whe'reas  iii  his  time  it  was  never  mora  than  3000.  It  is  said  by
kome,  that  Marlus  was  the  first  who  raised  the  legion  to  6000  ;-but
Livy  informs  us,  that  that  augmentation  was  made  by  Scipio  Afrir
v-unus,  long  before  Marius,  After  the  expulsion  of  the  kings,  it  was
a-ugmented  from  three  to  four  thousand,  and  some  time  after  to  five,
sind  at  last  by  Scipio  (as  we  have  said)  to  six.  But  this  was  never
dene,  but  upon  pressing  occasions.  The  stated  force  of  the  legion
was  4000  foot,  and  200  horse.

*  The  young  men,  when  they  took  upon  them  the  Tcga  viriiis^
or  man's  robe,  quitted  the  Bulla,  which  is  supposed  to  have  been  a
little  hollow  ball  of  gold,  and  made  an  offering  of  it  to  the  Dii  Lares,
or  household  gods.  As  to  th«  Prictexta,  or  robe  edged  with  pwrple,
it  was  worn  by  girls  till  their  marriage,  and  by  boys  till  they  were  se-
venteen. But  what  in  the  time  of  Uomulus  was  a  mark  of  distinc-
tion for  the  children  of  the  Sabine  women,  became  afterwards  very
common ;  for  even  tUs  children  of  thg  Liberti,  or  frecd-men;  v»'cre  it


ROMULUS.  107"

bulous  account  of  which  is,  that  Romulus  once,  to  ti^^
his  strength,  threw  a  spear,  whose  shaft  was  of  cornel-
wood,  from  Mount  Aventine  to  that  place  ;  the  head  of
which  stuck  so  deep  in  the  ground,  that  no  one  could  pull
it  out,  though  many  tried  ;  and  the  soil  being  rich,  so
nourished  the  wood,  that  it  shot  forth  branches,  and  be-
came a  trunk  of  cornel  of  considerable  bigness.  This,
posterity  preserved  with  a  religious  care,  as  a  thing  emi-
nently sacred,  and  therefore  built  a  wall  about  it :  and
when  any  one  that  approached  it,  saw  it  not  very  flourish.-
ing  and  green,  but  inclining  to  fade  and  wither,  he  pre-
sently proclaimed  it  to  all  he  met,  who,  as  if  they  were
to  assist  in  case  of  fire,  cried  out  for  water,  and  ran  from
all  quarters  with  full  vessels  to  the  place.  But  when  Caius
Caesar  ordered  the  steps  to  be  repaired,  and  the  workmen
were  digging  near  it,  it  is  said  they  inadvertently  injured
the  roots  in  such  a  manner,  that  the  tree  withered  away.

The  Sabines  received  the  Roman  months.  All  that
is  of  importance  on  this  subject  is  mentioned  in  the
life  of  Numa.  Romulus  on  tlie  other  hand,  came  into
the  use  of  their  shields,  making  an  alteration  in  his  own
armour,  and  that  of  the  Romans,  who,  before,  wore
buckles  in  the  manner  of  the  Greeks.  They  mutually
celebrated  each  other's  feasts  and  sacrifices,  not  abolish-
ing those  of  either  nation,  but  over  and  above  appoint-
ing some  new  ones  ;  one  of  which  is  the  Matronalia*,
instituted  in  honour  of  the  women,  for  their  putting  an
end  to  the  war  ,  and  another  the  Carmentaliaf.  Car-
menta  is  by  some  supposed  to  be  one  of  the  Destinies,
who  presides  over  human  nativities  ;  therefore  she  is  par-
ticularly worshipped  by  mothers.  Others  say,  she  waa
wife  to  Evander  the  Arcadian,  and  a  woman  addicted

*  During  this  feast,  such  of  the  Roman  women  as  were  married,
-served  their  slaves  at  table,  and  received  presents  from  their  hus-
bands, as  the  husbands  did  from  their  wives  in  the  time  of  the  Sa-
turnalia. As  the  festival  of  the  Matronalia  was  not  only  observed
in  honour  of  the  Sabine  women,  but  consecrated  to  Mars  ;  and,  as
some  will' have  it,  to  Juno  Lucina,  sacrifices  were  oftered  to  both
these  deities.  This  feast  was  the  subject  of  Horace's  Ode  ;  Mar-
tiis  Calebs  quid  agani  calendis,  Sic.  and  Ovid  describes  it  at  large  in
the  3d  Book  of  Fastv,  Dacier  says,  by  mistake,  that  this  feast  was
kept  on  the  first  of  April,  instead  of  the  first  of  March,  and  the
former  English  annotator  has  followed  him

t  This  is  a  very  solemn  feast,  kept  on  the  11th  of  January,  under
the  Capitol^  near  the  Carmental  gate.  They  begged  of  this  goddess
ta render  the  worueii  fruitful,  and  to  give  them  b-xppy  deliveries.


108  PLUTARCH^S    tlVES.

to  divination,  who  received  inspirations  from  Apollo,
and  delivered  oracles  in  verse  ;  thence  called  Carmenta,
for  Carmina  signifies  vtrse ;  but  her  proper  name,  as  is
agreed  on  all  hands,  was  Nicostrata.  Others,  again,
with  grater  probability  assert,  that  the  former  name  was
given  her,  because  she  was  distracted  with  enthusiastic
fury  ;  for  car&re  jiKnte  signifies  to  be  insane.  Of  the  feast
of  Palilia,  we  have  already  given  an  account.  As  for
the  Lupercalia*,  by  the  timCj  it  should  seem  to  be  a
feast  of  lustration  ;  for  it  was  celebrated  on  one  of  the
inauspicious  days  of  the  month  of  February,  which  name
denotes  it  to  be  the  month  of  I  urifying ;  and  the  day
was  formerly  called  Februta.  But  the  true  meaning  of
Lupercalia  is  the  Feast  of  Wolves  :  and  it  seems,  for
that  reason,  to  be  very  ancient,  as  received  from  the
Arcadians,  who  came  over  with  Evander.  This  is  the
general  opihion.  But  the  term  may  be  derived  from
Lujia^  a  she-wolf;  for  we  see  the  Luperci  begin  their
course  from  the  place  where  they  say  Romulus  was  ex-
posed. However,  if  we  consider  the  ceremonies,  the
reason  of  the  name  seems  hard  to  guess  ;  For  first,  goats
are  killed  ;  then  two  noblemen's  sons  are  introduced,
and  some  are  to  stain  their  foreheads  with  a  bloody  knife,
others  to  wipe  off  the  stain  directly,  with  wool  steeped
in  milk,  which  they  bring  for  that  purpose.  When  it  is.
wiped  off,  the  young  men  are  to  laugh.  After  this  they
cut  the  goats'  skins  in  pieces,  and  run  about  all  naked,
except  their  middle,  and  lash  with  those  thongs  all  they
meet.  The  young  women  avoid  not  the  stroke,  as  they
think  it  assists  conception  and  child-birth.  Another
thing  proper  to  this  feast  is,  for  the  Luperci  to  sacrifice
a  dog.  Butas,  who  in  his  elegies  has  given  a  fabulous
account  of  the  origin  of  the  Roman  institutions,  writes,
that  when  Romulus  had  overcome  Amulius,  in  the  trans-
ports of  victory  he  ran  with  great  speed  to  the  place
where  the  wolf  suckled  him  and  his  brother,  when  in-
fants ;  and  that  this  feast  is  celebrated,  and  the  young
noblemen  run,  in  imitation  of  that  action,  striking  all  that
are  in  their  way^

As  the  fam'd  twins  of  Rome,  Amulius  slain,
From  Alba  pour'd,  and  wih  their  reeking  swords
Saluted  all  they  met.

*  This  fesnval  was  celebrated  on  the  11th  of  February,  in  honour
©f  the  God  pan.


ROMULUSr  109

And  the  touchini^  of  the  forehead  with  a  bloody  knife,
is  a  symbol  of  that  shiiit^hter  and  danger,  as  the  wiping
off  the  blood  with  milk  is  in  memory  of  their  first  nou-
rishment. But  Caius  Acilius  relates,  that  before  the
building  of  Rome,  Romulus  and  Remus  having  lost  their
cattle,  first  prayed  to  Faunus  for  success  in  the  search  of
them,  and  then  ran  out  naked  to  seek  them,  that  they
might  not  be  incommoded  with  sweat  ;  therefore  the  Lu-
perci  run  about  naked.  As  to  the  dog,  if  this  be  a  feast
of  lustration,  we  may  suppose  it  is  sacrificed,  in  order  to
be  used  in  purifying  ;  for  the  Greeks  in  their  purifica-
tions make  use  of  dogs,  and  perform  the  ceremonies
which  they  call  Pcrhkulakhmoi,  But  if  these  rites  are
observed  in  gratitude  to  the  wolf  that  nourished  and  pre-
served Romulus,  it  is  with  propriety  they  kill  a  dog,
because  it  is  an  enemy  to  wolves:  yet, perhaps,  nothing
more  was  meant  by  it  than  to  punish  that  creature  for
disturbing  the  Lupcrci  in  their  running.

Romulus  is  likewise  said  to  have  introduced  the  Sacred
Fire,  and  to  have  appointed  the  holy  virgins  called
Vestals*.  Others  attribute  this  to  Numa,  but  allow
that  Romulus  was  remarkably  strict  in  observing  otlier
religious  rites,  and  skilled  in  divination,  for  which  pur-
pose he  bore  tlie  Lituus,  This  is  a  crooked  staff,  with
which  those  that  sit  to  observe  the  flight  of  birds,t  de-
scribe the  several  quarters  of  tlie  heavens.  It  was  kept
in  the  Capitol,  but  lost  when  Rome  was  taken  by  the
Gauls ;  afterwards,  when  the  barbarians  had  quitted  it,
it  was  found  buried  deep  in  ashes,  untouched  by  the  fire,
whilst  every  thing  about  it  was  destroyed  and  consumed.
Romulus  also  enacted  some  laws  ;  amongst  the  rest  that
severe  one,  which  forbids  the  wife  in  any  case  to  leave
her  husband,  \  but  gives  the  husband  power  to  divorce  his
wife,  in  case   of  her  poisoning  his  children,  or  counter-

*  Plutarch  means  that  Romuhis  was  the  first  who  introdnced  the
Sacred  Fire  at  Rome.  That  there  were  Vestal  virg-ins,  however,
before  this,  at  Alba,  we  are  certain,  because  the  mother  of  Romulus
was  one  of  them.  The  sacred  and  perpetual  lire  was  not  only  keptup
in  Italy,  but  in  Egypt,  in  Persia,  in  Greece,  and  almost  in  all  nation*.

t  The  Agurs.

:|:  Yet  this  privilege,  which  Plutarch  thinks  a  hardship  upon  the
women,  was  indulged  tl\e  men  by  Moses  in  greater  latitude.  The
women,  however,  among  the  Romans,  came  at  length  to  divorce


tlO  PLUTARCH'S    LIVES^

feiting  his  keys,  or  being-  guilty  of  adultery.  But  if  on
any  other  occasion  he  put  her  away,  she  was  to  have  one
moiety  of  his  goods,  and  the  other  was  to  be  consecrated
to  Ceres  ;  and  whoever  put  away  his  wife  was  to  make
an  atonement  to  the  gods  of  the  earth.  It  is  something
particuLir,  that  Romulus  appomted  no  punishment  for
actual  parricides,  but  called  all  m_urder  parricide,  look-
ing upon  this  as  abominable,  and  the  other  as  impossible.
For  many  ages,  indeed,  he  seemed  to  have  judged  right-
ly ;  no  one  was  guilty  of  that  crime  in  Rome  for  almost
six  hundred  years  ;  and  Lucius  Ostius,  after  the  wars  of
Hannibal,  is  recorded  to  have  been  the  first  that  murder-
ed his  father.

In  the  fifth  year  of  the  reign  of  Tatius,  some  of  his.
friends  and  kinsmen  meeting  certain  ambassadors  who
were  going  fromi  Laurentum  to  Rome,*  attempted  to  rob
them  on  the  roadj  and,  ae  they  would  not  suffer  it,  but
stood  in  theh'  ov/n  defence,  killed  them.  As  this  was  an
atrocious  crime,  Romulus  required  that  those  who  com-
mitted it  should  immediately  be  punished,  but  Tatius  he-
sitated and  put  it  off.  This  was  the  first  occasion  of  any
open  variance  between  them  ;  for  till  now  they  had  be-
haved themselves  as  if  directed  by  one  soul,-  and  the  ad-
ministration had  been  carried  on  witli  all  possible  una-
nimity. The  relations  of  those  that  were  murdered,
finding  they  could  have  no  legal  redress  from  Tatius,  fell
upon  him  and  slew  him  at  Lavinium,  as  he  was  offering
sacrifice  with  Romulus  ;t  but  they  conducted  Romulus
back  with  applause,  as  a  prince  who  paid  all  proper  re-
gard to  justice.     To  the  body  of  Tatius  he  gave  an  hon-

their  husbands,  as  appears  from  Juvenal  (Sat  9.)  and  Martial  (1.  x.
ep.  41.)  At  the  same  time  it  must  be  observed,  to  the  honour  of
Roman  virtue,  that  no  divorce  was  known  at  Rome  for  five  hundred
and  twenty  years.  One  P.  Servilius,  orCarvilius  Spurius,  was  the
first  of  the  Romans  that  ever  put  away  his  wife.

*  Dionysius  of  Halicarnassus  says,  they  were  ambassadors  from
Lavinium,  who  had  been  at  Rome  to  complain  of  the  incursions
made  by  some  of  Tatius's  friends  upon  their  territories  ;  and  that
as  they  were  returning,  the  Sabines  k,y  in  wait  for  them  on  the  road,
stripped  them,  and  killed  several  of  them.  Lavinium  and  Lauren-
tum were  neighbouring  towns  in  Latium.

t  Probably  this  was  a  sacrifice  to  the  Dii  Indigenes  of  Latium,  in
which  Rome  was  included.  But  Licinius  writes,  that  Ta.ius  went
not  tiiicher  with  Romulus,  nor  on  account  of  the  sacrifice,  but  that
he  went  alone  to  persuade  the  inhabitants  to  pardon  the  murderers.


ROMULUS.  Ill

curable  interment,  at  Armilustrium,*  on  Mount  Avcntine,
but  he  took  no  care  to  revenge  his  death  on  the  persons
that  killed  him.     Some  historians  write,  that  the  Lauren-
tians  in  great  terror  gave  up  the  murderers  of  Tatius  ;
but    Romulus   let  them   go,  saying,  "  Blood  with  blood
should  be  repaid."     This  occasioned  a  report,  and  indeed
a  strong  suspicion,  that  he  was  not  sorry  to  get  rid  of  his
partner  in  the  government.     None  of  these  things,  how-
ever, occasioned   any  disturbance  or  sedition  among  the
Sabines  ;  but  partly  out  of  regard  for  Romulus,  partly  out
of  fear  of  his  power,  or  because  the  reverenced  him   as   a
god,  they  all  continued  well  affected  to  him.     This  vene-
ration for  him  extended  to  many  other  nations.     The
ancient  Latins  sent  ambassadors,  and  entered  into  league
and  alliance  with  him.     Fidens,  a  city  in  the  neighbour-
hood of  Rome,  he  took,  as  some  say,  by  sending  a  body
of  horse  before,  with  orders  to  break  the   hinges  of  the
gates,  and  then  appearing  unexpectedly  In  person.    Others
will  have  it,  that  the  Fidenates  ftrst  attacked  and  ravaged
the  Roman  territories,  and  were  carrying  off  considera-
ble booty,  when  Romulus  lay  in  ambush  for  them,  cut
many  of  them  off,  and  took  their  city.     He  did  not,  how-
ever, demolish  it,  but  made  it  a  Roman  colony,  and  sent
into  it  two  thousand  five  hundred  inhabitants  on  the  thir-
teenth of  April.

After  this,  a  plague  broke  out,  so  fatal,  that  people  died
of  it  without  any  previous  sickness  ;  Vvdiile  the  scarcity  of
fruits,  and  barrenness  of  the  cattle,  added  to  the  calamity.
It  rained  blood  too  in  the  city  ;  so  that  their  unavoidable
sufferings  were  increased  with  the  terrors  of  superstition  ;
and  when  the  destruction  spread  itself  to  Laurentum,
then  all  agreed,  it  was  for  neglecting  to  do  justice  on  the
murderers  of  the  ambassadors  and  of  Tatius,  that  the  di-
vine vengeance  pursued  both  cities.  Indeed,  when  those
murderers  were  given  up  and  punished  by  both  parties,
their  calamities  visibly  abated  ;  and  Romulus  purified
the  city  with  lustrations,  which,  they  tell  us,  are  yet  cele-
brated at  the  Ferentine  gate.  Before  the  pestilence  ceas-
ed, the  people  of  Cameriaf   attacked  the  Romans,  and

*  The  place  was  so  called,  because  of  a  ceremony  of  the  same
name,  celebrated  every  year  on  the  19th  of  October,  when  the  troops
were  mustered,  and  purified  by  sacrifices.

t  This  was  a  town  which  Romulus  had  taken  before.  Its  old
inhabitants  took  this  opporlunity  to  rise  in  arms,  and  kill  the  Ro-
man garrison.   •


112  Plutarch's  lites.

over-ran  the  country,  thinking  them  incapable  of  resis-
tance by  reason  of  the  sickness.  But  Romulus  soon  met
them  in  the  field,  gave  them  battle,  in  which  he  killed  six
thousand  of  them,  took  their  city,  and  transplanted  half
its  remaining  inhabitants  to  Rome  ;  adding,  on  the  first
of  August,  to  those  he  left  in  Cameria,  double  their  number
from  Rome.  So  many  people  had  he  to  spare  in  about
sixteen  years  time  from  the  building  of  the  city.  Among
other  spoils,  he  carried  from  Cameria  a  chariot  of  brass,
which  he  consecrated  in  the  temple  of  Vulcan,  placing
upon  it  his  own  statue  croAvned  by  victory.

His  affairs  thus  flourishing,  the  weaker  part  of  his
neighbours  submitted,  satisfied,  if  they  could  but  live  in
peace  :  but  the  more  powerful,  dreading  or  envying  Ro-
mulus, thoiaght  they  should  not  by  any  ineans  let  him  go
unnoticed,  but  oppose  and  put  a  stop  to  his  growing  great-
ness. The  Veientes,  who  had  a  strong  city  and  extensive
country,*  were  the  first  of  the  Tuscans  who  began  the
war,  demanding  Fidens  as  their  property*  But  it  was
not  only  unjust,  but  ridiculous,  that  they  who  had  given
the  people  of  Fidense  no  assistance  in  the  greatest  ex-
tremeties,  but  had  suffered  them  to  perish  should  chal-
lenge their  houses  and  lands  now  in  the  possession  of
other  masters.  Romulus,  therefore,  gave  them  a  con-
temptous  answer  ;  upon  which  they  divided  their  forces
into  two  bodies ;  one  attacked  the  garrison  of  Fidenae,
and  the  other  went  to  meet  Romulus.  That  which  went
against  Fidense  defeated  the  Romans,  and  killed  two  thou-
sand of  them  ;  but  the  other  was  beaten  by  Romulus,
with  the  loss  of  more  than  eight  thousand  men.  They
gave  battle,  however,  once  more,  at  Fidenae,  where  all
allow  the  victory  was  chiefly  owing  to  Romulus  himself,
whose  skill  and  courage  were  then  remarkably  displayed,
and  whose  strength  and  swiftness  appeared  more  than
human.  But  what  some  report,  is  entirely  fabulous,  and
utterly  incredible,  that  there  fell  that  day  fourteen  thou-
sand men,  above  half  of  whom  Romulus  slew  with  his
own  hand.  For  even  the  Messenians  seem  to  have  been
extravagant  in  their  boasts,  when  they  tell  us  Aristomenes
offered  a  hecatomb  three  several  times,  for  having  as  often

*  Veil,  the  capital  of  Tuscany  was  situated  on  a  craggy-  rock,
about  one  hundred  furlongs  from  Rome  ;  and  is  compared  by  Dio-
nysius  of  Halicarnassus  to  Athens  for  extent  aud  riches.


ro:mulu5.  113

killed  a  hundred  Lacedaemonhms.*  After  tlie  Veientes
were  thus  ruined,  Romulus  suffered  the  scattered  re-
mains to  escape,  and  marched  directly  to  their  city.  The
inhabitants  could  not  bear  up  after  so  dreadful  a  blow,  but
humbly  suing  for  a  peace,  obtained  a  truce  for  a  hun-
dred years,  by  giving  up  a  considerable  part  of  their  ter-
ritory called  Septempagium,  which  signifies  a  district  of
seven  towns,  together  with  the  salt-pits  by  the  river  ;
besides  which,  they  delivered  into  his  hands  fifty  of  their
nobility  as  hostages.  He  triumphed  for  this  on  the  fif-
teenth of  October,  leading  up,  among  many  other  captives,
the  general  of  the  Veientes,  a  man  in  years,  whoseemed
on  this  occasion  not  to  have  behaved  with  the  prudence
which  might  have  been  expected  from  his  age.  Hence
it  is  that,  to  this  day,  when  they  offer  a  sacrifice  for  vic-
tory, they  lead  an  old  man  through  the  Forum  to  the
Capitol,  in  a  boy's  robe  edged  with  purple,  with  a  bulla
about  his  neck ;  and  the  herald  cries  "  Sardians  to  be
sold,"t  for  the  Tuscans  are  said  to  be  a  colony  of  the  Sar-
dians, and  Veii  is  a  city  of  Tuscany.

This  was  the  last  of  the  wars  of  Romulus.  After  this
he  behaved  as  almost  all  men  do,  v.ho  rise  by  some  great
and  unexpected  good  fortune  to  dignity  and  power  ;  for
exalted  with  his  exploits,  and  loftier  in  his  sentiments,
he  dropped  his  popular  affability,  and  assumed  the  mo-
narch to  an  odious  degree.  He  gave  the  first  offence  by
liis  dress  ;  his  habit  being  a  purple  vest,  over  vv^hich  he
wore  a  robe  bordered  with  purple.  He  gave  audience  in
a  chair  of  state.  He  had  always  about  him  a  number  of
young  men  called  Celeres,:j:  from  their  dispatch  in  doing
business  ;  and  before  him  went  men  with  staves  to  keep
off  the  populace,  who  also  wore  thongs  of  leather  at  their

*  Pausanias  confirms  this  account,  mentioning  both  the  time  and
place  of  these  achievments,  as  well  as  the  hecatombs  offered,  en  ac-
count of  them,  to  Jupiter  Ithomates,  Those  wars  between  the
Messenians  and  Spartans  were  about  the  time  of  Tullus  Hostilius.

t  The  Veientes,  with  the  other  Hetrurians,  were  a  colony  of  Lv-
dians,  whose  metropolis  was  the  city  of  Sardis,  Other  writers  date
this  custom  from  the  time  of  the  conquest  of  Sardinia  by  Tiberius
Sempronius  Gracchus,  when  such  a  number  of  slaves  was  brought
from  that  island,  that  none  were  to  be  seen  in  the  market  but  Sardi-
nians.

\  Romulus  ordered  the  Curiae  to  choose  him  a  guard  of  three
hundred  men,  ten  out  of  each  Curix;  and  these  he  called  Cek-res,
for  the  reason  which  Plutarch  has  assigi:ed,

▼  OL.    I,  Jk


114  Plutarch's  lives.

girdles,  ready  to  bind  directly  any  person  he  should  or-
der to  be  bound.  This  binding  the  Latins  formerly  called
ligare^*  now  alligare  ;  whence  those  Serjeants  are  called
LictQres,  and  their  vo^s  fasces  ;  for  the  sticks  they  used
on  that  occasion  were  small.  Though,  perhaps,  at  first
they  were  called  Litores^  aiid  afterwards,  by  putting  in  a
c,  Lictores  :  for  they  are  the  same  that  the  Greeks  called
Leitourgoi  (officers  for  the  people  ;)  and  leitos,  in  Greek,
still  signifies  the  pco/ilc^  but  laos  the  populace.

When  his  grandfather  Numitor  died  in  Alba,  though
the  crown  undoubtedly  belonged  to  him,  yet,  to  please
the  people,  he  left  the  administration  in  their  own  hands  ;
and  over  the  Sabinesf  (in  Rome)  he  appointed  yearly  a
particular  magistrate  :  thus  teaching  the  great  men  of
Rome  to  seek  a  free  commonwealth  without  a  king,  and
by  turns  to  rule  and  to  obey.  For  now  the  patricians
had  no  share  in  the  government,  but  only  an  honourable
title  and  appearance,  assembling  m  the  senate-house  more
for  form  than  business.  There,  with  silent  attention,
they  heard  the  Idng  give  his  orders,  and  differed  only
from  the  rest  of  the  people  in  this,  that  they  went  home
with  the  first  knowledge  of  what  was  determined.  This
treatment  they  digested  as  well  as  they  could  ;  but  when,
of  his  own  authority,  he  divided  the  conquered  lands
among  the  soldiers,  and  restored  the  Veientes  their  hos-
tages without  the  consent  or  approbation  of  the  senate,
they  considered  it  as  an  intolerable  insult,  Mence  arose
strong  suspicions  against  them,  and  Romulus  soon  after
unaccountably  disappeared.  This  happened  on  the  7th
of  July  (as  it  is  now  called)  then  Quintilis  :  and  we  have  no
certainty  of  any  thing  about  it  but  the  time  ;  various  ce-
remonies being  still  performed  on  that  day  with  reference
to  the  event.  Nor  need  we  wonder  at  this  uncertainty,
since,  v/hen  Scr[^io  Africanus  v/as  found  dead  in  his  house
after  supper,^  there  was  no  clear  proof  of  the  manner  of

*  Plutarch  had  no  critical  skill  in  the  Latin  language.

f  X}  lander  and  H.  Stephanus  are  raticnally  enough  cf  opinion,
that  instead  of  Sabines  we  should  read  Albans  ;  and  so  the  Latin
translator  renders  it.

\  This  was  Scipio,  the  sen  of  Paulus  j^lmilius,  adopted  bv  Scipio
Africanus,  As  he  constantly  opposed  the  design  of  the  Gracchi,  it
was  supposed  that  his  wife  Sempronia,  who  was  sister  to  those  se-
ditious men,  took  him  off  by  poison.  .  According  to  Valerius  Maxi-
mus,  no  judicial  inquiry  was  made  into  the  cause  of  his  death  ;  and
Victor  tells  us,  the  corpse  was.  carried  out,  with  the  face  covered
with  a  linen  cloth,  that  the  blackness  of  it  might  not  appear.


ROMULUS.  115

his  death  :  for  some  say,  that  being  naturally  infirm,  he
died  suddenly  ;  some,  that  he  took  poison  ;   and  others,
that    his   enemies  broke  into  his  house   by   night,   and
strangled  him.     Besides,  all  were  admitted  to  see  Scipio's
dead  body,  and  every  one  from  the  sight  of  it,  had  his  own
suspicion  or  opinion  of  the  cause-     But  as  Romulus  dis-
appeared on' a  sudden,  and  no  part  of  his  body  or  even  his
garments  could  ba  found,  some  conjectured,  that  the  sen-
ators, who  were  convened  in  the  temple  of  Vulcan,  fell
upon  hinv  and  killed  him  ;  after  which  each  earned  a  part
away  under  his  gown.     Others  say,  that  his  exit  did  not
happen  in  the  temple  of  Vulcan,  nor  in  the  presence  of
the  senators  only,  but  while  he  was  holding  an  assembly
of  the  people  without  the  city,  at  a  place  called  the  Goat's'
Marsh.     The  air  on  that  occasion  was  suddenly  convul-
sed and  altered  in  a  wonderful  manner  ;  for  the  light  of
the  sun  failed,*  and  they  were  involved  in  an   astonishing
darkness,  attended  on  every  side  with  dreadful  thunder-
ings,  and  tempestuous  winds.     The  multitude  then  dis-
persed and  fled,  but  the  nobility  gathered  into  one  body.
When  the   tempest  was  over,  and   the   light   appeared
again,  the  people  returned  to  the  same  place,  a  very  anx-
ious inquiry  was  made  for  the  king  ;  but  the  patricians
would   not  suffer  them  to  look  closely  into  the  matter.
They  commanded  them  to  honour  and  worship  Romulus,
who  was  caught  up  to  heaven,  and  who,  as  he  had  been  a
gracious  king,  would  be  to  the  Romans  a  propitious  deity.
Upon  this,  the  multitude  Mer;t  away  with  great  satisfac-
tion, and  worshipped  him,  in  hopes  of  his  favour  and  pro-
tection.    Some,  however,  searching  more  minutely  into
the  affair,  gave  the  patricians  no  small  uneasiness  ;  they
even  accused  them  of  imposing:  upon  the  people  a  ridicu-
lous tale,  when  they  had  murdered  the  king  witli  their
own  hands.

While  things  were  in  this  disorder,  a  senator,  we  are
told  of  great  distinction,  and  famed  for  sanctity  of  man-

*  Cic«ro  mentions  this  remarkable  darkness  in  a  fragment  of  his
sixth  book  de  Repub.  And  it  appears  from  the  astronomical  tables,
that  there  was  a  great  eclipse  of  the  sun  in  the  first  year  of  the  bix-
teenth  Olympiad,  supposed  to  be  tlie  year  that  Romulus  died,  on  the
twenty-sixth  of  May,  w^hich,  considering  the  little  exactness  there
•was  then  in  the  Roman  calendar,  might  very  well  coincide  with,
the  momh  of  July.


116  FLUT arch's    lives.

jners,  Julius  Proculus  by  name,*  who  came  from  Alba
with  Romulus,  and  had  been  his  faithful  friend,  went  into
the  Forum,  and  declared  upon  the  most  solemn  oaths,
before  all  the  people,  that  as  he  was  travelling  on  the
road,  Romulus  met  him,  in  a  form  more  noble  and  august
than  ever,  and  clad  in  bright  and  dazzling  armour.  As-
tonished at  the  sight,  he  said  to  him,  ''  For  what  misbe-
haviour of  ours,  O  king,  or  by  what  accident,  have  you  so
untimely  left  us,  to  labour  under  the  heaviest  calumnies,
and  the  whole  city  to  sink  under  inexpressible  sorrow  ?"
I'o  which  he  answered,  *■'  It  pleased  the  gods,  my  good
Proculus,  that  we  should  dwell  with  men  for  a  time  ;  and
after  having  founded  a  city  which  will  be  the  most  power-
ful and  glorious  in  the  world,  return  to  heaven,  from
whence  we  came.  Farev/ell  then,  and  go,  tell  the  Ro-
mans, that,  by  the  exercise  of  temperance  and  fortitude,
they  shall  attain  the  highest  pitch  of  human  greatness,
•undl,  the  god  Quirinus  will  ever  be  propitious  to  you."
This,  by  the  character  and  oath  of  the  relator,  gained
credit  with  the  Romans,  vvho  were  caught  with  the  en-
tliusiasm,  as  if  they  had  been  actually  inspired  ;  and,  far
from  contradicting  what  they  had  heard,  bade  adieu  to
all  their  suspicions  of  the  nobility,  united  in  the  deifying
of  Quirinus,  and  addressed  their  devotions  to  him.  This
is  very  like  the  Grecian  fables  concerning  Aristeas  the
Proconnesian,  and  Cleomedes,  the  Astypalensian.  For
Aristeas,  as  they  tell  us,  expired  in  a  fuller's  shop  ;  and
when  his  friends  came  to  take  away  the  body,  it  could  not
be  found.  Soon  after,  some  persons  coming  in  from  a
journey,  said  they  met  Aristeas  travelling  towards  Cro-
ton.  As  for  Cleomedes,  their  accoimt  of  him  is,  that  he
was  a  man  of  gigantic  size  and  strength  ;  but  behaving
in  a  foolish  and  frantic  manner,  he  was  guilty  of  many
acts  of  violence.  At  last  he  went  into  a  school,  where  he
struck  the  pillar  that  supported  the  roof  with  his  fist,  and
broke  it  asunder,  so  that  the  roof  fell  in  and  destroyed
the  children.  Pursued  for  this,  he  took  refuge  in  a  great
chest,  and  having  shut  the  lid  upon  him,  he  held  it  down
so  fast,  that  many  men  together  could  not  force  it  open  :
when  they  had  cut  the  chest  in  pieces,  they  could  not  find
Mm  either  dead  or  alive.     Struck  with  this  strange  afl:air>,

*  A  descendant  of  Julus  or  A^canius*


ROMULUS.  117

they  sent  to  consult  the  oracle  at  Delpai,  and  had  from
the  priestess  this  answer,

The  race  of  heroes  ends  in  CleomedeSt

It  is  likewise  said,  that  the  body  of  Alcmena  was  lost,
as  they  were  carrying  it  to  the  grave,  and  a  stone  was
seen  lying  on  the  bier  in  its  stead. .  Many  such  improba-
ble tales  are  told  by  writers  who  wanted  to  deify  being-s
naturally  mortal.  It  is  indeed  impious  and  illiberal  to
leave  nothing  of  divinity  to  virtue  :  but,  at  the  same  time,
to  unite  heaven  and  earth  in  the  same  subject,  is  absurd.
We  should,  therefore,  reject  fables,  when  we  are  posses-
sed of  undeniable  truth  ;  for,  according  to  Pindar,

Their  body  yields  to  death's  all-powerful  summons.
While  the  bright  inaage  of  eternity
Survives ■         •

This  alone  is  from  the  gods  :  from  heaven  it  comes,  and
to  heaven  it  returns  ;  not  indeed  with  ihe  body  ;  but
when  it  is  entirely  set  free  and  separate  from  the  body,
when  it  becomes  disengaged  from  every  thing  sensual  and
unholy.  For  in  the  language  of  Heraclitus,  the  pure
soul  is  of  superior  excellence,*  darting  from  the  body  like
"a  flash  of  lightening  from  a  cloud  ;  but  the  soul  that  is
carnal  and  immersed  in  sense,!   like   a  heavy  and  dank

*  This  is  a  very  difKcult  passage.  The  former  translator,  with  an
unjustifiable  liberty,  has  turned  ayr^jya/j  "^^X^  ^'^i,<  o^p^^'^y  ^  virtu-
ous soul  is  pure  and  wimixed  light ;  which,  however  excellent  the
sentiment,  as  borrowed  from  the  Scripture,  v;herehe  had  found  that
God  is  light,  is  by  no  means  the  sense  of  the  original.  .

Dacier  has  translated  it  literally  /'ame  sec/oe,  and  remarks  the  pro-
priety of  the  expression,  with  respect  to  that  position  of  Heraclitus,
that  fire  is  the  first  principle  of  all  things.  The  French  critic  went
upon  the  supposed  analogy  between  fire  and  dryness;  but  there  is  a
much  more  natural,  and  more  obvious  analogy,  which  may  help  us
to  the  interpretation  of  this  passage  ;  that  is,  the  near  relation
which  dryness  has  to  purity  or  cleanliness  :  and  indeed  we  find  the
word  ^n^os  used  metaphorically  in  the  latter  sense — |>Jf  e;  r^oTret

J  Milton,  in  his  Comus,  uses  the  same  comparison  ;  for  which,
Jipwever  he  is  indebted  rather  to  Plato  than  to  Plutarch,

The  lavish  act  of  sin

Lets  in  deiilement  to  the  inward  parts.

The  soul  grows  clotted  by  coniagion,

Imbodies,  and  imbrutes,  till  she  quite  lose

Tli€  diyiae  property  of  her  first  being.

i  l2.


tlS"  Plutarch's-  lives^

vapour,  with  difficulty  is  kindled  and  aspires.  There  is
therefore  no  occasion,  against  nature,  to  send  the  bodies
of  good  men  to  heaven;  but  we  are  to  conclude,  that
virtuous  souls,  by  nature  and  the  divine  justice,  rise  from
men  to  heroes,  from  heroes  to  genii ;  and  at  last,  if,  as  in
the  mysteries,  they  be  perfectly  cleansed  and  purified^
shaking  oiF  all  remains,  of  mortality,  and  all  the  power  of
the  passions,  then  tliey  finally  attain  the  inost  glorious
and  perfect  happiness,  and  ascend  from  genii  to  gods,
not  by  the  vote  of  the  people,  but  by  the  just  and  esta-
blished order  of  nature.*

•  The  surname  that  Romulus  had  of  Quirinus,  some
think  was  given  him,  as  (another)  Mars ;  others,  be-
cause they  call  the  Roman  citizens  Quirites ;  others,
again  because  the  ancients  gave  the  name  of  Quiris  to
the  point  of  a  spear,  or  to  the.  spear  itself;  and  that  of
Juno  Quiritis  to  the  statues  of  Juno,  when  she  was  repre-
sented leaning  on  a  spear.  Moreover,  they  styled  a  cer-
tain spear,  which  was  consecrated  in  the  palace,  Mars  ;
ikud  those  that  distinguished  themselves  in  war  were  re-
warded vvith  a  spear.  Romulus,  then,  as  a  martial  or
warrior  god,  was  named  Quirinus  ;  and  the  hill  on  which
his  temple  stands,  has  the  name  of  Quirinalis  on  his  ac-
count. The  day  on  which  he  disappeared,  is  called  the
Jlight  of-  the  people^  ami  JVonae  Caprotince,  because  then
they  go  out  of  the  city  to  offer  sa.crifice  at  the  Goat's-
Marsh.  On  this  occasion  they  pronounce  aloud  some  of
their  proper  names,  Marcus  and  Caius  for  instance,  re-^
presenting  the  flight  that  then  happened,  and  their  cal-
Jing  upon  one  another,  amidst  the  terror  and  confusion.
Others,  however,  are  of  opinion,  that  this  is  not  a  re-
presentation of  flight,  but  of  haste  a.nd  eagerness,  deriv-
iiig  the  ceremony  from  this  source:  When  the  Gauls,

Such  are  those  thick  and  gloomy  shadows  damp
Oft  seen  in  charnel  vaults  and  sepulchres,
Ling'ring  and  sitting  by  a  new  made  grave.
And  loth  to  leave  the  body  that  it  lov'd,.
And  links  itielf  by  carnal  sensuality
To  a  degenerate  and  degraded  state.

■^Iletiod  was  the  first  who  distinguished  those  four  natureE,men,her^
j^aes,  genii  and  gods.  He  saw  room,  it  seems,  for  perpetual  progession
and  ijnprovemcnt  in  a  state  of  immortality.  And  when  the  heathens,
tell  us,  that  before  the  last  degree,  that  of  divinity  is  reached,  those
beings  are  liable  to  be  replunged  into  the>r  primitive  state  of  darkness,.
iiQe.w.ouUi  Jjnagii^  they  hai  U€?.rd  sonaething  of  the  fiilleu  ang^els,.


ROMITLUS.  ilQ"

atfter  the  taking  of  Rome,  were  driven  out  by  Camillus,
and  the  city  thus  weakened  did  not  easily  recover  itself,
many  of  the  Latins,  under  the  conduct  of  Livius  Posthu-
mius,  marched  against  it.  This  army  sitting  down  before
Rome,  a.  herald  was  sent  to  signify,  that  the  Latins  were
desirous  to  renew  their  old  alliance  and  affinity,  which
was  now  declining  by  new  inter-marriages.  If,  there-
fore they  would  send  themi  a  good  number  of  their  vir--
gins  and  widows,  peace  and  friendship  should  be  esta-
blished between  them,  as  it  was  before  with  the  Sabines
on  the  like  occasion.  When  the  Romans  heard  this,
though  they  Avere  afraid  of  war  yet  they  looked  upon
the  giving  up  of  their  women  as  not  at  all  more  eligible
than  captiv.ty.  While  they  were  in  this  suspense,  a  ser-
vant-maid, named  Philotis,  or  according  to  others,  Tu-
tola,  advised  them  to  do  neither,  but  by  a  stratagem,
which  she  had  thought  of,  to  avoid  both  the  war  and  the
giving  of  hostages.  The  stratagem  was  to  dress  Philotis
herself  and  other  handsome  female  slaves,  in  good  attire,
and  send  them,  instead  of  free-born  virgins,  to  the  ene-
my. Then  in  the  night,  Philotis  was  to  light  up  a  torch
(as  a  signal)  for  the  Romans  to  attack  the  enemy,  and
dispatch  them  in  their  sleepi  The  Latins  were  satisfied,
and  the  scheme  put  in  practice.  For  accordingly  Philotis
did  set  up  a  torch  on  a  wild  fig-tree,  screening  it  behind
with  curtains  and  coverlets  from  the  sight  of  the  enemy^
whilst  it  was  visible  ta  the  Romans..  As  soon  as  they  be-
held it,  they  set  out  in  great  haste,  often  calling  upon
each  other  at  the  gates  to  be  expeditious.  Then  they  fell
upon  the  Latins,  who  expected  nothing  less,  and  cut  them
in  pieces.  Hence  this  feast,  in  memory  of  the  victory.
The  day  was  called  JVbna  Caprotina,  on  account  of  the
wild  Jig-tree,  in  the  Roman  tongue  caprijicus.  The  wo-
men are  entertained  in  the  fields  in  booths  made  of  the
branches  of  the  fig-tree  :  and  the  servant-maids  in  com-
panies run  about  and  play  ;  afterwards  they  come  to  blows,
and  throw  stones  at  one  another,  in  remembrance  of  their
then  assisting  and  standing  by  the  Romans  in  the  battle.
These  particulars  are  admitted  but  by  few  historians.  In-
deed, their  calling  upon  each  other's  names  in  the  day-time,
and  their  walking  in  procession  to  the  Goat's  Mar^h^*

*  Instead  of  &/?  stt;  ^ocXetTrcci^xhe  reading  in  Bryan's  text,  which
h%s  no  tollable  sence,  an  anonymous  copy  gives  us  oivine,  c(,X»hxQ,if*.


120  ROMULUS  AND  THESEUS  COMPARED,

like  persons  that  were  going  to  a  sacrifice,  seems  rather
to  be  placed  to  the  former  account :  though  possibly  both
those  events  might  happen,  in  distant  periods  on  the  same
day.  Romulus  is  said  to  have  been  fifty-four  years  of
age,  and  in  the  thirty-eighth  of  his  reign,*  when  he  was
taken  from  tlie  world.


ROMULUS  AND  THESEUS

COMPARED,

J.  HIS  is  all  I  have  met  with  that  deserves  to  be  re-
lated concerning  Romulus  and  Theseus.  And  to  come
to  the  comparison,!  first  it  appears,  that  Theseus  v/as  in-
clined to  great  enterprizes,  by  his  own  proper  choice,
and  compelled  by  no  necessity,  since  he  might  have  reign-
ed in  peace  at  Troezene,  over  a  kingdom  by  no  means
contemptible,  which  would  have  fallen  to  him  by  suc-
cession ;  Whereas  Romulus,  in  order  to  avoid  present
slavery  and  impending  punishment,  became  valiant  (as
Plato  expresses  it)  through  fear  and  was  driven,  by  the
terror  of  extreme  sufferings  to  arduous  attempts.  Be-
sides, the  greatest  action  of  Romulus  was  the  killing  of
one  tyrant  in  Alba :  But  the  first  exploits  of  Theseus,
performed  occassionally,  and  by  way  of  prelude  only,  v/ere
those  of  destroying  Sciron,  Sinnis,  Procrustes,  and  the
club-bearer  ;  by  whose  punishment  and  death  he  delivered
Greece  from  several  cruel  tyrants,  before  they,  for  whose
preservation  he  was  labouring,  knev/  him.     Moreover,

And  that  to  sacrifice^  or  rather  to  offer  up  prayers  at  a  sacrifice,  is  in
one  sense  of  ccXotXo(Z,%iy  appears  from  the  scholiast  on  Sophocles's
Tracbifiia  where  he  explains  uXxXctyoii  by  rcci^  iTii  rav  ^v(riaf
tv^om;.  This  signification,  we  suppose,  it  gained  from  the  loud  ac-
cent in  which  those  pra)  ers  were  said  or  sung.

*  Dionysius  of  Halicarnassus  (and  indeed  Plui arch  himself,  in  the
beginning  of  the  life  of  Numa)  say  s,  that  Romulus  left  the  world  in
the  thirty-seven'h  year  after  the  foundation  of  Rome.  But  perhaps
those  two  historians  may  be  reconciled  as  to  the  age  he  died  at.  For
Plutarch  says,  he  was  then  full  fiRy-four  years  of  age,  and  Dionysius
that  he  was  in  his  fifty-fif-.h  year

f  Nothing  can  be  more  exceliant  than  these  parallels  of  Plutarch.
He  weighs  the  vir,.ues  and  vices  of  men  in  so  just  a  balance,  and  puts
so  true  an  estimate  on  their  good  and  bad  quaiides,  that  the  reader  .
cannot  attend  to  them  wuhout  hifiuite  advantage.


ROMULUS  AND  THESEUS  COMPARED.  121

he  might  have  gone  safely  to  Athens  by  sea,  without  any
clanger  from  robbers  ;  but  Romuhis  could  have  no  se-
curity, while  Amulius  lived.  This  difference  is  evident.
Theseus,  when  unmolested  hinaself,  went  forth  to  rescue
others  from  their  oppressors.  On  the  other  hand,  Ro-
mulus and  his  brother,  while  they  were  uninjured  by  the
tyrant  themselves,  quietly  suffered  him  to  exercise  his^
cruelties.  And,  if  it  was  a  great  thing  for  Romulus  ta
be  wounded  in  the  battle  with  the  Sabines,  to  kill  Acron,
and  to  conquer  many  other  enemies,  we  may  set  against
these  distinctions  the  battle  with  the  Centaurs,, and  the
war  with  the  Amazons.

But  as  to  Theseus's  enterprize  with  respect  to  the  Cre-
tan tribute,  when  he  voluntarily  offered  to  go  among  the
young  men  and  virgins,  whether  he  was  to  expect  to  be
food  for  some  wild  beast,  or  to  be  sacrificed  at  Andro-
geiis's  tomb,  or,  which  is  the  lightest  of  all  the  evils  said
to  be  prepared  for  him,  to  submit  to  a  vile  and  dishonour-
able slavery,  it  is  not  easy  to  express  his  courage  and  mag-
nanimity, his  regard  for  justice  and  the  public  good,  and
his  love  of  glory  and  of  virtue.  On  tliis  occasion,  it  ap-
pears to  me,  that  the  philosophers  have  not  ill  defined  love
to  be  a  remedy  firovidcd  by  the godsfor  the  safety  and  fireser-
•vation  of  youth,*  For  Ariadne's  love  seems  to  have  been
the  work  of  some  god,  who  designed  by  that  means  to-
preserve  this  great  man.  Nor  should  we  blame  her  for
her  passion,  but  rather  wonder  that  all  were  not  alike  af-
fected towards  him.  And  if  she  alone  was  sensible  of  that
tenderness,  I  may  justly  pronounce  her  v/orthy  the  love
of  a  god,t  as  she  shewed  so  great  a  regard  for  virtue  and
excellence  in  her  attachment  to  so  worthy  a  man.

Both  Theseus  and  Romulus  were  born  with  political
talents  ;  yet  neither  of  them  preserved  the  proper  cha-
ratcr  of  a  king,  but  deviated  from  the  due  medium,  the
one  erring  on  the  side  of  democracy,  the  other  on  that  of
absolute  power,  according  to  their  diflerent  tempers.
For  a  prince's  first  concerns  is  to  preserve  the  government

*  Vide  Plat.  Conviv.

f  Plutarch  here  enters  into  the  notion  of  Socrates,  who  teaches,
that  it  ibthe  love  of  virtue  and  real  excellence  which  alone  can  unite
lis  to  the  Supreme  Being.  But  though  this  maxim  is  good,  it  is  not
applicable  to  Ariadne.  For  where  is  the  virtue  of  that  princess,  who
fell  in  love  with  a  stranger  at  first  sight,  and  hastened  to  the  comple-
tioa  of  hei^wishes  through  the  riiin  of  her  kindred  aud  her  couQtrj  .^


122  Plutarch's  lives.

itself  :  and  this  is  effected,  no  less  by  avoiding  v/halerer
is  improper,  tlia.n  by  cultivating  vrhat  is  suitable  to  his
dignity.  He  i^ho  g^ives  ufi^  or  extends  his  authority^  con-
tinues not  a  jirince  or  a  king,  but  degenerates  into  a  republi-
can or  a  tijrant,  and  thus  incurs  either  the  hatred  or  con-
tempt of  his  subjects.  The  former  seems  to  be  the  error
of  a  mild  and  humane  disposition,  the  latter  of  self-love
and  severity.

If,  then,  the  calamities  of  mankind  are  not  to  be  en-
tirely attributed  to  fortune,  but  we  are  to  seek  the  cause
in  their  different  m.anners  and  passions,  here  we  shall
find,  that  unreasonable  aiiger,  with  qvnick  and  unadvised,
resentment,  is  to  be  imputed  both  to  Romulus,  in  the  case
of  his  brother,  and  to  Theseus  in  that  of  his  son.  But,
if  we  consider  whence  their  anger  took  its  rise,  the  latter
seems  the  more  excusable,  from  the  ereater  cause  he  had
for  resentment,  as  yielding  to  the  heavier  blow.  For,  as
the  dispute  began  when  Romulus  v/as  in  cool  consultation
for  the  common  good,*  one  would  think  he  could  not  pre-
sently have  given  way  to  such  a  passion  :  Whereas  The-
seus was  urged  against  his  son,  by  emotions  which  few
men  have  been  able  to  withstand,  proceeding  from  love,
jealousy,  and  the  false  suggestions  of  his  wife.  What  is
more,  the  anger  of  Romulus  discharged  itself  in  an  action
of  most  unfortunate  consequence  ;  but  that  of  Theseus
proceeded  no  further  than  words,  reproaches,  and  impre-
cations, the  usual  revenge  of  old  men.  The  rest  of  the
young  man's  misery  seems  to  have  been  oAving  to  fortune.^
Thus  far  Theseus  seems  to  deserve  the  preference.

But  Romulus  has,  in  the  first  place,  thisi  great  advan-
tage, that  he  rose  to  distinction  from  very  small  begin-
nings. For  the  two  brothers  were  reputed  slaves  and
sons  of  herdsmen  ;  and  yet  before  they  attained  to  liberty
themselves,  they  bestowed  it  on  almost  ail  the  Latins  ;
gaining  at  once  the  most  glorious  titles,  as  destroyers  of
their  enemies,  deliverers  of  their  kindred;  kings  of  nations,
and  founders  of  cities,  not  transplanters,  as  Theseus  was,
who  filled  indeed  one  city  with  people,  but  it  was  by  ru-
ining many  others,  which  bore  the  names  of  ancient  kings

*  Plutarch  does  not  seem  to  have  had  a  just  idea  of  the  contest
between  Romulus  and  Remus  The  two  brothers  were  not  so  so-
licitous about  the  situation  of  their  new  city,  as  which  of  thent
should  have  the  command  in  it,  when  it  was  built.


ROMULUS    AND    THESEUS    COMPARED.  123

and  heroes.     And  Romulus  afterwards  eifected  the  same,
"vvhen  he   compelled  his  enemies  to  demolish  their  habi-
tations, and  incorporate  with  their  conquerors.     He  had
not,  however,  a  city  ready  built,  to  enlarge,  or  to  trans-
plant inhabitants  to  from  other  towns,  but  he  created  one,
gaining  to  himself  lands,  a  coimtry,  a  kingdom,  children,
wives,  alliances  ;  and  this  without  destroying  or  ruining
any  one.     On  the  contrary,  he  was  a  great  benefactor  to
persons  who,  having  neither  house  nor  habitation,  willing-
ly became  his  citizens  and  people.     He  did  not,  indeed,
like  Theseus,  destroy  robbers  and  ruffians,  but  he  subdued
nations,  took  cities,  and  triumphed  overkings  and  generals.
As  for  the  fate  of  Remus,  it  is  doubtful  by  what  hand  he
fell ;  most  writers  ascribing  it  to  others,  and  not  to  Ro-
mulus.    But,  in  the  face  of  all  the  world,  he  saved  his
mother  from  destruction,  and  placed  Ijis  grandfather,  who
lived  in   mean  and  dishonourable   subjection,  upon    the
throne  of -fineas  :  Moreover,  he  voluntarily  did  him  many
kind  offices,  but  never  injured  him,  not  even  inadvertent-
ly.    On  the  other  hand,  I  think,  Theseus,  in  forgetting  or
neglecting  the  cominand  about  the  sail,  can  scarcely,  by
any  excuses,  or  before  the  mildest  judges,  avoid  the  im-
putation of  parricide.     Sensible  how  difficult  the  defence
of  this  affair  would  be  to  those  who  should  attempt  it,  a
certain  Athenian  writer  feigns,  that  when  the  ship  ap-
proached, -/Egeus  ran  in  great  haste  to  the  citadel  for  the
better  view  of  it,  and  missing  his  step,  fell  down  ;  as  if  he
were  destitute  of  servants,  or  went,  in  whatever  hurry,
unattended  to  the  sea.

Moreover,  Theseus's  rapes  and  offences,  with  respect
to  women,  admit  of  no  plausible  excuse  ;  because,  in  the
first  place,  they  were  committed  often  ;  for  he  carried  off
Ariadne,  Antiope,  and  Anaxo  the  Trcezenian ;  after  the
rest,  Helen  ;  though  she  was  a  girl  not  yet  come  to  ma-
turity, and  he  so  far  advanced  in  years,  that  it  was  time
for  him  to  think  no  more  even  of  lawful  marriage:  The
next  aggravation  is  the  cause  ;  for  the  daughters  of  the
Troezenians,  the  Lacedsenionians,  and  the  Amazons,  were
not  more  fit  to  bring  children,  than  those  of  the  Athenians
sprung  from  Erectheus  and  Cecrops.  These  things,
therefore,  are  liable  to  the  suspicion  of  a  wanton  and  lieen-
cious  appetite.  On  the  other  hand,  Romulus,  having
carried  off  at  once  almost  eight  hundred  women,  did  not


124  Plutarch's  lives.

take  them  all,  but  only  Hersilia,  as  it  is  said,  for  himself,
and  distributed  the  rest  among  the  most  respectable  citi-
zens. And  afterwards,  by  the  honourable  and  affection-
ate treatment  he  procured  them,  he  turned  that  injury  and
violence  into  a  glorious  exploit,  performed  with  a  polrti-
cal  view  to  the  good  of  society.  Thus  he  united  and
cemented  the  two  nations  together,  and  opened  a  source
•of  future  kindness,  and  of  additional  power.  Time  bears
Vvdtness  to  the  conjugal  modesty,  tenderness,  and  fidelity,
which  he  established  ;  for  during  two  hundred  and  thirty
years  no  man  attempted  to  leave  his  wife,  nor  any  woman
her  husband.*  And,  as  the  very  curious  among  the
•Cireeks  can  tell  you,  who  v/as  the  first  person  that  killed
his  father  and  mother,  so  all  the  Romans  know,  that  Spu-
rius  Carvilius  was  the  first  that  divorced  his  wife,  alleging
her  barrenness. t  The  immediate  effects,  as  weU  as
length  of  time,  attest  what  I  have  said.  For  the  two  kings
shared  the  kingdom,  and  the  two  nations  came  under  the
same  government,  by  means  of  these  alliances.  But  the
marriages  of  Theseus  procured  the  Athenians  no  friend-
ship with  any  oth^r  state  ;  on  the  contrary,  enmity,  wars,
the  destruction  of  their  citizens,  and  at  last  the  loss  of
Aphidnse  ;  which,  only  through  the  compassion  of  the
enemy,  v/hom  the  inhabitants  supplicated  and  honoured
like  gods,  escaped  the  fate  that  befel  Troy  by  means  of
Paris.  However,  the  mother  of  Theseus,  deserted  and
given  up  by  her  son,  was  not  only  in  danger  of,  but  really
did  suffer,  the  misfortunes  of  Hecuba,  if  her  captivity  be
not  a  fiction,  as  a  great  deal  besides  may  very  well  be.
As  to  the  stories  we  have  concerning  both,  of  a  superna-
tural kind,  the  difference  is  great.  For  Romulus  was  pre-
served by  the  signal  favour  of  heaven;  but  as  the  oracle
"Which  commanded  JLgeus  not  to  approach  any  woman  in
a  foreign  country,  was  not  observed,  the  birth  of  Theseus
appeal's  to  have  been  unacceptable  to  the  gods.

*  These  numbers  are  wrong  in  Plutarch  ;  for  Dionysius  of  Hali-
carnassus  marks  the  time  with  great  exactness,  acquainting  us,
that  it  was  520  years  after  the  building  of  Rome,  in  the  consulate
of  M,  Pomponius  Matho  and  C.  Papirius  Masso.

t  Carvilius  made  oath  before  the  censors,  that  he  had  the  best  re-
gard for  his  wife,  and  that  it  was  solely  in  compliance  with  the  sa-
cred engagement  of  marriage,  the  design  of  which  was  to  have
children,  that  he  divorced  her.  But  tliis  did  not  hinder  his  charac-
ter from  being  ever  after  odious  to  the  people,  who  thought  he  ha4
set  a  very  pernicious  example.


[   125  ]

LYCURGUS.*


o


F  Lycurgus  the  lawgiver  we  have  nothing  to  relate
that  is  certain  and  uncontroverted.  For  there  are  dif-
ferent accounts  of  his  birth,  his  travels,  his  death,  and
especially  of  the  laws  and  form  of  government  which  he
established.  But  least  of  all  are  the  times  agreed  upon
in  which  this  great  man  lived.  For  some  say  he  flourished
at  the  same  time  with  Iphitus,t  and  joined  with  him  in
settling  the  cessation  of  arms  during  the  Olympic  games.
Among  these  is  Aristotle  the  philosopher,  who  alleges  for
proof  an  Olympic  quoit,  on  which  was  preserved  the  in-
scription of  Lycurgus 's  name.  But  others  who,  with
Eratosthenes  and  Apollodorus,  compute  the  time  by  the
succession  of  the  Spartan  kings, |  place  him  much  earlier

*  The  life  of  Lycurgus  was  the  first  which  Plutarch  published,  as
he  himself  observes  in  the  life  of  Theseus.  He  seems  to  have  had
a  strong  attachment  to  the  Spartans  and  their  customs,  as  Xenophon
likewise  had.  For,  beside  this  life,  and  those  of  several  other  Spar-
tan chiefs,  we  have  a  treatise  of  his  on  the  laws  and  customs  of  th«
Lacedjemonians,  and  another  of  Laconic  Apophthegms.  He  makes
Lycurgus  in  all  things  a  perfect  hero,  and  alleges  his  behaviour  as
a  proof,  that  the  wise  man,  so  often  described  by  the  philosophers,
was  not  a  mere  ideal  character  una^-tainable  by  human  nature.  It
is  certain,  however,  that  the  encomiums  bestowed  upon  him  and  his
laws  by  the  Delphic  oracle,  were  merely  a  contrivance  between  the
Pythoness  and  himself  ;  and  some  of  his  laws,  for  instance  that
concerning  the  women,  were  exceptionable.

f  Iphitus,  king  of  Elis,  is  said  to  have  instituted,  or  rather  restor-
ed the  Olympic  games,  108  years  before  what  is  commonly  reckon-
ed the  first  Olympiad,  which  commenced  in  the  year  before  Christ
776,  or,  as  some  will  have  it,  774,  and  boi-e  the  name  of  Coroebus,
as  the  following  Olympiads  did  those  of  other  victors.

Iphitus  began  with  offering  a  sacrifice  to  Hercules,  whom  the
Eleans  believed  to  have  been  upon  some  account  exasperated  against
them.  He  next  ordered  the  Olympic  games,  the  discontinuance  of
which  was  said  to  have  caused  a  pestilence,  to  be  proclaimed  all  over
Greece,  with  a  promise  of  free  admission  to  all  comers,  and  fixed
the  time  for  the  celebration  of  them.  He  likewise  took  upon  him-
self to  be  sole  president  and  judge  of  those  games,  a  privilege  which
the  Piseans  had  often  disputed  with  his  predecessors,  and  which
continued  to  his  descendants,  as  long  as  the  regal  dignity  subsisted.
After  this,  the  people  appointed  two  presidents,  which  in  time  in-
creased to  ten,  and  at  length  to  twelve.

\  Strabo  says,  that  Lycurgus  the  lawgiver  certainly  lived  in  the
fifth  generation  after  Althcmenes,  who  led  a  colony  mto  Crete.  This
Althemenes  was  the  son  of  Cissus,  who  founded  Argos,  at  the  same
VOL.   1.  .       M


126  Plutarch's  lives.

than  the  first  Olympiad.  Timseiis,  however,  supposes,
that,  as  there  were  two  Lycurgus's  in  Sparta  at  different
times,  the  actions  of  both  are  ascribed  to  one,  on  account
of  his  particular  renown ;  and  that  the  more  ancient  of
them  lived  not  long  after  Homer  ;  Nay  some  say  he  had
seen  him.  Xenophon,  too  confirms  the  opinion  of  his
antiquity,  when  he  makes  him  cotemporary  with  the
Heraclidse.  It  is  true,  the  latest  of  the  Lacedemonian
kings  were  of  the  lineage  of  the  Heraclidae  ;  but  Xeno-
phon there  seems  to  speak  of  the  first  and  more  immediate
descendants  of  Hercules.*  As  the  history  of  those  times
is  thus  involved,  in  relating  the  circumstances  of  Lycur-
gus's life,  we  shall  endeavour  to  select  such  as  are  at  least
controverted,  and  follow  authors  of  the  greatest  credit.

Simonides  the  poet  tells  us,  that  Prytanis,  not  Euno-
mus,  was  father  to  Lycurgus.  But  most  writers  give  us
the  genealogy  of  Lycurgus  and  Eunomus  in  a  different
manner  ;  for,  according  to  them.  Sous  was  the  son  of
Patrocles,  and  grandson  of  Aristodemus ;  Eurytion  the
son  of  Sous,  Prytanis  of  Eurytion,  and  Eunomus  of  Pry-
tanis ;  to  this  Eunomus  was  born  Polydectes,  by  a  for-
mer wife,  and  by  a  second,  named  Dianassa,  Lycurgus.
Eutychidas,  however,  says  Lycurgus  was  the  sixth  from
Patrocles,  and  the  eleventh  from  Hercules.  The  most
distinguished  of  his  ancestors  was  Sous,  under  whom  the
Lacedasmonians  made  the  Helots  their  slaves,!  and  gain-
ed an  extensive  tract  of  land  from  the  Arcadians.  Of
this  Sous  it  is  related,  that,  being  besieged  by  the  Cli-
torians  in  a  difficult  post  where  there  was  no  water,  he
agreed  to  give  up  all  his  conquests,  provided  that  him-
self and  all  his  army  should  drink  of  the  neighbouring
spring.  When  these  conditions  were  sworn  to,  he  as*
sembled  his  forces,  and  offered  his  kingdom  to  the  man

time  that  Patrocles,  Lycurgus's  ancestor  in  the  fifth  degree,  laid  the
foundation  of  Sparta.  So  that  Lycurgus  flourished  some  short
time  after  Solomon,  about  900  years  before  the  Christian  ^ra.

*  This  passage  is  in  Xenophon's  excellent  treatise  concerning  the
republic  of  Sparta,  from  which  Plutarch  has  taken  the  best  part  of
this  life.

t  The  Helots,  or  Ilotes,  were  inhabitants  of  Helos,  a  maritime
town  of  I^aconia.  The  Lacedsemonians  having  conquered  and  made
slaves  of  them,  called  not  only  them,  but  all  the  other  slaves  they  hap-
pened to  have,  by  the  name  oi Helotes  It  is  certain,  however,  that  the
descendants  of  the  original  Helotes,  though  they  were  extremely  ill-
treated,  and  some  of  them  assassinated,  subsisted  many  ages  in
Lacoaia.


LYCURGUS.  127

that  would  forbear  drinking ;  not  one  of  them,  however*
could  deny  himself,  but  they  all  drank.  Then  Sous  went
down  to  the  spring  himself,  and  having  only  sprinkled
his  face  in  sight  of  the  enemy,  he  marched  off,  and  still
held  the  country,  because  all  had  not  drank.  Yet,  though
he  was  highly  honoured  for  this,  the  family  had  not  their
name  from  him,  but  from  his  son,  were  called  Eurytionidcez
*  and  this,  because  Eurytion  seems  to  be  the  first  who  re-
laxed the  strictness  of  kingly  government,  inclining  to  the
interest  of  the  people,  and  ingratiating  himself  with  them.
Upon  this  relaxation,  their  encroachments  increased,  and
the  succeeding  kings,  either  becoming  odious,  treating
them  with  greater  rigour,  or  else  giving  way  through  weak-
ness or  in  hopes  of  favour,  for  a  long  time  anarchy  and
confusion  prevailed  in  Sparta  ;  by  which  one  of  its  kings,
the  father  of  Lycurgus  lost  his  life.  For  while  he  was  en-
deavouring to  part  some  persons  who  were  concerned  in  a
fray,  he  received  a  wound  by  a  kitchen  knife  of  which  he
died,  leaving  the  kingdom  to  his  eldest  son  Polydectes.

But,  he  too,  dying  soon  after,  the  general  voice  gave
it  for  Lycurgus  to  ascend  the  throne  ;  and  he  actually  did
so,  till  it  appeared  that  his  brother's  widow  was  preg-
nant. As  soon  as  he  perceived  this,  he  declared  that  the
kingdom  Ijelonged  to  her  issue,  pro^^ded  it  were  male,
and  he  kept  the  administration  in  his  hands,  only  as  his
guardian.  This  he  did  with  the  title  of  Prodicosy  which
the  Lacedsemonians  give  to  the  guardians  of  infant  kings.
Soon  after  the  queen  made  him  a  private  overture,  that
she  would  destroy  her  child  upon  condition  that  he  would
marry  her,  when  king  of  Sparta.  Though  he  detested
her  wickedness,  he  said  nothing  against  the  proposal,  but

*  It  may  be  proper  here  to  give  the  reader  a  short  view  of  the  regal
government  of  Lacedccmon,  under  the  Herculean  line.  The  Heracli-
dje  having  driven  out  Tisamer.es,  the  son  of  Orestes,  Eurysthenes  and
Procles,  the  sons  of  Aristodemus,  reigned  in  that  kingdom.  Under
them  the  government  took  a  new  form,  and  instead  of  one  sovereigpi
became  subject  to  two.  These  two  brothers  did  not  divide  the  king-
dom between  them,  neither  did  they  agree  to  reign  alternately,  but
they  resolved  to  govern  jointly,  and  with  equal  power  and  authority.
What  is  surprizing  is,  that,  notwithstanding  their  mutual  jealousy,
this  diarchy  did  not  end  with  these  two  brothers,  but  continued  under
a  succession  of  thirty  princes  of  the  line  of  Eurysthenes,  and  twenty-
seven  of  that  of  Procles.  Eurysthenes  was  succeeded  by  his  son  Agis,
from  whom  all  the  descendants  of  that  line  were  surnamed  Jgid.e,  as
the  other  line  took  the  name  EurytionicU,  from  Eurytion,  the  grand-
son of  Procles,  Pairoclesy  or  Protocles.     Pausan.  5trab.  49'  a/.


128  Plutarch's  lives.

pretending  to  approve  it,  charged  her  not  to  take  any
drugs  to  procure  an  abortion,  lest  she  should  endanger  her
own  health  or  life  ;  for  he  would  take  care  that  the  child,
as  soon  as  born,  should  be  destro)'ed.  Thus  he  artfully
drew  on  the  woman  to  her  full  time,  and,  when  he  heard
she  was  in  labour,  he  sent  persons  to  attend  and  watch
her  delivery,  with  orders,  if  it  were  a  girl  to  give  it  to
the  women,  but  if  a  boy,  to  bring  it  to  him,  in  whatever
business  he  might  be  engaged.  It  happened  that  he  was
at  supper  with  the  magistrates  when  she  was  delivered  of
a  boy,  and  his  servants,  who  were  present,  carried  the
child  to  him.  When  he  received  it,  he  is  reported  to
have  said  to  the  company,  S/iartans,  see  here  your  new-
born  king.  He  then  laid  him  down  upon  the  chair  of
state,  and  named  him  Charilaus,  because  of  the  joy  an4
admiration  of  his  magnanimity  and  justice,  testified  by  all
present.  Thus  the  reign  of  Lycurgus  lasted  only  eight
months*  But  the  citizens  had  a  great  veneration  for  him
on  other  accounts,  and  there  were  more  that  paid  him
their  attentions,  and  were  ready  to  execute  his  commands,
out  of  regard  to  his  virtues,  than  those  who  obeyed  him
as  a  guardian  to  the  king,  and  director  cf  the  admini-
stration. There  were  not,  however,  wanting  those  that
envied  him,  and  opposed  his  advancement,  as  too  high
for  so  young  a  man  ;  particularly  the  relations  and  friends
of  the  queen-mother,  who  seemed  to  have  been  treated
with  contempt.  Her  brother  Leonidas,  one  day  boldly
attacked  him  v/ith  virulent  language,  and  scrupled  not
to  tell  him,  that  he  was  well  assured  he  would  soon  be
king  ;  thus  preparing  suspicions,  and  matter  of  accusa-
tion against  Lycurgus,  in  case  any  accident  should  befal
the  king.  Insinuations  of  the  same  kind  were  likewise
spread  by  the  queen-mother.  IVIoved  with  this  ill  treat-
ment, and  fearing  some  dark  design,  he  determined  to
get  clear  of  all  suspicion,  by  travelling  into  other  coun-
tries, till  his  nephew  should  be  grown  up,  and  have  a  son
to  succeed  him  in  the  kingdom.

He  set  sail,  therefore  and  landed  in  Crete.  There
having  observed  the  forms  of  government,  and  conversed
•with  the  most  illustiious  personages,  he  was  struck  with
admiration  of  some  of  their  laws,*  and  resolved  at  his

*  The  most  ancient  writers,  as  Ephorus,  Callisthenes,  Aristode,
and  Plato,  are  of  opinion,  that  Lycurgus  adopted  many  things  in
the  Cretan  polity.    But  Pol}  bius  will  have  it  that  they  are  all  mis-


LYCURGUS.  129

return  to  make  use  of  them  in  Sparta.  Some  others  he
rejected.  Among  the  friends  he  gained  in  Crete  ;  was
Thales,*  with  whom  he  had  interest  enough  to  persuade
him  to  go  and  settle  at  Sparta.  Thales  was  famed  for  his
wisdom  and  political  abilities :  he  was-  withal  a  lyric
poet,  who  under  colour  of  exercising  his  art,  performed
as  great  things  as  the  most  excellent  lawgivers.  For  his
odes  were  so  many  persuasives  to  obedience  and  unanimity,
as  by  means  of  melody  and  numbers,  they  had  great  grace
and  power,  they  softened  insensibly  the  manners  of  the
audience,  drew  them  off  from  the  animosities  which  then
prevailed,  and  united  them  in  zeal  for  excellence  and
virtue.  So  that,  in  some  measure,  he  prepared  the  way
for  Lycurgus  towards  the  instruction  of  the  Spartans.
From  Crete  Lycurgus  passed  to  Asia,  desirous,  as  is  said,
to  compare  the  Ionian  f  expence  and  luxury  with  the  Cre-
tan  frugality  and  haixl  diet,  so  as  to  judge  what  effect
each  had  on  their  several  manners  and  governments  ;  just
as  physicians  compare  bodies  that  are  weak  and  sickly
with  the  healthy  and  robust.  There  also,  probably,  |  he
met  with  Homer's  poems,  which  were  preserved  by  the
posterity  of  Cleophylus.  Observing  that  many  moral
sentences,  and  much  political    knowledge    were   inter- "^

taken.  "  At  Sparta,'^  says  he,  (in  his  sixth  book"^  '♦  the  lands  are
equally  divided  among  all  the  citizens  ,-  wealth  is  banished ;  the
crown  is  hereditary  ;  whereas  in  Crete  the  contrary  obtains."  But
this  does  not  prove  that  Lycurgus  might  not  take  some  good  laws
and  usages  from  Crete,  and  leave  what  he  thought  defective.  There
is,  indeed,  so  great  a  conformity  between  the  laws  of  Lycurgus  and
those  of  Mmos,  that  we  must  believe  with  Strabo,'  that  these  were
the  foundation  of  the  other.

*  This  Thales,  who  was  a  poet  and  mirsician,  must  be  distinguish-
ed from  Thales  the  Milesian,  who  was  one  of  the  seven  wise  men
of  Greece.     The  poet  lived  250  years  before  the  philosopher,

t  The  lonians  sent  a  colony  from  Attica  into  Asia  Miiior,  about
1050  years  before  the  Christian  JEra,.  and  150  before  Lycurgus.  And
though  they  might  not  be  greatly  degenerated  in  so  short  a  time,  yet
our  lawgiver  could  judge  of  the  eflect  which  the  climate  and  Asiatic
plenty  had  upon  them.

\  He  adds  probably  ok  £<*««)»,  because  some  Greek  authors  have
affirmed  that  Lycurgus  saw  Homer  himself,  who  was  at  that  time  at
Chios.  But  Plutarch's  opinion  is  more  to  be  relied  on.  Homer
died  before  Lycurgus  was  born.  Before  the  time  of  Lycurgus,  they
had  noihing  in  Greece  of  Homer,  but  some  detached  piecs,  which
■were  severally  named  from  the  different  subjects  treated  of  in  them  j
suck  a&  thje- valour  of  Diomtdt,  Hector's  Ransonif  aiad  the  like.


130  Plutarch's  lives.

mixed  with  his  stories,  which  had  an  irresistible  charm,  he
collected  them  into  one  body,  and  transcribed  them  with
pleasure,  in  order  to  take  them  home  with  him.  For  his
glorious  poetry  was  not  yet  fully  known  in  Greece  ;  only
some  particular  pieces  were  in  a  few  hands,  as  they  hap-
pened to  be  dispersed,  Lycurgus  was  the  first  tliat  made
them  generally  known.  The  Egyptians  likewise  suppose
that  he  visited  them  ;  and  as  of  all  their  institutions  he
was  most  pleased  with  their  distinguishing  the  military
men  from  the  rest  Qf  the  people,*  he  took  the  same  method
at  Sparta,  and,  by  separating  from  these  the  miechanics
and  artificers,  he  rendered  the  constitution  more  noble
and  more  of  a  piece.  This  assertion  of  the  Egyptians
is  confirmed  by  some  of  the  Greek  writers*  But  we
know  of  no  one,  except  A ristocrates,  son  of  Hipparchus,
and  a  Spartan,  who  has  affirmed  that  he  went  to  Libya
and  Spain,  and  in  his  Indian  excursions  conversed  with
the  Gymnosofihisis,:\

The  Lacediemonians  found  the  want  of  Lycurgus  when
absent,  arxl  sent  many  embassies  to  intreat  him  to  return*
For  they  perceived  that  their  kings  had  barely  the  title
and  outwai^d  appendages  of  royalty,  but  in  nothing  else
differed  from  tlie  multitude  ;  wliereas  Lycurgus  had
abilities  from  nature  to  guide  the  measures  of  government,
and  pov/ers  of  persuasion,  that  drew  the  hearts  of  men
to  him*  The  kings,  however,  were  consulted  about  his,
return,  and  they  hoped  that  in  his  presence  they  should
experience  less  insolence  amongst  the  people-  Return-
ing then  to  a  city  thus  disposed,  he  immediately  applied
himself  to  alter  the  whole  frame  of  the  constitution,  sen-

*  The  ancient  Egyptians  kept  not  only  the  priests  and  mihtary
jnen  who  consisted  chiefly  of  the  nobihty,  distinct  from  the  rest  of
the  people ;  but  the  other  employments^  viz.  those  of  herdsmen^
Sihepherds,  merchants,  interpreters,  and  seameia,  descended  in  par-
ticular tribes  from  father  to  son»

t  Indian  priests  and  philosophers  who  went  almost  naked,  and
lived  in  woods.  The  Brad'tnan&  were  one  of  their  sects.  They
had  a  great  aversion  to  idleness.  Apuleius  tells  us,,  every  pupil  of
thebrs  was  obliged  to  give  account  every  day  of  some  good  he  had
done,  either  by  meditation  or  action,  before  he  was  admitted  to  sit
down  to  dinner.  So  thoroughly  were  they  persuaded  of  the  trans-
migration of  the  soul,  and  a  happy  one  for  themselves,  that  they
used  to  commit  themselves  to  the  flames,  when  they  had  lived  to
satiety,  or  were  apprehensive  of  any  misfortune.  But  we  are  afraid
it  was  vanity  that  induced  one  of  them  to  burn  himself  before  Alex-
ander the  Gieat,  and  another  to  do  the  same  before  Augustus  Caesae;.


LYCURGUS.  131

sible  that  a  partial  change,  and  the  introducing  of  some
new  laws,  would  be  of  no  sort  of  advantage  ;  but,  as  in  the
case  of  a  body  diseased  and  full  of  bad  humours,  whose
temperament  is  to  be  corrected  and  new  formed  by  me»
dicines,  it  was  necessary  to  begin  a  new  regimen.  With
these  sentiments  he  went  to  Delphi,  and  when  he  had  of-
fered sacrifice  and  co-nsulted  the  god,*  he  returned  with.
that  celebrated  oracle,  in  which  the  priestess  called  him,
Bdo-uedof  the  gods^  and  rather  a  god  than  a  man.  As  to
his  request  that  he  might  enact  good  laws,  she  told  him,
Apollo  had  heard  his  request,  and  promised  that  the  consti'-
tution  he  should  establish^  ivould  be  the  most  excellent  in  the
world.  Thus  encouraged,  he  applied  to  the  nobility,  and
desired  them  to  put  their  hands  to  the  work  ;  addressing;
himself  privately  at  first  to  his  friends,  and  afterwards,,
by  degrees,  trying  the  disposition  of  others,  and  preparing
them  to  concur  in  the  business.  When  matters  were
ripe,  he  ordered  thirty  of  the  principal  citizens  to  appear
armed  in  the  marketplace  by  break  of  day,  to  sti'ike  ter-
ror into  such  as  might  desire  to  oppose  him,  Hermippua
has  given  us  the  names  of  twenty  of  tlie  most  eminent  of
them  ;  but  he  that  had  the  greatest  share  in  the  whole  en-
terprise, and  gave  Lycurgus  the  best  assistance  in  the  es-
tablishing of  his.  laws,  was  called  Arithmiades.  Upon,
the  first  alarm,  king  Charilaus,  apprehending  it  to  be^
design  against  his  person,  took  refuge  in  the  Chalcioicos,f
But  he  was  soon  satisfied,,  and  accepted  of  their  oath.,
Nay,  so  far  from  being  obstinate,  he  joined  in  the  under-
taking. Indeed,  he  was  so  remarkable  for  the  gentleness
of  his  disposition,  that  Archelaus,  his  partner  in  the
throne,  is  reported  to  have  said  to  some  that  were  praising-
the  young  king,  Yesy  Charnlaus  is  a  good  man  to  be  surcy
ivho  cannot  Jind  in  his  heart  to  p.unish  the  bad.     Among  the

*  As  Mmos  had  persuaded  the  Cretans,  that  hk  laws  were  de-
livered to  him  from  Jupiter,  so  Lycurgus,  his  imitator,  was  willing
to  make  the  Spartans  believe  that  he  did  every  thing  hy  the  direc-
tion of  Apollo,  Other  legislatures  have  found  it  very  convenient
to  propagate  an  opinion,  that  their  institutions  were  from  the  gods.
For  that  self.love  in  human  nature,  which  would  but  ill  have  borne
with  the  superiority  of  genius  that  must  have  been  acknowledged
in  an  unassisted  lawgiver,  found  an  ease  and  satisfaction  iu  admit-
tmg  his  new  regulations,  when  they  were  said  to  come  from  heaven,

t  That  is,  the  brazen  temple.  It  was  staiiding  in  the  time  of  TaU--
laiiias,.  vrho  jived  in  tlie.  reig^a  of  Marcus  Aatoniaus*


122  FLUTARCH^S    LIVES*

many  new  institutions  of  Lycurgus,  the  first  and  most
important  was  that  of  a  senate  ;  which  sharing,  as  Plato
says,*  in  the  power  of  the  kings,  too  imperious  and  un-
restrained before,  and  having  equal  authority  with  them,
was  the  means  of  keeping  them  within  the  bounds  of
moderation,  and  highly  contributed  to  the  preservation
of  the  state.  For  before  it  had  been  veering  and  unset-
tled, sometimes ineling  to  arbitrary  power,  and  sometimes
towards  a  pure  democracy  ;  but  this  establishment  of  a
senate,  an  intermediate  body,  like  ballast,  kept  it  in  a  just
equilibrium,  and  put  it  in  a  safe  posture  :  the  tnventy^
eight  senators  adhejnng  to  the  kings^  luhenever  they  saw  the
people  too  encroaching^  andy  on  the  other  hand,  sup^iorting
the  people,  when  the  kings  attempted  to  make  themselves  ab^
solute.  This,  according  to  Aristotle,  was  the  number  of
senators  fixed  upon,  because  two  of  the  thirty  associates
of  Lycurgus  deserted  the  business  through  fear.  But
Sphffirws  tells  us,  there  were  only  twenty-eight  at  first
entrusted  with  the  design.  Something,  perhaps,  there  is
in  its  being  a  perfect  number,  formed  of  seven  multiplied
by  four,  and  withal  the  first  number,  after  six,  that  is
equal  to  all  its  parts.     But  I  rather  think,  just  so  many

*  The  passage  to  which  Plutarch  refers,  is  in  Plato's  third  book
oi laws,  where  he  is  examining  into  the  causes  of  the  downfall  o£
states.  An  Athenian  is  introduced  thus  speaking  to  a  Lacedaemo-
nian. "  Some  god,  I  believe,  in  his  care  for  your  state,  and  in  his
foresight  of  what  would  happen,  has  given  you  two  kings  of  the
same  family,  in  order  that  reigning  jointly,  they  might  govern  with
the  more  moderation,  and  Sparta  experience  the  greater  tranquillity.
After  this,  when  the  regal  authority  was  grown  again  top  absolute
and  imperious,  a  divine  spirit  residing  in  a.  human  nature  (i.  e.  Ly-
curgus) reduced  it  within  the  bounds  of  equity  and  moderation,  by
the  wise  provision  of  a  senate,  whose  authority  was  to  be  equal  to
that  of  the  kings."  Aristotle  finds  fault  with  this  circumstance  in
the  institution  of  the  senate,  that  the  senators  were  to  continue  for
life  ;  for  as  the  mind  grows  old  with  the  body,  he  thought  it  unrea-
sonable to  put  the  fortunes  of  the  citizens  into  the  power  of  men  who
through  age  might  become  incapable  of  judging.  He  likewise
thought  it  very  unreasonable  that  they  were  not  made  accountable
for  their  actions.  But  for  the  latter  inconvenience  sufficient  provi-
sion seems  to  have  been  made  afterwards,  by  the  institution  of  the
£phori,  who  liadit  chiefly  in  charge  to  defend  the  rights  of  the  peo-
ple ;  and  therefore  Plato  adds^  "  A  third  blessing  to  Sparta  was  the
-prince,  who  finding  the  power  of  the  senate  and  the  kings  too  ar-
bitrary and  imcontrouled,  contrived  tlae  authority  of  the  Ephorl  ^
au  restraiut  upoii  it^"  Sic^


LYCURGUS.  135

senators  were  created,  that,  together  with  the  two  kings,
tlie  whole  body  might  consist  of  thirty  members.

He  had  this  institution  so  much  at  heart,  that  he  ob-
tained from  Delphi  an  oracle  in  its  behalf,  called  rhetra^
or  the  decree.  This  was  couched  in  very  ancient  and  un-
common terms,  which,  interpreted,  ran  thus  :  When  you
have  built  a  temple  to  the  Syllanian  Jufiiter^  and  the  Sylla-
nian  Minei-va^*  divided  the  people  into  t7'ibes  and  classes,
and  established  a  seriate  oy  thirty  persons^  including  the  two
kings,  you  sfiall  occasionally  summon  the  people  toanassem^
bly  between  Babyce  and  Cnacion,  and  they  shall  have  the  de^
termining  voice*  Babyce  and  Cnacion  are  now  called
Oenus  :  But  Aristotle  thinks,  by  Cnacion  is  meant  the
river,  and  by  Babyce  the  bridge.  Between  these  they  held
their  assemblies,  having  neither  halls,  noi'  any  kind  of
building  for  that  purpose.  These  things  he  thought  of
no  advantage  to  their  councils,  but  rather  a  disservice  ;
as  they  distracted  the  attention,  and  turned  it  upon  trifles,
on  observing  the  statues  and  pictures,  the  splendid  roofs,
and  every  other  theatrical  ornament.  The  people  thus
assembled  had  no  right  to  propose  any  subject  of  debate,
and  were  only  authorised  to  ratify  or  reject  what  might  be
proposed  to  them  by  the  senate  and  the  kings.  But  be-
cause, in  process  of  time?  the  people,  by  additions  or  re-
trenchments, changed  the  terms,  and  perverted  the  sense
of  the  decrees,  the  kings Polydorus  and  Theopompus  in-
serted in  the  rhctra  this  clause.  If  the  people  attempt  to
corrupt  any  law,  the  senate  and  chiefs  shall  retire  :  That
is,  they  shall  dissolve  the  assembly,  and  annul  the  altera-
tions. And  they  found  means  to  persuade  the  Spartans
that  this  too  was  ordered  by  Apollo  j  as  we  learn  from
these  verses  of  Tyrtasus  :

Ye  sons  of  Sparta,  who  at  Phoebus^  shrine
Your  humble  vows  prefer,  attentive  hear
The  god's  decision.     O'er  your  beauteous  lands
Two  guardian  kings,  a  senate,  and  the  voice
Of  the  eoncurring  people,  lasting  laws
Shall  with  joint  power  establish.

Though  the  government  was  thus  tempered  by  Lycur-
gus,  yet  soon  after  it  degenerated  into  an   oligarchy,

*  As  no  account  can  be  given  of  the  meaning  of  the  word  Sylla-
nian, it  is  supposed  it  should  be  either  read  Sellastan,  from  Sellasia
a  town  of  Laconia  upon  the  Eurotas  ;  or  else  Hellanianf  as  much
%s  to  say,  the  Grecian  Jupiter,  8ic.


134  Plutarch's  lives.

whose  power  was  exercised  with  such  wantonness  and
violence,  that  it  wanted  indeed  a  bridle,  as  Plato  expresses
it.  This  curb  they  found  in  the  authority  of  the  JLJihori*
about  a  hundred  and  thirty  years  after  Lycurgus.  Elatus
was  the  first  invested  with  this  dignity,  in  the  reign  of
Theopompus  ;  who,  when  his  wife  upbraided  him,  that
he  would  leave  the  regal  poAver  to  his  children  less  than
he  received  it,  replied,  JVay^  but  greater^  because  more  last-
ing. And  in  fact,  the  prerogative,  so  stript  of  all  extra-
vagant pretensions,  no  longer  occasioned  either  envy  or
danger  to  its  possessors.  By  these  means  they  escaped
the  miseries  which  befel  the  Messenian  and  Argive  kings,
who  would  not  in  the  least  relax  the  severity  of  their
power  in  favour  of  the  people.  Indeed,  from  nothing
more  does  the  wisdom  and  foresight  of  Lycurgus  appear,
than  from  the  disorderly  governments,  and  the  bad  un-
derstanding that  subsisted  between  the  kings  and  people
of  Messena  and  Argos,  neighbouring  states,  and  related
in  blood  to  Sparta,     For,  as  at  first  they  were  in  all  res-

*  Herodotus,  (1.  i.  c  &5.)  and  Xenophon,  {de  Repub.  Lac.)  telt
lis,  the  Ephori  were  appointed  by  Lycurgus  himself.  But  the  ac-
count which  Plutarch  gives  us  from  Aristotle  {Polk  1.  v.)  and
others,  of  their  being  instituted  long  after,  seems  more  agreeable  to
reason.  For  it  is  not  likely,  that  Lycurgus,  who  in  all  things  en-
deavoured to  support  the  anst<H:racy,  and  left  the  people  only  the
right  of  assenting  or  dissenting  to  what  was  proposed  to  them,
would  appoint  a  kind  of  tribunes  of  the  people,  to  be  masters  as  it
were  both  of  the  kings  and  the  senate.  Some,  indeed,  suppose  the
Ephori  to  have  been  at  first  the  king's  friends,  to  whom  tkey  dele-
gated their  authority,  when  they  v.- ere  obliged  to  be  in  the  field.  But
it  is  very  clear  that  they  were  elected  by  the  people  out  of  their  own
body,  and  sometimes  out  of  the  very  dregs  of  it ;  for  the  boldest
citizen,  whoever  he  was,  was  most  likely  to  be  chosen  to  this  office,
which  was  intended  as  a  check  on  the  senate  and  the  kings.  They
were  five  in  number,  like  the  ^iriqueviri  in  the  republic  of  Canhage,
They  were  annually  elected,  and,  in  order  to  effect  any  thing,  the
unanimous  voice  of  the  college  was  requisite.  Their  authority,
though  well  designed  at  first,  came  at  length  to  be  in  a  manner
boundless.  They  presided  in  popular  assemblies,  collected  their
suffrages,  declared  war,  made  peace,  treated  with  foreign  princes,
determined  the  number  of  forces  to  be  raised,  appointed  the  funds
to  maintain  them,  and  distributed  rewards  and  punishments  in  the
name  of  the  state.  They  likewise  held  a  court  of  justice,  inquired
into  the  conduct  of  all  magistrates,  inspected  into  the  behaviour  and
education  of  youth,  had  a  particular  jurisdiction  over  the  IleloteSf
and,  in  short,  by  degrees,  drew  the  whole  administration  into  their
hands.  They  even  went  so  far  as  to  put  king  Agis  to  death  under
a  form  of  justice,  and  were  themselves  at  last  killed  by  Cleoi  lenei.


I  LTCURGUS.  135

i  pects  equal  to  her,  and  possessed  of  a  better  country,  and
yet  preserved  no  lasting  happiness,  but,  through  the  in-
solence of  the  kings  and  disobedience  of  the  people,  were
harassed  with  perpetual  troubles,  they  made  it  very  evi-
dent, that  it  was  really  a  felicity  more  than  human,    a
'  blessing  from  heaven  to  the  Spartans,  to  have  a  legislator
who  knew  so  well  how  to  frame  and  temper  their  govern-
'  ment«*     But  this  was  an  event  of  a  later  date.
j      A  second  and  bolder  political  enterprise  of  Lycurgus,
I  was  a  new  division  of  the  lands.     For  he  found  a  prodi-
t  gious  inequality,  the  city  overcharged  with  many  indigent
'  persons,  who  had  no  land,  and  the  wealth  centered  in  the
hands  of  a  few.     Determined,  therefore,  to  root  out  the
!  evils  of  insolence,  envy,  avarice,  and  luxury,  and  those
j  distempers  of  a  state   still    more  inveterate   and  fatal,  I
I  mean  poverty  and  riches,  he  persuaded  them  to  cancel  all
:  former  divisions  of  land,  and  to  make  new  ones,  in  such
,  a  manner  that  they  might  be  perfectly   equal  in  their
j  possessions  and  way  of  living.. ..Hence,  if  they  were  am-
bitious of  distinction  they  might  seek  it  in  virtue,   as  no
other  difference  was  left  between  them,  but  that  which
j  arises  from  the  dishonour  of  base  actions  and  the  praise
'  of  good  ones.     His  proposal  was  put  in    practice.     He
i  made  nine  thousand  lots  for  the  territory  of  Sparta,  which
:  he  distributed  among   so  many  citizens,  and  thirty  thou-
;  sand  for  the  inhabitants  of  the  rest  of  Laconia.     But  some
say  he  made  only  six  thousand  shares  for  the  city,  and  that
Polydorus  added  three  thousand  afterwards  :  others,  that
Polydorus  doubled  the  number  appointed  by  Lycurgus,
which  were  only  four  thousand  five  hundred.     Each   lot
was  capable  of  producing  (one  year  with  another)  seventy
bushels  of  grain  for  each  maii,t  and  twelve  for  each  wo-
(  man,  besides  a  quantity   of  wine  and  oil  in  proportion,
j  Such  a  provision  they  thought  sufficient  for  health  and  a
I  good  habit  of  body,  and  they  wanted  nothing  more.     A

I  *  Whatever  Plutarch  might  mean  by  recvra,  /xsv  «»  Viipov,  it  is
I  certain  that  kingly  power  was  abobshed  in  the  states  of  Messene
;  and  Argos  long  before  the  time  of  Lycurgus  the  lawgiver,  and  a
I  democracy  had  taken  place  in  those  cities.  Indeed,  those  states
i  experienced  great  internal  troubles,  not  only  while  under  the  gov-
I  £rnment  of  kings,  but  when  in  the  form  of  commonwealths,  and
I  never,  after  the  time  of  Lycurgus,  made  any  figure  equal  to  Lace-
1  daemon.

I  t  By  a  man  if  meant  a  master  of  a  family,  whose  househould  wai
i  to  subsist  upon  these  seventy  bushels.


1S5  Plutarch's  lives.

story  goes  of  our  legislator,  that  some  time  after,  return-
ing from  a  journey  through  the  fields  just  reaped,  and
seeing  the  shocks  standing  parallel  and  equal,  he  smiled,
and  said  to  some  that  were  by.  How  like  is  JLaconia  to  an
estate  nenvly  divide  d  among  many  brothers  i

After  this,  he  attempted  to  divide  also  the  moveables,
in  order  to  take  away  all  appearance  of  inequality  ;  but  he
soon  perceived  that  they  could  not  bear  to  have  their  goods
directly  taken  from  them,  and  therefore  took  another
method,  counter-working  their  avarice  by  a  stratagerri.*
First  he  stopped  the  currency  of  gold  and  silver  coin,  and
ordered  that  they  should  make  use  of  iron  money  only  :
then  to  a  great  quantity  and  weight  of  this  he  assigned  but
a  very  small  value  ;  so  that  to  lay  up  ten  minae^\  a  whole
room  was  required,  and  to  remove  it,  nothing  less  than  a
yoke  of  oxen.  When  this  became  current,  many  kinds
of  injustice  ceased  in  Lacedsemon.  Who  would  steal  or
take  a  bribe,  who  would  defraud  or  rob,  when  he  could
not  conceal  the  booty  ;  when  he  could  neither  be  dignified
by  the  possession  of  it,  nor  if  cut  in  pieces  be  served  by
its  use  ?  For  we  are  told  that  when  hot,  they  quenched
it  in  vinegar,  to  make  it  brittle  and  unmalleable,  and  con-
sequently unfit  for  any  other  service.  In  the  next  place,
he  excluded  unprofitable  and  superfluous  arts :  indeed,
if  he  had  not  done  this,  most  of  them  would  have  fallen
of  themselves,  when  the  new  money  took  place,  as  the
manufactures  could  not  be  disposed  of.  Their  iron  coin
would  not  pass  in  the  rest  of  Greece,  but  was  ridiculed
and  despised  ;  so  that  the  Spartans  had  no  means  of  pur-
chasing any  foreign  or  curious  wares  ;  nor  did  any  mer-
chant ship  unlade  in  their  harbours.    There  were  not  even

*  For  a  longtime  after  Lycurgus,  the  Spartans  gloriously  oppo-
sed the  growth  of  avarice  ;  insomuch,  that  a  young  man  who  had
bought  an  estate  at  a  great  advantage,  was  called  to  account  for  it,
and  a  fine  set  upon, him.  For,  besides  the  injustice  he  was  guilty
of  in  buying  a  thing  for  less  than  it  was  worth,  they  judged  that  he
was  too  desirous  of  gain,  since  his  mind  was  employed  in  getting,
at  an  age  when  others  think  of  nothing  but  spending.

But  when  the  Spartans,  no  longer  satisfied  with  their  own  terri-
tories (as  Lycurgus  had  enjoined  them  to  be)  came  to  be  engaged
in  foreign  wars,  their  money  not  being  passable  in  other  countries,
they  found  themselves  obliged  to  apply  to  the  Persians,  whose  gold
and  silver  dazzled  their  eyes.  And  their  covetousness  grew  at
length  so  infamous,  that  it  occasioned  the  proverb  mentioned  by
Plato,  One  may  see  a  great  deal  of  money  carried  into  Lacedatnon,  but
on§  never  sees  any  of  it  brought  out  again.
t  32/.  5s.  lOd,  Sterling.


LYCURGUS.  ISr

to  be  found  in  ull  theii'  country  either  sophists,  v/anderin 55
fortune-tellers,  keepers  of  infamous  houses,  or  dealers  in
j^old  and  silver  trinkets,  because  there  was  no  money.
-Thus  luxury,  losing  by  degrees  the  means  that  cherished
and  supported  it,  di^ed  away  of  itself:  even  they  Avho  had
great  possessions,  had  no  advantage  from  them,  since  they
could  not  be  displayed  in  public,  but  must  lie  useless,  in
unregarded  repositories.  Hence  it  was,  that  excellent
workmanship  ^Yas  shewn  in  their  useful  and  necessary-
furniture,  as. beds,  chairs,  and  tables  ;  and  the  Lacedae-
monian cup  called  cothon^  as  Critias  informs  us,  was  high-
ly valued,  particularly  in  campaigns:  for  the  water  which
must  then  of  necessity  be  drank,  though  it  would  often
otherwise  offend  the  sight,  had  its  muddiness  concealed
by  the  colour  of  the  cup,  and  the  thick  part  stopping  at
tlie  shelving  brim,  it  came  clearer  to  the  lips.  Of  these
improvements  the  lawgiver  was  the  cause  ;  for  the  work-
men having  no  more  employment  in  matters  of  mere  cu-
riosity, shewed  the  excellence  of  their  art  in  necessary
things.

Desirous  to  complete  the  conquest  of  luxury,  and  ex«
terminate  the  love  of  riches,  he  introduced  a  third  institu-
tion, which  was  wisely  enough  and  ingeniously  contrived.
This  was  the  use  of  public  tables,*  where  all  wxre  to  eat
in  common  of  the  same  meat,  and  such  kinds  of  it  as  were
appointed  by  law.  At  the  same  time,  they  were  forbid-
den to  eat  at  home,  upon  expensive  couches  and  tables,  to
call  in  the  assistance  of  butchers  and  cooks,  or  to  fatten.

*  Xenophon  seems  to  have  penetrated  farther  into  the  reason  of
this  institution  than  any  other  author,  as  indeed  he  had  better  op-
portunity to  do  :  the  rest  only  say,  that  this  was  intended  to  repress
luxury  ;  but  he  vefy  wisely  remarks,  that  it  was  also  intended  to
serve  for  a  kind  of  school  or  academy,  where  the  young  were  in-
structed by  the  old,  the  former  relating  the  great  things  that  had
been  performed  within  their  memory,  and  thereby  exciting  the
growing  generation  to  distinguish  themselves  by  performances
equally  great.

Bui  as  it  was  found  impracticable  for  all  the  citizens  to  eat  in
common,  when  the  number  of  them  came  to  exceed  the  number  of
the  lots  of  land,  Dacier  thinks  it  might  have  been  better  if  the  law-
giver had  ordained  that  those  public  tables  should  be  maintained  at
the  expence  of  the  public,  as  it  was  done  in  Crete.  But  it  must  be
considered,  that,  while  the  discipline  of  Lycurgus  was  kept  up  in
its  purity,  they  pi-ovided  against  any  inconvenience  from  tlie  increase
of  citizens,  by  sending  out  colonies,  and  Lacedxmon  was  nut  bi^^-
dencd  \vith»poor,  till  the  declension  of  tliat  state.
VOL.    I.  N


138  pliktarch's  lives.

Mke  voracious  animals  in  private.  For  so  not  only  their
manners  would  be  corrupted,  but  their  bodies  disorder-
ed ;  abandoned  to  all  manner  of  sensuality  and  dissolute-
ness, they  would  require  long  sleep,  warm  baths,  and  the
same  indulgence  as  in  perpetual  sickness.  To  effect  this
was  certainly  very  great  ;  but  it  was  greater  still,  to  se-
cure riches  from  rapine  and  from  envy,  as  Theophrastus
expresses  it,  or  rather  by  their  eating  in  common,  and  by
the  frugality  of  their  table,  to  take  from  riches  their  very-
being*  For  what  use  or  enjoyment  of  them,  what  pecu-
liar display  of  magnificence  could  there  be,  where  the  poor
man  went  to  the  same  refreshment  with  the  rich  ?  Hence
the  observation,  that  it  was  only  at  Sparta  where  Plutus
(according  to  the  proverb)  was  kept  blind,  and,  like  an
image,  destitute  of  life  or  motion.  It  must  further  be
observed,  that  they  had  not  the  privilege  to  eat  at  home,
and  so  to  come  without  appetite  to  the  public  repast :
they  made  a  point  of  it  to  observe  any  one  that  did  not  eat
and  drink  with  them,  and  to  reproach  him  as  an  intem-
perate and  effeminate  person  that  was  sick  of  the  com-
mon diet.

The  rich,  therefore  (we  are  told)  were  more  offended
with  this  regulation  than  with  any  other,  and,  rising  in  a
body,  they  loudly  expressed  their  indignation  :  nay,  they
proceeded  so  far  as  to  assault  Lycurgus  with  stones,  so
that  he  v/as  forced  to  fly  from  the  assembly  and  take  re-
fuge in  a  temple.  Unhappily,  hoAvever,  before  he  reach-
ed it,  a  young  man  named  Alcander,  hasty  in  his  resent-
ments, though  not  otherwise  ill-tempered,  came  up  with
him,  and,  upon  his  turning  round,  struck  out  one  of  his
eyes  with  a  stick.  Lycurgus  then  stopt  short,  and,  with-
out giving  way  to  passion,  shewed  the  people  his  eye  beat
out,  and  his  face  streaming  with  blood.  They  were  so
struck  Avith  shame  and  sorrow  at  the  sight,  that  they  sur-
rendered Alcander  to  him,  and  conducted  him  home  with
the  utmost  expressions  of  regret.  Lycurgus  thanked
them  for  their  care  of  his  person,  and  dismissed  them  all
except  Alcander.  He  took  him  into  his  house,  but  shew-
ed him  no  ill-treatment  either  by  word  or  action  ;  only
ordering  him  to  Avait  upon  him,  instead  of  his  usual  ser-
vants and  attendants.  The  youth,  who  was  of  an  inge-
nious disposition,  without  murmuring  did  as  he  was  com-
manded. Living  in  this  manner  with  Lycurgus,  and  hav-
ing an  opportunity  to  observe  the  mildness  and  goodness


LYCURGUS.  139

of  his  heart,  his  strict  temperance  and  indefutig-ahle  indus-
try, he  told  his  friends  that  I^ycurgus  was  not  that  proud
and  severe  man  he  might  have  heen  taken  for,  but,  above
all  others,  gentle  and  engaging-  in  his  behaviour.  This,
then,  was  his  chastisement,  and  this  punishment  he  suf-
fered, of  a  wild  and  head-strong  young  man  to  become  a
very  modest  and  prudent  citizen.  In  memory  of  his
misfortune,  Lycurgus  built  a  temple  io  Minerva  Qfitiltiis^
so  called  by  him  from  a  term  which  the  Dorians  use  for
the  eye.  Yet  Dioscorides,  who  wrote  a  treatise  concern-
ing tlie  Lacedemonian  government,  and  others,  relate,
that  his  eye  was  hurt,  but  not  put  out,  and  that  he  built
the  temple  in  gratitude  to  the  goddess  for  his  cure.  How-
ever, the  Spartans  never  carried  staves  to  their  assemblies
stntrv/aiYls.

The  public  repasts  were  called  by  the  Cretans  Anclria  ;
but  the  Lacedjemonians  styled  them  Phiditia^  either  from
their  tendency  to /riendshi/i  and  mutual  benevolence, /i/?z-
ditia  being  used  instead  of  Jihilida  ;  or  else  from  their
teaching  frugality  and  parsimony^  which  the  word  phiido
signifies.  But  it  is  not  at  all  impossible,  that  the  first  let-
ter might  by  some  means  or  other  be  added,  and  so  phidi-
tia  take  place  of  editia^  which  barely  signifies  eating.
There  were  fifteen  persons  to  a  table,  or  a  few  m.ore  or
less.  Each  of  them  was  obliged  to  bring  in  monthly  a
bushel  of  meal,  eight  gallons  of  wine,  five  pounds  of
cheese,  two  pounds  and  a  half  of  figs,  and  a  little  money
to  buy  flesh  and  fish.  If  any  of  them  happened  to  offer
a  sacrifice  of  first-fruits,  or  to  kill  venison,  he  sent  a  part
of  it  to  the  public  table  :  for  after  a  sacriiice  or  hunting,
he  was  at  liberty  to  sup  at  home  ;  but  the  rest  were  to
appear  at  the  usual  place.  For  along  time  this  eating  in
common  was  observed  Avith  great  exactness :  so  that
when  king  Agis  returned  from  a  successful  expedition
against  the  Athenians,  and  from  a  desire  to  sup  with  his
wife,  requested  to  have  his  portion  at  home*  the  Pole-
march^  refused  to  send  it  :t  nay,  when,  through  resent-
ment, he  neglected  the  day  following,  to  ofler  the  sacrifice

*  The  kings  of  Sparta  had  always  double  commons  allowed  them  ;
not  that  they  were  permitted  to  indulge  their  appetites  rncre  thau
others,  but  that  ihey  might  have  an  opportunity  of  sharing  their  por-
tion with  some  brave  man  whojii  they  chose  to  distinguibh  with  that
honour.

f  The  Pole^narchs  were  those  who  had  commanded  the  army  un-
der the  kings.  The  principal  men  in  the  state  always  divided  the
«ommou&.


14^  pliktarch's  lives.

usual  on  occasion  of  victory,  they  set  a  line  upon  luni.
Children  also  were  introduced  at  these  public  tables,  as  s©
many  schools  of  sobriety.  There  they  heard  discourses
concerning  government,  and  were  instrncted  in  the  most
liberal  breeding.  There  they  were  allowed  to  jest  with-
out scurrility,  and  were  not  to  take  it  ill  when  the  raillery
was  returned.  For  u  'ivas  reckoned  worthy  of  a  Lacedasmo-
nian  to  bear  a  jest :  but  if  any  one's  patience  failed,  he
had  only  to  desire  them  to  be  quiet,  and  they  left  off  im-
mediately. When  they  first  entered,  the  oldest  man  pre-
sent pointed  to  the  door,  and  said,  J\*ot  a  ivord  spoken  in
this  comjiany  goes  out  there.  The  admitting  of  any  man
to  a  particular  table  was  under  the  following  regulation.
Each  member  of  that  small  society  took  a  little  ba.ll  of
soft  bread  in  his  hand.  This  he  was  to  drop,  without
saying  a  word,  into  a  vessel  called  caddos^  which  the  waiter
carried  upon  his  head.  In  case  he  approved  of  the
candidate,  he  did  it  without  altering  the  figure,  if  not,  he
first  prest  it  flat  in  his  hand  ;,  for  a  flatted  ball  was  con-
sidered as  a  negative.  And  if  but  one  such  was  found,
the  person  was  nat  admitted,  as  they  thought  it  proper
that  the  whole  company  aliould  be  satisfied  with  each
other.  He  who  was  thus  rejected,  was  said  to  have  no
iuck  in  the  caddos.  The  dish  that  was  in  the  highest  es-
teem amongst  them  was  the  black  broth.  The  old  men
Avere  so  ibnd  of  it,  that  they  ranged  themselves  on  one
side  and  eat  it,  leaving  the  meat  to  the  young  people.  It
is  related  of  a  king  of  Pontus,*  that  he  purchased  a  Lace-
dsemonian  cook,  for  the  sake  of  this  broth.  But  when  he
came  to  taste  it,  he  strongly  expressed  his  dislike  ;  and
the  cook  made  answer,  Sir,  to  make  this  broth  relish^  it  is
nesessary  first  to  bathe  in  the  Rurotas.  After  they  had
drank  moderately,  they  went  home  without  lights.  In-
deed, they  were  forbidden  to  walk  v/ith  a  light  either  on
this  or  any  other  occasion,  that  they  might  accustom
themselves  to  march  in  the  darkest  night  boldly  and  re-
solutely.    Such  was  the  order  of  their  public  repasts.

Lycurgus  left  none  of  his  laws  in  writing  ;  it  was  or-
dered in  one  of  the  Rhetrac  that  none  should  be  written*
For  what  he  thought  most  conducive  to  the  virtue  and
happiness  of  a  city,  was  principles  interwoven  with  the
manners  and  breeding  of  the  people.  These  would  re-
main immoveable,  as  founded  in  inclination,  and  be  the

*  This  story  is  elsewhere  told  by  Plutarch  of  Dioiiysius  the  tyrant
of  Sicily  ;  and  Cicero  confirms  it,  that  he  was  the  persoa^


LVCURGUS.  i4t

stfon^cst  and  most  lasting  tie  ;  and  the  habits  which
education  produced  in  the  youth,  would  answer  in  each
the  purpose  of  a  lawgiver.  As  for  smaller  matters,  con-
tracts al30ut  property,  and  whatever  occasionally  varied,
it  was  better  not  to  reduce  these  to  a  written  form  and
unalterable  method,  but  to  suffer  them  to  chimge  with
the  times,  and  to  admit  of  additions  cr  retrenchments  ali
the  pleasure  of  persons  so  well  educated.  For  he  resolv-
ed the  whole  business  of  legislation  into  the  bringing  up
of  youth.  And  this,  as  we  have  observed,  was  the  reasca
why  one  of  his  ordinances  forbad  them  to  have  any  writ-
ten laws.

Another  ordinance  levelled  against  magnificence  and
expence,  directed,  that  the  ceilings  of  houses  should  be
wrought  with  no  tool  but  the  ax,  and  the  doors  with  no-
thing but  the  saw.  For,  as  Epaniinondas  is  reported  to
have  said  afterwards,  of  his  table,  Treason  lurks  not  under
such  a  dinn'r^  so  Lycurgus  perceived  before  him,  that
such  a  house  adnuts  not  of  luxury  and  needless  splendor.
Indeed,  no  man  could  be  so  absurd,  as  to  bring  into  a
dwelling  so  hiomely  and  simple,  bedsteads  with  silver  feet,
purple  coverlets,  golden  cups,  and  a  train  of  expence  that
follows  these  :  but  all  would  necessarily  have  the  bed  suit-
able to  the  room,  the  coverlet  to  the  bed,  and  the  rest  of
their  utensils  a.nd  furniture  to  that.  From  this  plain  sort
of -dwellings,  proceeded  the  question  of  Leotychidas  the
fcider  to  his  host,  when  he  supped  at  Corinth,  and  saw  the
ceiling  of  the  room  very  splendid  and  curiously  wrought,,
IVhjther  trees  grew  square  in  his  coimtry.*'

A  third  ordinance  of  Lycurgus  was,  that  the>^  should
not  often  make  war  against  the  same  enemy,  lest,  by  be-
ing frequently  put  upon  defending  themselves,  they  too
should  become  able  warriors  in  their  turn.  And  this  they
nmost  blamed  king  Agesilaus  for  aftei-wards,  that  by  fre-^
quent  and  continued  incursions  into  Uaotia,!  he  taught
tJie  Thcbans  to  make  head  against  the  Lacedxmoiiians-
Tliis  made  Antalcidas  say,  wheji  lie  saw  him  wounded,
The  Thcbans  pay  you  well  for  inaking  Ifficm  good  soUIiersy
who  neither  were  willing-nor  able  to  fight  yoii  defore.  These

*  This  i&rcnderecl  by  the  fv  rmer  Er.glish  translator,  as  if  Leoty-
chida:>'s  question  proceeded  frc\i:  ig^iuniuce,  vvhtre.as  ii  was  really  an.
arch  sneer  upon  the  sumptuous  and  expensive  buildings  of  Corinth,

t  This  ap^ared.  plamly  at  the  battle  uf  Leuctra,  where  ihe  La-
cedtcmoi^ians  were  overthrown  by  Epanii:Vv;ndas,  and  lost  their  king
Cieombrotus,  toeeihcr  ^\  iih  tiie  Hower  cf  thtir  cuniy.


'142  PLUTARCH^S    LITES*

ordinances  he  called  Rhetne,  as  if  they  had  been  oracles
and  decrees  of  the  Deity  himself.

As  for  the  education  of  youth,  which  he  looked  upon
as  the  greatest  and  most  glorious  work  of  a  lawgiver,  he
began  with  it  at  the  very  source,  taking  into  consideration^
their  conception  and  birth,  by  regulating  the  marriages.
For  he  did  not  (as.  Aristotle  says)  desist  from  his  attempt
to  bring  the  women  under  sober  rules.-  They  had,  in-
deed, assumed  great  liberty  and  power  on  account  of  the-
frequent  expeditions  of  their  husbands,  during  which  they
were  left  sole  mistresses  at  home,  and  so  gained  an  undue
deference  and  improper  titles  j  but,  notwithstanding  this,,
he  took  allpossibJc  care  of  them.  He. ordered  the  virgins
to  exercise  themselves  in  running,  wrestling,  and  throw-
ing quoits  and  darts  j  that  their  bodies  being  strong  and
vigorous,  the  children  afterwards  produced  from  them
might  be  the  same  ;  and  that,  thus  fortified  by  exercise,
they  might  the  better  support  the  pangs  of  child-birth,
and  be  delivered  with  safety^  Li  order  to  take  away  the-
excessive  tenderness  and  delicacy  of  the  sex,  the  conse-
quence of  a  recluse  life,  he  accustomed  the  virgins  occa-
sionally to  be  seen  naked  as  well  as  tlie  young  men,  and
to  dance  aiid  sing  in  their  presence  on  certain  festivals.
There  they  sometimes  indulged  in  a  little  raillery  upon,
those  that  had  mxisbehaved  themselves,  and  sovnetimes
they  sung  eneomiums  on  such  as  deserved  them,  thus  ex-
citing in  the  young  men  an  useful  emulation  and  love  of
glory.  For  he  who  was  praised  for  his  bravery^  and  ce-
lebrated among  the  virgins,  v/ent  av/ay  perfectly  happy  :.
v/hile  their  satirical-  glances  thrown  out  in  sport,  were  no^
less  cutting  than  serious  admonitions  ;  especially  as  the:
kings- and  senate  went  with  tiie  other  citizens  to  see  aii  that
passed.  As  for  the  virgins  appearmg  naked,  there  was.
Bothing  disgraceful  in  it,  because  every  thing  was  con-
ducted witli  modesty,  and  without  one  indecent  M^ord  or
action.  Nay  it  caused  a  simplicity  of  manners  and  aa
em.ulation  for  the  best  habit  of  body  ;  their  ideas  too  were
naturally  enlarged,  while  they  were  not  excluded  from-
their  share  of  bravery  and  honour.  Hence  they  were  fur-
nished with  sentiments  and  language,  such  as  Gorgo  the-
v/ife  of  Leonidas  is  said  to  have  made  use  of.  When  a.
woman  of  another  country  said  to  her.  You  of  Lacedi^nmrL
are  the  only  ivomen  m  the  world  that  rule  the  men  ;  she  an-
swered,. We  are  the  only  ivoineii  that  bring  forth  inetii,.


LYCURGUS^  143^

These  public  dances  and  other  exercises  of  tlie  young
maidens  naked,  in  sight  of  tlie  young  men,  were,  more-
over, incentives  to  marriage  ;  and,  to  use  Plato's  expres-
sion, drew  them  almost  as  necessarily  by  the  attractions
of  love,  as  a  geonictricai conclusion  follows  from  the  pre-
mises. To  euGourage  it  still  more,  some  marks  of  infamy
were  set  upon  those  that  continued  bachelors.*  For  they
were  not  permitted  to  see  these  exercises  of  the  naked
virgins  :  and  the  magistrates  commanded  them  to  march,
naked  round  the  market-place  in  the  winter,  and  to  sing
a  song  composed  against  themselves,  which  expressed  how
justly  thty  were  punished  for  their  disobedience  to  the
laws.  They  were  also  deprived  of  that  honour  and  res-
pect which  the  younger  people  paid  to  the  old  ;  so  that
nobody  found  fault  with  what  was  said  to  Dercyllidas,,
though  an  eminent  commander.  It  seems,  when  he  came
one  day  into  comp9.ny,  a  young  man,  instead  of  rising  up
and  giving  him  place,  told  him,  You  have  no  child  to  give
place  to  nie-i  nvhen  I  am  old.

In  their  marriages,  the  bridegroom  carried  off  the  bride
by  violence;  and  she  was  never  chosen  in  a  tender  age^.
but  when  she  had  arrived  at  full  maturity.  Then  the
woman  that  had  the  direction  of  the  w^edding,  cut  the
bride's  hair  close  to  the  skin,  dressed  her  in  man's  clothes,
laid  her  upon  a  mattrass,  and  left  her  in  the  dark.  The
bridegroom,  neither  opprcst  with  wine,  nor  enervated-
with  luxury,  but  perfectly  sober,  as  having  always  supped
at  the  common  table,  went  in  privately,  untied  her  gir-
dle, and  carried  her  to  another  bed.  Having  stayed  there
a  short  time,  he  modestly  retired  to  his  usuid  apartment,,
to  sleep  with  the  other  young  men  :  and  he  observed  the
same  conduct  afterwards,  spending  the  day  v.  ith  his  com-
panions,  and  reposing  himself  with  them  in  the  night,  nor
even  visiting  his  bride  but  with  great  caution  and  appre-
hensions of  being  discovered  by  the  rest  of  the  family  ;,
the  bride  at  the  same  time  exerted  all  her  art  to  contrive
convenient  opportunities  for  their  private  meetings.  And
this  they  did  not  for  a  short  time  only,  but  some  of  thern^

*  The  time  of  marriage  was  fixed  ;  and,  if  a  ma-n  did  not  marry
wheti  he  was  of  full  age,  he  was  liable  to  a  prosecution  ,  as  were
such  also  who  married  above  or  below  themselves.  Such  as  had
three  children  had  great  immujiities  :  and  those  that  had  four  were-
free  from  ^1  taxes.  Virgins  were  married  withcait  portions,  be-
cause neither  want  should  hinder  a  man,  aor  riches  induce  him,  x<y>
marry  contrary  to  his  ir:ciinaiioiis*


-T^r


144  PLUTARCH  S    LIVES.

even  had  children,  before  they  had  an  interview  wiih  their
wives  in  the  day-time.     This  kind  of  commerce  not  only
exercised  theh'  temperance  and  chastity,  but  kept  their
bodies  fruitful,  and  the  first  ardour  of  their  love  fresh  and
unabated ;  for  as  they  were  not  satiated  like  those  tiiat  are
always  with  their  wives,  there   still  was  place  for  unex-
tinguished desire.     When  he  had  thus  established  a  pro-
per regard  to  modesty  and  decorum  with  respect  to  mar-
riage, he  was  equally  studious  to  drive  from  that  state  the
vain  and  vromanish  passion  of  jealousy  ;  by   making  it
quite  as  reputable  to  have  children  in  common  with  per-
sons of  merit,  as  to  avoid  all  offensive  freedom  in  their
own  behaviour  to  their  wives.     He  laughed  at  those  who
revenge  with  wars  and  bloodshed  the  comrauriication  of  a
married  woman's  favours  ;  and  allowed,  that  if  a  man  in
years  should  have  a  young  wife,  he  mig'ht  introduce  to
her  some  handsom.e  and  honest  young  man,  whom  he  most
approved  of,  and  when  she  had  a  child  ef  this  generous
race,  bring  it  up  as  his  ov/n.     On  the  other  hand,  he  al-
lowed, that  if  a  man  of  character  should  entertain  a  pas-
sion for  a  married  v*  oman  on  account  of  her  modesty  and
the  beauty  of  her  children,  he  miglit  treat  with  her  hus-
band for  admission  to  lier  company,*  that  so  planting  in
a  beauty  beai-ing  soil,   he  rnigbt  produce  excellent  chil-
dren,! the  congenial  offspring  of  excellent  parents.     Fo?
in   the  first  place  Lycurgus  considered  children,  not  so
much  the  property  of  their  parents,  as  of  the  state  ;  and
therefore  he  would  not  have  tuem  begot  by  ordinary  per--
sons,  but  by  the  best  men  in  it.     In  the  next  place,  he
observed  the  vanity  and  absurdity  of  other  nations,  where
people  study  to  have  their  horses  and  dogs  of  the  finest
bi*eed  they  can  procure,  either  by  interest  or  money  ;  and
yet  keep  their  v/ives  shut  up,  that  they  may  have  children
by  none  but  themselves,  though  they  mav  happen  to  be
doating,  decrepid,  or  infirm.  As  if  children,  when  sprung,
from  a  bad  stock,  and   consequently  good  for  nothing,
•were  no  detriment  to  those  whom  they  belong  to,  and  who
have  the  trouble  of  bringing  tiiem  up,  nor  any  advantage,
when  well-descended  and  of  a  generous  di-Eposition   These

*  lit  this  case  the  kings  were  excepted  »  for  they  were  not  at  liber-
ty to  lend  rheir  wives-

f  The  English  translation,  published  in  175^,  has  here,  to  possess,
all  the  laluabie  qualifLcatims  oj'thtir  parevts  which  is  not  the  ineaiv-


LYCURGUS.  145

regulations  tending-  to  secure  a  healthy  ofTsprin^,  and  con-
sequently beneficial  to  the  state,  were  so  iar  from  encou-
raging- that  licentiousness  of  the  "women  v/hich  prevailed
afterwards,  that  adultery  was  not  known  amongst  them.
A  saying",  upon  this  subject,  of  Geradus  an  ancient  Spar-
tan, is  thus  related.  A  stranger  had  asked  him.  What  pii~
nii;hmt'nt  their  law  apjiointcd  for  adulterers  ?  He  answered,
My  friend^  there  are  no  adulterers  i?i  our  country.  The  other
replied,  £zit  what  if  there  should  be  one  ?  Why  then^  says
Geradus,  he  must  forfeit  a  bull  so  large  that  he  might  drink
of  the  Kurotas  from  the  top  of  Mount  Taygctus.  When  the
stranger  expressed  his  surprise  at  this,  and  said,  Hoiv  can
such  a  bull  be  found?  Geradus  answered  with  a  smile,
Hoiv  can  an  adulterer  be  found  in  Sparta  ?  This  is  the  ac-
count we  have  of  their  marriages.

It  was  not  left  to  the  father  to  rear  what  children  he-
pleased,  but  he  was  obliged  to  carry  the  child  to  a  place
called  Lesche^  to  be  examined  by  the  most  ancient  men  of
the  tribe,  Avho  were  assembled  there.  If  it  was  strong
and  well  proportioned,  they  gave  orders  for  its  education,
and  assigned  it  one  of  the  nine  thousand  shares  of  land :
but  if  it  was  weakly  and  deformed,  they  ordered  it  to  be
thrown  into  the  place  called  Apothetx^  which  is  a  deep  ca^
Tern  near  the  mountain  Taygetus  ;  ccncrdt-kig  that  its  llfs
could  be  no  advantage  either  to  itself  or  to  the  public,
since  nature  had  not  given  it  at  first  any  stcngth  or  good-
ness of  constitution.*  For  the  same  reason  the  women
did  not  wash  their  new-born  infants  with  water,  but  with
wine,  thus  making  some  trial  of  their  habit  of  body  ;  ima*
gining  that  sickly  and  epileptic  children  sink  and  die  un-
der the  experiment,  while  the  healthy  become  more  vigo-
rous and  hardy.  Great  care  and  art  was  also  exerted  by
the  nurses ,  for,  as  they  never  swathed  the  infants,  their
limbs  had  a  freer  turn,  and  their  coimtenances  a  more  li-
beral air  ;  besides,  they  used  them  to  any  sort  of  meat,  ta
have  no  terrors  in  the  dark,  nor  to  be  afraid  of  being
alone,  and  to  leave  all  ill -humour  and  unmanly  crying.

*  Tlie  general  expediency  of  this  law  may  be  well  deputed,  though
it  suited  the  mai-tial  constitution  of  Sparta  ;  since  many  persons  of
V  eak  constitutions  make  up  in  ingenuity  what  they  want  in  sti-ength,
and  so  become  more  valuable  members  of  the  community  than  the
most  robust.  It  seems,  however,  to  have  had  one  good  etVcct,  •viz.
making  \Tomen  very  ca\-eful  during  their  pregnancy,  of  either  eat-
ing, drinking,  or  exercising,  to  excess.  It  made  them  also  excel-
lent uur^es,  as  is  observed  juat  below.


146  Plutarch's  lives.

Hence  people  of  other  countries  purchased  Lacedaemo-
nian nurses  for  their  children  ;  and  Alcibiades  the  Athe-
nian is  said  to  have  be«n  nursed  by  Amycla  a  Spartan.
But  if  he  was  fortunate  in  a  nurse,  he  was  not  so  in  a  pre-
ceptor ;  for  Zopyrus,  appointed  to  that  office  by  Pericles,
was,  as  Plato  tells  us,  no  better  qualified  than  a  common
slave.  The  Spartan  children  were  not  in  tiiat  manner,
under  tutors  purchased  or  hired  with  money,  nor  v/ere  the
parents  at  liberty  to  educate  them  as  they  pleased  :  But  as
soon  as  they  were  seven  years  old,  Lycurgus  ordered  them
to  be  enrolled  in  companies,  where  they  were  all  kept  un-
der the  same  order  and  discipline,  and  had  their  exercises
and  recreations  in  common.  He  who  shewed  the  most
conduct  and  courage  amongst  tliem,  was  made  captain  of
the  company.  The  rest  kept  their  eyes  upon  him,  obeyed
his  orders,  and  bore  with  patience  the  punishments  he
inflicted  :  so  that  their  whole  education  was  an  exercise  of
obedience.  The  old  men  were  present  at  their  diversions.,
and  often  suggested  some  occasion  of  dispute  or  quarrel,
that  they  might  observe  with  exactness  the  spirit  of  each,
and  their  firmness  in  battle.

As  for  learning,*  they  had  just  what  was  absolutely
necessary.  All  the  rest  of  their  education  \yas  calculated
to  make  them  subject  to  command,  to  endure  labour,  to
fight  and  conquer.  They  added,  therefore,  to  their  dis-
cipline, as  they  advanced  in  age  ;  cutting  their  hair  very
close,  making  them  go  barefoot,  and  play,  for  the  most

*  The  plainness  of  their  manners,  ^nd  their  being  so  very  much
addicted  to  war,  made  the  Lacedjemonians  less  fond  of  the  sciences
than  the  rest  of  the  Greeks  If  they  wrote  to  be  read,  and  spoke  to
be  understood,  it  was  all  they  sought.  For  this  the  Athenians,  who
were  excessively  vain  of  their  learning,  held  them  in  great  contempt ;
insomuch  that  Thucydides  himself,  in  drawing  the  character  of  Bra-
sidas,  says,  he  spoke  Kell  enough  for  a  LaceJcemonian.  On  this  occasi-
on, it  i&pi'oper  to  mention  the  answer  of  a  Spartan  to  a  learned  A-
thenian,  who  upbraided  him  wdvh  the  ignorance  of  his  country .  All
you  nay  may  be  true,  and  yet  it  amounts  to  no  more,  than  that  ive  only  a-
morigst  the  Greeks  have  learnedno  evil  cmtoms  fromyotc.  The  Sparians,
however,  had  a  force  and  poignar.cy  of  expression,  which  cut  down
all  the  flowers  of  studied  elegance.  This  was  the  consequence  of
their  concise  way  of  speaking,  and  their  encouraging  on  all  occasions,
decent  repartee.  Arts  were  in  uo  greater  credit  with  them  than  sci-
ences Theatrical  diversions  found  no  countenance  ;  temperance  and
exercise  made  che  physician  unnecessary  ;  their  justice  left  no  room
for  the  practice  of  the  lawyer;  and  all  the  trades  that  minister  to
luxury,  were  unknown.  As  for  agriculture,  and  such  mechanic  bu.-
siness  as  was  absolutely  necessary,  It  was  left  to  the  slaves.


LTCURGUS.  147

part  quite  naked.  At  twelve  years  of  age,  their  under
garment  was  taken  away,  and  but  one  upper  one  a  year
allowed  them.  Hence  they  were  necessarily  dirty  in  their
persons,  and  not  indulged  the  great  favour  of  baths  and
oil,  except  on  some  particular  days  of  the  year.  They
slept  in  companies,  on  beds  made  of  the  tops  of  reeds,
which  they  gathered  with  their  own  hands,  without  knives,
and  brought  them  from  the  banks  of  the  Eurotas.  In
winter  they  were  permitted  to  add  a  little  thistle-down  aa
that  seemed  to  have  some  warmth  in  it.

At  this  age,  the  most  distinguished  amongst  them  be-
came favourite  companions  of  the  elder;*  and  the  old
men  attended  more  constantly  their  places  of  exercise,
observing  their  trials  of  strength  and  wit,  not  slightly  and
in  a  cursory  manner,  but  as  their  fathers,  guardians,  and
governors :  so  that  there  was  neither  time  nor  place,  where
persons  were  wanting  to  insruct  and  chastise  them.  One
of  the  best  and  ablest  men  in  the  city  was,  moreover,  ap-
pointed inspector  of  the  youth  ;  and  he  gave  the  com-
mand of  each  company  to  the  discreetest  and  most  spirited
of  those  called  Irais.  An  Iren  was  one  who  had  been  two
years  out  of  the  class  of  boys  :  a  Melliren  one  of  the  oldest
lads.  This  Ircn^  then,  a  youth  twenty  years  old,  gives
ordei-s  to  those  under  his  command,  in  their  little  battles,
and  has  them  to  serve  him  at  his  house.  He  sends  the
oldest  of  them  to  fetch  wood,  and  the  younger  to  gather
pot-herbs  :  these  they  steal  where  they  can  find  them,t
either  slyly  getting  into  gardens,  or  else  craftily  and  warily

*  Though  the  youth  of  the  male-sex  were  much  cherished  and  be-
loved, as  those  that  \ver«  to  build  up  the  future  glory  of  the  state ;
yet,  in  Sparta,  it  was  a  virtuous  and  modest  aft'ection.untinged  with
that  sensuality  which  was  so  scandalous  at  Athens  and  other  places.
Xenoi)hon  says,  these  lovers  lived  with  those  they  were  attached  to,
IS  a  father  does  with  his  children,  orabi-other  with  his  brethren.
The  good  effects  of  this  ])art  of  Lycurgus's  institutions  were  seen  in
the  union  that  reigned  among  the  citizens.

t  Not  that  the  Spartaiis  authorized  thefts  and  robberies  ;  for  as  all
kvas  in  common  in  their  re])ublic, those  vices  could  have  no  place  there.
But  the  design  was  to  accustom  children  who  were  destined  for  war,
to  surprize  the  vigilance  of  those  who  watched  over  them,  and  ex-
[)ose  themselves  courageously  to  the  severest  punishments,  in  case
they  failed  of  that  dexterity  which  was  exacted  of  them  A  dexterity
that  would  have  been  attended  with  fatal  etlects  to  the  morals  of  any
y^outh  but  the  Spartan,  educated,  as  that  was,  to  condemn  riches  and
■.uperfluiiies  aiid  guarded  in  all  other  respects  by  the  severest  virtue.


148  Plutarch's  lives.

creeping  to  the  common  tables.  But  if  any  one  be  caught,
he  is  severely  flogged  for  negligence  or  want  of  dexterity.
They  steal  too  whatever  victuals  they  possibly  can,  inge-
niously contriving  to  do  it  when  persons  arc  asleep,  or
keep  but  indiiTerent  v/atch.  If  they  are  discovered,  they
are  punished  not  only  with  whipping,  but  with  hunger.
Indeed  their  supper  is  but  slender  at  all  times,  that,  to
fence  against  want,  they  may  be  forced  to  exercise  their
courage  and  address.  This  is  the  first  intention  of  their
spare  diet :  a  subordinate  one  is,  to  make  them  grow  tall.
For  v/hen  the  animal  spirits  are  not  too  much  oppressed
by  a  great  quantity  of  food,  which  stretches  itself  out  in
breadth  and  thickness,  they  mount  upwards  by  their  na-
tural lightness,  and  the  body  easily  and  freely  shoots  up
in  height.  This  also  contributes  to  make  them  handsome  :
for  thin  and  slender  habits  yield  more  freely  to  nature,
which  then  gives  a  fine  proportion  to  the  limbs  ;  whilst
the  heavy  and  gross  resist  her  by  their  Aveight.  So  women
that  take  physic  diu'ing  their  pregnancy,  have  slighter
children  indeed,  but  of  a  finer  and  more  delicate  turn,  be-
cause the  suppleness  of  the  matter  more  readily  obeys
the  plastic  power.  However,  these  are  speculations
which  we  shall  leave  to  others.

The  boys  steal  with  so  much  caution,  that  one  of  them,
having  conveyed  a  young  fox  under  his  garment,  suffered
the  creature  to  tear  out  his  bowels  with  his  teeth  and  claws,
choosino:  rather  to  die  than  to  be  detected.  Nor  does  this
appear  incredible,  if  we  consider  what  their  young  men
can  indure  to  this  day  ;  for  we  have  seen  many  of  them
expire  under  the  lash  at  the  altar  of  *  Diana  Orthia,

The  Iren^  reposing  himself  after  supper,  used  to  order
one  of  the  boys  to  sing  a  song  ;  to  another  he  put  some
question  which  required  a  judicious  answer  :  for  exam-
ple, Who  nvas  the  best  man  in  the  city  ?  or,  What  he  thought

*  This  is  supposed  to  be  the  Diana  Tanrica,  whose  statue  Orestes
is  said  to  have  brought  to  Lacedsemon,  and  to  whom  human  victims
were  oftered.  It  is  pretended  that  Lycurgus  abolished  these  sacri-
fices, and  substituted  in  their  room  the  flagellation  of  young  men,
with  whose  blood  the  altar  was,  at  least,  to  be  sprinkled.  But,  in
truth,  a  desire  of  overcoming  ail  the  weaknesses  of  human  nature,
and  thereby  rendering  his  Spartans  not  only  superior  to  their  neigh-
bours, but  to  their  species,  runs  through  many  of  the  institutions  of
Lycurgus  ;  which  principle,  if  well  attended  to,  thoroughly  explains
them,  and  without  attending  to  which  it  is  impossible  to  give  any
Ticcount  at  ull  of  some  of  tliera.


lYCURGUS.  14^

nf  such  an  actioji  ?  Tills  accustomed  them  from  their
childhood  to  judge  of  the  virtues,  to  enter  into  the  affairs
of  their  countrymen.  For  if  one  of  them  was  asked,  Who  i*
a  good  citizen,  or  who  an  infamous  one,  and  hesitated  ir\
his  answer,  he  was  considered  as  abov  of  slow  parts,  and
of  a  soul  that  would  not  aspire  to  honour*  The  answer
was  likewise  to  have  a  reason  assigned  for  it,  and  proof
conceived  in  few  words.  He  whose  account  of  the  matter
was  wrong,  by  v/ay  of  punishment)  had  his  thumb  bitbjr
the  Ire}2.  The  old  men  and  magistrates  often  attended
these  little  trials,  to  see  whether  the  Iren  exercised  his
authority  in  a  rational  and  proper  manner.  He  was  per-
mitted, indeed,  to  inflict  the  penalties  ;  but  when  the  boys
were  gone,  he  was  to  be  chastised  himself,  if  he  had  pun-
ished them  either  with  too  much  severity  or  remissness.

The  adopters  of  favourites  also  shared  both  in  the  ho-
nour and  disgrace  of  their  boys  :  and  one  of  them  is  said
to  have  been  mulcted  by  the  magistrates,  because  the  boy
whom  he  had  taken  into  his  affections,  let  some  ungene-
rous word  or  cry  escape  him,  as  he  was  fighting.  This
love  was  so  honourable  and  in  so  much  esteem,  that  the
virgins  too  had  their  lovers  amongst  the  most  virtuous
matrons.  A  competition  of  affection  caused  no  misun=-
derstanding,  but  rather  a  mutual  friendship  between  those
that  had  fixed  their  regards  upon  the  same  youth,  and  an
united  endeavour  to  make  him  as  accomplished  as  possi*-
ble.

The  boys  were  also  taught  to  use  sharp  rcpartee,  sea-
soned with  humour,  and  whatever  they  said  was  to  be  con-
cise and  pithy.  For  Lycurgus,  as  we  have  observed,  fixed
but  a  small  value  on  a  considerable  quantity  of  his  iron
money  ;  but  on  the  contrary,  the  worth  of  speech  was  to
consist  in  its  being  comprised  in  a  few  plain  words,  preg-
nant with  a  great  deal  of  sense  :  and  he  contrived  that  hj
long  silence  they  might  learn  to  be  sententious  and  accute
in  their  replies.  As  debauchery  often  causes  weakness
and  sterility  in  the  body,  so  the  intemperance  of  the  tongue
•makes  conversation  empty  and  insipid.  King  Agis,  there-
fore, when  a  certain  Athenian  laughed  at  the  Lacedemo-
nian short  words,  and  said,  The  jui^gicrs  would  swalloiit
them  loith  ease  ufion  the  stage^  answered  in  his  Laconic
way,  And  yet  nue  can  reach  our  enemies  hearts  with  thenu
Indeed,  to  mc  there  seems  to  be  something  ija  this  concise

VOL.    I.  o


150  PLUTAHCli's    LIVES.

manner  of  speaking,  which  immedi^ttely  reaches  the  ob-
ject aimed  at,  and  forcibly  strikes  the  mind  of  the  hearer.
Lycurgiis  himself  was  siiort  and  sententious  in  his  dis-
course, if  we  may  judge  by  some  of  his  answers  which
are  recorded  ;  that,  for  instance,  concerning  the  consti-
tution. When  one  advised  him  to  estabUsh  a  popular
government  in  Laced^emon,  Go^  said  he,  and  Jirst  make  a
trial  of  it  in  thy  own  family.  That  again,  concerning  sa-
crifices to  the  Deity,  when  he  was  asked  why  he  appoint-
ed them  so  trifling  and  of  so  little  value,  That  %ve  may
never  be  in  want ^  says  he,  of  something  to  offer  him.  Once
more,  when  they  inquired  of  him,  what  sort  of  martial  ex-
*;rcises  he  allowed  of,  he  answered,  All^  except  those  in
ivhich  you  stretch*  out  your  hands.  Several  such-like  re-
plies of  his  are  said  to  be  taken  from  the  letters  which  he
wrote  to  his  countrymen  :  as  to  their  question,  "  How
shall  we  best  guard  against  the  invasion  of  an  enemy?"
By  continuing  floor,  and  not  desiring  in  your  possessio7is  to
be  one  above  another.  And  to  the  question,  whether  they
^  should  inclose  Sparta  with  walls,  That  city  is  well  fortified.^
ivhich  has  a  wall  of  men  instead  of  brick.  Whether  these
and  some  other  letters  ascribed  to  him  are  genuine  or  not,
is  no  easy  matter  to  determine.  However,  that  they  hated
long  speeches,  the  following  apopthegms  are  a  farther
proof.  King  Leonidas  said  to  one  who  discoursed  at  an
improper  time  about  affairs  of  some  concern.  My  friend-^
you  should  not  talk  so  much  to  the  purjiose,  of  what  it  is  not
the  purpose  to  talk  of  Charilaus,  the  nephew  of  Lycur-
gus,  being  asked  why  his  uncle  had  made  ao  few  laws,
answered,  To  men  of  few  words  few  laws  are  sufficient*
Some  people  finding  fault  with  Hecat^us  the  sophist,  be-
cause when  admitted  to  one  of  the  public  repasts,  he  said
nothing  all  the  time,  Archidamidas  replied,  He  who  know%
how  to  speak,  knows  also  when  to  speak.

The  manner  af  their  repartees,  which,  as  1  said,  were
seasoned  with  humour,  may  be  gathered  from  these  in-
stances. W^hen  a  troublesome  fellow  was  pestering  De-
maratus  with  impertinent  questions,  and  this  in  particular
several  times  repeated,  "  Who  is  the  best  man  in  Sparta?'*
He  answered.  He  that  is  lea.it  like  you.  To  some  who
were  commending  the  Eleans  for  managing  the  Olympic
games  with  so  much  justice  and  propriety,  Agis  said,

*  This  was  the  form  of  demanding  quarter  in  battle.


LYCJRGUS.  151

Ji^Mt  great  matter  is  i',  if  the  Rleans  do  justice  once  in  Jive
Itcare  ?  When  a  stran^jcr  was  professing  his  regard  for
Theopompus,  and  saying  that  his  own  countrymen  called
him  Philolacon  (a  lover  of  the  Laccdxmonians)  the  king
answered  him,  My  good  friend^  it  were  much  better,  if  they
called  you  Ffiilo/iolites  (a  lover  of  your  own  countrymen ►)
Plistonax,  the  son  of  Pausanias,  replied  to  an  orator  of
Athens,  who  said  the  Lacedasnionians  had  no  learning,
True^for  we  are  the  only /leo/de  cf  Greece  that  have  learnt
no  ill  of  you.  To  one  who  asked  what  number  of  men
there  v/as  in  Sparta,  xVrchidamidas  said,  E?ioi'gh  to  keep.
bad  men  at  a  distance*

Even  when  they  indulged  a  vein  of  pleasantry,  one
might  perceive,  that  they  would  not  use  one  unnecessary
word,  nor  let  an  expression  escape  them  that  had  not  some
sense  worth  attending  to.  For  one  being  asked  to  go  and
hear  a  person  who  imitated  the  nightingale  to  perfection,
answered,  I  have  heard  the  nightingale  herself.  Another
said,  upon  reading  this  epitaph,

Victims  of  Mars,  at  Seliniis  they  fell,  *

Whoquench'd  the  rage  of  tyranny.— —

"  And  they  deserved  to  fall,  for,  instead  of  quenching  it,
they  should  have  let  it  burn  out."  A  young  man  an-
swered one  that  promised  some  game  cocks  that  would
€tand  their  death,  Give  jne  those  that  will  be  the  death  of
otI\€rs,  Another  seeing  some  people  carried  into  the
coiintry  in  litters  said,  Alay  liiever  sit  in  any  j dace  where
I  cannot  rise  before  the  aged  I  This  was  the  manner  of
their  apopthegms  :  so  that  it  has  been  justly  enough  ob-
served that  the  term  lakonizein  (to  act  the  Lacednsmonian)
is  to  be  referred  rather  to  the.  exercises  of  the  mind,  than
those  of  the  body.^

Nor  were  poetry  and  music  less  cultivated  among  them,
than  a  concise  dignity  of  expression.  Their  songs  had  a
spirit,  which  could  rouse  the  soul,  and  impel  it  in  an  en-
thusiastic manner  to  action.  The  language  %vas  plain  and
manly,  the  subject  serious  and  moral.  For  they  consist-
ed chiefly  of  the  praises  of  heroes  that  had  died  for  Spar-
ta, or  else  of  expressions  of  detestation  for  such  wretches
as  had  declined  the  glorious  opportunity,  and  rather  chose
to  drag  on  life  in  misery  and  contempt.  Nor  did  they  for-
get, ta  express  an  ambition  for  glory  suitable  to   tlieir


t'52  i-lutarch's  lives.

respective  aj^es.  Of  this  it  may  not  be  anils^  to  give  an
instance.  There  v/ere  three  choirs  on  their  festivals,
corresponding-  v.'ith  the  three  ages  of  man.  The  old  ment^
began,

Once  in  battle  bold  we  shone  ;
the  young  men  answered,

Try  us  ;  our  vigour  is  not  gone  t
■and  the  boys  concluded,

The  palm  remains  for  us  alone.

Indeed,  if  we  consider  with  some  attention  such  of  the
Lacedaemonian  Doems  as  are  still  extant,  and  p:et  into
those  airs  which  are  played  upon  the  flute  when  they
march  to  battle,  we  must  agree,  that  Terpander  *  and
Pindar  have  very  fitly  joined  valour  and  music  together.
The  former  thus  speaks  of  Lacedsemon,

There  gleam's  the  youth's  bright  falchion  ;  there  the  muse
Lifts  her  sweet  voice  ;  there  awful  Justice  ope«
Her  wide  pavilion.

And  Pindar  sings,

There  in  gra.ve  council  sits  the  sage;
Tliere  burns  the  youth's  resistless  rage

To  hurl  the  quiv'i'ing  lance  ;
The  muse  with  glory  crowns  their  armi.
And  melody  exerts  her  charms,

And  Pleasure  leads  the  dance.

Thus  w^e  are  informed,  n.ot  only  of  their  warlike  turn,,
but  their  skill  in  music.     For,  as  the  Spartan  poet  says,.

To  swell  the  bold  notes  of  the  lyre.
Becomes  the  wan-ior's  lofty  hre.

And  the  king  always  offered  sacrifice  to  the  muses  t  be-
fore a  battle,  putting  his  troops  in  mind,  I  suppose,  of
their  early  education  and  of  the  judgment  that  would

*  Terpander  was  a  poet  and  musician  too,  (as  indeed  they  of  those-
times  were  in  general)  who  added  three  strings  to  the  harp,  which
till  then  had  but  four.  He  flourished  about  a  hundred  and  twenty
Tears  after  Homer.

t  Zenophon  says,  the  king  who  commanded  the  army,  sacrificed
to  Jupiter  and  Minerva  on  the  frontier  of  the  kingdom.  Probably
the  niu*€s  were  joined  with  Minei'va  the  patroness  of  science.


LYCURGUS.  153

be  p'ast  npori  them  ;  as  well  as  those  divinities  mi^ht
teach  them  to  despise  danger,  while  they  performed  some
exploit  fit  for  them  to  celebrate.

On  those  occasions  *  they  relaxed  the  severity  of  their
discipline,  permitting  their  rncn  to  be  curious  in  dressin^^
their  hair,  and  elegant  in  their  arms  and  apparel,  while
they  expressed  their  alacritVy  like  horses  full  of  lire,  and
neighing  for  the  race.  They  let  their  hair,  therefore,
grow  from  their  youth,  but  took  more  particular  care,
when  they  expected  an  action,  to  have  it  well-combed  and
shining  ;  remembering  a  saying  of  Lycurgus,  that  a.  large
head  of  hair  made  the  handsome  more  graceful^  ai^d  the  ugly
more  terrible.  The  exercises,  too,  of  the.  young  men,
during  the  campaigns,  were  more  moderate,  their  diet
not  so  hard,  and  their  whole  treatment  more  indulgent ;
so  that  they  were  the  only  people  in  the  world,  a\  ith  whom
military  discipline  wore,  in  the  time  of  war,  a  gentler  face
than  usuaU  When  the  army  was  drawn,  up^  and  the .
enemy  near,  the  king  sacrificed  a  goat,  and  commanded
them  all  to  set  garlands  upon  their  heads,  and  the  musi-
cians to  play  Castor's  march,  while  himself  began  the
pearly  which  was  the  signal  to  advance. .  It  was  at  once .
a  solemn  and  dreadful  sight,  to  see  them  measuring  their
steps  to  the  sound  of  music,  and  without  the  least  disorder
in  their  ranks  or  tumult  of  spirits,  moving  forward  cheer-
fully and  composedly,  with  harmony,  to  battle.  Neither
fear  nor  rashness  was  likely  tO'-approve  men  so» disposed,
possessed  as  they  were  of  a  iirm  presence  of  mind,  with
courage  and  confidence  of  success,  as  under  the  conduct
of  heaven.  When  the  king  advanced  against  the  enemy,
he  had  always  with  him  some  one  that  had  been  crowned  .
in  the  public  games  of  Greece,     And  they  tell,  us,  that  ar..

*  The  true  reason  of  this  was,  in  all  prabability,  that  war  might  •
be  leas  burthensome  to  them  ;  for  to  reader  them  bold  and  warlike
was  the  reigning  passion  of  the  legislator.  Under  this  article  we
may  add,  that  they  were  forbidden  to  remain  long  encamped  in  the
same  place,  as  well  to  hinder  their  being  surprised,  as  that  they  might
be  more  troublesome  to  their  enemies,  by  wasting  every  corner  of
their  country.  They  were  also  forbidden  to  fight  the  same  enemy
often.  They  slept  all  night  in  their  armour  ;  but  their  out-guards
were  not  allowed  their  shields,  that,  being  unprovided  of  deience,
they  might  not  dare  to  sleep.  In  all  expeditions  they  were  careful
jin  the  performance  of  religious  rites  ;  and,  afier  their  evening  pit;vl-
was  over,  the  soldiers  sung  together  hymna  to  their  gods.


154  PLUTARCH  S    LlVESir

Lacedxmonian,  when  large  sums  were  oflPered  hirrr  oir
condition  that  he  would  not  enter  the  Olympic  lists,  re-
fused them :  having  with  much  difficulty  thrown  his  an-
tagonist, one  put  this  question  to  him,  "  Spartan  what
*^  will  you  get  by  this  victory  ?"  he  answered  with  a.
smile,  I s halt  have  tJie  honour  to  Jight  foremost  in  theranksy
before  my  prince^.  When  they  had  routed  the  enemy,  they
continued  the  pursuit  till  they  were  assured  of  the  victory  :
after  that  they  immediately  desisted  ;  deeming  it  neither
generous  nor  worthy  of  a  Grecian,  to  destroy  those  Vv'ho;
made  no  farther  resistance..  This  was  not  only  a  proof
of  magnanimity,  but  of  great  service  to  their  cause.  For
when  their  adversaries  found  that  they  killed  such  as  stood,
it  out,  but  spared  the  fugitives,  they  concluded  it  was  bet-
ter to  ily  than  to  meet  their  fate  upon  the  spot.

Hippias  the  sophist  tells  us,  that  Lycurgus  himself  was-,
a  m.an  of  great  personal  valour,  and  an  experienced
commander.*  Philo3tephanus  also  ascribes  to  him  the  hrst
division  of  the  cavalry  into  troops  of  fifty,  who  were  drawn.*
up  in  a  square  body.  But  Demetrius  the  Phalerean
says,  that  he  never  had  any  military  employment,  and
that  there  was  the  profoundest  peace  imaginable  when  he
established  the  constitution  of  Sparta.  His  providing  for
a  cessation  of  arms  during  the  Olympic  games,  is  likewise
a  mark  of  the  humane  and  peaceable  man-  Some,  how-
ever, acquaint  us,  and,  among  the  rest,  Hermippus,  that
Lycurgus  at  fi.rst  Lad  no  communication  with  Iphetus ;.
but  coming  that  way>  and  happening  to  be  a  spectator,
he  heard  behind  him  a  human  voice  (as  he  thought)  which
expressed  some  wonder  and  displeasure  that  he  did  not  put
his  countrymen  upon  resorting  to  so  great  an  assembly.
He  turned  round  immediately,  to.  discover  whence  th^
voice  came,  and  as  there  was  no  man  to  be  seen,  con-
cluded it  was  from  Heaven..  He  joined  Iphetus,  there-
fore ;  and  ordering  along  with  him,  the  ceremonies  of  the
festival,  rendered  it  more  magnificent  and  lasting.

The  discipline  of  tlie  Lacedsemonians  continued  after
they  were  arrived  at  years  of  maturity.  For  no  man  was
at  liberty  to  live  as  he  pleased,  the  city  being  like  one
great  camp,,  where  all  had  their  stated  allowance,  and

*  Xenophon,  in  his  treatise  of  tile  Spartan  commonwealth,  says;
Lycurgus  brought  military  discipline  to  great  perfection,  and  give*.
\is  a  detail  of  his  regulations  and  improvements  in  the  art  of  \\"«^i,
tome,  of  NvhicU  I  have  weutioiied  ia  tlie  foregoing  note-


LYCURGUS.  15^

karew  their  public  charge,  each  man  concluding  that  he  nvas-
boim,  not  for  himself^  but  for  his  country.  Hence,  if  they
had  no  particular  orders,  they  employed  themselves  in
inspecting  the  boys,  and  teaching- them  something  useful,,
or  in  learning  of  those  that  were  older  than  themselves..
One  of  the  greatest  privileges  that  I^'curgus.proGured  his
countrymen,  was,  the  enjoyment  of  leisure,  the  conse-
quence of  his  forbidding  them  to.  exercise  any  mechanic,
trade.  It  was  not  worth  their  while  to  take  great  pains  tO:
raise  a  fortune,  since  riches  there  v/as  of  no  account :  and
the  Helotcs^  who  tilled  the  ground,  were  answerable  for  the:
produce  above-mentioned.  To  this  purpose  we  have  a»
story  of  a  Lacedaemonian,  who  happening  to  be  at  Athens.
Vr'hile  the  court  sat,  was  informed  of  a  man,  who  was  fin-
ed for  idleness :  and  v;hen  the  poor  fellow  was  returning-
home  in  great  dejection,  attended  by  his  condoling. friends,,
he  desir<id  the  company  to  shew  him  the  person  that  was-
condemned  for  keefiing  uji  his  dignity.  So  much  beneathi
tliem  they  reckoned  all  attention  to  mechanic  arts  and  alL
desire  of  riches  !,

Law-suits  were  banished  fiT)m  Lacedaimon  with  mo-
ney. The  Spartans  knew  neither  riches  nor  poverty,  but
possessed  an  equal  competency,  and  had  a  cheap  and  easy;
way  of  supplying  their  few  wants.  Hence,  when  they,
were  not  engaged  in  war,  their  time  was  taken  up  with
dancing,  feasting,  hunting,  or  meeting  to  exercise,  or
converse.  They  went  not  to  market  under  thirty  yearsc
of  age,*  all  their  necessary  concerns  being  managed  by
their  relations  and  adopters.  Nor  was  it  reckoned  a  cre-r
dit  to  the  old  to  be  seen  sauntering  in  the  market-place  ;
it  was  deemed  more  suitable  for  them  to  pass  great  part
of  the  day  in  the  schools  of  exercise,  or  places  of  conver-
sation. Their  discourse  seldom  turned  upon  money  or
business  or  trade,  but  upon  the  praise  of  the  excellent,  or
the  contempt  of  the  worthless  ;  and  the  last  was  expressed
with  that  pleasantry  and  humour,  which  conveyed  in-
struction and  correction  without  seeming  to  intend  it.
Nor  was  Lycurgus  himself  immoderately  severe  in  his
maimer ;  but  as  Sosibius  tells  us,  he  dedicated  a  little

*  This  aJso  is  said  to  have  been  the  age  when  they  began  to  serve  in
the  army.  But  as  they  were  obliged  to  forty  years  service  before  the
law  exempted  them  from  g.oing-  into  the  held,  I  incline  to  the  opinion,.
of  those  writers  who  tkiiik  that  tlicmiiit^y  age  \%  not  well  ftsctrtaijir-
ed..


156  PLUTARCH'S  lives;-

statue  to  the  god  of  laughter,  in  each  hall.  He  considered
facetiousness  as  a  seasoning  of  their  hardexei^cise  and  diet,
and  therefore  ordered  it  to  take  place  on  all  proper  occa-
sions, in  their  common  entertainrrients  and  parties  of  plea-
sure.

Upon  the  whole,  he  taught  his  citizens  to  think  nothing
more  disagreeable  than  to  live  by  (or  for)  themselves.
Like  bees,  they  acted  with  one  impulse  for  the  public
good,  and  always  assembled  about  their  prince.  They
wefe  possessed  with  a  thii-st  of  honour,  an  enthusiasm,
bordering  upon  insanity,  and  had  not  a  wish  but  for  their
country.  These  sentiments  are  confirmed  by  some  of
their  aphorisms.  When  pEedaretus  lost  his  election  for
one  of  the  three  hundred^  he  went  away  rejoicing  tliat  there
tvere  three  hundred  belter  men  than  himself  found  in  the
city.*  Pisistratidas  going  with  some  others,  ambassador
to  the  king  of  Persia's  lieutenants,  was  asked  whether
they  came  with  a  public  commission,  or  on  their  own  ac-
count ;  to  which  he  answered,  If  successful^  for  the  public  ;
if  unsuccessful^  for  ourselves,  Agrileonis,  the  mother  of
Erasidas,t  asking  some  Amphipolitans  that  waited  upon
her  at  her  house,  whether  Brasidas  died  honourably  and
as  becaiTie  a  Spartan  ;  they  greatly  extolled  his  merit,
and  said,  there  was  not  such  a  man  left  in  Sparta :  where-
upon she  replied,  Say  not  so,  my  friends  ;  for  Brasidas
was  indeed  a  man  of  honour -^  but  Lacedamon  can  boaat  of
many  better  men  than  he.

The  senate,  as  I  said  before,  consisted  at  first  of  those
that  v/ere  assistants  to  Lycurgus  in  his  great  enterprize.
Afterwards,  to  fill  up  any  vacancy  that  might  happen,  he
ordered  the  most  worthy  man  to  be  selected,  of  those  that
were  full  threescore  years  old.  This  v/as  the  most  res-
pectable dispute  in  the  world,  and  the  contest  was  truly
glorious  :  for  it  was  not  who  should  be  swiftest  among
the  swift,  or  strongest  of  the  strong,  but  who  was  the
wisest  and  best  among  the  good  and  wise.  He  who  had
the  preference  was  to  bear  this  mark  of  superior  excel-
lence through  life,  this  great  authority,  which  put  into

*  Xenophon  says,  it  was  the  custom  for  the  ephori  to  appoint  three
officers,  each  of  whom  was  to  select  an  hundred  men,  the  best  he-
could  find  ;  and  it  was  a  point  of  great  emulation  to  be  one  of  these
three  hundred..

t  Brasidas  the  Lacedaemonian  general  defeated  the  Athenians  in
a  battle  fought  near  Amphipoiis  a  town  of  Macedonia  on  the  banks
of  tlie  Str/mon|  but  lo&t  Uis  life  in  the  a-ction.     Th u  cy  b i p,  lib.  v.


LTCURGUSr  157

Ills  hands  the  lives  and  honour  of  the  citizens,  and  every
other  important  affair.     The  manner  of  the  election  was
this.     When  tlie  people  were  assembled,  some  persons
appointed  for  tlie  purpose  were  shut  up  in  a  room  near
the  place  ;  where  they  could  neither  see  nor  be  seen,  and
only  hear  shouts  of  the  constituents  :*  for  by  them  they
decided  this  and  most  other  affciirs.     Each  candidate  walk-
ed silently  through  the  assembly,  one  after  another  accor-
dini^  to  lot.     Those  that  were  shut  up  had  writing  tables^
in  which  they  set  down  in  different  columns  the  number
and  loudness  of  the  shouts,  without  knowing  who  they  were
for  ;  only  they  marked  them  as  first,  second,  third,  and
so  on,  according  to  the  number  of  competitors.     He  that
had  the  most  and  loudest  acclamations,  was  declared  duly
elected.     Then  he  was  crowned  with  a  garland,  and  went
round  to  give  thanks  to  the  gods  ;  a  number  of  young.
men  followed,  striving  which  should  extol  him  most,  and
^the  women  celebrated  his  virtues  in  their  songs,  and  bles-
sed his  worthy  life  and  conduct."     Each  of  his  relations
offered  him  a  repast,  and  tlicir  address  on  the  occasion
"was,  Hliaria  honours  ijou  iviih  this  collation*      "When  he
had  finished  the  procession,  he  went  to  the  common  ta-
ble, and  lived  as  before.     Only  two  portions  were  set  be-
fore him,  one  of  which  he  carried  away  ;  and  as  all  the.
women  related  to  him  attended  at  the  gates  of  the  public
hall,  he  called  her  for  Vvdiom  he  had  the  greatest  esteem,
and  presented  her  with  the  portion,  saying  at  the  same
time.  That  ivhkh  I  received  as  a  mark  of  honour  y  I  give  to.
you.     Then  she  was  conducted  home  with  great  applause
by  the  rest  of  the  women.

Lycurgus  likewise  made  good  regulations  with  respect
to  burials.  In  the  first  place,  to  take  avv'ay  all  superstition,
he  ordered  the  dead  to  be  buried  in  the  city,  and  even
permitted  their  monimients  to  be  erected  near  the  tem-
ples ;  accustoming  the  youth  to  such  sights  from  their
infancy,  that  they  might  have  no  uneasines  from  them,
nor  any  horror  for  death,  as  if  people  were  polluted  with
the  touch  of  a  dead  body,  or  with  treading  upon  a  grave.
In  the  next  place,  he  suffered  nothing  to  be  buried  with

*  As  this  was  a  tumultuary  and  uncertain  way  of  deciding  who
had  the  majority,  they  were  often  obliged  to  separate  the  j)eople
and  count  the  votes.  Aristotle  thinks  that  in  such  a  case  ])erson$.
should  not  ofFer  themselves  candidates,  or  solicit  the  office  or  em-
ployment, bu|  be  called  to  it  merely  for  their  abilities  and  their  merit..


158  pxuT arch's  lives.

the  corpse,  except  the  red  cloth  and  the  olive  leaves  in
which  it  was  wrapt.*  Nor  would  he  suffer  the  relations
to  inscribe  any  names  upon  the  tombs,  except  of  those
men  that  fell  in  battle,  or  those  women  who  died  in  some
sacred  office.  He  fixed  eleven  days  for  the  time  of
mourning  :  on  the  twelfth  they  were  to  put  an  end  to  it
after  offering  sacrifice  to  Ceres.  No  pa/t  of  life  was  left
vacant  and  unimproved,  but  even  with  their  necessary  ac-^
tions  he  interwove  the  praise  of  virtue  and  the  contempt
of  vice  :  and  he  so  filled  the  city  with  living  examples,
that  is  was  next  to  impossible,  for  persons  v/ho  had  these
from  their  infancy  before  their  eyes,  not  to  be  drav/n  and
formed  to  honour.

For  the  same  reason  he  would  not  pennit  all  that  desir-
ed it,  to  go  abroad  and  see  other  countries,  lest  they  should
contract  foreign  m-anners,  gain  traces  of  a  life  of  little  dis-
cipline, and  of  a  different  form  of  government.  He  for-
bade strangers  too,t  to  resort  to  Sparta,  who  could  not
assign  a  good  reason  for  their  coming  ;  not,  as  Thucydides
says,  out  of  fear  they  should  imitate  the  constitution  of
tliat  city,  and  make  improvements  in  virtue^  but  lest  they
should  teach  his  own  people  some  evil.  For  along  with
foreigners  come  new  subjects  of  discourse  ;|  new  dis-
course produces  new  opinions  ;  and  from  these  there  ne-
cessarily spring  new  passions  and  desirea,  which,  like
discords  in  music,  would  disturb  the  established  govern-
ment. He,  therefore,  thought  it  more  expedient  for  the
city,  to  keep  out  of  it  corrupt  customs  and  manners,  than
even  to  prevent  the  introduction  of  a  pestilence.

Thus  far,  then,  we  can  perceive  no  vestiges  of  a  dis-
regard to  right  and  wrong,  which  is  the  fault  some  people
find  with  the  laws  of  Lycurgus,  allowing  them  well  enough

*  vElian  tells  ii»(l.  vi.  c  6.),  that  not  all  the  citizens  indifferentlr
were  buried  in  the  red  cloth  and  olive  leaves,  but  only  such  as  had
distinguished  themselves  particularly  in  the  field.

t  He  received  with  pleasure  such  strangers  as  came  and  submitted
to  his  laws,  and  assigned  them  shares  of  land,  which  they  could  not
alienate.     Indeed,  the  lots  of  all  the  cizens  wei-e  unalienable.

:j:  Xenophon,  who  was  an  eye-witness,  imputes  the  changes  in
tXe  Spartan  discipline  to  foreign  manners.  But  in  fact  they  had  a
deeper  root.  When  the  Lacedaemonians,  instead  of  keeping  to  their
lawgiver's  injunction,  only  to  defend  their  own  country,  and  to  make
no  conquests,  carried  their  victorious  arms  all  over  Greece  and  into
Asia  itself,  then  foreign  gold  and  foreign  manners  came  into  Spar-
ta, corrupted  the  simplicity  of  its  institutions^ and  at  last  overturn*
•d  that  republic.


LTCURGUS.  159

Calculated  to  produce  valour,  but  not  to  promote  jusiice.
Perhaps  it  was  the  Cryluia^*  as  they  called  it,  or  ambus^
cade^  if  that  was  really  one  of  this  lawg-iver's  institutions,
as  Aristotle  says  it  was,  which  gave  Plato  so  bad  an  im-
pression both  of  Lycurgus  and  his  laws.  The  governors
of  the  youth  ordered  the  shrewdest -of  them  fi'om  time  to
time  to  disperse  themselves  in  the  country,  provided  only
with  daggers  and  some  necessary  provisions.  In  the
day  time  they  hid  themselves,  and  rested  in  the  most
private  places  they  could  find,  but  at  night  they  sallied
out  into  the  roads  and  killed  all  the  Hchtes  they  could
meet  with.  Nay,  sometimes  by  day,  they  fell  upon  them
in  the  fields,  and  murdered  the  ablest  and  strongest  of
them.  Thucydides  relates  in  his  history  of  the  Pelo-
ponnesian  war,  that  the  Spartans  selected  such  of  them
as  were  distinguished  for  their  courage,  to  the  number  of
two  thousand  or  more,  declared  them  free,  crowned  them
with  garlands,  and  conducted  them  to  the  temples  of  the
gods ;  but  soon  after  they  all  disappeared  ;  and  no  one
could,  either  then  or  since,  give  account  in  what  manner
they  were  destroyed.  Aristotle  particularly  says,  that  the
Eiihori^  as  soon  as  they  were  invested  in  their  office,  de-
clared war  against  the  Helotes^  that  they  might  be  massa-

*  The  cruelty  of  the  Lacedaemonians  towards  the  ^e/ofe,?,  is  fre-
quently spoken  of,  and  generally  decried  by  all  authors  ;  though
Plutarch,  who  was  a  great  admirer  of  the  Spartans,  endeavours  to
palliate  it  as  much  as  may  be.  These  poor  wretches  were  marked
out  for  slaves  in  their  dress,  their  gesture,  and,  in  short,  in  every
thing.  They  wore  dog-skin  bonnets  and  sheep-skin  vests  ;  they
were  forbidden  to  learn  any  liberal  art,  or  to  perform  any  act  worthy
of  their  master.  Once  a  day  they  received  a  certain  number  of
stripes,  for  fear  they  should  forget  they  were  slaves-;  and,  to  crown
all,  they  were  liable  to  this  ajptia,  which  was  sure  to  be  executed
on  all  such  as  spoke,  looked,  or  walked  like  freemen  ;  a  cruel  and
unnecessary  expedient,  and  unworthy  of  a  virtuous  peoj)]e.  The
Ephori,  indeed,  declared  war  against  them.  Against  whom  ?  why
against  poor  naked  slaves,  who  tilled  their  lands,  dressed  their  food,
and  did  all  those  offices  for  them,  which  they  were  too  proud  to  do
for  themselves.  Plutarch,  according  to  custom,  endeavours  to  place
all  this  cruelty  far  lower  than  the  times  of  Lycurgus  ;  and  alledges
that  it  Avas  introduced  on  account  of  the  Relates  joining  with  the
Messenians  after  a  terrible  earthquake,  that  happened  about  467
years  before  the  birth  of  Christ,  whereby  a  great  part  of  I^acedae-
mon  was  overthrown,  and  in  which  above  twenty  thousand  Spar-
tans perished.  But  i'Elian  tells  us  expressly  (Hist.  Var.  1.  iii  )  that
it  was  the  common  opinion  in  Greece,  that  this  very  earthquake  was
a  judgment  from  heaven  upon  the  Spartans  for  treating  the&e  Helotcs
u'ith  stich  inhumanity.


160  Plutarch's  lites.

cred  under  pretence  of  law.  In  other  respects  they  treat-
fed  them  ^yith  great  inhumanity :  sometiines  they  made
them  drink  till  they  were  intoxicated,  and  in  that  condi-
tion led  them  into  the  public  halls,  to  shev/  the  young  men
what  drunkenness  was.  Thev  ordered  them  too  to  sinti*
mean  songs,  and  to  dance  ridiculous  dances,  but  not  to
meddle  with  any  that  were  genteel  and  graceful.  Thus
they  tell  \is,  that  when  the  Thebans  afterwards  invaded
Lacdnia,  and  took  a  great  number  of  the  Helotes  prisoners,
they  ordered  them  to  sing  the  odes  of  Terpander,  Ale-
man,  or  Spendon  the  Lacedaemonian,  but  they  excused
themselves,  alleging  that  it  was  forbidden  by  their  mas-
ters. Those  v/ho  say,  that  a  freeman  in  Sparta  was  most
a  freeman,  and  a  slave  most  a  slave,  seem  well  to  have
considered  the  difference  of  states.  But  in  my  opinion,
it  was  in  after  times  that  these  cmelties  took  place  among
the  Lacedemonians  ;  chiefly  after  the  great  earthquake,
when,  as  history  informs  us,  the  Helotes,  joining  the
Messenians,  attacked  them,  did  infinite  damage  to  the
country,  and  brought  the  city  to  the  greatest  extremity.
I  can  never  ascribe  to  Lycurgus  so  abominable  an  act  as
that  of  the  ambuscade,  I  would  judge  in  this  case  by  the
mildness  and  justice  which  appeared  in  the  rest  of  his
conduct,  to  which  also  the  gods  gave  their  sanction.

When  his  principal  institutions  had  taken  root  in  the
manners  of  the  people,  and  the  government  was  come  to
such  maturity  as  to  be  able  to  support  and  preserve  itself,
then,  as  Plato  says  of  the  Deity,  that  he  rejoiced  when  he
had  created  the  world,  and  given  it  its  first  motion ;  so
Lycurgus  was  charmed  with  the  beauty  and  greatness  of
his  political  establishment,  when  he  saw  it  exemplified  in
fact  and  move  on  in  due  order.  He  was  next  desirous  to
make  it  immortal,  so  far  as  human  wisdom  could  effect  it,
and  to  deliver  it  down  unchanged  to  the  latest  times.  For
this  purpose  he  assembled  all  the  people,  and  told  them,
the  provisions  he  had  already  made  for  the  state  were  in-
deed sufficient  for  virtue  and  happiness,  but  the  greatest
and  most  important  matter  was  still  behind,  which  he  could
not  disclose  to  them  till  he  had  consulted  the  oracle  ;  that
they  must  therefore  inviolably  observe  his  laws,  without
altering  any  thing  in  them,  till  he  returned  from  Delphi ;
and  then  he  would  acquaint  them  with  the  pleasure  of
Apollo.  When  they  had  all  promised  to  do  so,  and  de-
sired him  to  set  forward,  he  took  an  oath  of  the  kings  and


LTCURG«'S*  If&t

ft^fiators,  and  afterwards  of  all  the  citizens,  that  they  would
abide  by  the  present  establishment  till  Lycurgus  came
back.     He  then  took  his  journey  to  Delphi,

When  he  arrived  there,  he  offered  sacrifice  to  the  gods^
and  consulted  the  oracle,  whether  his  laws  were  sufficient
to  promote  virtue,  and  secure  the  happiness  of  the  state*
Apollo  answered,  that  the  laws  were  excellent,  and  that
the  city  which  kept  to  the  constitution  he  had  established
would  be  the  most  glorious  in  the  world.  This  oracle
I^ycurgus  took  down  in  writing,  and  sent  it  to  Sparta.
He  then  offered  another  sacrifice,  and  embraced  his  friend*
and  his  son,  determined  never  to  release  his  citizens  from
their  oath,  but  voluntarily  there  to  put  a  period  to  his  life  ;*
while  he  was  y^et  of  an  age  when  life  was  not  a  burden,
when  death  was  not  desirable,  and  while  he  was  not  un-
happy in  any  one  circumstance.  He,  therefore,  destroy-
ed himself  by  abstaining  from  food,  persuaded  that  the.
very  death  of  lawgivers  should  have  its  use,  and  their  exit,
so  far  from  being  insignificant,  have  its  share  of  virtue
and  be  considered  as  a  great  action.  To  him  indeed
whose  performances  were  so  illustrious,  the  conclusion
of  life  was  the  crown  of  happiness,  and  his  death  was  left
guardian  of  those  invaluable  blessings  he  had  procured
Jhis  countrymen  through  life,  as  they  had  taken  an  oath
not  to  depart  from  his  establishment  till  his  return.  Nor
was  he  deceived  in  his  expectations.  Sparta  continued
superior  to  the  rest  of  Greece  both  in  its  government  at
home  and  reputation  abroad,  so  long  as  it  retained  the  in-
stitution of  Lycurgus  ;  and  this  it  did  during  the  space  of
five  hundred  years,  and  the  reign  of  fourteen  successive
kings  down  to  Agis  the  son  of  Archidamus.  As  for  the
appointment  of  the  Ephori^  it  was  so  far  from  weakening^
the  constitution,  that  it  gave  it  additional  vigour,  and  though
it  seemed  to  be  established  in  favour  of  the  people,  it
strengthened  the  aristocracy. f

But  in  the  reign  of  Agis  money  found  its  way  Into  Spar-
ta, and  with  money  came  its  inseparable  attendant,  avarice.
This  was  by  means  of  Lysander  ;  who,  though  himself

*  Yet  Lucian  says  that  Lycurgus  died  at  the  age  of  85.

t  After  all  this  pompous  account,  Plutarch  liimself  acknowledges
that  authors  are  not  well  agreed,  how  and  where  this  great  man
died.  That  >ie  stai-ved  himself  is  improbable  ;  but  that  here  urned
no  more  to  his  country,  seems  to  be  perfectly  agreeable  to  hb  in*»7
Bcr  of  acting,  as  well  a*  to  the  current  of  history.

VOL.    l-,f  P


162  Plutarch's  lives.

incapable  of  being  corrupted  by  money,  filled  his  countvy
with  the  love  of  it  and  with  luxury  too.  He  brought  both
gold  and  silver  from  the  wars,*  and  thereby  broke  through
the  laws  of  Lycurgus.  While  these  were  in  force,  Spar-
ta was  not  so  much  under  the  political  regulations  of  a
commonwealth,  as  the  strict  rules  of  a  philosophic  life  :
raid  as  the  poets  feign  of  Hercules,  that  only  with  a  club
and  lion's  skin  he  travelled  over  the  world,  clearing  it  of
lawless  ruffians  and  cruel  tyrants ;  so  the  Lacedxraonieais
with  a  peice  of  t  parchment  and  coarse  coat  kept  Greece
in  a  voluntary  obedience,  destroyed  usurpation  and  ty-
ranny in  the  states,  put  an  end  to  wars,  and  laid  seditions
asleep,  very  often  without  either  shield  or  lance,  and  only
by  sending  one  ambassador  ;  to  whose  directions  all  par-
ties concerned  immediately  submitted.  Thus  bees,Y/heii
their  prince  appears,  compose  their  quarrels  and  unite  in
one  swarm.  So  much  did  justice  and  good  government
prevail  in  that  state,  that  I  am  surprised  at  those  wdio  say,
the  Lacedaemonians  knew  indeed  how  to  obey,  but  not  how
to  govern  ;  and  on  this  occasion  quote  the  saying  of  king
Theopompus,  who,  when  one  told  him,  that  Sjiarta  was
Jireservedby  the  good  administration  of  its  kifigs,  replied,
Alii/,  rather  by  the  obedience  of  their  subjects.  It  is  cer-
tain that  people   wdll  ndt  continue  pliant  to    those  who

*  Xenophon acquaints  us,  that  when  Lysander  had  taken  Athens,
he  sent  to  Sparta  many  rich  spoils  and  470  talents  of  silver.  The
-coming  of  this  huge  mass  of  wealth  created  great  disputes  at  Spar-
ta. Many  celebrated  Lysander's  praises,  and  rejoiced  exceedingly
at  this  good  fortune,  as  they  called  it  ;  others,  who  were  better  ac-
quainted with  the  nature  of  things,  and  with  their  constituiion,
were  of  quite  another  opinion  :  they  looked  upon  the  receipt  of  this,
treasure  as  an  open  violation  of  the  laws  of  I.ycurgus  ;  and  they  ex-
pressed then-  apprehensions  loudly,  that,  in  process  of  time,  they
might,  by  a  change  in  their  manners,  pay  infinitely  more  for  this  mo-
ney than  it  was  worth.     The  event  justified  their  fears.

f  This  was  the  scytale,  the  nature  and  use  of  which  Plutarch  ex-
plains in  the  life  of  Lysander.  He  tells  us,  that  when  the  m.agis-
trates  gave  their  commission  to  any  admiral  or  general,  they  took
two  round  pieces  of  wood,  both  exactly  equal  in  breadth  and  thick-
ness ;  (Thucydides  adds,  that  they  were  smooth  and  long)  ;  one
they  kept  themselves,  the  other  was  delivered  to  their  officer.  When
they  had  any  thing  of  moment,  which  they  would  secretly  convey  to
him,  they  cut  a  long  narrow  scroll  of  parchment,  and  rolling  it  about
their  OAvn  staff,  one  fold  close  upon  another,  they  wrote  their  busi-
ness on  it  :  when  they  had  wrote  what  they  had  to  say,  they  took
off  the  parchment,  and  sent  it  to  the  general  ;  and  he  applying  it  to
his  own  staff,  the  characters,  which  before  were  confused  and  unia-
telligible,  appeared  then  very  plainly.


LYCURGUS.  163

know  not  how  to  command  :  but  it  is  the  part  of  a  good
governor  to  teach  ol^ediencc.  He  wlio  knows  how  to  lead
well,  is  sure  to  be  well  followed  :  and  as  it^  is  by  the  art
of  horsemanship  that  a  horse  is  made  gentle  and  tracta-
ble, so  it  is  by  the  abilitif-s  of  him  that  fills  the  throne  that
the  people  become  ductile  and  submissive.  Such  was
the  conduct  of  the  Lacedaemonians,  that  people  did  not
only  endure,  but  even  desired  to  be  their  subjects.  They
asked  not  of  them,  either  ships,  money,  or  troops,  but
only  a  Spartan  general.  When  they  had  receiv^eil  him,
they  treated  him  with  the  greatest  honour  and  respect :
so  Gylippus  was  revered  by  the  Sicilians,  Brasidas  by  the
Chalcidians,  Lysander,  Callicratidas  and  Agesilaus  by  all
the  people  of  Asia.  These,  and  such  as  these,  wherever
they  came,  were  called  moderators  and  reformers,  both  of
the  magistrates  and  people,  and  Sparta  itself  was  con-
sidered as  a  school  of  discipline,  where  the  beauty  of  life
and  political  order  were  taught  in. the  utmost  perfection.
Hence  Stratonicus  seems  facetiously  enough  to  have  said,
that  he  would  order  the  Athtnians  to  have  the  conduct  nf
7nysterics  and  Jirocefifiions  ;  the  JLlecins  to  Jireside  hi  games^
as  their  particular  province  ;  and  the  iMcedcemonians  to  be
beaten^  if  the  Others  did  amiss,*  Thf^  was  spoken  in  jest :
but  Antisthenes,  one  of  the  scholars  of  Socrates,  said
(more  seriously)  of  the  Thebans,  when  he  saw  them
•pluming  themselves  upon  their  success  at  Leuctra,  They
ivcre  just  like  so  ma?iy  school  boys  rejoicing  that  they  had
beaten  their  master.

It  was  not,  however,  the  principal  design  of  Lycurgus,
that  his  city  should  govern  many  others,  but  he  consider-
ed its  happiness^  like  that  of  a  private  man,  ^csjiowingfrom
virtue  and  self-consistency  ;  he  therefore  so  ordered  and
disposed  it,  that  by  the  freedom  and  sobriety  of  its  inhabi-
tants, and  their  having  a  sufficiency  within  themselves,
its  continuance  might  be  the  more  secure.  \  lato,  Dio-
genes, Zeno,  and  other  writers  upon  government,  have
talven  Lycurgus  for  their  model ;  and  these  have  attained
great  praise,  though  they  left  only  an  idea  of  something

*  Because  the  teachers  should  be  answerable  for  the  faults  of  their
pupils.  The  pleasantry  of  the  observation  seemsto  be  rhis.  That
as  the  Lacedaemonians  used  to  punish  the  parents  or  adopters  of
those  young  people  that  behaved  amiss  ;  now  that  they  were  the  in-
structors of  other  nations,  they  should  sufter  for  their  faul;  s.  Bry-
an's Latin  text  has  it,  that  the  Lacedemonians  aboulU  beat  iUnu —
But  there  is^o  joke  in  that.


164  PLUfARCH^S    LIVES.

excellent.  Yet  he  who  not  in  idea  and  in  "VTords,  but  ia.
fact  pi  educed  a  most  inimitable  form  of  government,  and
by  shewing  a  whole  city  of  philosophers,*  confoAmded
those  who  imagine  that  the  so  much  talked  of  strictness
of  a  philosophic  life  is  impracticable  ;  he,  I  say,  stands  in
the  rank  of  glory  far  before  the  founders  of  all  the  other
Grecian  states-f  Therefore  Aristotle  is  of  opinion,  that
the  honours  paid  him  in  Lacedremon  were  far  beneath  his
merit.  Yet  those  honours  were  very  great ;  for  he  has
a  temple  there,  and  they  offer  him  a  yearly  sacrifice,  as  a
god.  It  is  also  said,  that  wlien  his  remains  were  brought
home,  his  tomb  was  struck  with  lightning  :  a  seal  of  di-
vinity which  no  other  man,  however  eminent,  has  had,
except  Euripides,  who  died  and  was  buried  at  Arethusa
in  Macedonia.  This  was  matter  of  great  satisfaction  and
triumph  to  the  friends  of  Euripides,  that  the  same  thing
should  befal  him  after  death,  which  had  formerly  hap-
pened to  the  most  venerable  of  men,  and  the  most  favour-
ed of  heaven.  Some  say,  Lycurgus  died  at  Cirrha  ;  but
Apollothemis  will  have  it,  that  he  was  brought  to  Elis  and
died  there  ;  and  Timxus  and  Aristoxenus  write,  that  he
ended  his  days  in  Crete  ;  nay,  Aristoxenus  adds,  that  the
Cretans  shew  his  tomb  at  Pei'gamia,  near  the  high  road.
We  are  told,  he  left  an  only  son  named  Antiorus  :  and  as
he  died  without  issue,  the  family  was  extinct.  His  friends
and  relations  observed  his  anniversary,  which  subsisted
for  many  ages,^  and  the  days  on  which  they  met  for  that
purpose  they  called  Lycurgidce,  Aristocrates,  the  son  of
Hipparchus,  relates,  that  the  friends  of  Lycurgus,  with
whom  he  sojourned,  and  at  last  died  in  Crete,  burned  his
body,  and,  at  his  request,  threw  his  ashes  inco  the  sea.
Thus  he  guarded  against  the  possibility  of  his  remainsbe-
ing  brought  back  to  Sparta  by  the  Lacedxmonians,  lest

*  Aristotle  and  Plato  diifer  in  this  from  Plutarch.  Even  Polybi-
tis,  who  was  so  great  an  admirer  of  the  Spartan  government,  allows^
that,  though  the  Spartans.  consi<lered  as  individuals,  were  wise  and
vn-tuous,  yet  in  their  collective  capacity  they  paid  but  little  regard
to  justice  and  moderation.

•f  Solon,  though  a  person  of  a  different  temper,  was  no  less  disin-
terested than  Lycurgus.  He  settled  the  Athenian  commonwealth^
refused  the  sovereignty  when  offered  him,  travelled  to  avoid  the  im-
portunities of  his  countrymen,  opposed  tyranny  in  his  old  age,  and
when  he  found  his  oppositions  vain,  went  into  voluntary  exile.  Ly-
curgus and  Solon  were  both  great  men  ;  but  the  former  had  the
stronger,  the  latter  the  milder  genius :  the  effects  of  which  appear-
ed iu  the  commonwealths  they  founded.


NUMAr  165

they  should  then  thhik  themselves  released  from  their
oath,  on  the  pretence  that  he  was  returned,  and  make  in-
novations in  tlie  government.  This  is  what  we  had  ta
say  of  Lycurgus.


NUMA.

HERE  is  likewise  a  great  diyersity  amongst  histo-
rians about  the  time  in  which  king  Numa  lived,  though
some  families  seem  to  trace  their  genealogy  up  to  him
with  sulFicient  accuracv.     However,  acertain  writer  called
Clodius,   hi  his   emendation  of  chronolagy,  affirms,  that
the  ancient  archives  were  destroyed  when  Rome  was  sack-
ed by  the  Gauls  ;  and  that  those  which  are  now  shewn  as
such,  were  forged  in  favour  of  some  persons  who  wanted
to  stretch  their  lineage   far  back,   and  to  deduce  it  from
the  most  illustrious  houses.     Some  say,  that  Numa  was
the  scholar  of  Pythagoras  ;*  but  others  contend,  that  he
was  unacquainted  with  the  Grecian  literature,  either  al-
leging, that  his  ov/n  genius  was  sufficient  to  conduct  him
to  excellence,  or  that  he  was  instructed  by  some  barbarian
philosopher  superior  to  Pythagoras.     Some,  again,   af-
lirm,  that  Pythagoras  of  Samos  flourished  about  five  ge-^
nerations  below  the  times  of  Numa :  but  that  Pythagoras
the  Spartan,  who  won  the  prize  at  the  Olympic  race  in
the  sixteenth  Olympiad  (about  the  third  year  of  which  it
"W^as  that  Numa  came  to  the  throne)  travelling  into  Italy, .
became  acquainted  with  that  prince,  and  assisted  him  in
regulating  the  government.     Hence  many  Spartan  cus-
toms, taught  by  Pythagoras,  were  intermixed   with  the
Roman.     But  this  inixture  might  haveanother  cause,  as
Numa  was  of  Sabine  extraction,  and  the  Sabines   declare
themselves  to  have  been  a  Lacedamonian  colony. t     It  is  ;

*  Pythagoras  the  philosopher  went  not  into  Italy  till  the  reign  of
the  elder  Tarciuin,  which  was  in  the  iifry-t-rst  Olympiad,  and  four
generations  (as  Djonysiusof  Halicarnassus  tells  us)  after  Numa.

t  The  same  Dionysius  informs  us,  that  he  found  in  the  history
of  the  Sabines,  that,  whik  Lycurgus  was  guardian  to  his  nephew
Euromus  (Chavilaus  it  should  be)  some  of  the  Lacedsmonians,  un-
able to  endure  the  severity  of  his  laws,  ilod  into  Italy,  and  settled
ferst  at  Po»etia;  fruili  whence  several  of  them  removed  into  the

P3


t66  plutahch's  lives*

difficult  however,  to  adjust  the  times  exactly,  particulap-
ly  those  that  are  only  distinguished  with  the  names  of  the
01}TnpiG  conquerors. ;  of  which,  we  are  told,  Hippias,  the  "
Elean,  made  a  collection  at  a  late  period^ witliout  sufficieiit
vouchers.  We  shall  now  relate  what  we  have  met  with
most  remarkable  concerning  Numa,  beginning  from  that
point  of  time  which  is  most  suitable  to  our  purpose.

It  was  in  the  thirty-seventh  year  from  the  building  of
Rome,  and  of  the  reign  of  Romulus,  on  the  seventh  of  the
month  of  July  (which  day  is  now  called  A'onie  Ca/irotina)
when  that  prince  went  oiit  of  the  city  to  offer  a  solemn  sa-
crifice at  a  place  called  the  Goats-Marsh,  m  the  presence
of  the  senate  and  great  part  of  the  people.  Suddenly
there  happened  a  great  alteration  in  the  air,  and  the  clouds
burst  in  a  storm  of  wind  and  hail.  The  rest  of  the  as-
sembly were  struck  with  terror  and  ffed,  but  Romulus
disappeared,  and  could  not  be  found  either  alive  or  dead.
Upon  this,  the  senators  fell  under  a  violent  suspicion,  and
«.  report  was  propagated  against  them  among  the  people,
that  having  long  been  weary  of  the  yoke  of  kingly  gov-
ernment, and  desirous  to  get  the  power  into  their  own
hands,  they  had  murdered  the  kingv  Particularly  as  he
had  treated  them  for  sometime  in  an  arbitrary  and  impe-
rious manner..  But  they  found  means  to  obviate  this
suspicion,  by  paying  divine  honours  to  Romulus  as  a  per-
son that  had  been  privileged  from  the  fate  of  other  mor-
tals, and  was  only  removed  to  a  happier  scene.  More-
over, Proculus,  a  man  of  high  rank,  made  oath  that  he
saw  Romulus  carried  up  to  heaven  in  complete  armour,
and  heard  a  voice  commanding  that  he  should  he  called

Fresh  disturbances  and  tumults  arose  in  the  city  about,
the  election  of  a  new  king,  the  later  inhabitants  being  not
yet  thoroughly  incorporated  with  the  first,  the  common-
alty fluctuating  and  unsettled  in  itself,  and  the  patricians
full  of  animosity  and  jealousies  of  each  other.  All,  in-
deed, agreed  that  a  king  should  be  appointed,  but  they
differed  and  debated,  not  only  about  the  person  to  be  fixed
upon,  but  from  which  of  the  two  nations  he  sliould  be
elected.     For  neither  could  tliey  who  with  Romulus  built

eountry  of  the  Sabines,  and,  uniting  with  that  people,  taught  them
their  customs  ;  particularly  those  relating  to  the  conduct  of  war,  to.
fortitude,  patience,  and  a  fi-ugal  and  abstemious  manner  of  living.
This  colony  ,i;heai,  settled  in  It^lj  120  yejw:&  b&for«  tke  bii-tb  ofNu»»k


the  city,  endure,  that  the  Sabines,  who  had  been  admitted
citizens,  and  obtained  a  share  of  the  lands,  should  attempt
to  command  those  from  whom  they  had  received  such
privileges  ;  nor  yet  could  the  Sabines  depart  from  their
claim  of  giving  a  king  in  their  turn  to  Rome,  having  this
i^ood  argument  in  their  favour,  that,  upon  the  death  of
Tatius,  they  had  suffered  Romulus  peaceably  to  enjoy  the
throne,  without  a  colleague.  It  was  also  to  be  consider-
ed, that  they  did  not  come  as  inferiors  to  join  a  superior
people,  but  by  their  rank  and  immber  added  strength  and
dignity  to  the  city  that  received  them.  These  were  the
arguments  on  which  they  founded  their  claims.  I^est  this
dispute  should  produce  an  utter  confusion,  whilst  there
was  no  king,  nor  any  steersman  at  the  helm,  the  senators
made  an  order  that  the  hundred  and  fifty  members  who
composed  their  body,*  should  each,  in  their  turns,  be  at-
tired in  the  robes  of  state  ;  in  the  room  of  Quiriyius,  offer
the  stated  sacrifices  to  the  gods,  and  dispatch  the  whole
public  business,  six  hours  in  the  day,  and  six  hours  at
night.  This  distribution  of  time,  seemed  well  contrived,
in  point  of  equahty  amongst  the  regents,  and  the  change
of  power  from  hand  to  hand  prevented  its  being  obnoxious
to  the  people,  who  saw  the  same  person  ia  one  day  and
one  night  reduced  from  a  king  to^  a  private  man.  This
occasional  administration  the  Romans  C3.\\  2in In terreg7m7n.
But  though  the  matter  was  managed  in  this  moderate
and  populai"  way,  the  senators  could  not  escape  the  sus-
picions and  complaints  of  the  people,  that  they  were
changing  the  government  into  an  ohgarchy,  and,  as  they
bad  the  direction  of  all  affairs  in  their  hands,  were  un-
willing to  have  a  king.  At  last  it  was  agreed  between
the  two  parties,  that  one  nation  should  choose  a  king  out,
©f  the  whole  body  of  the  other.     This  was  considered  as

*  According  to  our  author  in  the  life  of  Romulus,  the  number  of
the  senators  was  2Q0.  Indeed,  Dionysius  says,  that  writers  differ-
ed in  this  particular,  some  affirming,  that  100  senators  were  added
to  the  original  number  upon  the  union  of  the  Sabines  with  the  Ro-
mans ;  and  others,  that  only  fifty  were  added.  Livy  gives  the  meat
probable  account  of  the  manner  of  the  Inttrregnum.  The  senators,
he  says,  divided  themselves  into  decuries  or  tens.  These  decuries
di'ew  lots  which  should  govern  first  ;  and  the  decury,  to  whose  lot
it  fell,  enjoyed  the  supreme  authority  for  five  days  ;  yet,  in  such  a:
manner,  that  one  person  only  of  the  goveniiug  deciU"/  U«id  thfe  ear-
•jgni  of  sovereignty  at  a  time.


16?  Plutarch's  livest,

the  best  means  of  putting  a  stop  to  the  present  contentiony
and  of  inspiring  the  king  with  an  affection  for  both
parties,  since  he  would  be  gracious  to  these,  because  they
had  elected  him,  and  to  those  as  his  kindred  and  country-
men. The  Sabines  leaving  the  Romans  to  their  option,
they  preferred  a  Sabine  king  of  their  own  electing,  to  a
Roman  chosen  by  the  Sabines.  Consulting,  therefore,
among  themselves*,  they  fixed  upon  Numa  Pompilius,
a  Sabine,  who  was  not  of  the  number  of  those  that  had
migrated  to  Rome,  but  so  celebrated  for  virtue,  that  the
Sabines  received  the  nomination  even  with  greater  ap-
plause than  the  Romans  themselves.  When  they  had  ac-
Cjuainted  the  people  with  their  resolution,  they  sent  the
most  eminent  personages  of  both  nations  ambassadors,
to  intreat  him  to  come  and  take  upon  him  the  govern-
ment*

Numa  was  of  Cures,  a  considerable  city  of  the  Sabinesy
from  which  the  Romans,  together  with  the  incorporated
Sabines,  took  the  name  of  Quirites.  He  was  the  son  of
a  person  of  distinction  named  Pomponius,  and  the  youngest
ef  four  brothers.  It  seemed  to  be  by  the  direction  of  the
gods,  that  he  was  born  the  twenty-first  of  April,  the  same
day  that  Rome  was  founded  by  Romulus.  His  mind  was
naturally  disposed  to  virtue  ;  and  he  still  farther  subdued  it
by  discipline,  patience^  and  philosophy ;  not  only  purg-
ing it  of  the  grosser  and  more  infamous  passions,  but  even
of  that  ambition  and  rapaciousness  which  was  reckoned
honourable  amongst  the  barbarians  ;  persuaded  that  true
fortitude  consists  in  the  conquest  of  appetites  by  reason.
On  this  account,  he  banished  all  luxury  and  splendor  from
his  house  ;  and  both  the  citizens  and  strangers  found  in
him  a  faithful  counsellor,  and  an  upright  judge.  As  for
his  hours  of  leisure,  he  spent  them  not  in  the  pursiaits  of
pleasure,  or  schemes  of  profit,  but  in  the  worship  of  the
gods,  and  in  rational  inquiries  into  their  nature  and  their
power.  His  name  became  at  length  so  illustrious,  that
Tatius,  who  v»^as  the  associate  of  Romulus  in  the  king-
dom, having  an  only  daughter  named  Tatia,  bestowed  her'

*  The  interrex,  for  tfee  time  being,  having  summoned  the  people,,
addressed  them  thus  :  "  Romans,  elect  yourselves  a  king  ;  the  senate
*'  give  their  consent ;  and,  if  you  choose  a  prince  worthy  to  succeed
*•  Romulus,  the  senate  will  confirm  your  choice."  The  people  were
so  well  pleased  with  this  condescension  of  the  senate,  that  they  re-
mitted the  choice. to  them.


NUMA.  160

lipon  him.  He  was  not,  however,  so  much  elated  witli
this  match  as  to  remove  to  the  court  of  his  father-in-law,
but  continued  in  the  country  of  the  Sabines,  paying  his
attentions  to  his  own  father,  who  was  now  grown  old.
Tatia  was  partaker  of  his  retirement,  and  preferred  the
calm  enjoyment  of  life  with  her  husband  in  privacy,  to
the  honours  and  distinction  in  which  she  might  have  lived
with  her  father  at  Rome.  Thirteen  years  ^after  their
marriage  she  died.

Xuma  then  left  the  society  of  the  city,  and  passed^his
time  in  wandering  about  alone  in  the  sacred  groves  and
lawns,  in  the  most  retired  and  solitary  places.  Hence  the
report  concerning  the  goddess  Egeria  chiefly  took  its
rise  ;*  and  it  was  believed  that  it  was  not  from  any  in-
ward sorrow  or  melancholy  turn  that  he  avoided  human
conversation,  but  from  his  being  admitted  to  that  which
was  more  venerable  and  excellent,  from  the  honour  he  had
of  a  familiar  intercourse  with  a  divinity  that  loved  him,
Vv'hich  led  him  to  happiness  and  knov/ledge  more  than
mortal.  It  is  obvious  enough,  how  much  this  resembles
many  of  the  ancient  stories  received  and  delivered  down
by  the  Phrygians  of  Atys,t  the  Bythenians  of  Herodotus,
and  the  Arcadians  of  Endvmion  ;  to  whom  miorht  be
added  many  others,  who  were  thought  to  have  attained  to
superior  felicity,  and  to  be  beloved  in  an  extraordinary
manner  by  the  gods.  And,  indeed,  it  is  rational  enough
to  suppose,  that  the  deity  would  not  place  his  affection
upon  horses  or  birdsj  but  rather  upon  human  beings,  emi-

*  Numa's  inclination  to  solitude,  and  his  custom  of  retiring  into
the  secret  places  of  the  forest  of  Aricia,  gave  rise  to  several  popular
opinions.  Some  believed,  that  the  nymph  Egeria  herself  dictated  to
him  the  laws,  both  civil  and  religious,  which  he  established.  And,
indeed,  he  declared  so  himself,  in  order  to  procure  a  divine  sanction  to
them.  But,  as  no  great  man  is  without  aspersions,  others  have
thouglit,  that,  under  this  affected  passion  for  woods  and  caves,  was
concealed  another  more  real  and  less  chaste.  This  gave  occasion  to
that  sarcasm  of  Juvenal,  in  speaking  of  the  grove  of  Egeria,  (^Sat.  iii.
ver.  12.)

Ulc  ubi  7iocturn<e  Kumcc  canst'ituebat  amiccc.
Ovid  says,  that  to  remove  her  grief  for  the  loss  of  Numa,  Diana
changed  her  into  a  foimtain  which  still  bears  her  name.     Metam.
l.xv.

t  Atys  v.'as  said  to  be  beloved  by  the  goddess  Cybele,  and  Endv-
mion by  Diana  ;  but  we  believe  there  is  no  where  else  any  mention
r>ade  of  this  Herodotus,  or  RUodotus,  as  Dacier  from  his  manuscript
calls  hijn.


170  Plutarch's  lives.

nently  distlng-ulslied  by  virtue ;  and  tliat  he  neither  dislike*
nor  disdains  to  hold  conversation  with  a  man  of  v/isdom
and  piety.  But  that  a  divinity  should  be  captivated  with,
the  external  beauty  of  any  human  body,  is  irrational  to
believe.  The  Egyptians,  indeed,  make  a  distinction  in
this  case,  wdiich  they  think  not  an  absurd  one,  that  it  is
not  impossible  for  a  woman  to  be  impregnated  by  the  ap-
proach of  some  divine  spirit ;  but  that  a  man  can  have
no  corporeal  intercourse  with  a  goddess.  But  they  do  not,
however,  consider  that  a  mixture,  be  it  of  v/hat  sort  it
may,  equally  communicates  its  being.  In  short,  the  re-
gard which  the  gods  have  for  men,  tliough,  like  a  hu-
man passion,  it  be  called  love,  must  be  employed  inform-
ing their  manners,  and  raising'  them  to  higher  degrees
of  virtue.  In  this  sense  we  may  admit  the  assertion  of  the
poets,  that  Phorbas,*  Hyacinthus,  and  Admetus,  were
beloved  by  Apollo;  and  that  Hippolytus,  the  Sicyonian^
was  equally  in  his  favour  ;  so  that  whenever  he  sailed
from  Cirrha  to  Sicyon,  the  priestess,  to  signify  Apollo's
satisfaction,  repeated  this  heroic  verse  \

He  comes,  again  the  much-loved  hero  comes.
It  is  also  fabled,  that  Pan  was  in  love  with  Pindar f   on
account  of  his  poetry  ;  and  that  Archilochus  and  Hesiod,:!:

*  Phorbas  was  the  son  of  Triopas,  khig  of  Argos.  He  delivered
the  Uhodians  from  a  prodigious  number  of  serpents  that  infested
their  island,  and  particularly  from  one  furious  dragon  that  had  de-
voured a  great  many  people.  He  was,  therefore,  supposed  to  be  dear
to  Apollo,  who  had  slain  the  Python.  After  his  death  he  was  placed
in  the  heavens,  with  the  dragon  he  had  destroyed,  in  the  constella-
tion Ophiucus,  or  Surpentm-ius.

Hyacinthus  was  the  son  of  Amyclas,  founder  of  the  city  of  Amy-
clae,  near  Sparta.  He  was  beloved  by  Apollo  and  Zephyrus,  and
■was  killed  in  a  fit  of  jealousy  by  the  latter,  who,  with  a  pull"  of  wind,
caused  a  quoit  thrown  by  Apollo  to  fall  upon  his  head.  He  was
changed  into  a  flower  which  bears  his  name.  Vide  Pausan.  de
Laconic.  1.  iii.  et  Ovid.  Metam.  1.  x.  fab.  5.

Admetus  was  the  son  of  Pheres,  king  of  Thessaly.  It  is  said  that
Apollo  kept  his  sheep.

t  Pindar  had  a  particular  devotion  for  the  god  Pan,  and  therefore
took  up  his  abode  near  the  temple  of  Rhea  and  Pan.  He  composed
the  hymns  which  the  Theban  virgins  sung  on  the  festival  of  that
deity  ;  and,  it  is  said,  he  had  the  happiness  to  hear  Pan  himself  shig-
ing  one  of  his  odes.

\  Archilochus  w^as  slain  by  a  soldier  of  Naxos,  who  was  obliged
by  the  priestess  of  Apollo  to  make  expiation  for  having  killed  a  man
consecrated  to  the  muses. As  for  Hesiod,  the  Orchomeniaus,  %


KUMA.  171

after  their  death,  were  honoured  by  the  heavenly  powers
for  the  same  reason.  Sophocles,  too,  (as  the  story  goes)
was  blessed  in  liis  life-time  with  the  conversation  of  the
god  jEsculapius,  of  which  inany  proofs  still  remain  ;  and
another  deity  procured  him  burial.*  Now,  if  we  admit
that  these  were  so  highly  favoured,  shall  we  deny  that
Zaleucus,t  Minos,  Zoroaster,  Numa,  and  Lycurgus,
kings  and  lawgivers,  were  happy  in  tlie  same  respect  I
Nay,  rather,  we  shall  think,  that  the  gods  might  seri-
ously converse  with  such  excellent  persons  as  these,  to
instruct  and  encourage  thein  in  their  great  attempts  ;
whereas,  if  they  indulged  poets  and  musicians  in  the
same  grace,  it  must  be  by  way  of  diversion.  To  such  as
are. of  another  opinion,  I  shall  say,  however,  with  Bac«
chylides,  T/ie  roay  is  broach  For  it  is  no  unplausible
account  of  the  matter  which  others  give,  when  they  tell
us,  that  Lycurgus,  Numa,  and  other  great  men,  finding
their  people  difficult  to  manage,  and  alterations  to  be
made  in  their  several  governments,  pretended  commis-
sions from  heaven,  which  were  salutary,  at  least  to  those
for  whom  they  were  invented.

Numa  was  now  in  his  fortieth  year,  when  ambassadors
came  from  Rome  to  make  him  an  offer  of  the  kingdom.
The  speakers  were  Proculus  and  Velesus,  whom  the
people  before  had  cast  their  eyes  upon  for  the  royal
dignity?  the  Romans  being  attached  to  Proculus,  and  the
Sabines  to  Velesus.  As  they  imagined  that  Numa  would
gladly  embrace  his  good  fortune,  they  made  but  a  short
speech.  They  found  it,  however,  no  easy  matter  to  per-
suade him,  but  were  obliged  to  make  use  of  much  intreaty
to  draw  him  from  that  peaceful  retreat  he  was  so  fond  of,
to  the  government  of  a  city  born,  as  it  were,  and  brought
up  in  war.  In  the  presence,  therefore,  of  his  father,  and
cue  of  his  kinsmen,  named  Marcius,  he  gave  them  this

people  of  Boeotia,  being  terribly  afflicted  by  a  plague,  were  ordered
by  the  oracle  to  remove  the  bones  of  that  poet,  from  Naupactus  in
JEioWd.,  into  their  country.

*  Sophocles  died  at  Athens,  while  Lysanderwas  carrying  on  the
siege  of  the  city ;  and  Bacchus  is  said  to  have  appeared  to  the  Spar-
tan general  in  a  dream,  and  ordered  him  to  permit  the  new  Athe-
nian Syren  to  be  buried  at  Decelea.

t  Zaleucus  gave  laws  to  the  Locrians  in  Magna  Grsecia  ;  Zoro-
aster, one  of  the  mogi,  and  king  of  the  Bactrians,  to  his  own  sub»
jects  ;  and  Minos  to  the  people  of  Crete.
t


172  PLUTARCH  S    LIVES.

answer  ;  "  Every  change  of  human  life  has  its  dangers;
but  when  a  man  has  a  suORciency  for  every  thing,  and
there  is  nothing  in  his  present  situation  to  be  complain-
ed of,  what  but  madness  can  lead  him  from  his  usual
track  of  life,  which,  if  it  has  no  other  advantage,  has
that  of  certainty,  to  experience  another  as  yet  doubtful
and  unknown  ?  But  the  dangers  that  attend  this  govern-
ment are  beyond  an  uncertainty,  if  we  may  form  a  judg-
ment from  the  fortunes  of  Romulus,  who  laboured  un*
der  the  suspicion  of  taking  off  Tatius,  his  colleague,
and  was  supposed  to  have  lost  his  own  life  with  equal  in-
justice. Yet  Romulus  is  celebrated  as  a  person  of  divine
origin,  as  supernaturally  nourished,  when  an  infant,  and
most  wonderfully  preserved.  For  my  part,  I  am  only
of  mortal  race,  and  you  are  sensible  my  nursing  and  edu-
cation boast  of  nothing  extraordinary.  As  for  my  cha-
racter, if  it  has  any  distinction,  it  has  been  gained  in  a
way  not  likely  to  qualify  me  for  a  king,  in  scenes  of  re-
pose and  employments  by  no  means  arduous.  My  geni-
us is  inclined  to  pea.ce,  my  love  has  long  been  fixed  up-
on it,  and  I  have  studiously  avoided  the  confusion  of  war:
I  have  also  drawn  others,  so  far  as  my  influence  extend-
ed, to  the  worship  of  the  gods,  to  mutual  offices  of  friend-
ship, and  to  spend  the  rest  of  their  time  in  tiUing  the
ground,  and  feeding  cattle.  The  Romans  may  have
unavoidable  wars  left  upon  their  hands  by  their  late  king,
for  the  maintaining  of  which  you  you  have  need  of  ano-
ther more  active  and  more  enterprising.  Besides  the  peo-
ple are  of  a  warlike  disposition,  spirited  with  success,  and
plainly  enough  discover  their  inclination  to  extend  their
conquests.  Of  course,  therefore,  a  person  who  has  set
his  heart  upon  the  promoting  of  religion  and  justice,  and
drawing  men  off  from  the  love  of  violence  and  war,  would
soon  become  ridiculous  and  contemtible  to  a  city  that  has
more  occasion  for  a  general  than  a  king."

Numa,  in  this  manner  declining  the  crown,  the  Romans,
on  the  other  hand,  exerted  all  their  endeavours  to  obviate
his  objections,  and  begged  of  him  not  to  throw  them  into
confusion  and  civil  war  again,  as  there  was  no  other  whom
both  parties  would  unanimously  elect.  When  the  ambas-
sadors had  retired,  his  father  and  his  friend  Marcius  pri-
Tately  urged  him,  by  all  the  arguments  in  their  power,  t»


KUMA.  173

receive  this  great  and  valuable  gift  of  heaven.  "  If  cx)n-
tented,  said  they,  with  a  competence,  yon  desii^  not
riches,  nor  aspire  after  the  honour  of  sovereignty,  hav-
ing a  higher  and  belter  distinction  in  virtue  ;  yet  consi-
der that  a  king  is  the  minister  of  God,  who  now  awakens,
and  puts  in  action  your  native  wisdom  and  justice  ;  de-
cline not,  therefore,  an  authority,  which  to  a  wise  man  is
a  field  for  great  and  good  actions ;  where  dignity  may  be
added  to  religion,  and  men  may  be  brought  over  to  pie-
ty, in  the  easiest  and  readiest  way,  by  the  influence  of
the  prince.  Tatius,  though  a  stranger,  was  beloved  by
this  people,  and  they  pay  divine  honours  to  the  memory
of  Romulus.  Besides,  who  knows,  as  they  are  victorious,
but  they  may  be  satiated  with  war,  and  having  no  farther
wish  for  t]-iumphs  and  spoils,  may  be  desirous  of  a  mild
and  just  governor  for  the  establishment  of  good  laws,  and
the  settling  of  peace  ?  But  should  they  be  ever  so  ardently
inclined  to  war,  yet  is  it  not  better  to  turn  their  violence
another  way,  and  to  be  the  centre  of  union  and  friendship
between  the  country  of  the  Sabines,  and  so  -great  and
flourishing  a  state  as  that  of  Rome  ? ' '  These  inducements
we  are  told,  were  strengthened  by  auspicious  omens,  and
by  the  zeal  and  ardour  of  his  fellow-citizens,  who  as  soon
as  they  had  learned  the  subject  of  the  embassy,  went  in
a  body  to  entreat  him  to  t^ike  the  government  upon  him,
as  the  only  means  to  appease  all  dissension,  and  effec-
tually incorporate  the  two  nations  into  one.

When  he  had  determined  to  go,  he  offered  sacrifice  to
the  gods,  and  then  set  forward  to  Rome.  Struck  with
love  and  admiration  of  the  man,  the  senate  and  people
met  him  on  the  way  ;  the  women  w^elcomed  him  with
blessings  and  shouts  of  joy  ;  the  temples  w^ere  crowned
with  sacrifices  ;  and  sounivei-sal  was  the  satisfaction,  that
the  city  might  seem  to  have  received  a  kingdom,  instead
of  a  king.  When  they  w^ere  come  into  the /'V«;w,  Spu-
lius  Vcttius,  whose  turn  it  then  was  to  be  Interrex^  put  it
to  the  vote,  whether  Numa  should  be  king,  and  all  the
citizens  agreed  to  it  with  one  voice.  The  robes  and  other
distinctions  of  royalty  then  were  offered  him,  but  he  com-
manded them  to  stop,  as  his  authority  yet  wanted  the
sanction  of  heaven.  Taking  therefore,  with  him  the
priests  and  aii^urs^  he  w^ent  up  to  the  Capitol^  which  the

VOL,    I.  (^

ff


174  FLUT arch's  lives.

Romans  at  that  time  called  the  Tar  J wi  cm  rock.  There
the  chief  of  the  avgurs  covered  the  head  of  Numaj*  and
turned  his  face  towards  the  south  ;  then  standing  behind
him,  and  laying  his  right  hand  upon  his  head,  he  offered
up  his  devotions,  and  looked  around  him,  in  hopes  of
seeing  birds,  or  some  other  signal  from  the  gods.  An  in-
credible silence  reigned  among  the  people,  anxious  for
the  event,  and  lost  in  suspence,  till  the  auspicious  birds
appeared  and  passed  on  the  right  hand.  Then  Numa
took  the  royal  robe,  and  went  d^.^n  from  the  mount  to
the  people,  who  received  him  with  loud  acclamations,  as
the  most  pious  of  men,  and  most  beloved  of  the  gods.

His  first  act  of  government  was  to  discharge  the  body
of  three  hundred  men,  called  Celcres,^  whom  Romulus
always  kept  about  his  person  as  guards ;  for  he  neither
chose  to  distrust  those  who  put  a  confidence  in  him,  nor
to  reign  over  a  people  that  could  distrust  him.  In  the
next  place,  to  the  priests  of  Jupiter  and  Mars  he  added
one  for  Romulus,  whom  he  styled  Flamen  Quirinalls,
Mamines  was  a  common  name  for  priests  before  that  time,
^nd  it  is  said  to  have  been  corrupted  from  Pilamines^  a
term  derived  from  PUoi^  which  in  Greek  signifies  ca/is^^
(for  they  wore,  it  seems,  a  kind  of  caps  or  hoods ;)  and
the  Latin  language  had  many  more  Greek  words  mixed
with  it  then,  than  it  has  at  this  time.  Thus  royal
mantles  were  by  the  Romans  called  KctJitZy  which  Juba
assures  us  was  from  the   Greek  ChUncs^  and  the  name

*  So  it  is  in  the  text  of  Plutarch,  as  it  now  stands ;  but  it  appears
from  Livy,  that  the  augur  covered  his  own  head,  not  that  of  Numa,
Augur  ad  l(£vam  ejus,  capitevelato,  sedein  cepit,  Sic,  And  indeed,  the
augur  always  covered  his  head  in  a  gown  peculiar  to  his  office,  called
J^ixna,  when  he  made  his  observations.  Mezeray  reconciles  these
writers  and  removes  the  seeming  mistake  of  Plutarch,  by  a  reading
which  Francis  Robortcl  had  found  in  an  ancient  manuscript,  roy^jvs/s

If  this  be  considered  only  as  an  emendation^  it  is  a  very  good  one.

t  Numa  did  not  make  use  of  them  as  guards,  but  as  inferior  mi-
nisters, who  were  to  take  care  of  the  sacrifices,  imder  the  direction
of  the  tribunes,  who  had  commanded  them  in  their  military  capacity.

I  Others  think  they  took  their  names  from  the  flame-coloured
tufts  they  had  on  their  caps.  They  were  denominated  from  the  par-
ticular god  to  whom  their  ministry  was  confined,  as  Flamen  Dialist
the  Priest  of  Jupiter;  Flamen  Marti  alts,  the  Prieatof  Mars.


NUMA.  lf$

of  Camillu'i^*  given  to  the  youth  who  served  in  the  tem-
ple of  Jupiter,  and  who  was  to  have  both  his  parents  ahve,
was  tlie  same  which  some  of  the  Greeks  gi\  e  to  Mercury,
on  account  of  his  being  an  attendant  of  that  god.

Numa  having  settled  these  matters  with  a  view  to  esta-
bhsh  himself  in  the  people's  good  graces,  immcdiiitely
after  attempted  to  sofcen  them,  as  iron  is  softened  by  fire,
and  to  bring  them  from  a  violent  and  warlike  disposition,
to  a  juster  and  more  gentle  temper.  For,  if  any  city
ever  was  in  a  state  of  injianimation^  as  Plato  expresses  it,
Rome  certainly  was,  being  composed  at  first  of  the  most
hardy  and  resolute  men,  whom  boldness  and  despair  had
driven  thither  from  all  quarters,  nourished  and  grown  up
to  power  by  a  series  of  wars,  and  strengthened  even  by
blows  and  conflicts,  as  piles  fixed  in  the  ground  become
firmer  under  the  strokes  of  the  rammer.  Persuaded  that
no  ordinary  means  were  sufficient  to  form  and  reduce  so
high-spirited  and  untractable  a  people  to  mildness  and
peace,  he  called  in  the  assistance  of  religion.  By  sacri-
fices, religious  dances,  and  processions,  which  he  ap-
pointed, and  wherein  himself  ofriciated,  he  contrived  to
mix  the  charms  of  festivity  and  social  pleasure  with  the
solemnity  of  the  ceremonies.  Tints  he  soothed  their
minds,  and  calmed  their  fierceness  and  martial  fire.
Sometimes  also,  by  acquainting  them  vrith  prodigies  from
heaven,  by  reports  of  dreadful  apparitions  and  menacing
voices,  he  inspired  them  with  terror,  and  humbled  them
with  superstition.  This  was  the  principal  cause  of  the
report,  that  he  drew  his  wisdom  from  the  sources  of  Py-
thagoras :  For  a  great  part  of  the  philosophy  of  the  lat-
ter, as  well  as  the  govenimentof  the  former,  consisted  in
religious  attentions  and  the  worship  of  the  gods.  It  is
likewise  said,  that  this  solemn  appearance  andair  of  sanc-
tity, was  copied  from  Pytliagoras.  That  Philosopher  had
so  far  tamed  an  eagle,  that,  by  pronouncing  certain
words,  he  could  stop  it  in  its  flight,  or  bring  it  dov/n  ;
andpassingtlirough  the  multitudes  assembled  at  the  Olym-

*  Camillus  is  derived  from  the  Boeotic  xat^w'Acr,  which  properly
signifies  a  servitor.  In  every  temple  there  was  a  youth  of  quality,
whose  business  it  was  to  minister  to  the  priest.  It  was  necessary
that  the  father  and  mother  of  the  youth  should  be  both  alive ;  fer
•which  reason  Plutarch  makes  use  of  the  word  «/A^(3a;iJl,  which  the
Latins  c^\patrini-u.m  et  matrimiun.


176  PLUTARCH^   LIVES.  ^

pic  games,  he  shewed  them  his  golden  thigh;  besides
ther  arts  and  actions,  by  which  he  pretended  to  some-
hing   supernatural.     This  led  Timon  the  Phliasian  to

%vrite,

To  catch  applause  Pythagoras  affects
/  A  solemn  air  and  grandeur  of  expression.

But  Numa  feigned  that  some  goddess  or  mountain
nymph,  favoured  him  with  her  private  regards,  (as  we
have  already  observed)  and  that  he  had  moreover  fre-
quent conversations  with  the  muses.  To  the  latter  he
ascribed  most  of  his  revelations  ;  and  there  was  one  in
particular  that  he  called  Tacita^  as  much  as  to  say,  the
muse  of  silence^*  whom  he  taught  the  Romans  to  distin-
guish with  their  veneration.  By  this,  too,  he  seemed  to
shew  his  knowledge  and  approbation  of  the  Pythagorean
precept  of  silence.

His  regulation-s  concerning  images  seem  likewise  to
have  some  relation  to  the  doctrine  of  Pythagoras ;  who
was  of  opinion  that  the  First  Cause  was  not  an  object  of
sense,  nor  liable  to  passion,  but  invisible,  incorruptible,
and  discernible  only  by  the  mind..  Thus  Numa  forbade
the  Romans  to  represent  the  Deity  in  the  form  either  of
man  or  beast.  Nor  was  there  among  them  formerly  any
rmageor  statue  of  the  Divine  Being :  During  the  first  hun-
dred and  seventy  years  tliey  built  temples,  indeed,  and
other  sacred  domes,  but  placed  in  them  no  figure  of  any
kind  ;  persuaded  that  it  v/as  impious  to  represent  things
divine  by  what  is  perishable,  and  that  we  can  have  no
conception  of  God  but  by  the  understanding.  His  sacri-
fices, too,  resembled  the  Pythagorean  v/orship  :  For  they
were  without  any  effusion  of  blood,  consisting  chiefly  of
flour,  libations  of  wine,  and  other  very  simple  and  unex-
pensive  things.

To  these  arguments  other  circumstances  are  added,  to
prove  that  these  two  great  men  were  acquainted  with  each
other.  One  of  which  is,  that  Pythagoras  was  enrolled  a
citizen  of  Rome.     This   account  we  have  in  an  address

*  The  common  ?eadu^^  of  the  text  Is,  oJoy  <r<w?r»A:?»  ft  vbxv^
the  word  viecv  signifies  young;,  but  it  should  undoubtedly  be  re^.d£V£xv
silent,  mute,  not  only  from  the  analogy  of  the  sense,  and  the  conjec-
ture of  Stephens,  but  on  the  authority  of  a  manuscript.  In  the  city
of  Erythrx,  there  was  a  temple  of  Minerva,  where  the  priestess-
was  called  HesycbiUf  that  is,  the  composeJ,  the  silent.


NUMA.  177

to  Antenor  from  Epicharmus,  a  writer  of  comedy,  and  a
very  ancient  author,  who  was  himself  of  the  school  of
Pythagoras.*  Another  is,  that  Numa  having  four  sons,t
called  one  of  them  Mamercus,  after  the  name  of  a  son  of
Pythagoras.  From  him  too,  they  tell  us,  the  ^milian
family  is  descended,  which  is  one. of  the  noblest  in  Rome  ;
the  king  having  given  him  the  surname  of  -(Emilius,  on
account  of  his  gmceful  and  engaging  manner  of  speaking.
And  I  have  myself  been  informed  by  several  persons  in
Rome,  that  the  Romans  being  commanded  by  the  oracle
to  erect  two  statues^t  one  to  the  wisest,  and  the  other  to
the  bravest  of  the  Grecians,  set  up  in  brass  the  figures  of
Pythagoras  and  Alcibiades.  But  as  these  matters  are  very
dubious,  to  support  or  refute  them  faitlier.  would  look
like  the  juvenile  affectation  of  dispute..

To  Numa  is  attributed  the  institution  of  that  high  or-^
der  of  priests  called  Po7it(/iceSy\\  over  Vv^hich  he  is  said  to
have  presided  himself.  Some  say,  they  were  called,  Pon-

*  As  Tlv'^ocyo^mvig  5<fifcrpiCn?  (xtr^fixc^i^y  does  not  necessarily  signify
■tcbolar  to  Pjthagoras,  we  have  rendered  it  of  tks- school nj' Pythagoras,
or  a  Pythagorean,  to  avoid  involving  Plutarch  in  a  glaring  anachro-
nism. According  to  the  JTiWrmora  Oxo/j.  Epicharmus  flourished  in
the  year  before  Christ  472  ;  and  it  is  certain  it  must  have  been  abotix
that  time,  because  he  was  at  the  court  of  Hiero.

f  Some  writers,  to  countenance  the  vanity  of  c&rtain  noble  fami-
lies in  Rome,  in  deducing  their  genealrgy  from  Numa,  have  given
that  prince  four  sons.  But  the  common  opinion  is,  that  he  had  only
one  daughter,  named  Pompilia.  The  i^milii  were  one  of  the  most
considerable  families  in  Rome,  and  branched  into  the  Lepidi,  the
Pauli,  and  the  Papi.  The  word  Aimulus  or  Mmylus,  in  Qreek,  sig-
nifies gentle,  graceful.

\  Pliny  tells  us,  (I.  xxxiv.  c.  5.)  it  was  in  the  time  of  their  v/ar
Vv'ith  the  Samnites,  that  the  Romans  were  ordered  to  set  up  tliese
statues  ;  that  they  were  accordingly  placed  in  the  coniitium ,-  and  that
they  remained  there  till  the  dictatorship  of  Sylla.  The  oracle,  by
this  direction,  probably  intimated,  that  the  Romans,  if  they  desired.
tc  be  victorious,  should  imitate  the  wisdom  and  valour  of  the  Greeks.

II  Numa  created  four,  who  were  all  patricians.  But,  in  the  year  of
Rome  453  or  454,  four  plebeians  were  added  to  the  number.  The
king  himself  is  here  asserted  to  have  been  the  chief  of  them,  orj&CT:-
iij'eoc  maxinius  ;  though  Livy  attributes  that  honour  to  an^other  per-
son of  the  sr.me  name,  viz-.  Numa  Marcius,  the  son  of  Marcius,one,
of  the  senators.  It  seems,  however,  not  improbable,  that  Numa,  who
was  of  so  religious  a  turn,  reserved  tlie  chief  dignity  in  the  priest-
liood  to  hiinself,  as  kings  had  done  in  the  first  ages  of  the  world,,
aad  as  the  emperors  of  Rome,  did  afterwards..


ITS  Plutarch's  lives.

tifices^  as  employed  in  the  service  of  Xhost  pou' erf  id  gods
that  govern  the  vv^orld  ;  ihrpotens  in  the  Roman  language-
signifies /zoTye?yw/.  Others,  from  their  being  ordered  by
^e  lawgiver  to  perform  such  secret  offices  as  were  in  their
/iViVer,  and  standing  excused  \yhen  there  was  some  great
impediment.  But  most  writers  assign  a  ridiculous  reason
for  the  term,  as  if  they  were  called  Puitificts  from  their
offering  sacrifices  upon  the  bridge,  which  the  Latins  call
pontem,  such  kind  of  ceremonies  it  seems  being  looked
upon  asi  the  mo^t  sacred,  and  of  greatest  antiquity.  These
priests,  too,  are  said  to  have  been  commissioned  to  keep
the  bridges  in  repair,  as  one  of  the  most  indispensable
parts  of  their  holy  office.  For  the  Romans  considered  it
as  an  execrable  impiety  to  demolish  the  wooden  bridge  ;
which^  we  are  told,  was  built  without  iron,  ^.nd  put  to-
gether with  pias  of  v/ood  only,  by  the  direction  of  some
oracle.  The  stone  bridge  wa&  built  m.any  ages  after,
when  ^Erailius  was  qurestor.  Some,  however,  inform  us,
that  the  wooden  bridge  was  not  constructed  in  the  time
of  Numa,  having  the  last  hand  put  to  it  by  Ancus  Mar-
cius,  who  was  grandson  to  Numa  by  his  daughter.

The  jioniifex  maxhnus^  chief  of  these  priests,  is  inter-
preter of  all  sacred  rites,  or  rather  a  superintendant  of
religion,  having  the  cai^e  not  only  sf  public  sacrifices-,
but  even  of  private  rites  and  offeringsj  forbidding  the
people  to  depPcrt  from  the  stated-cerem.onies,  and  teaching
them  how  to  honour  and  propitiate  the  gods.  He  had
also  the  inspection  of  the  holy  virgins  called  Vestcds.  For
to  Numa  is  ascribed  the  sacred  establishment  of  the  ves-
tal virgins,  and  the  whole  service  with  respect  to  the  per-
petual fire,  which  they  watch  continually.  This  office
seems  appropriated  to  them^either  because  fire,  which  is
of  a  pure  and  incorruptible  nature,  should  be  looked  after
by  persons  untouched  and  undefiled,  or  dse  because  vir-
ginity, like  fire  is  barren  and  unfruitful..  Agreeably  to
this  last  reason,  at  the  places  in  Greece,  w^here  the  sacred
lire  is  preserved  undistinguished, as  at  Delphi  and  Athens,
not  virgins,  but  widows  past  child-bearing,,  have  the
charge  of  it*  If  it  happens  by  any  accident  to  be  put
©ut,  as  the.  sacred  lamp  is  said  to  have  been  at  Athens,,
under  the.  tyranny  of  Aristion.;*  at  Delphi,  when  the

*  This  Aristion  held  out  a  long  time  against  Sylla,  who  besieged.
jtcd  took.  Athens  in  the  tin^.e  of  the  Mithridaticwar.  Aristion himiel£:


NlTMA.  179

tentpie  was  burnt  by  the  Medes  ;  and  at  Rome,  in  the'
Alithridatic  war,  as  also  in  the  civil  war,*  when  not  only
the  fire  was  extinguished,  but  the  altar  overturned  ;  it  is
not  to  be  lighted  again  from  another  fire,  but  new  fire  i&
to  be  gained  by  drawing  a  pure  and  unpolluted  flame
from  the  sun»-beams.  They  kindle  it  generally  with  con-
cave vessels,  of  brass,  formed  by  the  Conic  section  of  a
rectangled  triangle,  whose  lines  from  the  circumference
meet  in  one  central  point*  This  being  placed  against  the
sun,  causes  its  rays  to  converge  in  the  centre,  which,  by
reflection,  acquiring  the  force  and.  activity  of  fire,  rarefy
the  air,  and  immediately  Idmlle  such  light  and  dry  mat-
ter as  they  think  fi:t  to  apply.f  Some  are  of  opinion,
that  the  sacred  virgins  have  the  care  of  nothing  but  the
perpetual  fire.  But  others  say  they  have  some  private
rites  besides,  kept  from  the  sight  af  all  but  their  own  bo-
dy, concerning  which  I  have  delivered  in  the  life,  of
Camilius,  as  much  as  it  was  proper  to  inquire,  into  oi!
declare.

It  is  reported  that  at  first  only  two  virgins  were  con-
secrated by  Numa,  whose  names  were  Gegania  and  Ve-
rania  ;  afterwards  two  others  Caniileia  and  Tarpeia ;  to
whom  Servius  added  two  more  ;  and  that  number  has
continued  to  this  time.  The  vestals  were  obliged  by  the
king  to  preserve  their  virginity  for  thirty  years.  The
first  ten  years  they  spent  in  learning  their  office ;  the
next  ten  in  putting  in  practice  what  they  had  learned ;
and  the  third  peiiod  in.  instructing  of  others.  At  the
conclusion  of  this  time,  such  as  chose  it  had  liberty  to
marry,  and  quitting  their  sacred  employment,  to  take  up
some  other.  However,  we  have  account  of  but  very  few
that  accepted  this  indulgence,  and  those  did  not  prosper.
They  generally  became  a  prey  to  repentance  and  regret,

committed  inaumerable  outrag;es  in  the  city,  oiid  was  at  last  the
cause  of  its  being  sacked  and  phmdered.  As  for  the  sacred  fire,  it
was  kept  in  the  temple  of  Minerva.

*  Livy  tells  us  (1  86  )  that  towards  the  conclusion  of  the  civil  war
between  Sylla.  and  Marius,  Miitius  Scjevola,  the  pontiff,  was  killed
at  the  entrance  of  the  temple  of  Vesta  ;  but  we  do  not  find  that  t\\i
sacred  fii-e  was  extinguished.  And  even  when  that  temple  wa«  burnt
towards  the  end  of  the  first  Punic  war,  L.  Cecilius  Metellus,  then
pontiff,  rushed  through  the  llames,  and  hrowght  off  the  Fa/ladiutx.
and  other  sacred  things,  though  with  the  loss  of  his  sight.

t  Burning  glasses  were  invented  by  Arehinaed^S;^  who  fiourished.
500  years  ijlter  Nuraju,


180  PLTTT  ARCHES    LIVES*

from  whence  the  rest,  inspired  with  a  religious  fear,  wert
willing  to  end  their  lives  under  the  same  institution.

The  king  honoured  them  with  great  privileges,  sueh  as
power  to  make  a  will  during  their  father's  life,  and  to
transact  their  other  affairs  without  a  guardian,  like  the
motjiers  of  three  children  now.  When  they  went  abroad,
they  had  the  fasces  carried  before  them  ;*  and  if,  by  ac-
cident, they  met  a  person  led  to  execution,  his  life  was
granted  him.  But  the  vestal  was  to  make  oathf  that  it
was  by  chance  she  met  him,  and  not  by  design.  It  was.
death  to  go  under  the  chair  in  which  they  were  carried.

For  smaller  offences  these  virgins  were  punished  with,
stripes  :  and  soinetirnes  the /loniifejc  majcimus  gave  them,
the  discipline  naked,  in  some  dark  place,  and  under  the
cover  of  a  veil :  But  she  that  broke  her  vow.  of  chastity
was  buried  alive  by  the  Collins  gate-  There,,  within  the
walls,  is  raised  a  little  mount  of  earth,  called  in  Latin  J^-
ger  ;  under  which  is  prepared  a  small  cell,  with  steps  to
descend  to  it.  In  this  are  placed  a  bed,  a  lighted  lamp,,
and  some  slight  provisions,  such  as  bread,  water,  milk,
and  oil,  as  they  thought  it  impious  to  take  off  a  person,
consecrated  with  the  most  awful  ceremonies,  by  such  a
death  as  that  of  famine. |,  The  criminal  is  carried  to  pu-
nishment through  the  Foi-utnym  a  litter  well  covered  with-
out, and  bound  up  in  such  a  manner  that  her  cries  cannot
be  heard.  The  people  silently  make  way  for  the  litter,
and  follow  it  with  marks  of  extreme  sorrow  and  dejec-
tion. There  is  no  spectacle  more  dreadful  than  this,  nor
any  day  witli  the  city  passes  in  a  more  melancholy  man-
ner. When  the  litter  comes  to  the  place  appointed,  the
©fficei's  loose  the  cords,  the  high-priest  with  hands  lifted
lip  towards  heaven  offers  up  some  private  prayers  just  be-
fore the  fatal  minute,  then  takes  out  the  prisoner,  who  is
covered  with  a  veil,  and  places  her  upon  the  steps  which
lead  down  to  the  cell  :  after  this,  he  retires  with  the  rest

*  This  honour  was  not  conferred  upon  them  by  Numx,  but  by
the  trhimvirate  in  the  year  of  Rome  712.

•j-  Neither  a  vestal  nor  a  priest  of  Jupiter,  was  obliged  to  take  atx
oath.     They  were  belivedwithout  that  solemnity.

\  There  seems  to  be  something  improbable  and  inconsistent  in  this-.
Of  what  use  could  provisions  be  to  the  vestal,  who,  when  the  grave
was  closed  upon  her,  must  expire  through  want  of  air  ?  Or,  if  she
could  make  use  of  those  provisions,  was  she  not  at  last  to  die  by
famine  ?  Perhaps  what  Plutarch  here  call-;  provisions  were  materiah
fox  some  sacrihc^


XUMA.  181

of  the  priests,  and  when  she  is  gone  down,  the  step:^.  are
taken  away,  and  the  cell  is  covered  with  earth  ;  so  that
the  place  is  made  level  v»'ith  the  rest  of  the  mount,  lluis
were  the  vestals  punished  that  preserved  not  their  chas-
tity.

It  is  also  said,  that  Nunia  built  the  temple  of  Vcfitay
where  the  perpetual  lire  was  to  be  kept,*  in  an  orbicular
form,  not  intending  to  represent  the  figure  of  the  earth,  as
if  that  was  meant  by  Vesta^  but  the  frame  of  the  universe,
in  the  centre  of  which  the  Pythagoreans  place  the  element
of  fire,t  and  give  it  the  name  of  Vesta  and  Unity,  The
earth  they  suppose  not  to  be  without  motion,  nor  situated
in  the  centre  of  the  world,  but  to  niake  its  revolution
roulid  the  sphere  of  fire,  being  neither  one  of  the  most
valuable  nor  principal  parts  of  the  great  machine.  Plato,
too,  in  his  old  age,  is  reported  to  have  been  of  the  same
opinion,  assigning  the  earth  a  different  situation  from  the
centre,  and  leaving  that,  as  a  place  of  honour,  to  a  nobler
element.

The  Poiitijices^  were,  moreover,  to  prescribe  the  form
of  funeral  rites  to  such  as  consulted  them.  Numa  himself
taught  them  to  look  upon  the  last  offices  to  the  dead  as
no  pollution.  He  instructed  thern  to  pay  all  due  honoui*
to  the  infernal  gods,  as  receiving  the  most  excellent  part
of  us,  and  more  particularly  to  venerate  the  goddess  LU
bithia,  as  he  called  her,  who  presides  over  funeral  solem-
nities; whether  he  meant  by  htv  PrDsei-Jdne^  or  rather
Venus,!  ^s  some  of  the  most  learned  Romans  suppose  ;
not  improperly  ascribing  to  the  same  divine  power  the
care  of  our  birth  and  of  our  death.

He  himself  likewise  fixed  the  time  of  mourning,  accor-
ding to  the  different  ages  of  the  deceased.  He  allowed
none  for  a  child  that  died  under  three  years  of  age  ;  and
for  one  older  the  mourning  was  only  to  last  as  many  months
as  he  lived  years,  provided  those  were  not  more  than  ten.

*  Dionysius  of  Halicarnassus  (I.  ii.)  is  of  opinion,  and  probably
he  is  right,  that  Numa  did  build  the  temple  of  Vesta  in  a  round  form,
to  represent  the  figure  of  the  earth  ;  for  by  Veata  they  meant  the
earth.

t  That  this  was  the  opinion  of  Philolaus  and  other  Pythagoreans
is  well  known  :  but  Diogenes  Laertius  tells  us,  that  Pythagoras
himself  held  the  earth  to  be  the  centre.

\  This  Venus  Libit'ip.a  was  the  same  with  Proserpine.  She  was
called  at  Deljjhi  Venus  Epitumbia.  Pluto  was  the  Jupiter  of  the
shades  belo^  ;  and  there  they  had  their  Mercury  too.


182  Plutarch's  lives.

The  longest  mcnrning  was  not  to  continue  above  ten
months,  after  which  space  widows  were  permitted  to  mar-
ry again:  but  she  that  took  another  husband  before  that
term  was  out,  was  obliged  by  his  decree  to  sacrifice  acov/
with  calf,*

Numa  instituted. several  other  sacred  orders  ;  two  of
which  I  shall  mention,  the  Salii  f  and  Fecial€s,\  which  af-
ford p2.rticular  proofs  of  his  piety.  The  Feciales^  who
were  like  the  Irenophylakes^  or  guardians  cf  the  peacc^
among  the  Greeks,  had,  I  believe,  a  name  expressive  of
their  office  ;  for  they  were  to  act  and  mediate  between  the
two  parties,  to  decide  their  differences  by  reason,  and  not
suffer  them  to  go  to  war  till  all  hopes  of  justice  were  lost*
The  Greeks  call  such  a  peace  Irene,  as  puts  an  end  to
strife,  not  by  mutual  violence,  but  in  a  rational  way.  In
like  manner,  the  J'eczaies  or/2(?ra/afs,  were  often  dispatched

*  Such  an  unnatural  sacviflce  was  intended  to  deter  the  widows
from  marrying-  again  before  the  expiration  of  their  mourning.  Ro-
mulus's  year  consisting  but  often  months,  when  Numa  afterwards
added  two  months  more,  he  did  not  alter  the  time  he  had  before  set-
tled for  mourning  ;  and  therefore,  though  after  that  time  we  often
meet  with  Lucius  mvuis,  or  a  year's  mourning,  we  must  take  it  only
for  the  old  year  of  Romulus.

The  ordinary  colour  to  express  their  grief,  used  alike  by  both
sexes,  was  black,  without  trimmings.  But  after  the  establishment
oftlie  empire,  when  abundance  of  colours  came  in  fashion,  the  old
primitive  white  grew  so  much  into  contempt,  that  it  became  peculiar
to  the  women  for  their  mourning.     Viui  Plut.  ^osst.  Rom.

There  were  several  accidents  which  often  occasioned  the  conclud-
ing of  a  public  mourning,  or  suspension  of  a  private  one,  before  the
fixed  time  ;  such  as  the  dedication  of  a  temple,  the  solemnity  of  pub-
lic games  or  festivals,  the  solemn  lustration  pei-formed  by  the  cen-
sor, and  the  discharging  of  avow  made  by  a  magisti-ate  or  a  gene-
ral. They  likewise  put  off  their  mourning  habit  when  a  father,
brother,  or  son,  returned  from  captivity,  or  when  some  of  the  family
were  advanced  to  a  considerable  employment.

t  The  Salii  were  the  guardians  of  the  Ancilia,  or  twelve  shields
hung  up  in  the  temple  of  Ma'rs.  They  took  their  name  from  their
dancing  in  the  celebration  of  an  annual  festival  instituted  in  memo-
ry of  a  miraculous  shield,  which  Numa  pretended  fell. down,  from
heaven.

X  Dionysius  of  Halicarnassus  finds  them  among  the  Aborigines ;
and  Numa  is  said  to  have  borrowed  the  institution  from  the  people
of  Latium.  He  appointed  twenty  feciales  chosen  out  of  the  most
eminent  families  in  Rome,  and  settled  them  in  a  college.  T\\q pater
patratusy  who  made  peace,  or  denounced  war,  was  probably  one  of
their  body  selected  for  that  purpose,  because  he  had  both  a  father
ajid  a  son  alive.     Liv.  1.  i.  c.  24;.


NUMA.  183

tosirch  riiaions  as  had  injured  the  Romans  to   persuade
them  to  entertain  more  equitable  sentiments  :  if  they  re-
jected their  application,  they  called  the  gods  to  v/itness,
with  imprecations  against  themselves  and  their  country,
if  their  cause  v»'as  not  just ;  and  so  they  declared  war.
But  if  xhit  fecialcs  refused  their  sanction,  it  was  not  lawful
for  any  Romcin  soldier,  nor  even  for  the  king  himself,  to
begin  hostilities.     War  was  to  commence  with  their  ap-
probation, as  the  proper  judges  whether  it  was  just,  and
then  the  supreme  magistrate  was  to  deliberate  concerning
the  proper  means  of  carrying  it  on.     The  great  misfor-
tunes which  befel  the  city  from  the  Gauls,  are  said  to  -
have  proceeded  from  the  violation  of  these  sacred  rites.
For  when  those  barbarians  were  beseiging  Clusium,  Fabi-
us  Ambustus  was  sent  ambassador  to  their  camp,  with
proposals  of  peace  in  favour  of  the  besieged.     But  re-
ceiving a  harsh  answer,  he  thought  himself  released  from
his  character  of  ambassador,  and  rashly  taking  up  arms
for  the  Clusians,  challenged  the  bravest  man  in  the  Gaul
ish  army.     He  proved  victorious,  indeed,  in  this  combat,
for  he  killed  his  adversary,  and  carried  off  his  spoils  :  but
the  Gauls,  having  discovered  who  he  was,  sent  a  herald  to
Rome  to  accuse  Fabius  of  bearing  arms  against  them,
contrary  to  treaties  and  good  faith,  and  without  a  decla-
ration of  war.     Upon  this  th^  feciales  exhorted  the  senate
to  deliver  him  up  to  the  Gauls  ;  but  he   applied  to  the
people,  and  being  a  favourite  with  them,  was  screened
from  the  sentence.     Soon  after  this,  the  Gauls  marched  to
Rome,  and  sacked  the  whole  city  except  the  capitol ;  as
we  have  related  at  large  in  the  life  of  Camillus.

The  order  of  priests  called  Salii^  is  said  to  have  been

instituted  on  t{iis  occasion:  In  the  eighth  year  of  Numa's

reign,  a  pestilence  prevailed  in  Italy  ;  Rome  also  felt  its

ravages.     While  the  people  were  greatly  dejected,  we  are

told  that  a  brazen  buckler  fell  from  heaven  into  the  hands

of  Numa.     Of  this  he  gave   a  very  wonderful  account,

received  from  Egeria  and  the  muses  :  That  the  buckler

was  sent  down  for  the  preservation  of  the  city,  and  should

be  kept  with  great  care  :    That  eleven  others  should  be

.  made  as  like  it  as  possible  in  size  and  fashion,  in    order,

that  if  any  person  were  disposed  to  steal  it,  he  might  not

be  able  to  distinguish  tliat  which  fell  from  heaven  from

the  rest.     He  farther  declared,  that  the   place,  and  the

ine  adows  about  it,  where  he  frequently  conversed  with  the

t-


184  Plutarch's  lives.

muses,  should  be  consecrated  to  those  diviriities  ;  and^
that  the  sprhig  which  watered  the  ground,  should  be  sa-
cred to  the  use  of  the  vestal  vh'gins,  daily  to  sprinkle  and
purify  their  temple.  The  immediate  cessation  of  tlic
pestilence  is  said  to  have  confirmed  the  truth  of  this  ac-
count. Numa  then  shevved  the  buckler  to  the  artists,
and  commanded  them  to  exert  all  their  skill  for  an  exact
resemblance.  They  all  declined  the  attempt,  except
Veturius  Mamurius,  who  was  so  successful  in  the  imita-
tion, and  made  the  other  eleven  so  like  it,  that  not  even
Numa  himself  could  distinguish  them^  He  gave  these
bucklers  in  charge  to  the  Salii  ;  who  did  not  receive  their
name,  as  some  pretend,  from  Salius  of  Samothrace  or
Mantinea,  that  taught  the  way  of  dancing  in  arms,  but
rather  from  the  subsultive  dance  itself,  which  they  lead
up  along  the  streets,  when  in  the  month  of  March  they
carry  the  sacred  bucklers  through  the  city.  On  that
occasion  they  are  habited  in  purple  vests,  girt  with  broad
belts  of  brass  ;  they  wear  also  brazen  helmets,  and  carry
short  swords,  with  which  they  strike  upon  the  bucklers,
and  to  those  sounds  they  keep  time  with  their  feet.
They  move  in  an  agreeable  manner,  performing  certain
involutions  and  evolutions  in  a  quick  measure,  with  vi-
gour, agility,  and  ease.

These  bucklers  are  called  Ancilia^  from  the  form  of
them.  For  they  are  neither  circular,  nor  yet  like  the
pelta^  semicircular,  but  fashioned  in  two  crooked  indented
lines,  the  extremities  of  which  meeting  close,  form  a
curve,  in  Greek  ancylon.  Or  else  they  may  be  so  named
from  the  ancon,  or  bend  of  the  arm^  on  which  they  are
carried.  This  account  of  the  matter  we  have  fromJuba,
who  is  very  desirous  to  derive  the  term  from  the  Greek.
But  if  we  must  have  an  etymology  from  that  language,
it  may  be  taken  from  their  descending,  anekathen^  from
on  high ;  or  from  akesis^  their  healing  of  the  sick ;  or
from  auchmon  lusis,  their  putting  an  end  to  the  drought ;
or  lastly,  from  anaschesis,  deliverance  from  calamities :
For  which  reason  also  Castor  and  Pollux  were  by
Athenians  called  a«cyt<?5.  The  reward  Mamurius  had  for
his  art,  was,  we  are  told,  anode,  which  the  Salians  sung
in  memory  of  him,  along  with  the  Pyrrhic  dance.  Some,
however,  say,  it  was  not  Veturius  Mamurius,  who  was
celebrated  in  that  composition,  but  vetus  mcmoria,  the
ancient  rcmembrajice  of  the  thing.


SUM  A.  I^S5

After  Nutna  had  instituted  these  several  orders  ofpriests,
he  erected  a  royal  palace,  cslWqqI  Regla,  near  the  temple
of  Vesta;  and  there  he  passed  most  o£  his  time,  either
in  performing  some  sacred  function,  or  instructing  the
priests,  or.  at  least,  in  conversing  with  them  on  some
divine  subject.  He  had  also  another  house  upon  the
Quirinal  mount,  tlie  situation  of  which  they  still  shew  us.
In  all  pubhc  ceremonies  and  processions  of  the  priests,  a
herald  went  before,  who  gave  notice  to  the  people  to
keep  hoHday.  For,  as  they  tell  us,  the  Pythagoreans
would  not  suffer  their  disciples  to  pay  any  homage  or
worship  to  the  gods  in  a  cursory  manner,  but  required
them  to  come  prepared  for  it  by  meditation  at  home  ;  so
Numa  was  of  opinion,  that  his  citizens  should  neither  see
nor  hear  any  religious  service  in  a  slight  or  careless  way,
but,  disengaged  from  other  affairs,  bring  with  them  that
attention,  which  an  object  of  such  importance  required.
The  streets  and  ways,  on  such  occasions,  were  cleared  cf
clamour,  and  all  manner  of  noise  which  attends  manual
labour,  that  the  solemnities  might  not  be  disturbed.
Some  vestiges  of  this  still  remahi ;  for  when  the  consul  is
employed  either  in  augury  or  sacrificing,  they  call  out
to  the  people,  Hoc  age  ;  Aliiid  this^  and  thus  admonish
them  to  be  orderly  and  attentive.

Many  other  of  his  institutions  resemble  those  of  the
Pythagoreans.  For  as  these  had  precepts,  which  en-
joined not  to  sit  upon  a  bushel  ;*  not  to  stir  the  fire
with  a  sword  ;t  not  to  turn  back  upon  a  journey;^  to
offer  an  odd  number  to  the  celestial  gods,  and  an  even
one  to  the  terrestrial  ;||  the  sense  of  which  precepts  is  hid
from  the  vulgar  :  so  some  of  Numa's  have  a  concealed
meaning ;  as,  not  to  offer  to  the  gods  wine  proceeding

*  That  is,  not  to  give  up  ourselves  to  idleness.

t  Not  to  irritate  him  who  is  already  angry.

:|:  In  another  place  Plutarch  gives  this  precept  thus,  Ne-ter  return
from  the  borders.  But  the  sense  is  the  same  :  Die  like  a  man ;  do  not
long  afterlife,  when  it  is  departing,  or  wish  to  be  young  again.

II  The  Pagans  looked  on  an  odd  number  as  the  more  perfect,  and
the  symbol  of  concord,  because  it  cannot  be  divided  into  two  equal
parts,  as  the  even  number  may,  which  is  therefore  the  symbol  of  di-
vision, This  prejudice  was  not  only  the  reason  why  the  first  month
\yas  consecrated  to  the  celestial,  and  the  second  co  the  terrestrial  dei-
ties ;  but  gave  birth  to  a  thousand  superstitious  practices,  which  in
some  countries  are  still  kept  up  by  those  whom  reason  and  religion
ought  to  have  undeceived.

VOL.     I,  R


186  PLUTARClfs    LIVES.

from  a  vine  unpruned  ;  nor  to  sacrifice  without;  meal  \*
to  turn  round  when  you  worship  ;t  and  to  sit  down
when  you  have  worshipped.  The  two  first  precepts  seem
to  recommend  agriculture  as  a  part  of  religion.  And  the
turning  round  in  adoration,  is  said  to  represent  the  circu-
lar motion  of  the  world.  But  I  rather  think,  that  as  the
temples  opened  towards  the  east,  such  as  entered  them
necessarily  turning  their  backs  upon  the  rising  sun,  made
a  half  turn  to  that  quarter,  in  honour  of  the  god  of  the
day,  and  then  completed  the  circle,  as  well  as  their  devo-
tions, with  their  faces  towards  the  god  of  the  temple.—
Unless,  perhaps,  this  change  of  posture  may  have  an  enig-
matical meaning,  like  the  Egyptian  wheels,  admonishing
us  of  the  instability  of  every  thing  human,  and  preparing
us  to  .acquiesce  and  rest  satisfied  with  v*hatever  turns  and
changes  the  divine  Being  allots  us.  As  for  sitting  down
after  an  act  of  religion,  they  tell  us  it  was  intended  as
an  omen  of  success  in  prayer,  and  ©f  lasting  happiness
afterwards.  They  add,  that  as  actions  are  divided  by
intervals  of  rest,  so  when  one  business  was  over,  they  sat
down  in  the  presence  of  the  gods,  that  under  their  auspi-
cious conduct  they  might  begin  another.  Nor  is  this  re-
pugnant to  what  has  been  already  advanced  ;  since  the
lawgiver  wanted  to  accustom  us  to  address  the  deity,  not
in  the  midst  of  business  or  hurry,  but  when  we  have  time
and  leisure  to  do  it  as  v/e  ought.

By  this  sort  of  religious  discipline  the  people  became
so  tractable,  and  were  impressed  with  such  a  veneration
of  Numa's  power,  that  they  admitted  many  improbable,
and  even  fabulous  tales,  and  thought  nothing  incredible
or  impossible  which  he  undertook.  Thus  he  is  said  to
have  invited  many  of  the  citizens  to  his  table, |  where
he  took  care  the  vessels  should  be  mean,  and  the  provisi-
ons plain  and  inelegant ;  but  after  they  were  seated,  he  told

*  The  priucipal  intention  of  this  precept  might  be  to  weTin  thetn
from  sacrifices  of  blood,  and  to  bring  them  to  offer  only  cakes  and
figures  of  animals  made  of  paste.

•j"  Probably  to  represent  the  immensity  of  the  Godhead.

\  Dioi^.ysius  tells  us,  that  Numa  shewed  these  Remans  all  the
rooms  of  his  palace  in  the  morning,  meanly  furnished,  and  without
any  signs  of  a  great  entertainment ;  that  he  ke])t  them  with  him
great  part  of  the  day  ;  and  when  they  returned  to  sup  with  him  by  in-
vitation in  the  evening,  they  found  every  thing  surprisingly  magni-
ficent. It  is  likely,  Numa  imputed  the  change  to  his  invisible  friend.


NUJIA.  1S7

them,  the  goddess  with  whom  he  used  to  converse,  was
eoming  to  visit  him,  when,  on  a  sudden^  the  loom  wii.s
supphed  with  the  most  costly  vessels,  and~the  table  with
a  most  magnificent  entertainment.  But  nothing  can  be
imagined  more  absurd,  than  what  is  related  of  his  con-
versation with  Jupiter.  The  story  goes,  that  when  mount
^ve?iiine  v/'ds  not  inclosed  v/ilhhi  the  walls,  nor  yet  inha-
bited, but  abounded  with  flowing  springs  and  shady
groves,  it  was  frequented  by  two  demi-gods,  Picus  and
Faunus.  These,  in  other  respects,  were  like  the  Satijra^
or  the  race  of  Titans  ;*■  but  in  the  wonderful  feats  they
performed  by  the>r  skill  in  pharmacy  and  magic  more  re-
sembled the  hUi  Dactylij^  (as  the  Greeks  call  them  ;)
and  thus  provided,  they  roamed  about  Italy.  They  tell
us  that  Numa,  having  mixed  the  fountain  of  which  they
used  to  drink  with  wine  and  honey,  surprised  and  caught
tfiem.  Upon  this,  they  turned  themselves  into  many
fjrms,  and,  quitting  their  natural  figure,  assumed  strange
and  horrible  appearances.  Eut  when  they  found  they
could  not  break  or  escape  from  the  bond  that  held  uiem,
they  acquainted  him  with  many  secrets  of  futurity,  and
taught  him  a  charm  for  thunder  and  lightning,  comr
posed  of  onions,  hair,  and  pilchards,  which  is  used  to
ti.is  day.  Others  say,  these  demi-gods  did  not  com-
municate the  charm,  but  that  by  the  force  of  magic  they
brouglit  dov/n  Jupiter  from  heaven*  The  god,  resenting
this  at  Numa's  hands,  ordered  the  charm  to  conaist  of  heads,
Cf  onions^  replied  Numa.  Ac,  human, — Hairs^  said  Numa,
desirous  to  fence  against  the  dreadful  injunction,  and  in-
terrupting the  god.  Z/i^/??^,  said  Jupiter  :  Pilchards^  <amil
Numa.     He  was  instructed,  it  seems,  by  Egeria,  how  to

*  Some  manuscripts  give  ,us  Tav&^y  instead  o^Tirocvuvy  y/hich  is  a
better  reading,  because  Picus  and  Faunus  were  horned  S)lvan  dei-
ties like  Pa:i

t  J3iodorus  tells  us  from  Ephorus,  the  Idsei  Dactyliwere  origi-
nally from  mount  Ida  in  Phrygia,  from  whence  they  passed  into
Europe  wifh  king  Minos.  They  seuled  first  in  Samothrace,  where
they  taught  the  inhabitants  religious  rites.  Orpheus  is  thought  to
have  been  their  disciple  ;  and  the  first  that  carried  a  form  of  wor-
ship over  into  Greece.  The  Dactyli  are  likewise  said  to  have  found
out  the  use  of  fire,  and  to  have  discovered  the  nature  of  iron  and
brass  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  country  adjoining  to  mount  Berecyn-
thus,  and  to  have  taught  them  the  v/ay  of  working  them.  For  this,
and  many  other  useful  discoveries,  they  were  after  their  death  wor-
flipped  ?^  gods.


tSS^  FLUTAIlCIl''s    LIVEE.

manage  the  matter.  Jupiter  went  away  propiticus,  ia,
Greek  ileos^  whence  the  place  was  called  IHci-um  ;*  and  so
the  charm  was  effected.  These  things,  fabulous  and  ri-
diculous as  they  are,  shew  how  superstition,  confirmed  by
custom,  operated  upon  the  minds  of  the  people.  As  for
Numa  himself,  he  placed  his  confidence  so  entirely  in  God,
that  when  one  brought  him  word  the  enemy  was  coming,
he  only  smiled,  saying,  ^nd  lam  sacrificing.

He  is  recorded  to  have  beem  the  first  that  built  temples
to  Fides, \  or  Faith^  and  to  Terminus  ;\  and  he  taught  the
Romans  to  swear  X^y  faith,  as  the  greatest  oaths ;  v/hich
they  still  continue  to  make  use  of.  In  our  times  they  sa-
crifice animals  in  the  fields,  botli  on  public  and  private  oc-
casions, to  Termiyius,  as  the  god  of  boundaries  ;  but  for-
merly the  offering  was  an  inanimate  one  ;  for  Numa
argued  that  there  should  be  no  effusion  of  blood  in  the
rites  of  a  god,  who  is  the  witnesB  of  justice,  and  guardian
of  peace.  It  is  indeed  certain  that  Numa  vras  the  first
that  marked  out  the  bounds  of  the  Roman  territory  ;  Ro-
mulus being  unwilling,  by  measuring  out  his  own,  to  shew
how  much  he  had  encroached  upon  the  neighbouring
countries  :  For  bounds,  if  preserved,  are  barriers  against
lawless  power  ;  if  violated,  they  are  evidences  of  injustice.
The  territory  of  the  city  was  by  no  means  extensive  at
first,  but  Romulus  added  to  it  a  considerable  district  gain-
ed by  the  sword.  All  this  Numa  divided  among  the  in-
digent citizens,  that  poverty  might  not  drive  them  to  ra-
pine ;  and   as  he  turned  the  application  of  the  people  to

*  This  is  Plutarch's  mistake.  Ovid  informs  us,  (Fast.  1.  iii.^  that
Jupiter  was  called  Elicius  from  e'icere,  to  draiv  out,  because  Jupiter
was  drawn  out  of  heaven  on  this  occasion.

f  This  was  intended  to  make  the  Romans  pay  as  much  regard  to
their  word,  as  to  a  contract  in  writing.  And  so  excellent,  in  fact,
were  their  principles,  that  Poiybius  gives  the  Romans  of  his  time
this  honourable  testimony. — "  They  most  inviolably  keep  their  word
without  being  obliged' to  it  by  bail,  witness,  or  promise  ;  whereas,
ten  securities,  twenty  promises,  and  as  many  witnesses,  cannot
hinder  the  faithless  Greeks  from  attempting  to  deceive  and  disap-
point  you."  No  wonder,  then,  that  so  virtuous  a  people  were  vic-
torious over  those  that  were  become  thus  degenerate  and  dishonest.

:j:  The  Dii  Termini  were  represented  by  stones.which  Numa  caused
to  be  placed  on  the  borders  of  the  Roman  state,  and  of  each  man's
private  lands.  In  honour  of  these  deities,  he  instituted  a  festival
called  Terminalia,  which  was  annually  celebrated  on  thei32d  or23d
of  February.  To  remove  the  Dii  Termini  was  deemed  a  sacrilege
of  so  heinous  a  nature,  that  any  m,an  might  kill,  with  impunity,  tha.
transgressor.


NUMA.  189


i


agi'icalture,  their  temper  was  subdued  together  with  the
ground.  For  no  occupation  implants  so  speedy  and  so
effectual  a  love  of  peace,  as  a  country  life  ;  where  there
remains  indeed  courage  and  bravery  sufficient  to  defend
their  property,  but  the  temptations  to  injustice  and  ava-
rice are  removed.^  Niima,  therefore,  introduced  among
his  subjects,  an  attachment  to  husbandry  as  a  charm  of
peace,  and  contriving  a  business  for  them,  which  would
rather  form  their  manners  to  simplicity,  than  raise  them
to  opulence,  he  divided  the  country  into  several  portions,
which  he  called  jia^i  or  boroughs,  and  appointed  over
each  of  them  a  governor  or  overseer.  Sometimes  also
he  inspected  them  himself,  and,  judging  of  the  disposition
of  the  people  by  the  condition  of  their  farms,  some  he  ad-
vanced to  posts  of  honour  and  trust  ;  and,  on  the  other
hand,  he  reprimanded  and  endeavouaed  to  reform  the  ne-
gligent and  the  idle.*

But  the  most  admired  of  all  his  institutions,  is  his  dis-
tribution of  the  citizens  into  companies,  according  to  their
ails  and  trades.  For  the  city  consisting,  as  we  have  ob-
served, of  two  nations,  or  rather  factions,  who  were  by  no
means  Aviilingto  unite,  or  to  blot  out  the  reinembrance  of
their  original  diSTerence,  but  maintained  perpetual  contests
and  party  quarrels  ;  he  took  the  same  method  with  them
as  is  used  to  incorporate  hard  and  solid  bodies,  which,
while  entire,  will  not  mix  at  all,  but  v/hen  reduced  to  pow-
der, unite  with  ease.  To  attain  his  purpose,  he  divided,
as  I  said,  the  v/hole  multitude  into  srnrdl  bodies^  who
gaining  new  distinctions,  lost  by  degrees  the  great  and
original  one,  in  consequence  of  their  being  thus  broken
into  so  many  parts.  This  distribution  v/as  made  accord-
iiig  to  the  several  arts  or  trades,  of  musicians,  goldsmiths,
masons,  dyers,  slioenickers,  tanners,  brasiers, -and  pot-
ters. He  collected  the  other  artificers  also  into  compa-
nies, who  hadtlieir  respective  hails,  courts,  and  religious
ceremonies,  peculiar  to  each  society.  By  these  jneans  he
first  took  away  the  distinction  of  Sabines  and  Romans,
subjects  of  Tatius,  and  subjects  of  Romulus,  botli  name.
and  thing  ;  the  very  separation  into  parts  mixing  and  in-
corporating the  whole  togetlxer.

*  To  neglect  the  cultivation  of  a  farm,  was  considered  amongst
the  Romans  as  a  ceasoriuin  probruai  ;  a  fault  that  merited  the  clia^-
tii-ement  of  the  censor.

R.  2


t9'0  Plutarch's  lives..

He  is  celebrated  also  in  his  political  capacity,  for  cop-
recting  the  law  which  empowered  fathers  to  sell  their  chil-
dren,* excepting  such  as  married  by  their  father's  com-
mand or  consent ;  for  he  reckoned  it  a  great  hardship
that  a  woman  should,  marry  a  man  as  free,  and  then  live
with  a  slave.

He  att(jmpted  the  reformation  of  the  calendar  too,
which  he  executed  with  some  degree  of  skill,  though  not
with  absolute  exactness.  In  the  reign  of  Romulus,  it  had
neither  measure  nor  order,  some  months  consisting  of
fewer  than  twenty  days,!  while  some  were  stretched  to.
thirty-live,  and  othera  even  to  more.  They  had  no  idea
of  the  difference  between  the  annual  course  of  the  sun
and  that  of  the  moon,  and  only  laid  down  this  position,

•"Romulus  had  allowed  fathers  greater  power  over  their  children,
than  masters  had  over  their  slaves,  for  a  master  could  sell  his  slave
blit  once  ;  whereas  a  father  could  sell  his  son  three  times,  let  him
be  of  what  age  or  condition  soever.

t  But  Macrobius  tells  us,  (Satumal.  1.  i.  c.  12.)  that  Romulus:
settled  the  number  of  days  with  more  equality,  allotting  to  March,.
May,Quintillis,and  October,  one  and  thirty  days  each  ;  to  April, June,
Sextilis,  November,  and  Decem.bcr,  thirty  ;  making  up  in  all  rhree
hundred  and  four  days  Numa  was  better  acquainted  with  the  ce-
lestial motions ;  and  therefore,  in  the  first  place, added  the  two  months.
of  January  and  February,  By  the  way,  it  is  probable  the  reader
^ill  think,  that  neither  Romulus,  nor  any  other  man,  could  be  so
ignorant  as  to  make  the  lunar  year  consist  of  three  hundred  aud  fovir
days  ;.  and  that  the  Romans  reckoned  by  lunar  montiis,  and  conse-
quently by  the  lunaf  year,  originally,  is  plain  from  their  calends,
nones,  and  ides.  To  compose  these  two  months,  he  added  fifty
days  to  the  three  hundred  and  four,  in  order  to  make  them  answer
to  the  course  of  the  moon.  Beside  this,  he  observed  the  difTerence
l>etvt'een  the  solar  and  the  lunar  course  to  be  eleven  days  ;  and,  to
remedy  the  inequality,  he  doubled  those  days  after  every  two  years,
adding  an  interstitial  month  after  February ;  which  Plutarch  here
calls  Mercedinus  ;  and,  in  the  life  of  Julius  Czesar  Mercedonins.  Fes-
tus  speaks  of  certain  days,  which  he  calls  Dies  Mercedonii,  because
they  were  appointed  for  the  payment  of  workmen  a.nd  domestics,
which  is  all  we  knov/  of  the  word.  As  Numa  was  sensible,  that
the  solar  year  consisted  of  three  hundred  a,nd  sixty-five  days,  and
six  hom-s,  and. that  the  six  hours  made  a  whole  day  in  four  years,  lie
commanded,  that  the  month  Mercedinus,  after  every  four  }  ears,
should  consist  of  twenty-three  days  ;  but  the  care  cf  these  interca-
lations being  left  to  the  priests,  they  put  in  or  left  out  the  interca-
lary day  or  month,  as  they  fancied  it  lucky  cr  unlucky  ;  and,  by
that  means,  created  such  a  confusion,  that  the  festivals  came,  in
process  of  tim^e,  to  be  kept  at  a  season  quite  contrary  to  what  they
had  been  formerly.  The  Roman  calendar  had  gained  near  three
months  in  the  days  of  Julius  Casar,  and  therefore,  wanted  a  great,
isfcrmation  again.


NUMA.  19f

that  the  year  consisted  of  three  hundred  and  sixty  days,
Numa,then,  observing-  that  there  was  a  difference  of  eleven
days,  three  hundred  and  fifty-four  days  making  up  the
lunar  year,  and  three  hundred  and  sixty-five  the  solar,
doubled  those  eleven  days,  and  inserted  them  as-  an  in-
tercalary month,  after  that  of  February,  every  other  year..
This  additional  month  was  called  by  the  Romans  Mtrce-
dimis,  But  this  amendment  of  the  irregularity  after-^
wards  required  a  farther  amendment.  He  likewise  alter-
ed the  order  of  the  months,  making  March  the  third,  which
was  the  first ;.  January  first  which  was  the  eleventh  of
Romulus,  and  February  the  second,  which  was  the  twelfth
and  last.  Many,  however,  assert,  that,  the  two  months
of  January  and  February  were  added  by  Numa,  whereas
before  tliey  had  reckoned  but  ten  months  in  the  year,  as
some  barbarous  nations  had  but  three  ;  and,  among  the
Greeks,  the  Arcadians  four,  and  the  Acarnanians  six*
The  Egyptian  year,  they  tell  us,  at  first,  consisted  only  of
one  month,  afterwards  of  four.  And  therefore,  though
ihey  inhabit  a  new  country,  tliey  seem  to  be  a  very  ancient
people,  and  reckon  in  their  chronology  an  incredible  num-
ber of  years,  because  they  account  months  for  years.*

That  the  Roman  year  contained  at  first  ten  months
only,  and  not  twelve,  we  have  a  proof  in  the  nam.e  of  the
last ;  for  they  still  call  it  December,  or  the  tenth  month  ;
and  that  March  was  first,  is  also  evident,  because  the
fifth  from  it  was  called  Quintilis^  the  sixth  Sextilis^  and
so  the  rest  in  their  order.  If  January  and  February  had
then  been  placed  before  jVIarch,  the  month  Quintilia  \\o\x\d
have  been  the  fifth  in  name,  but  the  seventh  in  reckon-
irig.  Besides,  it  is  reasonable  to  conclude,  that  the  month
of  March,  dedicated  by  Romulus  to  the  god  A/ar*,  should
stand  first  ;  and  April  second,  which  has  its  name  from
Jtihrodite^  or  Vams^  for  in  this  month  the  women  sacrifice

*  To  suppose  the  Egyptians  reckoned  months  for  years,  does  in-
deed bring  their  computation  pretty  near  the  tnith,  with  respect  to
the  then  age  of  the  world  ;  for  they  reckoned  a  succession  of  kings
for  the  sjjace  of  36000  years.  But  that  supposition  would  make  the
reigns  of  their  kings  unreasonably  short.  Besides,  Herodotus  says,
the  Egyptians  were  the  first  that  began  to  compute  by  years  ;  and
that  they  made  the  >  ear  consist  of  twelve  months.  Their  boasted
antiquity  must,  therefore,  be  imputed  to  their  stretching  the  fabulous
part  of  their  history  too  far  back.  As  to  Plutarch's  saying  that
Egypt  was  a  new  country,  it  is  strange  that  such  a. notion  could  cyer.-
be  entertsi^ed  by  a  man  of  his  know  ledge.


i'92"  PLUTARCH'S    LIVES,

to  that  goddess,  and  bathe  on  the  first  of  it,  with  crowns-
of  myrtle  on  their  heads.     Some,  however,  say,  April  de-
rives not  its  name  from  ./Aphrodite  ;  but,  as  the  very  sound
of  the  term  seems  to  dictate,  from  ajierire^  to  ojien^  be-
cause the  spring  having  then  attained  its  vigour,  it  ofiens
and  unfolds  the  blossoms  of  plants.     The  next  month,
which  is  that  of  May,  is  so  called  from  Maia^  the  mother
of  Mercury  ,  for  to  him  it  is  sacred.     June  is  so  styled
from  the  youthful  season  of  the  year.     Some  again  inform
us,  that  these  two  months  borrow  their  names  from  the
two  ages,  old  and  young  ;  for  the  older  men  are  called
?najores,  and  the  yoxm^er Junior es .  The  succeeding  months
were  denominated  according  to  their  order,  of  fifth,  sixth,
seventh,  eighth,  ninth,  tenth.     Afterwards  Qui?uilis,\7Si.s
called  July?  in  honour  of  Julius  Cjesar,  who  overcame
Pompey  ;  and  Sextilis  August,  from  Augustus  the  second
emperor  of  Rome.     To  the  tv/o  followins"  months  Domi-!-
tian  gave  his  tM^a  names  of  Gcrmanicus  and  Domitianus^
which  lasted  but  a  little  while;  for,   when  he  was  slain,
they  resumed  their  old  names,  September  and  October,.
The  two  last  were  the  only  ones  that  all  along  retained
the  original  appellation  which  they  had  from  their  order.
February,  which  was  either  added  or  transposed  by  Nu-
ma,  is  the  month  of  purification  ;  for  so  the  term  signifies ;
and  tiien  rites  are  celebrated  for  the  purifying  of  trees,*
and  procuring  a  blessing  on  their  fruits  ;  then  also  the  feast
of  Lujiercalia  is  held,  whose  ceremonies  greatly  resem-
ble those  of  a  lustrationw     January,  the  first  month,  is  so.
named  from  Janus,     And   Numa  seems  to  me  to  have
taken  away  the  precedency  from  March,  which  is  deno-
jninated  from  the  god  of  war,  with  a  design  to  shew  his
preference  of  the  political  virtues  to  the  martial.     For
this  JaniLs^  in  the  most  remote  antiquity,  whether  a  demi-

*  Another  reading  has  it,  To/f  ^nos  EVtcyt^aai  instead  of  to*$
pvroiq  ;  and  then  the  sense  will  be,  they  sacrifice  to  the  dead.  Both
have  their  authorities  ;  the  common  reading  being  supported  by  a
passage  in  Ovid,  who  takes  notice  that  the  JLuperci  puriiied  the.
ground. —

Sccta  quia  Pelle  Luperci

Gmne  solum  lustr ant,  Lib.  ii.  Fast.

And  the  other,  which  seems  the  better,  rests  upon  the  authority  of
Varro  and  others  who  mention  an  offering  to  the  dead  in  the  moHth
of  February — Ab  deis  injeris  Februaris  appeliatus  quod  tunc  his  paren-
tetur.


5UMA.  193

s^-od  or  a  king,  bcii:ig'  remarkable  for  his  polllical  abiliiies
iiid  his  cultivation  of  society,  reclaimed  men  from  their
rude  and  savage  manners;  he  is  therefore  represented
with  two  faces,  as  having  altered  tlie  former  state  of
the  world,  and  given  quite  a  new  turn  to  life.  He  has
also  a  teniple  at  Rome  with  two  gales,  which  they  call
the  gates  of  war.  It  is  the  custom  for  this  temple  to  stand
open  in  the  time  of  war.  and  to  be  shut  in  tlie  time  of  peace.
The  latter  was  seldom  the  case,  as  the  empire  has  been
generaliy  engaged  in  war  on  account  of  its  great  extent,
and  its  having  to  contend  with  so  many  sm  rounding  bar-
barous nations.  It  has,  therefore,  been  shut  only  in  the
reign  of  Augustus  Csesar,*  when  he  had  conquered  An-
thony :  and  before,  in  the  consulate  of  Marcus  Attilius  f
and  Titus  ^Manlius,  a  little  while  i  for  a  new  war  break-
ing out,  it  was  not  opened  for  one  day,  but  stood  con-
stantly shut  during  the  space  of  forty-three  years,  while
uninterrupted  peace  reip:iied  in  every  quarter.  Not  only
the  people  of  Rome  were  softened  and  humanized  by  tlie
justice  and  mildness  of  the  kiiag,  but  even  the  circumjacent
cities,  breathing,  as  it  were,  the  same  salutary  and  delight-
ful air,  began  to  change  their  behaviour.  Like  the  Ro-
mans, tliey  became  desirous  of  peace  and  good  laws,  of
cultivating  the  ground,  educating  their  children  in  tran-
quility, and  paying  their  homage  to  the  gods,  Italy  then
was  taken  up  with  festivals  and  sacrifices,  games  and  en-
tertainments ;  the  people,  without  any  a;'>prehensions  of
danger,  mixed  in  a  friendly  manner,  and  treated  each  o-
ther  with  mutual  hospitality  ;  the  love  of  virtue  and  jus-
tice, as  from  the  source  of  Numa's  wisdom,  gently  flow-
ing upon  all,  and  moving  with  the  composure  of  /n's  heart.
Even  the  hyperbolical  expressions  of  the  poets  fall  short
of  describing  the  happiness  of  those  days.

Secure  Arackne  spread  her  slender  toils

O'er  the  broad  buckler  ;  eating  rust  consumed

*  Augustus  shut  the  temple  of  Janus  three  several  times  ;  one  of
which  was  in  the  year  of  Rome  750,  before  the  birth  of  our  Saviour.^
according  to  Isaiah's  prophecy,  that  all  the  world  should  be  blest  with
peace,  when  the  Prince  of  Peace  was  born.  This  temple  w  as  also
shut  by  Vespasian  after  his  triumph  over  the  Jews.

t  Instead  of  Marcus  we  should  read  Caius  Attillius.  Titus  Man-
Tuis,  his  colleague,  shut  the  temple  of  Janus,  at  the  conclusion  of  the
first  Punic  war.


194  PLUTAKCIl's    LIVES.

The  vengeful  swords  and  once  far-gkaming-  spears.
No  more  the  trur.ip  of  v/ar  sweib;  its  hearse  throat,
Nor  robs  the  eye-lids  of  their  genial  slumber.*

We  have  no  account  of  either  war  or  insurrection  in  the
state,  durini^  Nnma's  reign;  Nay,  he  experienced  nei-
ther enmity  nor  envy ;  nor  did  ambition  dictate  either  open
or  private  attempts  against  his  crov/n.  Whether  it  were
the  fear  of  the  gods,  who  took  so  pious  a  man  under  their
protection,  or  reverence  cf  his  virtue,  or  the  singular
good  fortune  of  his  timecj  that  kept  the  manners  of  men
pure  and  unsullied,  he  was  an  illustrious  instance  of  that
truth  which  Plato  several  ages  after  ventin^cd  to  deliver
concerning  government ;  That  the  onlij  sure  fir  os/iect  of  dc-
liverance  from  the  evils  oflfs  will  be^  ivhcn  the  divine  Pro-
vidence shall  so  order  it^  that  the  regal  poiver,  invested  in  a.
firince  who  has  the  sentiments  cf  a  ^ihilosojiher^  shall  render
virtue  triumphant  over  vice.  A  man  of  such  wisdom  is  not
only  happy  in  himself,  but  contributes  by  his  instructions
to  the  happiness  of  othei^.  There  is,  in  truth,  no  need
either  of  force  or  menaces,  to  direct  the  multitude  ;  for
when  they  see  virtue  exemplified  in  so  glorious  a  pattern
as  the  life  of  their  prince,  they  become  wise  of  themselves,
and  endeavour,  by  friendship  and  unanimity,  by  a  strict
regard  to  justice  and  temperance,  to  form  themselves  to
an  innocent  and  happy  life.  This  is  the  noblest  end  of
government ;  and  he  is  most  worthy  of  the  royal  seat  who
can  regulate  the  lives  and  dispositions  of  his  subjects  in
such  a  manner.  No  one  was  more  sensible  of  this  than
Numa.

As  to  his  v/ives  and  children,  there  are  great  contra-
dictions among  historians.  For  some  say,  he  had  no  wife
but  Tatia,  nor  any  child  but  one  daughter  named  Pom-
pilia.  Others,  beside  that  daughter,  give  an  account  of
four  sons,  Pompon,  Pinus,  Calpus,  and  Mamercus,  every
one  of  which  left  an  honourable  posterity,  the  Pomponii
being  descended  from  Pompon,  the  Pinarii  from  Pinus
the  Calpurnii  from  Calpus,  and  the  Mamercii  from  Ma-
mercus.    These  were  surnamed  Regis  or  kings. -f     But  a

*  Plutarch  took  this  passage  from  some  excellent  verses  of  Bac-
ehylides  in  praise  of  peace,  given  us  by  Stobaeus.

t  Fex  was  the  surname  of  the  iEmilians  and  Marcians,  but  not  of
the  Pomponians,  the  Pinarians,  or  Mamercians.  The  Pinarii  were
descended  from  a  family  who  were  priests  of  Hercules,  and  more  gtUr-
cient  than  the  times  of  Numa.


NXJMA.  195

tliird  set  oF  writers  ccuse  the  former  of  forging  these
.genealogies  from  Numa,  in  order  to  ingratiate  themselves
with  particular  families.  And  they  tell  us,  that  Pompilia
was  not  the  daughter  of  Tatia,  but  of  Lucretia,  another
wife,  whom  he  married  after  he  ascended  the  throne.  All,
however,  agree,  that  Pompilia  was  married  to  Marcius,
son  of  that  Marcius  who  persuaded  Numa  to  accept  the
crown  ;  for  he  followed  him  to  Rome,  where  he  was  en-
rolled a  senator,  and  after  Num.a's  death,  was  competitor
with  Tullus  Hostilius  for  the  throne  ;  but  failing  in  the  en-
terprize,  he  starved  himself  to  death.  His  son  Marcius,
husband  to  Pompilia,  remained  in  Rome,  and  had  a  son
named  Ancus  Marcius,  who  reigned  after  Tullus  Hos-
tilius. This  son  is  said  to  have  been  but  five  years  old  at
the  death  of  Numa.

Numa  was  carried  off  by  no  sudden  or  acute  distemper  ;
but,  as  Piso  relates,  wasted  away  insensibly  with  old  age
and  a  gentle  decline.  Pie  was  some  few  years  above
eighty  when  he  died.

The  neighbouring  nations  that  were  iii  friendship  and
alliance  with  Rome,  strove  to  make  the  honours  of  his
burial  equal  to  the  happiness  of  his  life,  attending  with
crowns  and  other  public  oiferings.  The  senators  carried
the  bier,  and  the  ministers  of  the  gods  walked  in  proces-
sion. The  rest  of  the  people,  with  the  women  and  chil-
dren, crowded  to  the  funeral  ;  not,  as  if  they  were  attend-
ing the  interment  of  an  aged  king,  but  as  if  they  had  lost
one  of  their  beloved  relations  in  the  bloom  of  life  ;  for
they  followed  it  with  tears  and  loud  lamentations.  They
did  not  burn  the  body,*  because  (as  we  are  told)  he  him-
self forbade  it  ;  but  they  made  two  stone  coffins,  and  bu-
ried them  under  the  Janiculum ;  the  one  containing  his
body,  and    the   other  the   sacred   books    which  he  had

*  In  the  most  ancient  times  they  committed  the  bodies  of  the  dead
I  to  the  ground,  as  appears  from  the  liistory  of  the  patriarchs.     But
the  Egyptians,  from  a  vain  desire  of  preserving  their  bodies  from
corruption  after  death,  had  them  embalmed;  persons  of  condition
\  with  rich  spices,  and  even  the  poor  had  theirs  preserved  with  salt.
[  The  Greeks,  to  obviate  the  inconveniences  that  might  possibly  hap-
pen from  corruption,  burnt  the  bodies  of  the  dead;  but  Pliny  tells
;  us  that  Sylla  was  the  first  Roman,  whose  body  was  burnt.     When
I  Paganism  w-as  abolished,  the  burning  of  dead  bodies  ceased  with  it,
I  and  in  the  belief  of  the  resurrection,  christians  committed  their  dead
'  with  due  care  and  honour  to  the  earth,  to  repoee  there  till  that  great
f  event.


196  PLUTARCI-i's    LIVES.

written  m  the  same  manner  as  the  Grecian  legislatsrs
wrote  their  tables  of  laws,

Niima  had  taken  care,  however,  in  his  life-time,  to  in-
struct the  priests  in  all  that  those  books  contained  ;  and
to  impress  both  the  sense  and  practise  on  their  memo-
ries-    He  then  ordered  them  to  be  buried  v/ith  him,  per-
suaded that  such  mysteries  could  not  safely  exist  in  life-
less writing.     Influenced  by  the  same   reasoning,   it    is
said,  the  Pythagoreans  did  not  commit  their  precepts  to
writing,  but  entrusted  them  to  the  memories  of  such  as
they  thought  worthy  of  so  great  a  deposit.     And  when
tliey  happened  to  communicate  to  an  unworthy    person
their  abstruse  problems  in  geometry,  they  gave  out  that
the  gods  threatened  to  avenge  his  profaneness  and  impiety
with  some  great  and  signal  calamity.     Those,  therefore,
may  be  well  excused  who  endeavour  to  prove  by  so  many
resemblances  that  Numa  was  acquainted  with  Pythagoras.
Valerius   Antias  relates,  that  there   v/ere  twelve  books
wriiten  in  Latin  concerning  religion,  and  twelve  more  of
philosophy,  in   Greek,  buried  in  that  coffin.     But  four
hundred  years  after,*  when  Publius  Cornelius  and  Marcus
Bsebius  were  consuls,   a  prodigious  fall    of  rain   having
washed  away  the  earth  that  covered  the  cofSins,  and  the
lids  falling  off,  one  of  them  appeared  entirely  empty,  with-
out the  least  remains  of  the  body  ;  in  the  other  the  books
v/ere   found.     Petilius,  then  Praetor,    having    examined
them,  made  his  report  upon  oath  to  the   senate,  that  it
appeared  to  him  inconsistent  both   with  justice  and  reli-
gion, to  make  them  public  :  In  consequence  of  which  all
the  volumes  were  cai-ried  into  the  Comitium,  and  burnt.

*  Plutarch  probably  wrote  five  hundred  ;  for  this  happened  in  the
year  of  Rome  573.  '*  One  Terentius,"  says  Varo,  £0/'.  S.  August.
de  Civ.  jDe/]  "  had  a  piece  of  ground  near  the  Janiculum  ;  and  an
husbandman  of  his  one  day  accidentally  running  over  Numa's  tomb,
turned  up  some  of  the  legislator's  books,  wherein  he  gave  his  reasons
for  establishing  the  religion  of  the  Romans  as  he  left  it.  The  hus-
bandman carried  these  books  to  the  prsetor,  and  the  prsetor  to  the
senate,  who,  after  having  read  his  frivolous  reasons  for  his  religious
establishments,  agreed,  that  the  books  should  be  destroyed,  in  pur-
suance of  Numa's  intentions.  It  was  accordingly  decreed,  that
the  praetor  should  throw  them  into  the  fire."  But  though  Numa's
motives  for  the  religion  he  established  might  be  trivial  enough,  that
was  not  the  chief  reason  for  surpre&sing  them.  The  real,  at  least
the  principal  reason,  was  the  many  new  superstitions,  equally  trivi-
al-, which  the  Romans  had  introduced,  and  the  worship  which  they
paid  to  images,  contrary  to  Numa's  appointment.


N-iJMA    AND    LYCURGXJS    COMPARED.  197

Glory  follows  in  the  train  of  great  men,  and  increases
after  their  death  ;  for  envy  docs  not  long  survive  them  :
nay,  it  sometimes  dies  before  them.  The  misfortunes,
indeed,  of  the  succeeding  kings  added  lustre  to  the  cha-
racter of  Numa.  Of  the  five  that  came  after  him,  the
last  was  driven  from  the  throne,  and  lived  long  in  exile  ;
and  of  the  other  four,  not  one  died  a  natural  death.  Three
were  traitorously  slain.  As  for  Tullus  HostiHus,  v/ho
teigned  next  after  Numa,  he  ridiculed  and  despised  many
of  his  best  institutions,  particularly  his  religious  ones,  as
effeminate  and  tending  to  inaction ;  for  his  view  was  to
dispose  the  people  to  war.  He  did  not,  however,  abide  by
his  irreligious  opinions,  but  falling  into  a  severe  and  com-
pHcated  sickness,  he  changed  them,  for  a  superstition,*
very  different  from  Numa's  piety  :  Others,  too,  were  in-
fected with  the  same  false  principles,  when  they  saw  the
manner  of  his  deaths  which  is  said  to  have  happened  by-
lightning,  t


NUMA  AND  LYCURGUS

COMPARED.


H


.  AVING  gone  through  the  lives  of  Numa  and  Lycur-
gus,  we  must  now  endeavour  (though  it  is  no  easy  matter)
to  contrast  their  actions.  The  resemblances  between
them  however,  are  obvious  enough  ;  their  wisdom,  for
instance,  their  piety,  their  talents  for  government,  the
instruction  of  their  people,  and  their  deriving  their  laws
from  a  divine  source.  But  the  chief  of  their  peculiar
distinctions,  was  Numa's  accepting  a  crown,  and  Lycur-
gus's  relinquishing  one.     The  former  received  a  kingdom

*  None  are  so  superstitious  in  distress  as  those,  who,  in  their  pros-
perity, have  laughed  at  religion.  The  famous  Canoxi  Yossius  was
no  less  remarkable  for  the  greatness  of  his  fears,  than  he  was  for
the  littleness  of  his  faith.

t  The  palace  of  Tullus  Hostilius  was  burnt  down  by  lightning  ;
and  he,  with  his  wife  and  children,  perished  in  the  flames.  Though
some  historians  say,  that  Ancus  Marcius,  who,  as  the  gx:andson  of
Numa,  expected  to  succeed  to  the  crown,  took  the  opportunity  of
the  storm,  to  assassinate  the  king.

VOL.   I.  S


iV8  PLUT  arch's    lives.

withciit  seeking  it,  the  latter  resigned  cue  when  lie  "hrid
it  in  possession.  Niima  was  advanced  to  sovereign  power
when  a  private  p'^rson  and  a  stranger  ;  Lycurgus  reduced
himself  from  a  king  to  a  piivate  person.  It  was  an  ho-
nour to  the  one  to  attain  to  royal  dignity  by  his  justice  ;
and  it  was  an  honour  to  the  other  to  prefer  justice  to  thrit
dignity.  Virtue  rendered  the  oni:  so  respectable  as  to
deserve  a  throne,  and  the  other  so  great  as  to  be  above  it.
The  second  observation  is,  that  both  managed  their
.respective  governments,  as  musicians  do  the  lyre,  each  in
a  different  manner,  Lycurgus  wound  up  the  strings  of
Sparta,  which  he  found  relaxed  vrith  luxury,  to  a  stronger
tone  :  Numa  softened  the  high  and  harsh  tone  of  Rome.
The  former  had  the  more  difficult  task.  For  it  v/as  not
their  swords  and  breast  plates,  which  he  p^-suaded  his
citizens  to  lay  aside,  but  their  gold  and  silver,  their  sump-
tuous beds  and  tables  ;  what  he  taught  them,  was,  not  to
devcte  their  time  to  feasts  and  sacrifices,  after  quitting
the  rugged  paths  of  v/ar,  but  to  leave  entertainments  and
the  pleasures  of  wine,  for  the  la.borious  exercises  of  arms
and  the  wrestling-ring,  Numa  effected  his  purposes  in  a
friendly  way  by  the  regard  and  veneration  the  people  had
for  his  person  ;  Lycurgus  had  to  struggle  with  conflicts
and  dangers,  before  he  could  establish  his  laws.  The
genius  of  Numa  was  more  mild  and  gentle,  softening  and
attempering  the  fiery  dispositions  of  his  people  to  justice
and  peace.  If  we  be  obliged  to  admit  the  sanguinary  and
unjust  treatment  of  the  Helotes,  as  a  part  of  the  politics
of  Lycurgus,  we  must  allow  Numa  to  have  been  far  the
more  humane  and  equitable  lawgiver,  who  permitted  ab-
solute slaves  to  taste  of  the  honour  of  freemen,  and  in
the  Saturnalia  to  be  entertained  along  with  their  masters.*
For  this  also  they  tell  us  was  one  of  Numa's  institutions,
that  persons  in  a  state  of  servitude,  should  be  admitted,
i\t  least  once  a  year,  to  the  liberal  enjoyment  of  those  fruits

*  The  Saturnalia  was  a  feastcelebratedon  thel4thof  the  kalends
of  January.  Beside  the  sacrifices  in  honour  of  Saturn,  who,  upon
his  retirmo^into  Italy,  introduced  there  the  happiness  of  the  golden
age,  servants  were  at  this  time  indulged  in  mirth  and  freedom,  in
memory  of  the  equality  which  prevailed  in  that  age  ;  presents  were
sent  from  one  friend  to.another ;  and  no  war  was  to  be  proclaimed,
or  offender  executed.  It  is  uncertain  when  this  festival  was  insti-
tuted. Macrobius  says,  it  was  celebrated  in  Italy  long  before  the
building  of  Rome  ;  and  probably  he  is  right,  for  the  Greeks  kept
the  same  feast  under  the  n^Bie  Q^'  Cbronia,  Macrob,  Satiu-n,  1.  i.  c.  7*


KtJMA    AKD    LYCURGU^    COJIPARED.  t9S

which  they  had  helped  to  raise.  Some  however  pretend
to  find  in  this  custom  the  vestiges  ©f  the  equality  which
subsisted  in  the  times  of  Saturn,  when  there  was  nei'Jier
servant  nor  master,  but  all  were  upon  the  same  footing,
and,  as  it  were,  of  one  family.

Both  appear  to  have  been  equally  studious  to  lead  their
people  to  temperance  and  sobriety.  As  to  the  other
virtues,  the  one  was  more  attached  to  fortitude,  and  the
other  to  justice.  Thoui^h  possibly  the  different  nature
and  quality  of  their  respective  governments,  required  a
different  process.  For  it  was  not  through  want  of  courage,
but  to  guard  against  injustice,  that  Numa  restrained  his
subjects  from  war  :  nor  did  Lycurgus  endeavour  to  infuse
a  martial  spirit  into  his  people,  with  a  view  to  encourage
them  to  injure  others,  but  to  guard  them  against  being-
injured  by  invasions.  As  each  had  the  luxuriances  of  his
citizens  to  prune,  and  their  deficiencies  to  fill  up,  they
must  necessarily  make  very  considerable  alterations.

Numa's  distribution  of  the  people  was  indulgent  a?td
agreeable  to  the  commonalty,  as  with  him  a  various  and
niixt  mass  of  goldsmiths,  musicians,  shoemakers,  and
other  trades  composed  the  body  of  the  city.  But  Lycur-
gus inclined  to  the  nobility  in  modelling  his  state,  and  he
proceeded  in  a  severe  and  unpopular  manner  ;  putting  all
mechanic  arts  in  the  hands  of  slaves  and  strangers,  while
the  citizens  were  only  taught  how  to  manage  the  spear
and  shield.  They  were  only  artists  in  war,  and  servants
of  Mars,  neither  knowing  nor  desiring  to  know  any  thing
but  how  to  obey,  command  and  conquer  their  enemies.
That  the  freemen  might  be  entirely  and  once  for  all  free,
he  would  not  suffer  them  to  give  any  attention  to  their
circumstances,  but  that  the  whole  business  was  to  be  left
to  the  slaves  and  Helotes,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  dres-
sing of  their  meat.  Numa  m.ade  no  such  distinction,  as
this  :  he  only  put  a  stop  to  the  gain  of  rapine.  Not  so-
licitous to  prevent  an  inequality  of  substance,  he  forbade  no
other  means  of  increasing  the  fortunes  of  his  subjects,
nor  their  rising  to  the  greatest  opulence  ;  neither  did  he
guard  against  poverty,  which  at  the  same  time  made  its
way  into,  and  spread  in  the  city.  While  there  was  no
great  disparity  in  the  possessions  of  his  citizens,  but  all
were  moderately  provided,  he  should  at  first  have  combat-
ed the  desire  of  gain  j  and,  like  Lycurgus,  Ijave  watched


200  PLUTARCH^S    LIVES*

against  its  inconveniences  ;  for  those  were  by  no  means-
inconsiderable,  but  such  as  gave  birth  to  the  many  and
great  troubles  that  happened  in  the  Roman  state.

As  to  an  equal  division  of  lands,  neither  was  Lycurgus
to  blame  for  making  it,  nor  Numa  for  not  making  it.
The  equality  v/hich  it  caused,  afforded  the  former  a  firm
foundation  for  his  government ;  and  the  latter  finding  a
division  already  made,  and  probably  as  yet  subsisting  en*
tire,  had  no  occasion  to  make  a  new  one.

With  respect  to  the  community  of  wives  and  children,
each  took  a  politic  method  to  banish  jealousy.  A  Roman
husband,  when  he  had  a  sufficient  number  of  children,  and
was  applied  to  by  one  that  had  none,  might  give  up  his
wife  to  him,*  and  was  at  liberty  both  to  divorce  Jier,  and
take  her  again.  But  the  Lacedaemonian,  while  his  wife
remained  in  his  house,  and  the  marriage  subsisted  in  its
original  force,  allowed  his  friend,  who  desired  to  have
children  by  her,  the  use  of  his  bed  ;  and  (as  we  have  al-
ready observed)  many  husbands  invited  to  their  houses
such  men  as  were  likely  to  give  them  healthy  and  well-
made  children.  The  difference  between  the  two  customs,
is  this,  that  the  Lacedaemonians  appeared  very  easy  and
Mnconcerned  about  an  affair  that  in  other  places  causes
so  much  disturbance,  and  consumes  men's  hearts  with
jealousy  and  sorrow ;  whilst  among  the  Romans  there
was  a  modesty,  which  veiled  the  matter  with  a  new  con~
tract,  and  seemed  to  declare  that  a  community  in  wedlock
is  intolerable  I

Yet  farther^  Numa's  strictness  as  to  virgins,  tended  to
form  them  to  that  modesty  which  is  the  ornament  of
their  sex :  but  the  great  liberty  which  Lycurgus  gave
them,  brought  upon  them  the  censure  of  the  poets,  par-
ticularly Ibycus  :  for  they  call  them  Phc^nomcridcs  and
Androviancis^  Euripides  describes  them  in  this  manner,

These  quit  their  homes,  ambitious  to  display,
Amidst  the  youths,  their  vigour  in  the  race.
Or  feats  of  wrestling,  whilst  their  airy  robe
Flies  back,  aral  Leaves  their  limbs  uncover'd.—

The  skirts  of  the  habit  which  the  virgins  wore,  were  not
sewed  to  the  bottom,  but  opened  at  the  sides  as  they

*  It  does  not  appear  that  Numa  gave  any  sanction  to  this  liberty.
Plutarch  himself  says  a  little  b^lpw,  that  no.  divorce  w*i  known. in;
Rome  till  long  after.


NUMA  AND  LYCURGUS  COMPARED.  201

walked,  and  discovered  the  thigh ;    as    Sophocles    very
plainly  writes  :

Still  in  the  light  dress  struts  the  vain  Hermione,
Whose  opening  folds  display  the  naked  thigh.
Consequently  their  behaviour  is  said  to  have  been  too
bold,  and  too  masculine,  in  particular  to  their  husbands.
For  they  considered  themselves  as  absolute  mistresses  in
their  houses  ;  nay,  they  wanted  a  share  in  affairs  of  state,
and  delivered  their  sentiments  v/lth  great  freedom  con-
cerning the  most  weighty  matters.  But  Numa,  though
he  preserved  entire  to  the  matrons  all  the  honour  and
respect  that  were  paid  them  by  thei4:-  husbands  in  the  time
of  Romulus,  when  they  endeavoured  by  kindness  to  com-
pensate for  the  rape,  yet  he  obliged  them  to  behave  Avith
gre;^  reserve,  and  to  lay  aside  all  impertinent  curiosity-
He  taught  them  to  be  sober,  and  accustomed  tliem  to
silence,  entirely  to  abstain  from  wine,*  and  not  to  speak
even  of  the  most  necessaiy  affairs  except  in  the  presence
of  their  husbands.  When  a  woman  once  appeared  in  tlie
forum  to  plead  her  awn  cause,  it  is  reported  that  the  se-
nate ordered  the  oracle  to  be  consulted,  what  this  strange
event  portended  to  the  city.f  Nay,  what  is  recorded  of
a  few  infamous  women,  is  a  proof  of  the  obedience  and
meekness  of  the  Roman  matrons  in  general.  For  as  our
historians  give  us  accounts  of  those  vrlio  first  carried
war  into  the  bowels  of  tlieir  country,  or  against  their
brothers,  or  were  fxrst  guilty  of  parricide  ;  so  the  Ro-
mans relate,  that  Spurius  Carvilius  was  the  first  among
them  that  divorced  his  wife,  when  no  sucii  thing,  had  hap-
pened before  for  two  hundred  and  thirty  years  from  tlie
building  of  Rome  :|  and  tliatThalsa,  the  wife  of  Pinarius,

*  Romvilns  made  the  drinking  of  wine,  as  well  as  adiil-ery,  a  ca-
pital crime  in  women.  For  he  said,  adultery  opens  the  door  to  ail
sores  of  crinies,  and  wine  opens  the  door  to  adultery.  The  severity
of  this  law  was  softened  in  the  succeeding  ages  ;  the  women  who
were  overraken  in  liquor,  were  not  condemned  to  die,  but  to  lose
their  dowers.

t  What  then  appeared  so  s^:range,  becairrt^  afterwards  common
•enough  ;  insom.ucL  that  every  troublesome  woman  of  that  kind,  was
called  Afrania,  from  a  senator's  wife  of  that  name,  who  busied  her-
self much  in  couris  of  justice.  The  eloquent  Hortensia,  daughter  to
the  orator  Hra-tensius,  pleaded  v.ith  r,uch  success  for  the  women,
when  the  triuniviro  had  laid  a  fine  upon  them,  that  she  got  a  cousL-  -
disable  part  of  it  remitted.

\  It  wag  iji  X\iz  520th  year  of  Rome  that  this  happenctU

S  2


202  Plutarch's  lifes^

\t2LS  the  first  that  quarrelled,  having  a  dispute  Avith  her
mother-in-law  Gegania,  in  the  reign  of  Tarquin  t/ie/iroud.
So  well  framed  for  the  preserving  of  decency  and  a  pro-
priety of  behaviour,  were  tliis  lawgiver's  regulations
with  respect  to  marriage.

Agreeable  to  the  education  of  virgins  in  Sparta,  were
the  directioiiS  of  Lycurgus  as  to  the  time  of  their  being
married.  For  he  ordered  them  to  be  m.arried  when  both
their  age  and  wishes  led  them  to  it ;  that  the  company  of
a  husband,  which  nature  now  required,  might  be  the
founda.tion  of  kindness  and  love,  and  not  of  fear  and  ha-
tred, which  would  be  the  consequence  when  nature  was
forced;  and  that  their  bodies  might  have  strength  to  bear
the  troubles  of  breeding  and  the  pangs  of  child-birth  ;
the  propagation  of  children  being  looked  upon  aa^  the
only  end  of  marriage.  But  the  Romans  married  their
daughters  at  the  age  of  twelve  years,  or  under  ;  tliat  both
their  bodies  and  manners  might  come  pure  and  untainted
into  the  management  of  their  husbands.  It  appears  then
that  the  former  institution  more  natiu'ally  tended  to  the
procreation  of  children,  and  the  latter  to  the  forming  of
tlie  manners  for  the  matrimonial  union.

However,  in  the  education  of  the  boys,  in  regulating
their  classes,  and  laying  down  the  whole  method  of  their
exercises,  their  diversions,  and  their  eating  at  a  common,
table,  Lycurgus  stands  distinguished,  and  leaves  Numa
only  upon  a  level  with  ordinary  lawgivers.  For  Numa
left  it  to  the  option  or  convenience  of  parents,  to  bring
up  their  sons  to  agriculture,  to  ship-building,  to  the  busi-
ness of  a  brasier,  or  the  art  of  a  musician.  As  if  it  were
not  necessary  for  one  design  to  run  through  the  education
of  them  all,  and  for  each  individual  to  have  the  same
bias  given  him  j  but,  as  if  they  were  all  like  passengers
in  a  ship,  who  coming  each  from  a  different  employ-
ment, and  with  a  difierent  intent,  stand  upon  their  com-
mon defence  in  time  of  danger,  merely  out  of  fear  for
themselves  or  their  property,  and  on  other  occasions  are
attentive  only  to  their  private  ends.  In  such  a  case  com-
mon legislators  would  have  been  excusable,  who  might,
have  failed  through  ignorance  or  want  of  pov/er ;  but
should  not  so  wise  a  man  as  Numa,  who  took  upon  him.
the  govemment  of  a  state  so  lately  foiTned,  and  not  likely
to  make  the.  kast  opposition  to  any  thing  h<?  proposed..


NUMA  AND  LYCURGUS  C03IPARED.  SOS

]^ave  considered  it  as  his  first  care,  to  give  the  children,
such  a  bent  of  education,  and  the  youth  such  a  mode  of
exercise,  as  would  prevent  any  great  difference  or  confu-
sion in  their  manners,  that  so  they  might  be  formed  from
their  infancy,  and  persuaded  to  walk  together,  in  the
same  paths  of  virtue.  Lycurgus  found  the  utility  of
this  in  several  respects,  and  particularly  in  securing  the
continuance  cf  his  laws.  For  the  oath  the  Spartans  had
taken,  would  have  availed  but  little,  if  the  youth  had
not  been  already  tinctured  with  his  discipline,  and  train-
ed to  a  zeal  for  his  establishment.  Nay,  so  strong  and
deep  was  the  tincture,  that  the  principal  laws  which  he
enacted,  continued  in  force  for  more  than  five  hundred
years.  But  the  primary  view  cf  Numa's  government,
which  v/as  to  settle  the  Romans  in  lasting  peace  and  tran-
quillity, immediately  vanished  with  him  :  and,  after  bis
death,  the  temple  of  Janus,  which  he  had  kept  shut  (as
if  he  had  really  held  war  in  prison  and  subjection)  Avas  set
wide  open,  and  Italy  was  filled  with  blood.*  The  beau-
tiful pile  of  justice  Avhich  he  had  reared,  presently  fell
to  the  ground,  being  without  the  cement  of  education.

You  v/ill  say  then,  was  not  Rome  bettered  by  her  wars  ?
A  question  this  which  wants  a5.<Iong  answer,  to  satisfy
such  as  place  the  happiness  ^  a  state  in  riches,  luxury,
and  an  extent  of  dominion,  rather  than  in  security,  equity,
temperance  and  content.  It  may  seem,  hovvcver,  to  af-
ford an  argimient  in  faAour  of  Lycurgus,  that  the  Romans,
upon  quitting  the  discipHne  of  Numa,  soon  arrived  at  a
much  higher  degree  of  power  ;  whereas  the  Lacedaemo-
nians, as  soon  as  they  departed  from  the  institution  of
Lycurgus,  from  being  the  most  respectable  people  of
Greece,  became  the  meanest,  and  were  in  danger  of  be-
ing absolutely  destroyed.  On  the  other  hand,  it  must  be
acknowledged  something  truly  great  and  divine  in  Numa,
to  be  invited  from  another  country  to  the  throne  ;  to
make  so  many  alterations  by  means  of  persuasions ;
to  reign  undisturbed  over  a  city  not  yet  united  in  itself,
without  the  use  of  an  armed  force  (which  Lycurgus  was.
obliged  to  have  recourse  to,  when  he  availed  himself  of
the  aid  of  the  nobility  against  the  commons),  and,  by  his=
wisdom  and  justice  alone,  to  conciliate  and  combine  alL
isis  subjects  in  peace

*  ki.  the-vjars- with- tt^Fidenates,tbe- Albans,  and  the.  LaUBfc-


[  204  J

SOLON.*

JL/IDYMUS  the  grammarian,  in  his  answer  to  Ascle-
piades  concerning  the  laws  of  Solon,  cites  the  testimony
of  one  Philocles,  by  which  he  would  prove  Solon  the  son
of  Euphorion,  contrary  to  tlie  opinion  of  others  that  have
wrote  of  him.  For  they  all  with  one  voice  declare  that
Execestides  was  his  father  ;  a  man  cf  moderate  fortune
and  power,  but  of  the  noblest  family  in  Athens,  being  der
scended  fromCodrus.  His  mother,  according  to  Hera.-
clides  of  Pontus,  was  eousin-german  to  the  mother  of
Pisistratus.  This  tie  of  friendship  at  first  united  Solon  and
Pisistratus  in  a  very  intimate  friendship,  which  was  dmwn
closer  (if  we  may  believe  some  writers)  by  the  regard
which  the  former  had  foi' the  beauty  and  excellent  cjuali-
ties  of  the  latter^  Hence  we  may  believe  it  was,  that  wheii
they  differed  aftervvards  about  matters  of  state^  this  dis-
sention  broke  not  out  mto  any  harsh  or  ungenerous  treat-
ment of  each  other  ;  but  their  first  union  kept  some  hold
of  their  hearts,  some  sparks  of  the  Jlame  still  remained^
and  the  tenderness  of  foimer  friendship  was  not  quite
forgotten.         ******


Solon's  father  having  hurt  his  fortune, t  as  Hermippus
tells   us,   by  indulging  his  great  and  munificent   spirit,

*  Solon  flourished  about  the  year  bafore  Christ  597.

t  Pisistratus  was  rema^-kably  courteou.s,  affable,  and  liberal.  He
had  always  two  or  three  slaves  near  him  with  bags  of  silver  coiu  :
when  he  saw  any  man  look  sickh-,  or  heard  that  any  died  insolvent,
he  relieved  the  one,  and  buried  the  others  at  his  own  expence.  if"
he  perceived  people  melancholy  he  inquired  the  cause^  and  if  hs
found  it  was  poverty,  he  furnished  them  with  wliat  might  enable
them  to  get  bread,  but  not  to  live  idly.  Nay,  he  left  even  his  gar-
dens and  orchards  open,  and  the  fruit  free  to  the  citizens.  His
looks  were  easy  and  sedate,  his  language  soft  and  modest.  In  short,
if  his  virtues  had  been  genuine,  and  not  dissembled,  with  a  view  to
the  tyranny  of  Athens,  he  would  (as  Solon  told  him)  have  been  the
best  citizen  ia  it.

:j:  Aristotle  reckons  Solon  himself  among  the  inferior  citizens,  and
quotes  his  own  works  to  prove  it.  The  truth  is,  that  Solon  was
E£Vfrrich,it  may  Ue,  because  l\e  was  always  lionest...   Iii hia xjiourb^


S0L0>r.  205

ihoiii^h  the  son  might  have  been  supported  by  hisfiicnds,
yet  as  he  v/as  of  a  family  that  had  long-  been  assistin.^  to
others,  he  was  ashamed  to  accept  of  assistance  himself  ;
and  therefore 'm  his  younger  years  applied  himself  to  mer-
chandize. Some,  however,  say  that  he  travelled,  rather
to  f^ratify  his  curiosity  and  extend  his  knowledge,  than  to
raise  an  estate.  For  he  professed  his  love  of  wisdom,  and
when  far  advanced  in  years  made  this  declaration,  I  groio
oidin  the  Jiur^uit  of  Ic&ndii^.  He  was  not  too  much  at-
tached to  wealth,  as  we  may  gather  from  the  following
verses  :

The  man  that  boasts  of  golden  stores,.
Of  grain  that  loads  his  bending  flooir.,
Of  fields  with  fresh'ning  herbage  green,
Where  bounding  steeds  and  herds  are  seen,
1  call  not  happier  than  the  swain
Whose  limbs  are  sound,  whose  food  is  plain^
Whose  joys  a  blooming  wife  endears,
Whose  hours  a  smiling  offspring  cheers.

Tet  in  another  place  he  says  :

The  flow  of  riches,  though  desiv'd,
Life's  real  goods,  if  well  acouir'd,
Unj.ustly  let  me  never  gain,
Lest  vengeance  follow  in  their  train.

Indeed,  a  good  man,  a  valuable  member  of  society,  should
neither  set  his  heart  upon  superfluities,  nor  reject  the
use  of  what  is  necessary  and  convenient.  And  in  those
times,  as  Hesiod  t  informs  us,  no  business  was  looked
upon  as  a  disparagement,  nor  did  any  trade  cause  a  disad-

he  was  mightily  addicted  to  poetry.  And  Plato  (in  TimaoJ  says,
that  if.  he  had  finished  all  his  poems,  and  particularly  the  History
of  the  Atlantic  Island,  which  he  brought  out  of  Egypt,  and  had  ta-
ken time  to  revise  and  correct  them  as  others  did,  neither  Komer,,
Hesiod.  nor  any  other  ancient  poet  would  have  been  more  famous.
It  is  evident  both  from  the  life  and  ^\n•it!ngs  of  this  great  man,  that
he  was  a  person  not  only  of  exalted  viiiue,  but  of  a  pleasant  and
agreeable  temper.  He  considered  men  as  men ;  and  keeping  both
their  capacity  for  virtue,  and  their  proneness  to  evil  in  his  view,  he
adapted  his  laws  so  as  to  strengthen  and  support  the  one,  and  to
check  and  keep  under  the  other.  His  institutions  are  as  remarka-
ble for  their  sweetness  and  practicability,  as  those  of  Lycurgus  ara
for  harshness  and  forcing  human  nature.

*  This  passage  of  Solon's,  and  another  below,  are  now  foiind
among  the  sentences  of  Theognis.

t  Lib.  Ob.  8c.  Di.  vcr,  309.


206  FLUTAilCll's    LIVES.

vantageous  distiiiciion.  The  profession  of  niercharidizc
was  honourable,  as  it  broui^ht  home  the  prod'acc  of  bar-
barous countries,  en,i^ap^ed  the  friendship  of  kings,  and
opened  a  wide  field  of  knowledge  and  experience.  Nay,
some  merciiants  have  been  founders  of  great  cities  ;  Pro-
tus,  for  instance,  that  built  Marseilles,  for  whom  the  Gauls
about  the  Rhone  had  the  highest  esteem.  Thales  also,
and  Hippocrates  the  mathematician,  are  said  to  have  -had
their  share  in  commerce  ;  and  the  oil  that  Plato  disposed
of  in  Egypt,*  defrayed  the  expence  afhis  travels.

If  Solon  was  too  expensive  and  luxurious  in  his  vray  of
living,  and  indulged  his  poetical  vein  in  his  description  of
pleasure  too  freely  for  a  philosopher,  it  is  imputed  to  his
mercantile  life.  For  as  he  passed  through  many  and
great  dangers,  he  might  surely  compensate  them  with  a
little  relaxation  and  enjoyment.  But  that  he  placed  him-
self rather  in  the  class  of  the  poor  than  the  rich,  is  evident
from  these  lines  :

For  vice,  tlio'  plexty^  fills  her  horn,.
And  virtue  sinks  in  want  and  scorn  ;
Yec  never,  sure,  shall  Solon  change
His  truth  for  Avealth's  most  easy  range  !
Since  virtue  lives,  and  truth  shall  stand,
While  wealth  eludes  the  gi-asping  hand.

He  seems  to  have  made  use  of  his  poetical  talent  at  first,
not  for  any  serious  purpose,  but  only  for  amusement,  and'
to  fill  up  his  hours  of  leisure  ;  but  afterwards  he  inserted*
moral  sentences,  and  interwove  many  political  transac-
tions in  his  poems,  not  for  the  sake  of  recording  or  re-
membering them,  but  sometimes  by  way  of  apology  for-
his  own  administration,  and  sometimes  to  exhort,  to  ad-
vise, or  to  censure  the  citizens  of  Athens.  Some  are  of
opinion,  that  he  attempted  to  put  his  laws  too  in  verse,
and  they  give  us  this  beginning.

Supreme  of  gods,  whose  power  we  first  address
This  plan  to  honour,  and  these  laws  to  bless.

Ljke  m.ost  of  the  sages  of  those  times,  he  cultivated  chiefly
that  part  of  moral  philosophy  which  treats  of  civil  obliga-

*  It  was  usual  to  trade  into  Egypt  with  the  oil  of  Greece  and  Ju-
dea.  It  is  said  in  the  prophet  Hosea,  (c.  xii.  v.  1.)  Ephraim  car-
r'leth  oil  into  Egypt.


soxoN.  2or

tjons.  His  physics  were  of  a  very  simple  Ciiid  apident
cast,  TiS  appears  from  the  following  lines  ;

From  cloudy  vapcurs  falls  the  treasm'd  snow,
And  the  fierce  hail :  from  light'nhig's  rapid  blaze
Springs  the  loud  thunder-r— winds  disturb  the  deep.
Than  whose  unruffled  breast,  no  snicother  scene
In  all  the  works  of  nature  !

Upon  the  whole,  Thales  seems  to  have  been  the  only  phi-
losopher, who  then  carried  his  speculations  beyond  things
in  common  use,  wliile  the  rest  of  the  wise  men  maintain-
ed their  character  by  rules  for  social  life.

They  are  reported  to  have  met  at  Delphi,  and  after-
wards at  Corinth  upon  the  invitation  of  Periander,  who
made  provision  lor  their  entertainment.  But  what  con-
tributed most  to  their  honour,  was  their  sending  the  trifiod
from  one  to  another,  A^ith  an  ambition  to  outvie  each
other  in  modesty.  The  story  is  this  :  When  some  Coans
were  drawing  a  net,  certain  strangers  fix)m  Miletus  bought
the  draught  unseen.  It  proved  to  be  a  golden  tripod,
which  Helen,  as  she  sailed  from  Troy,  is  said  to  have
thrown  in  there,  in  compliance  with  an  ancient  oracle.  A
dispute  arising  at  first  between  the  strangers  and  the  fish-
ermen about  the  tripod,  and  afterwards  extending  itself
to  the  states  to  which  they  belonged,  so  as  almost  to  en-
gage them  in  hostilities,  the  priestess  of  Apollo  took  up
the  matter,  by  ordering  that  the  wisest  man  they  could
find  should  have  the  tripod.  And  first  it  was  sent  to
Thales  at  Miletus,  the  Coans  voluntarily  presenting  that
to  one  of  the  Milesians,  for  which  they  would  have  gone
to  war  with  them  all.  Thales  declared  that  Bias  was  a
wiser  man  than  he,  so  it  was  brought  to  him.  He  sent  it
to  another,  as  wiser  still.  After  making  a  farther  circuit,
it  came  to  Thales  the  second  time.  And  at  last,  it  was
carried  from  Miletus  to  Thebes,  and  dedicated  to  the  Is-
menian  Apollo.  Theophrastus  relates,  that  the  tripod
was  first  sent  to  Bias  at  Priene ;  that  Bias  sent  it  back
again  to  Thales  at  Miletus  ;  that  so  having  passed  through
the  hands  of  the  seven,  it  came  round  to  Bias  again,  and
at  last  was  sent  to  the  temple  of  Apollo  at  Delphi.  This
is  the  most  current  account ;  yet  some  say  the  present  was
not  a  tripod,  but  a  bowl  sent  by  Croesus";  and  others,  that
it  was  a  cup  which  one  BtUhycles  had  left  for  that  pur-
pose.


PLUTARCH'S    LIVrs.

We  have  a  particular  account  of  a  conversation  which
Solon  had  with  Anacharsis,*  and  of  another  he  had  with
Thales.  Anacharsis  went  to  Solon's  house  at  Athens,
knocked  at  the  door,  and  said  he  tvas  a  stranger  who  de-
sired to  tnter  into  eiigagemenis  offriendshili  and  mutual  hos-
pitality nvith  him*  Solon  ansv/ered,  Friendshifis  are  best
formed  at  home.  Then  do  you,  said  Anacharsis,  ivho  are  at
home^  make  me  your  friend^  and  receive  vie  into  your  house*
Struck  with  the  quickness  of  his  repartee.  Solon  gave  him
a  kind  welcome,  and  kept  him  some  time  with  him,  be-
ing then  employed  in  public  affairs  and  in  modelling  his
laws.  When  Anacharsis  knew  what  Solon  was  about,  he
laughed  at  his  undertaking,  and  at  the  absurdity  of  ima-
gining he  could  restrain  the  avarice  and  injustice  of  his
citizens  by  written  laws,  which  in  all  resfiects  resembled
spiders  webs,  and  would  like  them,  only  entangle  and  hold
the  poor  and  lueak,  while  the  rich  and  powerful  easily  broke
through  them.  To  this  Solon  replied.  Men  keep  their  agree-
ments, when  it  is  an  advantage  to  both  parties  not  to  break
them;  and  he  would  so  frame  his  laws,  as  to  make  it  evident
to  the  Athenians,  that  it  would  be  more  for  their  interest  to
observe  them  than  to  transgress  them^  The  event,  however,
•shewed,  that  Anacharsis  M^as  nearer  the  truth  in  his  con-
jecture, than  Solon  was  in  his  hope.  Anacharsis  having
seen  an  assembly  of  the  people  at  Athens,  said,  he  was
surprised  at  this,  that  in  Greece  wise  men  pleaded  causes^
and  fools  determined  thems

When  Solon  was  entertained  by  Thales  at  Miletus,  he
expressed  some  wonder  that  he  did  not  marry  and  7-aise  a
family.  To  this  Thales  gave  no  immediate  answer  ;  but
some  days  after  he  instructed  a  stranger  to  say.  That  he
came  from  Athens  ten  days  before,  Solon  inquiring.  What
news  there  was  at  Athens?  the  man,  according  to  his  in-

*  The  Scythians,  long  before  the  days  of  Solon  had  been  celebra-
ted for  their  frugality,  their  temperance,  and  justice.  Anacharsis
was  one  of  these  Scythians,  and  prince  of  the  blood.  He  went  to
Athens  about  the  forty-seventh  olympiad,  that  is,  590  years  before
Christ.  His  good  sense,  his  knowledge,  and  great  experience  made
him  pass  for  one  of  the  seven  wise  men.  But  the  greatest  and  wisest
men  have  their  inconsistencies ;  for  such  it  certainly  was,  for  Ana-
charsis to  carry  the  Grecian  worship,  the  rights  of  Cybele,  into
Scythia,  contrary  to  the  laws  of  his  country.  Though  he  perform-
ed those  rites  privately  in  a  woody  part  of  the  country,  a  Scythian
happened  to  see  him,  and  acquainted  the  king  with  it,  who  came
immediately  and  shot  him  with  aa  arrow  upon  the  spot.  Herqdot.
1.  iv.  c.  76.


SOLOX.  20''&

slructions,  said,  JVone^  except  the  funeral  of  a  young  many
which  was  attended  by  the  whole  city.  For  he  was  the  son
(as  they  told  me)  of  a  person  of  great  honour ^  and  of  the
highest  reputation  for  virtue^  %vho  was  then  abroad  upon  hit
travels.  What  a  miserable  man  is  he^  said  Solon :  but  what
was  his  naine  ?  I  have  heard  his  name,  answered  the
stranger,  but  do  not  recollect  it.  Ml  Iremember  ?«,  that  there
was  much  talk  of  his  wisdc?n  and  justice,  Solon,  whose  ap-
prehensions increased  with  every  reply,  was  now  much
disconcerted,  and  mentioned  his  own  name,  askinj^,  JVhe^
ther  it  was  not  Solon's  son  that  was  dead?  The  stranger
answering  in  the  affirmative,  he  began  to  beat  his  head,
and  to  do  and  say  such  things  as  are  usual  to  men  in  a
transport  of  grief.*  Then  Thales  taking  him  by  the
hand,  ScJd  with  a  smile,  TJtese  things^  which  strike  down
so  firm  a  man  as  Solon^  kept  me  from  marriage  and  from
having  children.  But  take  courage^  my  good  friend^  for  rM
a  word  of  what  has  been  told  you  is  time,  Hermippus  says,
he  took  this  story  from  Patsecus,  who  used  to  boast  he
had  the  soul  of  ^Esop.

But  after  all,  to  neglect  the  procuring  of  what  is  ne-
'cessary  or  convenient  in  life,  for  fear  of  losing  it,  would
be  acting  a  very  mean  and  absurd  part.  By  the  same
rule  a  man  might  refuse  the  enjoyment  of  riches,  or  ho-
nour, or  wisdom,  because  it  is  possible  for  him  to  be  de-
prived of  them.  Even  the  excellent  qualities  of  the
mind,  the  most  valuable  and  pleasing  possession  in  the
world,  we  see  destroyed  by  poisonous  drugs  or  by  the
violence  of  some  disease.  Nay,  Thales  himself  could
not  be  secure  from  fears,  by  living  single,  unless  he  would
renounce  all  interest  in  his  friends,  his  relations,  and  his
country.  Instead  of  that,  however,  he  is  said  to  have
adopted  his  sister's  son,  named  Cybithus.  Indeed  the
soui  has  not  only  a  principle  of  sense,  of  understanding,
of  memory,  but  of  love  ;  and  when  it  has  nothing  at
home  to  fix  its  affection  upon,  it  unites  itself,  and  cleaves
to  something  abroad.  Strangers  or  persons  of  spurious
birth  often  insinuate  themselves  into  such  a  man's  heart,
as  into  a  house  or  land  that  has  no  lawful  heirs,  and,  to-
gether with  love,  bring  a  train  of  cares  and  apprehensions

*  Whether  on  this  occasion,  cr  on  the  real  loss  of  a  son,  is  un-
certain, Solon  being  desired  not  to  weep,  since  weeping  would  avail
nothing;  he  answered,  witli  much  humanity  and  good  sensfe,  Jnd
for  this  came  I  v:eap,
vol..   I.  *  T


210  Plutarch's  lives.

for  them.  It  is  not  uncommon  to  hear  persons  of  a  mo-
rose temper,  who  talk  against  marriage  and  a  family,  ut-
tering the  most  abject  coii^jDlaints,  when  a  child  which
they  have  had  by  a  slave  or  a  concubine,  happens  to
sicken  or  die.  Nay,  some  have  expressed  a  very  great
regret  upon  the  death  of  dogs  and  horses  ;  whilst  others
have  borne  the  loss  of  valuable  children,  without  any  af-
niction,  or  at  least  without  any  indecent  sorrow,  and  have
passed  the  rest  of  their  days  with  calmness  and  compo-
sure. It  is,  certainly,  wea.kness,  not  affection,  which
brings  infinite  troubles  and  fears  upon  men,  who  are  not
fortiiiedby  reason  against  the  power  of  fortune  ;  who  have
no  enjoyment  of  a  present  good,  because  of  their  appre-
hensions, and  the  real  anguish  they  find  in  considering
that,  in  time,  they  may  be  deprived  of  it.  No  man,  surely,
should  take  reftige  in  poverty,  to  guard  against  the  loss
of  an  estate  ;  nor  remain  in  the  unsocial  state  of  celibacy,
that  he  may  have  neither  friends  nor  children  to  lose  ;  he
should  be  armed  by  reason  against  all  events.  But,  per-
haps, wc  have  been  too  diffuse  in  these  sentiments.

When  the  Athenians,  tired  out  with  a  long  and  trou-
blesome war  against  tlie  Megarensians  ;  for  the  isle  of
Salamis,  made  a  law,  that  no  one  for  the  future,  under
pain  ofdeath,  should  either  by  speech  or  writing  propose
that  the  city  should  assert  its  claim  to  that  island  ;  Solon
was  very  uneasy  at  so  dishonourable  a  decree,  and  seeing
great  part  of  the  youth  desirous  to  begin  the  war  again,  be-
ing restrained  from  it  only  by  fear  of  the  law,  he  feigned
himself  insane  ;*  and  a  report  spread  from  his  house  into
the  city,  that  he  was  out  of  his  senses.  Privately,  how-
ever, he  had  composed  an  elegy,  and  got  it  by  heart,  in
order  to  repeat  it  in  public  ;  thus  prepared,  he  sallied  out
unexpectedly  into  the  market  place  with  a  cap  upon  his
head.f     A  great  number  of  people  flocking  about  him

*  When  the  Athenians  were  delivered  from  their  fears  by  the
death  of  Epaminondas,  they  began  to  squander  away  upon  shows
a^d  plays  the  money  that  had  been  assigned  for  the  pay  of  the  army
and  navy,  and  at  the  same  time  they  made  it  death  for  any  one  to
propose  a  reformation.  In  that  case,  Demosthenes  did  not,  like
Solon,  attack  their  error,  under  a  pretence  of  insanity,  but  boldly
and  resolutely  spoke  against  it,  and  by  the  force  of  his  eloquence
brought  them  to  correct  it.

t  None  wore  caps  but  the  sick.


SOLON.  211

there,  he  got  upon  the  heralds'  stone,  and  sungf  the  clec^y
which  begins  thus,

Hear  and  attend  :  from  Salamis  I  came
To  show  your  error.

This  composition  is  entitled  Salamis^  and  consists  of  a
hundred  very  beautiful  lines.  When  Solon  had  done,  liis
friends  began  to  express  their  admiration,  and  Pisistra-
tus,  in  particular,  exerted  himself  in  persuading  the  peo-
ple to  comply  with  his  directions  ;  whereupon  they  re-
pealed the  law,  once  more  undertook  the  war,  and  invested
Solon  with  the  command.  The  commoii  account  of  his
proceedings  is  this.  He  sailed  with  I'isistratus  to  Coliar,,
and  having  seized  the  women  who,  according  to  the  cus-
tom of  the  country,  were  offering  sacrifice  to  Ceres  there-,
he  sent  a  trusty  person  to  Salamis,  who  was  to  pretend
he  was  a  deserter,  and  to  advise  the  Megarensians,  if
they  had  a  mind  to  seize  the  principal  Athenian  matrons,
to  set  sail  immediately  for  Colias.  The  Mcgarensians
readily  embracing  the  proposal,  and  sending  out  a  l^ody
of  men,  Solon  discovered  the  ship  as  it  put  off  from  the
island  ;  and  causing  the  women  directly  to  withdraw,  or-
dered a  number  of  young  men,  whose  faces  were  yet
smooth,  to  dress  themselves  in  their  habits,  caps,  and
shoes.  Thus  with  weapons  concealed  under  their  clothes,
they  were  to  dance  and  play  by  the  sea-side,  till  the  enemy
was  landed,  and  the  vessel  near  enough  to  be  seized.
Matters  being  thus  ordered,  the  Megarensians  were  de-
ceived with  the  appearance,  and  ran  confusedly  on  shore,
striving  which  should  first  lay  hold  on  the  women.  But
they  met  with  so  warin  a  reception,  that  they  were  cut  off
to  a  man  :  and  the  Athenians  embarking  immediately  for
Salamis,  took  possession  of  the  island.

Others  deny  that  it  was  recovered  in  this  manner,  and
tell  us,  that  Apollo,  being  first  consulted  at  Delphi,  gave
this  answer,

Go,  first  propitiate  the  country's  chiefs
Hid  in  i^sopus'  lap  ;  who,  when  intcrr'd,
Fac'd  the  declining  sun.

Upon  this,  Solon  crossed  the  sea  by  night,  and  offered
sacrifices  to  Salamis,  to  the  heroes  Pcriphemus  and  Ci-
chreus.  Then  taking  five  hundred  Athenian  volunteers
who  had  obtained  a  decree,  that  if  they  conquered  the
island,  the  government  of  it  should  be  invested  in  them,
he  sailed  with  a  number  of  fishing-vessels  and  one  galley*


212  PLUTARCH  S    LIVES.

of  thirty  oars  for  Salamis,  where  he    cast  anchor  at  a
pomt  which  looks  towards  Eubcea.

The  Megarensians  that  were  in  the  place,  having  heard
a  confused  report  of  what  had  happened,  betook  them-
selves in  a  disorderly  manner  to  arms,  and  sent  a  ship  to
discover  the  enemy.  As  t^,e  ship  approached  too  near,
Solon  took  it,  and  securing  the  crew,  put  in  their  place
some  of  the  bravest  of  the  Athenians,  v/ith  orders  to
malce  the  best  of  their  way  to  the  city,  as  privately  as
possible.  In  the  mean  time,  with  the  rest  of  his  men,  he
attacked  the  Megarensians  by  land;  and  wdiile  these  were
engaged,  those  from  the  ship  took  the  city.  A  custom
which  obtained  afterwards,  seems  to  bear  witness  to  the
truth  of  this  accoimt.  For  an  Athenian  ship,  once  a
year,  passed  silently  to  Salamis,  and  the  inhabitants  conr-
ing  down  upon  it  with  noise  and  tumult,  one  man  in
annour  leaped  ashore,  and  i^n  shouting  tovv'ards  the  pro-
montory of  Sciradium,  to  meet  those  that  were  advanc-
ing by  land.  Near  that  place  is  a  temple  of  Mars  erected
by  Solon  :  for  there  it  was  that  he  defeated  the  Megaren-
sians,  and  disnaissed,  upon  certain  conditions,  such  as
were  not  slain  in  battle.

However,  the  people  of  ^Megara  persisted  in  their  claim
till  both  sides  had  severely  felt  the  calamities  of  war,  and
then  they  referred  the  affair  to  the  decision  of  the  Lace-
dfimonians.  Many  authors  relate  that  Solon  availed  him-
s.elf  of  a  passage  in  Homer's  catalogue  of  ships,  which
he  alleged  before  the  arbitrators,  dexterously  inserting  a
line  of  his  own :  for  to  this  verse,

Ajax  from  Salamis  twelve  ships  commands,
he  is  said  to  have  added.

And  ranks  his  forces  with  th'  Athenian  power.*

But  the  Athenians  look  upon  this  as  zji  idle  story,  and
tell  us,  that  Solon  made  it  appear  to  the  judges,  that  Phi-
l^eus  and  Eurysaces,  sons  of  Ajax,  being  admitted  by  the
Athenians  to  the  freedom  of  their  city,  gave  up  the  island
to  them,  and  removed,  the  one  to  Brauron,  and  the  other
to  Melite  in  Attica :  hkeMdse,  that  the  tribe  of  the  Phi-
laidse,  of  which  Pisistratus  was,  had  its  name  from  that
Phil^us.  He  brought  another  argument  against  the  Me-

*  This  line  coiild  be  no  siifticient  evidence  ;  for  there  are  many
passages  in  Homer  which  prove  that  the  ships  of  Ajax  were  st;^
tioned  xiqxx  theThessaliaGE,,


SOLON.


213


garensians,  from  the  manner  of  burying  in  Salamis,
which  was  agreeable  to  the  custom  of  Athens,  and  not  to
that  of  Megara  ;  for  the  Megarensians  inter  the  dead  with
their  faces  to  the  east,  and  the  Athenians  turn  theirs  to  the
west.  On  the  other  hand,  Ilercas  of  Megara  insists,  that
the  Megarensians  likewise  tui*n  the  faces  of  the  dead  to
the  west,  and,  what  is  more,  that,  like  the  people  of  Sala-
mis, they  put  three  or  four  corpses  in  one  tomb,  whereas
the  Athenians  have  a  separate  tomb  for  each.  But  Solon's
cause  was  farther  assisted  by  certain  oracles  of  Apollo,  in
which  the  island  was  called  Ionian  Salamis.  This  matter
was  determined  by  five  Spartans,  Critolaides,  Amompha-
retus,  Hypsechidas,  Anaxilas,  and  Cleomenes.

Solon  acquired  considerable  honour  and  authority  in
Athens  by  this  affair  ;  but  he  was  much  more  celebrated
among  the  Greeks  in  general,  for  negociating  succours
for  the  temple  at  Delphi,  against  the  insolent  and  injuri-
ous behaviour  of  the  Cirrhaeans,*  and  persuading  the
Greeks  to  arm  for  the  honour  of  the  god.  Athis  motion,
it  was  that  the  Amfihyctions  declared  war  ;  as  Aristotle,
among  others,  testifies,  in  his  book  concerning  the  Py-
thian games,  where  he  attributes  that  decree  to  Solon —
He  was  not,  however,  appointed  general  in  that  war,  as
Hermippus- relates  from  Euanthes  the  Samian.  For  ^s-
chines.tl>e  orator  says  no  such  thing  ;  and  we  find  in  the.
records  of  Delphi,  that  Alcmison,  not  Solon,  commanded
the  Athenians  on  that  occasion.

*  The  inhabitants  cf  Cirrha,  a  town  seated  In  the  bay  of  Covinthr
after  having  by  repeated  incursions  wasted  the  territory  of  Delphi,
besieged  the  city  itself  from  a  desire  of  making  themselves  masters:
of  the  riches  contained  in  the  temple  ApoJlo.     Advice  of  this  being^-
sent   \.o  x\\.Q.  Amphycti(jri.s,yN\io  were  the  states-general  of  Greece,
Solon  advised  that  this  matter  should  be  \miversaliy  resented.    Ac-,
cordingly  Clysthenes,  tyrant  of  Sicyon,\vas  sent  commander  in  chief  ■
agjainst   the    Cirrho^ans  ;  Alcmteon  was  genevU  cf  the  Athenian
quota  ;  and  Soion  went  as  counsellor  or  assista.nt  to  Clysthenes. —
When  the  Greek  army  had  besieged  Cirrha  some  time  without  any
great  appearanceof  success,  Apollo  was  consulted,  who  answered,
that  they  should  not  be  able  to  reduce  the  j)lace,  till  the  waves  of  the
Cirrhican  sea  washed  the  territories  of  Delphi.     This  answer  struck
the  army  with  surprize,  from  which  Solon  extricated  them  by  ad-
vising Clysthenes  to  consecrate  the  whole  teiTit cries  cf  Cirrha  to  the
Delphic  Apollo,  whence  it  would  follow  that  the  sea  must  wash  the
sacred  coast.     Pausanias  {in  Pbocicis)  mentions  another  stratagem,  ,
which  was  not  worthy  of  lae  justice  of  Solon.     Cirrha,  ho^\  ever,.,
•was  taken,  and  became  henceforth  the  arsenal  of  Dtlphi.
t  T.  2


314  rLUTAHCH's    LIVES,

The  execrable  proceedings  against  the  accomplices  of
Cylon,*  had  long  occasioned  great  troubles  in  the  Athe-
nian state.  The  conspirators  had  taken  sanctuary  in  Mi-
nerva's temple  ;  but  Megacles»  then  Archon,  persuaded
them  to  quit  it,  and  stand  trial,  under  the  notion  that  if
they  tied  a  thread  to  the  shrine  of  the  goddess,  and  kept
hold  of  it,  they  would  still  be  under  her  protection.  But
■when  they  came  over  against  the  temple  of  the  furies,
•  the  thread  broke  of  itself ;  upon  which  Megacles  and  his
colleagues  rushed  upon  them  and  seized  them,  as  if  they
had  lost  their  privilege.  Such  as  were  out  of  the  temple
were  stoned  j  those  that  fled  to  the  altars  were  cut  in
piecee  there  ,  and  they  only  were  spared  who  made  ap-
plication to  the  wives  of  the  magistrates.  Fiom  that  time
those  magistrates  were  called  execrable^  and  became  ob-
jects of  trhe  public  hatred.  The  remains  of  Cylpn's  fac-
tion afterwards  recovered  strength,  ard  kept  up  the  quar-
rel with  the  descendants  of  Megacles.  The  dispute  was
greater  than  ever,  and  the  two  parties  more  exasperated,,,
when  Solon,  whose  authority  was  nov.^  very  great,  and
ethers  of  the  principal  Athenians,  interposed,  and  by  in-
treaties  and  arguments  persuaded  the  persons  calfed
execrable^  to  submit  to  justice  and  a  fair  triah  before  three
hundred  judges  selected  from  the  nobility.  Myron,  of  the
PkyUnsian  ward  carried  on  the  impeachment,  and  tl:»ey
were  condenmed  :  As  many  as  were  alive, were  diiven  into
exile ;  and  the  bodies  of  the  dead  dug  up  and  cast  out
beyond  the  borders  of  Attica.  Amidst  these  disturbances^

*  There  v.  as,  for  a  loiig  time  after  the  democrr.cy  took  place,  tl
strong  party  against  it,  Avhp  left  ko  measures  untried,  in  order,  if
possible,  to  restore  their  ariCient  form  of  government.  Cylon,  amau
of  quality,  and  son-in-law  to  Theagenc?.,  tyrant  cf  Megara,  repined
at  the  sudden  change  of  the  magistrates,  and  hf.d  the  thoughts  of
asking  that  as  a  favour,  v/hith  he  appreheiided  to  be  due  to  his  birtl;-
right.  He  formed,  therefore,  adesiga  to  seize  the  citadel,  which  he
put  in  practice  in  the  forty-Hfth  olympiad,  when  miany  cf  the  citi-
zens were  gone  to  the  Olympic  games.  Me^gacies,  who  was  at  that
time  chief  archon,  vrith  the  other  magistrates  and  the  wliole  power
of  Athens,  immediately  besieged  the  conspirators  there,  and  reduced
them  to  such  distress,  that  Cylon  and  his  brother  ned,  and  left  the,
meaner  sort  toshift  for  themselves.  Such  as  escaped  the  sword  took,
refuge,  as  Plutarch  relates,  in  Minerva's  temple  ;  and  ihovgh  they
deserved  death  for  conspiring  against  the  government,  yet,  as  the
magistrates  put  them  to  death  in  breach  of  the  ])rlvilege  of  sanctu-
ary, they  brouglit  upon  themselves  the  indignation  of  the  supersti-
tious Athenians,  who  deemed  stich  a  breach  a  greater  crime  thaxu


SOLQJl.  ^t5

the  Megarensians  renewed  the  wai',  took  Nisxafrom  the
Athenians,  and  recovered  Salamis  once  more.

About  this  time  the  city  was  Ukewise  afflicted  with  su-
perstitious fears  and  strange  appearances  :  and  the  sooth-
sayers declared,  that  there  were  certain  abominable  crimes
which  wanted  expiation,  pointed  out  by  the  entrails  of
the  victims.  Upon  this  they  sent  to  Crete  for  Epimieni-
des  the  Pluzstian^  *  who  is  reckoned  the  seventh  among
the  wise  men,  by  those  that  do  not  admit  Periander  into-
the  number.  He  was  reputed  a  man  of  great  piety,  be-
loved by  the  gods,  and  skilled  in  matters  of  religion,  par-
ticularly in  what  related  to  inspiration  and  the  sacred
mysteries  :  therefore  the  men  of  those  days  called  him
t^he  son  of  the  nymph  Balte,  and  one  of  the  Curetes  re-
vived. V/hen  he  arrived  a.t  Athens,  he  contracted  a  friend-
ship with  Solon,  and  privately  gave  him  considerable  as-
sistance, prepaiing-  the  Avay  for  the  reception  of  his  laws.
I'or  he  taught  tjie  Athenians  to  be  more  frugal  in  their
religious  worship,  and  more  moderate  in  their  mourning,
by  intermixing  certain  sacrifices  v/ith  the  funeral  solem-
nities, and  abolishing  the  cruel  a.nd  barbarous  cu&toma
that  had  generally  prevailed  among  the  women  before.
"What  is  stijl  of  greater  consequence,  by  expiations,  lustra-
tions, and  tlie  erecting  of  temples  and  shrmes,  he  hallow-
ed and  puritied  the  city,  and  made  the  people  more  obser-
vant of  justice  and  more  inclined  to  union.

When  he  had  seen  Munychia,  and  considei-ed  it  some
time,  he  is  reported  to  have  said  to  those  about  him,t

*  This  Epimenides  was  a  very  extraordinaiy  person.  Diogenus
Laertius  tells  us,  that  he  was  the  inventor  of  the  art  of  lustrating
or  purifying  houses,  fields,  and  persons  ;  which,  if  spoken  of  Greece,
may  be  true  ;  but  Moses  l\ad  long  before  taught  the  Hebrews  some-
tiiing  of  this  nature.  (J>7'ie  Levit.  xvi  )  Epiraenides  took  seme
sheep  that  were  all  black,  and  others  that  were  all  white  ;  these  he
led  into  the  Areopagus,  and  turning  them  loose,  directed  certain
persons  to  follow  them,  who  should  mark  where  they  couched,  and
there  sacrilice  them  to  the  local  deity.  This  being  done,  altars  were
erected  in  all  these  places  to  perpetuate  the  memory  of  this  solemn
expiation.  There  were,  however,  other  ceremonies  practised  for
the  purpose  of  lustration,  of  which  Tzetzes,  in  his  poetical  chroni-
cle, gives  a  particular  account,  but  which  are  too  trifling  to  be  men-
tioned here.

t  This  prediction  was  fulfilled  l270  years  after,  when  Antipater
Constraii\ed  the  Athenians  to  admit  his  garrison  into  that  place.  Be-
sides this  prophecy,  Epimenides  uttered  another  during  his  stav  at
Athens;  for  hearing  that  the  citizens  were  alarmed  at  the  progress
«ithe  Persian  pow cr  at  sea,  he  advised  them  to  make  themselves


21G  PLUTARCH'fr   LIVES,

Ho%t)  blind  is  man  to  futurity  I  If  the  Mhenians  could  foresee
ivhat  trouble  that  filacenvill give  them^  they  ivould  tear  it  in
pieces  with  their  teeth^  rather  than  it  should  stand.     Some-
thing similar  to  this  is  related  of  Thales.     For  he  ordered
the  Milesians  to  bury  him  in  a  certain  recluse  and  neglec-
ted place,  and  foretold,  at  the  same  time,  that  their  mar-
ket place  would  one  day  stand  there.     As  for  Epimenidcs,
he  was  held  in  admiration  at  Athens  ;  great  honours  were
paid  him,  and  many  valuable  presents  made  :  yet  he  would
accept  of  notching  but  a  branch  of  the  sacred  olive,  whick.
they  gave  him  at  his  request ;  and  with  that  he  departed.
AVhen  the  troubles  about  Cylon's  affair  were  over,  and
the  sacrilegious  persons  removed,  in  the  manner  we  have
mentioned,  the  Athenians  relapsed  into  their  old  disputes
concerning  the   government  ',    for  there  were  as  many
parties  among  them  as  there  were  different  tracts  of  land
in  their  country.     The  inhabitants   of  the   mountainous
part  were,  it  seems  for  a  democracy  ;  those  of  the  plains
for  an  oligarchy  ;  and  those  of  the  sea-coasts  contending
for  a  mixed  kind  of  government,  hindered  the  other  two
from  gaining  their  point.     At  the  same  time,  the  inequali-
ty between  the  poor  and  the  rich  occasioned  the  greatest
discord,  and  the  state  was  in  so  dangerous   a  situation,
that  there  seemed  to  be  no  way  to  quell  the  seditious,  or
to  save  it  from  ruin,  but  changing  it  to  a  monarchy.     Sa
greatly  v/ere  the  poor  in  debt  to  the  rich,  that  they  were
obliged  either  to  pay  them  a  sixth  part  of  the  produce  of
the  land  (whence  they  were  called  i/ffc^cTwo^-zV  and  Thete&)
or  else  to  engage  their  persons  to  their  creditors,  who
might  seize  them  on  failure  of  payment.     Accordingly
some  made  slaves  of  them,  and  others  sold  them  to   fo-
reigners.     Nay,  some  parents  were  forced  to  sell  their,
own  children,  (fpr  no  law  forbade  it)  and  to  quit  the  city^
to  avoid  the  severe  treatment  of  those  usurers.     But  the
greater  number,  and  men  of  the  most  spirit,  agreed  to
standby  each  other,   and  to    bear  such   iinpositions  no
longer.     They  determined  to  choose  a  trusty,  person  for.
their  leader  to  deliver  those  who  had  failed  in  their  time.

easy,  for  that  the  Persians  v/oiild  not  for  many  years  attempt  any
thing  against  the  Greeks,  and  when  they  did,  they  would  receive
greater  loss  themselves  than  they  would  be  able  to  bring  upon  ihCi
states  they  thought  to  destroy.      ^ Lant.  in  Vita  {if  Mimeih.


SOLGN.  ^T

of  payment,  to  dn  idc  tlie  land,  and  to  give  an  entire  new
face  to  the  commonwealth.

Then  the  most  prudent  of  the  Athenians  cast  their  eyes
upon  Solon,  as  a  man  least  obnoxious  to  either  party,
havini^  neither  been  engaged  in  oppressions  with  the  rich,
nor  entangled  in  necessities  with  the  poor.  Him,  there-
fore, they  intrcatcd  to  assist  the  public  in  this  exigency,
and  to  compose  these  differences.  Phanias  the  Lesbian
asserts,  indeed,  that  Solon,  to  savethestate,  dealt  artfully
with  both  parties,  and  privately  premised  the  poor  a  di-
vision of  the  lands,  and  the  rich  a  confirmation  of  their
securities.  At  first  he  was  loth  to  take  the  administra-
tion upon  him,  by  reason  of  the  avarice  of  some  and  the
insolence  of  otliers  ;  but  was,  however,  chosen  archon
next  after  Philombrotus,  and  at  the  same  time  arbitrator
and  lawgiver ;  the  rich  accepting  of  him  readily,  as  one
of  t/iemj  and  the  poor,  as  a  good  and  worthy  man.  They
tell  us  too,  that  a  saying  of  his,  which  he  had  let  fall  some
time  before,  that  equality  causes  710  tvar^  was  then  much
repeated,  and  pleased  both  the  rich  and  the  poor  ;  the  lat-
ter expecting  to  come  to  a  balance  by  their  numbers  and
by  the  measure  of  divided  lands,  and  the  former  to  pre-
serve an  equality  at  least,  by  their  dignity  and  power.
Thus  both  parties  being  in  great  hopes,  the  heads  of  then\
were  urgent  with  Solon  to  make  himself  king,  and  en-
deavoured to  persuade  him,  that  he  might  with  better  as-
surance take  upon  him  the  direction  of  a  city  where  he
had  the  supreme  authority.  Nay,  many  of  the  citizens,
that  leaned  to  neither  party,  seeing  the  intended  change
difficult  to  be  effected  by  reason  and  law,  were  not  against
the  entrusting  of  the  government  to  the  hands  of  one  wise
and  just  man.  Some,  moreover,  acquaint  us,  that  he
received  this  oracle  froiu  Apollo,

Seize,  seize  the  helm  ;  the  reeling  vessel  guide  :
With  aiding  patriots  stem  the  raging  tide.

His  friends,  in  particular  told  him  it  "would  appear  that
he  wanted  courage,  if  he  rejected  the  monarchy  for  fear
of  the  name  of  tyrant  ;  as  if  the  sole  and  supreme  power
would  not  soon  become  a  lawful  sovereignty  through  the
virtues  of  him  that  received  it»  Thus  formerly,  (said  they)
the  Eub(eans   set  up  Tynnondas  and  lately  the  Mityle-


218  Plutarch's  lives.

nscans  Pittacus  for  their  prince.*  None  of  these  things
moved  Solon  from  his  purpose,  and  the  answer  he  is  said
to  have  given  his  friends  is  this,  Absolute  monarchy  is  a
fairjield,  but  it  has  no  outlets  And  in  one  of  his  poems  he
thus  addresses  himself  to  his  friend  Phocus,

^If  I  spared  my  country,

If  gilded  violence  and  tyrannic  sway

Could  never  charm  me  ;  thence  no  shame  accmes ;

Still  the  mild  honour  of  my  name  I  boast,

And  find  my  empire  there.

Whence  it  is  evident  that  his  reputation  was  very  great,
before  he  appeared  in  the  character  of  a  legislator.  As
for  the  ridicule  he  was  exposed  to  for  rejecting  kingly
power,  he  has  described  it  in  the  following  verses  :

Nor  wisdom's  palm,  nor  deep-laid  policy
Can  Solon  boast.     For  when  its  noblest  blessings
Heaven  pour'd  into  his  lap,  he  spurn'd  them  from  him.
Where  was  his  sense  and  spirit,  when  enclos'd
He  found  the  choicest  prey,  nor  deign'd  to  draw  it  ?
Who,  to  command  fair  Athens  but  one  day,
Would  not  himself,  with  all  his  race,  kave  fallen
Contented  on  the  morrow  ?

Thus  he  has  introduced  the  multitude  and  men  of  low
minds,  as  discoursing  about  him.  But  though  he  rejected
absolute  power,  he  proceeded  with  spirit  enough  in  the
administration  :  he  did  not  make  any  concessions  in  be-
half of  the  powerful,  nor,  in  the  framing  of  his  laws,  did
he  indulge  the  humour  of  his  constituents.  Where  the
former  establishment  was  tolerable,  he  neither  applied
remedies,  nor  used  the  incision-knife,  lest  he  should  put
the  whole  in  disorder,  and  not  have  power  to  settle  or
compose  it  afterwards  in  the  temperature  he  could  wish.
He  only  made  such  alterations  as  he  might  bring  the  peo-
ple to  acquiesce  in  by  persuasion,  or  compel  thern  to  by
his  authority,  making  (as  he  says)  ybrce  and  right  conspire^
Hence  it  was,  that  having  the  question  afterwards  put  to

*  Pittacus  one  of  the  seven  wise  men  of  Greece,  made  himself
master  of  Mitylene ;  for  which,  Alcaeus,  who  was  of  the  same  town,
cotemporary  with  Pittacus,  and,  as  a  poet,  a  friend  to  liberty,  sa-
tirized him,  as  he  did  the  other  tyrants.  Pittacus  disregarded  his
censures,  and  having  by  his  authority  quelled  the  seditions  of  his
citizens,  and  established  peace  and  harmony  among  them,he  volun-
^rily  quitted  his  power,  »nd  restored  his  country  to  its  libertv.


SOLON.  219

him,  Whether  he  had  Jirovided  the  best  of  laivsfor  the
Athenians^  he  answered,  The  best  they  were  cafmble  of  re-
cdving.  And  as  the  moderns  observe,  that  the  Atheni-
ans used  to  qualify  the  harshness  of  things  by  givinj^  them
softer  and  politer  names,  calling  whores  mistresses.,  tri-
butes contributions^  garrisons  guards,  and  prisons  castles  ;
so  Solon  seems  to  be  the  first  that  distinguished  the  can-
celling of  debts  by  the  name  of  a  discharge.  For  this  was
the  first  of  his  public  acts,  that  debts  should  be  forgiven,
and  that  no  man,  for  the  future,  should  take  the  body  of
his  debtor  for  security.  Though  Androtion  and  some
others  say,  that  it  was  not  by  the  cancelling  of  debts,  but
by  moderating  the  interest,  that  the  poor  were  relieved,
they  thought  themselves  so  happy  in  it,  that  they  gave
the  name  of  discharge  to  this  act  of  humanity,  as  well  as
to  the  enlarging  of  measures  and  the  value  of  money,
which  went  along  with  it.  For  he  ordered  the  minte,  which
before  went  but  for  seventy-three  drachmas^  to  go  for  a
hundred  :  so  that,  as  they  paid  the  same  in  value,  but
much  less  in  weight,  those  that  had  great  sums  to  pay
were  relieved,  while  such  as  received  them  were  no  losers.

The  greater  part  of  writers,  however,  affimi,  that  it
was  the  abolition  of  past  securities  that  was  called  a  dis-
charge^ and  with  these  the  poems  of  Solon  agree.  For  in
them  he  values  himself  on  having  taken  avjay  the  marks  of
mortgaged  land^^  which  before  ivere  almost  every  nvhere  set
2^/^,  and  made  free  those  fields  which  before  were  bound  :  and
not  only  so,  but  of  such  citizens  as  were  »ezzable  by  their
creditors  for  debt,  some,  he  tells  us,  he  had  brought  back
from  other  countries,  where  they  had  wandered  so  long,  that
they  had  forgot  the  Attic  dialect,  and  others  he  had  set  at
liberty,  who  had  experienced  a  cruel  slavery  at  home*

This  affair,  indeed,  brought  upon  him  the  greatei|
trouble  he  met  with  :  For  when  he  undertook  the  annul-
ling of  debts,  and  was  consideringof  a  suitable  speech  and
a  proper  method  of  introducing  the  business,  he  told  some
of  his  most  intimate  friends,  namely,  Conon,  Clinias,  and
Hipponicus,  that  he  intended  only  to  abolish  the  debts,
and  not  to  meddle  with  the  lands.  These  friends
of  his  hastening  to  make  their  advantage  of  the  secret,
before  the  decree  took  place,  borrowed  large  sums  of  the

*  The  Athenians  had  a  custom  of  fixing  up  Wlets,  to  shew  th»t
hoHses  or  lands  were  mortgaged.


220  Plutarch's  lives.

rich,  and  purchased  estates  with  them.  Aftenvards  when,
the  decree  warj  pubUshed,  they  kept  their  possessions  with-
otit  paying  the  money  they  had  taken  up  ;  which  brought
great  reflections  upon  Solon,  as  if  he  had  not  been  im-
posed upon  with  the  rest,  but  were  rather  an  accomplice
in  the  fraud.  This  charge,  however,  was  soon  removed,
by  his  being  the  first  to  comply  with  the  law,  and  remitting
a  debt  of  five  talents,  which  he  had  out  at  interest.  Others,
among  whom  is  Polyzelus  the  Rhodian,  say  it  was  fifteen
talents.  But  his  friends  went  by  the  name  of  Chreocoiii
dx  or  debt -cutters  ever  after.

The  method  he  took,  satisfied  neither  the  poor  nor  the
rich.  The  latter  were  displeased  by  the  cancelling  of
their  bonds ;  and  the  former  at  not  finding  a  division  of
lands :  upon  tliis  they  had  fixed  their  hopes,  and  they
complained  that  he  had  not,  like  Lycurgus.  made  all  the
citizens  equal  in  estate.  Lycurgus,  however,  being  the
eleventh  from  Hercules,  and  having  reigned  many  years
in  Lacedxmon,  had  acquired  great  authority,  interest
and  friends,  of  which  he  knew  very  well  how  to  avail
himself  in  setting  up  a  new  form  of  government.  Yet  he
was  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  force  leather  than  persua-
sion, and  had  an  eye  struck  out  in  the  dispute,  before  lie
could  bring  it  to  a  lasting  settlement,  and  establish  such  an
union  and  equality,  as  left  neither  rich  nor  poor  in  the  city.
On  the  other  hand,  Solon's  estate  was  but  moderate,  not
superior  to  that  of  some  commoners,  and  therefore  he
attempted  not  to  erect  such  a  commonwealth  as  that  of
Lycurgus,  considering  it  as  out  of  his  power :  he  pro-
ceeded as  far  as  he  thought  he  could  be  supported  by  the
confidence  the  people  had  in  his  probity  and  wisdom.

That  he  answered  not  the  expectations  of  the  genera-
lity, but  offended  them  by  falling  short,  appeal^  from
these  verses  of  his

Those  eyes  with  joy  once  sparkling  when  they  view'd  nie.

With  cold,  oblique  regard,  behold  me  now.

And  a  little  after


■—Yet  who  but  Solon


Could  have  spoke  peace  to  their  tumultuous  w^ves.
And  not  have  sunk  beneath  them  r*

-TTtx^  i^iXn  yocXtc  is  a  proverbial  expression,  which  will


not  bear  a  litei-al prose  translation,  much  less  a  poetical  one :  it  was
necessary,  therefore,  to  give  a  new  turn,  to  the  sentence,  only  keep*
ing  the  sense  i-n  view.


SOLON  52i

But  beinc^:  soon  seBsible  of  the  utility  of  the  decree,  they
laid  aside  their  complaints,  ofiered  a  public  sacrifice  which
they  called  scisacthia^  or  tlie  sacrifice  of  the  discharge,
and  constituted  Solon  lawgiver  and  swperintendant  of  the
commonwealth  ;  committting  to  him  the  regulation  not
of  a  part  only,  but  the  whole,  maL^istracies,  assemblies,
courts  of  judicature,  and  senate  ;  and  leaving  him  to  de-
termine the  qualifications,  number,  and  time  of  meeting
for  them  all,  as  well  as  to  abrogate  or  continue  the  for-
mer constitutions,  at  his  pleasure.

First  then,  he  repealed  the  lav/  of  Draco,*  except
those  concerning  murder,  because  of  the  severity  of  the
punishments  they  appointed,  which  for  almost  all  offences
were  capital ;  even  tho^^e  that  were  convicted  of  idleness
were  to  suffer  death,  and  such  as  stole  only  a  few  apples
or  pot-herbs,  were  to  be  punished  in  the  same  manner  as
sacrilegious^  persons  and  murderers.  Hence  a  saying  of
Dcmades,  who  lived  long  after,  was  much  admired,  that
Draco  wrote  his  laws  not  with  ink^  but  with  blood.  And  he
himself  being  asked,  Why  he  made  death  the  Jiunishmentfor
most  offences^  answered,  Small  ones  deserve  it^  and  I  ca?i
jlrid  no  greater  for  the  most  heinous.

In  the  next  place,  Solon  took  an  estimate  of  the  estates
of  the  citizens  ;  intending  to  leave  the  great  offices  m  the
hands  of  the  rich,  but  to  give  the  rest  of  the  people  a
share  in  other  departments  which  they  had  not  before.

*  Draco  was  archon  in  the  second,  thongtf  som^  say  in  the  last,
year  of  the  thirty-ninth  01ym})iad, .about  the  year  before  Christ  623.
Though  the  name  of  this  great  man  occurs  frequently  in  history,  yet
we  no  where  find  so  much  as  ten  lines  togerher  concerning  him  and
his  institutions.  He  may  be  considered  as  the  first  legislature  of  the
Athenians  ;  for  the  laws,  or  ra!:her  precepts,  of  Triptolemus  were
very  few,  viz.  Honour  your  parents  ;  ivorsbip  the  gods  ^  hurt  not  anhnals  ;
Draco  was  the  first  of  the  Greeks  that  punished  adultery  with  death ;
and  he  esteemed  murder  so  h\g\\  a  crime,  that  to  imprint  a  deep  ab-
horrence of  it  in  the  minds  of  men,  he  ordained  that  process  should
be  carried  on  even  against  inan:mave  things,  if  they  accidentally  caus-
ed the  death  of  any  person.  B .-.:  besides  murder  and  adultery,  which
deserved  death,  he  made  a  nuniber  of  smaller  ofrences  capital ;  and
that  brouglit  almost  all  his  laws  into  disuse.  The  extravagant  se-
verity  of  them,  like  an  edge  too  finely  ground,  hindered  his  thesinoi,
as  he  called  them,  from  striking  deej).  Porphyry  (r/e  abstinent)  has
preserved  one  of  them  concerning  divine  vv'orsliip,  *'  It  is  an  ever-
lasting law  in  Attica,  that  the  gods  are  to  be  worshipped,  and
the  heroes  also,  according  to  the  customs  of  the  ancestors,  and  in
private  only  with  a  proper  address,  first  fruits,  and  annual  libations."

yOL.    I.  U


222  PLUTARCH'S    LIVES.

Such  as  had  a  yearly  income  of  five  hundred  measures
in  wet  or  dry  goods,  he  placed  in  the  first  rank,  and  called
them  Pe7iiacosiojnedimni  '.*  The  second  consisted  of  those
that  could  keep  a  horse,  or  whose  lands  produced  three
hundred  measures ;  these  v/ere  of  the  equestrian  order  and
called  Hippodatelountes.  And  those  of  the  third  class,  who
had  but  two  hundred  measures,  were  called  Zeu^ita.
The  rest  were  named  Thetes^  and  not  admitted  to  any
office  ;  they  had  only  a  right  to  appear  and  give  their  vote
in  the  general  assembly  of  the  people.  This  seemed  at
first  but  a  slight  privilege,  but  afterwards  shewed  itself  a
matter  of  great  importance  ;  for  most  causes  came  at  last
to  be  decided  by  them  ;  and  in  such  matters  as  were  un-
der the  cognizance  of  the  magistrates  there  lay  an  appeal
to  the  people.  Besides,  he  is  said  to  have  drawn  up  his
lavr's  in  an  obscure  and  ambiguous  manner,  on  purpose
to  enlarge  the  authority  of  the  popular  tribunal.  For  as
they  could  not  adjust  their  differences ;  by  the  letter  of
the  law,  they  were  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  living  judg-
es ;  I  mean  the  whole  body  of  citizens,  v/ho  therefore  had
all  controversies  brought  before  them,  and  were  in  a  man-
ner superior  to  the  laws.  Of  this  equality  he  himself
takes  notice  in  these  words:

By  me  the  people  held  their  native  rights
Uninjured,  unoppress'd — The  great  restrain'd
From  lawless  violence,  and  the  poor  from  rapine,
By  me,  their  mutual  shield.

Desirous  yet  farther  to  strengthen  the  common  people,
he  impowered  any  man  whatever  to  enter  an  action  for
one  that  was  injured.  If  a  person  was  assaulted,  or  suf-
fered damage  or  violence, another  that  was  able  and  willing
to  do  it,  might  prosecute  the  offender.  Thus  tlie  lawgiv-
er v/isely  accustomed  the  citizens,  as  members  of  one  bo-
dy, to  feel  and  to  resent  one  another's  injuries.     And  we,

*  The  Pcntactxioniedirmi  paid  a  Orient  to  the  public  treasury  ;  the
Hippodatelountes,  as  the  word  signihes,  were  obliged  to  tind  ahorse,
and  to  serve  as  cavalry  in  the  v/ars  ;  the  Zeugitce  were  so  called,  as
being  the  middle  rank  between  the  knights  and  these  of  the  lowest
order  (for  rowers  who  have  the  midale  bench  between  the  Thama-
lites  and  the  Thranites,  are  called  Zevgitce ,-)  and  though  the  7betee
had  barely  each  a  vote  in  the  general  assemblies,  yet  that  (as  Plu-
tarch observes)  appeared  in  time  to  be  a  great  privilege,  K'.oit  caus-
es being  brought  by  appeal  before  the  people.


soLoy.  223"

are  told  of  a  saying  of  his  agreeable  to  this  law  :  bein{^
asked,  What  city  rjas  hen  ynoddlcd?  he  answered,  Thaty
where  those  vjho  are  not  injured  are  no  less  ready  to  firosecute
and  punish  offenders  than  those  who  are.

When  these  points  v/cre  adjusted,  he  established  the
council  of  the  areopagus.*  which  was  to  consist  of  such  as
had  borne  the  office  of  archon^]  and  himself  was  one  of  tho-
number.  But  observing  that  the  people,  now  discharged
from  their  debts,  grew  insolent  and  imperious,  he  pro-
ceeded to  constitute  another  council  or  senate,  of  four
hundred,  \  a  hundred  out  of  each  tribe,  by  whom   all

*  The  court  of  areopagiis,  though  settled  long  before,  had  lost
ir.uch  of  its  power  by  Draco's  preferring  the  ephetse.  In  ancient
times,  and  till  Solon  became  legislator,  it  consisted  of  such  persons
as  were  most  conspicuous  in  the  state  for  their  wealtli,  power,  and
probity  ;  but  Solon  made  it  a  rule  that  such  only  should  have  a  seat
in  it  as  had  borne  the  oflice  ofarcboji  This  had  the  effect  he  de-
signed, it  raised  the  reputation  of  the  areopagiics  yery  high,  and  ren-
dered their  decrees  so  venerable,  that  none  contested  or  repined  at
tliem  through  a  long  course  of  ages.

■\  After  the  exstinction  of  the  race  of  the  Medontidce,  the  Atheni-
ans made  the  ofFxe  oi  arcbon  annual ;  and,  instead  of  one,  they  cre-
ated nine  archons.  By  the  latter  expedient,  they  provided  against
the  too  great  pov/er  of  a  single  person,  as  by  the  former  they  took
away  all  apprehension  of-the  arcbmis  setting  up  for  sovereigns.  In
one  word,  they  attained  now  what  they  had  long  sought,  the  mak-
ing tlieir  supreme  magistrates  dependent  en  the  people.  This  re-
markable ?era  of  the  completion  of  ihe  Athenian  democracy  was,  ac-
cording to  the  Alannora,  in  the  first  year  of  the  xxivth  Olympiad,
before  Christ  634.  That  these  magistrates  might  however  retain
sufficient  authority  and  dignity,  they  had  high  titles  and  great  ho-
nours annexed  to  their  offices.  The  first  was  styled  by  way  of  emi-
nence Tbe  Archon,  and  the  year  was  distinguished  by  his  name.
The  second  was  called  ^fl^f/ei-'j,  that  is,  kbig ;  for  they  chose  to  have
that  title  considered  as  a  secondary  one.  This  ofncer  had  the  care
of  religion.  The  third  had  the  name  of  Po'emarch,  for  war  was  his
particular  province.  The  other  six  had  the  title  of  Thesmctbetce,
and  were  considered  as  the  guardians  of  their  laws.  These  arcbans
continued  till  the  time  of  the  emperor  Callienus.

\  The  number  of  tribes  were  increased  by  Calisthenes  to  ten,  after
he  had  driven  out  the  Pisistratida  ;  and  then  this  senate  consisted  of
five  hundred,  fifty  being  chosen  out  of  each  tribe.  Towards  the
close  of  che  year  the  president  of  each  tribe  gave  in  a  list  of  candidates,
out  of  whom  the  senators  were  elected  by  lot.  The  senatc^rs  then
appointed  the  oihcers  cdi\\c<\  prytayies.  The  prytwiies,  while  the  se-
nate consisted  of  500,  were  50  in  number  ;  and,  for  the  avoiding  of
confusion,  ten  of  these  presided  a  week,  during  which  space  they
were  called  proeuri,  and  out  of  them  an  etistatss  or  president  was
•hosen,  whose  ofSoe  lasted  but  one  day


224.  ?lqtarch's   lives.

aukirs  were  ta  be  previoiislv  considered  ;  and  ordered
that  no  matter,  v.ithout  their  approbation,  should  be  laid
before  the  general  asspinbly.  In  the  mean  time  the  high
court  of  the  areopagus  were  to  be  the  inspectors  and  guar-
dians of  the  laws.  Thus  he  supposed  the  commonwealth,
secured  by  two  councils,  as  by  two  anchors,  would  be  less
liable  to  be  shaken  by  tumults,  and  the  people  would  be^
come  more  orderly  and  peaceable.  Most  >vriters,  as  we
have  observed,  afHrm  that  the  council  of  the  arso/iag-ns  wds
of  Solon's  appointing  :  and  it  seems  greatly  to  confirm
their  assertion,  that  Draco  has  made  no  mention  of  tlie
areopcgitesy  but  in  capital  causes  constantly  addresses  him-
self to  the  ep.hstit  :  yet  the  eighth  law  of  Solon's  thirteenth
table  is  set  down  in  these  very  words,  Whoever  nvere  de-
clared injatnousy  befjve  Solon's  archonahip.^  let  them  be  restore
ed  in  honour y  ex cepd  such  as  haring.  been  condemned  in  the
areopagus,  or  by  the  epJiett^^  or  by  the  kings  in  the  Prytane^
uTn^for  murder  or  robbery ^  or  attempting  to  usurp  the  gov-
ermncnl^  had.jied  their  country^  before  this  law  was  made.
This  on  the  contrary,  shows,  that  before  Solon  was  chief
magistrate  and  delivered  his  laws,  the  council  of  the  ar<?o-
pagus  wcis  in  bein  g.  For  who  could  have  been  condemned
in  the  areopagus  before  .Solon's  time,  if  he  was  the  liist
tliat  erected  it  into  a  court  of  judicature  ?  Unless,  perhaps,
there  be  some  obscurity  or  deficiency  in  the  text,  and  the
meaning  be,  that  such  as  have  been  convicted  of  crimes^
that  are  now  cognizable  before  the  areopagitess  the  etMet<z^*
and  prytanesy  shall  continue  infamous,  whilst  others  are
restored.  But  this  I  submit  to  the  judgment  of  the  reader.
The  most  peculiar  and  surprising  of  his  other  lav/s,  is,
that  which  declares  the  man  infam-ous  who  stands  neuter
in  time  of  sedition,  f     It  seems,  he  would  nothtwe  us  be

*  T\\e  ephetce  were,  first  appointed  in  the  reign  of  Demophon,  the
son  of  Theseus,  for  the  trying  of  v/ilfal  murders  a,nd  cases  of  man-
slaughter. They  consisted  at  first  of  iifcy  Athenians  and  as  many
Argives  ;  but  Draco  excluded  the  Argives,  and  ordered  that  it  should
be  composed  of  fifty-one  Athenians,  who  v/ere  all  to  be  turned  of
fifty  years  of  age  He  also  fixed  their  authority  above  that  of  the-
areopagites  ;'  but  Solon  brought  them  under  that  court,  and  limited
their  jurisdiction.

t  Aulas  GelHus,  who  has  preserved  the  very  words  of  this  law,
adds,  that  one  who  so  stood  neuter,  should  lose  his  houses,  his  couu-
trv,and  estate,  and  be  sent  out  an  exile.     Noct.  Attic.  1.  ii.  c  12.

Plutarch  in  another  place  condemns  this  law  ;  hut  GcUius  highly
commends  it,  and  assigns  this  reason — The  wise  and  just,  as  well  as
the  envious  and  vricked,  being  obliged  to  choose,  some^sidc,  matters


SOLOK.  225^

imlifferent  and  unaSected  with  the  flite  of  the  public,  whca-
our  concerns  are  upon  a  safe  bottom  ;  nor  when  we  are
in  health,  be  insensible  to  the  distempers  and  griefs  o£
our  country.  He  would  have  us  espouse  the  better  and
juster  cause,  and  hazard  every  thing  in  defence  of  ii,
rather  tlian  wait  in  safety  to  see  which  side  the  victory
will  incline  to.  That  law,  too,  seems  quite  ridiculous  and
absurd,  which  permits  a  rich  heiress,  whose  husband  hap-
pens to  be  impotent,  to  console  herself  with  his  nearest  re-
lations. Yet  some  say,  this  lav/,  was  very  properly  level-
led against  those,  who,  conscious  of  their  own  inabilit)',
raatch  with  heiresses  for  the  sake  of  the  portion,  and  un-
der colour  of  law  do  violence  to  nature.  For  when  they
know  that  such  heiresses  may  make  choice  of  others  to
grant  their  favours  to,  they  will  either  let  those  matches
alone,  or  if  they  do  marry  in  that  manner,  they  must  suf-
fer the  shame  of  their  avarice  and  dishonesty.  It  is  right, .
that  the  heiress  should  not  have  liberty  to  choose  at  large
but  only  amongst  her  husband's  relations,  that  the  child
which  is  born  may,  at  least,  belong  to  his  kindred  and
family.  Agreeable  to  this  is  the  direction,  that  the  bride,
and  bridegroom  should  be  shut  up  together  and  eat  of  the
same  quince  ;*  and  that  the  husband  of  an  lie  iress  should
approach  her  at  least  three  times  in  a  month.  For,  though
they  may  happen  not  to  liave  children,  yet  it  is  a  mark
ef  honour  and  regai^d  due  from  a  man  to  the  chastity  of
his  v/ife  :  it  removes  many  uneabinesses,  and  prevents .
differences  from  proceeding  to  an  absolute  breach.

In  all  other  marriages,  he   ordered  that  no   dowries .
should  be  giVen  :  the  bride,  was  to  bring  v/ith  her  only
three  suits  of  clothes,  and  some  household  stuff  of  small
value. t     For  he  did  not  choose  that  marriages  should  be

were  easily  accommodated  ;  whereas  if  tht  latter  only,  as  is  genevrJ  -
ly  the  case  with  other  cities,  had  the  management  of  factions,  they
would,  for  private  reasons,  be  continuaHy  kept  uji,  to  the  great  hiut,
if  not  the  utrer  ruin  of  the  state.

*  The  eating  of  the  quince,  which  was  not  peculiar  to  an  heiress
and  her  huvband,  (for  all  new  married  peoi)Ie  eat  it)  implied  that
their  discourses  ought  to  be  pleasant  to  each  other,  that  fruit  mak-
ing the  breath  sweet.

J  The  bride  brought  wich  her  an  earthen  pan  called  phrogctccnt
wherein  barley  was  parched  ;  to  signify  that  she  undertook  the  bu-
siness of  the  house,  and  would  do  her  part  towards  proYiding,  for
the  family.

V.  a.-


226  ,  PLUTARCH'S    LIV^LS^

made  with  mercenary  or  venal  views,  but  woiild  havt?
that  union  cemented  by  the  endearment  of  children,  and
every  other  instance  of  love  and  friendship.  Nay,  Dio-
nysins  himself,  when  his  mother  desired  to  be  married  to
a  young  Syracusan,  told  htVyHe  had^  indeed^  by  his  tyran^
ny,  broke  througii  the  larjs  of  his  co-untry^  but  he  could  tiot
break  those  of  nature^  by  coitv.tenancing  so  dln/iroporiioncd
a  mutch.  And  surely  such  disorders  should  not  be  toler-
ated in  any  state,  nor  such  matches  v»'here  there  is  no  equal-
ity of  years,  or  inducements  of  love,  or  probability  that  the
end  of  marriage  will  be  ansv/ered.  So  thai  to  an  old  man
who  marries  a  yoimg  woman,  some  prudent  magistrate  o\^
hiwgiver  might  express  himself  in  the  words  addressed  to
Phiioctetes,

Poor  sciil  I  how  fit  art  x\\Q\\  to  rcany  i

And  if  he  found  a  young  man  in  the  house  of  a  rich  old
vioman,  like  a  partridge,  growing  fat  in  his  private  ser-
vices, he  would  remove  him  to  some  young  virgin  who
vranted  a  husba.nd.     But  enough  of  this.

That  lavv'  of  Solon's  is  also  justly  cornm.endcd,  which,
forbids  men  to  speak  ill  of  the  dead.  For  piety  requires
us  to  consider  the  deceased  as  sacred  ;  justice  calls  upon
us  to  spare  those  that  are  not  in  being  :  and  good  policy,
to  prevent  the  perpetuating  of  hatred.  He  forbade  his  peo-
ple also  to  revile  the  living,  in  a  temple,  in  a  court  of  justice,
in  the  great  assembly  of  the  people,  or  at  the  public  Jj:ames.-
He  that  offended  in  this  respect,  was  to  pay  three  drach-
mas to  the  person  injured,  and  two  to  the  public.  Never
to  restrain  anger  is,  indeed,  a  proof  of  weakness  or  want
of  breeding;  and  ahvays  to  guard  againstit,  is  very  difficult,
and  to  some  persons  impossible.  Now,  what  is  enjoined
by  law  should  be  practicable,  if  the  legislator  desires  to
punish  a  few  to  some  good  purpose,  and  not  maify  to  no
purpose.

His  laAV  concerninc:  wills  has  likewise  its  m.erit.  For
before  his  time  the  Athenians  were  not  allowed  to  dispose
of  their'estates  by  will;  the  .houses  and  other  substance  of
the  dccea.^d  were  to  remain  among  his  relations.  But  he
permitted  any  one  that  had  not  children,  to  leave  his  pos-
sessions to  whom  he  pleased;  thus  preferring  the  tie  of
friendship  to  that  of  kindred,  and  choice  to  necessity,  he
gave  every  man  the  full  and  free  disposal  of  his  own.  Yet
he  allowed  not  all  soils  of  leg^acies,  but  tliose  only  that


SOLON.  227

T'fcre  nof  extorted  byphrcnzy,  the  consequence  of  disease
or  poisons,  by  imprisonment  or  violence,  or  the  persua-
sions of  a  wife.  For  he  considered  inducements  that  oper-
ated against  reason,  as  no  better  than  force  :  to  be  deceived
was  with  //?";/?  the  stime  thing  as  to  be  compelled  ;  and  he
looked  upon  pleasure  to  be  as  great  a  perverter  as  pain.*

He  regulated,  moreover,  the  journtiys  of  women,  theii'
mournings  and  sacrifices,  and  endeavoured  to  keep  them
t  iear  of  all  disorder  and  excess.  They  were  not  to  go  out
of  town  with  more  than  three  habits  ;  the  provisions  they
carried  with  them,  were  not  to  exceed  the  value  of  an
obfjlufi  ;  their  basket  was  not  to  be  above  a  cubit  high  ;'  and
in  the  night  they  were  not  to  tiavel  but  in  a  carriage,  v/ith
a  torch  before  them.  At  funeraisthey  were  forbid  to  tear
themselves,!  and  no  hired  mourner  was  to  utter  lamenta-
ble notes,  or  to  act  any  tiling  else  that  tended  to  excite
sorrow.  They  were  not  permitted  to  sacrifice  an  ox  on^
those  occasions  ;  or  to  bury  more  than  three  garments  with
the  body  ;  or  to  visit  any  tombs  beside  those  of  their  own
family,  except  at  the  time  of  interment.  Most  of  these
things  are  likewise  forbidden  by  our  laws,  with  the  addi-
tion of  this  circumstance,  that  tliose  who  ofTend  in  such  a
manner  are  fined  by  the  censors  of  the  women,  as  giving
way  to  weak  passions  and  childisli  sorrow.

As  the  city  was  filled  with  persons  who  assembled  frcm
all  parts,  on  account  of  the  great  security  in  which  peo-
j)le  lived  in  Attica,  Solon  observing  this,  and  that  the
country  withal  was  poor  and  barren,  and  that  merchants
who  traffic  by  sea,  do  not  use  to  import  their  goods  where
they  can  have  nothing  in  exchange,  turned  the  attentiorv
of  the  citizens  to  manufactures.  For  this  purpose  he  made
a  Ia>v,  that  no  son  should  be  obliged  to  maintain  his  fa-

*  He  likewise  ordained  that  adopted  persons  should  make  no  will,,
hut  as  soon  as  they  had  children  lawfully  begotten,  ihey  were  at
liberty  to  recuin  into  the  family  wheiice  they  ^Ycre  adopted  ;  or  if
they  continued  in  it  to  their  death,  the  estates  reveried  to  the  rela-
tions of  the  persons  who  adopted  rhem.  Demosth.  in  Ch-at.  Leptin,

I  Demosthenes  {in  7iniocr.)  recites  Solon's  directions  as  to  fu-
nerals as  follows  :  "  Let  ^he  dead  bodies  be  laid  out  in  the  house».
according  as  the  deceased  gave  order,  and  the  day  following  before
sun-rise  carried  forth.  Whilst  the  body  is  carrying  to  the  grave  let  the
men  go  before,  the  women  fellow.  It  shall  not  be  lawful  for  any.
woman  to  enter  upon  the  goods  of  the  dead,  and  to  f(;llow  the  body
to  the  grave  under  threescore  years  of  age,  except  such  as  are  witlxr-
in  the  degrees  of  cousins.''


3^S  Plutarch's-  lives.

ther,  if  he  had  not  taus-ht  him  a  trade.*  As  for  Lycur»
gus,  whose  city  was  clear  of  stmngers,  and  whose  country,
according  to  Euripides,  was  sufficient  for  twice  the  num-
ber of  inhabitants ;  where  there  was,  moreover  a  multi-
tude of  Hdotes^  who  were  not  only  to  be  kept  constantly
employed,  but  to  be  humbled  and  worn  out  by  servitude  ;
it  was  right  for  him  to  set  the  citizens  free  from  laborious
and  mechanic  arts,  and  to  employ  them  in  arms,  as  the
only  art  fit  for  them  to  learn  and  exercise.  But  Solon,
rather  adapting  his  laws  to  the  sta.te  of  his  country,  than
his  country  to  his  laws,  and  perceiving  tliat  the  soil  of  Atti-
ca, which  hardly  rewarded  the  husbandman's  labour,  was-
far  from  being  capable  of  maiata.ining  a  lazy  mAiltitude,  or-
dered that  trades  sliould  be  accounted  honourable ;  that
the  council  of  the  areofiagus  should  examine  into  every
man's  means  of  subsisting^. and  chastise  the  idle

But  that  law  v/as  more  rigid,  which  (as  Heraclides  of.
Pontus  informs  us)  excused  bastards  from  relieving  their
fathers.  Nevertheless,  the  man  that  disregards  so  honour-
able a  state  as  marriage,  does  not  take  a  woman  for  the
sake  of  children,  but  merely  ta  indulge  his  appetite.  He.
has,  therefore,  his  rev/ard  ;  and  there  remains  no  pretence
for  him  to  upbraid  tho^e  children,  whose  very  birth  he  has.
made  a  reproach  to  them.

In  truth,  his  laws  concerning  v/omen,  in  general  ap-
pear very  absurd.  For  he  permitted  any  one  to  kill  an
adulterer  taken  in  the  fact ;  f  but  if  a  man  committed  a.
i*ape  upon  a  free  waman,  he  was  only  to  be  fined  a  hun-
dred drachmas;  if  he  gained  his  purpose,  by  persuasion,
twenty  ;  but  prostitutes  were  excepted,  because  they  have
their  price.  And  he  would  not  ailov/  them  to  sell  a
daughter  or  sister,  unless  she  were  taken  in  an  act  of  dis-
honour before  marriage.  But  to  punish  the  same  fault
sometimes  in  a  severe  and  rigorous  manner,  and  some-
times lightly  and  as  it  v/ere  in  sporty  v/ith  a  trivial  fine,
is  not  agi^eable  to  reason :  unless  the  scarcity  of  money

*  He  that  was  thrice  convicted  of  idleness,  was  to  be  declared  /»-

faincus.     Herodotus  (1.  vii.)  and  Diodcrus  Srculus  (1.  i.)  agree  that

a  law  of  this  kind  was  in  use  in  Egypt      It  is  probable  therefore-

that  Solon,  who  was  thoroughly  acquainted  wxth  the  iearnmg  of  that

nation,  bon-owed  it  from  them.

f  No  adulteress  was  to  adorn  herself,  or  to  assist  at  the  piiblic
sacrifices  ;  and  in  case  she  did,  he  gave  liberty  to  any  one  to  tea*
^r  clothes  off  her  iwck,  and  beat  her  into  the  bargain.


SOLON.  229

*  in  Athens,  at  that  time,  made  a  pecuniary,  mulct  a  heavy-
one.  And  indeed  in  thci  valuation  of  thins^s  for  the  sa-
crifice, a  sheep  and  a  jnedinviua  of  corn  were  reckoned  each
at  a  drachma  only.  To  the  victor  in  the  Isthmean  games,
ho  appointed  a  reward  of  a  hundred  drachmas  ;  and  to
the  victor  in  the  Olympian,  live  hundred.*  He  that
caufjht  a  he-wolf,  was  to  have  live  drachmas  ;  he  that
took  a  she-wolf,  one  :  and  the  former  sum  (as  Demetrius
Phalereus  asserts)  was  the  value  of  an  ox,  the  latter  of  a
sheep.  Though  the  prices  Avhich  he  fixes  in  his  sixteenth
table  for  select  victims,  were  probably  much  higjier  than
the  common,  yet  they  are  small  in  comparison  of  the  pre  -
sent.  The  Athenians  of  eld  were  great  enemies  to  wolves,
because  their  country  was  better  for  pasture  than  tillage  :
and  some  say  their  tribes  had  not  their  names  from  the
sons  of  Ion,  but  from  the  different  occupations  they  fol-
lowed ;  the  soldiers  being  called  hopllta^  the  artificers  cr-
gades  ;  and  of  the  other  two,  the  husbandmen  tclcantes  /
and  the  graziers  a^icores.

As  Attica  was  not  supplied  with  water  from  perennial
rivers,  lakes  or  springs,!  but  chiefly  by  wells  dug  for
that  purpose,  he  made  a  law,  that  where  there  was  a
public  well,  all  Avithin  the  distance  of  four  furlongs,
should  make  use  of  it:  but  where  the  distance  was  great-
er, they  were  to  piovide  a  well  of  their  own.  And  if  they
dug  ten  fathoms  deep  in  their  own  ground,  and  could
find  no  water,  they  had  liberty  to  fill  a,  vessel  of  six  gal-
lons twice  a  day  at  their  neighbours.  Thus  he  thought
improper  to  assist  persons  in  real  necessity,  but  not  to  en-
courage idleness.  His  rec;;uiations  with  respect  to  the
planting  of  trees,  were  also  very  judicious.  He  that
planted  any  tree  in  his  field,  was  to  place  it  at  least  five
feet  from  his  neighbour's  ground  ;  and  if  it  was  a  fig-
tree*  or  an  olive,  nine;  for  these  extend  their  roots  far-
ther than  others,  and  their  neighbourhood  is  prejudicial
to  some  trees,  not  only  as  they  take  away  the  nourishment,,
but  as  their  efPiuvia  is  noxious.     He  that  would  dig  a  pit

*  At  the  same  time  he  contracted  the  rewards  bestowed  upon  wrest-
lers, esteeming  such  gratuities  useless  and  even  dangerous  ;  as  they
tended  to  encourage  idleness  by  putting  men  upon  wasting  that  time
in  exercises  which  ought  to  be  spent  in  providing  for  their  families,

t  Strabo  tells  us  there  was  a  spring  of  fresh  water  near  the  Ly-
e3cum  ;  but  the  soil  of  Attica  in  general  was  dry,  and  the  rivers  llis-
sus  and  Eridamus  did  uotrun  constaiitly.


230  Plutarch's  lives.

or  a  ditch,  was  to  dig  it  as  far  from  another  man*s  groundy
as  it  was  deep  ;  and  if  any  one  would  raise  stocks  of  bees,
he  was  to  place  them  three  hundred  feet  from  those  al-
ready raised  by  another.

Of  all  the  products  of  the  earth,  he  allowed  none  to  be
sold  to  strangers,  but  oil :  and  whoever  presumed  to  ex-
port any  thing  else,  the  archon  wa»  solemnly  to  declare
him  accursed,  or  to  pay  himself  a  hundred  drachmas  into
the  public  treasury.  This  law  is  in  the  first  table.  And
therefore  it  is  not  absolutely  improbable,  what  some  af-
firm, that  the  exportation  of  figs  was  foniierly  forbidden,
and  that  the  informer  against  the  delinquents  was  called
a  sycophant.

He  likewise  enacted  a  law  for  reparation  of  damage
received  from  beasts.  A  dog  that  had  bit  a  man  was  to
be  delivered  up  bound  to  a  log  of  four  cubits  long  ;*  an
agreeable  contrivance  for  security  against  such  an  animal.

But  the  wisdom  of  the  law  concerning  the  naturalizing
of  foreigners,  is  a  little  dubious  ;  because  it  forbids  the
freedom  of  the  city  to  be  granted  to  any  but  such  as  are
for  ever  exiled  from  their  own  country,  or  transplant
themselves  to  Athens  with  their  whole  family,  for  the
sake  of  exercising  some  manual  trade.  This,  we  are
told,  he  did,  not  with  a  view  to  keep  strangers  at  a  dis-
tance, but  rather  to  invite  them  to  Athens,  upon  the^ sure
hope  of  being  admitted  to  the  privilege  of  citizens  :  and
he  imagined  the  settlement  of  those  might  be  entirely  de-
pended upon,  who  had  been  driven  from  their  native
country,  or  had  quitted  it  by  choice.

That  law  is  peculiar  to  Solon,  which  regulates  the  go-
ing to  entertainments  made  at  the  public  charge,  by  him
CdiW^d. Jiarasitien.  \     For  he  does  not  allow  the  same  per-

*  This  law,  and  several  others  of  Solon's  were  talcen  into  the
twelve  tables.  In  the  consulate  of  T.  Romilius  and  C.  Ve*^urius,
in  the  year  of  Rome  293,  the  Romans  sent  depuries  to  Athens,  to
transcribe  his  laws,  and  those  of  the  other  lawgivers  of  Greece,  in,
osfder  to  form  thereby  a  body  of  laws  for  Rome.

f  In  the  first  ages  the  name  oi parasite  was  venerable  and  sacred,
for  it  properly  signified  one  that  was  a  m.essmate  at  the  table  of  sa-
crifices. There  were  in  Greece  several  persons  particularly  honour-
ed with  this  title,  much  like  those  whom  the  Romans  called  epulores,
a  religious  order  mstituted  by  Numa  Solon  ordained  that  every
tribe  should  offer  a  sacrifice  once  a  month,  and  at  the  end  of  the  sa-
crifice make  a  public  entertainment,  at  which  all  who  were  of  that
tribe  should  be  obliged  to  assist  by  turna.


SOLON.  231

son  to  repair  to  them  often,  and  he  lays  a  penalty  upon
such  as  refuse  to  go  when  invited  ;  looking  upon  the  for-
mer as  a  mark  of  epicurism,  and  the  latter  of  contempt
of  the  public.

All  his  laws  were  to  continue  in  force  for  a  hundred
years,  and  were  written  upon  wooden  tables,  which  might
be  turned  round  in  the  oblong  cases  that  contained  them.
Some  small  remains  of  them  are  preserved  in  the  Pryta-
neum  to  this  day.  They  were  called  cyrdes,  as  Aristotle
tells  us ;  and  Cratinus,  the  comic  poet,  thus  spoke  of  them:

By  the  great  names  of  Solon  and  of  Draco,
Whose  cyrbes  now  but  ser\'e  to  boil  our  pulse.

Some  say,  those  tables  were  properly  called  cyrbes^  on
which  were  written  the  rules  for  religious  rites  and  sacri-
fices and  the  other  axones.  The  senate,  in  a  body,  bound
themselves  by  oath  to  establish  the  laws  of  Solon  ;  and  the
theamotheta^  or  guardians  of  the  laws,  severally  took  an
oath  in  a  palticular  form,  by  the  stone  in  the  market-place,
that  for  every  law  they  broke,  each  would  dedicate  a  gold-
en statue  at  Delphi  of  the  same  weight  with  himself.*

Observing  the  irregularity  of  the  months, t  and  that
the  moon  neither  rose  nor  set  at  the  same  time  with  the
sun,  as  it  often  happened  that  in  the  same  day  she  over-

*  Gold  in  Solon's  time  was  so  scarce  in  Greece,  that  when  the
Spartans  were  ordered  by  the  oracle  to  gild  the  face  of  Apollo's
statue,  they  inquired  in  vain  for  gold  all  over  Greece,  and  were  di-
rected by  the  pythoness  to  buy  some  of  Croesus  king  of  Lydia.

t  Solon  discovered  the  falseness  of  Thales's  maxim,  that  the  raoon
performed  her  revolution  in  thirty  days,  and  found  that  the  true  time
was  twenty-nine  days  aad  a  half.  He  directed,  therefore,  that  each
of  the  twelve  months  should  be  accounted  twenty-nine  or  thirty  days
alternately.  By  this  means  a  lunar  year  was  formed,  of  354  days;  and
to  reconcile  it  to  the  solar  year,  he  ordered  a  month  of  twenty -two
days  to  be  intercalated  every  two  years,  and  at  the  end  of  the  second
two  years,  he  directed  that  a  month  of  twenty-three  days  should  be
intercalated.  He  likewise  engaged  the  Athenians  to  divide  their
months  nito  three  parts,  st\  led  the  beginning,  middling,  and  ending  ;
each  of  these  consisted  of  ten  days,  when  the  month  was  thirtv  days
long,  and  the  last  of  nine,  when  it  was  nine-and-twenty  davs  long.
In  speaking  of  the  two  first  parts,  they  reckoned  according  to  the
usual  order  of  numbers,  viz.  the  first,  ijfc  day  of  the  moon  begin-
ning; the  first,  second,  Ijfc.  of  the  moon  middling;  but  v/ith  res-
pect to  the  last  part  of  the  month,  they  reckoned  backwards,  that
is,  instead  of  saying  the  first,  second,  ijfc.  day  of  the  moon  ending,
they  said  the  tenth,  ninth,  cjfc.  of  the  moon  ending.  This  is  a  etr-
cumstancs  which  should  be  carefully  attended  to.


232  Plutarch's  lives.

took  and  passed  by  him,  he  ordered  that  day  to  be  called
hene  kai  nca  (the  old  and  the  new)  ;  assigning  the  part  of
it  before  the  conjunction,  to  the  old  month,  and  the  rest
to  the  beginning  of  the  new.  He  seems,  therefore,  to
have  been  the  first  who  understood  that  verse  in  Homer,
which  makes  mention  of  a  day  wherein  the  cldmonth  ended,
ctnd  the  new  began.*

The  day  following  he  called  the  netv  moon.  After  the
twentieth  he  counted  not  by  adding,  but  subtracting,  to
the  thirtieth,  according  to  the  decreasing  phases  of  the
moon.

When  his  laws  took  place,!  Solon  had  his  visitors
every  day,  finding  fault  with  some  of  them,  and  com-
mending others,  or  advising  him  to  make  certain  addi-
tion, or  retrenchments.  But  the  greater  part  came  to
desire  a  reason  for  this  or  that  article,  or  a  clear  and  pre-
cise explication  of  the  meaning  and  design.  Sensible  that
he  could  not  well  excuse  himself  from  complying  with
their  desires,  and  that,  if  he  indulged  their  importunity,
the  doing  it  might  give  oifence,  he  determined  to  with-
draw from  the  difficulty,  and  to  get  rid  at  once  of  their
cavils  and  exceptions.  For,  as  he  himself  observes,
Not  all  the  gi-eatest  enterpnze  can  please,

*  Odyss.  xiv.  162.

j-  Plutarch  has  only  mentioned  such  of  Solon's  laws  as  he  thought
the  most  singular  and  remarkable  ;  Diogenes,  Laertius,  and  Demos-
thenes have  given  us  account  of  some  others  that  ought  not  to
be  forgotten. — "  Let  not  the  guardian  live  in  the  same  house  with
the  mother  of  his  wards.  Let  not  the  tuition  of  minors  he  com-
jnitted  to  him  v^^ho  is  next  after  them  in  the  inheritance.  Let  not
an  engraver  keep  the  im.pvession  of  a  seal  which  he  has  engraved.
Let  him  that  puts  out  the  eye  of  a  man  who  has  but  one,  lose  both
his  own.  If  an  archon  is  taken  in  liquor,  let  him  be  put  to  death.
Let  him  who  refuses  to  maintain  his  father  and  mother,  be  infa-
mous :  and  so  let  him  that  has  consumed  his  patrimony.  Let  hint
who  refuses  to  go  to  war,  flies,  or  behaves  cowardly,  be  debatTcd  the
precincts  of  theformn  and  places  of  public  worship.  If  a  man  sur-
prises his  wife  in  adultery,  and  lives  with  her  afterwards,  let  him  be
deemed  infamous.  Let  him  v/ho  frequents  the  houses  of  lev^^d  v\'0-
men,  be  deb  a.rred  from  sperJiing  in  the  assemblies  of  the  people.  I-et
a  pander  be  pursued,  and  put  to  death  if  taken.  If  any  man  steal
in  the  day-time,  let  him  be  carried  to  the  eleven  officers;  if  in  the
mght,  it  shall  be  lawful  to  kill  him  in  the  act,  or  to  wound  him  in
the  pursuit,  and  carry  him  to  the  aforesaid  ofticers  t  if  he  steals
common  things,  let  him  pay  double,  and  if  the  convictor  thinks  iit,
be  exposed  in  chains  five  days  ;  if  he  is  guilty  of  sacrilege,  let  him
fee  put  to  death."


SOLON.  233

Under  pretence,  therefore,  of  traffic,  he  set  sail  for  an  -
other  country,  having  obtained  leave  of  the  Athenians  for
ten  years  al3sence.  In  that  time  he  hoped  his  laws
would  become  familiar  to  them.

Kis  first  voyage  was  to  Egypt,  where  he  abode  some
time,  as  he  himself  relates,

On  the  Canopian  shore,  by  Nile's  deep  mouth.

There  he  conversed  tipon  points  of  philosophy,  with  Psc-
nophis  the  Heliopolitan,  and  Senchis  the  Saite,  the  most
learned  of  the  Egyptian  priests  ;  and  having  an  account
from  them  of  the  Atlantic  Islands*  (as  Plato  informs  us)
he  attempted  to  describe  it  to  the  Grecians  in  a  poem. —
From  Egypt  he  sailed  to  Cyprus,  and  there  was  honoured
with  the  best  regards  of  Philocyprus,  one  of  the  kings  of
that  island,  who  reigned  over  a  small  city  built  by  De-
mophon  the  sen  of  Theseus,  near  the  river  Clarius,  in  a
strong  situation  indeed,  but  very  indifferent  soil.  As  there
v/as  an  agreeable  plain  below,  Solon  persuaded  him  to
build  a  larger  and  pleasanter  city  there,  and  to  remove
the  inhabitants  of  the  other  to  it.  He  also  assisted  in  lay-
ing out  the  whole,  and  building  it  in  the  best  manner  for
convenience  and  defence  :  so  that  Philocyprus  in  a  short
time  had  it  so  well  peopled,  as  to  excite  the  envy  of  the
other  princes.  And  therefore,  though  the  former  city  was
called  Aijieia^  yet  in  honour  of  Solon,  he  called  the  new
one  Solis  He  himself  speaks  of  the  building  of  this  city,
in  his  elegies,  addressing  himself  to  Philocyprus  :

For  you  be  long  the  Solian  thrcne  decreed !
For  you,  a  race  of  prosperous  sons  succeed !

*  Plato  finished  this  history  from  Solon's  memoirs,  as  may  be  seen
in  his  Timanis,  and  Critias.  He  pretends  that  this  Atlantis,  an  island
situated  in  the  Atlantic  ccean,  was  bigger  than  Asia  and  Africa,  and
tliat  notwithstanding  its  vast  extent,  it  was  drowned  in  one  day  and
night.  Diodorus  Siculus,  says,  the  Carthaginians,  who  discovered  it,
made  it  death  for  any  one  to  settle  in  it.  Amidst  animiberof  con-
jectures concerning  it,  one  of  the  most  probable  is,  that  in  those  days
the  Africans  had  some  knowledge  of  America.  Another  opinion,
v/orth  mentioning,  is,  that  the  AtlartiJts  or  Fortunate  Islands  were
what  we  now  call  the  Canaries.     Homer  thus  describes  them,

Stern  winter  smiles  on  that  auspicious  clime  :
The  fields  are  florid  with  unfadmg  prime-
Mould  the  round  hail,  or  flake  the  fleecy  snow  ;
But  from  the  breezy  deep  the  blest  inhale
The  fragrant  murmurs  cf  the  western  gale.  Pope,

VOL.    I.  X


234  Plutarch's  lives.

If  in  those  sctnes,  to  her  so  justly  dear,
My  hand  a  blooming  city  help'd  to  rear.
May  the  sweet  voice  of  smiling  Venus  bless,
And  speed  me  home  with  honours  and  success  !

As  for  his  interview  with  Croesus,  some  pretend  to
prove  from  chronology,  that  it  is  fictitious.  But  since
the  story  is  so  famous,  and  so  well  attested,  nay.  (what  is
more)  so  agreeable  to  Solon's  character,  so  worthy  of  his
v.isdom  and  magnanimity,  I  cannot  prevail  with  myself
to  reject  it  for  the  sake  of  certain  chronological  tables,
which  thousands  are  correcting  to  this  day,  without  be-
ing able  to  bring  them  to  any  certainty.  Solon,  then,  is
said  to  have  gone  to  Sardis  at  the  request  of  Croesus ;  and
when  he  came  there,  he  was  affected  much  in  the  same
manner  as  a  person  born  in  an  inland  country,  v/hen  he
first  goes  to  see  the  ocean  :  for  as  he  takes  every  great  ri-
ver he  comes  to  for  the  sea ;  so  Solon,  as  he  passed
through  the  court,  and  saw  many  of  the  nobility  richly
dressed,  and  v/alking  in  great  pomp  amidst  a  crowd  of  at-
tendants and  guards,  took  each  of  them  for  Croesus.  At
last  v/hen  he  was  conducted  into  the  presence,  he  found
the  king  set  off  vfith  whatever  can  be  imagined  curious
and  valuable,  either  in  beauty  of  colours,  elegance  of
golden  ornaments,  or  splendor  of  jewels  ;  in  order  that  the
grandeur  and  variety  of  the  scene  might  be  as  striking  as
jjossible.  Solon,  standing  over  against  the  throne,  was
not  at  all  surprised,  nor  did  he  pay  those  compliments  that
WQve  expected  ;  on  the  contrary,  it  was  plain  to  all  per-,
sons  of  discernment  that  he  despised  such  vain  ostenta-
tion and  littleness  cf  pride.  Croesus  then  ordered  his
treasures  to  be  opened,  and  his  magnificent  apartments
and  furniture  to  be  shown  him  :  but  this  was  quite  a  need-
less trouble  ;  for  Solon  in  one  viev/  of  the  king  v/as  able  to
read  his  character.  \Vhen  he  had  seen  all,  and  was  con-
ducted back,  Croesus  asked  him,  J/  he  had  ever  bchdd  a
happier  man  than  he  ?  Solon  ansv/ered,  He  had^  a?:d  that  the
person  was  one  Telliis^  a  plain  but  K'jorthy  citizen  of  Ath-v.?^
ivho  I'-ft  valuable  children  behind  him  ;  and  mho  having  bee7i
above  the  ivant  of  necessaries  all  his  Ufe^  died  gioricmsly
fghting  for  ids  country  *  By  this  time  he  appeared  to  Croe-
sus to  be  a  strange,  uncouth  kind  of  rustic,  who  did  not
measure  happiness  by  the  quantity  of  gold  and  silver,
but  could  prefer  the  life  and  death  of  a  private  and  iiiciui


f'


SOLON,  23j

person  to  hli  high  dignity  and  power.  However,  he  asked
him  as'-ain,  Whether^  after  Tcllus^  he  knena  another  hafifiicr
man  in  the  world?  Solon  answered,  Yes^  Cleobis  and  Bit on^
"amed  for  their  brotJierlj  affect  ion  ^  and  dui  if ul  behaviour  to
their  mother  ;  for  the  oxen  tiot  being  ready ^  they  put  them-
selves  in  the  harness,  and  dretu  their  mother  to  Juno's  tern-
pie,  who  was  extremely  happy  ii  having;  such  sons,  and
mrued  forward  aniixht  the  blessings  of  the  people,  y/fter
the  sacrifce  they  drank  a  cheerful  cup  tvith  their  friends,
and  then  laid  dywn  to  rest,  but  rose  no  more  ;  for  they  died
in  the  night  without  sorrow  or  pain,  in  the  midst  of  so  much
giory^  JVell .'  said  Crc^sus,  now  highly  displeased,  and
do  you  not  then  rank  us  in  the  number  of  hap  J)  y  men  ?  Solon,
unwilling  either  to  flatter  him,  or  to  exasperate  him  more,
replied,  King  of  Lydia,  as  God  has  given  the  Greeks  a  ;«c-
djrate  /iroporiion  of  other  things,  so  likewise  he  has  favour-
ed them  wiiha  democralic  spirit  and  a  liberal  kind  of  wis-
dom, which  has  no  taste  for  the  splendors  of  royalty,  Morc-
O'ocr^  the  vicissitudes  of  life,  suffer  us  not  to  be  elated,  by
any  present  good  fortune,  or  to  admire  that  fjllcity,%v]dch  is
liable  to  change.  Futurity  carries  for  every  man  manyva^
rlous  and  uncertain  events  in  its  bosom.  He,  therefore,
whom  heaven  blesses  with  success  to  the  last,  is  in  our  esti-
inaiion  the  happy  man.  But  the  happiness  of  him  who  still
lives,  and  has  the  dangers  of  life  to  enccwiiery  a/:/iears  to
us  710  better  than  that  of  a  chamj.icn,  before  the  combat  is  de-
termined, and  while  the  crown  is  uncertain.  With  these
words  Solon  departed,  leaving  Cresus  chagrined,  but  not
instructed.

At  that  time  iEsop,  the  fabulist,  was  at  the  court  of
Crcesus,  who  had  sent  for  him,  and  carressed  him  not  a
little.  He  was  concerned  at  the  unkind  reception  Solon
met  with,  and  thereupon  gave  him  this  advice,  ^i  mem
should  either  not  converse  with  kings  at  all^  or  say  what  /v
agreeable  to  them  :  To  which  Solon  replied,  Aay,  but  he
should  either  not  do  it  at  all,  or  say  luhat  is  useful  to  them.

Though  Croesus  at  that  time  held  our  lavv'giver  in  con-
tempt ;  yet  when  he  was  defeated  in  his  wars  with  Cyrus  ;
when  his  city  was  taken,  himself  made  prisoner,  and  laid
bound  upon  the  pile  in  order  to  be  burnt,  in  the  presence
of  Cyrus  and  all  the  Persians,  he  cried  out  as  loud  as  he
possibly  could,  "  Solon  1  Solon  I  Solon!"  Cyrus,  surpris-
ed at  this,  sent  to  inquire  of  him,  "  What  god  or  man  it


236  Plutarch's  lives.

was,  whom  alone  he  thus  invoked  under  so  great  a  cah.rni-
ty  ?"  Croesus  answered  v/ithout  the  least  disguise,  "  He
is  one  of  the  wise  men  of  Greece,  whom  I  sent  for,  not  with
a  design  to  hear  his  wisdom,  or  to  learn  what  might  be
of  service  to  me,  but  that  he  might  see  and  extend  the
reputation  of  that  glory,  the  loss  of  which  I  find  a  much
greater  misfortune,  than  the  possession  of  it  v/as  a  bles-
sing. My  exaJied  state  was  only  an  exterior  advantage,
the  happiness  of  opinion  ;  but  the  reverse  plunges  me  into
real  sufferings,  and  ends  in  misery  irremediable.  This
was  foreseen  by  that  great  man,  who  forming  a  conjec-
ture of  the  future  from  what  he  then  saw,  advised  me  to
consider  the  end  of  life,  and  not  to  rely  or  grow  insolent
upon  uncertainties."  When  this  was  told  Cyrus,  who
was  a  much  v/iser  man  than  Crcssus,  finding  Solon's
maxinl  confirmed  by  an  example  before  him,  he  not  only
set  Croesus  at  libertv,  but  honoured  him  v/ith  his  nrotec-
tion  as  long  as  he  lived.  Thus  Solcn  had  the  glory  of
saving  the  life  of  one  of  these  kings,  and  of  instructing
the  other.

During  his  absence,  the  Athenians  were  much  divided
among  themselves,  Lycurgus  being  at  the  head  of  the  low
country,*  Megacles,  the  son  of  Alcmaion,  of  the  people
that  lived  near  the  sea-coast,  and  Pisistratus  of  the  moun-
taineers ;  among  which  last  was  a  multitude  of  labouring
people,  whose  enmity  was  chiefly  levelled  at  the  rich.
Hence  it  was,  that  though  the  city  did  observe  Solon's
laws,  yet  all  expected  some  change,  and  were  desirous  of
another  establishment  ;  not  in  hopes  of  an  equality,  but
with  a  view  to  be  gainers  by  the  alteration,  andendrely  to
subdue  those  that  differed  from  them.

While  matters  stood  thus,  Solon  arrived  at  Athens,
where  he  was  received  Avith  great  respect,  and  still  held
in  veneration  by  all ;  but  by  reason  of  his  great  age  he
had  neither  the  strength  nor  spirit  to  act  or  speak  in  pub-
lic as  he  had  done.  He  therefore  applied  in  private  to  the
heads  of  the  factions,  and  endeavoured  to  appease  and  re-
concile them.  Pisistratus  seemed  to  give  him  gn*eater
attention  than  the  rest ;  for  Pisistratus  had  an  affable  and
engaging  manner.     lie   was  a  liberal  benefactor  to  the

*  These  three  parties  into  which  the  Athenians  were  divided,  viz-
the  Pediaci,  the  Parali,  and  Diacrii,  have  been  mentioned  in  this  life
before.


SOLOK.  237

poor  ;*  and  even  to  his  enemies  he  behaved  with  great
candour.  He  counterfeited  so  dexterously  the  good  qual-
ities which  nature  had  denied  him,  that  he  gained  more
credit  than  the  real  possessors  of  tliem,  and  stood  foremost
in  the  public  esteem  in  point  of  moderation  and  equity,
in  zeal  for  the  present  government,  and  aversion  to  all
that  endeavoured  at  a  change.  With  these  arts  he  im-
posed upon  the  people  ;  but  Solon  soon  discovered  his  real
character,  and  was  the  first  to  discern  his  insidious  de-
signs. Yet  he  did  not  absokitely  break  with  him,  but  en-
deavoured to  soften  him  and  advise  him  better  ;  declarins^
both  to  him  and  others,  that  if  ambition  could  but, be  ban-
ished from  his  soul,  and  he  could  be  cured  of  his  desire
of  absolute  power,  there  would  not  be  a  man  better  dispos-
ed, or  a  more  worthy  citizen  in  Athens.

About  this  time,  Thespis  began  to  change  the  form  cf
tragedy,  and  the  novelty  of  the  thing  attracted  many  spec-
tators ;  for  this  was  before  any  prize  was  proposed  for
tliose  that  excelled  in  this  respect.  Solon,  who  was  al-
ways willing  to  hear  and  to  learn,  and  in  his  old  age  more
inclined  to  any  thing  that  miglit  divert  and  entertain,  par-
ticularly to  music  and  good  fellowship,  v/ent  to  see  Thes-
pis himself  exhibit,  as  the  custom  of  the  ancient  poets
was.  When  the  play  was  done,  he  called  to  Thespis.  and
acked  him.  If  he  ivas  nA  aslianied  to  ttll  so  mcunj  lies  be-
fu7'e  so  g-rcat  an  assc?nbiy  ?  Thespis  ansv/ered,  It  luas  no
gVL-at  matter,  if  he  s/ioke  or  acted  so  in  jest^  To  which
yolon  replied,  striking  the  ground  violently  with  his  staff,
If  we  encourage  such  jesting  as  this,  lue  shall  quickly  find  it
in  our  contracts  and  agreements.

Soon  after  this,  Pi3istra.tus  having  wounded  himself
for  the  purpose,  drove  in  that  condition  into  the  market-
place, and  endeavoured  to  inflame  the  minds  of  the  peo-
ple, by  telling  them.,  his  enemies  had  laid  in  wait  for  him,
and  trea.ted  him  in  that  manner  on  account  of  his  patrio-
tism. Upon  this  tl-e  multitude  loudly  expressed  their
indignation  :  but  Solon  came  up,  and  thus  accosted  him,

*  By  the  poor  we  are  not  to  vvnderstand  such  as  asked  a^ms,  for
there  were  none  such  at  Athens.  "  In  those  days,"  says  Isocrares,
"  there  was  no  citizen  that  died  of  want,  o^  hegged  in  ihe  Screets,
to  the  dishonour  of  the  community."  This  was  owing  to  the  laws
aj^ainst  idleness  and  pr.*digality,  and  the  care  which  the  ureo^r^t^
took  tliat  every  mun  sh,^uld  have  a  visible  llvjlih jcd.


238  plutArghts  lives.

Son  tif  IJip/iiOcrates<,  yGu  act  Romeros  Ulyssts  but  -very  in-
diff'erentiy  ;  for  he  ^wounded  fdmself  to  deceive  his  enemies^
but  you  have  done  it  to  imfiose  upon  your  country  men.  Not-
withstanding this,  the  rabble  were  ready  to  take  up  arms
for  liim  :  and  a  general  assembly  of  the  people  being  sum-
moned, Ariston  made  a  motion,  that  a  body-guard  of  fifty
clubmen  should  be  assigned  him.  Solon  stood  up  and  op-
posed it  with  meny  arguments,  of  the  same  kind  with
those  lie  has  left  us  in  his  poems  :

You  hang  with  rapture  on  his  honey'd  tongue.

And  again,

Your  art,  to  public  interest  ever  blind,
Your  fox-like  art  still  centres  in  yourself.

But  when  he  saw  the  poor  behave  in  a  riotous  manner,
and  determined  to  gratify  Pisistratus  at  any  rate,  while
the  rich  out  of  fear  declined  the  opposition,  he  retired  with
this  declaration  ;  that  he  had  shown  more  wisdom  than
the  former,  in  discerning  what  method  should  have  been
taken ;  and  more  courage  than  the  latter,  who  did  not
w^ant  understanding,  but  spirit  to  oppose  the  establishment
of  a  tyrant.  The  people  having  made  the  decree,  did
not  curiously  inquire  into  the  number  of  guards  which
Pisistratus  employed,  but  visibly  connived  at  his  keeping
as  many  as  he  pleased,  till  he  seized  the  citadel.  When
this  was  done,  and  the  city  in  gieat  confusion,  Megacies,
with  the  rest  of  the  Alcn^Konidx,  immediately  took  to
flight.  But  Solon,  though  he  was  now  very  old,  and  had
none  to  second  him,  appeared  in  public,  and  addressed
himself  to  the  citizens,  sometimes  upbraiding  them  with
their  past  indiscretion  and  cowardice,  sometimes  exhorting
and  encouraging  them  to  stand  up  for  their  liberty.  Then
it  was  that  he  spoke  those  memorable  words,  It  'would  have
been  easier  for  them  to  rejtress  the  advances  of  tyratiny  ^  and
prevent  its  establishment  ;  but  noiv  it  was  established  and
grown  to  some  height^  it  would  be  more  glorious  to  demolish
ity  However  finding,  that  their  fears  prevented  their  at-
tention to  what  he  said,  he  returned  to  his  own  house,  and
placed  his  weapons  at  the  street  door,  v/ith  these  words,
/  have  done  all  in  my  jiower  to  defend  my  country  and  its
laws.  This  was  his  last  public  effort.  Though  some
exhorted  him  to  fly,  he  took  no  notice  of  their  advice,  but
was  composed  enough  to  make  verses>  in  which  he  thus,
reproaches  the  Athenians,


If  fear  or  folly  has  your  rights  betray'd,

Let  not  the  fault  on  righteous  heav'n  be  laid.

You  gave  them  guards  ;  you  rais'd  your  tyrants  high,

T'  impose  the  heavy  yoke  that  draws  the  heaving  sigh.

Many  of  his  friends,  alarmed  at  this,  told  him  the  tyrant
would  certainly  put  him  to  death  for  it,  and  asked  him,
what  he  trusted  to>  that  he  went  such  imprudent  lengths  :
he  answered,  To  old  age.  However,  when  Pisistratus
had  fully  established  himself,  he  made  his  court  to  Solon,
and  treated  him  with  so  much  kindness  and  respect,  that
Solon  became  as  it  were,  his  counsellor,  and  gave  sanction
to  many  of  his  proceedings.  He  observed  the  greatest
part  of  Solon's  laws,  showing  himself  the  example,  and
obliging  his  friends  to  follow  it.  Thus  when  he  was  ac-
cused of  murder  before  the  court  of  areo/iagus^  he  appear-
ed in  a  modest  manner  to  make  his  defence  ;  but  his  ac-
cuser dropped  the  impeachment.  He  likewise  added
other  laws,  one  of  which  was,  that  /lersons  maimed  in  the
ivars  ahould  be  maintained  at  the  public  charge.  Yet  this*
Heraclides  tells  us,  was  in  pursuance  of  Solon's  plan,  who
had  decreed  the  same  in  the  case  of  Thersippus.  But  ac-
cording to  Theoplirastus,  Pisistratus,  not  Solon,  made  the
law  against  idleness,  which  produced  at  once  greater  in-
dustry in  the  country  and  tranquility  in  the  city.

Solon,  moreover,  attempted  in  verse  a  large  description,
or  rather  fabulous  account  of  the  Atlantic  Island,"'  which  he
had  learned  of  the  wise  men  of  Sais,  and  which  particularly
concerned  the  Athenians ;  but  by  reason  of  his  age,  nat
"wantof  leisui'e  (as  Plato  would  have  it)  he  v/as  apprehen-
«sive  tht  work  v/ould  be  too  much  for  him,  and  therefore
did  not  go  through  with  it.  These  verses  ar<i  a  proaf
that  business  was  not  the  hindrance  :

1  grow  in  learning  as  I  grow  in  years.

And  again.

Wine,  \w\^,  and  beauty  still  their  charms  bestow.
Light  all  the  shades  of  life,  and  cheer  us  as  we  go.

Plato,  ambitious  to  cultivate  and  adorn  the  subject  of  the
Atlantic  Island,  as  a  delightful  spot  in  some  fair  field  un-

*  This  fable  imported,  that  the  people  of  Atlantis  having  subdued
all  Libya,  and  a  great  part  of  Euroj)e,  threatened  Egypt  and  Greece  ;
•feut  the  Athenians  making  head  against  their  victorious  army,  over-
•threw  them  in  several  engagements,  and  confined  them  to  tlicir  ow»
island.


240  Plutarch's  lives.

occupied,  to  which  also  he  had  some  chiim  by  his  being^
related  to  Solon,*  laid  out  magnificent  courts  and  enclo-
sures, and  erected  a  grand  entrance  to  it,  such  as  no  other
story,  fable,  or  poem  ever  had.  But  as  he  began  it  late,
he  ended  his  life  before  the  work  ;  so  that  the  more  the
reader  is  delighted  with  the  part  that  is  written,  the  more
regret  he  has  to  find  it  unfinished.  As  the  temple  of  Jupi-
ter Olympius  in  Athens  is  the  only  one  that  has  not  the
last  hand  put  to  it,  so  the  wisdom  of  Plato,  amongst  his
many  excellent  works  has  left  nothing  imperfect  but  the
Atlantic  Island.

Heraclides  Ponticus  relates  that  Solon  lived  a  consider-
able time  after  Pisistratus  usurped  the  government ;  but
according  to  Phanias  the  Ephesian,  not  quite  t\vo  years.
For  Pisistratus  began  his  tyranny  in  the  archonship  of'Co-
mias,  and  Phanias  tells  us,  Solon  died  in  the  archonship
af  Hegestratus,  the  immediate  successor  to  Comias.  The
story  of  his  ashes  t  being  scattered  about  the  isle  of  Sa-la-
mis,  ajipears  absurd  and  fabulous  :  and  yet  it  is  related  by
several  authors  of  credit,  and  by  Aristotle  in  particuL\r.


PUBLICOLA.


OUCH  is  the  character  of  Solon;  and  tlierefore  with
him  we  will  compare  Pubiicola,  so  called  by  the  Romaa
people,  in  acknowledgement  of  his  merit  ;  for  his  pater-
nal name  was  Valerius,  He  was  descended  from  that  an-
cient Valerius,:}:  who  was  the  principal  authoroi  the  union
between  the  Romans  and  the  Sabines.  For  he  it  was  that
most  effectually  persuaded  the  two  kings  to  come  to  a
conference,  and  to   settle   their  differences.     From  this

*  Plato's  mother  was  a  descendant  of  the  brother  of  Solon.

t  It  is  said  by  Diogenes  Laei-tius,  that  this  was  dene  by  his  cvvn
order.  In  thus  disposing  of  his  remains,  eii-her  Solon  himself,  or
those  who  \vrote  his  history,  imi'  ated  the  story  of  Lycurgus,  who
lefc  eai  express  order  that  h.is  ashes  should  be  thrown  inio  the  sea.

:j:  The  first  of  his  family,  who  settled  at  Rome,  was  Valerius  Vo-
lesus,  a  Sabine  j  or,  as  Fcs'.us  and  the  fai:U  Capitolhii  call  him  Ve*
lusus.


PUBLICOLA.  2il

man  our  Valerius  deriving  his  extraction,  distinguished
himself  by  liis  eloquence  and  riches,*  even  while  Rome
was  yet  under  kingly  government.  His  eloquence  he
employed  with  great  propriety  and  spirit  in  defence  of
justice,  and  his  riches  in  relieving  the  necessitous.  Hence
it  was  natural  to  conclude,  that  if  the  government  should
become  republican,!  his  station  in  it  would  soon  be  one  of
the  most  eminent.

When  Tarquin  the  firoud^  who  bad  made  his  way  to  the
throne,  by  the  violation  of  all  rights,:}:  divine  and  human,
and  then  exercised  his  power  as  he  acquired  it,  when,  like
an  oppressor  and  a  tyrant,  he  becam.e  odious  and  insup-
portable to  the  people  ;  they  took  occasion  to  revolt,
from  the  unliappy  ff.te  of  Lucretia,  who  killed  herself  on
account  of  the  rape  committed  upon  her  by  the  son  of  Tar-
quin. ||  Lucius  Brutus,  meditating  a  change  of  govern-
ment, applied  to  Valerius  first,  and  with  his  powerful  as-
sistance expelled  the  king  and  his  family.     Indeed,  while

*  Plutarch  by  this  would  insinuate,  that  ai-bitrary  power  is  no  friend
to  eloquence.  And  undoubtedly  the  want  of  liberty  does  depress  the
spirit,  aiid  restrain  the  force  of  genius  :  whereas,  in  republics  and
limited  monarchies,  full  scope  is  given,  as  well  as  many  occasions
afforded  to  the  richest  vein  of  oratory.

t  Governments,  as  well  as  other  things,  pushed  to  excessive
lengths,  often  change  to  the  contrary  extreme.

\  He  made  use  of  the  body  of  his  father-in-law,  Servius  Tullius,
whom  he  had  murdered,  as  a  step  to  the  throne.

Ij  Livy  tells  us,  that  she  desired  her  father  and  husband  to  meet
her  at  her  own  house.  With  her  father  Lucretius  came  Publius
Valeriu3,  afterwards  Publicola,  and  with  her  husband  Lucius  Junius
Brutus,  and  many  other  Uomans  of  distinction.  To  them  she  dis-
closed in  few  words  the  whole  matter,  declared  her  firm  resolution
not  to  outlive  the  loss  of  her  honour,  and  conjured  them  not  to  let
the  crime  of  Sextus  Tarquinius  go  unpunished.  Then  the  heroine,
notwithstanding  their  endeavours,  to  dissuade  her  from  it,  plunged
a  dagger  in  her  breast.  While  the  rest  were  filled  with  grief  and
consternation,  Brutus,  who,  till  that  time,  had  feigned  himself  an
idiot,  to  prevent  his  being  obnoxious  to  the  tyrant,  took  the  bloodf
poniard,  and  shewing  it  to  the  assembly,  said,  "I  swear  by  this
blood,  which  once  was  so  pure,  and  which  nothing  but  the  detesta-
ble villainy  of  Tarquin  co\ild  have  polluted,  that  I  will  pursue  L.
Tarquinius  the  proud,  his  wicked  wife,  and  their  children,  with  fii'e
and  sword  ;  nor  v/ill  ever  suffer  iny  of  that  family,  or  any  othe\-
v;hatsoever,  to  reign  at  Rome.  Ye  gods  '.  I  call  you  to  witness  this
my  oath.'*  At  these  words  he  presented  the  dagger  to  Collatinus,
Lucretius,  Valerius,  and  the  rest  of  the  company  ;  and  engaged  them
to  take  the  same  oath.


242  I'LUtapxh's  lives.

the  people  seemed  inclined  to  give  one  person  the  chief
command,  and  to  set  up  a  general  instead  of  a  king,  Va-
lerius acquiesced,  and  v/illingly  yielded  the  first  place  to
Brutus,  under  whose  auspices  the  republic  commenced.
But  when  it  appeared  that  they  could  not  bear  the  thought
of  being  governed  by  a  single  person,  when  they  seemed
more  ready  to  obey  a  divided  authority,  and  indeed  pro-
posed and  demanded  to  have  two  consuls  at  the  head  of
the  state,  then  he  offered  himself  a  candidate  for  that
high  office,  together  with  Brutus,  but  lost  his  election.
For,  contrary  to  Brutus's  desire,  Tarquinius  Collatinus,
the  husband  of  Lucretia,  was  appointed  his  colleague.
Not  that  he  was  a  more  worthy  or  able  man  than  Valeri-
us ;  but  those  that  had  the  chief  interest  in  the  state,  ap-
prehensive of  the  return  of  the  Tarquins,  who  made  great
eiforts  without  and  endeavoured  to  soften  the  resentment
of  the  citizens  within,  were  desirous  to  be  commanded  by
the  most  implacable  enemy  of  that  house.

Valerius,  taking  it  ill  that  it  should  be  supposed  he
would  net  do  his  utmost  for  his  country,  because  he  had
received  no  particular  injury  from  the  tyrants,  withdrew
from  the  senate,  forbore  to  attend  the ybrw?;?,  and  would
not  intermeddle  in  the  least  with  public  afTairs.  So  that
many  began  to  express  their  fear  and  concern,  lest  through
resentment  he  shoujd  join  the  late  royal  famJly,  and  over-
turn the  commonwealth,  which,  as  yet,  was  but  tottering.
Brutus  was  not  v/ithout  his  suspicions  of  some  others,
and  therefore  determined  to  bring  the  senators  to  their
oat]i  on  a  solemn  day  of  sacrifice,  which  he  appointed  for
that  purpose.  On  this  occasion  Valerius  went  with  great
alacrity  into  the  forum^  and  was  the  first  to  make  oath
that  he  would  never  give  up  the  least  point,  or  hearken  to
any  terms  of  agreement  with  Tarquin,  but  would  defend
the  Roman  liberty  with  his  sword  ;  which  afforded  great
satisfaction  to  the  senate,  and  strengthened  the  hands  of
the  consuls.*     His  actions  soon  confirmed  the  sincerity

*  Thus  ended  the  regal  state  of  Rome,  245  years,  according  to  the
common  computation,  after  the  building  of  the  city.  But  Sir  Isaac
Newton  justly  observes,  that  this  can  scarce  be  reconciled  to  the
course  of  nature,  for  we  meet  with  no  instance  in  all  history,  since
chronology  was  certain,  wherein  seven  kings,  mcst  of  whom  were
slain,  reigned  so  long  a  time  in  continual  succession.  By  contract-
ing, therefore,  the  reigns  of  these  kings,  and  those  of  the  knigs  of
Alba,  he  places  the  building  of  Rome,  net  in  the  seventh,  but  m  the
38th  01}  mpiad.


PUBLICOLA.  243

of  liis  oath.  For  ambassadors  came  from  Tarquin  with
letters  calculated  to  gain  the  people,  and  instructions  to
treat  with  them  in  such  a  manner  as  might  be  most  like-
ly to  corrupt  them  I  as  they  were  to  tell  them  from  the
king,  that  he  had  bid  adieu  to  Ills  high  notions,  and  was
willing  to  listen  to  very  moderate  conditions.  Though
the  consuls  were  of  opinion,  that  they  should  be  admitted
to  confer  with  the  people,  ^''alerius  would  not  suffer  it,
but  opposed  it  strongly,  insistnig  that  no  pretext  for  in-
novation should  be  given  the  needy  multitude,  who  might
consider  war  as  a  greater  grievance  than  tyranny  itself.

After  this  ambassadors  came,  to  declare  that  he  would
give  up  all  thoughts  of  the  kingdom,  and  lay  down  his
arms,  if  they  would  but  send  him  his  treasures  and  other
effects,  that  his  family  and  friends  might  not  want  a  sub-
sistence in  their  exile.  Many  persons  inclined  to  indulge
him  in  this,  and  Collatinus  in  particular  agreed  to  it  ;
but  Brutus,'-'  a  man  of  great  spirit  and  quick  resentment,
ran  into  the  forum^  and  called  his  colleague  a  traitor,  for
being  disposed  to  grant  the  enemy  the  means  to  carry  on
the  war,  and  recover  the  crown,  when  indeed  it  v/ould  be
too  much  to  gra.nt  them  bread  in  the  place  where  they
might  retire  to.  The  citizens  being  assembled  on  that
occasion,  Caius  Minutius,  a  private  man,  was  the  first
who  delivered  his  sentiments  to  them,  advising  Brutus,
and  exhorting  the  Romans,  to  take  care  that  the  treasures
should  fight  for  them  against  the  tyrants,  rather  than  for
the  tyrants  against  than.  The  Romans,  however,  were
of  opinion,  tliat  while  they  obtained  that  liberty  for  which
they  began  the  v/ar,  they  should  not  reject  the  offered
peace  for  the  sake  of  the  treasures,  but  cast  them  out  to-
gether with  the  tyrants.

In  the  mean  time  Tarquinius  made  but  small  account
of  his  eft'ects  ;  but  the  demand  of  them  furnished  a  pre-
tence for  sounding  the  people,  and  for  preparing  a  scene
of  treachery.  This  was  carried  on  by  the  ambassadors
under  pretence  of  taking  care  of  the  effects,  part  of  which
they  said  they  were  to  sell,  part  to  collect,  and  the  rest  to

*  Dionypuifi  of  Hal!cainas<^iis,  on  the  con*^raiy,  says,  the  afiair
was  debated  iu  the  senate  wi.h  great  moderation  ;  ar.d  when  it
could  not  be  settled  there,  whether  they  should  prefer  honour  or  pro-
lit,  it  was  referred  to  people,  who,  to  their  immortal  j)*aise,  carried
it,  by  a  majority  of  cne  vote,  for  honour.


344  plutjIRCii's  lives.  •

send  away.  Thus  they  gained  time  to  corrupt  tv/o  of
the  best  families  in  Rome,  that  of  the  Aquilii,  in  which
were  three  senators,  and  the  Vitellii,  among  whom  were
two.  All  these,  by  the  mother's  side,  were  nephews  to
Collatinus  the  consul.  The  Vitellii  were  likewise  allied
to  Brutus  ;  for  their  sister  was  his  wife,  and  he  had  se-
veral children  by  her  ;*  two  of  whom,  just  arrived  at
years  of  matarity,  and  being  of  their  ki'ndred  and  ac-
quaintance, the  Vitellii  drew  in,  and  persuaded  to  engage
in  the  conspiracy  ;  insinuating,  that  by  this  means,  they
might  marry  into  the  family,  of  the  Tarquins,  share  in
their  royal  prospects,  and,  at  the  same  time,  be  set  free
from  the  yoke  of  a  stupid  and  cruel  father.  P  or,  his
inflexibility  in  punishing  criminals,  they  called  cruelty ;
and  the  stupidity,  which  he  had  used  a  long  time  as  a
cloak  to  shelter  him  from  the  bloody  designs  of  the  ty-
rants, had  procured  him  the  name  "of  Brutus^f  which  he
refused  not  to  be  known  by  afterwards.

The  youths  thus  engaged,  were  brought  to  confer  with
the  Aquilii  ;  and  all  agreed  to  take  a  great  and  horrible
oath,  by  drinking  together  of  the  blood,^  and  tasting  |j
the  entrails  of  a  man  sacrificed  for  that  purpose.  This
ceremony  was  performed  in  the  house  of  the  Aquilii ;  and
the  room  chosen  for  it  (as  it  was  natural  to  suppose)  was
dark  and  retired.  But  a  slave,  named  Vindicius,  hulked
there  undiscovered.  Not  that  he  had  placed  himself  in
that  room  by  design  ;  nor  had  he  any  suspicion  of  what
was  going  to  be  transacted ;  but  happening  to  be  there,
and  perceiving  with  what  haste  and  concern  they  entered,
he  stopped  short  for  fear  of  being  seen,  and  hid  himself
behind  a  chest  ;  yet  so  that  he  could  see  what  was  done,
and  hear  what  was  resolved  upon.  They  came  to  a  re«
solution  to  kill  the  consuls  ;  and  having  wrote  letters  to
signify  as  much  to  Tarquin,  they  gave  them  to  the  am-

*  Dionysius  and  Livy  make  mention  of  no  more  than  two  ;  but
Plutarch  agrees  with  those  who  say  that  Brutus  had  more,  and  that
Marcus  Brutus,  who  killed  Cjesar,  was  descended  from  one  of  them.
Cicero  is  among  those  that  hold  the  latter  opinion  ;  or  else  he  pre-
tended to  be  so,  to  make  the  cause  and  person  of  Brutus  more  po-
pular.

f  Tarquin  had  put  the  father  and  brother  of  Brutus  to  death.

\  They  thought  such  a  horrid  sacrifice  would  oblige  every  mem-
ber of  the  conspiracy  to  inviolable  secrecy.  Cataline  put  the  same
in  practice  afterwards.

y  The  word  ^ixav)  signif  es  to  taste,  as  well  as  fa  tcucvb.


PUBLIGOLA.  24j

bassaJors,  who  then  were  guests  to  the  Aquiiii,  and  pre-
sent at  the  conspiracy.

When  the  affair  was  over  they  withdrew,  and  Vmdi-
cius,  stealing  from  his  lurking-hole,  was  not  determined
what  to  do,  but  disturbed  with  doubts.  He  thought  it
shocking,  as  indeed  it  was,  to  accuse  the  sons  of  the  most
horrid  crimes  to  their  father  Brutus,  or  the  nephews,  to
their  uncle  Collatinus,  and  it  did  not  presently  occur  to
him  that  any  private  Roman  was  fit  to  be  trusted  with  so
important  a  secret.  On  the  other  hand,  he  was  so  much
tormented  with  the  knowledge  of  such  an  abominable
treason,  that  he  could  do  any  thing  rather  than  conceal
it.  At  length,  induced  by  the  public  spirit  and  humanity
of  Valerius,  he  bethought  himself  of  applying  to  him,
a  man  easy  of  access,  and  willing  to  be  consulted  by  the
necessitous,  whose  house  was  always  open,  and  who  never
refused  to  hear  the  petitions  even  of  the  meanest  of  the
people.

Accordingly  Vindicius  coming,  and  discovering  to  him
the  whole,  in  the  presence  of  his  brother  Marcus  and  his
wife;  Valerius  astonished  and  terrified  at  the  plot,  would
not  let  the  man  go,  but  shut  him  up  in  the  room,  and  left
his  wife  to  watch  the  door.  Then  he  ordered  his  brother
to  surround  the  late  king's  palace,  to  seize  the  letters,  if
possible,  and  to  secure  the  servants  ;  while  himself,  with
many  clients  and  friends  whom  he  always  had  about  him,
and  a  numerous  retinue  of  servants,  went  to  the  house  of
the  Aquiiii.  As  they  were  gone  out,  and  no  one  expected
him,  he  forced  open  the  doors,  and  found  the  letters  in
the  ambassador's  room.  While  he  was  thus  employed,
the  Aquiiii  ran  home  in  great  haste,  and  engaged  with
him  at  the  door,  endeavouring  to  force  the  letters  from
him.  But  Valerius  and  his  party  repelled  their  attack,
and  twisting  their  gowns  about  their  necks,  after  much
struggling  on  both  sides,  dragged  them  with  great  diffi-
culty through  the  streets  into  Xhefurmn,  Marcus  Valerius
had  the  same  success  at  the  royal  palace,  where  he  seized
other  letters  leady  to  be  conveyed  away  among  the  goods,
laid  hands  on  what  servants  of  the  king's  he  could  find,
and  had  them  also  mio  the.  forum*

When  the  consuls  had  put  a  stop  to  the  tumult,  Vindi-
cius was  produced  by  order  of  Valerius  ;  and  the  accusa-
tion   being  lodged,    the   letters    were  read,   which   the

VOL.  I.  y


246  Plutarch's  lives,

traitors  had  not  the  assurance  to  contriidict.     A  melan-
choly stilUiess  reigned  among  the  rest ;  but  a  few,  willing:
to  favour  Brutus,  mxentioned  banishment.     The  tears  of
CollatinuSj  and  the  silence  of  Valerius,  gave  some  hopes
of  mercy.     But  Brutus  called  upon  each  of  his  sons  by
name,  and  said,    YoUy  Titus,  and  you,  Valerius,'^  why  do
not  you  make  your  defence  against  the  charge  ?  After  they
had  been  thus  questioned  three  several  times,  and  made
no  answer,  he  turned  to  the  /zci&r^,  and  said.  Yours  is  the
part  that  remains.     The  lictors  immediately  laid  hold  on
the  youths,  stripped  them  of  their  garments,  and,. having
tied  their  hands  behind  them,  flogged  them  severely  with
their  rods.     And  though  others  turned  their  eyes  aside,
unable  to  endure  the  spectacle,  yet  it  is  said  that  Brutus
neither  looked  another  way,  nor  suffered  pity  in  the  least
to  smooth  his  stern  and  angry  countenance  ;t  regarding
his  sons  as  they  suffered  with  a  threatening  aspect,  till
they  were  extended  on  the  ground,  and  their  heads  cutoff
with  the  ax.   Then  he  departed,  leaving  the  rest  to  his  col-
league. This  was  an  action  which  it  is  not  easy  to  praise
or  condemn  with  propriety.    For  either  the  excess  of  vir-
tue raised  his  soul  above  the  influence  of  the  passions,  or
else  the  excess  of  resentment  depressed  it  into  insensibi-
lity. Neither  the  one  nor  the  other  was  natural,  or  suitable
to  the  human  faculties,  but  was  either  divine  or  brutah    It
is  more  equitable,  however,  that  our  judgment  should  give
its  sanction  to  the  glory  of  this  great  man,  than  that  our
weakness  should  incline  us  to  doubt  of  his  virtue.     For
the  Romans  do  not  look  upon  it  s-.s  so  glorious  a  work,
for  Romulus  to  have  built  the  city,  as  for  Brutus  to  have
founded  and  established  the  commonwealth.

After  Brutus  had  left  the  tribunal,  the  thought  of  what
v.-as  done  involved  the  rest  in  a.stonishment,  horror,  and
silence.  But  the  easiness  and  forbearance  of  Collatinus
gave  fresh  spirits  to  the  Aquilii,  they  begged  time  to
make  their  defence,  and  desired  tliat  their  slave  Vindicius

*  The  name  of  Brutns's  second  son  was  not  Valerius,  but  Ti-.
berius

i  Livy  gives  a  difierent  acccunbof  Brutus's  behaviour,  ^iim
inter  cni7.c  ieu:pti6  pater,  <vultusqve  et  os  fjus,  spectaculo  esset,  eminente
a7iimo  putrto  ihter  pubiicce  poence  minis  Ley  ium  1  here  cculd  not  be  a
more  striking  spec  acie  than  the  countenance  of  Brutus,  for  anguish
sate  mixed  wi"li  digiiity,  and  he  could  not  conceal  the  father,  though '
he  supported  the  magistrate.     Liv  lib  ii.  cap.  5.


PUBLICOLA.  247

mi^-ht  be  restored  to    tliera,  and  not  remain  with  their
accusers.  The  consul  v/iis  inclined  to  grant  their  request,
and   thereupon  to  dismiss  the  assembly  ;  but   Valeriuj
■vYOuld  neither  sufter  the   slave  to  be  taken  from  among
the  crowd,  nor   the  people  to    dismiss  the  ti^aitors  and
withdraw.     At  last  he  seized  the  criminals  himself,  and
called  for  Brutus,  exclaiming  that  CoUatinus  acted  most
un^>vorthiIy,  in  laying  his  colleague  under  the  hard  neces-
sity of  putting  his  ov/n  sons  to  death,  and  then  inclining
to   gratify  the   women    by  releasing   the  betrayers  and
enemies  of  their  country.     CoUatinus,  upon  this,  losing
all  patience,  commanded  Vindicius  to   be    taken  away  j
-the  iictors  made  way  through  the  crowd,  seized  the  man,
and  came  to  blows  with  such   as  endeavoured  to  rescue
•him.     The  friends  of  Valerius  stood  upon  their  defence,
and  the  people  cried  out  for  Brutus.     Brutus  returned  ;
and  silence  being  made,  he  said,  It  ivas  enough  for  him  to
give  judgment  li^onhis   oimi  sons  ;  a^Jbr  the  rc-^t^  he  left
them  to  the  sentence  of  th".  fieople^  ivho  %v ere  now  free  ;  and
any  oni'  that  choieit^  might  filead  bfore  them.     They  did
not,  hov/ever,  wait  for  pleadings,  but  immediately   put  it
to  the  vote,  v/ith  one  voice  condemned  them  to  die  ;   and
the  trciitors    were  beheaded.     CoUatinus,  it   seems,  was
somewhat  suspected  before,  on  account  of  his  near  rela-
tion to  the  royal  family  ;*  and  one  of  his  names  was  ob-
noxious to  the  people;  for  they  abhorred  the  ve:  y  name
of  Tarquin.     But  on  this  occasion  he  had  provoked  them
beyond  expression  ;  and  therefore  he  voluntarily  resigined
the  consulship,  and  retired  from  the  city.     A  new  elec-
tion consequently  Vv'aa    held,  and  Valerius  declared  con-
sul with  great  honour,  as  a  proper  mark  of  gratitude  for
his  patriotic  zeal.     Ashe  v/as  of  opinion  that  Vindicius
should  have  his  share  of  the  reward,  he  procured  a  de-
cree of  the  people  that  the  freedom  of  the  city  should  be
given  him,  which  Was  never  conferred  on  a  slave  bCiOre,
and  that  he  should  be  enrolled  in  what  tribe  he  pleased,
and  give  his  suffrage  with  it.     As  for  other  freedm^n,
Appius,  wanting  to  make  himself  popular,  procured  them
a  right  of  voting,  long  after.     The  act  of  enininchising^

*  Lucius  Tarquinius,  tl:e  son  of  Egerius,  and  nephew  of  Tar-
qainius  Priscus,  was  called  CoUatinus,  from  CoUatia,  of  which  he
was  governor.  Tarquinius  Suj^erbus,  and  Egerius  the  father  of
Coilatinus,,  were  first  cousins.

•


248  PLXfrARGH's    LIVES.

a  slave  is  ta  this  day  called  VwdieSSy^we  are  told) from
this  Vindiciws.

The  next  step  that  was  taken,  was  to  give  up  the  goods
of  the  Tarquins  to  be  plundered ;  and  their  palace  and
other  houses  were  levelled  wdth  the  ground.  The  plea-
santest  part  of  the  Campus  Martius  had  been  in  their  pos-
session, and  this  was  now  consecrated  to  the  god  Mars.*
It  happened  to  be  the  time  of  harvest,  and  the  sheaves
then  lay  upon  the  ground ;  but  as  it  was  consecrated,
they  thought  it  not  lawful  to  thrash  the  corn,  or  to  make
use  of  it ;  a  great  number  of  hands,  therefore,  took  it  up
in  baskets,  and  threw  it  into  the  river.  The  trees  were
also  cut  down  and  thrown  in  after  it,  and  the  ground  left
entirely  without  fruit  or  product,  for  the  service  of  the
god.f  A  great  quantity  of  different  sorts  of  things  be-
ing thus  thrown  in  together,  they  were  not  carried  far
by  the  current,  but  only  to  the  shallows  where  the  first
heaps  had  stopped.  Finding  no  farther  passage,  every
thing  settled  there,  and  the  whole  was  bound  still  faster
by  the  river ;  for  that  washed  down  to  it  a  deal  of  mud>
which  not  only  added  to  the  mass,  but  served  as  a  cement
to  it ;  and  the  current,  far  from  dissolving  it,  by  its  gentle
pressure  gave  it  the  greater  firmness.  The  bulk  and  so.-
lidity  of  this  mass  received  continual  additions,  most  of
what  was  brought  dovni  by  the  Tiber  settling  ther«.  It
is  now  an  island  sacred  to  religious  uses  \\  several  tera^
pies  and  porticos  have  been  built  upon  it,  and  it  is  called
in  Latin,  Inter  duos  pontes^W  the  island  betm-cen  the  tivo
bridges.  Some  say,  however,  that  this  did  not  happen  at
the  dedication  of  Tarquin's  field,  but  some  ages  after,
when  Tarquinia,  a  vestal,  gave  another  adjacent  field  to
the  public  ;  for  which  she  was  honoured  with  great  pri-
vileges, particularly  that  of  giving  her  testimony  in  court,^
which  v/as  refused  to  all  other  women ;  they  likewise
voted  her  liberty  to  marry,  but  she  did  not  accept  it..,.

*  Plutarch  should  have  said  re-consecrated.  For  it  was  devoted
to  that  godm  the  time  of  Romulus,  as  appears  from  his  laws.  But
the  Tarqu'ms  had  sacrilegiously  converted  it  to  their  own  use.

t  A  field  so  kept,  was  very  properly  adapted  to  the  service  of  the
god  of  war,  who  lays  waste  all  before  him.

I  Livy  says  it  was  secured  against  the  force  of  the  current  by
jettees.

I)  The  Fabrician  bridge  joined  it  to  the  city  on  the  side  of  the  Car
pitol,  and  the  Cestian  bridge  on  the  side  of  the  Janiculine  gate.


PUBLIC  OLA.  249

This  is  the  account,  though  seemingly  fabulous,  which,
some  give  of  the  matter.

Tarqmn,  despairing  to  re-ascend  the  throne  by  strata-
gem, applied  to  the  Tuscans,  who  gave  him  a  kind  re-
ception, and  prepared  to  conduct  him  back  with  a  great
annament.  The  consuls  led  the  Roman  forces  against
them,  and  the  two  armies  were  drawn  up  in  certain^
consecrated  parcels  of  ground,  the  one  called  the  Arsian;
grove,  the  other  the  ^suvian  meadow.  When  they?
came  to  charge,  Aruns,  the  son  of  Tarquin,  and  Brutus
the  Roman  consul.*  met  each  other,  not  by  accident,
but  design ;  animated  by  hatred  and  resentment,  the  one
against  a  tyrant  and  enemy  of  his  country,  the  other  to
revenge  his  banishment^  they  spurred  their  horses  to
the  encounter.  As  they  engaged  rather  with  fury  than
conduct,  they  laid  themselves  open,  and  fell  by  each
other's  hand.  The  battle,  whose  onset  was  so  dreadful,
had  not  a  milder  conclusion  :  the  carnage  was  prodigious,
and  equal  on  both  sides,  till  at  length  the  armies  were
separated  by  a  storm.

Valerius  was  in  great  perplexity,  as  he  knew  not  which
side  had  the  victory,  and  found  his  men  as  much  dis-
mayed at  the  sight  of  their  ov/n  dead,  as  animated  by  the
less  of  the  enemy.  So  great,  indeed,  >vas  the  slaughter,
that  it  could  not  be  distinguished  whD  had  the  advantage  ;
and  each  army  having  a  near  viev/  of  their  OAvn  loss,  and
only  guessing  at  that  of  the  enemy,  were  inclined  to  think
themselves  vanquished,  rather  than  victorious.  Wheii
night  came  on,  (such  a  night  as  one  might  im.agine  after
so  bloody  a  day)  and  both  camps  were  hushed  in  silence
and  repose,  it  is  said  that  the  grove  shook,  and  a  loud
voice  proceeding  from  it  declared,  that  the  Tuscans  had
lost  one  mail  m'jre  than  the  Romajis^  The  voice  was  un-
doubtedly divine  ;t  for  immediately  upon  that  the  Ro-
mans recovered  their  spirits,  and  the  field  rung  with
acclamations ;  while  the  Tuscans,   stinick  with  fear  and

*  Bnitus  is  deservedly  reckoned  among  the  most  nius'rious  he-
r-^os.  He  restored  liberty  to  his  country,  secured  it  wiih  the  blood
ofViisown  sons,  and  died  in  defending  it  ap;ainst  a  tyrant  The
Romans  afrerwards  erected  his  sta'ue  in  the  Capitol,  where  h(?  was
placed  in  the  midst  of  the  kings  of  Rome,  with  a  naked  sword  in
his  hand.

t  It  was  said  to  be  the  voice  of  the  god  Pan.

2  Y

9


250  PLUTARCIi's    LIVES.

confusion,  deserted  their  camp,  and  most  of  them  disper-
sed. As  for  those  that  remained,  who  were  not  quite  five
thousand,  the  Romans  took  them  prisoners,  and  plunder-
ed the  camp.  When  the  dead  were  numbered,  there
were  found  oa  tlie  side  of  the  Tuscans  eleven  thousand
three  hundred^  aad  oathatof  the  Romans  as  many,  ex-
cepting one.  This  battle  is  said  to  have  been  fought  on.
the  last  of  February.  Valerius  was  honoured  v/ith  a.
triumph,  and  was  the  first  consul  that  made  his  entry  ia
a  chariot  and  four.^  Tlie  occasioa  rendered  the  spectacle
glorious  and  venerable,  not  invidious,  and  (as  some  would
have  it)  grievous  to  the  Romans ;  for,  if  that  had  beea
the  case,  the  custom,  would  not  have  been  so  zealously
kept  up,  nor  would  the  ambition  to  obtain  a  triumph  have
lasted  so  many  ages.  The  people  were  pleased,  too>
with  the  honours  paid  by  Valeriiis  to  the  remains  of  his.
colleague,  his  burying  him  with  so  much  pomp,  and  pro-
nouncing his  funeral  oration  ;  which  last  the  Romans  so
generally  approved,  or  rather  were  so  much  charmed
with,  that  afterv/ards  all  the  great  and  illustrious  meiv
among  them,  upon  their  decease,  had  their  encomium
fro m<  persons  of  distinction.*  This  funeral  oration  v/as
more  ancient  than  any  among  the  Greeks  ;  unless  we  ai'
low,  what  Anaximenes,  the  orator  relates^,  tiiat  Solon
Avas  the  author  of  this  custom.

But  that  which  offended  and  exasperated  the  people  was-
this :  Brutus,  whom  they  considered  as  the  fatlier  of  li-
berty, vt^ould  not  rule  alone,  but  took  to  himself  a  first
and  a  second  colleague  ;  yet  this  man  (said  they)  grasps
the  ivhois  auiboritij-i  a7id  is  ?iot  the  siicce&sor  to  the  consulate
cf  Brutus y  to  lahichhe  has  no  rights  but  to  the  tyranny  of
Tarquin*  To  lohat fmrficse  is  it  in  words  to  extol  Brutus^
and  in  deeds  to  imitate  Tarquin^  ivhilc  he  has  all  the  rods  aiid-
axes  carried  before  him  alone ^  and  seta  out  from  a  house
more  stately  thj:m  the  royal  palace  which  he  demolished  ?  It
is   true,  Valerivis   did  live   in  a   house   too   lofty  and

♦  Funeral  orations  were  not  ini^sc  among  the  Greeks  till  the  bat-
tle of  Marathon^  which  was  si-xtecn  years  after  the  death  of  Brutus.
The  heroes  that  fell  so  gloriously  these,  did,  indeed,  well  deserve
such  eulogiums  ;  and  the  Grecians  never  granted  them  but  to  those
that  were  slain  fight'mg  for  their  country.  In  this  respect  the  custom.
cf  the  Romans  was  more  equitable  ;  for  they  honoured  with  these
public  marks  of  regard  such  as  had  sen-ed,  their  country  in  any  cs--

T32.cit7.


PUBLICOLA.  2St

superb,  on  the  Velian  eminence,  which  commanded  the
forum  and  every  thing  that  passed  ;  and  as  the  avenues
were  difficult,  and  the  ascent  steep,  when  he  came  down
from  it  his  appearance  was  very  pompous,  and  resembled
the  state  of  a  king  rather  than  that  of  a  consul.  But  he
soon  shewed  of  what  consequence  it  is  for  persons  in  high
stations  and  authority  to  have  their  ears  open  to  truth  and
good  advice,  rathe  r  than,  flattery.  For  when  his  friends
informed  liim,  that  most  people  thought  he  was  taking
wrong  steps,  he  made  no  dispute,  nor  expressed  any  re-
sentment, but  hastily  assembled  a  number  of  workmeri
whilst  it  was  yet  night,  who  demolished  his  house  entirely  ;
so  that  when  the  Romans  in  the  morning  assembled  to-
look  upon  it,  they  admired  aivi  adored  his  magnanimity  ;,
but,  at  the  same  time,  were  troubled  to  see  so  grand  and
magnificent  an  edifice  ruined  by  the  envy  of  the  citizens,  as
they  would  have  lamented  the  death  of  a  great  man  who
had  fallen  as  suddenly,  and  by  the  same  cause.  It  gave
them  pain,  too,  to  see  the  consul,  who  had  now  no  home^
obhged  to  take  shelter  in  another  man's  house.  For  Va-
lerius was  entertained  by  his  friends,  till  the  people  provi-
ded apiece  of  ground  for  him,  where  a  less  stately  house
was  built,  in  the  place  where  the  temple  of  Victory  noyr
stands.*

Desirous  to  make  his  high  office,  as  well  as  himself,
rather  agreeable  than  formidable  to  the  people,  he  order-
ed the  axes  to  be  taken  away  from  the  rods,  and  that,
whenever  he  went  to  the  great  assembly,  the  rods  should
be  avaled  in  respect  to  the  citizens,  as  if  tlie  supreme  pow-
er were  lodged  in  t/ie?n.  A  custom  which  the  consuls
observe  to  this  day.t  The  people  were  not  aware,  that  by
this  he  did  not  lessen  his  own  power,  (as  they  imagined)
but  only  by  such  an  instance  of  moderation  obTiated  and
cut  off  all  occasion  of  envy,  and  gained  as  much  authori-
ty to  his  person,  as  he  seemed  to  take  from  his  office  ;  for
they  all  submitted  to  him  with  pleasure,  and  were  so  much
charmed  with  his  behaviour,  that  they  gave  him  the  name
of  Publicola^  that  is,  the  PeoliWs   respectful  fritnd*     In

*  Plutarch  has  ^ ^'ivhere  the  temple  calledWz\\%  Publicus  new  standt..
He  had  found  in  the  historians  viccc  potx,  which  in  old  Latin  sigp^ii-
fees  victory  ;  but  as  he  did  not  understand  it,  he  substituted  F/cw*
Fublicus,  which  here  would  have  no  sense  at  all.

f  The  axes  too  were  still  borne  before  the  consuls  when  they
Tt:ere  in  the  field'.^


252  Plutarch's  lives,

this  both  his  former  names  were  lost;  and  this  we  shall
make  use  of  in  the  sequel  of  his  life.  '  »

Indeed,  it  was  no  more  than  his  due  ;  for  he  permitted
all  to  sue  for  the  consulship.*  Yet.  before  a  colleague  was
appointed  him,  as  he  knew  not  what  might  happen,  and
was  apprehensive  of  some  opposition  from  ignorance  or
envy,  while  he  had  the  sole  power  he  made  use  of  it  to
establish  some  of  the  most  useful  and  excellent  regulations.
In  the  first  place,  he  filled  up  the  senate,  which  then  wa^
very  thin  ;  several  of  that  august  body  having  been  put
to  death  by  Tarquin  before,  and  others  fallen  in  the  kite
battle.  He  is  said  to  have  made  up  the  number  a  hun-
dred and  sixty-four.  In  the  next  pi  ice,  he  causea  certain
laws  to  be  enacted,  which  gre^itly  augmented  the  pov/er
of  the  people.  The  first  gave  liberty  of  appeal  Irom  the
consuls  to  the  people  ;  the  second  made  it  death  to  enter
upon  the  magistracy,  without  the  people's  consent ;  the
third  was  greatly  in  favour  of  the  poor,  as,  by  exempt-
ing them  from  taxes,!  it  promoted  their  attention  to  ma-
nufactures. Even  ills  law  agamst  disobedience  to  the
consuls,  was  not  less  popular  than  the  rest ;  and,  in  effect,
it  favoured  the  commonalty  rather  than  the  great ;  for  the
fine  Vr^as  only  the  value  of  five  oxen  and  two  sheep.  The
value  of  a  sheep  was  ten  a^o/i,  of  an  ox  a  hundred  ;:{:  the
Romans  as  yet  not  making  miich  use  of  money,  because
their  wealth  consisted  in  abundance  of  cattle.  To  this  day
they  call  their  substance/^ecz^/zV/,  from  peciis^  cattle,  their
most  ancient  coins  having  the  impression  of  an  ox^  a
sheep,  or  a  hog  ;  and  their  sons  being  distinguished  with
the  names  of  Suilli^  Bubulci^  Cajiraril^  and  Forcii  derived
from  the  names  of  such  animals.

Though  these  laws  of  Publicola  were  popular  and  equit-
able ;  yet,  amidst  this  moderation,  the  punishment  lie
appointed,  in  one  case,  was  severe.  For  he  made  it  law-
ful, without  a  form  of  trial,  to  kill  any  man  that  should  at-

*  If  Publicola  gave  the  plebeians,  as  well  as  the  patricians,  a  right
to  the  consulate,  that  nght  did  not  then  take  place  For  Lucius  Sex-
tius  was  the  first  plebeian  who  arrived  at  that  honour,  many  ages' af-
ter the  time  of  which  Plu'.arch  speaks  ;  and'':his  condnued  but  ele-
ven years  ;  for  in  che  ,welfth,  which  was  the  four  hundredth  year  of
Home,  both  the  consuls  were  again  pa'  vicians.     Liv.  b.  vii.  cap.  18.

^  Yie  exemp  ed  arcificers,  widows,  and  old  men,  who  had  no
children  to  relieve  them,  from  paying  tribute.

I  Before,  the  fine  was  such  as  the  commonalty  could  not  pay
without  absolute  ruin..


PUBLICOLA.  2S3

.tempi  to  set  liimself  up  for  king ;  and  the  person  that  took
Kway  his  life,  was  to  stand  excused,  if  he  could  make
pioof  of  the  intended  crime.  His  reason  for  such  a  law^
we  presume,  was  this  :  though  it  is  not  possible  that  he
vho  undertakes  so  great  an  enterprise,  should  escape  all
notice  ;  yet  it  is  very  probable  that,  though  suspected,  he
may  accomplish  his  designs  before  he  can  be  brought  to
answer  for  it  in  a  judicial  way  ;  and  as  the  crime,  if  com-
mitted, would  prevent  his  being  called  to  account  for  it,
this  law  impowered  any  one  to  punish  him  before  such
cognizance  was  taken.

His  law  concerning  the  treasury,  did  him  honour.  It
was  necessary  that  money  should  be  raised  for  the  war
from  the  estates  of  the  citizens,  but  he  determined  that
neither  himself  nor  any  of  his  friends  should  have  the  dis-
posal of  it ;  nor  would  he  suffer  it  to  be  lodged  in  any  pri-
vate house.. ..He,  therefore,  appointed  the  temple  of  Saturn
to  be  the  treasury,  which  they  still  make  use  of  for  that
purpose,  and  impowered  the  people  to  choose  two  young
men  as  guastors^  or  treasurers,*  The  first  were  Publius
Veturius  and  Marcus  Minutius  ;  and  a  large  sum  was
collected  ;  for  a  hundred  and  thirty  thousand  persons  were
taxed,  though  the  orphans  and  widows  stood  excused.

These  matters  thus  regulated,  he  procured  Lucretius,
,the  father  of  the  injured  Lucretia,  to  be  appointed  his
.colleague.  To  him  he  gave  thtjasces  (as  they  are  called)
together  with  the  precedency,  as  the  older  man  ;  and  this
mark  of  respect  to  age  has  ever  since  continued.  As
Lucretius  died  a  few  days  after,  another  election  was  held,
and  Marcus  Horatius  t  appointed  in  his  room  for  the  re-
maining part  of  the  year*

About  that  time,  Tarquln  making  preparations  for  a
second  war  against  the  Romans,  a  great  prodigy  is  said
to  have  happened.  This  prince,  while  yet  upon  the  throne,

*  The  office  of  the  quzestors  was  to  take  care  of  the  public  trea-
sure, for  which  they  were  accountable  when  their  year  was  out  ;  to
furnish  the  necessary  sums  for  the  service  of  the  public ;  and  to  re-
ceive ajnbassadors,  attend  them,  and  provide  them  with  lodgings  and
other  necessaries.  A  general  could  not  obtain  the  honours  of  a  tri-
umph, till  he  had  given  them  a  faithful  account  of  the  spoils  he  had
taken,  and  sworn  to  it.  There  were  at  first  two  quaestors  only,
but  when  the  Roman  empire  was  consider?.bly  enlarged,  their  num-
ber v/as  increased.  The  office  of  quaestor,  though  often  discharged
by  persons  who  had  beea  consuls,  was  tli«  first  step  to  great  em.
proyments.

t  Hoj-Rtiji  Pulvillus.  *


-j4  PLUTARCH'S    LIVEo.

had  almost  finished  the  temple  of  Jupiter  Capitolinus,
when  either  by  the  direction  of  an  oracle,'**  or  upon  some
fancy  of  his  own,  he  ordered  the  artists  of  Veii  to  make
an  eartlien  chariot,  wliich  was  to  be  placed  on  the  top  of
it.  '■  Soon  after  this  he  forfeited  the  cro'vf n.  The  Tuscans,
however,  moulded  the  chariot,  and  set  it  in  the' furnace  ;
but  the  case  was  very  different  with  it  from  that  of  other
clay  in  the'fire,  v/hich  condenses  and  contracts  upon  the
e-dialation  of  the  moisture,  whereas  it  enlarged  itself  and
sv/elled,  till  it  crrew  to  such  a  size  and  hardness,  that  it
was  with  difficulty  they  got  it  out,  even  after  the  furnace
was  dismantled.  The  soothsayers  being  of  opinion,  that
this  chariot  betokened  power  and  success  to  the  persons
with  whom  it  should  remain,  the  people  of  Veil  determin-
ed not  to  give  it  up  to  the  Romans  ;  but,  upon  their  de-
manding it,  returned  this  answer.  That  it  belonged  to
Tarquin,  not  to  those  that  had  driven  him  from  his  king-
dom. It  happened  that  a  few  days  after,  there  was  a
chariot-race  at  Veil,  wdiich  was  observed  as  usual ;  except
that,  as  the  charioteer,  who  had  won  the  prize  and  re-
ceived the  crown,  was  gently  driving  out  of  the  ring,  the
horses  took  fright  from  no  visible  cause  ;  but,  either  by
some  direction  of  the  gods,  or  turn  of  fortune,  ran  away
with  their  driver,  at  full  speed,  towards  Rome.  It  was  in
vain  thathe  pulled  the  reins,  or  soothed  them  with  wordsy
he  was  obliged  to  give  way  to  the  career,  and  was  Avhirled
along,  till  they  came  to  the  Capitol,  where  they  flung  him,
at  the  gate  now  called  Ratumena.  The  Veientes,  sur-
prised and  terrified  at  this  incident,  ordered  the  artists  to
deliver  up  the  chariot. f

Tarquin,  the  son  of  Demoratus,  in  his  wars  with  the
Sabines,  made  a  vow  to  build  a  temple  to  Jupiter  Capito-
linus ;  which  was  performed  by  Tarquin  ths  firoud^  son  or
grandson  to  the  former.  He  did  not,  however,  consecrate
it^  for  it  was  not  quite  finished,  when  he  was  expelled
from  Rome.|:     When  the  last  hand  was  put  to  it,  and  it

*  It  was  an  usual  thing  to  place  chariots  on  the  tops  of  temples.

t  A  miracle  of  this  kind,  and  not  less  extraordinary,  is  saialo  have
happened  in  modern  Rome  When  poor  St.  Michael's  church  was
in  a  ruinous  condition,  the  horses  that  were  employed  in  drawing
stones  through  the  city,  unanimously  agreed  to  carry  their  loads  to
St.  Michael.

I  This  temple  was  200  feet  long,  and  185  and  upwards  broad.
The  front  was  adorned  with  three  rows  of  columns,  and  the  sides
with  two.  Ill  the  nave  were  tliree  shrines,  one  of  Jupiter,  anotlier
©f  Juno,  and  the  third  of  Minerva.


PLJBLICOLA.  255

had  received  every  suitable  ornament,  Publi  cola  y/as  ambi-
tious of  tlie  ho]iour   of  cledicatinjj  it.      This  excited  the
envy  of  some  of  the  nobility,  who  could  better  brook  his
other  honqurs  ;  to  which,    indeed,  in  his  legislative  and
Diilitary  capacities,  he  had  a  better  claim  ;  but,  as  he  had
no  concern  in  this,  they  did  not  think  proper  to  grant  it  him,
but  encouraged  and  importuned  Horatius  to  apply  for  it..
In  the  meantime,  Publicola's  command  of  the  army  ne-
cessarily required  his  absence,  and  his  adversaries  taking
the  opportunity  to  procm^e  an  order  from  the  people,  that
Horatius  should  dedicate  the  temple,  conducted  him  to  tlie
Capitol.     A  point  which  they  could  not  have  gained  had
Publicola  been  present.     Yet  som.e  say,  the  conrsuls  having
cast  lots  for  it,*  the  dedication  fell  to  Horatius,  and  the  ex-
pedition, against  his  inclination,  to  Publicola.     But  we  may
easily  conjecture  how  they  stood  disposed,  by  the  proceedr ;
ings  on  the  day  of  dedication.     This  was  the  thirteenth,
of  September,  which  is  about  the  full  moon  of  the  month
Mclagiinion^  when  prodigious  numbers  of  all  ranks  being
assembled,  and  silence  enjoined,  Ploratius,  after  the  other
ceremonies,  took  hold  of  one  of  the  gate-posts,  (as  the
custom  is)  and  was  going  to  pronounce  the  prayer  of  con-
secration.    But  Marcus,  the  brother  of  Publicola,  who  had .
stood  for  some  time  by  the  gates  watching  his  opportu-
nity, cried  out,  Conaid^  your  son  lies   dead   in   the   camp^
This  gave  great  pain  to  all  that,  heard  it ;  but  the  consul
not  in  the  least  disconcerted,  made  answer,  Then  cast  cut
the  dead  where  you  please ^^  I  admit  of  no  mourning  on    his
occasion  ;  and  so  proceeded  to  finish  the  dedication.     The
news  was  not  true,  but  an  invention  of  Marcus,  who  hoped
by.  that  means  to  hinder  Horatius  from  completing  M^hat
he  was  about.      But  his  presence  of  mind  is  equally  ad-
mirable, whether  he  immediately  perceived  the  falsity,  or
believed  the  account  to  be  time,  without  shewing  any  emo-
tion.

The  same  fortune  attended  the  dedication  of  the  second
temple.  The  first,  built  by  Tarquin,  and  dedicated  by
Horatius,  as  we  have  related,  was  afterwards  destroyed  by
fire  in  the  civil  wars.f     Sylla  rebuilt  it^  but  did  not  live  to

*  Liyy  says  positively,  they  cast  lots  for  it.  Plutarch  seems  to  have
taken  the  sequel  of  the  story  from  him.  Liv.  lib.  ii  c.  8,

t  After  the  first  temple  was  destroyed  in  the  v/ars  between  SyHa
and  Marius,  Sylla  rebuilt  it  with  columns  of  marble,  which  he  had


256  Plutarch's  lives,

consecrate  it;  so  the  dedication  of  this  second  temple
fell  to  Catulus.  It  was  ag^ain  destroyed  in  the  troubles
which  happened  in  the  time  of  VitelUus  ;  and  a  third  was
built  by  Vespasian,  who,  with  his  usual  good  fortune,
put  the  last  hand  to  it,  but  did  not  see  it  demolished,  as
it  was  soon  after :  happier  in  this  respect  than  Sylla,  who
died  before  his  was  dedicated,  Vespasian  died  before  his
was  destroyed.  For  immediately  after  his  decease,  the
Capitol  was  burnt.  The  fourth,  which  now  stands,  wa^
built  and  dedicated  by  Domitian.  Tarquin  is  said  to
have  expended  thirty  thousand  pounds  weight  of  silver
upon  the  foundations  only  ;  but  the  greatest  wealth  any
private  man  is  supposed  to  be  now  possessed  of  in  Rome,
would  not  answer  the  expence  of  the  gilding  of  the  pre-
sent temple,  which  amounted  to  more  than  twelve  thou-
sand talents.*  The  pillars  are  of  Pentelic  marble,  and
the  thickness  was  in  excellent  proportion  to  their  length,
when  we  saw  them  at  Athens  ;  but  when  they  were  cut
and  polished  anew  at  Rome,  they  gained  not  so  much  in
the  polish,  as  they  lost  in  the  proportion  ;  for  their  beauty
is  injured  by  their  appearing  too  slender  for  their  height.
But  after  admiring  the  magnificence  of  the  Capitol,  if
any  one  was  to  go  and  see  a  gallery,  a  hail,  or  bath,  or
the  apartments  of  the  women,  in  Domitian's  palace,  what
is  said  by  Epicharmus  of  a  prodigal,

Your  lavish'd  stores  speak  not  the  liberal  mind,
But  the  disease  of  giving  ;

he  might  apply  to  Domitian  in  some  such  manner  as
this:  JVcithtr  piety  nor  ma^nijiccnce  appears  z«  i/owr  ex-
taken  cut  of  the  temple  of  Jupiter  Olympius  at  Athens,  and  trans-
ported to  Rome.  But  (as  Plutarch  observes)  he  did  not  live  to  con-
secrate it ;  and  he  was  heard  to  say,  as  he  was  dying,  that  his  leav-
ing that  temple  to  be  dedicated  by  another,  was  the  only  unfortu-
nate circumstance  of  his  life.

*  194,350/  sterling.  In  this  we  may  see  the  great  distance  be-
tween the  wealth  of  private  citizens  in  a  free  country,  and  that  of
the  subjects  of  an  arbitrary  monarch.  In  Trajan's  time  there  was
not  a  private  man  in  Rome  worth  200,000/.  ;  whereas  under  the
commonwealth,  iEmilius  Scaurus,  in  his  sdileship,  erected  a  tem-
porary theatre  which  cost  above  500,000/. ;  Marcus  Crassus  had  an
estate  in  land  of  above  a  millicn  a-year;  L.  Cornelius  Balbus  left
by  will,  to  every  Roman  citizen,  twenty -five  f/ewanV,  which  amounts
to  about  sixteen  shillings  of  our  money  ;  and  many  priva'.e  men
ar;iorLg  rhe  Remans  rnaini^ained  from  ten  lo  twenty  thousand  slave*^v


?UBLICOLA.  257

pence  ;  you  have  the  disease  of  building  ;  like  Midas  of  old,^
you  vjould  turn  every  thing  to  gold  and  marble.  So  much
for  this  subject.

Let  us  now  return  to  Tarquin.  After  that  great  battle
in  which  he  lost  his  son,  whov/as  killed  in  single  combat
by  Brutus,  he  fied  to  Clusiurn,  and  begged  assistance  of
Laras  Porsena,  then  the  most  powerful  prince  in  Italy,
and  a  man  of  great  worth  and  honour.  Porsena  pro-
mised him  succours  ;*  and,  in  the  first  place,  sent  to  the
Romans,  commanding  them  to  receive  Tarquin.  Upon
their  refusal,  he  declared  war  against  them ;  and  having
informed  them  of  the  time  \yhen,  and  the  place,  where  he
would  make  his  assault,  he  marched  thither  accordingly
with  a  great  army.  Publicola,  who  was  then  absent,  was
chosen  consul  the  second  time,t  and  with  him  Titus  Lu-
cretius. Returning  to  Rome,  and  desirous  to  outdo  Por-
sena in  spirit,^  he  built  the  town  of  Sigliuria,  notwith-
standing the  enemy's  approach  ;  and  when  he  had  finished
the  walls  at  a  great  expence,  he  placed  in  it  a  colony  of
seven  hundred  men,  as  if  he  held  his  adversary  very
cheap.  Porsena,  however,  assaulted  it  in  a  spirited  man-
ner, drove  out  the  garrison,  and  pursued  the  fugitives  so
close,  that  he  was  near  entering  Rome  along  v/ith  them.
But  Publicola  met  him  without  the  gates,  and  joining
battle  by  the  river,  sustained  the  enemy's  attack,  v/ho
pressed  on  with  numbers,  till  at  last  sinking  under  the
wounds  lie  had  gallantly  received,  he  was  carried  out  of
the  battle,  Lucretius,  his  colleague,  having  the  same
fate,  the  courage  of  the  Romans  drooped,  and  they  re-
treated into  the  city  for  security.  The  enemy  making
good  the  pui'suit  to   the  wooden-bridge,  Rome   was  in

not  so  much  for  service  as  ostentation.  No  wonder  then  that  the
slaves  once  took  up  arms,  and  went  to  war  with  the  Roman  com-
monwealth.

*  Besides  that  Porsena  was  willing  to  assist  a  distressed  king,  he
considered  the  Tarquins  as  his  countrymen,  for  they  v/ere  of  Tuscan
extraction.

t  It  was  when  Publicola  was  consul  the  third  time,  and  had  for
colleague  Horatius  Pulvillus,  that  Porsena  marched  against  Rome.

\  Sijjliuria  was  not  built  at  this  tim.e,  nor  cut  of  ostentation,  as
Plutarch  says  ;  for  it  was  built  as  a  barrier  against  the  Latins  and
tlie  Hernici,  and  not  in  the  th'rd,  but  in  the  second  consulship  of
Publicola.

VOL.    I.  7.


253  Plutarch's  lives.

^;reat  clanger  of  being  taken ;  when  Horatliis  Codes,*
and  with  him  two  others  of  the  first  rank,  Herminius  and
SpuriusLartius,t  stopped  them  at  the  bridge.  Horatius
had  the  surname  of  Cocks  from  his  having  lost  an  eye,
in  tlie  wars ;  or,  as  some  will  have  it,  from  the  fcinii  cf
his  nose,  which  was  so  very  flat,  that  both  his  eyes,  as
\vell  as  eye-brov/s,  seemed  to  be  joined  together ;  so  that
when  the  vulgar  intended  to  call  him  Cyclops,  by  a  mis-
nomer, they  called  him  Codes,  which  name  remained
wdth  him.  This  man  standing  at  the  head  of  the  bridge,
defended  it  against  the  enemy,  till  the  Romans  broke  it
down  behind  him.  Then  he  plunged  into  the  Tyber,
armed  as  he  was,  and  swam  to  the  other  side,  but  was
wounded  in  the  hip  with  a  Tuscan  spear.  Publicola,
struck  with  admiration  of  his  valour,  immediately  pro-
cured a  decree,  that  every  Roman  should  give  him  one
day's  provision  ',\  and  that  he  should  have  as  much  land
as  he  himself  could  encircle  with  a  plough  in  one  day.
Besides,  they  erected  his  statue  in  brass  in  the  temple  of
Vulcan,  witii  a  view  to  console  him  by  this  honour  for
his  wound,  and  lameness  consequent  upon  it.|j

While  Porsena  laid  close  siee-e  to  the  city,  the  Romans
were  attacked  with  famine,  and  another  body  of  Tuscans
laid  w  aste  the  country.  Fublicola,  who  was  now  consul
the  third  time,  was  of^  opinion  that  no  operations  could
be  carried  on  against  Porsena  but  defensive  ones.  He
marched  out-^  however,  privately  against  those  Tuscans
who  had  committed  such  ravages,  defeated  them,  and
killed  five  thousand.

The  story  of  **Mucii:s  has  been  the  subject  of  many
pens,  and  is  variously  related  :  I  shall  give  that  account

*  He  was  son  to  a  brother  of  Horatius  the  consvil,  and  a  descen-
dant of  that  Horatius  wlio  remained  victorious  in  the  great  combat
between  the  Horatii  and  Curiatii  in  the  reign  of  TuUus  Hostilius.

•f  In  the  Greek  text  it  is  Lucretius,  which  we  suppose  is  a  cor-
ruption of  Lartius,  the  name  we  find  in  Livy.

:J:  Probably  he  had  three  hundred  thousand  contributors,  for  even
tlie  women  readily  gave  in  their  quota.

II  This  defect,  and  his  having  bvit  one  eye,  prevented  his  ever  be-
ing coiisul.

^  The  consuls  spread  a  report,  which  was  soon  carried  into  the
Tuscan  camp  by  the  slaves  Vv'ho  deserted,  that  the  next  day  all  the
cattle  brought  thither  from  the  country,  would  be  sent  to  giaze  in
the  fields  under  a  guard.  This  bait  drew  the  enemy  into  anambuth,

**  jMucius  Cordus.


PUBLICOLA.  259

of  it,  which  seems  most  credible.     Ivliicius  wa?.  in  all  re-
spects a  man  of  merit,  but  particularly  distinguished  by
his  valour.     Having  secretly  formed  a  scheme  to  trike  oil"
Porsena,  he  made  his  way   into    his  camp  in  a  T\i3c?.n
dress,  where  he  likewise  took  care  to  speak  the  Tuicau
hinguage.  In  this  disguise  he  approached  the  seat  where
the  king  sat  with  his  nobles  ;  and  as  he  did  not  certainly
know  Porsena,  and  thought  it  improper  to  ask,  he  drew
his  sword  and  killed  the  person  that  seemed  most  likely
to  be  the  king.     Upon  this  he  was  seized  and  examined.
Mean  time,  as  there  happened   to   be  a    portable  altar
there,  with  fire  upon  it,  where  the  king  was  about  to  offer
sacrifice,  Mucins  thrust  his  right  hand  into  it  ;*   and  as
tlie  flesh  was    burning,   he  kept  locking    upon  Porsena
with  a  firm  and  menacing  aspect,  till  the  king,  astonished
at  his  fortitude,  returned    him  his    sword  with  his  oath
hand.     He  received  it   with  his  left-hand,  from  whence
we  are  told  he  had  the  surname  of  Saevola,  which  signi-
fies Iff  I -handed  ;  and  thus  addressed  himself  to  Porsena,
*'  Your  threatenings  I  regarded  not,  but  am  conquered
by  your  generosity,  and  out  of  gratitude,  v/ill  declare  to
you  what   no  force    sliould  have  wrested    from    m.e....
There  are  three   hundred  Romans  that  have   taken  the
same  resolution  with  mnie^  who  now  v/alk   about  your
camp,   watching   their    opportunity.     It  was  my  lot  to
make  the  first    attempt,  and    I  am  not    sorry   that  my
sword  was  directed  by   fortune   against  another,  instead
of  a  man  of  so  much  honour,  v/ho,  as  such,  should  rather
be  a  friend,  than  an  enemy  to  the  Rom.ajis."     Porsena
believed  this  account,  and  v/as  more  inclined  to  hearken
to  terms,  not  so  much,  in  my  opinion,  through  fear  of
the  three  hundred  assassins,  as  admiration  of  the  dignity
of  the  Roman  valour.     All  authors  call  this  man  Mucius
Scr2vola,t  except  Athenodorus  Sandon,  v/ho,  in  a  work
addressed  to  Octavia,  sister    to  Augustus,  says   he  was
named  Posthumius.

Publicola,  who  did  not  look  upon  Porsena  as  so  bitter
an  enemy  to  Rome,  but  that  he  deserved  to  be  taken  into

*  LJvy  says,  that  Porsena  threatened  Mncius  with  the  torture  hj
fire,  to  make  him  discover  his  accomplices  ;  whereupon  Mucius
thrust  his  hand  into  the  flame,  to  let  him  see  that  he  was  not  to  be
mtimitlated.

t  Mucius  was  rewarded  with  a  large  piece  of  ground  belonging
to  the  public.


260  Plutarch's  lives.

its  friendship  and  alliance,  was  so  far  fi'om  refusing  to
refer  the  dispute  with  Tarquin  to  his  decision,  that  he
was  really  desirous  of  it,  and  several  times  oiFered  to
prove  that  Tarqnin  was  the  worst  of  men,  and  justly  de-
prived of  the  crown.  When  Tarquin  roughly  answered,
that  he  would  admit  of  no  arbitrator,  much  less  of  Por-
sena,  if  he  changed  his  mind  and  forsook  his  alliance.
Porsena  was  offended,  and  began  to  entertain  an  ill  opi-
nion of  him  ;  being  likewise  solicited  to  it  by  his  son
Aruns,  who  used  all  his  interest  for  the  Romans,  he  was
prevailed  upon  to  put  an  end  to  the  war,  on  condition
that  they  gave  up  that  part  of  Tuscany  which  they  had
conquered,*  together  with  the  prisoners,  and  received
their  deserters.  For  the  performance  of  these  conditions
they  gave  as  hostages  ten  young  men  and  as  many  vir-
gins, of  the  best  families  in  Rome ;  among  whom  was
Valeria  the  daughter  of  Publicola.

Upon  the  faith  of  this  treaty,  Poreena  had  ceased  from
all  acts  of  hostility,  v/hen  the  Roman  virgins  went  down
to  bathe,  at  a  place  where  the  bank  forming  itself  in  a
crescent,  embraces  the  river  in  such  a  manner,  that  there
it  is  quite  calm  and  undisturbed  v/ith  waves.  As  no
guard  was  near,  and  they  saw  none  passing  or  repassing,
they  had  a  violent  inclination  to  swim  over,  notwith-
standing the  depth  and  strengtii  of  the  stream.  Some  say
one  of  them,  named  CIcelia,  passed  it  on  horseback,  and
encouraged  the  other  virgins  as  they  swam,  ^Vhen  they
came  safe  to  Publicola,  he  neither  commended  nor  ap-
proved their  exploit,  but  was  grieved  to  think  he  shoukl
appear  unequal  to  Porsena  in  point  of  honour,  and  that
this  daring  enterprizeof  the  virgins  should  make  the  Ro-
mans suspected  of  unfair  proceeding.  He  took  them,
therefore,  and  sent  them  back  to  Porsena.  Tarquin  hav-
ing timely  intelligence  of  this,  laid  an  ambuscade  for
them,  and  attacked  their  convey.  They  defended  them-
selves, though  greatly  inferior  in  number  ;  and  Valeria,
the  daughter  of  Publicola,  broke  through  them  as  they
were  engaged,  with  three  servants,  who  conducted  her
safe  to  Porsena's  camp.  As  the  skirmish  was  not  yet  de-
cided, nor  the  danger  over,  Aruns,  the  son  of  Porsena,

*  The  Romans  were  required  to  reinsfate  the  Veientes  in  the  pos-
session of  seven  villages,  which  they  had  taken  from  them  in  for-
mer war  Si


PUBLICOLA.  261

being  informed  of  it,  marched  up  with  all  speed,  put  the
enemy  to  flight,  and  rescued  the  Romans.  When  Por-
sena  saw  the  virgins  returned,  he  demanded  which  of
them  was  she  that  proposed  the  design,  and  set  the  ex-
ample. When  he  understood  that  Cloelia  v/as  the  person,
he  treated  her  with  great  pohteness,  and  commanding
one  of  his  own  horses  to  be  brought  with  very  elegant
trappings,  he  made  her  a  present  of  it.  Those  Ihat  say,
Cloelia  was  the  only  one  that  passed  the  river  on  horse-
back, allege  this  as  a  praof.  Others  say  no  such  conse- .
quence  can  be  drawn  from  it,  and  that  it  was  nothing  more
than  a  mark  of  honour  to  her  from  the  Tuscan  king,  for
her  bravery.  An  equestrian  statue  of  her  stands  in  the
Via  sacra ^'^  where  it  leads  to  mount  Palatine  ;  yet  some
v/ill  have  even  this  to  be  Valeria's  statue,  not  Cloelia's.

Porsena,  thus  reconciled  to  the  Romans,  gave  many
proofs  of  his  greatness  of  inind.  Among  the  rest  he  or-
dered the  Tuscans  to  carry  off  nothing  but  their  arms,
and  to  leave  their  camp  full  of  provisions  and  many  other
things  of  value,  for  the  Romans,  Hence  it  is,  that. even
in  our  times,  whenever  there  is  a  sale  of  goods  belong-
ing to  the  public,  they  are  cried  first  as  the  goods  of  Por-
sena, to  eternize  the  memory  of  his  generosity.  A
brazen  staUie,  of  rude  and  antique  v/orkmanship,  was
also  erected  to  his  honour,  near  the  senate-house. t

After  this,  the  Sabines  invading  the  Roman  territory,
Llarcus  Valerius,  brother  to  Pubiicola,  and  Posthumlus
Tubertus,  were  elected  consuls.  As  every  important  ac-
tion was  Still  conducted  by  the  advice  and  assistance  ef
Pubiicola,  Marcus  gained,  two  great  battles  ;  in  the  se-
cond of  which  he  killed  thirteen  thousand  of  the  enemy,
without  the  loss  of  one  Roman*  For  this  he  vras  not  only
rewarded  with  a  triumph,  but  a  house  was  built  for  him
at  the  public  expencc,  on  mount  Palatine.  And  whereas
the  doors  of  other  houses  at  that  time  opened  inwards,
the  Street-door  of  that  house  was  made  to  open  outwards,
to  show  by  such  an  honourable  distinction,  that  he  was
always  ready  to  receive  any  proposal  fcr  the  public  ser-

*  Dionysius  Halicarnassus  tells  v-s  in  express  terms,  that  in  his
time,  that  is,  in  tlie  reign  of  Augustus,  there  were  no  remains  of
that  statue,  it  having  been  consumed  by  lire.

t  The  senate  likewise  sent  an  embassy  to  him,  with' a  preseVit  of
a  throne  ai^orneJ  with  ivory,  a  sceptre,  a  crown  cf  gckl,and  a,  tii-
uii^.pha!  roDc.  2   o


262  plutarch'^s  lives.

vice.  *  All  the  doors  in  Greece,  they  tell  us,  were  iov-
merly  made  to  open  so,  Vv'hich  they  prove  from  those  pas-
sages in  the  comedies,  -where  it  is  mentioned,  that  those
that  went  out  knocked  loud  on  the  inside  of  the  doors  first*
to  give  warning  to  such  aspassedby  or  stood  before  them.
-lest  the  doors  in  opening  should  dash  against  them.

The  year  following,  Pubiicoia  v/as  appointed  consul
the  fourth  time,  because  a  confederacy  between  the  Sa-
bines  and  Latins  threatened  a  war ;  and,  at  the  same
time,  the  city  was  oppressed  with  superstitious  terrors,  on
account  of  the  imnerfect  births,  and  R-enerai  abortions
among  the  women.  Publieola,  having  consulted  the  bi-
byTs  books  upon  in,!  offered  sacrifice  to  Pluto,  and  renew-
ed certain  game&  that  liad  formeriy  beeniubtituted  by  the
direction  of  the  Delphic  oracie.  Yvhen  he  had  revived
the  city  with  the  pleasing  hope  that  the  gods  were  appeaS'
cd,  he  prepared  to  arm  against  the  »ienaces  of  men  ;  for
ihere  appeared  to  be  a  formidable  if  ague  and  strong  arma-
ment against  him.  Among  ihe  Sabiaes,  AppiusCIaiisu;>
■\vas  a  man  of  an  opulent  fortune,  and  remarkable  pergonal
strength  ;  famed,  moreover,  for  his  virtues,  and  the  forjte
of  his  eloquence.  What  is  the  fate  of  all  great  men,  to
be  persecuted  by  envy,  was  likewise  his  :  and  his  opposing
the  war  gave  a  handle  to  malignity  to  insinuate  that  be
Avanted  to  strengthen  the  Romarj  power,  in  order  the  more
easily  to  enslave  his  own  country.     Perceiving  that  the

*  Posthumius  h?.d  his  sha-e  in  the  triumph,  as  well  as  in  the
atchievernents,

+  An  unknown  woman  h  said  to  have  come  to  Tarquin  with  nine
volumes  of  oracles  written  by  the  Si'yloi  Cuma,  forvvhicb  she  de-
demanded  a  very  considerable  price.  Tarqoin  refusing  to  purchase
tliem  at  her  rate,  she  burnt  three  of  thxm,  and  then  a^ked  the  same
price  for  the  remaining  six.  Her  proposal  being  rejected  with  sccrn,
she  burnt  three  more,  and,  notwithstanding,  still  insisted  on  her  first
price.  Tarquin,  surprised  at  the  novelty  of  the  thing,  put  the  books
in  the  hands  of  the  augurs  to  be  examined,  who  advised  him  to  pur-
chase them  at  any  rate  :  Accordingly  he  did,  and  appointed  tvv'O
J  ersons  of  distinction,  styled  DuuviTiri,  to  be  guardians  of  tViem,
v.' ho  locked  them  up  in  a  vault  under  the  temple  of  Jupiter  Capitoli-
nus,  and  there  theyv/ere  kept  till  they  Avere  burnt  v^rith  the  temple
itself.  These  officers,  whose  number  was  af.evwards  increased,
consulted  the  Sibylline  books,  by  direction  of  the  senate,  when  some
dangerous  sedition  was  likely  to  break  out,  v.^hen  the  Roman  armies
had  been  defeated,  or  when  any  of  those  prodigies  appeared  which
•were  thoizghc  fatal.  They  also  presided  over  the  sacrifices  and  shows,,
wlilch  they  appointed  to  appease  the  wrath  of  heaven^


PUBUCOLA.  263

populace  gave  a  willing-  ear  to  these  calumnies,  and  that
he  was  become  obnoxious  to  the  abettors  of  the  war,  he
was  apprehensive  of  an  impeachment;  but  being  power-
fully supported  by  his  friends  and  relations,  he  bade  his
enemies  defiance.  This  delayed  the  war,Pbiblicola  mak-
ing it  his  business  not  only  to  get  intelligence  of  this
sedition,  but  also  to  encourage  and  inflame  it,  sent  proper
persons  to  Appius,  to  tell  him,  "  That  he  was  sensible
he  was  a  man  of  too  much  goodness  and  integrity,  to
avenge  himself  of  hi:i  countrymen,  though  greatly  injured
by  them  ;  but  if  he  chose,  for  his  security,  to  come  over
to  the  Romans,  and  to  get  out  of  the  way  of  his  enemies,
he  should  find  such  a  reception,  both  in  public  and  pri-
vate,as  v/as  suitable  to  his  virtue  and  the  dignity  cfRome."
Appius  considered  this  proposal  with  great  attention,  and
the  necessity  of  his  affairs  prevailed  with  him  to  accept
it.  He,  therefore,  persuaded  his  friends,  and  they  inflii-
encedmany  others,  so  that  five  thousand  men  of  the  most
peaceable  disposition  of  any  among  the  Sabines.  with  their
families,  removed  with  him  to  Rome.  Publicola,  who
was  prepared  for  it,  received  them  in  the  most  friendly
and  hospitable  manner,  admitted  them  to  the  freedom  of  the
city,  and  gave  them  two  acres  of  land  a-piece,  by  the  li-
ver Anio.  To  x\ppiushe  gave  the  twenty -five  acres,  and
a  seat  in  the  senate.  This  laid  the  found-ationof  his  great-
ness in  the  republic,  and  he  used  the  advantage  with  so
much  prudence,  as  to  rise  to  the  first  rank  in  pov/er  and
autliority.  The  Claudian  family,*  descended  from  him,
is  as  illustrious  as  any  in  Rome.

Though  the  disputes  among  the  Sabines  v/ere  decided
by  this  migration,  the  demagogues  would  not  suifer  them'
to  rest  ;  representing  it  as  a  matter  of  great  disgrace,  if
Appius,  nov/  a  deserter  and  an  enemy,  should  be  able  to
obstruct  their  taking  vengeance  of  the  Romans,  when  he
could  not  prevent  it  by  his  presence.  They  advanced,
therefore,  with  a  great  ai'my,  and  encamped  near  Fidenae.
Having  ordered  two  thousand  men  to  lie  in  ambush  in  the

*  There  were  two  families  of  the  Claitdii  in  Rome  ;  one  patriciaa
and  the  other  plebeian.  The  first  had  the  surname  of  PM/ci>er,  and
the  other  of  Marcelliis.  In  course  of  time  the  patrician  fanuly  pro-
duced twenty-three  consuls,  five  dictators,  and  seven  censors,  and
obtained  two  trium])hs  and  two  ovations.  The  eopetor  Tiberius
-was  descended  of  this  £«uniJy»


^64  Plutarch's  lives.

shrubby  and  hollow  places  before  Rome,  they  appointed
a  few  horse  at  clay -break  to  ravage  the  country  up  to  the
very  gates,  and  then  to  retreat,  till  they  drew  the  enemy
into  the  ambuscade.  But  Publicola  getting  information
that  very  day  of  these  particulars  from  deserters,  prepared
himself  accordingly,  and  made  a  disposition  of  his  forces.
Posthumius  Balbus  his  son-in-law,  went  out  with  three
thousand  men,  as  it  began  to  grow  dark,  and  having:  taken
possession  of  the  summits  of  the  hills  under  which  the
Sabines  had  concealed  themselves,  watched  his  opportuni-
ty. His  colleague  Lucretius  with  the  lightest  and  most
active  of  the  Romans,  was  appointed  to  attack  the  Sabine
cavalry,  as  they  were  driving  off  the  cattle,  while  himself,,
with  the  rest  of  the  forces,  took  a  large  compass,  and  in-
closed the  enemy's  rear.  The  morning  happened  to  be
very  foggy,  when  Posthumius,  at  dawn,  with  loud  shcuts,
fell  upon  the  ambuscade  from  the  heights,  Lucretius
charged  the  horse  in  their  retreat,  and  Publicola  attacked
the  enemy's  camp.  The  Sabines  were  every  where  worsted
and  put  to  the  rout.  As  the  Romans  met  not  with  the
least  resistance,  the  slaughter  was  prodigious.  It  is  clear
that  the  vain  confidence  of  the  Sabines  was  the  principal,
cause  of  tlieir  ruin.  \¥hile  one  part  thought  the  other
was  safe,  they  did  not  stand  upon  their  defence  ;  those  in
the  camp  ran  tov/ards  the  corps  that  was  placed  in  ambus-
cade, while  they,  in  their  turn,  endeavoured  to  regain  the
camp.  Thus  they  fell  in  v/ith  each  otherin  great  disorder,
and  in  mutual  want  of  that  assistance  which  neither  was
able  to  give.  The  Sabines  would  have  been  entirely  cut
off,  had  not  the  city  of  Fidenx  been  so  near,  v/hich  proved
an  asylum  to  some,  particularly  those  that  fled  when  the
camp  was  taken.  Such  as  did  not  take  refuge  there,  were
either  destroysd  or  taken  prisoners.

The  Romans,  though  accustomed  to  ascribe  every  great
event  to  the  interposition  of  the  gods,  gave  the  credit  of
this  victory  solely  to  the  general ;  and  the  first  thing  the
soldiers  vv'ere  heard  to  say,  v/as,  that  Publicola  had  put
the  enemy  in  their  hands,  lame,  blind,  and  almost  bound,
for  the  slaughter.  The  peopre  were  enriched  with  the
plunder  and  the  sale  of  prisoners.  As  for  Publicola,  he
was  honoured  with  a  triumph  ;  and  having  surrendered
the  administration  to  the  succeeding  consuls,  he  died  soon:
after;  thus  finisliing  his  life   in  .  circumstances  esteemed-


PUBLICOLA.  265

the  happiest  aiid  most  glorious  that  a  man  can  attain  to.*
The  people,  as  if  they  had  done  nothing  to  requite  his
merit  in  his  life  time,  decreed  that  his  funeral  should  be
solemnized  at  the  public  charge  ;  and  to  make  it  the  more
honourable,  every  one  contributed  a  piece  of  money  called
Quadrans,  Besides,  the  women,  out  of  particular  regard
to  his  memory,  continued  the  mourning  for  him  a  whole
year.  By  an  order  of  the  citizens,  his  body  was  likewise
interred  within  the  city,  near  the  place  called  Velia^  and
all  his  family  were  to  have  a  burying  place  there.  At  pre*
sent,  indeed,  none  of  his  descendants  are  interred  in  that
ground  :  they  only  carry  the  corpse  and  set  it  down  there,
when  one  of  the  attendants  puts  a  lighted  torch  under  it,
which  he  immediately  takes  back  again.  Thus  they  claim
by  that  act  the  right,  but  wave  the  privilege  ;  for  the
body  is  taken  away,  and  interred  without  the  wall.


SOLON  AND  PUBLICOLA

COMPARED.

X  HERE  is  something  singular  in  this  parallel,  and
what  has  not  occurred  to  us  in  any  other  of  the  lives  we
have  written,  that  PubHcola  should  exem.pUfy  the  maxims
of  Solon,  and  that  Solon  should  proclaim  before-hand  the
happiness  of  Publicola.  For  the  definition  of  happiness
which  Solon  gave  Croesus,  is  more  applicable  to  Publicola
than  to  Tellus.  It  is  true,  he  pronounces  Tellus  happy,
on  account  of  his  virtue,  his  valuable  children,  and  glorious
death  ;  yet  he  mentions  him  not  in  his  poems  as  eminent-
ly distinguished  by  his  virtue,  his  children,  or  his  ompioy-
ments.  For  Publicola,  in  his  life-time,  attained  the  highest
reputation  and  authoi'ity  among  the  Romans,  by  means
of  his  virtues  ;  and,  after  his  death,  his  family  was  reckon-

*  He  was  the  most  virtuous  citizen,  one  of  the  greatest  generals,,
and  the  most  popular  consul  Rome  ever  had.  As  he  had  taken  more
care  to  transmit  his  virtues  to  his  posterity,  than  to  enrich  them  ;
and  as,  notwithstanding  the  frugality  of  his  life,  and  the  great  offices
he  had  borne,  there  was  not  found  money  enough  in  his  house  to  de-
fray the  charges  of  his  funeral,  he  was  buried  at  the  expence  of  the
public.  His  poverty  is  a  circumstance  which  Plutarch  should  have
mentioned,  because  a  funeral  at  the  public  charge  was  aii  honour
sometimer.  paid  to  the  rich.


266  PLUTARCH'S    LIVES.

ed  among  the  most  honourable  ;  the  houses  of  the  Pub-
licolsjthe  Messalse,  and  Valerii,*  iilustrious  for  the  space
of  six  hundred  years,!  still  acknowledging  him  as  the
fountain  of  their  honotu'.  Tellus,  like  a  brave  man,  keep-
ing his  post,  and  fig-hting  to  the  last,  fell  by  the  enemy's
hand;  whereas  Publicola,  after  having  slain  his  enemies,
(a  much  happier  circumstance  than  to  be  slain  by  them)
after  seeing  his  country  victorious,  through  his  conduct  as
consul  and  as  general,  after  triumphs  and  all  other  marks
of  honour,  died  that  death  which  Solon  had  so  passionate-
ly wished  for,  and  declared  so  happy.:):  Solon,  again,  in
his  answer  to  Mimnermus,  conceding  the  period  of  hu-
man life,  thus  exclaims :

Let  friendship's  faithful  heart  attend  ir.y  bier,
Heave  the  sad  sigh,  and  drop  the  pitying  tear  !

And  Publicola  had  this  felicity :  For  he  v/as  lamented
not  only  by  his  friends  and  relations,  but  by  the  whole
city  ;  thousands  attended  his  funeral  with  tears,  with  re-
gret, with  the  deepest  sorrow  ;  and  the  Roman  matrons
mourned  for  him,  as  for  the  loss  of  a  son,  a  brother  or  a
common  parent.

Another  wish  of  Solon's  is  thus  ex|>ressed  :

The  flow  of  riches  thougli  desired.
Life's  real  goods,  if  v/ell  acquir'd,
Unjustly  let  me  never  gain,
Lest  vengeance  follow  in  their  train.

And  Publicola  not  only  acquired,  but  employed  his  riches
honourably,  for  he  was  a  generous  benefactor  to  the  poor  :
so  that  if  Solon  was  the  widest,  Publicola  was  the  happiest

*  That  is  the  other  V^ler'n,  viz.  the  Maximi,  the  Corniini,  the  Potlti,
the  Lceiihii,  and  the  Flacci.

f  It  appears  from  this  passage  that  Plutarch  wrote  this  life  about
the  beginning  of  Trajan's  reign.

\  Cicero  thought  this  wish  of  Solon's  unsuitable  to  so  w^ise  a  man,
and  preferred  to  it  that  of  the  poet  Ennius,  v/ho  pleasing  himself
with  the  thought  of  an  immortality  on  earth  as  a  poet,  desired  to  die
unlamented.  Cicero  rejoiced  in  the  same  prospect  as  an  ora*:or.
The  passion  for  immortality  is, indeed, a  natural  one  ;  but  as  the  chief
part  of  our  happiness  consists  in  the  exercise  of  the  benevolent  af-
fections, in  giving  and  receiving  sincere  testimonies  of  regard,  the
xmdoubted  expressions  of  that  regard  must  soothe  the  pains  of  a
dying  man,  and  comfort  him  with  the  reflection,  that  he  has  not  beea
wanting  in  the  offices  of  humanity.


SOLON    AND    PUBLICOLA    COMPARED.  267

of  huxiian  kind.  What  the  former  had  wished  for  as  the
g^reatest  and  most  desirable  of  blessings,  the  latter  actu-
ally possessed,  and  continued  to  enjoy.

Thus  Solon  did  honour  to  Pul^Iicola,  and  he  to  Solon
Ln  his  turn.  For  he  considered  him  as  the  most  excellent
pattern  that  could  be  proposed,  in  regulating  a  democra-
cy ;  and,  like  him,  laying  aside  the  pride  of  power,  he
rendered  it  gentle  and  acceptable  to  all.  He  also  made
use  of  several  of  Solon's  laws  ;  for  he  empo^¥ered  the  peo-
ple to  elect  their  own  magistrates,  and  left  an  appeal  to
them  from  the  sentence  of  other  courts,  as  the  Athenian
lawgiver  had  done.  He  did  not,  indeed,  with  Solon,  create
a  new  senate,*  but  he  almost  doubled  the  number  of  that
which  he  found  in  being.

His  reason  for  appointing  gmestors  or  treasurers  was,
that  if  the  consul  was  a  worthy  man  he  might  have  leisure
to  attend  to  greater  affairs  ;  if  unworthy,  that  he  might
not  have  greater  opportunities  of  injustice,  when  both  the
government  and  treasury  were  under  his  direction.

Publicola's  aversion  to  tyrants  was  stronger  than  that
of  Solon.  For,  the  latter  made  every  attempt  to  set  up
arbitrary  power  punishable  by  law;  but  the  former  made
it  death  without  the  formality  of  trial.  Solon,  indeed,
justly  and  reasonably  plumes  himself  upon  refusing  abso-
lute power,  when  both  the  state  of  affairs  and  the  inclina-
tions of  the  people  would  have  readily  admitted  it  :  and
yet  it  was  no  less  glorious  for  Fublicola,v»^h en,  finding  the
consular  authority  too  despotic,  he  rendered  it  milder  and
more  popular,  and  did  not  stretch  it  so  far  as  he  might  have
done.  That  this  was  the  best  method  of  governing,  So-
lon seems  to  have  been  sensible  before  him,  when  he  j^ays
of  a  republic.

The  reins  nor  strictly  nor  too  loosely  hclH,
And  safe  the  carof  shppery  power  ycu  guide.

But  the  annulling  of  debts  was  peculiar  to  Solon^and  v/as
indeed  the  most  effectual  way  to  support  the  liberty  of

*  By  IobAj),  we  apprehend  that  Plutarch  here  rather  means  the
senate  or  council  of  Jour  bunJred,  thv.n  the  council  of  Areopagus.
The  Jour  Lxindred  had  the  prior  cognizance  of  all  that  was  to  come
before  the  people,  and  nothing  could  be  proposed  to  the  general  as-
sembly till  digested  by  them  ;  so  that,  as  far  as  he  was  able,  he  pro-
vided against  a  thirst  of  arbitrary  power  in  the  rich,  and  a  desire  cf
licentious  freedom  in  the  ccm.nions  ;  the  Areopagus  being  a  check
upon  th'2  former,  as  the  senate  was  a  curb  upon  the  latter.


268  Plutarch's  lives.

the  people.  For  laws  intended  to  establish  an  equality
would  be  of  no  avail,  while  the  poor  were  deprived  of
the  benefit  of  that  equality  by  their  debts.  Where  they
seemed  most  to  exercise  their  Hberty,  in  offices,  in  de-
bates, and  in  deciding  causes,  there  they  were  most  en*
slaved  to  the  rich,  and  entirely  under  their  controul....
What  is  more  considerable  in  this  case  is,  that,  though
the  cancelling-  of  debts  generally  produces  seditions,  So-
lon seasonably  applied  it,  as  a  strong,  though  hazardous
medicine,  to  remove  the  sedition  then  existing.  The
measure,  too,  lost  its  infamous  and  obnoxious  nature,
when  made  use  of  by  a  man  of  Solon's  probity  and
character.

If  we  consider  the  whole  administration  of  each,  So-
lon's was  more  illustrious  at  first.  He  was  an  original,
and  followed  no  example  ;  besides,  by  himself,  without
a  colleague,  he  effected  many  great  things  for  the  public
advantage.  But  Publicola's  fortune  was  more  to  be  ad-
mired at  last.  For  Solon  lived  to  see  his  own  establish-
ment overturned  ;  whereas  that  of  Publicola  preserved
the  state  in  good  order  to  the  time  of  the  civil  wars.
And  no  wonder ;  since  the  former,  as  soon  as  he  had
enacted  his  laws,  left  them  inscribed  on  tables  of  wood,
without  any  one  to  support  their  authority,  and  departed
from  Athens  ;  whilst  the  latter  remaining  at  Rome,  and
continuing  in  the  magistracy,  thoroughly  established  and
secured  the  commonwealth.

Solon  was  sensible  of  the  ambitious  designs  of  Pisis-
tratus,  and  desirous  to  prevent  their  being  put  in  execu-
tion ;  but  he  miscarried  in  the  attempt,  and  saw  a  ty-
rant ^et  up.  On  the  other  hand,  Publicola  demolished
kingly  power,  when  it  had  been  established  for  some
ages,  and  was  at  a  formidable  height.  He  was  equalled
by  Solon  in  virtue  and  patriotism,  but  he  had  power  and
good  fortune  to  second  his  virtue,  which  the  other
v/anted.

As  to  warlike  exploits,  there  is  a  considerable  differ-
ence ;  for  Daimachus  Plattsensis  does  not  even  attribute
that  enterprize  against  the  Megarensians  to  Solon,  as  we
have  done  ;  whereas  Publicola,  in  many  great  battles,
performed  the  duty  both  of  a  general  and  a  private
-soldier.

Again,  if  we  compare  their  conduct  in  civil  afi*airs,
we  shall  find  that  Solon,  only  acting  a  part,  as  it  were.


yuBLicoLA.  269

and  under  the  form  of  a  maniac,  went  out  lo  speak  con-
cerning the  recovery  of  Salamis.  But  Publicola,  in  the
face  of  the  greatest  danger,  rose  up  against  Tarquin,
detected  the  plot,  prevented  the  escape  of  the  vile  con-
spirators, had  them  punished,  and  not  only  excluded  the
tyrants  from  the  city,  but  cut  up  their  hopes  by  the  roots.
If  he  was  thus  vigorous  in  prosecuting  aifairs  that  re-
quired spirit,  resolution,  and  open  force,  he  was  still
more  successful  in  negociation,  and  the  gentle  arts  of
persuasion  ;  for,  by  his  address,  he  gained  Porsena,  wliose
power  was  so  formidable,  that  he  could  not  be  quelled
by  dint  of  arms,  and  made  him  a  friend  to  Rome.

But  here,  perhaps,  some  will  object,  that  .>olon  reco-
vered Salamis,  when  the  Athenians  had  given  it  up  ;
whereas  Publicola  surrendered  lands  that  the  Romans
were  in  possession  of.  Our  judgment  of  actions,  however,
should  be  formed  according  to  the  respective  times  and
posture  of  affairs.  An  able  politician,  to  manage  all  for
the  best,  varies  his  conduct  as  the  present  occasion  re-
quires ;  often  quits  a  part,  to  save  the  v/hole  ;  and,  by
yielding  in  small  matters,  secures  considerable  advan-
tages. Thus  Publicola,  by  giving  up  what  the  Romans
had  lately  usurj^ed,  saved  all  that  was  really  their  ov/n ;
and,  at  a  time  when  they  found  it  diflncult  to  defend  their
city,  gained  for  them  the  possession  of  the  besieger's
camp.  In  effect,  by  referring  his  cause  to  the  arbitration
of  the  enemy,  he  gained  his  point,  and,  -with  that,  all
the  advantages  he  could  have  proposed  to  himself  by  a
victory.  For  Porsena  put  an  end  to  the  war,  and  left  the
Romans  all  the  provision  he  had  made  for  carrying:  it  on,
induced  by  that  impression  of  their  virtue  and  honour,
which  he  had  received  from  Publicola.


VOL.    r^  Ad


£  270  ]

THEMISTOCLES.

X  HE  family  of  Themistocles  was  too  obscure  to  raise
him  to  distinction.  He  v/as  the  son  of  Neocles,  an  infe-
rior citizen  of  Athens,  of  the  ward  of  Phrear,  and  the
tribe  of  Leontis.  By  his  mother's  side  he  is  said  to  have
been  illegitimate,*  according  to  the  following  verses  :

Though  born  in  Thrace,  Abrotonon  my  name,
My  son  enrolls  me  in  the  lists  of  fame,
The  great  Themistocles.

Yet  Phanias  vv  rites,  that  the  mother  of  Themis-tocles  was
of  Caria,  not  of  Thrace,  and  that  her  name  was  not
Abrotonon  but  Euterpe.  Neanthes  mentions  Halicar-
nassus  as  the  city  to  which  she  belonged.  But  be  that  as
it  ma<y,  when  all  the  illegitimate  youth  assembled  at  Cy-
nosarges,  in  the  wrestling-ring  cledicated  to  Hercules,
without  the  gates  ;  which  was  appointed  for  that  purpose,
because  Hercules  himself  was  not  altogether  of  divine
extraction,  but  had  a  mortal  for  his  mother ;  Themis-
tocles found  means  to  persuade  some  of  the  young  no-
blemen to  go  toCynosarges,  and  take  their  exerdsewith
him.  This  was  an  ingenious  contrivance  to  take  away
the  distinction  between  the  illegitimate  or  aliens,  and  the
legitimate,  v/hose  parents  were  both  Athenians.  I,t  is
plain,  however,  that  he  was  related  to  the  house  of  the
Lyccmedic  ;t  for  Simonides  informs  us,  that  when  a
chapell  of  that  flimily  in  the  ward  of  Phyle,  where  the
mysteries  of  Ceres  used  to  be  celebrated,  was  burnt  down
by  tlie  barbarians,  Themistocles  rebuilt  it^  and  adorjied
it  with  pictures.

It  appears,  that,  when  a  boy,  he  v/as  full  of  spirit  and
hrc,  quick  of  apprehension,  naturally  inclined  to  bold
attempts,  and    likely  to  make  a  great  statesman.     His

*  It  \v?.s  a  law  at  Athens,  that  every  citizen  who  had  a  foreigner,
to  his  mother,  should  be  deemed  a  bastard,  the  ugh  bcrn  in  wedlock,
and  should  consequently  be  incapable  of  inheriting  his  fa,ther*s
estate.

f  The  Lycometbe  v/ere  ?.  family  in  Athens,  who  (accordirg  to
Pausanias)  had  the  care  cf  the  sacrifices  ciVered  to  Ceres;  and  m
that  chevpel  which  Tberei-s  r(;buiit,  initiations  and  other  n-,ysteries
weve  celebrated-


THEMISTOCLES.  27t

lioiivs  of  leisure  and  vacation  he  spent  not,  like  other
boys,  in  idleness  and  play  ;  but  he  was  always  inventing
and  composing  declamations  ;  the  subjects  of  which  were
either  the  impeachment  or  defence  of  some  of  his  school*
fellows  :  So  that  his  master  would  often  say,  '^  Boy,  you
will  be  nothing  common  or  indifferent :  You  will  either
be  a  blessing  or  a  curse  to  the  community."  As  for
moral  philosophy?  and  the  polite  arts,  he  learned  them
but  slowly,  and  with  little  satisfaction ;  but  instructions  in
political  knowledge,  and  the  administration  of  public  af-
fairs, he  received  with  an  attention  above  his  years ;  be-
cause they  suited  his  genius.  When,  therefore,  he  was
laughed  at,  long  after,  in  company  where  free  scope  was
given  to  raillery,  by  persons  who  passed  as  more  accom-
plished in  what  was  called  genteel  breeding,  he  was
obliged  to  answer  them  with  some  asperity :  ^'  'Tistrue
I  never  learned  how  to  tune  a  harp,  or  play  upon  a  lute,
but  I  know  how  to  raise  a  small  and  inconsiderable  oity
to  glory  and  greatness."

Stesimbrotus,  indeed,  informs  us,  that  Themistocle^
studied  natural  philosophy,  both  under  Anaxagoras  and
Melissus.  But  in  this  he  errs  against  chronology.*  For
w^hen  Pericles,  who  was  much  younger  than  Themisto-
cles,  besieged  Samos,  Melissus  defended  it,  and  Anaxa-
goras  lived  with  Pericles.  Those  seem  to  deserve  more
attention  who  say,  that  Themistocles  was  a  follower  of
Mnesiphilus  the  Phrearian  ;  who  was  neither  orator,  nor
Hatural  philosopher,  but  a  professor  of  Vvhat  v/as  then  called
wisdom,!  which  consisted  in  a  knowledge  of  the  arts  of
government,  and  the  practical  part  of  poetical  prudence.
This  was  a  sect  formed  upon  the  principles  of  Solon, :j:  and
descending  in  succession  from  him ;  but  when  the  sci-
ence of  government  came  to  be  mixed  with  forensic  arts,

*  Anaxagoras  was  born  in  the  first  year  of  the  70th  Olympiad  ;
Themistocles  won  the  battle  of  Salamis  the  first  year  of  the  75th
Olympiad  ;  and  Melissus  defended  Sam.os  against  Pericles  the  last
year  of  the  84th  Olympiad.  Themistocles,  therefore,  could  neither
study  under  Anaxagoras,  who  was  only  twenty  years  old  when
tliat  general  gamed  the  battle  of  Salamis,  nor  yet  under  Melissus,
who  did  uot  begin  to  fiourish  till  36  years  after  that  battle.

\  The  first  sages  were  in  reality  great  politicians,  who  gave  rules
and  precepts  for  the  government  of  communities.  Thales  was  the
first  who  can-ied  his  speculations  into  physics.

\  During  tlie  space  of  about  an  hundred  or  an  htmdred  and.
twenty  yeajp.


272  Plutarch's  lives.

and  passed  from  action  to  mere  words,  its  professors,  in-
stead of  sages  v/ere  called  Sophists.*  Tiiemistocles,  how-
ever, was  conversant  in  public  business,  when  he  attended
the  lectures  of  IMnesiphilas.

In  the  first  sallies  of  youth,  he  v/as  irregular  and  un-
steady ;  as  he  followed  his  own  disposition,  without  any
moral  restraints.  He  lived  in  extremes,  and  those  ex-
tremes were  often  of  the  v/orst  kind»t  But  he  seemed  to
apologize  for  this  afterwards,  when  he  observed,  that  the
wildest  colts  make  the  best  horses^  when  they  come  to  be  firo-
pcrly  broke  and  managed.  The  stories,  however,  which
fcome  tell  us,  of  his  father's  disinheriting  Lim,  and  his
mother's  laying  violent  hands  upon  herself,  because  she
could  not  bear  the  thoughts  of  her  son's  infcimy,  seem  to
be  quite  fictitious.  Others,  on  the  contrary,- say,  that
his  father,  to  dissuade  him  from  accepting  any  public  em.-
ployment,  showed  him  some  old  galleys  that  lay  worn
out  and  neglected  on  the  sea-shore,  just  as  the  populace
neglect  their  leaders,  when  they  have  no  farther  service
for  them.

Tiiemistocles  had  an  early  and  violent  inclination  for
public  business,  andAvas  so  strongly  smitten  with  the  love
of  glory,  with  an  ambition  of  the  highest  station,  that  he
involved  himself  in  troublesome  quarrels  with  persons  of
the  first  rank  and  influence  in  the  state,  particularly  vrith
Aristides  the  son  of  I.ysimachus,  Avho  always  opposed
him.  Their  enmity  began  early,  but  the  cause ,  as  Ariston
the  philosopher  relates,  we^  nothing  more  than  their  re-
gard for  Ptesileus  of  Teos.     After  this,  their  disputes  con-

*  The  Sophists  were  rather  rhetoricians  than  philosophers,  skilled
in  words,  but  superficial  in  knowledge,  as  Diogenes  Laeriius  informs
us.  Protagoras,  who  flourished  about  the  84th  01ymj)iad,  a  liule
before  the  birth  of  Plato,  v/as  the  first  who  had  the  appellation  of
Sophist.  But  Socrates,  who  was  more  conversant  in  morality  than
in  politics,  physics,  or  rhetoric,  and  Avho  was  desirous  to  improve
the  woi-ld  rather  in  practise  than  in  theory,  modestly  took  the  name
of  Philoaophos,  i.  e.  a  lover  ofxcisdom,  and  not  that  of  Sopbos,  i.  e.  a
sage  or  ivise  man.

t  Idomeneus  says,  that  one  morning  Themistocles  harnassed  four
naked  courtezans  in  a  chariot,  and  made  them  draw  him  across  the
Ceramicus  in  the  sight  of  all  the  people,  who  were  there  assembled  ;
and  that  at  a  time  when  the  Athenians  were  perfect  strangers  to  de-
bauchery, either  in  wine  or  women.  But  if  that  vice  was  then  so
little  known  in  Athens,  how  could  there  be  found  four  prostitutes,
impudent  enougli  to  be  exposed  in  that  manner  I


TKEMISTOCLES  27o

tinued  about  public  affairs  ;  and  the  dissimilarity  of  their  ■
Jives  and  manners  naturally  added  to  it.  Aristides  was  of
a  mild  temper  and  of  great  probity.  He  managed  the
concerns  of  government  with  inflexible  justice,  not  with
a  view  to  ingratiate  himself  with  the  people,  or  to  promote
his  own  glory,  but  solely  for  the  advantage  and  safety  of
the  state.  He  was,  therefore,  necessarily  obliged  to  op-
pose Themistocles,  and  to  prevent  his  promotion,  because
he  frequently  put  the  people  upon  unwarrantable  enter-
prizes,  and  was  ambitious  of  introducing  great  innova,tions.
Indeed,  Themistocles  was  so  carried  away  with  the  love
of  glory,  so  immoderately  desirous  of  distinguishing  him-
self by  some  great  action,  that,  though  he  was  very  young,
when  the  battle  of  Marathon  was  fought,  and  when  the
generalship  of  Miltiades  was  every  where  extolled,  yet
even  then  he  was  observed  to  keep  much  alone,  to  be  very
pensive,  to  watch  whole  nights,  and  not  to  attend  the  usual
entertainments  :....Whenhe  was  asked  the  reason  by  his
friends,  who  wondered  at  the  change,  he  said,  The  trophies
of  Miltiades  ivouldnot  auffer  him  to  aleep.  While  othea*3
imagined  the  defeat  of  the  Persians  at  Marathon  had  put
an  end  to  the  war,  he  considered  it  as  the  beginning  of
greater  conflicts.,*  and,  for  the  benefit  of  Greece,  lie  was
ahvays  preparing  himself  and  the  Athenians  against  those
conflicts,  because  he  foresaw  them  at  a  distance.!

And,  in  the  first  place,  v/hereas  the  Athenir.ns  had  used
to  share  the  revenue,  of  the  silver  mines  of  I.auriuiTi
among  themselves,  he  alone  had  the  courage  to  make  av
motion  to  the  people,  that  they  should  divide  them  in  that
manner  no  longer,  but  build  with  them  a  number  of  gal-
leys to  be  employed  in  the  war  against  the  -'Eginetx,  who
then  made  a  considerable  figure  in  Greece,  and  by  means
of  their  numerous  navy  were  masters  of  the  sea.  By
seasonably  stirring   up  the  resentment  and  emulation  of

*  He  did  not  question  but  Darius  would  at  length  porccive,  that  the
only  way  to  deal  vvjtli  the  Greeks  was  to  attack  them  vigorously  by
sea,  where  they  could  make  the  least  op])osition.

t  The  two  principal  qualifications  of  a  general  are  a  quick  and
comprehensive  view  of  what  is  to  be  done  upon  any  jjrescnt  emer-
gency, and  a  happy  foresight  of  v/hat  is  to  come  :  Tliemistccles  pos-
ses-icd  both  these  qualifications  in  a  great  degree.  Withresoect  to
the    latter,    Thucydides   gives  him  this    eulogium,  «Ti  rrhitici  7*.

A   -^      O


274  Plutarch's  lives^

his  countrymen  against  these  islanders,*  he  the  more  eas^iiy
prevailed  with  them  to  provide  themselves  with  ships,
than  if  he  had  displayed  the  terrors  of  Darius  and  tlie
Persians,  who  were  at  a  greater  distance,  and  of  M'hose
coming  they  had  no  great  apprehensions.  With  this  money
a  hundred  galleys,  with,  three  banks  of  oars,  were  built,
which  afterwards  fought  against  Xerxes.  From  this  step
he  proceeded  to  others,  in  order  to  draw  the  attention  of
the  Athenians  to  maritime  affairs,  and  to  convince  them>
that,  though  by  land  they  were  not  able  to  cope  with  their
neighbours,  yet  with  a  naval  force  they  might  not  only
repel  the  barbarians,  but  hold  all  Greece  in  subjection.
Thus  of  good  land  forces,  as  Plato  says,  he  made  them
mariners  and  seamen,  and  brought  upon  himself  the  as-
persion, of  taking  from  his  countrymen  the  spear  and  tlie
shield,  and  sending  them  to  the  bench  and  tiie  oar.  Ste-
simbrotus  writes  that  Themistocles  effected  this,  in  spite
of  the  opposition  of  IVliltiades.  Wliether  ])y  this  pro-
ceeding he  corrupted  the  sim.plicity  of  the  Athenian  con-
stitution, is  a  speculation  not  proper  to  be  indulged  here.
But  that  the  Greeks  ov/ed  their  safety  to  these  naval  ap-
plications, and  that  those  ships  re-established  the  city  of
Athens  after  it  ha.d  been  destroyed,  (to  omit  other  proofs)
Xerxes  himself  is  a  sufhcient  witness.  For,  after  his  de-
feat at  sea,  he  was  no  longer  able  to  make  head  against  the
Athenians,  though  his  land  forces  remained  entire  ;  and,
it  seems  to  me,  that  he  left  JMardonius  rather  to  prevent  a
pursuit,  than  witli  any  hope  of  his  bringing  Greece  into
subjection.

Some  authors  write,  that  Themistocles  vras  intent  upon
the  acquicition  of  m.on.ey,  with  a  view  to  spend  it  profuse-
ly ;  arid  indeed,  for  his  frequent  sacrifices,  and  the  splen-
did manner  in  which  he  entertained  strangers,  he  had  need
of  a  large  supply.  Yet  others,  on  the  contrary,  accuse
him  of  meanness  and  attention  to  trifles,  and  say  he  even
sold  presents  that  were  made  him  for  his  table.  Nay,  when

*  Plutarch  in  this  place  follows  Herodotus.  But  Thucydides  is
express,  that  Themistocles  availed  himself  of  both  these  arguments,
the  apprehensions  which  the  Athenians  were  under  of  the  retuwn  of'
the  Persians,  as  well  as  the  war  against  the  yEginetse.  Indeed  he
could  not  neglect  so  powerful  an  inducement  to  strengthen  tliemselves
at  sea,  since,  according  to  Plato,  accounts  were  daily  brought  of  the
formidable  preparations  of  Darius  ;  and,  upon  his  death,  it  appeared^
that  XerAes  inherited  all  his  fatlier's  rancour  against  th-i  Greeks.


THEMISTOCLES.  2T5

Jie  begged  a  coltof  Philides,  who  was  a  breeder  of  horses,
and  was  refused,  he  threatened,  he  tjouIcI  soon  make  a
Trojan  home  of  his  house^  enigmatically  hinting,  that  he
would  raise  up  troubles  and  impeachments  against  him
from  some  of  his  own  family.

.  In  ambition 5 however,  he  had  no  equal.  For  when  he
was  yet  young,  and  but  httle  known,  he  prevailed  upon
Epicles  of  Ilermione,  a  performer  upon  the  lyre,  much
valued  by  tlie  Atheoians^  to  practise  at  his  house  ;  hoping
by  this  means  to  draw  a  great  number  of  people  thither-
And  when  he  went  to  the  Olympic  games,  he  endeavoured
to  equal  or  exceed  Cimon,  in  the  elegance  of  his  table,
the  splendor  cf  his  pavilions,  and  other  expences  of  his
train.  These  things,  however,  were  not  agreeable  to  the
Greeki.  They  looked  upon  them  as  suitable  to  a  young
man  of  a  noble  family  ;  but  when  an  obscure  person  set
himself  up  so  much  above  his  fortune,  he  gained  nothing
by  it  but  the  imputation  of  vanity.  He  exhibited  a  trage-
dy,* too,  at  his  own  expence,  and  gained  the  prize  with
his  traQ:edians,  at  a  time  v/hen  those  entertainments  v/ere
pursued  with  great  avidity,  and  emulation.  In  memory  of
his  success,  he  put  up  this  inscription,  Thcmistocles  the
Fhrcarian  exhibited  the  tragedy-)  Phrynichus  composed  2V,t
Adimantus  iiresided.  This  gained  him  popularity  ;  and
what  added  to  it,  v/as,  his  charging  his  memory  with  the
names  of  the  citizens  ;  so  that  he  readily  called  each  by
his  own.  He  was  an  impartial  judge,  too,  in  the  causes  that,
were  brought  before  him  ;  and  Simonides  of  Ceos,:!:  mak-

*  Tragedy  at  this  time  was  just  arrived  at  perfection  ;  and  so  great
a  taste  had  the  Athenians  lor  this  kind  of  entertainment,  th&t  the
principal  |;ersons  in  the  commonwealtii  couid  not  oblige  then  more
than  by  exiubiting  the  best  tragedy  with  the  most  elegant  decora-
tions. Public  prizes  were  appointed  for  those  that  excelled  in  this
respect ;  and  it  was  matter  of  great  emulation  to  gain  them.

\  Phrynichus  was  the  disciple  of  Thespis,  who  was  esteemed  the
inventor  cf  tragedy.  He  was  the  first  that  brought  fem.ale  actors
Aipon  the  stage.  His  chief  plays  were  Actzeon,  Alcestis,  and  the
Daniades,     iEsch)  lus  was  his  cotemporary.

I  Snnonitles  celebrated  the  battles  cf  Marathon  and  Salamis  inhis
poems  ;  and  was  the  author  of  several  odes  and  elegies  ;  some  of
which  are  still  extant  and  well  known.  He  was  much  in  the  favour
of  Pausanias  king  of  Sparta,  and  of  Hiero  khig  of  Sicily.  Plato
had  so  liigh  an  opinion  of  his  merit,  that  he  gave  him  the  epithet  of
divine.  He  died  in  the  first  year  of  the  78th  Olympiad,  at  almost
ninety  years  cf  age  ;  so  that  he  v/as  very  near  fourscore  when  h-c
described'tjjrbattle  of  Salami*.


276  PLUTARCH'S    LlVESr^

ing  an  unreasonable  request  to  him  when  archon^*  he  an-
swered, JVtither  wouldyou  be  a  goodfioet^  if  you  transgres-
sed the  rules  of  harmony  j  nor  I  a  good  magistrate^  if  I
granted  your  petition  contrary  to  law.  Another  time  he
rallied  Simonides  for  his  absurdity  in  abusing  the  Corin-
thians^  ivlio  inhabited  so  elegant  a  city  ;  and  having  his  oivn.
picture  drawn^  'when  he  had  so  ill-favoured  an  aspects

At  length,  having  attained  to  a.  great  height  of  power,
and  popularity,  his  faction  prevailed,  and  he  procured  the
banishment  of  Aristides  by  what  is  called  the  Ostracism. \

The  Medesnow  preparing  to  invade  Greece  again, tha
Athenians  considered  who  should  be  their  general ;  and
many  (we  are  told)  thinlving  the  commission  dangerous,
declined  it.  But  Epicydes,  the  son  of  Euphemides,  a  man
of  more  eloquence  than  courage,  and  ca.pable  v/ithal  of  be-
ing bribed,  solicited  it,  and  was  likely  to  be  chosen.  The-
mistocJes,  fearing  the  consequence  would  be  fatal  to  the
public,  if  the  choice  fell,  upon  Epicydes,  prevailed  upon
him. by  pecuniary  considerations  to  drop  his  pretensions.

His  behaviour  is  also  commended  with  respect  to  the
interpreter  who  came  with  the  king  of  Persia's  ambassa-
dors that  were  sent  to  demand  earth  and  water.i  By  a
decree  of  the  people,  he  put  him  to  death,  for  presuming
to  make  use  of  the  Greek  language  to  express  the  de-

*  The  foiTner  ti-anslator  renders  xvrH  g^oirviy8VT6S,  vjhen  he  v:as-
com?nander  of  the  army,  which  is  indeed  the  sense  of  it  a  little  below,
but  not  here.  Pkitarch  xises  the  word  sgccTfTfCs  ioxprxtor,  which  :s
almost  synonymsus  to  archon.  And  in  this  passage  he  so  explains
it  himself,  Nor  shoidd  I  be  a  good  archoii,  &,c.

t  It  is  not  ceriain  by  whom  the  Ostracism  was  introduced  ;  some
say,  byPisistratus,  or  ratherby  his  sons  ;  others,  by  Clisthenes  ;  and
otiiers  make  it  as  ancient  as  the  time  of  Theseus.  By  this  men,  whp
became  powerful  to  such  a  degree,  as  to  threaten  the  state  with  dan-
ger, were  br.nished  for  ten  years  :  and  they  were  to  quit  the  Athe-
i%ian  territories  in  ten  days.  The  method  of  it  was  this  ;  every  citi-
zen took  a  piece  of  a  broken  pot  or  shell,  on  which  he  wrote  the
name  of  the  person  he  would  have  banished.  This  done,  the  ma-r
gistrates  coun  :ed  the  shells  ;  and,  if  they  amoimted  to  6000,  sorted
them  :  and  the  man  whose  name  was  found  on  the  greatest  number
of  shells,  was  of  course  exiled  for  ten  years.

I  This  was  a  demand  of  submission.  But  Herodotus  assures  us,
that  Xerxes  did  not  send  such  an  embassy  to  the  Athenians:  the.
ambassadors  of  his  father  Darius  were  trea-ed  with  great  indignity
when  they  made  that  demand  ;  for  the  Atheniajis  threw  them  into
»  ditch,  and  told  them.  There  ">.vas  earth  and  'water  enough.


THEMISTOCLES.  277

manO.s  of  the  barbarians.  To  this  wc  may  add  his  pro-
ceedings in  the  affair  of  Arthmiiis  the  Zelite  ;*  who,  at  his
motion,  was  declared  infamous,  with  his  children  and  all
his  posterity,  for  bringing  Persian  gold  into  Greece.  But
that  which  redounded  most  of  all  to  his  honour,  was,  his
putting  an  end  to  the  Grecian  wars,  reconciling  the  several
states  to  each  other,  and  persuading  them  to  hiy  aside  tlieir
animosities  during  the  war  with  Persia.  In  this  he  is
said  to  have  been  much  assisted  by  Chileus  the  Arcadian.

As  scon  as  he  had  taken  the  command  upon  him,  he
endeavoured  to  persuade  the  people  to  quit  the  city,  to
embark  on  board  their  ships,  and  to  meet  the  barbarians
at  as  great  a  distance  from  Greece  as  possible.  But,  many
opposing  it,  he  marched  at  the  head  of  a  great  army,  to-
gether with  the  Lacedemonians,  to  Tempe^  intending  to
cover  Thessaly,  which  had  not  as  yet  declared  for  the
Persians.  Vv  hen  he  returned  without  effecting  any  thing,
the  Thessalians  haying  embraced  the  king's  party,  and  all
the  country,  as  far  as  Bosotia,  following  their  example,  the
Atheiiiaiis  w^ere  more  v/illing  to  hearken  to  his  proposal  to
fight  the  enemy  at  sea,  and  sent  him  with  a  fleet  to  guard
the  straits  of  Artcmisium.f

AV'hen  the  fleets  of  the  several  states  were  joined,  and
the  majority  were  of  opinion,  that  Eurybiades  should  have
the  chief  command,  and  with  his  Lacedxmonians  begin
the  engagem.ent ;  the  Athenians,  who  had  a  greater  num-
ber ot  ships  than  all  the  rest  united,:}:  thought  it  an  indig-
nity to  part  with  the  place  of  honour.  But  Themistocles
perceiving  the  danger  of  any  disagreement  at  that  time,
gave  up  the  command  to  Eurybiades,  and  satisfied  the
Athtniahs,  by  representing  to  them,  that,  if  they  behaved

*  Arthmius  was  of  Zele,  a  town  in  Asia  Jlinor,  but  settled  at
Athens.  He  was  not  only  declared  infamous  for  bringing  in  Persian
gokl, and  endeavouring  to  corrupt  with  it  some  of  the  prhicipal  Athe-
nians, but  banished  by  sound  of  trumpet.  ViJe  ^schin.  Orat.  cent.
C'tesipbon.

t  At  the  same  time  that  the  Greeks  thought  of  defending  the  pass
of  Thermopylae  by  land,  they  sent  a  fleet  to  hinder  the  passage  of
tlie  Persian  navy  tlirough  the  straits  ofEuboea,  which  fleet  rendez-
voused at  Anemisium.

:j.  Herodotus  tells  us  in  the  beginning  of  his  eighth  book,  that  the
Athenians  furnished  127  vessels,  and  that  the  whole  complement  of
the  rest  of  the  Greeks  amounted  to  no  more  than  151;  of  which
twenty  belonged  likewise  to  the  Athenians,  Vv'ho  had  lent  them  to
the  Ciialcidians.


278  rLUTARCPl's    livbs*

like  m«ii  in  that  war,  the  Grecians  would  voluntarily  yield
them  the  superiorit'/  for  the  future.  To  him,  therefore,
Greece  seems  to  owe  her  preservation,  and  the  Atheni-
ans in  particular  the  distinguished  glory  of  surpassing
their  enemies  in  valour,  and  their  allies  in  moderation.

The  Persian  fleet  coming  up  to  Aphetse,  Eurybiades
was  astonished  at  such  an  appearance  of  ships,  particular-
ly when  he  was  informed  that  there  were  two  hundred
more  sailing  round  Sciathus.  He,  therefore,  was  desir-
ous, without  loss  of  time,  to  draw  nearer  to  Greece,  and  to
keep  close  to  the  Peloponnesian  coast,  where  he  might
have  an  army  occasionally  to  assist  the  fleet;  for  he  con-
sidered the  naval  force  of  the  Persians  as  invincible.  Upon
this,  the  Eubceans,  apprehensive  that  the  Greeks  would
forsake  them,  sent  Pelagon  to  negociate  privately  with
Themistocles,  and  to  offer  him  a  large  sum  of  money.
He  took  the  money,  and  gave  it  (as  Herodotus  writes)  to
Eurybiades.*  Finding  himself  most  opposed  in  his  designs
by  Architeles,  captain  of  the  sacred  galley  f  who  had  not
money  to  pay  his  men,  and  therefore  intended  immediate-
ly to  withdraw  ;  he  so  incensed  his  countrymen  against
him,  that  they  went  in  a  tumultuous  manner  on  board
his  ship,  and  took  from  him  what  he  had  provided  for  his
supper.  Architeles  being  much  provoked  at  this  insult,
Themistocles  sent  him  in  a  chest  a  quantity  of  provisions,
and  at  the  bottom  of  it  a  talent  of  silver,  and  desired  him
to  refresh  himself  that  evening,  and  to  satisfy  his  crev/  in
the  morning  ;  otherwise,  he  would  accuse  him  to  the
Athenians  of  having  received  a  bribe  from  the  enemy.
This  particular  is  mentioned  by  Phpjiias  the  Lesbian.

*  According  to  Herodotus,  the  affair  was  thus  :  The  Eubceans,
not  being  able  to  prevail  with  Eurybiades  to  remain  on  their  coast,
till  they  could  carry  off  their  wives  and  children,  addressed  them-
selves to  Themistocles,  and  made  him  a  present  of  thirty  talents.
He  took  the  money  ;  and  with  five  talents  bribed  Eurybiades.  Then
Adiamanthus  the  Corinthian,  being  the  only  commander  who  in-
sisted on  weighing  anchor  ;  Themistocles  went  on  board  him,  and
told  him  in  few  words  :  "  Adiamanthus,  you  shall  not  abandon  us,
for  1  will  give  you  a  greater  present  for  doing  your  duty  than  the
king  of  the  Medes  would  send  you  for  deserting  the  allies."  Which
he  performed  by  sending  him  three  talents  on  board.  Thus  he  did
what  the  Eubceans  requested,  and  saved  twenty-two  talents  for
himself.

f  The  sacred  galley  was  that  which  the  Athenians  sent  every  year
to  Delos,  with  sacrifices  for  Apollo ;  and  they  pretend  it  was  the
same,  in  which  Theseus  carried  x\\i  tribute  to  Crete.


THEMISTOCLES.  279

Though  the  several  engagements  *  with  the  Persian
fleet  in  the  straits  of  Euboeawere  not  decisive  ;  yet  they
were  of  great  advantage  to  the  Greeks,  who  learned  by
experience,  that  neither  the  number  of  ships,  nor  the
beauty  and  splendour  of  their  ornaments,  nor  the  vaunting
shouts  and  songs  of  the  barbarians,  have  any  thing  dread-
ful in  them  to  men  that  know  how  to  fight  hand  to  hand,
and  are  determined  to  behave  gallantly.  These  things
they  were  taught  to  despise,  when  they  came  to  close
action  and  grappled  with  the  foe.  In  this  case  Pindar's
sentiments  appear  just,  when  he  says  of  the  fight  at  Arte-
misium,

'Twas  then  that  Athens  the  foundations  laid
Of  Liberty's  fair  structure.

Indeed,  intrepid  courage  is  the  commencement  of  vic-
tory.

Artemisium  is  a  maritime  place  of  Eubcea,  to  the  north
of  Hestixa.  Over  against  it  hes  Olizon,  in  the  territory
that  formerly  was  subject  to  Philocletes  ;  where  there  is
a  small  temple  of  Diana  of  the  East^  in  the  midst  of  a
grove.  The  temple  is  encircled  with  pillars  of  white
stone,  which,  when  rubbed  with  the  hand,  has  both  the
colour  and  smell  of  saffron.  On  one  of  the  pillars  are  in-
scribed the  following  verses  :

When  en  these  seas  the  sons  of  Athens  conquer'd
The  various  powers  of  Asia  ;  grateful  here
They  rear'd  this  temple  to  Diana.

There  is  a  place  still  to  be  seen  upon  this  shore,  where
there  is  a  large  heap  of  sand,  which,  if  dug  into,  shows  to-
wards the  bottom  a  black  dust  like  ashes,  as  if  some  fire
had  been  there  ;  and  this  is  supposed  to  have  been  that  in
which  the  wrecks  of  the  ships  and  the  bodies  of  the  dead
were  burnt.

The  news  of  what  had  happened  at  Thermopyla  being
brought  to  Artemisium,!  when  the  confederates  were  in-

*  They  came  to  three  several  engagements  within  three  days  ;
in  the  last  of  which,  Clineas,  the  father  of  Akibiades,  performed
wanders.  He  had,  at  his  own  e::peiice,  fitted  out  a  ship  which
carried  two  hundred  mer;.

•  t  I'he  last  engagement  at   Thermopylae,  wherein  Xerxes  forced
the  passes  of  the  mouiita,ins,  by  the  defeat  of  the  Lacedaemonians,

.  ff


280  Plutarch's  lives.

formed  that  Leonidas  was  slain  there,  and  Xerxes  mas"
ter  of  the  passages  by  land,  they  sailed  back  to  Greece  '
and  the  Athenians  elated  with  their  late  distinguished  va-
lour, brought  up  the  rear.  As  Themistocles  sailed  along
the  coasts,  wherever  he  saw  any  harbours  or  places  pro-
per for  the  enemy's  ships  to  put  in  at,  he  took  such  stones
as  he  happened  to  find,  or  caused  to  be  brought  thither
for  that  purpose,  and  set  them  up  in  the  ports  and  wa-
tering-places, with  the  following  inscription  engraved  in
large  characters,  and  addressed  to  the  lonians.  "  Let
the  lonians,  if  it  be  possible,  come  over  to  the  Greeks,
from  whom  they  are  descended,  and  who  now  risk  their
lives  for  their  liberty.  If  this  be  impracticable,  let  them
at  least  perplex  the  barbarians,  and  put  them  in  disorder
in  time  of  action."  By  this  he  hoped  either  to  bring  the
lonians  over  to  his  side,  or  to  sow  discord  among  them,
by  causing  them  to  be  suspected  by  the  Persians.

Though  Xerxes  had  passed  through  Doris  down  to
Phocis,  and  was  burning  and  destroying  the  Phocion  ci-
ties, yet  the  Greeks  sent  them  no  succours.  And,  not-
withstanding all  the  intreaties  the  Athenians  could  use
to  prevail  with  the  confederates,  to  repair  with  them  into
Bceotia,  and  cover  the  frontiers  of  Attica,  as  they  had  sent
a  fleet  to  Artemisium  to  serve  the  common  cause,  no  one
gave  ear  to  their  request.  All  eyes  were  turned  upon
Peloponnesus,  and  all  were  determined  to  collect  their
forces  within  the  Isthmus^  and  to  build  a  wall  across  it
from  sea  to  sea.  The  Athenians  were  greatly  incensed  to
see  themselves  thus  betrayed,  and,  at  the  same  time,  de-
jected and  discouraged  at  so  general  a  defection.  They
alone  could  not  think  of  giving  battle  to  so  prodigious  an
army.  To  quit  the  city,  and  embark  on  board  their  ships,
was  the  only  expedient  at  present ;  and  this  the  generality
were  very  unwilling  to  hearken  to,  as  they  could  neither
have  any  great  ambition  for  victory,  nor  idea  of  safety,

Thespians  andThebans,  wko  had  been  left  to  guard  them,  happen-
ed on  the  same  day  with  the  battle  at  Artemisium  ;  and  the  news  of
it  was  brought  to  Themistocles  by  an  Athenian  called  Abronichus.
Though  the  action  at  Thermopylae  had  not  an  immediate  relation
to  Themistocles,  yet  it  would  have  tended  more  to  the  glory  of  that"
general,  if  Plutarch  had  J:aken  greater  notice  of  it ;  since  the  ad-
.vantagc  gained  there  by  Xerxes,  opened  Greece  to  him,  and  render-.
ed  him  much  more  formidable.  Thermopylae  is  well  known  to  be  a
tiarrow  pass  in  the  mountains  near  the  Euripus,


THEMISTOCLE^.  281

-when  tliey  had  left  the  temples  of  their  gods  and  the  mo-
numents of  theh'  ancestors.

Themistocles,  perceiving  that  he  could  net  by  the  force
of  human  reason  prevail  with  the  multitude,*  set  his
machinery  to  work..,  as  a  poet  would  do  in  a  tragedy,  and
had  recourse  to  prodigies  and  oracles.  The  prodigy  he
availed  himself  of,  was,  the  disappearing  of  the  dragon  of
Minerva,  which  at  that  time  quitted  the  holy  place  ;  and
the  priests  finding  the  daily  offerings  set  before  it  nn-
touched,  gave  it  out  among  the  people,  at  the  suggestion
of  Themistocles,  that  the  goddess  had  forsaken  the  city,
and  tliat  she  offered  to  conduct  them  to  sea.  Moreover,
by  way  of  explaining  to  the  people  an  oracle  then  re-
ceived,! he  told  them,  that,  by  wooden  walls,  there  could
not  possibly  be  any  tiling  meant  but  ships  ;  and  that
Apollo,  now  calling  Salamis  divhie^  not  wretched  and  un-
fortunate^ as  formerly,  signified  by  such  an  epithet,  that  it
would  be  productive  of  some  great  advantage  to  Greece.
His  councils  prevailed,  and  he  proposed  a  decree,  that  the
city,  should  be  left  to  the  protection  of  Minerva, :j:  the
tutelary  goddess  of  the  Athenians;  that  the  young  men
should  go  on  board  the  ships  ;  and  that  every  one  should

*  He  prevailed  so  effectually  at  last,  that  the  Athenians  stoned
Cyrsilus,  an  orator,  who  vehemently  opposed  him,  and  urged  all  the
common  topics  of  love  to  the  place  of  one's  birth,  and  the  alTection
to  wives  and  helpless  infants.  The  women  too,  to  show  how  far
they  were  from  desiring  that  the  cause  of  Greece  should  suiter  for
them,  stoned  his  wife.

f  This  was  the  second  oracle,  which  the  Athenian  deputies  re-
ceived from  Aristonice  pries' ess  of  Apollo  Many  were  of  opinion,
that,  by  the  walls  of  wood  which  she  advised  rhem  to  have  recou.*se
to,  was  meant  the  citadel,  because  it  was  palisaded ;  but  others
thought  it  could  intend  nothing  but  ships.  The  mainlainers  of  th2
former  opinion  urged  against  such  as  supported  the  latter,  that  the
last  line  but  one  of  the  oracle,  £l  '^avi  'ILaXxf^iq,  ockcXu^-  gz  cy
iix-vx  yvvetiKuv,  was  directly  against  him,  and  that,  without  ques-
tion, it  portended  the  destruction  of  the  Athenian  fleet  near  Sala-
mis. Themistocles  alleged  in  answer,  that  if  the  oracle  had  intend-
ed to  foi-etel  the  destruction  of  the  Athenians,  it  would  not  have
called  it  the  divine  Salamis,  but  the  unhappy  ;  and  that  w-hereas  the
unfortunate  in  the  oracle  were  styled  the  sons  of  w^omen,  it  could
mean  no  other  than  the  Persiansr,  who  were  scandalously  elfemi-
nate.         Heropot.  I.  vii.  c  143,  144.

1  But  how  was  this,  when  he  had  before  told  the  people  tliat
Minerva  had  forsaken  the  city  !

VOL.    I.  fib


282  Plutarch's  lives.

provide  as  well  as  he  possibly  could  for  the  safety  of  the
children,  the  women,  and  the  slaves.

When  this  decree  was  made,  most  of  the  Athenians  re-
moved their  parents  and  wives  to  Trcszene,*  where  they
were  received  with  a  generous  hospitality.  The  Tros-
zenians  came  to  a  resolution  to  maintain  them  at  the  pub-
lic expence,  for  which  purpose  they  allowed  each  of  them
two  oboli  a  day ;  they  permitted  the  children  to  gather
fruit  wherever  they  pleased,  and  provided  for  their  edu-
cation by  paying  their  tutors.  This  order  was  procured
by  Nicagoras.

As  the  treasury  of  Athens  wa?  then  but  low,  Aristotle
mforms  us  that  the  cowvtoi  A'reopagus  distributed  to  every
man  who  took  part  in  the  expedition  eight  drachmas ;
which  was  the  principal  means  of  manning  the  fleet....
But  Clidemus  ascribes  this  also  to  a  stratagem  of  The-
mistocles  ;  for  he  tells  us,  that,v/hen  the  Athenians  went
down  to  the  harbour  ^f  Piraeus,  the  Aegis  was  lost  from
the  statue  of  Minerva  ;  and  Themistocles,  as  he  ransacked
every  thing,  under  pretence  of  searching  for  it,  foimd
large  sums  of  money  hid  among  the  baggage,  which  he
applied  to  the  public  use  ;  and  out  of  it  all  necessaries
were  provided  for  the  fleet.

The  embarkation  of  the  people  of  Athens  was  a  very
affecting  scene.  What  pity  !  what  admiration  of  the
firmness  of  those  men,  who,  sending  their  parents  and
families  to  a  distant  place,  unmoved  with  their  cries,  their
tears,  or  embraces,  had^the  fortitude  to  leave  the  city,
and  embark  for  Salamisi  '^Vhat  greatly  heightened  the
distress,  was  the  number  of  citizens  whom  they  weie
foi^t:ed  to  leave  behind,  because  of  their  extreme  oldage.t
And  some  emotions  of  tenderness  v/ere  due  even  to  the
tame  domestic  animals,  which,  running  to  the  shore,  with
lamentable  bowlings,  expressed  their  affection  and  regret
for  the  persons  that  had  fed  them.  One  of  these,  a  dog
that  belonged  to  Xanthippus,  the  father  of  Pericles,  un-
willing to  be  left  behind,  is  said  to  have  leapt  into  the
sea,  and  to  have  sv/am  by  the  side  of  the  ship,  till  it
reached  Salamis,  where,  quite  spent  v/ith  toil,  it  died  im-

*  Theseus,  the  great  hero  in  Athenian  story,  was  originally  of
Tro?zeue.

f  In  this  desc:  ipticn  Vr'C  find  strong  traces  of  Plutarch's  humani  ty
scd  good-jiature.


THEMISTOCLES.  283

mediately.     And  they  shew  us  to  this  day,  a  place  called
Cynos  Sema^  where  they  tell  us  that  dog  was  buried.

To  these  great  actions  of  Themistocles  may  be  added
the  following.  He  perceived  that  Aristides  was  much
regretted  by  the  people,  who  were  apprehensive,  that
out  of  revenge,  he  might  join  tlie  Persians,  and  do  great
prejudice  to  the  cause  of  Greece;  he,  therefore,  caused
a  decree  to  be  made,  that  all  who  had  been  banished  only
for  a  time,  should  have  leave  to  return,  and  by  their  coun-
sel and  valour  assist  their  fellow-citizens  in  the  preser-
vation of  their  country.

Eurybiades,  by  reason  of  the  dignity  of  Sparta,  had
the  command  of  the  fleet ;  but,  as  he  was  apprehensive  of
the  danger,*  he  proposed  to  set  sail  for  the  Isthmus^  and
fix  his  station  near  the  Peloponnesian  army.  Themisto-
cles, however,  opposed  it ;  and  the  account  we  have  of
the  conference  on  that  occasion  deserves  to  be  mentioned.
When  Eurybiades  said,t  "  Do  not  you  know,  Themisto-
cles, that,  in  the  public  games,  such  as  rise  up  before
their  turn,  are  chastised  for  it?""  Yes,"  answered  The-
mistocles ;  "  yet  such  as  are  left  behind  never  gain  the
crown."  Eurybiades,  upon  this,  lifting  up  his  staff,  as  if
he  intended  to  strike  him,  Themistocles  said,  "  Strike,
if  you  please,  but  hear  me:"  The  LavCedsemonians  ad-^
miring  his  command  of  temper,  bade  him  speak  what  he
had  to  say :  and  Themistocles  was  leading  him  back  to
the  subject,  when  one  of  the  officers  thus  interrupted  him,
*'  It  ill  becomes  you  who  have  no  city,  to  advise  us  to
quit  our  habitations-  and  abandon  our  country."  The-
mistocles retorted  upon  liim  thus  ;  "  Wretch,  that  thou
art,  we  have  indeed  left  our  walls  and  hwises,  not  choo-
sing, for  the  sake  of  those  inanimate  things,  to  become
slaves;  yet  we  have  still  the  most  respectable  city  of
Greece,  in  these  two  hundred  ships,  which  are  here  ready

*  It  does  not  appear  that  Eurybiades  wanted  courage.  After
Xerxes  had  gained  the  pass  of-Thermopy]?e,  it  was  the  general  opi-
nion of  the  chief  officers  of  the  confederate  fleet  assembled  in  coun-
cil, (except  those  of  Athens)  that  their  only  resource  was  to  build
a  strong  wall  across  the  Isthmus,  and  to  defend  Peloponnesus
against  the  Persians.  Besides,  the  Lacedaemonians,  who  were  im-
partial judges  of  men  and  things,  gave  the  palm  of  valour  to  Eury-
biades, and  that  of  prudence  to  Themistocles.

f  Herodotus  says,  this  conversation  passed  between  Adiaman-
thus,  general  of  the  Corinthians,  and  Themistocles  ;  but  Plutarch
relates  it  witlvmore  probability  of  Eurybiades,  who  was  commander
in  chief.


284f  PlUTAReH"*S    LIVES.

to  defend  you,  if  you  will  give  them  leave.  But'  if  you
foi'sake  and  betray  us  a  second  time,  Greece  shall  soon
find  the  Athenians  possessed  of  as  free  a  city,*  and  as
valuable  a  country  as  that  which  they  have  quitted."
These  v/ords  struck  Eurybiades  with  the  apprehension
that  the  Athenians  might  fall  off  from  him.  We  are
told  also,  that,  as  a  certain  Eretrian  was  attempting  to
speak,  Themistocles  said,  *'  What  !  have  you,  too,  some-
thing to  say  about  v/ar,  who  are  like  the  fish  that  has  a
sword,  but  no  heart,"

While  Themistocles  v/as  thus  maintaining  his  argu-
ment upon  deck,  some  tell  us  an  owl  was  seen  flying  to
the  right  of  the  fleet,!  which  came  and  perched  upon  the
shrouds.  This  omen  determined  the  confederates  to  ac-
cede to  his  opinion,  and  to  prepare  for  a  sea-fight.  But
no  sooner  did  the  enemy's  fleet  appear  advancing  towards
tlie  harbour  of  Phalerus  in  Attica,  and  covering  all  the
neighbouring  coasts,  while  Xerxes  himself  was  seen
marching  his  land  forces  to  the  shore,  than  the  Greeks,
struck  with  the  sight  of  such  prodigious  armaments,  be-
gan to  forget  the  counsel  of  Themistocles,  and  the  Pelo-
ponnesians  once  more  looked  towards  the  Isthmus,  Nay
they  resolved  to  set  sail  that  very  night,  and  such  orders
were  given  to  all  the  pilots.  Themistocles  greatly  con-
cerned that  the  Greeks  were  going  to  give  up  the  advan-
tage of  their  station  in  the  straits,:}:  and  to  retire  to  their
respective  countries,  contrived  that  stratagem  which  was
put  in  execution  by  Sicinus.  This  Sicinus  was  of  Persian
extraction,!!  and  a  captive,  but  much   attached  to  The-

*  The  address  of  Themistocles  is  very  much  to  be  admired.  If
Eurybiades  was  really  induced  by  his  leai-s  to  return  to  the  Isthmus,
the  Athenians  took  a  right  metliod  to  remove  those  fears  by  sug-
gesting greater  ;  for  what  other  free  country  could  he  intimate  that
the  people  of  Athens  would  acquire,  but  that  when  driven  from  their
own  city,  in  their  distress  and  despair,  they  might  seize  the  state
of  Sparta  ]

t  The  owl  was  sacred  to  Minerva  the  protectress  of  the  Athe-
nians.

:j:  If  the  confederates  had  quiijted  the  straits  of  Salamis,  where
they  could  equal  the  Persians  in  the  line  of  battle,  such  of  the  Athe-
nians as  were  in  that  island  must  have  become  an  easy  prey  to  the
enemy  ;  and  the  Persians  would  have  found  an  open  sea  on  the  Pe-
loponnesian  coast,  where  they  could  act  with  all  their  force  against
the  ships  of  the  allies.

I!  Probably  it  was  from  an  erroneous  reading  of  a  passage  in  He-
rodotu:i,  viz,  liif-cTiii  HT  to  ^fxrcnz^^v ,  nav  ^n^eav  ixt^^X),  TrXcmt)


THEMISTOCLES.  285"

mistocles,  and  the  tutor  of  his  children.  On  this  occa-
sion Themistocles  sent  him  privately  to  the  king  of  Per-
sia, with  orders  to  tell  him,  that  the  commander  of  the
Athenians,  having  espoused  his  interest,  was  the  first  to
inform  him  of  the  intended  flight  of  the  Greeks  ;  and
that  he  exhorted  him  not  to  suffer  them  to  escape ;  but
while  they  were  in  this  confusion,  and  at  a  distance  from
their  land  forces,  to  attack  and  destroy  their  whole  navy.
Xerxes  took  this  information  kindly,  supposing  it  to
proceed  from  friendship,  and  immediately  gave  orders  to
his  officers,  with  two  hundi'ed  ships,  to  surround  all  the
passages,  and  to  inclose  the  islands,  that  none  of  the
Greeks  might  escape,  and  then  to  folio v/  with  the  rest  of
the  ships  at  their  leisure.  Aristides,  the  son  of  Lysima-
chus,  was  the  first  that  perceived  this  motion  of  the  ene-
my ;  and  though  he  was  not  in  friendship  with  Themis-
tocles, but  had  been  banished  by  his  means,  (as  has  been
refated)  he  went  to  him,  and  told  him  they  were  surroun-
ded by  the  enemy.*  Themistocles  knov/ing  his  probity,
and  charmed  with  his  coming  to  give  this  intelligence,  ac-
quainted him  with  the  affair  of  Sicinus,  and  intreated  him
to  lend  his  assistance  to  keep  the  Greeks  in  their  station  ;
and,  as  they  had  a  confidence  in  his  honour,  to  persuade
them  to  come  to  an  engagement  in  the  straits.  Aristides
approved  tiie  proceedings  of  Theuiistocles,  and  going  to
the  other  admirals  and  captains,  encouraged  them  to  en-
gage. While  they  hardly  gave  credit  to  his  report,  a
.Tenian  galley,  commanded  by  Parstius,  came  over  from
the  enamy  to  bring  the  same  account;  so  that. indigna-
tion, added  tO'  necessity,  excited  the  Greeks  to  their
combat,  f

instead  of  ro  Mri^iov,  that  Plutarch  Calls  Sicintis  a  Persian.  Mi'
chylus,  however,  who  was  in  this  action,  speaking  of  Sicinus,  says,
A  certain  Greek  from  the  army  of  tfje  Athenians  told  Xerxes,  SjJ'c.

*  Aristides  was  not  then  in  the  confederate  fieet,  but  in  the  isle  of
iEgina,  from  whence  he  sailed  by  night,  with  great  hazard  through
the  Persian  fleet,  to  carry  this  intelligence.

f  The  different  conduct  of  the  Spartans  and  the  Athenians  on  this
occasion  seems  to  show  how  much  superior  the  accommodating  laws
of  Solon  were  to  the  austere  discipline  of  Lycurgus.  Indeed,  while
the  institutions  of  the  latter  remain«d  in  force,  the  Laceda^monians-
were  the  greatest  of  all  people.. ..But  that  was  impossible.  The
severity  of  Lycurgus's  legislation  naturally  tended  to  destroy  it.....
Kor  was  thi*  all...,, From  the  extremes  of  abstemious  hardchips,  tU

B  b  2-


286  Plutarch's  lives..

As  soon  as  it  was  clay,  Xei'xes  sat  dov/ii  on  £tn  erai-
nence  to  view  the  fleet  and  its  order  of  battle.  He  placed
himself,  as  Phanodenius  writes,  above  the  temple  of  Her-
cules, where  the  isle  of  Saiamis  is  separated  from  Attica
by  a  narrow  frith  ;  but,  according  to  xVcestodorus,  on  the
confines  of  Megara,  upon  a  spot  called  Kerata^  the  hornfs.
He  was  seated  on  a  throne  of  gold,*  and  had  many  secre-
taries about  him,  whose  business  it  was  to  write  down  the
particulars  of  the  action.

In  the  mean  time,  as  Themistocles  was  sacrificing  on
the  deck  of  the  admiral-galley,  three  captives  were  brought
to  him  of  uncommon  beauty,  elegantly  attired,  and  setoff
•with  golden  ornaments.  They  were  said  to  be  the  sons
of  Autarctus  and  Sandace,  sister  to  Xerxes,  Euphran-
tide,  the  soothsayer,  casting  his  eye  upon  them,  and  at  the
same  time  observing  that  a  bright  flame  blazed  out  from  the
victims,!  while  a  sneezing  was  lieard  from  the  right,  took
Themistocles  by  the-  hand,  and  ordered  that  the  three
youths  should  be  consecrated  and  sacrificed  to  Bacchus
Omcstes  ;|  for  by  this  means  the  Greeks  might  be  assured,
not  only  of  safety,  but  victory.

Themistocles  was  astonished  at.  the  strangeness  and
cruelty  of  the  order;  but  the  multitude,  who,  in  great  and
pressing  difficulties,  trust  rather  to  absurd  than  rational
methods,  invoked  the  god  with  one  voice j  and  leading  the
captives  to  the  altar,  insisted  upon  their  being  onered  up,
as  the  soothsayer  had  directed.     This  particviiar  we  have

next  step  was  not  to  a  rnoderate  erijoyment  of  life,  but  to  all  the  li-
centiousness of  the  most  eflVn'iiiiate  luxury.  The  laws  of  Lycurgus
made  men  of  the  Spartan  women  ;  when  they  were  broken,  they
made  women  of  the  men.

*  This  throne,  or  seat,  whether  of  gold  or  silver,  or  both,  was  ta-
ken and  carried  to  Athens,  where  it  wab  consecrated  in  the  temple
of  Minerva,  with  the  golden  sabre  of  Mardonius,  which  was  taken
afierv/ards  in  the  battle  of  Plate^a.  Demosthenes  calls  it  ^.^6«
apyvooTTtex,  a.  chair  nxith  silver  feet.

f  A  bright  flame  was  always  considered  as  a  fortunate  omen,
whether  it  were  a  real  one  issuing  from  an  altar,  or  a  seeming  one,
(what  we  call  shell-fire)  from  the  head  of  a  living  person.  Virgil
mentions  one  of  the  latter  sort,  which  appeared  about  the  head  of
lulus  and  Florus,  another  that  was  seen  about  the  head  cf  Servius
Tullius.  A  sneezing  on  tlie  right  hand,  too,  was  deemed  a  lucky
cmen  both  by  the  Gr«€ks  and  Latins.

:}:  In  the  same  manner  Chios,  Tenedos,  and  Lesbos,  offered  yiuman
sacrifices  to  Bacchus  surnamed  Omodius.  But  this  is  the  sole.  'n\^
Stance  v/eknow  of  among  the.  Athenians.


THEMISTOCLES.  287

from  Phanias  the  Lesbian,  a  man  not  unversed  in  letters
and  philosophy.

As  to  the  number  of  the  Persian  ships,  the  poet  iEschy-
lus  speaks  of  it,  in  his  tragedy  entitled  Perate,  as  a  matter
he  was  well  assured  of.

A  thousand  ships  (for  well  I  know  the  number)
The  Persian  flagobey'd  :  two  hundred  more
And  seven,  o'erspread  tlie  seas.

The  Athenians  had  only  one  hundred  and  eighty  galleys  ;
each  carried  eighteen  men  that  fought  upon  deck,  four
of  whom  were  archers,  and  the  rest  heavy-armed.

If  Thcmistocles  was  happy  in  choosing^  a  place  for  ac-
tion, he  was  no  less  so  in  taking  advantage  of  a  proper  time
ibr  it ;  for  he  would  not  engage  the  enemy,  till  that  time
of  day  when  a  brisk  wind  usually  arises  from  the  sea,
which  occasions  a  high  surf  in  the  channel.  This  v/as  no
inconvenience  to  the  Grecian  vessels,  which  were  low
built  and  well  compacted  ;  but  a  very  great  one  to  the
Persian  ships,  which  had  high  sterns  and  lofty  decks,  and
were  heavy  and  unwieldy  ;  for  it  caused  them  to  veer  in
such  a  manner,  that  their  sides  were  exposed  to  the  Greeks
v/ho  attacked  them  furiously.  During  the  wliolc  dispute,
great  attention  was  given  to  the  motions  ofThemistocles,
as  it  was  believed  he  knew  best  how  to  proceed.  Aria-
menes,  the  Persian  admiral,  a  man  of  distinguished  ho-
nour, and  by  far  the  bravest  of  the  king's  brothers,  direct-
ed his  manoeuvres  chiefly  aganist  him.  His  ship  was  very
tall,  and  from  thence  he  threw  darts  and  shot  forth  ar-
rows as  from  the  walls  of  a  castle.  But  Aminias  the  De-
cdtan^  and  Sosicles  the  Pedian,  who  sailed  in  one  bottom,
bore  down  upon  him  with  their  prow,  and  both  ships
meeting,  they  were  fastened  together  by  means  of  their
brazen  beaks  ;  when  Ariamenes  boardiwg  their  galley,
they  received  him  witii  their  pikes,  and  pushed  him
into  the    sea.       Artemisia   *  knew  tiie    body    amongst

*  Artemisia,  queen  of  HalicarnassivR,  distinguished  herself  above
all  the  rest  of  the  Persian  forces,  her  ships  being  the  last  that  fled;
which  Xerxes  observing,  cried  out,  that  the  men  behaved  like  women
and  the  women  with  the  courage  and  intrepidity  of  men.  The  A-
thenians  were  so  incensed  against  her,  that  tliey  ofl'ered  a  reward  of
ten  thousand  drachmas  to  any  one  that  should  take  her  alive.  This
princess  must  not  be  confounded  with  that  Artemisia,  wiio  was  the
wife  of  Mai^olus  king  ofCaira-


288  Plutarch's  lives.

others  that  were  floating  with  the  wreck,  and  carried  it'
to  Xerxes.

While  the  fight  was  thus  raging,  we  are  told  a  great
light  appeared  as  from  Eleusis  ;  and  loud  sounds  and
voices  were  heard  through  all  the  plain  of  Thriasia  to  the
sea,  as  of  a  great  number  of  people  carrying  the  mystic
symbols  of  Bacchus  in  procession.*  A  cloud,  too,  seemed
to  rise  from  among  the  crowd  that  made  this  noise,  and
to  ascend  by  degrees,  till  it  fell  upon  the  galleys.  Other
phantoms  also,  and  apparitions  of  armed  men,  they
thought  they  saw,  stretching  out  their  hands  ft'om  jEgina
before  the  Grecian  fleet.  These  they  conjectured  to  be
the  Aeacid(z^\  to  whom,  before  the  battle,  they  had  ad-
dressed their  prayers  for  succour.

The  first  man  that  took  a  ship  was  an  Athenian,  named
Lycomedes,  captain  of  a  galley,  who  cut  dcrvvn  the  en-
signs from  the  enemy's  ship,  and  consecrated  them  to  the
laurelled  A^oWo,  As  the  Persians  could  come  up  in  the
straits  but  few  at  a  time,  anil  often  put  each  other  in  con-
fusion, the  Greeks  equalling  them  in  the  line,  fought
them  till  the  evening,  when  they  broke  them  entirely,  and
gained  that  signal  and  complete  victory^  than  which  (as
Simonides  says)  no  other  naval  atchievement  either  of
the  Greeks  or  barbarians  ever  was  more  glorious.  This
success  was  owing  to  the  valour,  indeed,  of  all  the  con-
federates, but  chiefly    to  the   sagacity  and  conduct  of

Themistocles4

After  the  battle,  Xerxes,  fuli  of  indignation  at  his  dis-
appointment, attempted  to  join  Salamis  to  the  continent,
by  a  mole   so  well  secured,  that   his  land-forces  might

*  Herodotus  says,  these  voices  were  heard,  and  this  vision  seen,
some  days  before  the  battle,  while  the  Persian  land  forces  were  ra-'
vaging  the  territories  of  Attica,  Dicaeus,  an  Athenian  exile,  (who
hoped  thereby  to  procure  a  mitigation  of  his  covmtry's  fate)  was
the  first  that  observed  the  thing,  and  carried  Jm  aecount  of  it  to
Xerxes.

•}•  A  vessel  had  been  sent  to  i^gina  to  implore  the  assistance  of
TEcus  and  his  descendants,  ^cus  was  the  son  of  Jupiter,  and  had
been  king  of  j^gina.  He  was  so  remarkable  for  his  justice,  that
his  prayers,  whilst  he  lived,  are  sard  to  have  procured  gi-eat  advan-
tages to  the  Greeks ;  and,  after  his  death,  it  v^as  believed  that  he
was  appointed  one  of  the  three  judges  in  the  infernal  regions.

^  In  this  battle,  which  was  one  of  the  most  memorable  we  find
in  history,  the  Grecians  lost  forty  ships,  and  the  Persiaiistwo  huR-
dred,  beside  a  great  many  more  that  were  taken.


THEMISTOCLES.  289

{pass  over  it  into  the  island,  and  tliat  he  might  shut  up
the  pass  entirely  against  the  Greeks.  At  the  same  time,
Thtmistocles,  to  sound  Aristides,  pretended  it  was  his
own  opinion  that  they  should  sail  to  the  Hellespont,  and
break  down  the  bridge  of  ships  ;  "  For  so,"  says  he,
"  we  may  take  Asia,  without  stirring  out  of  Europe."
Aristides*  did  not  in  the  least  relish  his  proposal,  but  an-
swered him  to  this  purpose  :  "  Till  now  we  have  had  to
do  with  an  enemy  immersed  in  luxury  ;  but  if  we  shut
him  up  in  Greece,  and  drive  him  to  necessity,  he  who-  is
master  of  such  prodigious  forces,  will  no  longer  sit  under
a  golden  canopy,  and  be  a  quiet  spectator  of  the  proceed-
ings of  the  war,  but  awaked  by  danger,  attempting  every
thing,  and  present  every  where,  he  will  correct  his  past
errors,  and  follow  counsels  better  calculated  for  success.
Instead,  therefore,  of  Jireaking  that  bridge,  we  should,
if  possible,  provide  another,  that  he  may  retire  the  sooner
out  of  Europe."  "  If  that  is  the  case,  said  Themisto-
cles,  we  must  all  consider  and  contrive  how  to  put  him
upon  the  most  speedy  retreat  out  of  Greece."

This  being  resolved  upon,  he  sent  one  of  the  king's
eunuchs,  whom  he  found  among  the  prisoners,  Arnaces
by  name,  to  acquaint  him,  "  That  the  Greeks,  since
their  victory  at  sea,  were  determined  to  sail  to  the  Hel-
lespont, and  destroy  the  bridge  ;  but  that  Themistocles
in  care  for  the  king's  safety,  advised  him  to  hasten  to-
wards his  own  seas,  and  pass  over  into  Asia,  while  his
friend  endeavoured  to  find  out  pretences  of  delay,  to  pre-
vent the  confederates  from  pursuing  him."  Xerxes,
terrified  at  the  news,  retired  with  the  greatest  precipi-
tation.t  How  prudent  the  management  of  Themistocles
and  Aristides  was,   Mardonius  afforded  a  proof,  when,

*  According  to  Herodotus,  it  was  not  Aristides,  but  Eurybiades
who  made  this  reply  to  Themistocles.

t  Xerxes,  havingleft  Mardonius  in  Greece  with  an  army  of  three
liundred  thousand  men,  marched  with  the  rest  towards  Thrace,  in
order  to  cross  the  Hellespont.  As  no  provisions  had  been  prepared
before  hand,  his  army  underwent  great  hardships,  during  the  whole
time  of  his  march,  which  lasted  five-and-forty  days.  The  king,
finding  they  were  not  in  a  condition  to  pursue  their  route  so  expe-
ditiously as  he  desired,  advanced  with  a  small  retinue  ;  but,  when  he
arrived  at  the  Hellespont,  he  found  his  bridge  of  boats  broken
down  by  the  violence  of  the  storms,  and  was  reduced  to  the  neces-
sity of  crossing  over  in  a  fishing-boat.  From  the  Hellespont  lie
continued%is  flight  to  Sardis.


290  Plutarch's  lives.

^vith  a  small  part  of  the  king's  forces,  he  put  the  Greeks
in  extreme  danger  of  losing  all,  in  the  battle  of  Platxa.

Herodotus  tells  us,  that,  among  the  cities,  jEgina  bore
away  the  palm ;  but,  among  the  commanders,  Themis-
tocles,  in  spite  of  envy,  was  universally  allowed  to  have
distinguished  himself  most.  For,  when  they  came  to
the  Isthmus,  and  every  officer  took  a  billet  from  the
altar,*  to  inscribe  upon  it  the  names  of  those  that  had
done  the  best  service,  every  one  put  himself  in  the  nrst
place,  and  Themistccles  in  the  second.  The  Lacedae-
monians, having  conducted  him  to  Sparta,  adjudged
Eurybiades  the  prize  of  valour,  and  Themistoclesthat  of
wisdom,  honouring  each  with  a  crown  of  olive.  They
likewise  presented  the  latter  with  the  handsomest  chariot
in  the  city,  and  ordered  three  hundred  of  their  youth  to
attend  him  to  the  borders.  At  the  next  Olympic  games,
too,  we  are  told,  that,  as  soon  as  Themistocles  appeared
in  the  ring,  the  champions  were  overlooked  by  the  spec-
tators>  who  kept  theis  eyes  upon  him  all  the  day,  and
pointed  him  out  to  strangers  with  the  utmost  admiration
and  applause.  This  incense  was  extremely  grateful  to
him ;  and  he  acknowledged  to  his  friends,  that  he  then
reaped  the  fruit  of  his  labours  for  Greece.

Indeed,  he  was  naturally  very  ambitious,  if  we  may
form  a  conclusion  from  his  memorable  acts  and  sayings.

For,  when  elected  admiral  by  the  Athenians,  he  would
not  dispatch  any  business,  whether  public  or  private,
singly,  but  put  off  all  affairs  to  the  day  he  was  to  embark,
that  having  a  great  deal  to  do,  he  might  appear  with  the
greater  dignity  and  importance.

One  day,  as  he  was  looking  upon  the  dead  bodies  cast
up  by  the  sea,  and  saw  a  number  of  chains  of  gold  and
bracelets  upon  them,  he  passed  by  them,  and  turning  to
his  friend,  said.  Take  these  t/dng-sjbr  yourself^  for  you  arc
not   Themistocles,

To  Antiphates,  who  had  form.erly  treated  him  with,
disdain,  but  in  his  glory  made  his  court  to  him,  he  said,.
Yomig  man^  ive  are  both  come  to  our  senses  at  the  same  timcy
though  a  little  too  late.

He  used  to  say,  "  The  Athenians  paid  him  no  honour
or  sincere  respect ;  but  when  a  storm  arose,  or  danger

*  The  altar  of  Neptune.  This  solemnity  was  designed  to  make
them  give  their  judgment  impartially  as  in  the  presence  of  the  gods.


TIIEMISTOCLES.  2Q1

appeared,  they  sheltered  themselves  under  him,  as  under
a  plane-tree,  which,  when  the  weather  was  fair  again,  they
would  rob  of  its  leaves  and  branches."
,'  When  one  of  Seriphus  told  him,  "  He  was  not  so  much
honoured  for  his  own  sake,  but  for  his  country's."....
"  True,"  answered  Themistocles  ;  <«  for  neither  should
I  have  been  greatly  distinguished  if  I  had  been  of
Seriphus,  nor  you,  if  you  had  been  an  Athenian."

Another  officer,  who  thought  he  had  done  the  state
some  service,  setting  himself  up  against  Themistocles,
and  venturing  to  compare  his  own  exploits  with  his,  he
answered  him  with  this  fable  "  There  once  happened  a
dispute  between  the  feast-day  and  the  day  after  the  feast :
Says  the  day  after  the  feast ^  I  am  full  of  bustle  and  trou-
ble, whereas,  with  you,  folks  enjoy,  at  their  ease,  every
thing  ready  provided.  You  say  right,  says  thefeast-day,
but  if  I  had  not  been  before  you,  you  would  not  have
been  at  all.  «S'o,  had  it  not  been  for  me,  then,  ivhere  ivould
you  have  been  nozu  ?''*

His  son  being  master  of  his  mother,  and  by  her  means,
of  him,  he  said,  laughing,  "  This  child  is  greater  than
any  man  in  Greece  ;  for  the  Athenians  command  the
Greeks,  I  command  the  Athenians,  his  mother  com-
mands me.  and  he  commands  his  mother."

As  he  loved  to  be  particular  in  every  thing,  when  he
happened  to  sell  a  farm,  he  ordered  the  crier  to  add,  that
it  had  a  good  neighbo^ir.

Two  citizens  courting  his  daughter  he  preferred  the
worthy  man  to  the  rich  one,  and  assigned  this  reason.  He
had  rather  she  should  have  a  man  vjithout  money,  than  mo^
ney  without  a  man.  Such  was  the  pointed  manner  in
wiiich  he  often  expressed  himself.f

After  the  greatest  actions  we  have  related,  his  next  en-
Iterprisewas  to  rebuild  and  fortify  the  city  of  Athens....
jTheopompus  tells,  he  biibed  the  Lacedemonian  Ephori,
that  they  might  not  oppose  it ;  but  most  historians  say,
lie  over-reached  them.  He  was  sent,  it  seems,  on  pretence

I  *  There  is  the  genuine  Attic  salt  hi  most  of  these  retorts  and  ob-
servations  of  Themistodes.  His  wit  seems  to  have  been  equal  to
|his  military  and  poHtical  capacity.

i  t  Cicero  has  preserved  another  of  his  sayings,  which  deserves
imentioning.     When  Simonides  offered  to  teach  Themistodes  the


lart  or  memory,  he  answered,  Ah  !  rather  teach  tne  the  art  offjrgtt-
Min7;forlojten  rmzmbcrvihat  I  'ixiould  not,  and  ccnr,ot ftrcct  <whi:t  I


^Axoidd,


292  Plutarch's  lives,

of  an  embassy  to  Sparta,  The  Spartans  complained,  that
the  Athenians  were  fortifying  their  city,  and  the  gover-  -
nor  of  jEgina,  who  was  come  for  that  purpose,  supported
the  accusation.  But  Themistocles  absolutely  denied  it,
and  challenged  them  to  send  proper  persons  to  Athens
to  inspect  the  walls  ;  at  once  gaining  time  for  finishing
them,  and  contriving  to  have  hostages  at  Athens  for  his
return.  The  event  answered  his  expectation.  For  the
Lacedsemonians,  when  assured  how  the  fact  stood,  dis-
sembled their  resentment,  and  let  him  go  with  impunity.

After  this,  he  built  and  fortified  the  Piraeus,  (hciving  ob-
served the  conveniency  of  that  harbour.)  By  which  m^eans
he  gave  the  city  every  maritime  accommodation.  In
this  respect  his  politics  were  very  different  from  those  of
the  ancient  kings  of  Athens.  They,  we  are  told,  used
their  endeavours  to  draw  the  attention  of  their  subjects
from  the  business  of  navigation,  that  they  might  turn  it
entirely  to  the  culture  of  the  ground :  and  to  this  purpose
they  published  the  fable  of  tlie  contention  between  Mi-
nerva and  Neptune,  for  the  patronage  of  Attica,  when  the
former,  by  producing  an  olive-tree  before  the  judges,
gained  her  cause.  Themistocles  did  not  bring  the  Pirseus
into  the  cityj  as  Aristophanes  the  comic  poet  would  have
it ;  but  he  joined  the  city  by  a  line  of  communication  to
the  Pirseus,  and  the  land  to  the  sea.  This  measure
strengthened  the  people  against  the  nobility,  and  made
them  bolder  and  more  untractable,  as  power  came  with
w^ealth  into  the  hands  of  masters  of  ships,  mariners,  and
pilots.  Hence  it  was,  that  the  oratory  in  Fynx^  which
was  built  to  front  the  sea,  was  afterwards  turned  by  the
thirty  tyrants  towards  the  land  ;*  for  they  believed  a  mari-
time power  inclinable  to  a  democracy,  whereas  persons
employed  in  agriculture  would  be  less  uneasy  under  an
oligarchy.

Themistocles  had  something  still  greater  in  view  for
strengthening  the  Athenians  by  sea.  After  the  retreat  of
Xerxes,  when  the  Grecian  fleet  was  gone  into  the  harbour
of  Pagass  to  winter,  he  acquainted  the  citizens  in  full  as-
sembly, ^'  That  he  had  hit  upon  a  design  which  might
greatly  concribute  to  their  advantage,  but  it  was  not  fit  "  to

*  The  thirty  tyrants  were  established  at  Athens  by  Lysander,  403
yearsbefore  the  Christian  8sra,  and  7r  years  after  the  battle  of  Sa-
laniis.


THSMISTOCLES.  293

be  communicated  to  their  v/hole  body."  The  Athenians
ordered  him  to  communicate  it  to  Aristides  only,*  and,  if
he  approved  of  it,  to  put  it  in  execution.  Themistocles
then  informed  him,  "  That  he  had  thoughts  of  burning
tlie  confederate  fleet  at  Pag^asse.' '  Upon  which,  Aristides
went  and  declared  to  the  people,  "  That  the  enterprise
which  Themistocles  proposed,  was  indeed  the  most  ad-
vantageous in  the  v/orld,  but,  at  the  same  time,  the  most
unjust."  The  Athenians,  therefore,  commanded  him  to
lay  aside  ali  tlioughts  of  it.f

About  this  time  the  Lacedai^monians  made  a  motion  in
the  assem.bly  of  the  jimfihictyons^  to  exclude  from  that
council  all  those  states  that  had  not  joined  in  the  confede-
racy against  the  king  of  Persia.  But  Themistocles  was
apprehensive,  that,  if  the  Thessalians,  the  Argives,  and
Thebans,  were  expelled  from  the  council,  the  Lacedaemo-
nians would  have  a  great  majority  of  voices,  and  conse-
quently procure  what  degrees  they  pleased.  He  spoke,
therefore:  in  defence  of  those  states,  and  brought  the  de-
puties off  from  that  design,  by  representing,  that  thirty-
one  cities  only  had  their  share  of  the  burden  of  that  war,
and  that  the  greatest  part  of  these  were  but  of  small  con-
sideration ,  that  consequently  it  would  be  both  unreason-
able and  dangerous  to  exclude  the  rest  of  Greece  from
the  league,  and  leave  the  council  to  be  dictated  to  by  two
or  three  great  cities.  By  this  he  became  very  obnoxious
to  the  I^acedaemonians,  who,  for  this  reason,  set  up  Cimon.
against  him  as  a  rival  in  ail  affairs  of  state,  and  used  all
their  interest  for  his  advancement.

He  disobliged  the  allies,  also,  by  sailing  round  the
islands,  and  extorting  money  from  them  j  as  we  may  con-
clude from  the  answer  v/hich  Herodotus  tells  us  the  Andri-

*  How  glorious  this  testimony  of  the  public  regard  to  Aristides,
from  a  people  then  so  free,  and  withal  so  virtuous  !

f  It  is  nardly  possible  for  the  militar)  Und  political  genius  of  The-
nnstocles  to  save  him  from  contempt  and  detestation,  when  we  ar-
rive at  this  part  o*  his  conduct  ....A  serious  proposal  to  burn  the
confederate  fleet !  ....That  fleet,  whose  united  efforts  had  saved  Greece
from  destruction  !.  ..which  had  fought  under  his  auspices  with  such
irresistible  valour  !..  .That  sacred  fleet,  the  minutest  parts  of  which
should  have  been  religiously  preserved,  or  if  consumed,  consumed
only  on  the  altars,  and  in  the  service  of  the  gods  !...  How  disbc  leal
is  that  policy,  which,  in  its  way  to  power,  tramples  on  humanity,  jus-
tice, and  gijtfitude  '.

VOL.    I.  C    C


294  Plutarch's  lives.

ans  gave  him  to  a  demand  of  that  sort.  He  told  them,
"  He  brought  two  gods  along  with  him,  Persuasion  and
Force,"  They  replied,  "They  had  also  two  great  gods
on  their  side,  Poverty  and  Despair^  who  forbade  them  to
satisfy  him."  Timocreon,  the  Rhodianpoet,  writes  with
great  bitterness  against  Themistocles,  and  charges  him
with  betraying  him,  though  his  friend  and  host,  for  mo-
ney, while,  for  the  like  paltry  consideration,  he  procured
the  return  of  other  exiles.     So  in  these  verses  ;

Pausanius  you  may  praise,  and  you  Xantippus,
And  you  Leutychidas  :  But  sure  the  hero,
Who  bears  th'  Athenian  palm,  is  Aristides.
What  is  the  false,  the  vain,  Themistocles  ?
The  very  light  is  grudg'd  him  by  Latona,
Who  for  vile  pelf  betray'd  Timocreon,
His  friend  and  host ;   nor  gave  him  to  behold
His  dear  Jalysus.     For  three  talents  more
Me  sail'd  and  left  him  on  a  foreign  coast.
What  fatal  end  awaits  the  man  that  kills.
That  banishes,  that  sets  the  villain  up,
To  fill  his  glitt'ring  stores  ?  while  ostentation,
With  vain  airs,  fain  would  boast  the  generous  hand,
And,  at  the  Isthmus,  spreads  a  public  board
,For  crowds  that  eat,  and  curse  him  at  the  banquet.

But  Timocreon  gave  a  still  looser  rein  to  his  abuse  of
Themistocles,  .after  the  condemnation  and  banishment  of
that  great  man,  inapo.em  which  begins  thus  :

Muse,  crown'd  with  glory,  bear  this  faithful  strain.
Far  as  the  Grecian  name  extends...

Timocreon  is  said  to  have  been  banished  by  Themistocles
for  favouring  the  Persians.  When,  therefore,  Themis-
tocles was  accused  of  the  same  traitorous  inclinations,  Ke
wrote  against  him  as  follows  :

Timocreon's  honour  to  the  Medes  is  sold.
But  yet  not  his  alone  :   Another  fox
Finds  tlie  same  fields  to  prey  in.

As  the  Athenians,  thixyugh  envy,  readily  gave  ear  to  ca-
lumnies against  him,  he  was  often  forced  to  recount  his
own  services,  which  rendered  him  still  more  insupporta-
ble ;  and  when  they  expressed  their  displeasure,  he  said,
Are  you  weary  of  receiving  benrjits  often  from  the  same
hand  ?

Another  offence  he  gave  the  people,  was,  his  building  a
teijiple  to  Diaaa,  under  i\ut  i\^m^  oi  JristobiUefOVy  Diana


THEMI3T0CLES.  295

nf  the  6tfst  counsel,  miimatin^thdLt  he  had  given  the  best
rounsel,  not  only  to  Athens,  but  to  all  (ireece.  He  built
this  temple  near  his  own  house,  in  the  quarter  of  Melita,
where  now  the  executioners  cast  out  the  bodies  of  those
that  have  suifered  death,  and  where  they  throw  the  halters
and  clothes  of  such  as  have  been  strangled  or  otherwise
put  to  death.  There  was,  even  in  our  times,  a  statue  of
Themistocles  in  this  temple  of  Diana  Aristobule^  from
which  it  appeared  that  his  aspect  was  as  heroic  as  his  soul.

At  last,  ths  Athenians  unable  any  longer  to  bear  that
high  distinction  in  which  he  stood,  banished  him  by  the
Ostracism  ;  and  this  was  nothing  more  than  they  had  done
to  others  whose  power  was  become  a  burthen  to  them,
and  who  had  risen  above  the  equality  which  a  common-
wealth requires  ;  for  the  Ostracism,  or,  ten  years  banish-
ment, was  pot  so  much  intended  to  punish  this  or  that
great  man,  as-  topacify  and  mitigate  the  fury  of  envy,  who
delights  in  the- disgrace  of  superior  characters,  and  loses
a  part  of  her  rancour  by  their  falh

In  the  time  of  his  exile,  while  he  took  up  his  abode  at
Argos,*  the  affair  of  Pausanias  gave  great  advantage  to
the  enemies  of  Themistocles.  The  person  that  accused
him  of  treason,  was  Leobotes  the  son  of  Alcrazcon,  of
Agraule,  and  the  Spartans  joined  in  the  impeachment.
Pausanias  at  first  concealed  his  plot  from  Themistocles,
though  he  was  his  friend  ;  but  when  he  saw  him  an  exile,
and  full  of  indignation  against  the  Athenians,  he  ventured
to  communicate  his  designs  to  him,  shewing  him  the  king
of  Persia's  letters,  and  exciting  him  to  vengeance  against
the  Greeks,  as  an  unjust  and  ungrateful  people.  The-
mistocles rejected  the  solicitations   of  Pausanias,  and  re-

*  The  great  Pausanias,  who  had  beaten  the  Persians  in  the  battle
of  Piatxa^  and  who,  on  many  occasions,  had  behaved  with  great  ge-
nerosity as  well  as  moderation,  at  last  degenerated ;  and  fell  into  a
scandalous  ti-eaty  with  the  Persians,  in  hopes,  through  their  interest,
to  make  himself  sovereign  of  Greece.  As  soon  as  he  had  conceived
these  sti'ange  notions,  he  fell  into  the  manners  of  the  Persians,  af-
fected all  their  luxury,  and  derided  the  j)lain  customs  of  his  country,
of  which  he  had  formerly  been  so  fond.  The  Ephori  waited  some
time  for  clear  proof  of  his  treacherous  designs,  and  when  they  had
obtained  it,  determined  to  imprison  him.  But  he  fled  into  the  tem-
ple of  Minerva  Chalcioicos,  arid  they  besieged  him  there.  They
walled  up  all  the  gates,  and  his  own  mother  laid  the  Hrst  stone.
When  they  had  almost  starved  him  to  death,  they  laid  hands  on  him,
and  by  the  time  they  had  got  him  out  of  the  tem.ple,  he  expirtd.


296  PLUTAilCirs    LIVES,

fused  to  have  the  least  share  in  his  designs  ;  but  he  gave
no  information  of  what  had  passed  between  thern,  nor  let
the  secret  transpire  ;  whether  he  thought  he  would  desist
of  himself,  or  that  he  would  be  discovered  some  other
way,  as  he  had  embarked  in  an  absurd  and  extravagant
enterprise  without  any  rational  hopes  of  success.

However,  v/hen  Pausanias  Vi^as  put  to  death,  there  were
found  letters  and  other  writings  relative  to  the  bwsiness,
which  caused  no  small  suspicion  against  Themistocies,
The  Lacedaemonians  raised  a  clamour  against  him ;
and  those  of  his  fellow-citizens  that  envied  him,  insisted
on  the  charge.  He  could  not  defend  himself  in  person,
but  he  answered  by  letter  the  principal  parts  of  the  accu-
sation. For,  to  obviate  the  calumnies  of  his  enemies,  he
observed  to  the  Athenians,  "  That  he  who  was  born  to
command,  and  incapable  of  servitude,  could  never  sell
himself,  and  Greece  along  with  him,  to  enemies  and  bar-
barians." The  people,  hov/ever,  listened  to  his  accusers,
and  sent  them  with  orders  to  bring  him  to  his  answer  be-
fore the  states  of  Greece.  Of  this  he  had  timely  notice,
and  passed  over  to  the  isle  of  Corcyra.  The  inhabitants
of  which  had  great  obhgations  to  him  ;  for  a  difference
between  them  and  the  people  of  Corinth  had  been  refer*
red  to  his  arbitration,  and  he  had  decided  it  by  awarding
the  Corinthians*  to  pay  dov/n  twenty  talents,  and  the  isle
of  Leucas  to  be  in  common  between  the  two  parties,  as  a
colony  from  both.  From  thence  he  fled  to  Epirus  ;  and,
finding  himself  still  pursued  by  the  Athenians  and  Lace«
daemonians,  he  tried  a  very  hazardous  and  uncertain  re-
source* in  imploring  the  protection  of  Admetus,  king  of
the  Molossians.  Admetus  had  made  a  request  to  the
Athenians,  which  being  rejected  with  scorn  by  Themis-
tocles  in  the  time  of  his  prosperity  and  influence  in  the
state,  the  king  entertained  a  deep  resentment  against
him,  and  made  no  secret  of  his  intention  to  revenge  him-
self, if  ever  the  Athenian  should  fall  into  his  power....
However,  while  he  was  thus  flying  from  place  to  place,  he

*  The  scholiast  upon  Thucydides  tells  us,  Themistocles  served
the  people  of  Corcyra  in  an  affair  of  greater  importance.  The  states
of  Greece  were  inclined  to  make  war  upon'that  island  for  not  join-
ing in  the  league  against  Xerxes  ;  but  Themistocles  represented,
that,  if  they  were  in  that  manner  to  punish  all  the  cities  that  had
not  acceded  to  the  league,  their  proceedings  would  bring  greater
calamities  upon  Greece  than  it  had  suffered  from  the  barbarians-


TIIEMISTOGLES.  297

Was  more  afraid  of  the  recent  envy  of  his  countrymen,
than  of  the  consequences  of  an  old  quarrel  with  the  king  ;
and  therefore  he  went  and  put  himself  in  his  hands,  ap-
pearing before  him  as  a  suppliant,  in  a  particular  and  ex-
traordinary manner.*  He  took  the  king's  son,  who  Avas
yet  a  child,  in  his  arms,  and  kneeled  down  before  the
household  gods.  Thismiinnerof  offering  a  petition,  the
Molosslons  look  upon  as  the  most  effectual,  and  the  only
one  that  can  hardly  be  rejected.  Some  say  the  queen,  v.hose
name  was  Phthia,  suggested  this  method  of  supplication
to  Themistocles.  Others,  that  Admetus  himself  taught
him  to  act  the  part,  that  he  might  have  a  sacred  obli-
gation to  allege,,  against  giving  him  up  to  those  that
might  come  to  demand  hiniv

At  that  time  Epicrates,  the  Acanianian,  found  means
to  convey  the  v/ife  and  children  of  Themistocles  out  of
Athens,  and  sent  them  to  him;  for  which  Cimon  after-
wards condemned  him  and  put  him  to  death.  This  ac-
count is  given  by  Stesimbrotus  ;  yet,  I  knov/  not  how,
forgetting  Avhat  Jie  had-  asserted,  op  making  Themisto-
cles forget  it,  he  tells  us  he-sailed  from  thence  to  Sicily,
and  demanded  king  Hiero's  daughter  in  marriage,  promi-
sing to  bring  tlie  Greeks  under  his  subjection  ;  and  that,
upon  Hiero's  refusal,  he  passed  over  into  Asia.  But  this
is  not  probable.  For  Theophrastus,  in  his  treatise  on
monarchy,  relates,  that,  when  Hiero  sent  his  race-horses
to  the  Olympic  games,  and  set  up  a  supejrb  pavilion  there,
Themistocles  harangued  the  Greeks,  to  persuade  tliem
to  pull  it  down,  and  not  to  suffer  the  tyrant's  horses  to
run.  Thucydides  writes,  that  he  went  by  land  to  the
.iEgean  sea,  and  embarked  at  Pydna  ;  that  none  in  the
ship  knew  him,  till  he  was  driven  by  a  storm  to  Naxos,
which  was  at  that  time  besieged  by  the  Athenians  ;  that,
through  fear  of  being  taken,  he  then  informed  the  mas-
ter of  the  ship,  and  the  pilot,  who  he  wiis  ;  and  that  partly
by  intreaties,  partly  by  threatening  he  would  declare  to
the  Athenians,  however  falsely,  that  they  knew  him  from
the  first,  and  were  bribed  to  take  him  into  their  vessel,
he  obliged  them  tq  weigh  anchor  and  sail  for  Asia.

*  It  was  nothing  particular  for  a  suppliant  to  do  homap;e  to  the
household  gods  of  the  person  to  whom  he  had  a  request ;  but  to  do
it  with  the  king's  son  in  his  arms  was  an  extraordinary  circuiia--
staace.  ^

CC  2


29^  PLUTARCH  S    LI\*ES»

The  g-reatest  part  of  his  treasures  was  privately  sent
after  him  to  Asia  by  his  friends.  What  was  discovered
and  seized  for  the  public  use,  Theopompus  says,  amount-
^idtoan  hundred  talents,  Theophrastus  fourscore  :  though
he  was  not  worth  three  talents  before  his  employment  in
the   governments*

When  he  was  landed  at  Cwma,  he  uncerstood  that  a
number  of  people,  particularly  Ergoteles  and  Pythodorus,
were  watching  to  take  him.  He  was,  indeed,  a  rich  booty
to  those  that  were  determined  to  get  money  by  any  means
whatever ;  for  the  king  of  Persia  had  offered  by  procla-
mation tv/o  hundred  talents  for  apprehending  him.j  He,
therefore,  retired  to  iEgs^  ^  little  town  of  the  jEoIians,
where  he  was  known  to  nobody  but  Nicogenes,  his  host,
who  was  a  man  of  jrreat  wealth,  and  had  some  interest  at
the  Persian  courts  In  his  house  he  was  concealed  a  few
days  ;  and,  one  evening  after  supper,  when  the  sacritice
was  offered,  Olbius,  tutor  to  Nicogene's  children,  cried
out,  as  in  a  rapture  of  inspiration,

Counsel,  O  Nighty  and  victory  are  thine.

After  this,  Themistocles  went  to  bed,  and  dreamed  he
saw  a  dragon  coiled  round  his  body,  and  creeping  up  to
his  neck ;  which,  as  soon  as  it  touched  his  face,  v/as
turned  into  an  eagle,  and,  covering  him  with  his  wings?,
took  him  up  and  carried  him  to  a  distant  place,  v/hei  e  a.
golden  sceptre  appeared  to  him,  upon  which  he  rested
securely,  and  was  delivered  from  all  his  fear  and  trouble,.

In  consequence  of  this  warning,  he  was  sent  av/ay  by
Nicogenes,  who  contrived  this  method  for  it.  The  bar-
barians in  general,  especially  the  Persians,  are  jealous  of
the  women  even  to  madness  ;  not  only  of  their  wives,,
but  their  slaves  and  concubines  ;  ibr,  beside  the  care  they
take  that  they  shall  be  seen  by  none  but  their  ov.n  fa-

*  This  is  totally  inconsistent  with  that  splendonpin  which,  ac-
cording to  Plutarch's  own  account,  he  lived,  hefcre  he  had  any  pub-
lic appointments.

I  The  resentment  cf  Xerxes  is  not  at  all  to  be  wondered  at,  •ince
Themistocles  had  not  only  beaten  him  in  the  battle  of  Salaniis,  but,
what  was  more  disgraceful  stiilj  had  made  him  a  dupe  to  his  design-
ing persuasions  and  representations.  In  the  loss  of  victory,  he  had.
some  consolation,  as  he  w'as  not  himself  the  immediate  cau^eof  it,.
but  for  his  ridiculous  return  to  Asia,  his  anger  covild  only  falL  upon
himself  and  Themistocles.


THEMiSTOCLES.  299

icily,  they  keep  them  like  prisoners  in  their  houses  ;  and
when  they  take  a  journey,  they  are  put  in  a  carriage
close  covered  on  all  sides.  In  such  a  carriage  as  this
Theniistocles  was  conveyed,  the  attendants  being  in-
structed to  tell  those  they  met,  if  they  happened  to  be
questioned,  tliat  tliey  were  carrying  a  Grecian  lady  from
Ionia  to  a  nobleman  at  court.

Thucydides,  and  Charon  of  Lampsacus,  relate,  that
Xerxes  was  then  dead^  and  that  it  was  to  his  son*  Ar-
taxerxes  that  Themistocles  addressed  himself.  But  Epho-
rus,  Dinon,  Clitarchus,  Heraclides,  and  several  others,
write,  that  Xerxes  himself  was  then  upon  the  throne.,..
The  opinion  of  Thucydides  seems  most  agreeable  to  chro-
nology, though  it  is  not  perfectly  well  settled.  The-
mistocles, now  ready  for  the  dangerous  experiment,  ap-
plied first  to  Artabanus,t  a  military  officer,  and  told  him,
♦*  He  was  a  Greek,  who  desired  to  have  audience  of  the
king  about  matters  of  great  importance,  which  the  king
himself  had  much  at  heart."  Ailabanus  answered,
"  The  laws  of  men  are  different ;  some  esteem  one  thing
honourable,  and  some  another  ;  but  it  becomes  ail  men
to  honour  and  observe  the  customs  of  their  own  country.
With  you  the  thing  most  admired,  is  said  to  be  liberty
ancl.  equality.  We  have  many  excellent  laws  ;  and  we
pegard  it  as  one  of  the  most  indispensable,  to  honour  the
kine:,  and  to  adore  him  as  the  imasre  of  that  deity  who
preserves  and  supports  the  universe.  If,  therefore,  yoti
are  willing  to  conform  to  our  customs,  and  to  prostrate
yourself  before  the  king,  you  may  be  permitted  to  see
hirn  and  speak  to  hinru  But  if  you  cannot  bring  yourself
to  this,  you  must  acquaint  him  with  your  business  by  a.
third  person.  It  would  be  an  infringement  of  the  cus-
tom of  his  country,  for  the  king  to  admit  any  one  to  au-
dience that  does  not  worslxip  him^"  To  this  Themis-
tocles replied.  "  My  business,  Artabanus,  is  to  add  to  the
king's  honour  and  power;  therefore  I  will  comply  with-
your  customs,  since  the  god  that  has  exalted  the  Persians,
will  have  it  so  ;  and  by  my  means  the  number  of  the

*  Themistocles,  therefore,  arrived  at  the  Fersian  court  in  the  first
year  of  the  79th  Olympiad,  462  years  before  the  birth  of  Christ  ;
for  that  was  the  first  year  of  Artaxerxes's  reign.

t  Son  of  that  Artabanus,  captain  of  the  guards,  who  slew  Xerxes,
and  periuadjd  Artaxerxes  to  cut  oft"  his  elder  brother  Darius.


300  ■  Plutarch's  lives.

king's  worshippers  shall  be  increased.  So  let  this  be
no  hinderance  to  my  communicating  to  the  king  what  I
have  to  say."  <'  But  who,"  said  Artabanus,  *'  shall  we
say  you  are?  for  by  your  discourse  you  appear  to  be  no
ordinary  person."  Themistocles  answered,  "  Nobody
must  know  that  before  the  king  himself."  So  Phanias
writes  ;  and  Eratosthenes,  in  his  treatise  on  riches,  adds,
that  Themistocles  was  brought  acquainted  with  Artaba-
liiis,  and  recommended  to  him  by  an  Eretrian  woman,,
who  belonged  to  that  officer.

.  When  he  was  introduced  to  the  king,  and,  after  his
prostration,  stood  silent,  the  king  commanded  the  inter-
preter to  a.sk  him- who  he  was.  The  intei^preter  accoixl-
ingly  put  the  question,  and  he  answered,  "The  man  that
is  now  come  to.  address  himself  to  you,.  O  king,  is  The-
mistocles the  Athenian  ;  an :  exile  persecuted  by  the
Greeks.  The  Persians  have  suffered  much  by  me,  but
it  has  been  more  than  compensated  by  my  preventing
your  being  pursued  ;  when  after  I  had  delivered  Greece,
and  saved  my  own  country,  I  had  it  in  my  power  to  do
you  also  a  service.  My  sentiments  are  suitable  to  my
present  misfortunes,  and  I  come  prepared  either  to  re>-
ceive  your  favour,  if  you  ai'e  reconciled  tome,  or,  if  you
retain  any  resentment,,  to  disai'm  it  by  iny  submission..
Reject  not  the  testimony  my  enemies  have  given  to  the
services  I  have  done. the  Pei'sians,  and  make  use  of  the  op-
portunity my  misfortunes  afford  you,  ratiier  to  shew  your
generosity,  than  to  satisfy  your  revenge.  If  you  save  me,
you  save  your  suppliant.;  if  you  destroy  me,  you  destroy
the  enemy  of  Greece."*  In  hopes  of  influencing  tiie  king
by  an  argumtint  ds'awn  from  religion,  Themistocles  added
to  this  speech  an  accoiKit  of  the  vision  he  had  in  Nico-
genes's  house,  and  an  oracle  of  Jupiter  of  Dodona,  which,
ordered  him  /o  go  to  oJie  rohobore  the  same  name  nvith  the
g-od  ;  from  M-hich  he  conciuded  he  was  sent  to  him,  since
both  were  called,  and  really  were,  great  kings.

The  king  gave  him  no  answer,  though  he  admired  his
courage  and  magnanimity  ;  but,  with  his  friends,  he  fe-
licitated himself  upon  this,  as  the  most  fortunate  event
imaginable.     We  are  tokl  also,  that  he  prayed  to  Arima^

*  How  extremely  abject  and  contemptible  is  this  petition,  whereia*
the  cupphant  fcimds  every  argument  in.  his  favour  upon  his ittceff  /


THEMISTOCLES.  301

riius;*  thai  his  enemies  might  ever  be  so  infatuated,  as  to
drive  from  amongst  them  their  ablest  men  ;  that  he  of-
fered sacrifice  to  the  gods,  and  immediately  after  made  a
great  entertainment ;  nay,  that  he  was  so  affected  with
joy,  that  when  he  retired  to  rest,  in  the  midst  of  his  sleep^
he  called  out  three  times,  /  have  T/iemisiocles  the  A-
thsrdan.

As  soon  as  it  was  day,  he  called  together  his  friends,
and  ordered  Themistocles  to  be  brought  before  him.  The
exile  expected  no  favour,  when  he  found  that  the  guards,
at  the  first  hearing  of  his  name,  treated  him  with  rancour,
and  loaded  him  with  reproaches.  Nay,  when  the  king
had  taken  his  seat,  and  a  respectful  silence  ensued,  Rox-
anes,  one  of  his  officers,  as  Themistocles  passed  him,
"whispered  him  with  a  sigh.  Ah  I  thou  subtle  serpent  of
Greece,  the  king's  good  genius  has  brought  thee  thither.
However,  when  he  had  prostrated  himself  twice  in  the  pre-
sence, the  king  saluted  him,  and  spoke  to  him  graciously,
telling  him.,  "  He  owed  him  two  hundred  talents  ;  for,  a^
he  had  delivered  himself  up,  it  \^'^s  but  just  that  he  should
receive  the  reward  offered  to  any  one  that  should  bring
him."  He  promised  him  much  more,  assured  him  of
iiis  protection,  and  ordered  him  to  declare  freely  whatever
he  had  to  propose  concerning  Greece.  Themistocles  re-
plied, "That  a  man's  discourse  was  like  a  piece  of  tapes-
try,! which,  when  spread  open,  displays  its  figures  ;  but
when  it  is  folded  up,  they  are  hidden  and  lost  ;  there^
fore  he  begged  time."  The  king,  delighted  with  the  com-
parison, bade  him  take  what  time  he  pleased;  and  he  de-
sired a  year  :  in  which  space  he  learned  the  Peman
language,  so  as  to  be  able  to  converse  with  the  king  with-
out an  interpreter.

Such  as  did  not  belong  to  tlie  court,  believed  that  he
entertained  their  prince  on  the  subject  of  the  Grecian  af-
fairs ;  but  as  there  were  then  many  changes  in  the  minis-
try, he  incurred  the  envy  of  the  nobility,  who  suspected
that  he  had  presumed  to  speak  too  freely  of  them  to  th2
king.  The  honours  that  were  paid  him  were  far  superi-
or to  those  that  other  strangers  had  experienced  ;  the
king  took  him  with  him  a  hunting,  conversed  familiarly

*  The  god  of  darkness,  the  supposed  author  of  plagues  and  ca-
lamities, %vas  called  Abiiman  or  Arimanius,

•j-  In  this  he  artfully  conformed  to  the  figurative  manner  of  speak-
ing in  use  anloug  the  eastern  nations.


3(52  I»X.UTARCh's    LIVES.

with  him  in  his  palace,  and  introduced  him  to  the  qyeeii^
mother,  who  honoured  him  with  her  coniidence.  He
hkewise  gave  orders  for  his  being  iiistructed  in  the  learn*
ino^  of  the  Magi.

Demaratus,  the  Lacedemonian,  who  was  then  at  court,
being  ordered  to  ask  a  favour,  desired  that  he  might  be
carried  through  Sardis  in  royal  state,*  with  a  diadem
upon  his  head.  But  Mithropaustes,  the  king's  cousin-
german,  took  him  by  the  hand,  and  said,  Demaratus,  this
diadem  does  not  carry  brains  along  tvith  it  to  cover  ;  nor
ivould  you  be  Jupiter,  though  you  should  take  hold  of  his
thunder.  The  king  was  highly  displeased  at  Demaratus
for  making  this  request,  and  seemed  deteiTnined  never  to
forgive  him;  yet,  at  the  desire  of  Themistocles,  he  was
persuaded  to  be  reconciled  to  him.  And  in  the  following
reigns,  when  the  affairs  ofPersiaancf  Greece  were  more
closely  connected,  as  oft  as  the  kings  requested  a  favour
of  any  Grecian  captain,  they  are  said  to  have  promised
him,  in  express  terms,  That  he  should  be  a  greater  man  at
their  court  than  Themistocles  had  been.  Nay,  Vi^e  are  toldj
that  Themistocles  himself,  in  the  m^d^st  of  his  greatness,
and  the  extraordinary  respect  that  was  paid  him,  seeing
his  table  most  elegantly  spread,  turned  to  his  children,
and  said,  Children^  we  should  have  been  undone^  had  it  ?ict
been /or  our  undoing.  Most  authors  agree,  that  he  had
three  cities  given  him.  for  bread,  wine,  and  meat,  Magne-
sia, Lampsacus,  and  Myus.f,    Neanthes  of  Cyzicus,  and.-

*  This  v/as  the  hrghest  ms-tk  ofhonovit  which  the  Persian  kings
could  give.  Ahasuerus,  the  same  with  Xerxes,  the  father  of  this
Artaxerxes,  had  not  long  before  ordained  that  Mordecai  should  be
honoured  in  that  manner.

t  The  country  about  Magnesia  was  so  fertile,  that  it  brought
Themistocles  a  revenue  of  fifty  talents  ;  Lampsacushad  in  its  neigh-
bourhood th2  noblest  vineyards  of  the  east  ;  and  Myus  or  Myon
abounded  in  provisions,  particularly  in  fish.  It  was  usual  with  the
eastern  monarchs,  instead  of  pensions  to  their  favourites,  to  assign
them  cities  and  provinces.  Even  such  provinces  as  the  kings  re-
tained the  revenue  of,  were  under  particular  assignments  ;  one  pro-
vince furnishing  so  much  for  wine,  another  for  victuals,  a  third  for
the  privy  purse,  and  a  fourth  for  the  wardrobe.  One  of  the  queens
had  all  Egypt  for  her  cloathing ;  and  Plato  tells  us  (1.  Alcibiad.)
that  many  of  the  provinces  were  appropriated  for  the  queen's  ward-
lobe  ;  one  for  her  girdle,  another  for  her  head-dress,  and  so  of  the
rest  ;  and  each  p! evince  bore  the  name  of  that  part  of  the  dress  it
was  to  furnish.


TKEMISTOCLES.  303

Phanias,  add  two  more,  Percote  and  Palrescepsis,  for  his
chamber  and  his  w'^ardrobe.

Some  business  relative  to  Greece  having  brought  him
to  the  sea-coast,  a  Persian  named  Epixyes,  governor  of
Upper  Phrygia,  who  had  a  design  upon  his  hfe,  and  had
long  prepared  certain  Pisidians  to  kill  him,  when  he  should
lodge  in  a  city  called  Leontocephalus,  or  JLioji's  Head,
now  determined  to  put  it  in  execution.  But,  -as  he  lay
sleeping  one  day  at  noon,  the  mother  of  the  gods  is  said
to  have  appeared  to  him  in  a  dream,  and  thus  to  have  ad^
dressed  him  :  "  Beware,  Themistocles,  of  the  Lion's
Head,  lest  the  Lion  crush  you.  For  this  warning  I  re-
quire of  you  Mnesiptolema for  my  servant."  Themisto-
cles aAvoke  in  great  disorder,  and  when  he  had  devoutly
returned  thanks  to  the  goddess,  left  the  high-road,  and
took  another  way,  to  avoid  the  place  of  danger.  At  night
he  took  up  his  lodging  beyond  it  ;  but  as  one  of  the  hor-
ses that  had  carried  his  tent  had  fallen  into  a  river,  and
his  servants  were  busied  in  spreading  the  wet  hangings  to
dry,  the  Pisidians,  who  were  advancing  with  their  swords
drawn,  saw  these  hangings  indistinctly  by  moon-light,  and
taking  them  for  the  tent  of  Themistocles,  expected  to  find
him  reposing  himself  within.  They  approached,  there-
fore, and  lifted  up  the  hangings  j  but  the  servants  that
had  the  care  of  them,  fell  upon  them  and  took  them.
The  danger  thus  avoided,  Themistocles  admiring  the
goodness  of  the  goddess  that  appeared  to  him,  built  a  tem-
ple in  Magnesia,  which  he  dedicated  toCybele  Dindymene
and  appointed  his  daughter  Mnesiptolema  priestess  of  it.

When  he  was  come  to  Sardis,  he  diverted  himself  with
looking  ujDon  the  ornaments  of  the  temples ;  and  among
the  great  number  of  ofierings,  he  found  in  the  temple  of
Cybele  a  female  figure  of  brass,  two  cubits  high,  called
Hydrophorus^  or,  the  water-bearer^  which  he  himself,
when  surveyor  of  the  aqueducts  at  Athens,  had  caused
to  be  made  and  dedicated  out  of  the  fines  of  such  as  had
stolen  the  water,  or  diverted  the  stream.  Whether  it
was  that  he  was  moved  at  seeing  this  statue  in  a  strange
country,  or  that  he  was  desirous  to  show  the  Athenians
how  much  he  was  honoured,*  and  what  power  he  had  all

*  It  IS  not  improbable  that  this  proceeded  from  a  principle  of
vanity.  The  love  of  admiration  was  the  ruhn^;  passion  of  The-
niistocies,  and  discovers  itself  unif^)rmly  through  his  whole  con-
duct ...Tliere  iwght,  however,  be  another  reaoun  which  Plutarck


•304  •  PLUTARCH'S    LIVES.

over  the  king's  dominions,  he  addressed  himself  to  the
governor  of  Lydia,  and  begged  leave  to  send  back  the  sta-
tue to  Athens.  The  barbarian  immediately  took  fire,  and
Baid,  he  would  certainly  acquaint  the  king  what  sort  of  a
request  he  had  made  him.  Themistocles,  alarmed  at  this
menace,  applied  to  the  governor's  women,  and,  by  mo-
ney, prevailed  upon  them  to  pacify  him.  After  this,  he
behaved  with  more  prudence,  sensible  how  much  he  had
to  fear  from  the  envy  of  the  Persians.  Hence,  he  did
not  travel  about  Asia,  as  Theopompus  says,  but  took  up
his  abode  at  Magnesia,  where,  loaded  with  valuable  pre-
sents, and  equally  honoured  with  the  Persian  nobles,  he
long  lived  in  great  security  ;  for  the  king,  Avho  was  en-
gaged in  the  affairs  of  the  upper  provinces,  gave  but
little  attention  to  the  concerns  of  Greece.

But  when  Egypt  revolted,  and  was  supported  in  that
revolt  by  the  Atheniansj  when  the  Grecian  fleet  sailed  as
far  as  Cyprus  and  Cilicia,  and  Cimon  rode  triumphant
master  of  the  seas,  then  the  king  of  Pei'sia  applied  him-
self to  oppose  the  Greeks,  and  to  prevent  the  gro^vth  of
their  power.  He  put  his  forces  in  motion,  sent  out  his
generals,  and  dispatched  messengers  to  Themistocles  at
Magnesia,  to  command  him  to  perform  his  promises,  and
exert  himself  against  Greece.  Did  he  not  obey  the  sum-
mons then  ?... No.. ..neither  resentment  against  the  Athe-
nians, nor  the  honours  and  authority  in  which  he  now
flourished,  could  prevail  upon  him  to  take  the  direction
of  the  expedition.  Possibly  he  might  doubt  the  event
of  the  war,  as  Greece  had  then  several  great  generals  ;
and  Cimon  in  particular  was  distinguished  with  extra-
ordinary success.  Above  all,  regard  for  his  own  atchieve-
ments,  and  the  trophies  he  had  gained,  whose  glory  he
was  umvilling  to  tarnish,  determined  him  (as  the  best
method  he  could  take)  to  put  such  an  end  to  his  life
as   became  his  dignity.*     Having,  therefore,  sacrificed

has  not  mentioned.  Themistocles  was  an  excellent  manager  in  po-
litical religion...  He  had  lately  been  eminently  distinguished  by  the
favour  of  Cybele.  He  finds  an  Athenian  statue  in  her  temple....
The  goddess  consents  that  he  should  send  it  to  Atliens  ;  and  the
Athenians,  out  of  respect  to  the  goddess,  must  of  course  cease  to
persecute  her  favourite  Themistocles.

*  Thucydides,  who  was  cotemporary  with  Tliemistocles,  only
says,  He  died  of  a  distemper  ;  but  some  report  that  he  poisoned  bim-
■ielff  seeing  it  impossible  to  accomplish  ivbat  he  had  prornisa^i  the  kin^,

Th  vcvpiD.  de  Bel!,  Pelopon.  I.  i.


THEMISTOCLES.  305

crificed  to  the  gods,  assembled  his  friends,  and  taken  his
last  leave,  he  drank  bull's  blood,*  as  is  generally  reported  ;
or,  as  some  relate  it,  he  took  a  quick  poison,  and  ended
his  days  at  Magnesia,  having  lived  sixty-five  years,  most
of  which  he  had  spent  in  civil  or  military  employments,
When  the  king  was  acquainted  with  the  cause  and  man-
ner of  his  death,  he  admired  him  more  than  ever,  and
continued  his  favour  and  bounty  to  his  friends  and  re-
lations.f

Themistocles  had  by  Archippe,  the  daughter  of  Ly-
sander  of  Alopece,  five  sons,  Neocles,  Diodes,  Archep-
tolis,  Polyeuctes,  and  Cleophantus.  The  three  last  sur-
vived him.  Plato  takes  notice  of  Cleophantus  as  an  ex-
cellent horseman,  but  a  man  of  no  merit  in  other  respects,
Neocles,  his  eldest  son,  died  when  a  child,  by  the  bite  of
a  horse  ;  and  Diodes  was  adopted  by  his  grandfather  Ly-
sander.  He  had  several  daughters  ;  namely,  Mnesipto-
lema,  by  a  second  wife,  who  was  married  to  Archeptolis,
her  half  brother  ;  Italia,  whose  husband  was  Panthides
of  Chios  ;  Sibaris,  married  to  Nicomedes  the  Athenian  ;
and  Nicom.ache,  at  Magnesia,  to  Phrasicles,  the  nephew
of  Themistocles,  who  after  her  father's  death,  took  a
voyage  for  that  purpose,  received  her  at  the  hands  of  her
brothers,  and  brought  up  her  sister  Asia,  the  youngest
of  the  children.

The  INIagnesians  erected  a  very  handsome  monument
to  him,  which  still  remains  in  the  market-place.  No  cre-
dit is  to  be  given  to  Andocides,  who  writes  to  his  friends,
that  the  Athenians  stole  his  ashes  out  of  the  tomb,  and
scattered  them  in  the  air  ;  for  it  is  an  artifice  of  his  to
exasperate  the  nobility  against  the  people.  Phylarchus,
too,  more  like  a  writer  of  tragedy  than  an  historian,
availing  himself  of  what  may  be  called  a  piece  of  ma-
chmery,  introduces  Neocles  and  Demopolis,  as  the  sons

*  Whilst  they  were  sacrificing  the  bull,  he  caused  the  blood  to  be
received  in  a  cup,  aiid  drank  it  whilst  it  was  warm,  which  (accord-
ing to  PUny)  is  mortal,  because  it  coagulates  or  thickens  in  an  in-
stant.

t  There  is,  in  our  opinion,  more  true  heroism  in  the  death  of
Themistocles  than  in  the  death  of  Cato.  It  is  something  enthusi-
astically great  when  a  man  determines  not  to  survive  his  liberty;
but  it  is  something  still  gieater,  when  he  refuses  to  survive  hi«
honour.

VOL.  u  D  d


90&  Plutarch's  lives.

of  Themistocles,  to  make  his  story  more  interesting  and
pathetic.  But  a  very  moderate  degree  of  sagacity  may
discover  it  to  be  a  fictiow.  Yet  Diodorus  the  geographer
writes,  in  his  treatise  of  sepulchres,  but  rather  by  con-
jecture than  certain  knowledge,  that,  near  the  harbour
of  Piraeus,  from  the  promontory  of  Alcimus,*  the  land
makes  an  elbow,  and  when  you  have  doubled  it  inv/ards,
by  the  still  water,  there  is  a  vast  foundation,  upon  which
stands  the  tomb  of  Themistocles,!  in  the  form  of  an  al-
tar. With  him  Plato,  the  comic  writer,  is  supposed  to
agree  in  the  following  lines  :

Oft  as  the  merchant  speeds  the  passing  sail,
Thy  tomb,  Themistocles,  he  stops  to  hail  :
When  hostile  ships  in  martial  combat  meet,
Thy  shade  attending,  hovers  o'er  the  fleet.

Various  honours  and  privileges  were  granted  by  the
Magnesians  to  the  descendants  of  Themistocles,  which
continued  down  to  our  times  ;  for  they  were  enjoyed  by
one  of  his  name,  an  Athenian,  with  whom  I  had  a  parti-
cular acquaintance  and  friendship  in  the  house  of  Ami-
monius  the  philosopher.

*  Meursius  rightly  corrects  It  Alimus.  We  find  no  place  in  Attica
called  Alcimus,  but  a  borough  named  Alimus  there  was,  on  the  east
of  the  Piraeus.

f  Thuycidides  says,  that  the  bones  of  Themistocles,  by  his  own
command,  were  privately  carried  back  into  Attica,  and  buried  there.
But  Pausanias  agrees  with  Theodorus,  that  the  Athenians  repent-
ing of  their  ill  usage  of  this  great  man,  honoured  him  with  a  tomb
in  the  Pirxus.

It  does  not  appear,  indeed,  that  Themistocles  ^v hen  banished,  had
any  design  either  to  revenge  himself  on  Athens,  or  to  take  refuge
in  the  court  of  the  king  of  Persia.  The  Greeks  themselves  forced
him  upon  this,  or  rather  the  Lacedaemonians  ;  for  as  by  their  in-
trigues his  countrymen  were  induced  to  banish  him,  so  by  their  im-
portunities after  he  was  banished,  he  was  not  suffered  to  enjoy  any
nifuge  in  quiet.


[  5or  ]
CAMILLUS.

x\.MONG  the  many  remarkable  things  related  of  Fu-
rius  Camillus,  the  most  extraordinary  seems  to  be  this,
that  though  he  was  often  in  the  highest  commands,  and
performed  the  greatest  actions,  though  he  was  five  times
chosen  dictator,  though  he  triumphed  four  times,  and  was
styled  the  second  founder  of  Rome  ^  yet  he  was  never  once
consul.  Perhaps  we  may  discover  the  reason  in  the  state
of  the  commonwealth  at  that  time  :  the  people  then  at
variance  with  the  senate,*  refused  to  elect  consuls,  and,  in-
stead of  them  put  the  government  in  the  hands  o{  military
tribunes.  Though  these  acted,  indeed,  with  consular
power  and  authority,  yet  their  administration  was  less
grievous  to  the  people,  because  they  were  more  in  num-
ber. To  have  tli^;  direction  of  affairs  entrusted  to  six
persons  instead  of  two,  was  some  ease  and  satisfaction  to
a  people  that  could  not  bear  to  be  dictated  to  by  the  no-
bility. Camiihis,  then  distinguished  by  his  atchieve-
ments  and  «.t  the  height  of  glory,  did  not  choose  to  be
consul  against  the  inclinations  of  the  people,  though  the
comitia^  or  assemblies  in  which  they  mi.2:ht  have  elected
consuls,  were  several  times  held  in  that  period.  Ina.li
his  other  commissions,  which  w^ere  many  and  various,
he  so  conducted  himself,  that  if  he  was  entrusted  with
the  sole  power,  he  shared  it  with  others,  and  if  he  had  a
colleague,  the  glory  was  hisovm.  The  authority  seemed
to  be  shared  by  reason  of  his  great  modesty  in  command,
which  gave  no  occasion  to  envy  ;  and  the  glory  \vas  se-
cured to  him  by  his  genius  and  capacity,  in  which  he
was  universally  allov/ed  to  have  no  equal.

The  family  of  theFuriif  was  not  very  illustrious  be-
fore his  time  ;  he  was  tl^e  first  that  raised  it  to  distinction,

*  The  old  quarrel  about  the  distributlonof  lands  was  revived,  the
people  insisting  that  every  citizen  should  have  an  equal  share.  The
senate  met  frequently  to  disconcert  the  proposal ;  and  at  last  Ap-
pius  Claudius  moved,  that  some  of  the  college  of  the  tribunes  of  the
people  should  be  gained,  as  the  only  remedy  against  the  tyranny  of
that  body  :  which  was  accordingly  put  in  execution.  The  com-
mons, thus  disappointed,  chor.e  military  tribunes,  instead  of  consuls,
and  sometimes  had  them  all  plebeians.     Liv.  1.  iv.  c.  48.

\  Furiut  waHthe  family  name.  Camillus,  (as  has  been  already  cb-


508  Plutarch's  lives.

when  he  served  under  Posthumius  Tabertus  in  the  great
battle  v/ith  the  Equi  and  Volsci.*  In  that  action,  spurring
his  horse  before  the  ranks,  he  received  a  wound  in  the
thigh,  when  instead  of  retiring,  he  plucked  the  javelin  out
of  the  wound,  engaged  with  the  bravest  of  the  enemy,
and  put  them  to  flight.  For  this,  among  other  honours,
he  was  appointed  censor,  an  office  at  that  time  of  great
dignity. t  There  is  upon  record  a  very  laudable  act  of
his,  that  took  place  during  his  office.  As  the  v^ars  had
made  many  widows,  he  obliged  such  of  the  men  as  lived
single,  partly  by  persuasion,  and  partly  by  threatening
them  with  fines,  to  marry  those  widows.  Another  act  of
his,  which  indeed  v/as  absolutely  necessary,  was,  the
causing  orphans,  who  before  were  exempt  fi'om  taxes,
to  contribute  to  the  supplies  :  for  these  were  very  large
by  reason  of  the  continual  wars.  What  was  then  most
urgent  was  the  siege  of  Veii,  whose  inhabitants  some  call
Venetani,  This  city  was  the  barrier  of  Tuscany,  and  in
the  quantity  of  her  arms  and  number  of  her  military,  not
inferior  to  Rome.  Proud  of  her  wealth,  her  elegance  and
luxury,  she  had  maintained  with  the  Romans  many  long
and  gallant  disputes  for  glory  and  for  power.  But  hum-
bled by  many  signal  defeats,  the  .Veientes  had  then  bid
adieu  to  that  ambition  ;  they  satisfied  themselves  with
building  strong  and  high  walls,  and  filling  the  city  with
provisions,  arms,  and  all  kinds  of  warlike  stores  ;  and  so
they  waited  for  the  enemy  without  fear.     The  siege  was

served)  was  an  appellation  of  children  of  quality  who  ministered  in
the  temple  of  some  god.  Our  Camillus  was  the  first  who  retained
it  as  a  surname.

*  This  was  in  the  year  of  Home  224:,  when  Camillas  might  be  about
feurteen  or  fifteen  years  of  age,  (for  in  the  year  of  Rome  389  he  was
near  fourscore)  though  the  Roman  youth  did  not  use  to  bear  arm*
sooner  than  seventeen.  And  though  Plutarch  says  that  his  gallant
behaviour  at  that  time  procured  him  the  censorship,  yet  that  was  an
Cilice  which  the  Romans  never  conferred  upon  a  young  person  ;  and
in  fact,  Camillus  was  not  censor  till  the  year  of  Rome  553.

•j-  The  authority  of  the  censors,  in  the  time  of  the  republic,  was
very  extensive.  They  had  power  to  expel  senators  the  house,  to
degrade  the  knights,  and  to  disable  the  commons  from  giving  their
votes  m  the  assemblies  of  the  people.  But  the  emperors  took  the-
office  upon  themselves  ;  and,  as  many  of  them  abused  it,  it  lost  its
honour,  and  sometimes  the  very  title  was  laid  aside.  As  to  what
Plutarch  says,  that  Camillus,  when  censor,  obliged  many  of  the
bachelors  to  marry  the  widows  of  those  who  had  fallen  in  the  wars  ;

that  was  in  pursuance  of  opc  of  the  powers  of  his  office Coelibcs

esse  frobib^rtQ*


CAMILLUS.  309

long,  but  no  less  laborious  and  troublesome  to  the  be-
sicijers  than  to  them.  For  the  Romans  had  long  been
accustomed  to  summer  campaigns  only,  and  to  winter  at
home  ;  and  then  for  the  lirst  time  their  officers  ordered
them  to  construct  forts,  to  raise  strong  works  about  their
camp,  and  to  pass  the  winter  as  well  as  summer  in  the  ene-
my's  country.

The  seventh  year  of  the  war  was  now  almost  past,  when
the  generals  began  to  be  blamed  ;  and  as  it  was  thought
they  shewed  not  sufficient  vigour  in  the  siege,*  they  were
superceded,  and  others  put  in  their  room  ;  among  whom
was  CamiUus,  then  appointed  tribune  the  second  time-t
He  was  not,  however,  at  present  concerned  in  the  siege,
for  it  fell  to  his  lot  to  head  the  expedition  against  the  Fa-
lisci  and  Capenates,  who,  while  the  Romans  were  other-
wise employed,  committed  gre*t  depredations  in  their
country,  and  harrassed  them  during  the  whole  Tuscan
war.  But  Camillus  falling  upon  them,  killed  great  num-
bers, and  shut  up  the  rest  within  their  walls.

During  the  heat  of  the  war,  a  phxnomenon  appoaredi
in  the  Alban  lake,  which  might  be  reckoned  amongst  the
strangest  prodigies  ;  and  as  no  common  or  natural  cause
could  be  assigned  for  it,  it  occasioned  great  consternation.
The  summer  was  now  declining,  and  the  season  by  no  means
rainy,  nor  remarkable  for  south  winds.  Of  the  many
springs,  brooks,  and  lakes,  Vvhich  Italy  abounds  with,
some  were  dried  up,  and  others  but  feebly  resisted  the
drought ;  the  rivers,  always  low  in  the  summer,  then  ran
with  a  very  slender  stream.  But  the  Alban  lake,  which
has  its  source  within  itself,  and  discharges  no  part  of  its
water,  being  quite  surrounded  with  mountains,  without
any  cause,  unless  it  was  a  supernatural  one,  began  to  rise

*  Of  the  six  military  inbunes  of  that  year,  only  two,  L.  Virginiiis
and  Manius  Sergius,  carried  on  the  siege  of  Veii.  Sergius  command-
ed the  attack,  and  Virginius  covered  the  siege.  While  the  army  was
thus  divided,  the  Falisci  and  Capenates  fell  upon  Sergius,  and,  at
the  same  time,  the  besieged  sallying  out,  attacked  him  on  the  other
side.  The  Romans  under  his  command,  thinking  they  had  all  the
forces  of  Hetruria  to  deal  with,  began  to  lose  courage,  and  retire.
Virginius  could  have  saved  his  colleague's  troops,  but  as  Sergius  was
too  proud  to  send  to  him  for  succour,  he  resolved  not  to  give  him
any.  The  enemy,  therefore,  made  a  dreadful  slaughter  of  ihe  Ro-
mans in  their  lines      Liv.  lib.  v.  c.  8.

\  The  yeiir  of  Rome  35r.

D  d  2


310  PLUT arch's  lives,

anci  swell  in  a  most  remarkable  mannerj  increasing  till
it  reached  the  sides,  and  at  last  the  very  tops  of  the  hills,
ail  which  happened  without  any  agitation  of  its  waters.
For  a  whik  it  was  the  wonder  of  the  shepherds  and  herds-
men :  but  when  the  earth,  which  like  a  mole,  kept  it  from
overflowing-  the  country  below,  was  broken  down  v/ith  the
quantity  and  weight  of  water,  then  descending  like  a  tor-
rent through  the  ploughed  fields  and  other  cultivated
grounds  to  the  sea,  it  not  only  astonished  the  Romans,
but  was  thought  by  all  Italy  to  portend  some  extraordina-
ry event.  It  was  the  great  subject  of  conversation  in  the
camp  before  Veii,  so  that  it  came  at  last  to  be  known  to  the
besieged.

As  in  the  course  of  lono:  sieo-es  there  is  usually  some
conversation  v/ith  the  enemy,  it  happened  that  a  Roman
soldier  formed  an  acquaintance  with  one  of  the  townsmen,
a  man  versed  in  ancient  traditions,  and  supposed  to  be
more  than  ordinarily  skilled  in  divination.  The  Roman,
perceiving  that  he  expressed  great  satisfaction  at  the  story
of  the  lake,  and  thereupon  laughed  at  the  siege,  told  him,
"  This  w^as  not  the  only  wonder  the  times  had  produced,
but  other  prodigies  still  stranger  than  this  had  happened
to  the  Romans;  v/hich  he  should  be  glad  to  <:ommunicate
to  him,  if  by  that  means  he  could  provide  for  his  own
safety  in  the  midst  of  the  public  ruin."  The  man  readily
hearkening  to  the  proposal,  came  out  to  him,  expecting
to  hear  some  secret,  and  the  Roman  continued  the  dis-
ccurse, drawing  him  forward  by  degrees,  till  they  were  at
some  distance  from  the  gates.  Then  he  snatched  him  up
in  his  arms,  and  by  his  superior  strength  held  him,  till,
with  the  assistance  of  several  soldiers  from  the  camp,  he
was  secured  and  carried  before  the  generals.  The  man,
reduced  to  this  necessity,  and  knowing  that  destiny  cannot
be  avoided,  declared  the  secret  oracles  concerning  his  own
country,  "  That  the  city  could  never  be  taken,  till  the  wa-
ters of  the  Alban  lake,  which  had  now  forsook  their  bed,
and  found  new  passages,  were  turned  back,  and  so  divert-
ed, as  to  prevent  their  mixing  with  the  sea."*

The  senate,  informed  of  this  prediction,  and  deliberating
about  it,  were  of  opinion,  it  would  be  best  to  send  to  Del*
phi  to  consult  the  oracle.     They  chose  for  this  purpose

*  The  phrophecy,  according  to  Livy,  (I.  v.  c.  15.)  was  this,  Vtli
shall  never  bt  taken  till  all  the  water  U  run  out  of  the  lake  of  Alba,


CAMILLUS,  311

three  persons  of  honour  and  distinction,  Licinius  Cossus,
Valerius  Potitus,  and  Fabius  Ambustus  ;  who,  having
had  a  prosperous  voyage,  and  consulted  Apollo,  returned
v/iLh  this  anion.^  other  answers,  "  That  they  had  neg-
lected some  ceremonies  in  the  Latin  feasts."*  As  to  the
water  of  the  Alban  lake,  they  were  ordered,  if  possibk,
to  shut  it  up  in  its  ancient  bed  ;  or,  if  that  could  not  be
effected,  to  dig-  canals  and  trenches  for  it,  till  it  lost  itself
on  the  land.  Agreeably  to  this  direction,  the  priests
were  employed  in  offering-  sacrifices,  and  the  people  in
labour,  to  turn  the  courseof  the  water. t

In  the  tenth  year  of  the  siege,  the  senate  removed  the
other  magistrates,  and  appointed  Camillus  dictator,  who
made  choice  of  Cornelius  Scipio  for  his  general  of  horse.
In  the  first  place  he  made  vows  to  the  gods,  if  they  favour-
ed him  with  putthig  a  glorious  period  to  the  war,  to  cele-
brate the  great  Circensian  games  to  their  honour,:}:  and  to
consecrate  the  temple  of  the  goddess,  Avhcm  the  Romans
call  the  mother  matuta.  By  her  sacred  rites  we  may  sup-
pose this  last  to  be  the  goddess  Leucothea.  For  they  take
a  female  slave  into  the  inner  part  of  the  temple, !|  where
they  beat  her,  and  then  drive  her  out  ;  they  carry  their
brother's  children  in  their  arms  instead  of  their  own  \\
and  they  represent  in  the  ceremonies  of  the  sacrifice  all
that  happened  to  the  nurses  of  Bacchus,  and  what  Ino
suffered  for  having  saved  the  son  of  Juno's  rival.

After  these  vows,  Camillus  penetrated  into  the  country
of  the  Faiisci,  and  in  a  great  battle  overthrew  them  and
their  auxiliaries  the  Capenates.  Then  he  turned  to  the
siege  of  Veii ;  and  perceiving  it  would  be  both  difficult
and  dangerous  to  endeavour  to  take  it  by  assault,  he
ordered  mines  to  be  dug,  the  soil  about  the  city  being
easy  to  w^ork,   and  admitting  of  depth  enough  for  the

*  These  feasts  were  instituted  by  Tarquin  the  Proud.  The  Ro-
mans presided  in  them  ;  but  all  the  people  of  Latiuni  were  to  attend
them,  and  to  partake  of  a  bull  then  sacrificed  to  Jupiter  Latialis.

f  This  wonderful  work  subsists  to  this  day,  and  the  v/aters  of  the
lake  Albano  run  through  it.

\  These  were  a  kind  of  tournament  in  the  great  circus.

II  Leucothoe  or  Ino  was  jealous  of  one  of  her  female  slaves,  who
was  the  favourite  of  her  husband  Athamas.

^  Ino  was  a  very  unhappy  mother  ;  for  she  had  seen  her  son  Lear-
qhus  slain  by  her  luisband,  whereupon  she  threw  herself  into  the  sea
with  her  other  son  Melicertes.  But  she  was  a  more  fortuuate  aunt,
kavin^  preserved  Bacchus  the  son  of  her  sister  Semcle.


312  Plutarch's  lives.

works  to  be  carried  on  unseen  by  the  enemy.  As  this
succeeded  to  his  wish,  lie  made  an  assault  without,  to  call
the  enemy  to  the  walls  ;  and  in  the  mean  time,  otiiers  of
his  soldiers  made  their  way  through  the  mines,  and  se-
cretly penetrated  to  Juno's  temple  in  the  citadel.  This
was  the  most  considerable  temple  in  the  city  ;  and  we  are
told,  that  at  that  instant  the  Tuscan  general  happened
to  be  sacrificing  ;  when  the  soothsayer,  upon  inspection
of  the  entrails,  cried  out,  "  The  gods  promise  victory  to
him  that  shall  finish  this  sacrifice;"*  the  Romans,  who
were  under  ground,  hearing  what  he  said,  immediately
removed  the  pavement,  and  came  out  with  loud  shouts
and  clashing  their  arms,  which  struck  the  enemy  with
such  terror,  that  they  fled,  and  left  the  entrails,  which
were  carried  to  Camillus.  But  perhaps  this  has  more  of
the  air  of  fable  than  of  history.

The  city  thus  taken  by  the  Romans  SAVord  in  hand,
while  they  were  busy  in  plundering  it  and  carrying  off
its  immense  riches,  Camillus  beholding  from  the  citadel
what  was  done,  at  first  burst  into  tears  :  and  when  those
about  him  began  to  magnify  his  happiness,  he  lifted  up
his  hands  towards  heaven,  and  uttered  this  player  :....
''  Great  Jupiter,  and  ye  gods  that  have  the  inspection  of
our  good  and  evil  actions,  ye  know  that  the  Romans,
not  without  just  cause,  but  in  their  own  defence,  and  con-
strained by  necessity,  have  made  war  against  this  city,
and  their  enemies  its  unjust  inhabitants.  If  we  miust
have  some  misfortune  in  lieu  of  this  success,  I  intreat
that  it  may  fall,  not  upon  Rome  or  the  Roman  army,  but
upon  myself:  yet  lay  not,  ye  gods,  a  heavy  hand  upon
me  !"t     Having  pronounced  these  words,  he  turned  to

*  Words  spoken  by  persons  unconcerned  in  their  aiFairs,  and
upon  a  quite  different  subject,  were  interpreted  by  the  Heathens  as
good  or  bad  omens,  if  they  happened  to  be  any  way  applicable  to
their  case.  And  they  took  great  pains  to  fulfil  the  cnien,  if  they
thought  it  fortunate  ;  as  well  as  to  evade  it,  if  it  appeared  unlucky.
•\  Livy,  who  has  given  us  this  prayer,  has  not  qualified  it  with  that
modificanon  so  unworthy  of  Camillus,  a/j  sf^xvrov  tXxy(^i7  ro  x,uy.a
Ti'Kivrr.a-ocis  may  it  be  Huith  as  little  detriment  as  possible  to  myself '
On  the  contrary,  he  says,  ut  earn  invidiam  lenire  sua  privato  inco?n-
modo,  cuam  mini nio  publico pcpuli  Romani liceret.  Camillas  prayed,
that,  if  this  success  7nust  ha'ce  an  equivalent  in  some  ensiling  mis^:r-
tune,  that  misfortiwe  might  fall  upon  himself,  and  the  Roman  people
escape  vokh  as  little  detriment  as  possible.  This  was  gi-eat  and  he-
roic. Plu'carch,  having  but  an  imperfect  knowledge  of  the  llonxin
language,  prcbably  mistook  the  sense.


CAMILLUS.  3iS

the  right,  as  the  manner  of  the  Romans  Is  after  prayer
and  supplication,  but  fell  in  turning.  His  friends  that
%vere  by,  expressed  great  uneasiness  at  the  accident,  but
he  soon  recovered  himself  from  the  fall,  and  told  them,
*'  It  was  only  a  small  inconvenience  after  great  success,
agreeable  to  his  prayer."*

After  the  city  was  pillaged,  he  determined,  pursuant
to  his  vow,  to  remove  this  statue  of  Juno  to  Rome.  The
workmen  were  assembled  for  the  purpose,  and  he  offered
sacrifice  to  the  goddess,  "  Beseeching  her  to  accept  of
their  homage,  and  graciously  to  take  up  her  abode  among
the  gods  of  Rome."  To  which  it  is  said  the  statue  softly
answered,  "  She  was  willing  and  ready  to  do  it."  But
Livy  says,  Camillus,  in  offering  up  his  petition,  touched
the  image  of  the  goddess,  and  intreated  her  to  go  with
them,  and  that  some  of  the  standers-by  answered,  '*  She
consented,  and  would  willingly  follow  them."  Those
that  support  and  defend  the  miracle,  have  the  fortune  of
Rome  on  their  side,  which  could  never  have  risen  from
such  small  and  contemptible  beginnings  to  that  height  of
glory  and  empire,  without  the  constant  assistance  of
some  god,  who  favoured  them  with  many  considerable
tokens  of  his  presence.  Several  miracles  of  a  similar
nature  are  also  alleged ;  as,  that  images  have  often  sweat-
ed ;  that  they  have  been  heard  to  groan  ;  and  that  some-
times they  have  turned  from  their  votaries,  and  shut
their  eyes.  Many  such  accounts  we  have  from  our  an-
cients :  and  not  a  few  persons  of  our  own  times  have
given  us  wonderful  relations,  not  unworthy  of  notice....
But  to  give  entire  credit  to  them,  or  altogether  to  disbe-
lieve them,  is  equally  dangerous,  on  account  of  human
v/eakness.  We  keep  not  always  within  the  bounds  of
reason,  nor  are  masters  of  our  minds !  sometimes  we
fall  into  vain  superstition,  and  sometimes  into  an  impious
neglect  of  all  religion.  It  is  best  to  be  cautious  and  to
avoid  extremes.!

Whether  it  v/as  that  Camillus  was  elated  with  his  great
exploit  in  taking  a  city  that  was  the  rival  of  Rome,  after

*  This  is  a  continuation  of  the  former  mistake.  Livy  tells  us,  it
was  conjectured  frcm  the  event,  that  this  fall  of  Camillus  was  a  pre-
sage of  his  condemnation  and  banishment.

t  The  great  Mr.  Addison  seems  to  have  had  this  passage  of  Plu-
tarch in  his  eye,  when  he  delivered  his  opinion  concerning  the  doc-
trine of  witches.


514  PLUTARCH  S    LIVES.

it  had  been  besieged  ten  years,  or  that  he  was  misled  by
his  flatterers,  he  took  upon  him  too  much  state  for  a  ma-
gistrate subject  to  the  laws  and  usages  of  his  country  :
for  his  triumph  was  conducted  with  excessive  pomp,  and
he  rode  through  Rome  in  a  chariot  drawn  by  four  white
horses,  which  no  general  ever  did  before  or  after  him....
Indeed,  this  sort  of  carriage  is  esteemed  sacred,  and  is
appropriated  to  the  king  and  father  of  the  gods.*     The
citizens,  therefore,  considered  this  unusual  appearance  of
grandeur  as  an  insult  upon  them.     Besides,  they  were
offended  at  his  opposing  the  law  by  which  the  city  was
to  be  divided.     For  their  tribunes  had  proposed  that  the
senate  and  people  should  be  divided  into  two  equal  parts  ;
one  part  to   remain  at    Rome,  and  the  other,  as  the  lot
happened  to   fall,  to  remove  to   the  conquered  city,  by
which  means  they  would   not  only  have  more  room,  but
by  being  in  possession  of  two  considerable  cities,  be  bet-
ter  able  to  defend  their   territories  and  to  watch  over
their  prosperity.     The  people,  who  were  very  numerous,
and  enriched  by  the  late  plunder,  constantly  assembled  in
the Jbrujn^  and  in  a  tumultuous  manner  demanded  to  have
it  put  to  the  vote.     But  the  senate  and  other  principal  ci-
tizens  considered  this  proposal  of  the  tribunes,   not   so
much  the  dividing  as  the  destroying  of  Rome,t  and  in
their  uneasiness  applied  to  Camillus.  Camillus  w^as  afraid
to  put  it  to  the  trial,  and  therefore  invented  demurs  and
pretences  (^f  delay,  to  prevent  the  bill's  being  offered  to
the  people  ;  by  which  he  incurred  their  displeasure.

Biit  the  greatest  and  most  manifest  cause  of  their  ha-
tred was,  his  behaviour  with  respect  to  the  tenths  of  the
spoils :  and  if  the  resentment  of  the  people  was  not  in
this  case  altogether  just,  yet  it  had  some  shew  of  reason.
It  seems  he  had  made  a  vow,  as  he  marched  to  Veii,
that,  if  he  took  the  city,  he  would  consecrate  the  tenths
to  Apollo.  But  when  the  city  was  taken,  and  came  to  be
pillaged,  he  was  either  unwilling  to  interrupt  his  men,  or
in  the  hurry  had  forgot  his  vow,  and  so  gave  up  the
;  whole  plunder  to  them.  After  he  had  resigned  his  dicta-
torship, he  laid  the  case  before  the  senate  :  and  the  sooth-

*  He  likewise  coloured  his  face  with  vermiUIon,  the  eoloui- with
which  the  staiucs  of  the  gods  w^ere  commonly  painted.

f  They  feared,  that  two  such  cities  would,  by  degrees,  become
two  different  states,  which,  after  a  destructive  war  with  each  other,
would  at  length  fall  a  prey  to  their  common  enemies.


CAMILLUS.  315

sayers  declared,  that  the  sracrifices  announced  the  anger
of  the  gods,  which  ought  to  be  appeased  bv  offerings  ex-
pressive of  their  gratitude  for  the  favours  they  had  re-
ceived. The  senate  then  made  a  decree,  that  the  plunder
should  remain  with  the  soldiers  (for  they  knew  not  how
to  manage  it  otherwise)  j  but  that  each  should  produce
upon  oath,  the  tenth  of  the  value  of  what  he  had  got....
This  was  a  great  hardship  upon  the  soldiers  ;  and  those
poor  fellows  could  not  without  force  be  brought  to  refund
so  large  a  portion  of  the  fruit  of  their  labours,  and  to
make  good  not  only  what  they  had  hardlv  earned  but
now  actually  spent.  Camillus,  distressed  v/ith  their  com-
plaints, for  want  of  a  better  excuse,  made  use  of  a  very
absurd  apology,  by  acknowledging  h-  had  forgotten  his
vow.  This  they  greatly  resented,  that  having  then  vowed
the  tenths  of  the  enemy's  goods,  he  should  now  exact
the  tenths  of  the  citizens,  However,  they  all  produced
their  proportion,  and  it  was  resolved  that  a  vase  of  massy
gold  should  be  made  and  sent  to  Delphi.  But  as  there
was  a  scarcity  of  gold  in  the  city,  while  the  magistrates
were  considering  how  to  procure  it,  the  Roman  matrons
met,  and  having  consulted  among  themselves,  gave  up
their  golden  ornaments,  which  weighed  eight  talents,  as
an  offering  to  the  god.  And  the  senate  in  honour  of  their
piety,  decreed  that  they  should  have  funeral  orations  as
well  as  the  men,  which  had  not  been  the  custom  before.*
They  then  sent  three  of  the  chief  of  the  nobility  ambas-
sadors, m  a  large  ship  well  manned  and  fitted  out  in  a
manner  becoming  so  solemn  an  occasion.

In  this  voyage,  they  were  equally  endange-ed  by  a
storm  and  a  calm,  but  escaped  beyond  all  expectation,
when  on  the  brink  of  destruction.  For  the  wind  slacken-
mgnear  the  ^olian  islands,  the  galleys  of  theLipareans
gave  them  chase  as  pirates.  Upon  their  stretching?  out
their  hands  for  mercy,  theLipareans  used  no  violence  to
their  persons,  but  towed  the  ship  into  harbour,  and  there

•  The  matrons  had  the  value  of  the  gold  paid  them  :  and  it  was
no  on  th,s  occasion,  but  afterwards,  when  they  contributed  their
golden  ornaments  to  make  up  the  sum  demanded  by  the  Gauls  that
funeral  orat,ons  were  granted  them.  The  privilege  thev  were  no"
favoured  wuh,  was   leave  to  ride  in  chariots  at  the  public   garnet


©thcr  occasions,  in  th«  streets.

m


S16  PLUTARCH'fi   LIVES.

exposed  both  them  and  their  goods  to  sale,  having  first
adjudged  them  to  be  lawful  prize.  V/ith  much  difficulty,
however,  they  were  prevailed  upon  to  release  them,  out
of  regard  to  the  merit  and  authority  of  Timesitheus  the
chief  magistrate  of  the  place  ;  who,  moreover,  conveyed
them  with  his  own  vessels,  and  assisted  in  dedicating  the
gift.     For  this,  suitable  honours  were  paid  him  at  Rome.

And  now  the  tribunes  of  the  fieojile  attempted  to  bring
the  law  for  removing  part  of  the  citizens  to  Veii  once
more  upon  the  carpet  :  but  the  war  with  the  Falisci  very
seasonably  intervening,  put  the  management  of  the  elec-
tions in  the  hands  of  the  patricians  ;  and  they  nominated
Camillus  a  military  tribune^*  together  with  five  others  ;
as  affairs  then  required  a  general  of  considerable  dignity,
reputation,  and  experience.  When  the  people  had  con-
firmed this  nomination,  Camillus  marched  his  forces  into
the  country  of  the  Falisci,  and  laid  siege  to  Falerii,a  city
well  fortified,  and  provided  in  all  respects  for  the  war.
He  was  sensible  it  was  like  to  be  no  easy  affair,  nor  soon
to  be  dispatched,  and  this  was  one  reason  for  his  engaging
in  it  ;  for  he  was  desirous  to  keep  the  citizens  employed
abroad,  that  they  might  not  have  leisure  to  sit  down  at
home  and  raise  tumults  and  seditions.  This  was  indeed  a
remedy  which  the  Romans  always  had  recourse  to,  like
good  physicians,  to  expel  dangerous  hum.ours  from  the
body  politic.

The  Falerians,  trusting  to  the  fortifications  with  which
they  were  surrounded,  made  so  little  account  of  the  siege,
that  the  inhabitants,  except  those  w  ho  guarded  the  walls,
walked  the  streets  in  their  common  habits.  The  boys  too
went  to  school,  and  the  master  took  them  out  to  walk  and
exercise  about  the  walls.  For  the  Falerians,  likethe  Greeks,
chose  to  have  their  children  bred  at  one  public  school,  that
they  might  betimes  be  accustomed  to  the  same  discipline,
and  form  themselves  to  friendship  and  society.

This  schoolmaster,  then,  designing  to  betray  the  Fale-
rians by  means  of  their  children,  took  them  every  day  out
of  the  city  to  exercise,  keeping  pretty  close  to  the  walls
at  first,  and  when  their  exercise  was  over  led  them  in
again.  By  degrees  he  took  them  out  farther,  accustoming
them  to  divert  themselves  freely,  as  if  they  had  nothing

*  The  year  of  Rome  S61.  Camillus  was  then  military  tribune  the
third  time.


CAMILLUS*  317

to  fear.  At  last,  having  j^ot  them  altogether,  he  brought
them  to  the  Roman  advanced  guard,  and  delivered  them
lip  to  be  carried  to  Camilhis.  Wlien  he  came  into  hi:,
presence,  he  said,  *'  He  was  the  schoohnaster  of  Falerii,
but  preferring  his  favour  to  the  obligations  of  duty,  he
came  to  deliver  up  those  children  to  him,  and  in  them  the
whole  city."  This  action  appeared  very  shocking  to  (3a-
millus,  and  he  said  to  those  that  were  by,. "  ^Var  (at  best)
is  a  savage  thing,  and  wades  through  a  sea  of  violence  and
injustice  ;  yet  even  war  itself  has  its  laws,  which  men  of
honour  will  not  depart  from  ;  nor  do  they  so  pursue  vic-
tory, as  to  avail  themselves  of  acts  of  villainy  and  baseness.
For  a  great  general  should  rely  only  on  his  own  virtue,
and  not  upon  the  treachery  of  others."  Then  he  ordered
the  lictors  to  tear  off  the  wretch's  clothes,  to  tie  his  hands
behind  him,  and  to  furnish  the  boys  with  rods  and  scour-
ges, to  punish  the  traitor,  and  whip  him  into  the  city.
By  this  means  the  Falerians  had  discovered  the  school-
master's treason  ;  the  city,  as  might  be  expected,  was
full  of  lamentations  for  so  great  a  loss,  and  the  principal  in-
habitants, both  men  and  women,  crowded  about  the  walls
and  the  gate  like  persons  distracted.  In  the  midst  of  this
disorder  they  espied  the  boys  whipping  on  their  master,
naked  and  bound;  and  calling  Camillus  "  their  god,  their
deliverer,  their  father."  Not  only  the  parents  of  those,
children,  but  all  the  citizens  in  general  were  struck  with
admiration  at  the  spectacle,  and  conceived  such  an  affec-
tion for  the  justice  of  Camillus,  that  they  immediately  as-
sembled in  council,  and  sent  deputies  to  surixnider  to  him
both  themselves  and  their  city.

Camillus  sent  them  to  Rome  :  and  v/hen  they  were  in-
troduced to  the  senate,  they  said,  "The  Romans,  in  pre-
ferring justice  to  conquest,  have  taught  us  to  be  satisfied
with  submission  instead  of  liberty.  At  the  same  time  we
declare  we  do  not  think  ourselves  so  much  beneath  you  in
strength,  as  inferior  in  virtue."  The  senate  referred  the
disquisition  and  settling  of  the  articles  of  peace  to  Camil-
lus ;  v/ho  contented  himself  with  taking  a  sum  of  money
of  the  Falerians,  and  having  entered  into  alliance  with  the
whole  nation  of  the  Falasci,  returned  to  Romq.

But  the  soldiers,  vrho  expected  to  have  had  the  plun-
dering of  Falerii,  when  they  came  back  empty-handed,  ac-
cused Camilhi?  to  tlieir  fellow-citizens  as  an  enemy  to  the

VOL.    I.  K  e


313  rLUTAKCIi''s    LIVES.

commonc,  and  one  that  maliciously  opposed  the  interest  of
the  poor.  And  v»hen  the  tribunes  again  proposed  the  law
for  transplanting  part  of  the  citizens  to  Veii,*  and  sum-
moned the  people  to  give  their  votes,  Camillas  spoke  very
freely,  or  rather  with  much  asperity  against  it,  appearing
remarkably  violent  in  his  opposition  to  the  people  ;  who
therefore  lost  their  bill,  but  harboured  a  strong  resent-
ment against  Camillus.  Even  the  misfortune  he  had  in
his  family,  of  losing  one  of  his  sons,  did  not  in  the  least
mitigate  their  rage  ;  though,  as  a  man  of  great  goodness
and  tenderness  of  heart,  he  v/as  inconsolable  for  his  loss,
and  shut  himself  up  at  home,  a  close  mourner  with  the
women,  at  the  same  time  that  they  were  lodging  an  im-
peachment against  him.

His  accuser  was  Lucius  Apuleius,  who  brought  against
him  a  charge  of  fraud  with  respect  to  the  Tuscan  spoils  ;
and  it  was  alleged  that  certain  brass  gates,  a  part  of  those
spoils,  were  found  with  him.  The  people  were  so  much
exasperated,  that  it  was  plain  they  would  lay  hold  on  any"
pretext  to  condemn  him.  He,  therefore,  assembled  his
friends,  his  colleagues,  and  fellow-soldiers,  a  great  number
in  all,  and  begged  of  them  not  to  suffer  him  to  be  crushed
by  false  and  unjust  accusations,  and  exposed  to  the  scorn
of  his  enemies.  When  they  had  consulted  together,  and
fully  considered  the  affair,  the  answer  they  gave  was,  that
they  did  not  believe  it  in  their  power  to  prevent  the  sen-
tence, but  they  would  willingly  assist  him  to  pay  the
fine  that  might  be  laid  upon  him;  He  could  not,  how-
ever, bear  the  thoughts  of  so  great  an  indignity,  and  giv-
ing way  to  his  resentment,  determined  to  quit  the  city  as
a  voluntary  exile.  Having  taken  leave  of  his  wife  and
children,  he  went  in  silence  from  his  house  to  the  gate  of
th«  city.f  There  he  made  a  stand,  and  turning  about,
stretched  out  his  hands  towards  the  capitol,  and  prayed
to  the  gods,  "  That  if  he  was  driven  out  without  any

*  The  patricians  carried  it  against  the  bill,  only  by  a  majority  of
one  tribe.  And  now  they  were  so  well  pleased  with  the  people,
tliat  the  very  next  morning  a  decree  was  passed,  assigning  six  acres.
of  the  lands  of  Veii,  not  only  to  every  father  of  a  family,  but  to  every
single  person  of  free  condition.  On  the  other  hand,  the  people,  de-
liglited  with  this  liberality,  allowed  the  electing  of  consuls,  mstead
cr  military  tribunes.

^  This  v/as  fcur  years  after  the  tal;:ng  of  Ffeletii,


CAMILLUS.  319

lUiiil.t,pf  his  own»  and  merely  by  tlic  violence  or  envy  of
the  people,  the  Romans  mig-ht  quickly  repent  it,  and  ex-
press to  all  the  world  their  want  of  Camilius,  and  their  re-
gret for  his  absence."

When  he  had  thus,  like  Achilles,  uttered  his  impreca-
tions against  his  countrymen,  he  departed  ;  and  leaving-
ins  cause  undefended,  he  was  condemned  to  pay  a  fine  of
fifteen  thvousand  a:ies  ;  which,  reduced  to  Grecian  money,
is  one  thousand  five  hundred  drachma  :  for  the  r/v  is  a
small  coin  that  is  the  tenth  part  of  apiece  of  silver,  which
for  that  reason  is  called  cknarius,  and  answers  to  our
drachmu.  There  is  not  a  man  in  Rome  who  does  not  be-
lieve that  these  imprecations  of  Caraiilus  had  theireffect ;
ihough  the  punishment  of  iiis  countrymen  fo:  their  in-
justice, proved  no  v^^ays  agreeable  to  him,  but  ol  ihe  con-
trary matter  of  grief.  Yet  hov/  great,  how  memorable
was  that  punishment  I  How  remarkably  did  veiii?;eance
pursue  the  Romans  i  What  danger,  destruction,  and  dis-
grace, did  those  times  bring  upon  the  city  !  whether  it
was  the  work  of  fortune,  or  whether  it  is  the  office  of  some
deity  to  see  that  virtue  shall  not  be  oppressed  by  the  un-
grateful with  impunity.*

The  first  token  of  the  approaching  calamities,  was  the
death  of  Julius  the  Censor,]  For  the  Romans  have  a  par-
ticular veneration  for  the  censorji  and  look  upon  his  office
as  sacred.  A  second  token  happened  a  little  before  the
exile  of  Camilius.  Marcus  Ceditius,  a  man  of  no  illus-
trious family  indeed,  nor  of  senatorial  rank,  but  a  person  of
great  probity  and  virtue,  informed  the  military  t  rbunes
of  a  matter  which  deserved  great  attention.  As  he
w^as  going  the  night  before  along  what  is  called  tlie
New  Road,  he  said  he  was  addressed  in  a  loud  voice.
Upon  turning  aboui  he  saw  nobody,  but  heard  tliesc
words  in  an  accent   more  than  human  i.    "  Go,  Marcus

*  Ifwas  the  goddess  Nemesis  whom  the  Heathens  believed  to
have  the  office  of  punishing  evil  actions  in  this  world,  particularly
pride  and  ingratititde.

t  The  Greek  text  as  it  now  stands,  instead  of  the  censor  Julius,
has  the  month  of  July  ;  but  that  has  been  owing  to  the  error  of  some
igiiorant  transcriber.  Upon  the  death  of  Caius  Julius  the  censor,
Marcus  Cornelius  was  appointed  to  succeed  him  :  but  as  the  censor-
ship of  the  latter  proved,  unfortunate,  ever  after,  when  a  censor
happened  to  die  in  his  olfice,  they  not  only  forbore  naming  anotlicr
in  his  place>  but  obliged  his  colleague  to  quit  his  dignity.


o20  Plutarch's  lives.

Ceditius,  and  early  in  the  monJjig  acquaint  the  rjia^lb-
irates,  that  they  must  shortly  e:spect  the  Gauls."  But
the  tribunes  made  a  jest  cf  the  information  ;  and  soon
after  followed  the  discjiace  cf  Camillus.

The  Gauls  are  of  Celtic  origin,*  and  are  said  to  have
left  their  country,  which  was  too  smsll  to  maintain  their
vast  numbers,  to  go  in  search  of  another.  These  emi-
grants consisted  of  many  thousands  of  young  and  aMe
warriors,  with  a  still  greater  number  of  women  and  chil-
dren, Pait  of  them  took  their  route  tov/ards  the  northern
ocean,  crossed  the  Rhiphrean  mountains,  and  settled  in  the
extreme  parts  cf  Europe  ;  and  part  established  them-
selves for  a  lonp;  time  betv,'een  tlie  Pyrenees  and  the  Alps,
near  the  Sencnes  and  Celtorians-t  But  happening  to  taste
of  wine,  which  was  then  for  the  first  time  brought  out  of
Italy,  they  so  much  admired  the  liquor,  and  were  so  en-
chanted with  this  new  pleasure,  that  they  snatched  up
their  arms,  and  taking  their  parents  along  with  them,
marched  to  the  Alps,:!  to  seek  that  country  which  pro-
duced such  excellent  fruit,  and,  in  comparison  of  which,
ihey  considered  all  others  as  barren  and  ungenial.

The  man  that  first  carried  wine  am.ongst  them,  and
excited  them  to  invade  Italy,  is  said  to  have  been  Aruns,
a  Tuscan,  a  man  of  some  distinction,  and  not  naturally  dis-
posed to  mischief,  but  led  to  it  by  his  misfortunes.  He
was  guardian  to  an  orphan  namedLucumo,!iof  the  greatest
fortune  in  the  country,  and  most  celebrated  for  beauty.
Aruns  brought  him  up  from  a  boy,  and  when  grown  up,
he  still  continued  at  his  house,  upon  a  pretence  of  enjoy-
ing his  conversation.     Mean  v/hile  he  had  corrupted  his

*  The  ancients  called  aU  the  inhabitants  of  the  west  and  north,
as  far  as  Scythia,  by  the  ccramon  name  of  CeltK.

t  The  country  of  the  Senones  contained  Sens,  Anxerre,  and
Troyes,  as  far  up  as  Paris.  Who  the  Celtorii  \vcre  is  not  knovvu  :
probably  the  word  is  corrupted.

I  Livy  tells  us,  Italy  was  known  to  the  Gauls  two  hundred  years
before,  though  he  does  indeed  nicnticn  the  story  of  Aruns.  Then
he  goes  on  to  inform  us,  that  the  mig-rations  of  the  Gauls  into  Italy
and  other  countries,  was  occasioned  by  their  numbers  being  too
large  for  their  old  settlements  ;  and  that  the  two  brothers  Beliovesus
and  Sigovesus  casting  lots  to  determine  which  way  they  shtuid  steer
their  course,  Italy  fell  to  Beliovesus,  and  Germany  to  Sigove.sus.

Ij  Liiaimo  was  not  the  nam.e  hut  the  title  of  the  young  man.  He
was  Lord  of  a  Liicumo7iy,  Hetruria  wiis  divided  into  prii\ci|>alities
.called  Z,'ucvino7iie*\


CAMILLUS.  S21

guardian's  wife,  or  she  had  corrupted  him,and  for  a  long
time  the  criminal  commerce  was  carried  on  undiscovered.
At  length  their  passion  becoming  so  violent,  that  they
could  neither  restrain  nor  conceal  it,  the  young  man  car-
ried her  off,  and  attempted  to  keep  her  openly.  The
husband  endeavoured  to  find  his  redress  at  law,  but  was
disappointed  by  the  superior  interest  and  wealth  of  Lu-
cumo.  He  therefore  quitted  his  own  country,  and  hav-
ing heard  of  the  enterprising  spirit  of  the  Gauls,  went  to
them,  and  conducted  their  armies  into  Italy.

In  their  first  expedition  they  soon  possessed  themselves
of  that  country  which  stretches  out  from  the  Alps  to  both
seas.  That  this  of  old  belonged  to  the  Tuscans,  the
names  themselves  are  a  proof:  for  the  sea  which  lies  to
the  north  is  called  the  Adriatic  from  a  Tuscan  city  named
Adria,  and  that  on  the  other  side  to  the  south  is  called
the  Tuscan  sea.  All  that  country  is  well  planted  with
trees,  has  excellent  pastures,  and  is  well  watered  with
rivers.  It  contained  eighteen  considerable  cities,  whose
manufactures  and  trade  procured  them  the  gratifications
©f  luxury.  The  Gauls  expelled  the  Tuscans,  and  made
themselves  masters  of  these  cities  j  but  this  was  done  long
before.

The  Gauls  were  now  besieging  Clusium,  a  city  of
Tuscany.  The  Clwsians  applied  to  the  Romans,  intreat-.
ing  them  to  send  ambassadors  and  letters  to  the  barba-.
rians.  Accordingly  they  sent  thi*ee  illustrious  persons  of
the  Fabian  family,  who  had  borne  the  highest  employ-
ments in  the  state.  The  Gauls  received  thern  courte>
ously  on  account  of  the  name  of  Rome,  and  putting  a
stop  to  their  operations  against  the  town,  came  to  a  con-
ference. But  when  they  were  asked  what  injury  they  had
received  from  the  Clusians  that  they  came  against  their
city,  Brennus,  king  of  the  Gauls^  smiled  and  said,  *'  The
injury  the  Clusians  do  us,  is  their  keeping  to  them-
selves a  large  tract  of  ground,  when  they  can  only  culti-
vate a  small  one,  and  refusing  to  give  up  a  part  of  it  to  us
v/ho  are  strangers^  numerous,  and  poor.  In  the  same
manner  you  Romans  \Yere  injured  formerly  by  the  Al-
bans, the  Fidenates,  and  the  Ardeates,  and  lately  by  the
people  of  Veii  and  Capenoe,  and  the  greatest  part  of  the
Fahsci  and  the  Volsci.  Upon  these  you  make  war;  if
they  refuse  to  share  with  ycu  their  gccds,  yov]  enslave
*  E  e  2


•*22  PLlTTARCn'S    LIVES.

their  persons, lay  waste  their  country  and  demolish  their
cities.  Nor  are  your  proceedings  dishonourable  or  un-
just; for  you  follow  the  most  tuicient  of  lau  s,  which
directs  the  weak  to  obey  the  strong,  from  the  Creator
even  to  the  irrational  part  of  the  creation.,  that.are  .taught
by  nature  to  make  unc  of  the  advantage  their  strength
affords  them  against  the  feeble.*  -Cease,  then  to  express
your  compassion  for  the  Ckisians,  lest  you  teach  the  Gauls
in  their  turn  to  commiserate  those  that  have  been  op-
pressed by  the  Romans.

By  this  answer  the  Romans  clearly  perceived  that
Brennus  vrould  come  to  no  terms ;  and  therefore  they
went  into  Clusium,  where  they  encouraged  and  animated
the  inhabitants  to  sally  against  the  barbarians,  either  to
make  trial  of  the  strength  of  the  Ciusians,  or  to  shew
their  own.  Tiie  Ciusians  made  the  sally,  and  a  sharp
coniiict  ensued  near  the  walls,  when  Qtiintus  Ambustus,
one  of  the  Fabii,  spunked  his  horse  against  a  Gaul  of  ex-
traordinary size  and  figure,  who  had  advanced  a  good
way  before  the  ranks.  At  first  he  was  not  known,  be-
cause the  encounter  was  hot,  and  his  armour  dazzled  the
eyes  of  the  beholders  ;  but  v/hen  he  had  overcome  and
killed  the  Gaul,  and  came  to  despoil  him  of  his  arms,
Brennus  knew  him,  and  called  the  gods  to  witness,  '^  That
against  all  the  laws  and  usages  of  mankind  which  were
esteemed  the  mpst  sacred  and  inviolable,  Ambustus  came
as  an  ambassador,  but  acted  as  an  enemy."  He  dl\i^y
off  his  men  directly,  and  bidding  the  Ciusians  farewei,
led  his  army  towards  Rome.  But  that  he  might  not
seem  to  rejoice  that  such  an  affront  was  offered,  or  to
have  .wanted  a  pretext  for  hostilities,  he  sent  to  demand
the  offender  in  order  to  punish  him,  and  in  the  mean  time
advanced  but  slowly.

The  herald  being  arrived,  the  senate  was  assembled
and  many  spoke  against  the  Fabii ;  particularly  the  priests
called  Jecialts  represented  the  action  as  an  offence  against
religion,  and  adjured  the  senate  to  lay  the  whole  guilt
and  the  expiation  of  it  upon  the  person  who  alone  was  to
blame,  and  so  avert  the  wrath  of  heaven  from  the  rest  of
the  Romans.  These  Jecutles  were  appointed  by  Numa,
the  mildest  and  justest  of  kings,  conservators  of  peace,
as  well  as  judges  to  give  sanction  to  the  just  causes  of
war.  The  senate  referred  the  matter  to  the  people,  and
the  priests  accused  Tahius  .with   some   ardour  before


CAMILLUS-  323

thcrn,  but  such  was  the  disregard  they  expressed  for  their
persons,  aiid  such  their  contempt  of  religion,  that  they
constituted  that  very  Fabius  and  his  brethren  military
tribunes'.*

As  soon  as  the  Gauls  were  informed  of  this,  they  were
greatly  enraged,  and  would  no  lonr^er  dv-day  their  march,
but  hastened  forward  with  tlie  utmost  celerity.  Their
prodigious  numbers,  th^ir  « littering  armo,  their  fury  and
impetuosity  struck,  tenor  v/lierever  they  came  ;  people
gave  up  their  lands  for  lost,  not  doubting  but  the  cities
would  scon  follow  :  however,  v.hut  was  beyond  all  ex-
pectation, they  injured  no  man's  property  ;  they  neither
pillaged  the  fields  nor  insulted  the  cities ;  and  as  they
passed  by,  they  cried  out,  "  They  were  going  to  Rome)
they  were  at  vrar  Avith  the  Romans  only,  and  considered
all  others  as  their  friends."

While  the  barl^arians  were  going  foi'ward  in  this  im-
petuous manner,  the  tribunes  led  out  their  forces  to  battle,
in  number  not  inferior,!  (for  they  consisted  of  forty  thou-
sand foot)  but  the  greatest  part  undisciplined^  and  such
as  had  never  handled  a  weapon  before.  Besides,  they
paid  no  attention  to  religion,  having  neither  propitiated
the  gods  by  sacrifice,  nor  consulted  the  sooth-sayers
as  was  their  duty  in  time  of  danger,  and  before  an  en-
gagement. Another  thing  which  occasioned  no  small
confusion,  was  the  number  of  persons  joined  in  the  com-
mand ;  whereas  before,  they  had  often  appointed  for
wars  of  less  consideration  a  single  leader,  v/hom  they  call
dictator^  sensible  of  how  great  consequence  it  is  to  good
order  and  success,  at  a  dangerous  crisis,  to  be  actuated
as  it  were  with  one  soul,  and  to  have  the  absolute  com-
mand invested  in  one  person.  Their  ungrateful  treat-
ment of  Camillus,  too,  was  not  the  least  unhappy  cir-
cumsttmce  ;  as  it  now  appeared  dangerous  for  the  gene-
rals to  use  their  authority  without  some  flattering  indul-
gence to  the  people.

Id  this  condition  they  marched  out  of  the  city,  and
encamped  about  eleven  miles    from  it,  on  the  banks  of

*  The  year  of  Home  366;  or  (according  to  some  Chronolcgers)
565.

•j-  They  were  infei-ior  in  number ;  for  the  Gauls  were  seventy
thousand ;  and  therefore  the  Romans,  when  they  came  to  action,
were  obliged  to  extend  their  wings  so  as  to  make  their  centre  very
thin,  which  wSis  one  reason  of  their  being  soon  broken.


524  Plutarch's  lives.

the  river  Allia,  not  far  from  its  confluence  with  the  Tiber.
There  the  barbarians  came  upon  them,  and  as  the  Ro-
mans engaged  in  a  disorderly  manner,  they  were  shame-
fully beaten  and  put  to  flight.  Their  left  wing  was  soon
pushed  into  the  river,  and  there  destroyed.  The  right
wing,  which  quitted  the  field  to  avoid  the  charge,  and
gained  the  hills,  did  not  suffer  so  much  ;  many  of  them
escaping  to  Rome.  The  rest  that  survived  the  carnage,
when  the  enemy  were  satiated  with  blood,  stole  by  night
to  Veil,  concluding  that  Rome  was  lost,  and  its  inhabitants
put  to  the  sword.

This  battle  was  fought  when  the  moon  was  at  full,  about
the  summer  solstice,  the  very  same  day  that  the  slaughter
of  the  Fabii  happened  long  before,*  when  three  hundred
of  them  were  cut  off"  by  the  Tuscans.  The  second  mis-
fortune, however,  so  much  effaced  the  memory  of  the
first,  that  the  day  is  still  called  the  day  q/"  Allia,  from  the
river  of  that  name.

As  to  the  point,  whether  there  be  any  lucky  or  unlucky
days,t  and  whether  Heraclitus  was  right  in  blaming  He-
siod  for  distinguishing  them  into  fortunate  or  unfortunate,
as  not  knowing  that  the  nature  of  all  days  is  the  same,
we  have  considered  it  in  another  place.  But  on  this  oc-
casion perhaps  it  may  not  be  amiss  to  mention  a  few  ex-
amples. The  Boeotians,  on  the  fifth  of  the  month  which
they  call  Hi/ipodromhis  and  the  Athenians  Hecatomb  (eon
[July]  gained  two  signal  victories,  both  of  which  restored
liberty  to  Greece  ;  the  one  at  Leuctra  ;  the  other  at  Ge-
r^stus,  above  two  hundred  years  before, :{:  when  they  de-
feated Lattamyas  and  the  Thessalians,  On  the  other
hand,  the  Persians  were  beaten  by  the  Greeks  on  the  sixth

*  The  sixteenth  of  July.
•  f  The  ancients  deemed  some  days  lucky  and  others  unlucky,  either
from  some  occult  power  which  they  supposed  to  be  in  numbers,  or
from  the  nature  of  the  deities  who  presided  over  them,  or  else  fron>
observation  of  fortunate  or  unfortunate  events  having  often  happen-
ed on  particular  days.

\  The  Thessalians  under  the  command  of  Lattamyas  were
beaten  by  the  Boeotians  not  long  before  the  battle  of  Thermopylae,
and  little  more  than  one  hundred  yearsbefore  the  battle  of  Leuctra.
There  is  also  an  error  here  in  the  name  of  the  place,  probably  in-
troduced by  seme  blundering  transcriber  (for  Plutarch  must  have
been  well  acquainted  with  the  names  of  places  in  Boeotia.)  Instead
of  Gersstus,  we  should  read  Ceressus  ;  the  former  was  a  promon-
tory in  Eubcsa,  the  latter  was  a  fort  in  Bceotia.


CAMILLU3*  325

of  BocdromUn  [September]  at  Marathon,  on  the  third  of
Flatxa,  as  a.h  ••  Mycde,  and  on  the  twenty-sixth  at  Arbeii.
About  the  full  moon  of  the  same  month,  the  AthenicUis,
under  the  conduct  of  Chabi  ias,  were  victorious  in  the  sca-
fight  near  Naxos,  and  on  the  twentieth  they  gained  the
victory  of  Salamis,  as  we  have  mentioned  in  the  treatise
concerning  days.  The  month  T/mrgclion  [May]  was  al-
-so  remarkably  unfortunate  to  the  barbarians  :  for  in  tiiat
month  Alexander  defeated  the  king  of  Persia's  generals
near  the  Granicus  ;  and  the  Carthaginians  were  beaten  by
Timoleon  in  Sicily  on  the  twenty-fourth  of  the  same  ;  a
*lay  still  more  remarkable  (according  to  Ephorus,  Callist-
henes,  Demaster,  and  Phylarchus)  for  the  taking  of  Troy.
On  the  contrary,  the  month  Mctagitnion  [August]  which
Uie  Boeotians  call  Par,eirufi^  was  very  unlucky  to  the
Greeks  ;  for  on  the  seventh  they  were  beaten  by  Antipa-
ter  in  the  battle  ofCranonand  utterly  ruined,  and  before
that,  they  were  defeated  by  Philip  at  Cha:ronea.  And
on  that  same  day  and  month  and  year,  the  troops  which
under  Archidamnsmade  a  descent  upon  Italy,  were  cut
to  pieces  by  the  barbarians.  The  Carthaginians  have  set
a  mark  upon  the  twenty-second  of  that  month,  as  a  day
that  has  always  brought  upon  them  the  greatest  of  calami-
ties. At  the  same  time,  I  amnot  ignorant  that  about  the
time  of  the  celebration  of  the  mysteries.^  Thebes  was  de-
molished by  Alexander  ;  and  after  that,  on  the  san^e
twentieth  of  Bocdrowicn  [September]  a  day  sacred  to  the
solemnities  of  Bacchus,  the  Athenians  v/ere  obliged  to
receive  a  Macedonian  garrison.  On  one  and  the  same  day
the  Romans  under  the  command  of  Cscpio,  Vrere  stripped
of  their  camp  by  the  Cimbri,  and  afterwards  under  Lucul-
lus  conquered  Tigrancs,  and  the  Armenians.  King  At-
talus  and  Pompey  the  Great,  both  died  on  their  birth  days.
And  I  could  give  account  of  many  others  who,  on  the  same
day,  at  different  periods,  have  experienced  both  good  and
bad  fortune.  Be  that  as  it  may,  the  Romans  marked  the
day  of  their  defeat  at  Allia  as  unfortunate  ;  and  as  super-
stitious fears  generally  increase  upon  a  misfortune,  they
not  only  distinguished  that  as  such,  but  the  two  next  that
follow  it  in  every  month  throughout  the  year.

If  after  so  decisive  a  battle  the  Gauls  had  immediately
pursued  the  fugitives,  there  would  have  been  nothing  to
iiinder  the  ^itire  destructioo  of  Rome,  and  ail  that  remain-


326  PLUTARcn's  lives.

ed  in  it ;  with  such  terror  was  the  city  struck  at  the  return
of  those  that  escaped  iVoni  the  battle,  and  so  tilled  with
confusion  and  distraction !  But  the  Gauls,  not  imagining-
the  victory  to  be  so  great  as  it  was,  in  the  excess  of  their
joy  indulged  themselves  in  good  cheer,  and  shared  the
plunder  of  the  camp  ;  by  which  means  numbers  that
were  for  leaving  the  city  had  leisure  to  escape,  and  those
that  remained  had  time  to  recollect  themselves  and  pre-
pare for  their  defence.  For,  quitting  the  rest  of  the  city,
they  retired  to  the  Capitol,  which  they  fortified  with  strong-
ramparts  and  provided  well  with  arms.  But  their  first
care  was  of  their  holy  things,  most  of  which  they  convey-
ed into  the  Capitol.  As  for  the  sacred  fire,  the  veatal
virgins  took  it  up,  together  with  other  holy  rehcks,  and
fled  away  with  it  :  though  some  will  have  it,  that  they
have  not  the  charge  of  any  thing  but  that  evtrliving  fire,
which  Numa  appointed  to  be  worshipped  as  the  principle
of  all  things.  It  is  indeed  the  most  active  thing  in  nature  ;
and  all  generation  either  is  motion,  or,  at  least,  with  mo-
tion. Other  parts  of  matter,  when  the  heat  fails,  lie
sluggish  and  dead,  and  crave  the  force  of  fire  as  an  in-
forming soul ;  and  when  that  comes,  they  acquire  some
active  or  passive  quality.  Hence  it  was  that  Numa,  a  man
curious  in  his  researches  into  nature,  and  on  account  of
his  wisdom  supposed  to  have  conversed  with  the  muses,
consecrated  this  fire,  and  ordered  it  to  be  perpetually  kept
up,  as  an  image  of  that  eternal  power  which  preserves  and
actuates  the  universe.  Others  say,  that  according  to  the
usage  of  the  Greeks,  the  fire  is  kept  ever  burning  before
the  holy  places,  as  an  emblem  of  purity  ;  but  that  there
are  other  things  in  the  most  secret  part  of  the  temple,  kept
from  the  sight  of  all  but  those  virgins  whom  they  call  i^cs-
tals  :  and  the  most  current  opinion  is,  that  the  palladium
of  Troy,  which  -/Eneas  brought  into  Italy,  is  laid  up  there.
Others  say,  the  Samothraci?un  gods  are  there  concealed  ;
whom  Dardanus,*  after  he  had  built   Troy,   brought   to

*  Dardanus,  who  flourished  in  the  time  of  Moses,  about  the  year
before  Christ  1480,  is  said  to  have  been  originally  of  Arcadia,  from
whence  he  passed  to  Samothrace.  Afterwards  he  married  Barea  or
Arista  the  daughter  of  Teucer,  king  of  Phrygia.  Of  the  Samothra-
cian  gods  we  have  already  given  an  account  ;  but  may  add  here,
from  Macrobius,  that  the  dii  mc^ni,  which  Dardanus  brought  from
Samothrace,  were  the  penates,  or  household  gods  which  jT-Lneas,  af-
terv/ard>  carried  into  Italy.  Dionysius  of  Halicarnassus  says,  he  had


CAMILLUS.  52/

that  city  and'causetl  to  be  worshipped  ;  and  that  after  the
taking  of  Troy,  .Eneas  privately  carried  them  off,  and
kept  them  till  he  settled  in  Italy.  But  those  that  pretend
to  know  most  about  these  matters,  say,  there  are  placed,
two  casks  of  a  moderate  size,  the  one  open  and  empty,
the  other  full  and  sealed  up,  but  neither  of  them  to
be  seen  by  any  but  those  holy  virgins.  Others,  again,
think  this  is  all  a  mistake,  which  arose  from  their  putting
most  of  their  sacred  utensils  in  two  casks,  and  hiding  them
under  ground  in  the  temple  of  Quirinus,  and  that  the
place  from  those  casks  is  still  called  Z>o//&/o.

They  took,  however,  with  them  the  choicest  and  most
sacred  things  they  had,  and  fled  with  them  along  the  side
of  the  river  ;  where  Lucius  Albinus,  a  plebeian,  among
others  that  were  making  their  escape,  was  carrying  his
wife  and  children  and  some  of  his  most  necessary  movea-
bles in  a  waggon.  But  when  he  saw  the  vestals  in  a  help-
less and  wetuy  condition,  carrying  in  their  arms  the  sa-
cred symbols  of  the  gods,  he  immediately  took  out  his
family  and  goods,  and  put  the  virgins  in  the  waggon,  that
they  might  make  their  escape  to  some  of  the  Grecian
cities.*  This  piety  of  Albinus,  and  the  veneration  he  ex-
pressed for  the  gods  at  so  dangerous  a  juncture,  deserves
to  be  recorded.

As  for  the  other  priests,  and  the  most  ancient  of  the
senators  that  were  of  consular  dignity,  or  had  been  ho-
noured with  triumphs,  they  could  not  bear  to  think  of  quit-
ting the  city.  They,  therefore,  put  on  their  holy  vest-
ments and  robes  of  state,  and,  in  a  form  dictated  by  Fabius
the  pontifex  maximuH^  making  their  vows  to  the  gods,t
devoted  themselves  for  their  country  :  thus  attired,  they
sat  down  in  their  ivory  chairs  in  the  forum^\  prepared  for
the  worst  extremity.

seen  the  penates  in  an  old  temple  at  Rome.  They  were  of  antique
workmanship,  representing  x^vo  young  men  sitting, and  holding  each
a  lance  in  his  hand,  and  had  for  their  inscription  Denas,  instead
of  Penas.

*  Albinus  conducted  them  to  Caere,  a  city  of  Hetruria,  where  they
met  with  a  favourable  reception.  The  vestals  remanied  a  consider-
able time  at  Caere,  and  there  performed  the  usual  rites  of  religion  ;
and  hence  those  rites  were  called  Ceremonies.

f  The  Romans  believed,  that,  by  those  voluntary  consecrations  to
the  infernal  gods,  disorder  and  confusion  was  brought  among  the
enemy,
f  These  ivory  ir  curw/tf  chairs  v/ere  used  only  by  those  who  had  home


323  Plutarch's  lives.

The  third  day  after  the  .battle,  Brennus  arrived  with
his  army ;  and  finding  the  gates  of  the  city  opened  and
the  walls  destitute  of  guards,  at  first  he  had  some  appre-
hensions of  a  stratagem  or  ambuscade,  for  he  could  not
think  the  Romans  had  so  entirely  given  themselves  up  to
despair.  But  when  he  found  it  to  be  so  in  reality,  he
entered  by  the  Colline  gate,  a'nd  took  Rome,  a  little  more
than  three  hundred  and  sixty  years  after  its  foundation  ;
if  it  is  likely  that  any  exact  account  has  been  kept  of  those
limes,*  the  confusion  of  v/hich  has  occasioned  so  much
obscurity  in  things  of  a  later  date.

Some  uncertain  rumours,  however,  of  Rome's  being
taken,  appear  to  have  soon  passed  into  Greece.  For  He-
raclides  of  Pontus,t  who  lived  not  long  after  these  times,
in  his  treatise  concerning  tliesoul^  relates,  thatau  account
was  brought  from  the  west  that  an  army  from  the  coun-
try of  the  Flyperboreansj:  had  taken  a  Greek  city  called
Rome,  situated  somewhere  near  the  great  sea.  But  I
do  not  wonder  that  such  a  fabulous  writer  as  Heraclides
should  embellish  his  account  of  the  takingof  Rome  with
the  pompous  terms  of  Hyperboreans  and  the  great  sea*
It  is  very  clear  tliat  Aristotle  the  philosopher  had  heard
that  Rome  was  taken  by  the  Gauls  ;  but  he  calls  its  de-
liverer Lucius  ;  whereas  Camillus  was  not  called  Lucius
but  Marcus.  These  authors  had  no  better  ?cUthority  than
common  report.

Brennusj^^thus  in  possession  of  Rome,  set  a  strong  guard
about  the  capitol,  and  himself  went  down  into  ih&  Jh^-um;
where  he  was  struck  with  amazement  at  the  sight  of  so
many  men  seated  in  great  state  and  silence,  who  neither

the  most  honourable  offxes,  and  the  persons  who  had  a  right  to  sit
in  them  bore  also  ivory  staves.

*  Livy  tells  us,  that  the  Romans  of  those  times  did  not  much  ap-
ply themselves  to  writing,  and  that  the  commentaries  of  the  pon-
tifices,  and  their  other  monuments  both  public  and  private,  were  de-
stroyed when  the  city  was  burnt  by  the  Gauls,

t  He  lived  at  that  very  time  :  for  he  was  at  first  Plato's  scholar,
and,  afterwai-ds  Aristotle's  ;  and  Plato  was  but  forty -one  years  old
when  Rome  was  taken.

\  The  ancients  called  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  north  Hyptrho'
reans,  and  the  Mediterranean  the  Great  Sea,  to  distinguish  it  from
theEuxine.  Notwithstanding  that  Heraclides  was  right  in  this,  he
might  be  a  very  fabulous  writer :  so  was  Herodotus  ;  and  so  were  the
ancient  historians  of  almost  all  countries  ;  and  the  reason  is  obvi-
ous i   they  had  little  more  than  traditicn  to  write  frcm.


CAMILLUS.  329

rose  up  at  the  approach  of  their  enemies,  nor  changed
countenance  or  colour,  but  leaned  upon  their  staves,  and
sat  looking  upon  each  other  without  fear  or  concern....
"The  Gauls  astonished  at  so  surprising  a  spectacle,  and  re-
garding them  as  superior  beings,  for  a  long  time  were
afraid  to  approach  or  touch  them.  At  last  one  of  them
Tentured  to  go  near  Manius  Papirius,  and  advancing  his
hand,  gently  stroked  his  beard,  which  was  very  long :
upon  which,  Papirius  struck  him  on  the  head  with  his
staff,  and  wounded  him.  The  barbarian  then  drew  his
sword  and  killed  him.  After  this,  the  Gauls  fell  upon
the  rest  and  slew  them,  and  continuing  their  rage,  dis-
patched all  that  came  in  their  way.  Then  for  many  days
together  they  pillaged  the  houses  and  carried  off  the
spoil ;  at  last  they  set  fire  to  the  city,  and  demolished
vvhat  escaped  the  flames,  to  express  their  indignation-
against  those  in  the  capitol,  who  obeyed  not  their  sum-
mons, but  made  a  vigorous  defence,  and  greatly  annoyed
the  besiegers  from  the  walls.  This  it  was  that  provoked
them  to  destroy  the  whole  city,  and  to  dispatch  all  that
fell  into  their  hands,  without  sparing  either  sex  or  age.

As  by  the  length  of  the  siege  provisions  began  to  fail
the  Gauls,  they  divided  their  forces,  and  part  stayed  with
the  king  before  that  fortress,  while  part  foraged  the
country,  and  laid  waste  the  towns  and  villages.  Their
success  had  inspired  them  with  such  confidence,  that  they
did  not  keep  in  a  body,  but  carelessly  rambled  about  in
"different  troops  and  parties.  It  happened  that  the  largest
and  best  disciphned  corps  went  against  Ardea,  where  Ca^
millus,  since  his  exile,  lived  in  absolute  retirement.  This
great  event,  however,  awaked  him  into  action,  and  his
mind  was  employed  in  contriving,  not  how  to  keep  him-^
self  concealed  and  to  avoid  the  Gauls,  but,  if  an  opportu-
nity should  offer,  to  attack  and  conquer  them.  Perceiv-
ing that  the  Ardeans  were  not  deficient  in  numbers,  but
courage  and  discipline,  which  v/as  owing  to  the  inexpe-
rience and  inactivity  of  their  officers,  he  applied  first  to
the  young  men,  and  told  them,  "  They  ought  not  to
ascribe  the  defeat  of  the  Romans  to  the  valour  of  the
Gauls,  or  to  consider  the  calamities  they  had  suffered
in  the  midst  of  their  infatuation,  as  brought  upon  them
by  men  who,  in  fact,  could  not  claim  the  merit  of  the
victory  but  as  the  work  of  fortune.  That  it  would
VOL.   I.  •  F   f


o50  I'LUTARCIf's    LIVES.

be  glorious,  lliough  they  risked  something  by  it  to
repel  a  foreign  and  barbarous  enemy,  whose  end  in  con-
quering was,  like  fire,  to  destroy  what  they  subdued  :  but
that  if  they  would  assume  a  proper  spirit,  he  would  give
them  an  opportunity  to  conquer  without  any  hazard  at
all.  When  he  found  the  young  men  were  pleased  with
his  discourse,  he  went  next  to  the  magistrates  and  senate
of  Ardea  ;  and  having  persuaded  them  also  to  adopt  his
scheme,  he  armed  all  that  were  of  a  proper  age  for  it,  and
drew  them  up  within  the  walls,  that  the  enemy,  who  were
but  at  a  small  distance,  might  not  know  what  he  was  about.

The  Gauls  having  scoured  the  country,  and  loaded
themselves  with  plunder,  encamped  upon  the  plains  in  a
careless  and  disorderly  manner.  Night  found  them  in-
toxicated with  wine,  and  silence  reigned  in  the  camp.  As
soon  as  Camillus  was  informed  of  this  by  his  spies,  he
led  the  Ardeans  out ;  and  having  passed  the  intermediate
space  without  noise,  he  reached  their  camp  about  mid-
night. Then  he  ordered  a  loud  shout  to  be  set  up,  and
the  trumpets  to  sound  on  all  sides,  to  cause  the  greater
confusion  :  but  it  was  with  difficulty  they  recovered  them-
selves from  their  sleep  aiid  intoxication.  A  few^  whom
fear  had  made  sober,  snatched  up  their  arms  to  oppose
Camillus,  and  fell  with  their  weapons  in  their  hands  :  but
the  greatest  part  of  them,  buried  in  sleep  and  wine,  were
surprised  unarmed  and  easily  dispatched.  A  sma.ll  num-
ber, that  in  the  night  escaped  out  of  the  camp,  and  wan-
dered in  the  fields,  were  picked  up  next  day  by  the  caval-
ry, and  put  to  the  sword.

The  fame  of  this  action  soon  reaching  the  neighbour-
ing cities,  drew  out  many  of  their  ablest  warriors.  Par-
ticularly such  of  the  Romans  as  had  escaped  from  the
battleof  Alliato  Veii,  lamented  with  themselves  in  some
such  manner  as  this,  "  What  a  general  has  heaven  taken
from  Rome  in  Camillus,  to  adorn  the  Ardeans  with  his
exploits  ?  while  the  city  which  produced  and  brought  up
so  great  a  man  is  absolutely  ruined.  And  w^,  for  want
of  a  leader,  sit  idle  within  the  walls  of  a  strange  city,  and
betray  the  liberties  of  Italy.  Come  then,  let  us  send  to
the  Ardeans  to  demand  our.  general,  or  else  take  our
weapons  and  go  to  him  :  for  he  is  no  longer  an  exile,  nor
we  citizens,  having  no  country  but  what  is  in  possession
of  an  enemy>."


CAMILLUS.  331

This  motion  was  aj^reedto,  and  they  sent  to  Camilhii
to  intreat  him  to  accept  of  the  command.  ]]iu  he  an-
swered, he  could  not  do  it,  before  he  was  legally  appoint-
ed to  it,  by  the  Romans  in  the  Capitol.*  For  he  looked
upon  them,  while  they  were  inbeinj^  as  the  commonwealth,
and  would  readily  obey  their  orders,  but  without  them
would  not  be  so  officious  as  to  interpose. t

They  admired  the  modesty  and  honour  of  Camillus,
but  knew  not  how  to  send  the  proposal  to  the  Capitol.     It
sefimed  indeed  impossible  for  a  messenger  to  passinto  the
Citadel,  whilst  the  enemy  were  in  possession  of  the  city.
However,  a  youno;  man,   named  Pontius  Cominius,  not
distintjuished  by  his  biith,  but  fond  of  glory,  readily  took
upon  him  the  commission.     He  carried  no  letters  to  the
citizens  in  the   Capitol,    lest,  if  he  should  happen  to  be
taken,  the  enemy  should  discover  by  them  the  intentions
of  Camillus.     Having  dressed  himself  in  mean  attire,  un-
der which  he  concealed  some  pieces  of  cork,  he  travelled
all  day  without  fear,  and  approached  the  city  as  it  grew
dark.     He  could  not  pass  the  river  by  the  bridge,  because
it  was    guarded  by  the   Gauls ;  and  therefore  took    his
clothes,  which  were  neitlier  many  nor  heavy,  and  bcuiid
them  about  his  head  ;  and  having  laid  himseif  upon  the
the  pieces  of  cork,  easily  swam  over  and  reached  the  city.
Then  avoiding  those  quarters  where,  by   the  lights  and
noise,  he  concluded  they  kept  watcli,  he  went  to  the  Ccr-
^  menial  gate,  where  there  was  the   greatest  silence,   and
where  the  hill  of  the  Capitol  is  the  steepest  and  most  crag-
gy.    Up  this  he  got  unperceived,  by  a  way  the  most  dif-
ftcult  and  dreadful,  and  advanced  near  the  guards  upon  the
walls.     After  he  had  hailed  them  and  told  them  his  name,
they  received  him  vyith  joy,   and  conducted  him  to  the
magistrates.

The  senate  was  presently  assembled,  and  he  acquainted
them  with  the  victory  of  Camillus,  which  they  had  not
heard  of  before,  as  well  as  with  the  proceedings  of  the
soldiers  at  Veil,  and  exhorted  them  to  confirm  Camillus

*  Livy  says,  the  Roman  soldiers  at  Veii  applied  to  the  remains  of
;  the  senate  in  the  Capitol  for  leave,  before  they  offered  the  command
j  to  Camillus.  So  much  regard  had  those  brave  men  for  the  consti-
j  tution  of  their  country,  though  Rome  then  lay  in  a-  "es.  livery
I  private  man  was  indeed  a  patriot.
1         t  M>j3«»  ^oAvrpat'yttavjsjio,


332  PLUTAUCIi's    LIVES.

in  the  command,  as  the  citizens  out  of  Rome  would  obey
aone  but  him.  Having  heard  his  report  and  consulted,
together,  tliey  declared  Camillus  dictator,  and  sent  Pontius
back  the  same  way  he  came,  who  M^as  equally  fortunate
in  his  return  ;  for  he  passed  the  enemy  undiscovered,  and
delivered  to  the  Romans  at  Veii  the  decree  of  tJie  senate,
Vviiich  they  received  v>ith  pleasure.

■  Camillus,  at  his  arrival,  found  twenty  thousand  of  them
in  arms,  to  whom  he  added  a  greater  number,  of  the  al-
lies, and  prepared  to  attack  the  enemy.  Thus  was  he  ap-
pointed dictator  the  second  time,  and  having  put  himself
at  the  head  of  the  Romans  and  confederates,  he  marched
out  against  the  Gauls.

Meantime,  some  of  the  barbarians  employed  in  the
siege,  happening  to  pass  by  the  place  where  Pontius  had
■made  his  way  by  night  up  to  the  Capitol,  observed  many
traces  of  his  feet  and  hands,  as  he  had  worked  himself  up
the  rock,  torn  off  what  grew  there,  and  tumbled  down  the
mould.  Of  this  they  informed  the  king  ;  who  coming  and
viewing  it,  for  the  present  said  nothing;  but  in  the  even-
ing he  assembled  the  lightest  and  most  active  of  his  men,
who  were  the  likeliest  to  climb  any  diflBicult  height,  and  thus
addressed  them  :  "  The  enemy  have  themselves  shown  us
a  way  to  reach  them,  which  we  were  ignorant  of,  and  have
proved  that  this  rock  is  neither  inaccessible  nor  untrod  by
human  feet.  What  a  shame  m  ould  it  be  then  after  having
made  a  beginning,  not  to  finish  ;  and  to  quit  the  place  as

■  impregnable,  when  the  Romans  them  selves  have  taught  vis
how  to  take  it  ?  Where  it  vras  easy  for  one  man  to  as-
cend, it  cannot  be  difi&cult  for  many,  one  by  one  ;  nay,
should  many  attempt  it  together,  they  will  find  great  ad-
vantage in  assisting  each  other.  In  the  mean  time  I  intend
great  rewards  and  honours  for  such  as  shall  distinguish
themselves  on  this  occasion."

The  Gauls  readily  embraced  the  king's  proposal,  and
about  midnight  a  number  of  them  together  began  to  climb
the  rock  in  silence,  which,  though  steep  and  craggy,
proved  more  practicable  than  they  expected.  The  fore-
most having  gained  the  top,  put  themselves  in  order,  and
were  ready  to  take  possession  of  the  wall,  and  to  fall  upon
the  guards  who  were  fast  asleep ;  for  neither  man  nor
dog  perceived  their  coming.     However,  there  were  cer-


CAMILLUS,  533

tain  3acred  ,R;eese  kept  near  Juno's  temple,*  and  at  other
times  plentifully  fed  ;  but  at  this  time,  as  corn  and  the
other  provisions,  that  remained  were  scarce  sufficient  for
the  men,  they  were    neglected  and  in   poor  condition.
This  animal  is  naturally  quick  of  hearing,  and  soon  alarm-
ed at  any   noise  ;,  and  as  hunger  kept  them  waking  and
uneasy  ;  they   immediately  perceived  the  coming  of  the
Gauls,  and  running  at  them  with  all  the  noise  they  could
make,  they  awoke  all  the  guards.     The  barbarians  now,
perceiving  they  were  discovered,  advanced  with  loud  shouts
and  great  fury.     The  Romans  in  haste  snatched  up  such
weapons  as  came  to  hand,  and  acquitted  themselves   like
men  on  this  sudden  emergency.     First  of  all,  Manlius,  a
\  man  of  consular  dignity,  remarkable  for  his  strength  and
extraordinary  courage,  engaged  two  Gauls  at  once  ;  and
,  as  one  of  them  was  lifting  up  his  battle-ax,  with  his  sword
cut  off  his  right  hand  :  At  the  same  time  he  thrust  the
:  boss  of  his  shield. in  the  face  of  the  other,  and  dashed  him
down  the  precipice.     Thus  standing  upon  the   rampart,
with  those  that  had  come  to  his  assistance  and  fought  by
i  his  side,  he  drove  back  the  rest  of  the  Gauls  that  had  got
[  up,  who    were    no  great    number,  and  who  performed
i  nothing  worthy  of  such  an  attempt.     The  Romans  having
thus  escaped  the  danger  that  threatened  them,  as  soon  as  it
was  light,  threw  the  officer  that  commanded  the  watch
down  the  rock  amongst  the  enemy,  and  decreed  Manlius  a.
reward  for  his  victory,  which  had  mere  of  honour  in   it
than  profit ;  for  every  man  gave  him  what  he  had  for  one
I  day's  allowance,  which  was  half  a  pound  of  bread  and  a
I  quartern  of  the  Greek  cotyie.

After  this,  the  Gauls  began  to^lose  courage  :  For  pro-
( visions  were  scarce  and  they  could  not  forage  for  fear  of
I  Camillus.t  Sickness  too,  prevailed  among  them,  which
:  took  its  rise  from  the  heaps  of  dead  bodies,  and  from  their
J  encamping  amidst  the  rubbish  of  the  houses  they
(  had  burnt  ;  where  there  was  such  a  quantity  of  ashes

*  Geese  were  ever  after  had  in  honour  at  Rome,  and  a  flock  of
.  them  always  kept  at  ihe  expence  of  ihfe  public.  A  golden  image  of;
j  a  goose  was  erec.ed  in  memory  of  them,  and  a  goose  every  year  car-
i  rled  \a  triumph  upon  a  soft  litte'r  finely  adorned;  while  dogs  were
held  in  abhorrence  by  the  K.omans,  wlio  every  year  impaled  one  of
(  them  upon  a  branch  of  elder.  Plin.  et  Pjlut.  de  Fortuna  Rom.
I  t  Camillas  bding  master  of  the  country,  posted  strong  giTavds  en
'  all  the  roads,  and  in  eliecc  besieged  the  besiegers.
•  Ff2


334  Plutarch's  lives.

as,  v/hen  raised  by  the  winds  or  heated  by  the  sun,  by
their  dry  and  acrid  quality  so  corrupted  the  air,  that  every
breath  of  it  was  pernicious.  But  what  effected  them  most
was,  the  change  of  climate  ;  for  they  had  lived  in  countries
that  abounded  with  shades  and  agreeable  shelters  from
the  heat,  and  were  now  got  into  grounds  that  were  low,
and  unhealthy  in  autumn.  All  this,  together  with  the
length  and  tediousness  of  the  siege,  which  had  now  lasted
more  than  six  montiis,  caused  such  desolation  among
them,  and  carried  off  such  numbers,  that  the  carcases  lay
unburied.

The  besieged,  however,  were  not  in  a  much  better  con-
dition. Famine,  which  now  pressed  them  hard,  and
their  ignorance  of  what  Camillus  was  doing,  caused  no
small  dejectioM  :  Tor  the  barbarians  guarded  the  city  with
^o  much  care,  that  it  was  impossible  to  send  any  messen-
ger to  him.  Both  sides  being  thus  equally  discouraged,
the  advanced  guards,  v.iio  Vv^ere  near  enough  to  converscj
first  began  to  talk  of  treating.  As  the  motion  was  ap-
proved by  those  that  had  the  chief  direction  of  affairs,
Sulpitius,  one  of  the  military  tribunes,  v/ent  and  con-
ferred with  Brennus  ;  where  it  was  agreed,  that  the
Romans  should  pay  a  thousand  pounds  weight  of  gold,*
and  that  the  Gauls  upon  the  receipt  of  it  should  immedi-
'.itely  quit  the  city  and  its  territories.  When  the  condi-
tions were  sworn  to,  and  the  gold  was  brought,  the
Gauls  endeavouring  to  avail  themselves  of  false  weights,
privately  at  first,  and  afterwards  openly  drew  down  their
own  side  of  the  balance.  The  Romans  expressing  their
resentment,  Brennus  in  a  contemptuous  and  insulting
manner  took  off  his  sword,  and  threw  it  belt  and  all,
into  the  scale  :  And  when  Sulpitius  asked,  what  that
meant,  he  answered,"  What  should  it  mean  butwoef  to
*'  the  conquered  ?"  which  became  a  proverbial  saying,
Som.e  of  the  Romans  were  highly  incensed  at  this,  and
talked  of  returning  with  their  gold,  and  enduring  the
utmost  extremities,  of  the  siege  ;  but  others  were  of  opi-
nion, that  it  was  better  to  pass  by  a  small  injury,  since
the  indignity  lay  not  in  paying  more  than  was  due,  but
in  paying  any  thing  at  all ;  a  disg-race  only  consequent
upon  the  necessity  of  the  times.

*  That  is,  forty-five  theusand  pounds  st'crling.
•\  V<£  Victis.


CAMILLUS.  535

While  they  were  thus  disputuig  with  the  Gauls',  Camil-
lus  arrived  at  the  gates  ;  and  being  informed  of  what  had
passed,  ordered  the  main  body  of  his  army  to  advance
slowly  and  in  good  order,  wliile  he  with  a  select  band
marched  hastily  up  to  the  Romans,  who  all  gave  place
and  received  the  dictator  with  respect  and  silence.  Then
he  took  the  gold  out  of  the  scales  and  gave  it  to  the  lictors
and  ordered  the  Gauls  to  take  away  the  balance  and  the
weights,  and  to  be  gone  ;  telling  them,  it  nvas  the  custom
of  the  Roma?is  (o  deliver  their  country  with  steely  not  with
gold.  And  when  Brennus  expressed  his  indignation,  and
complained  he  had  great  injustice  done  him  by  this
infraction  of  the  treaty,  Camillus  answered,  **"  That  it
was  never  lawfully  made  ;  nor  could  it  be  valid,  without
his  consent  who  was  dictator  and  sole  magistrate  ;  they
had,  therefore,  acted  without  proper  authority  :  But  they
miglit  make  their  proposals,  now  he  was  come,  whom
the  laws  had  invested  with  power  either  to  pardon  the
suppliant,  or  to  punish  the  guilty,  if  proper  satisfaction
was  not  made.

At  this  Brennus  was  still  more  highly  incensed,  and  a
skirmish  ensued;  swords  were  drawn  on  both  sides,  and
thrusts  exchanged  in  a  confused  manner,  which  it  is  easy
to  conceive  must  be  the  case,  amidst  the  ruins  of  houses
and  in  ncwrow  streets,  where  there  was  not  room  to  draw
up  regulady.  Brennus,  however,  soon  recollected  him-
self and  drew  off  his  forces  into  the  camp,  with  the  loss
of  a  small  niimber.  In  the  night  he  ordered  them  to
march  and  quit  the  city  ;  and  having  retreated  about
eight  miles  from  it,  he  encamped  upon  the  Gabinian
road.  Early  in  the  morning,  Camillus  came  up  with
them,  his  arms  dazzling  the  sight,  and  his  men  full  of
spirits  and  fire.  A  sharp  engagcmentensued  which  lasted
a  loiig  time  ;  at  length  the  Gtiuls  were  routed  with  great
slaughter,  and  their  camp  taken.  Some  of  those  that
fled  were  killed  in  the  pursuit ;  but  the  greater  part  were
cut  in  pieces  by  the  people  in  the  neighbouring  towns
and  villages,  who  fell  upon  them  as  they  were  dispersed.*

*  There  is  reason  to  question  the  truth  of  the  latter  part  of  this
story.  Phitarch  copied  it  from  Livy.  But  Polybius  represents  the
Gauls  as  a(^uaUy  receiving  the  geld  from  the  Romans,  and  returning
in  safety  to  their  own  country  ;  and  this  is  confirmed  by  Justin,  Sue-
tonius, and  even  by  Livy  himself  in  another  part  of  his  history  x.  16.


336  Plutarch's  lives.

T^us  was  Rome  strangely  taken,  and  more  strangely-
recovered,  after  it  had  been  seven  months  in  the  posses-
sion of  the  barbarians':  for  they  entered  it  a  little  after
the  Ides^  the  fifteenth  of  July,  and  were  driven  out  about
the  Ides^  the  thirteenth  of  February  following.  Camiilus
returned  in  tnumph,  as  became  the  deliverer  of  his  lost
country,  and  the  restorer  of  Rome.  Those  that  had '
quitted  the  place  before  the  siege,  with  their  wives  and
children,  now  followed  his  chariot ;  and  they  that  had
been  besieged  in  the  capitol  and  were  almost  perishing
with  hunger,  met  the  other  and  embraced  them;  weeping
for  joy  at  this  unexpected  pleasure,  which  they  almost
considered  as  a  dream.  The  priests  and  ministers  of  the
gods  bringing  back  wih  them  what  holy  things  they  had
hid  or  conveyed  away  when  they  fled,  afforded  a  most
desirable  spectacle  to  the  people ;  and  they  gave  them  the
kindest  welcome,  as  if  the  gods  themselves  had  returned
Y/ith  them  to  Rome.  Next,  Camiilus  sacrificed  to  the
gods,  and  purified  the  city,  in  a  form  dictated  by  the
pontiffs.  He  rebuilt  the  former  temples  and  erected  a
new  one  to  Aius  JLoquudua  the  speaker^  or  nuarner^  upon
the  very  spot  where  the  voice  from  heaven  announced  in
the  night  to  Marcus  Ceditius  the  coming  of  the  barba-
rians. There  was,  indeed,  no  small  difficulty  in  disco-
vering the  places  where  the  temples  had  stood,  but  it  was,
effected  by  the  zeal  of  Camiilus  and  the  industry  of  the
priests.

As  it  was  necessary  to  rebuild  the  city,  which  w^as;
entirely  demolished,  an  heartless  despondency  seized  the
multitude,  and  they  invented  pretexts  of  delay.  They^
v/ere  in  want  of  all  necessary  materials,  and  had  more
occasion  for  repose  and  refreshment  after  their  sufferings,
than  to  labour  and  wear  themselves  out,  when  their
bodies  were  weak  and  their  substance  was  gone.  They
had,  therefore,  a  secret  attachment  to  Veii,  a  city  which
remained  entire,  and  was  provided  with  every  thing.
This  gave  a  handle  to  their  demagogues  to  harangue
them,  as  usual,  in  a  way  agreeable  to  their  inclinations,
and  made  them  listen  to  seditious  speeches  against  Camii-
lus ;  "  As  if  to  gratify  his  ambition  and  thirst  of  glory,
he  would  deprive  them  of  a  city  fit  to  receive  them,,
force  them  to  pitch  their  tents  among  rubbish,  ai:d  rebuild
a  ruin  that  was  like  one  great  funeral  pile  ;  in  order  that
he  might  not  only  be  called  the  general  and  dictator  of


CAMILLUS.  237

l^ome,  but  tl>fc  founder,  too,  instead  of  Romulus,  whose
light  he  invaded."

On  this  account,  the  senate  afraid  of  an  insurrection,
wouldnotlet  Camilluslay  down  the  dictatorship  within  the
year,  as  he  desired,  though  no  other  person  had  ever
borne  that  high  office  mere  than  six  months.  In  the
mean  time  they  went  about  to  console  the  people,  to  gain
them  by  carrcsses  and  persuasions.  One  while  they
shewed  them  the  monun)ents  and  tombs  of  their  ances-
tors, then  they  put  them  in  mind  oftheir  temples  ?ind  holy
places,  which  Romulus  and  Numa,  and  the  other  kings,
had  consecrated  and  left  in  charge  with  them.  Above
all,  amidst  tlie  sacred  and  awful  symbols,  they  took
care  to  make  them  recollect  the  fresh  human  head,*
which  was  found  when  the  foundations  of  the  Capitol
were  dug,  and  which  pre-signified  that  the  same  place
was  destined  to  be  the  head  of  Italy.  They  urged  the  dis-
grace it  would  be  to  extinguish  again  the  sacred  fire,
which  the  vestals  had  lighted  since  the  war,  and  to  quit
the  city  ;  whether  they  were  to  see  it  inhabited  by  stran-
gers, or  a  desolate  wild  for  flocks  to  feed  in.  In  this
moving  manner  the  /latricians  remonstrated  to  the  people
both  in  public  and  private  ;  and  were,  in  their  turn,  much
affected  by  the  distress  of  the  multitude,  who  lamented
their  present  indigence,  and  begged  of  them,  now  they
were  collected  like  the  remains  of  a  shipwreck,  not  to
oblige  them  to  patch  up  the  ruins  of  a  desolated  city,
when  there  was  one  entire  and  ready  to  receive  them.

Camillus,  theretbre,  thought  proper  to  take  the  judg-
ment of  the  senate  in  a  body.  And  when  he  had  exerted
his  eloquence  in  favour  of  his  native  country,  and  others
had  done  the  same,  he  put  it  to  the  vote,  beginning  with
Lucius  Lucretius,  whose  right  it  was  to  vote  first,  and
who  was  to  be  followed  by  the  rest  in  their  order.  Silence
was  made  ;  and  as  Lucretius  was  about  to  declare  himself,
it  happened  that  a  centurion  who  then  commanded  the

*  This  prodigy  happened  in  the  reign  of  Tarquin  tbe  proud,  who
undoubtedly  must  have  put  the  head  there  on  purpose  :  for  in  dig-
ging the  foundatio)!  it  was  found  warm  and  bleeding,  as  if  just  se-
vered from  the  body.  Upon  this,  the  Romans  sent  to  consult  the
Tuscan  sooth-sayers,  who,  after  vainly  endeavouring  to  bring  the
presage  to  favour  their  own  country,  acknowledged  that  the  place
where  that  head  was  found  would  be  tlK  head  of  all  Italy.  Dio-
Nvs.  Hal,  lib.  iv.


338  i»LUTARcn*s  lives.

clay -guard,  as  he  passed  the  house,  called  v/ith  aloud  voice
to  the  ensign,  to  stofi  and  set  uji  hh  standard  thereof  or  that
n'us  the  best  place  to  stay  in.  These  words  being  so  sea-
sonably uttered,  at  a  time  when  they  were  doubtful  and
anxious  about  the  event,  Lucretius  gave  thanks  to  the
gods  ;  and  embraced  the  omen ;  while  the  rest  gladly
assented.  A  wonderful  change,  at  the  same  time,  took
place  in  the  minds  of  the  people,  who  exhorted  and  en-
couraged each  other  to  the  work,  and  they  began  to
build  immediately,  not  in  any  order  or  upon  a  regular
plan,  but  as  inclination  or  convenience  directed.  By  rea-
son of  this  hurry  the  streets  were  narrow  and  intricate,
and  the  houses  badly  laid  out ;  for  they  tell  us  both  the
walls  of  the  city  and  the  streets  were  built  within  the
compass  of  a  year.

The  persons  appointed  by  Camillus  to  search  for  and
mark  out  the  holy  places,  found  all  in  confusion.  As
they  were  looking  round  the  Palatium^  they  came  to  the
court  of  jMars,  where  the  buildings,  like  the  rest,  were
burnt  and  demolished  by  the  barbarians  ;  but  in  remoy-
ing  the  rubbish  and  cleaning  the  place,  they  dir^covered,
under  a  great  heap  of  ashes,  the  augural  staffof  RomAilus.
This  staff  is  crooked  at  one  end,  and.  called  lituus.  It  is
used  in  marking  out  the  several  quarters  of  the  heavens,
in  any  process  of  divination  by  the  iiight  of  birds,  which
Romulus  was  m.uch  skilled  in  and  made  great  use  of....
When  he  was  taken  out  of  the  world,  the  priests  care-
fully preserved  the  staff  from  defilement,  like  other  holy
relicks  ;  And  this  having  escaped  the  fire,  when  the  rest
^yere  consumed,  they  indulged  a  pleasing  hope,  and  con-
sidered it  as  a  presage,  that  Rome  would  last  for  ever.*

Before  they  had  finished  the  laborious  task  of  build-
ing, a  new  war  broke  out.  The  ^Equi,  the  Volsci,  and  the
Latins,  all  at  once  invaded  their  territories,  and  the  Tus-
.cans  laid  siege  to  Sutrium,  a  city  in  alliance  with  Rome.
The  military  tribunes  too,  who  commanded  the  army,

*  About  this  time,  the  tribunes  of  the  people  determined  to  im-
peach Q.  Fabius,  who  had  violated  the  law  of  nations,  and  thereby-
provoked  the  Gauls,  and  occasioned  the  burning  of  Rome.  His
crime  being  notorious,  he  was  fummo'ned  by  C.  Martius  Rutilus  be-
fore the  assembly  of  the  people,  to  answer  for  his  conduct  in  the
embassy.  The  criminal  had  reason  to  fear  the  severest  punish-
ment ;  but  his  relations  gave  out  that  he  died  suddenly ;  which  ge-
nerally happened  .when  the  accused  person  had  courage  enough  to
prevent  his  pondemnati^rn,  and  the  shame  of  a  public  punishment.


CAMILLUS.  339

being  surrounded  by  the  Latins  near  Mount  Marcius,
and  their  camp  in  great  danger,  sent  to  Rome  to  desire
succours  ;  on  which  occasion  Camillus  was  appointed
dictator  the  third  time.

Of  this  war  there  are  two  different  accounts:  I  begin
with  the  fabulous  one.  It  is  said,  the  Latins  either  seek-
ing a  pretence  for  war,  or  really  inclined  to  renew  their
ancient  affinity  with  the  Romans,  sent  to  demand  of  them
a  number  of  free  born  virgins  in  marriage.  The  Romans
were  in  no  small  perplexity  as  to  the  course  they  should-
take  :  For,  on  the  one  hand,  they  were  afraid  of  war,  as
they  were  not  yet  re-established  nor  had  recovered  their
losses ;  and  on  the  other,  they  suspected  that  the  Latins
only  wanted  tlieir  daughters  for  hostages,  though  they
coloured  their  design  with  the  special  name  of  marriage.
While  they  were  thus  embarrassed,  a  female  slave,  named
Tutula,*  or,  as  some  call  her,  Philotis,  advised  the  ma-
gistrates to  send  with  her  some  of  the  handsomest  and
most  genteel  of  the  maid-servants,  dressed  like  virgins  of
good  families,  and  leave  the  rest  to  her.  The  magistrates
approving  the  expedient,  chose  a  number  of  female  slaves
proper  for  her  purpose,  and  sent  them  richly  attired  to
the  Latin  camp,  which  was  not  far  from  the  city.  At
night,  while  the  other  slaves  conveyed  away  the  enemies'
swords,  Tutula,  or  Philotis  got  up  into  a  wild  fig-tree  of
considerable  height,  and  having  spread  a  thick  garment
behind,  to  conceal  her  design  from  the  Latins,  held  up  a
torch  towards  Rome,  which  was  the  signal  agreed  upon
between  her  and  the  magistrates,  who  alone  were  in  the
secret.  For  this  reason  the  soldiers  sallied  out  in  a  tu-
multuous manner,  calling  upon  each  other,  and  hastened
by  their  officers,  who  found  it  difficult  to  bring  them  into
any  order.  They  made  themselves  masters,  however,  of
the  entrenchments,  and  as  the  enemy,  expecting  no  such
attempt,  were  asleep,  they  took  the  camp  and  put  the
greatest  part  of  them  to  the  sv/ord.  This  happened  on
the  A'ones^iht  seventh  of  July,  then  called  QuintiUis:  And
on  that  day  they  celebrate  a  feast  in  memory  of  this  action.
In  the  first  place,  they  sally  in  a  crov/ding  and  disorderly
manner  cut  of  the  city,  pronouncing  aloud  the  most  fa-
miliar and  common  names,  as  Caius,  Marcus,  Lucius,

*  In  the  life  ^f  Romulus  she   is  called  Tuiola.     Macrobius  calls
her  Tuieiai


340  Plutarch's  lives.

and  the  like  ;  by  which  they  imitate  the  soldiers  then
caUing  upon  each  other  in  their  hurry.  Next,  the  maid-
servants walk  about,  elegantly  dressed,  and  jesting  on  all
they  meet.  They  have  also  a  kind  of  fight  among  them-
selves, to  express  the  assistance  they  gave  in  the  engage-
ment with  the  Latins.  Then  they  sit  down  to  an  entertain-
ment, shaded  with  branches  of  the  fig-tree  :  And  that  day
is  called  N'oncs  Cahratinx^  as  some  suppose,  on  account  of
the  wild  fig-tree,  from  v/hich  the  maid-servant  held  out
the  torch ;  for  the  Romans  call  that  tree  cajmjicus.  Others
refer  the  greatest  part  of  what  is  said  and  done  on  that
occasion  to  that  part  of  the  story  of  Romulus  when  he  dis-
appeared, and  the  darkness  and  tempest,  or,  as  some  ima-
gine, an  eclipse  happened.  It  was  on  the,  same  day,  at
least,  and  the  day  might  be  called  .Vonne  Capratini?  ;  for
the  Romans  call  SLg-oai  Cajira  ;  and  Romulus  vanished  out
of  sight  while  he  was  holding  an  assembly  of  the  people
^i\h&  Goat's  Marshy  as  we  have  related  in  his  life.

The  other  account  that  is  given  of  this  war,  and  ap-
proved by  most  historians,  is  as  follows.  Camillus,  being
appointed  dictator  the  third  time,  and  knowing  that  the
army  under  the  inilitary  tribunes  was  surrounded  by  the
Latins  and  Volscians,  was  constrained  to  make  levies
among  such  as  age  had  exempted  from  service.  With
these  he  fetched  a  large  compass  about  Mount  Marcius,
and  unperceived  by  the  enemy  posted  his  army  behind
them;  and  by  lighting  many  fires  signified  his  arrival....
The  Romans  that  were  besieged  in  their  camp,  being  en-
couraged by  this,  resolved  to  sally  out  and  join  battle....
But  the  Latins  and  Volscians  kept  close  within  their
works,  drawing  a  line  of  circumvallation  with  palisades,
because  they  had  the  enemy  on  both  sides,  and  resolving
to  wait  for  reinforcements  from  home,  as  well  as  for  the
Tuscan  succours,

Camillus,  perceiving  this,  and  fearing  that  the  enemy
might  surround  them,  hastened  to  make  use  of  the  pre-
sent opportunity.  As  the  works  of  the  confederates  con-
sisted of  wood,  and  the  wind  used  to  blow  hard  from  the
mountains  at  sun-rising,  he  provided  a  great  quantity  of
combustible  matter,  and  drew  out  his  forces  at  day-break.
Part  of  them  he  ordered  with  loud  shouts  and  missive  wea-
pons to  begin  the  attack  on  the  opposite  side  ;  while  he
himself ;  at  the  head  of  those  that  were  charged  with  the


CA.MILLU3.  341

fire,  watched  the  proper  minute,  on  that  side  of  the  works
M'here  the  wind  used  to  blow  directly.  When  the  sun
was  risen  the  wind  blew  violently ;  and  the  attack  beings
begun  on  the  other  side,  he  gave  the  signal  to  his  own
party,  who  jxDured  a  vast  quantity  of  fiery  darts  and  other
burning-  matter  into  the  enemy's  fortifications.  As  the
flam.e  soon  caught  hold,  and  vras  fed  by  the  prJisa,des  and
other  timber,  it  spread  itself  into  all  quarters ;  and  the
Latins  not  being  provided  with  any  means  of  extinguish-
ing it,  the  camp  was  almost  full  of  fire,  and  they  were
^'educed  to  a  small  spot  of  ground.  At  last  they  were
forced  to  bear  down  upon  that  body  who  were  posted  be-
fore the  camp  and  ready  to  receive  them  sword  in  hand.
Consequently  very  few  of  them  escaped  ;  and  those  that
remained  in  the  camp  were  destroyed  by  the  flames,  till
the  Romans  extinQ-uished  them  for  the  sake  of  the  nlun-
der.

After  this  exploit,  he  left  his  son  Lucius  in  the  camp
to  guard  the  prisoners  and  the  booty,  while  he  himself
penetrated  into  the  enemy's  country.  There  he  took  the
city  of  the  iEqui  and  reduced  the  Volsci,  and  then  led  his
army  to  Sutrium,  whose  fate  he  was  not  yet  apprised  of,
and  which  he  hoped  to  relieve  by  fighting  the  Tuscans
who  had  sat  down  before  it.  But  the  Sutrians  had  already
surrendered  their  town,  with  the  loss  of  every  thing  but
the  clothes  they  had  on ;  and  in  this  condition  he  met
them  by  the  way,  with  their  wives  and  children,  bewail-
ing their  misfortunes.  Camillus  was  extremely  moved
at  so  sad  a  spectacle  ;  and  perceiving  that  the  Romans
wept  with  pity  at  the  affecting  intreaties  of  the  Sutrians,
he  determined  not  to  defer  his  revenge,  but  to  march  to
Sutrium  that  very  day  ;  concluding  that  men  who  had  just
taken  an  opulent  city,  where  they  had  not  left  one  ene-
my, and  who  expected  none  from  any  other  quarter,
would  be  found  in  disorder  and  off  their  guard.  Nor  was
he  mistaken  in  his  judgment.  He  not  only  passed  through
the  country  undiscovered,  but  approached  the  gates  and
got  possession  of  the  walls  before  they  were  aware.  In-
deed there  was  none  to  guard  them  ;  for  all  were  engaged
in  festivity  and  dissipation.  Nay,  even  when  they  per-
ceived that  the  enemy  were  masters  of  the  town,  they
were  so  overcome  by  their  indulgencies,  that  few  endea-
voured to  escape  ;  they  were  either  slain  in  their  houses,

VOL.   I,  G    r>"


o42  pll'tarch's  lives.

or  surrendered  themselves  to  the  conquerors.  Thus  the
city  of  Sutrium  being  twice  taken  in  one  day,  the  ne^y
possessors  were  expelled,  and  the  old  ones  restored,  by
Caniillus.

By  the  triumph  decreed  him  on  this  occasion,  he  gained
no  less  credit  and  honour  than  by  the  two  former.  For
those  of  the  citizens  that  envied  him,  and  were  desirous
to  attribute  his  successes  rather  to  fortune  than  to  his
valour  and  conduct,  were  compelled  by  these  last  actions,
lo  allow  his  great  abilities  and  application.  Among  those
that  opposed  him  and  detracted  from  his  merit,  the  most
considerable  was  Marcus  Manlius,  who  was  the  first  that
repulsed  the  Gauls,  when  they  attempted  the  Capitol  by
night,  and  on  that  account  was  surnamed  Cafiitolhius,  He
was  ambitious  to  be  the  greatest  man  in  Rome,  and  as  he
could  not  by  fair  means  outstrip  Camillus  in  the  race  of
honour,  he  took  the  common  road  to  absolute  power  by
courting  the  populace,  particularly  those  that  were  in  debt.
Some  of  the  latter  he  defended  by  pleading  their  causes
against  their  creditors  ;  and  others  he  rescued,  forcibly
preventing  their  being  dealt  with  according  to  law  :  So
that  he  soon  got  a  number  of  indigent  persons  about  him,
who  became  formidable  to  the  patricians  by  their  insolent
and  riotous  behaviour  in  the  fo7'uni.

In  this  exigency  they  appointed  Cornelius  Cossus*  dic-
tator, who  named  Titus  Quintius  Capitolinus  his  general
of  horse  ;  and  by  this  supreme  magistrate  Manlius  was
committed  to  prison  :  On  which  occasion  the  people  went
into  mourning  ;  a  thing  never  used  but  in  time  of  great
and  public  calamities.  The  senate,  therefore,  afraid  of  an
insurrection,  ordered  him  to  be  released.  But  when  set
at  liberty,  instead  of  altering  his  conduct,  he  grew  more
insolent  and  troublesome,  and  filled  the  whole  city  with
faction  and  sedition.  At  that  time  Camillus  was  again
created  a  military  tribune,  and  Manlius  taken  and  brought
to  his  trial.  But  the  sight  of  the  Capitol  was  a  great  dis-
advantage to  those  that  carried  on  the  impeachment.  The
place  where  Manlius  by  night  maintained  the  fight  against
the  Gauls,  was  seen  from  th.^  forum  ;  and  all  that  attend-
ed were  moved  with  compassion  at  his  stretching  out  his
hands  towards  that  place,  and  begging  thorn  witii  tears

*  Vide  Liv.  lib,  vi.  C3,p.  ii.


CAMILLUS.  343

to  remember  his  atchievements.  The  judg-es  of  course
were  greatly  embarrassed,  and  often  adjourned  the  court,
not  choosing  to  acquit  him  after  such  clear  proofs  of  his
crime,  nor  yet  able  to  carry  the  laws  into  execution  in  a
place  which  continually  reminded  the  people  of  his  services.
Camillus,  sensible  of  this,  removed  the  tribunal  without
the  g-ate,  into  the  Peteline  Grove,  where  there  was  no
prospect  of  the  Capitol.  There  the  prosecutor  brought
his  charge,  and  the  remembrance  of  his  former  bravery
gave  Y/ay  to  the  sense  which  his  judges  had  of  his  pre-
sent crimes.  Manlius,  therefore,  was  condemned,  car-
ried to  the  Capitol,  and  thrown  headlong  from  the  rock-
Thus  the  same  place  was  the  monument,  both  of  his  glory
and  his  unfortunate  end.  The  Romans,  moreover,  raised
his  house,  and  built  there  a  temple  to  the  goddess  Moneta,
They  decreed  likewise  tb.at  for  the  future  no  patrician
should  ever  dwell  in  the  Capitol.*

Camillus,  who  was  now  nominated  military  tribune  the
sixth  time,  declined  thathonour.  For,  besides  thathe  was  of
an  advanced  age,  he  was  apprehensive  of  the  effects  of  envy
and  of  some  change  of  fortune,  after  so  much  glory  and
success.  But  the  excuse  he  most  insisted  on  in  public,
v/as,  the  state  of  his  health,  which  at  that  time  was  infirm.
The  people,  however,  refusing  to  accept  of  that  excuse,
cried  out,  "  They  did  not  desire  him  to  fight  either  on
horoeback  or  on  foot ;  they  only  wanted  his  counsel  and
his  orders.  Thus  they  forced  him  to  take  the  office  upon
him,  and,  together  with  Lucius  Furius  Medullinus,  one  of

*  Lest  the  advantageous  situation  cf  a  fortress,  that  commanded

the  whole  city,  should  suggest  and  facilitate  the  design  of  enslaving

it.     For  Manlius  was    accused  of  aiming  at  the  sovereign  power.

I  His  fate  may  serve  as  a  v/arning  to  all  ambitious  men  who  want  to

rise  on  the  ruins  of  their  country  ;  for  he  could  not  escape  or  find

j  mercy  with  the  people,  though  he  produced  above    four  hundred

j  plebeians,  whose  debts  he  had  paid  ;  though  he  shewed  thirty  suits

I  t)f  armour,  the  spoils  of  thirty  enemies,  whom  he  had  slain  in  single

I  combat  ;  though  he  had  received  forty   honorary  rewards,   among

i  which  were  two  mural  and  eight  civic  crowns,  (C.  Servilius,   when

j  general  of  the  horse,  being  of  the  number  of  citizens  whose  lives  lu;

I  liad  saved;)  and  though  he  had  crowned  all  with  the  preservation

of  the   Capitol.      So  inconstant,    however,   is  the  multitude,  that

Manlius  was  scarce  dead,  when  his  Ions  was  generally  lamented,

1  and  a  plague,  which  soon  followed,  ascribed  to  the  anger  of  Jupiter

1  against  the  authors  of  his  death.


o^-i<  PLUTARCH  S    LIVES.

his  colleagues,  to  niarch  immediately  against  the
enemy."

These  were  the  people  of  Frceneste  and  the  Volsci,  who
with  a  considerable  army  were  laying  waste  the  country
in  alliance  with  Rome.  Camillus,  therefore,  went  and
encamped  over  against  them,  intending  to  prolong  the
war,  that  if  there  should  be  any  necessity  for  a  battle,  he
mig]]t  be  sufficiently  recovered  to  do  his  part.  But  as  his
coHeague  Lucius,  too  ambitious  of  glory,  was  violently
and  indiscretely  bent  upon  fighting,  and  inspired  the  other
officers  with  the  same  ardour,  he  was  afraid  it  might  be
thought  that  tlirough  envy  he  withheld  from  the  young
officers  the  opportunity  to  distinguish  themselves.  For
tliis  reason  he  agreed,  though  with  great  reluctance,  that
Lucius  should  draw  out  the  forces,  whilst  he,  on  account
of  his  sickness,*  remained  with  a  handful  of  men  in  the
camp.  But  when  he  perceived  that  Lucius,  who  engaged
in  a  rash  and  precipitate  manner,  v/as  defeated,  and  the
Romans  put  to  flight,  he  could  not  contain  himself,  but
leaped  from  his  bed,  and  went  with  his  retinue  to  the  gates
of  the  camp.  There  he  forced  his  way  through  the  fu-
gitives up  to  the  pursuers,  and  made  so  good  a  stand,  that
those  who  had  fled  to  the  camp  soon  retured  to  the  charge,
and  others  that  were  retreating  rallied  and  placed  them-
selves about  him,  exhorting  each  other  not  to  forsake  their
general.  Thus  the  enemy  were  stopt  in  the  pursuit.
Next  day  he  marched  out  at  the  head  of  his  army,  entire-
ly routed  the  confederates  in  a  pitched  battle,  and  enter-
ing their  camp  along  with  them,  cut  most  of  them  ia
pieces.

After  this,  being  informed  that  Satricum,  a  Roman
colony,  was  taken  by  the  Tuscans,  and  the  inhabitants
put  to  the  sword,  he  sent  home  the  main  body  of  his
forces,  wliich  consisted  of  the  heavy-armed,  and  with  a
select  band  of  light  and  spirited  young  men  fell  upon  the
Tuscans  that  were  in  possession  of  the  city,  some  of  whom
he  put  to  the  sword,  and  the  rest  were  driven  out.

Returning  to  Rome  with  great  spoils,  he  gave  a  signal
evidence  of  the  good  sense  of  the  Roman  people,  who
entertained  no  fears  on  account  of  the  ill  health  or  age  of
a  general  that  was  not  dt4icient  in  courage  or  experience,

*  Livy  says,  he  placed  himself  on  an  emhiencc,  with  a  corps  de  re-
ftcrve,  to  observe  the  succcs  cf  the  battle.


CAMILLU3.  546"

but  made  choice  of  him,  innrm  and  reluctant  as  he  was,
rather  than  of  those  youn,^  men  who  wanted  and  solicited
the  command.  Hence  it  was,  that  upon  the  news  of  the
revolt  of  the  Tusculans,  Camillus  was  ordered  to  march
against  them,  and  to  take  with  him  only  one  of  his  five
colleagues.  Though  they  all  desired  and  made  interest
for  the  commission,  yet,  passing  the  rest  by,  he  pitched
upon  Lucius  Furius,  contrary  to  the  general  expectation  :
for  ihis  was  the  man  who  but  just  before,  against  the
opinion  of  Camillus,  was  so  eager  to  engage,  and  lost  the
battle.  Yet,  willing,  it  seems,  to  draw  a  veil  over  his  mis-
fortune and  to  wipe  off  his  disgrace,  he  was  generous
enough  to  give  him  the  preference.*

When  the  Tusculans  perceived  that  Camillus  was  com-
ing against  them,  they  attempted  to  correct  their  error  by,
artful  management.  They  filied  the  fields  with  husband-
rtien  and  shepherds,  as  in  time  of  profound  peace  ;  they
left  their  gates  open,  and  sent  their  ciiildren  to  school  as
befi'ore.  The  tradesmen  were  found  in  their  shops  em.-
ployed  in  their  respective  callings,  and  the  better  sort  of
citizens  walking  in  the  public  places  in  their  usual  dress.
Meanwhile  the  magistrates  were  busily  passing  to  and
fi'o,  to  order  quarters  for  the  Romans  ;  as  if  they  expect-
ed no  danger  and  were  conscious  of  no  fault.  Though
these  arts  could  not  alter  the  opinion  Camillus  had  cf  their
revolt,  yet  their  repentance  disposed  him  to  compassion.
He  ordered  them,  therefore,  to  go  to  the  senate  of  Rome
and  beg  pardon  :  and  when  they  appeared  there  as  sup-
pliants, he  used  his  interest  to  procure  their  forgiveness,
and  a  grant  of  the  privileges  of  Roman  citizens  t  be-
sides. These  were  the  principal  actions  of  his  sixth  tri-
buneship.

*  This  choice  of  Camilkis  had  a  different  motive  frcm  whit  Plu-
tarch mentions.  He  knew  that  Furius,  who  had  fek  the  ill  eflects
of  a  precipitate  conduct,  would  be  the  first  man  to  avoid  such  a
conduct  for  the  future.

■  t  He  was  only  a  Uoman  citizen,  in  the  most  extensive  Figrinta-
tion  of  the  words,  who  had  a  right  cf  having  an  house  in  Rome,  of
giving  his  vote  in  the  Comitia,  and  of  standing  candidate  for  any  cf-
lice  ;  and  who,  consequently,  was  incorporated  into  one  of  the  tribes.
The  freedmen  in  the  times  of  the  republic  were  excluded  from  dig-
nities :  and  of  the  municipal  towns  and  Roman  colonies,  wliich  en-
joyed the  right  of  citizenship,  some  had,  and  some  had  mot,  the  right
of  sufl'rage  and  of  promotion  to  offices  inPvome.  v

GO"    O


346  PLUTARCH'S    LIVES.

After  this,  Licinius  Stolo  raised  a  great  sedition  in  the
state ;  putting  himself  at  the  head  of  the  people,  who
insisted  that  of  the  tv/o  consuls  one  sliould  be  a  plebeian.
Tribunes  of  the  people  were  appointed,  but  the  multitude
would  suffer  no  election  of  consuls  to  be  held.*  As  this
want  of  chief  magistrates  was  likely  to  bring  on  still
greater  troubles,  the  senate  creuted  Camillus  dictator  the
fourth  time  against  the  consent  of  the  people,  and  not
even  agreeable  to  his  own  inclination.!  For  he  was  un-
willing to  set  himself  against  those  persons,  who,  having
been  often  led  on  by  him  to  conquest,  could  with  great
truth  affirm,  that  he  had  more  concern  with  them  in  the
military  way,  than  with  the  patricians  in  the  civil ;  and
at  the  same  time  was  sensible  that  the  envy  of  those  very
patricians  induced  them  now  to  promote  him  to  that
iiigh  station,  that  he  might  oppress  the  people  if  he  suc-
ceeded, or  be  ruined  by  them  if  he  failed  in  his  attempt.
He  attempted,  however,  to  obviate  the  present  danger,  and
as  he  knew  the  day  on  which  the  tribunes  intended  to  pro-
pose their  law,  he  published  a  general  muster,  and  sum-
moned the  people  from  the  formn  into  the  field,  threaten-
ing to  set  heavy  fines  upon  those  that  should  not  obey.
On  the  other  hand,  the  tribunes  of  the  people  opposed
him  witli  menaces,  solemnly  protesting  they  would  fine
him  fifty  thousand  drachmas^  it  he  did  not  permit  the  peo-
ple to  put  their  bill  to  the  vote.  Whether  it  was  that  he
was  afraid  of  a  second  condemnation  and  banisment,
which  would  but  ill  suit  him,  now  he  was  grown  old  and
covered  with  glory,  or  whether  he  thought  he  could  not
get  the  better  of  the  people  whose  violence  was  equal  to

*  This  confusion  lasted  five  yenrs  ;  during  which  the  tribunes  of
the  people  prevented  the  Comitia  from  being  held,  which  were  ne-
cessary for  the  election  of  the  chief  magistrates.  It  was  occasioned
by  a  trifling  accident.  Fabius  Ambustus  having  married  his  eldest
daughter  to  Servius  Sulpicius,  a  patrician,  and  at  this  time  military
tribune,  and  the  younger  to  Licinius  Stolo,  a  rich  plebeian ;  it  hap-
pened that  while  the  younger  sister  was  paying  a  visit  to  the  elder,
Stilpicius  came  home  from  the  forum  and  his  lictors,  with  the  staff
of  the  fasces,  thundered  at  the  door.  The  younger  sister  being  fright-
ened at  the  noise,  the  elder  laughed  at  her,  as  a  person  quite  ignorant
of  high  life.  This  afront  greatly  afflicted  her  ;  and  her  father,  to
comfort  her,  bid  her  not  be  uneasy,  for  she  should  soon  see  as  much
state  at  her  own  house  as  had  surprised  her  at  her  sister's,

t  The  year  of  Rome  388.


CAMILLUS.  347

their  power,  for  the  present  he  retired  to  his  own  house;
and  soon  after,  under  pretence  of  sickness,  resigned  the
dictatorship.*  The  senate  appointed  another  dictator,
who  havinij  named  for  his  general  of  horse  that  very
Stolo  who  was  leader  of  the  sedition,  sutfered  a  hiw  to  be
made  that^was  extremely  disagreeable  to  the  patricians.
It  provided  that  no  person  whatsoever,  should  possess  more
than  five  hundred  acres  of  land.  Stolo  having  carried
his  point  with  the  people,  flourished  greatly  for  a  while  :
but  not  long  after  being  convicted  of  possessing  more
than  the  limited  number  of  acres,  he  suffered  the  penal-
ties of  his  own  law.f

The  most  difficult  part  of  the  dispute,  and  that  which
they  began  with,  namely,  concerning  the  election  of
consuls,  remained  still  unsettled ;  and  continued  to  give
the  senate  great  uneasiness  ;  when  certain  information  was
brought  that  the  Gauls  were  marching  again  from  the
coasts  of  the  Adriatic,  with  an  immense  a.rmy  towards
Rome.  With  this  news  canie  an  account  of  the  usual
effects  of  war,  the  country  laid  waste,  and  such  of  the
inhabitants  as  could  not  take  refuge  in  Rome  dispersed
about  the  mountains.  The  terror  of  this  put  a  stop  to
the  sedition  ;  and  the  most  popular  of  the  senators  uniting
with  the  people,  with  one  voice  created  Camillus  dictator
the  fifth  time.  He  was  now  very  old,  wanting  little  of
fourscore  ;  yet,  seeing  the  necessity  and  danger  of  the
times,  he  was  willing  to  risk  all  inconveniences,  and,
without  alledging  any  excuse,  immediately  took  upon  him
the  command,  and  made  the  levies.  As  he  knew  the
chief  force  of  the  barbarians  lay  in  their  swords,  which
they  managed  without  art  or  skill,  furiously  rushing  in,
and  aiming  chiefly  at  the  head  and  shoulders,  he  furnish-
ed most  of  his  men  with  helmets  of  well-polished  iron,
that  the  swords  might  either  break  or  glance  aside  ;  and
round  the  borders  of  their  shields  he  drew  a  plate  of  brass,
because  the  wood  of  itself  could  not  resist  the  strokes.  Be-
sides this,  he  taught  them  to  avail  themselves  of  long  pikes,

*  He  pretended  to  find  something  amiss  in  the  auspices  which
were  taken  when  he  was  appointed.

t  It  was  eleven  years  after.  Popilius  Laenas  fined  him  ten  thou-
sand sesterces  for  being  possessed  of  a  thousand  acres  of  land,  in  con-
junction withiiis  son,  whom  hs  had  emancipated  for  that  purpose,
Liv.  lib.  vii.  c.  15.


348  plutahch's   lives.

by  pushing  with  which  they  might  prevent  the  effect  of
the  enemy's  swords.

When  the  Gauls  were  arrived  at  the  river  Anio  v>-ith
their  army,  encumbered  with  the  vast  booty  they  had
made,  Camilhis  drew  out  his  forces,  and  posted  them
upon  a  hill  of  easy  ascent,  in  which  were  many  hollows,
sufficient  to  conceal  the  greatest  part  of  his  men,  while
those  that  were  in  sight  should  seem  through  fear  to  ha\e
taken  advantage  of  the  higher  grounds.  And  the  more  to
fix  this  opinion  in  the  Gauls,  he  opposed  not  the  depre-
dations committed  in  his  sight,  but  remained  quietly  in
the  camp  he  had  fortined,  while  he  had  beheld  part  of
them  dispersed  in  order  to  plunder,  and  part  indulging
themselves  day  and  night,  in  drinking  and  revelling.
At  last,  he  sent  out  the  light-armed  infantry  before  day,
to  prevent  the  eneriiy's  drawing  up  in  a  regular  manner,
and  to  harrass  them  by  sudden  skirmishing  as  they  issued
out  of  their  trenches  ;  and  as  soon  as  it  was  light  he  led
down  the  heavy-armed,  and  put  them  in  battle  array  upon
the  plain,  neither  few  in  number  nor  disheartened,  as  the
Gauls  expected,  but  numerous  and  full  of  spirits.

This  was  the  first  thing  that  shook  their  resolution,  for
they  considered  it  as  a  disgrace  to  have  the  Romans  the
aggressors.  Then  the  light-arrned  falling  upon  them  be-
fore they  could  get  into  order  and  rank  themselves  by
companies,  pressed  them  so  warmly,  that  they  were  obli-
ged to  come  in  great  confusion  to  the  engagement.  Last
of  all,  Camillus  leading  on  the  heavy-armed,  the  Gauls
v/ith  brandished  sv/ords  hastened  to  fight  hand  to  hand ;
but  the  Romans  meeting  the  strokes  with  their  pikes,  and
receiving  them  on  that  part  that  was  guarded  with  iron,
so  turned  their  swords,  which  were  thin  and  soft  tempered,
that  they  were  soon  bent  almost  double  ;  and  their  shields
were  pierced  and  weighed  down  with  the  pikes  that  stuck
in  them.  They,  therefore,  quitted  their  own  arms,  and
endeavoured  to  seize  those  of  the  enemy,  and  to  wrest
their  pikes  from  them.  The  Romans  peeing  them  naked,
nov/  began  to  make  use  of  their  swords,  and  made  great
carnage  among  the  foremost  ranks.  Mean  time  the  rest
took  to  flight,  and  were  scattered  along  the  plain  ;  for
Camillus  had  before-hand  secured  the  heights;  and,  as  in
confidence  of  victory  they  had  left  their  camp  unfortified,
they  knew  it  would  be  taken  with  ease.


CAMILLUS.  349

This  batlle  is  said  to  have  been  fought  thirteen  years
after  the  taking-  oi  Rome;'^  and  in  consequence  of  this
success,  the  Romans  laid  aside,  for  the  future,  the  dismal
apprehensions  they  had  entertained  of  the  barbarians.
They  had  imagined,  it  p.cenis,  that  the  former  victory  they
had  gained  over  the  Gauls,  was  owing  to  the  sickness  that
prevailed  in  their  army,  and  to  other  unforeseen  accidents,
rather  than  to  their  own  valour  :  and  so  great  had  their
terror  been  formerly  that  they  had  made  a  law,  that  the
firic-^ts  should  be  exempted  from  military  service^  except
in  case  of  an  invasion  from  /he  Gauls,

This  was  the  last  of  Camillus's  martial  exploits.  For
the  takmg  of  Velitrx  was  a  direct  consequence  of  this
victory,  and  it  surrendered  without  tiie  least  resistance.
But  the  greatest  conflict  he  ever  experienced  in  the  stcite,
still  remained  :  For  the  people  were  harder  to  deal  v/ith
since  they  returned  victorious,  and  they  insisted  that  one
of  the  consuls  should  be  chosen  out  of  their  body,  con-
trary to  the  present  constitution.  The  senate  opposed
them,  and  v/ould  not  suffer  Camiilus  to  resign  the  dicta-
torship, thinking  they  could  better  defend  the  rights  of
the  nobility  nnder  the  sanction  of  his  supreme  authority,
But  one  day,  as  Camiilus  was  sitting  in  ihz  forum,  and
employed  in  the  distribution  of  justice,  an  officer,  sent
by  the  tribunes  of  the  people,  ordered  him  to  follow
him,  and  laitl  his  hand  upon  him,  as  if  he  v.'ould  seize
and  carry  him  away.  Upon  this  such  a  noise  and  tu-
mult was  raised  in  the  assembly,  as  never  had  been
itnown  ;  those  that  were  about  Camiilus  thrusting  the
plebeian  officer  down  from  the  tribunal,  and  the  popu-
lace calling  out  to  drag  the  dictator  from  his  seat.  In
this  case  Camiilus  was  much  embarrassed ;  he  did  not,
however,  resign  the  dictatorhip,  but  led 'off*  the  patri-
cians to  the  senate-house.  Before  he  entered  it,  he  turn-
ed tov/ard.s  the  capitol,  and  prayed  to  the  gods  to  put  a
happy  end  to  the  present  disturbances,  solemnly  vowiniy
to  build  a  temple  to  Concord,  when  the  tumult  should
be  over.

In  the  senate  there  was  a  diversity  of  opinions  and
great  debates.     Mild  and    popular  counsels,   however,

*  This  b^tlc  was  fought,  not  thirteen,  but  twenty-three  years
after  the  takin>2:  of  Korre.


350  PLUTARCfl's    LIVES.

prevailed,  v/iiich  allov/ed  one  of  the  consuls  to  be  a  ple-
beian.* When  the  dictator  announced  this  decree  to  the
people,  they  received  it  with  great  satisfaction,  as  it  was
natural  they  sliould  ;  they  were  immediately  reconciled
to  the  senate,  and  conducted  Camillus  home  with  great  ap-
plause. Next  day  the  people  assembled,  and  voted  that
the  temple  which  Camillus  had  vowed  to  Concord^  should,
on  account  of  this  great  event,  be  built  on  a  spot  that
fronted  the  forum  and  place  of  assembly.  To  those  feasts
which  are  called  latin  they  added  one  day  more,  so  that
the  whole  was  to  consist  of  four  days  ;  and  for  the  pre-
sent they  ordained  that  the  whole  people  of  Rome  should
sacriiice  with  garlands  on  their  heads.  Camillus  then  held
an  assembly  for  the  election  of  consuls,  when  Marcus
-/Emilius  v>ras  chosen  out  of  the  nobility,  and  Lucius  Sex-
tius  from  the  commonalty,  tlie  iirst  plebeian  that  ever  at-
tained that  honour.

This  was  the  last  of  Camillus 's  transactions.  The  year
following  a  pestilence  visited  Rome,  v/hich  carried  off  a
prodigious  number  of  the  people,  most  of  the  magistrates,
and  Camillus  himself.  His  death  could  not  be  deemed
premature,  on  account  of  his  greeit  age  and  the  ofiices  he
had  borne,  vet  was  he  more  lamented  than  all  the  rest  of
the  citizens  v,  ho  died  of  that  distemper.

*  The  people  having  gained  tli'.s  point,  the  consulate  was  revived,
and  the  military  vvibuneship  laid  aside  for  ever.  But  at  the  same
time  the  patricians  procured  the  great  privilege  that  a  new  officer,
called/>r<Ptor,  should  be  appointed,  who  was  to  be  always  one  of
their  bcdy.  The  consuls  had  been  generals  of  the  Roman  armies,
and  at  the  same  time  judges  of  civil  affairs,  but  as  tliey  were  often
in  tlie  Held,  it  w-as  thought  proper  to  separate  the  latter  branch  from
their  office,  and  appro])natc  it  to  a  judge  with  the  title  oipriVtor,  who
was  to  be  next  in  dignity  to  the  counsuls.  About  the  year  of  Rome
501,  another  6;u'tor  was  appointed,  to  decide  the  dilTerences  among
foreigners.  Upon  the  taking  of  Sicily  and  Sardinia  two  more  j&rrf-
tora  were  cre?,ted,  and  as  many  moi-e  upon  the  conquest  of  Spain.


351   1


PERICLES.


w


HEN  Crcsar  happened  to  see  some  strangers  at
Uome  carrying'  young  dogs  and  monkeys  in  their  arms,
and  fondly  caressing  them,  he  asked,  "  "Whether  the  wo-
men in  their  country  never  bore  any  children  ;"  thus  re-
proving with  a  proper  severity  those  who  lavish  upon
brutes  that  natural  tenderness  which  is  due  only  to  man-
kind. In  the  same  manner  we  must  condemn  those  who
employ  that  curiosity  and  love  of  knowledge  which  nature
has  implanted  in  the  hum?ai  soul,  upon  low  and  worthless
objects,  while  they  neglect  such  as  are  excellent  and  use-
ful. Otir  senses,  indeed,  by  an  effect  almost  mechanical,
are  passive  to  the  impression  of  outward  objects,  whether
agreeable  or  offensive  :  but  the  mind,  possessed  of  a  self-
directing  power,  may  turn  its  attention  to  whatever  it
thinks  proper.  It  should,  therefore,  be  employed  in  the
most  useful  pursuits,  not  barely  in  contemplation,  but  in
such  contemplation  as  may  nourish  its  faculties.  For  as
that  colour  is  best  suited  to  the  eye,  which  by  its  beauty
and  agreeableness,  at  the  same  time  both  refreshes  and
strengthens  the  sight,  so  the  application  of  the  mind  should
be  directed  to  those  subjects,  which  through  the  channel
of  pleasure  may  lead  us  to  our  proper  happiness.  Such
are  the  works  of  virtue.  The  very  description  of  these,
inspires  us  with  emulation,  and  a  strong  desire  to  imitate
them;  whereas  in  other  things,  admiration  does  not  al-
ways lead  us  to  imitate  v/hat  we  admire  ;  but  on  the  con-
trary, while  we  are  charmed  with  the  work,  we  often  des-
pise the  workman.  Thus  we  are  pleased  with  perfumes
and  purple,  while  dyers  and  perfumers  appear  to  us  in  the
light  of  mean  mechanics.

Antisthenes,*  therefore,  when  he  was  told  that  Ismenias
played  excellently  upon  the  flute,  answered  properly
enough, "  Then  he  is  good  for  nothing  else  ;  otherwise  he
would  not  have  played  so  well."  Such  also  was  Philip's
saying  to  his  son,  when  at  a  certain  entertainment  he  sang

*  AntisthentB  was  a  disciple  of  Socrates,  and  founder  of  the  sect
of  the  Cynics.


352  Plutarch's  lives.

in  a  very  agreeable  and  skilful  manner,  <'  Are  not  you
ashamed  to  sing  so  well  ?"  It  is  enough  for  a  prince  to
bestow  a  vacant  hour  upon  hearing  others  sing,  and  he
does  the  muses  sufficient  honour,  if  he  attends  the  pei-
formances  of  those  who  excel  in  their  arts.

If  a  man  applies  himself  to  servile  or  mechanic  employ-
ments, his  industry  in  those  things  is  aprcof  of  his  inat-
tention to  nobler  studies.  No  young  man  of  noble  birth
or  liberal  sentiments,  from  seeing  the  Jupiter  at  Pisa,
would  desire  to  be  Phidias,  or  from  the  sight  of  the  Juno
at  Argos,  to  be  Polycletus  ;  or  Anacreon,  or  Philemon,
or  Archilochus,  though  deVighted  with  their  poems.*  For
though  a  work  may  be  agreeable,  yet  esteem  of  the  author
is  not  the  necessary  consequence.  We  may  therefore
conclude,  that  things  of  this  kind  which  excite  not  a  spirit
of  emulation,  nor  produce  any  strong  impulse  or  desire
to  imitate  them,  are  of  little  use  to  the  beholders.  But
virtue  has  this  peculiar  property,  that  at  the  same  time
that  we  admire  her  conduct,  we  long  to  copy  the  exam-
ple. The  goods  of  fortune  we  wish  to  enjoy,  virtue  we
desire  to  practise  ;  the  former  we  are  glad  to  receive  from
others,  the  latter  we  are  ambitious  that  others  should  re-
ceive from  us.  The  beauty  of  goodness  has  an  attractive
power  ;  it  kindles  in  us  at  once  an  active  principle  ;  it
forms  our  manners,  and  influences  our  desires,  not  only
when  represented  in  a  living  example^  but  even  in  an
historical  description.

For  this  reason  we  chose  to  proceed  in  writing  the  lives
of  great  men,  and  have  composed  this  tenth  book,  which
contains  the  life  of  Pericles,  and  that  of  Fabius  Maximus
who  carried  on  the  war  against  Hannibal  ;  men  who  re-
sembled each  other  in  many  virtues,  particularly  in  justice
and  moderation,  and  who  effectually  served  their  respec-
tive commonwealths,  by  patiently  enduring  the  injurious
and  capricious  treatment  they  received  from  their  col-

*  This  seems  to  be  somewhat  inconsistent  with  that  respect  and
esteem,  in  which  the  noble  arts  of  poetry  and  sculpture  were  held  in
ancient  Greece  and  Rome,  and  with  that  admiration  which  the  pro-
ficients in  those  arts  always  obtain  among  the  people.  But  there
was  still  a  kindof  jealousy  between  the  poets  and  philosophers,  and
cur  philosophical  biographer  shows  pretty  clearly  by  the  Platonic  pa-
rade cf  this  introduction,  that  he  would  magniiy  the  latter  at  the
exj)encc  cf  the  former.


PERICLES.  353

leagues  and  their  countrj^men.  V/bcther  we  are  right  in
our  judgment  or  not,  will  be  er.sy  to  see  in  the  work  itself.
Pericles  was  of  the  tribe  of  Acamantis,  and  of  the  ward
of  Cholargia.  His  family  was  one  of  the  most  consider-
able in  Athens  both  by  the  father  and  mother's  side.  His
father  Xanthippus,  who  defeated  the  king  of  Persia's
genei-als  at  Mycale,  married  Agariste,  the  niece  of  Clist-
lienes,  who  expelled  the  family  of  Pisistratus,  abolished
the  tyranny,  enacted  laws,  and  established  a  form  of  go-
vernment tempered  in  such  a  manner  as  tended  to  una-
nimity among  the  people,  and  the  safety  of  the  state.  She
dreamed  that  she  was  delivered  of  a  lion,  and  a  few  days
after  brought  forth  Pericles.  His  person  in  other  respects
was  well  turned,  but  his  head  was  disproportionably  long.
For  this  reason  almost  all  his  statues  have  the  head  cov-
ered with  a  helmet,  the  statuaries  choosing,  I  suppose,  to
hide  that  defect.  But  the  Athenian  poets  called  him
Schinocephalus  or  onion-head,  for  the  word  schinos  is  some-
times used  instead  of  scilla  a  sea^onion,  Cratinus,  the
comic  writer,  in  his  play  called  Chirones^  has  this  pas-
sage:

Faction  receiv'd  cid  Time,  to  her  embraces  ;
Hence  came  a  tyrant-spawn,  on  earth  called  Pericles,
In  heaven  the  head-compeiler.

And  again  in  his  jYemesis^  he  thus  addresses  him  :

Come,  blessed  Jove,*  the  high  and  mighty  head.
The  friend  of  hospitality  !

And  Teleclides  says,

Now,  in  a  maze  of  thought,  he  ruminates
On  strange  expedients,  while  1,1s  head,  depress'd
With  its  own  weight,  sinks  on  his  knees  ;  and  now
From  the  vast  caverns  of  his  brain  burst  forth
Storms  and  fierce  thunders.

*  Pericles  (a-  Plutarch  afterwards  observes)  wr.s  called  Olympius
or  Jupiter.  The  poet  here  addresses  him  under  that  character  with
the  epithet  of  waxctp/s,  which  signifies /•/wse'/,  but  may  also  s'gnify
^r^at-headed.  In  '^ui  un^uage  we  have  nc  word  with  such  a  double
meanuig.  Jus*:  ab'-ve,  he  is  called  Cepho/egertte.^,  head-com[eJer,
(as  if  his  head^vas  an  assemblage  of  man)  htads)  iiib.c^dof  Kepbe-
tegeretes,  cloud-compeller,  a  common  epithet  cf  Jupiter.

VOL.    I.  H   h


354  i*lutarch's  lives.

And  Eupolis,  in  his  Demi^  asking  news  of  all  the  great
orators,  whom  he  represented  as  ascending  from  the
shades  below,  when  Pericles  comes  up  last,  cries  out,

Heax3  of  the  tribes  that  haunt  those  spacious  rednis,
Does  he  ascend  ?

Most  writers  agree,  that  the  master  who  taught  him
music  was  called  Damon,  the  first  syllable  of  whose  name
they  tell  us,  is  to  be  pronounced  short :  but  Aristotle  in-
forms us,  that  he  learned  that  art  of  Pythoclides.  As  for
Damon,  he  seems  to  have  been  a  politician,  who  under
the  pretence  of  teaching  music,  concealed  his  great  abili-
ties from  the  vulgar  :  and  he  attended  Pericles  as  his  tu-
tor and  assistant  in  politics,  in  the  same  manner  as
a  master  of  the  gymnastic  art  attends  a  young  man  to  fit
him  for  the  ring.  However,  Damon's  giving  lessons  up-
on the  harp  was  discovered  to  be  a  mere  pretext,  and,  as
a  busy  politician  and  friend  to  tyranny,  he  was  banished
by  the  ostracism.  Nor  was  he  spared  by  the  comic  poets.
One  of  them,  named  Plato,  introduces  a  person  addres-
sing him  thus:

Inform  me  Damon,  first,  does  fame  say  true  ?
And  wast  thou  really  Periclea's  Chiron  P*

Pericles  also  attended  the  lectures  of  Zeno  of  Elea,t  who
in  natural  philosophy,  was  a  follower  of  Parmenides,
and,  who,  by  much  practice  in  the  art  of  disputing,  had
learned  to  confound  and  silence  all  his  opponents  ;  as  Ti-
mon  the  Phlasian  declares  in  these  verses:

*  The  word  Chiron  again  is  ambiguous,  and  may  either  signify,
'wast  thou  preceptor  to  Pericles  ?  or,  'vcast  thou  more  v^icked  than  Peri-
cles ?

f  This  Zenowasof  Elea,  a  town  of  Italy,  and  aPhocian  colony  :
and  must  be  carefully  distinguished  from  Zeno  the  founder  of  the  sect
of  the  Stoics.  The  Zeno  here  spoken  of  was  respectable  for  attempt-
ing to  rid  his  country  of  a  tyrant.  The  tyrant  took  him,  and  caused
him  to  be  pounded  to  death  in  a  raonar.  But  his  death  accomplished
what  he  could  not  effect  in  his  life-time  :  for  his  fellow  citizens  were
f:o  much  incensed  at  the  dreadful  manner  of  it,  that  they  fell  upon
^he  tyrant  and  stoned  him.  As  to  his  arguments,  and  those  of  his
mas  er  Parmenides,  pretended  to  be  so  invincible,  one  of  them  was
lo  prove  there  can  be  no  such  thing  as  motion,  since  a  thing  can  nei-
ther move  in  the  place  where  it  is,  nor  in  the  place  where  it  is  not.
But  this  sophism  is  easily  refuted ;  for  motion  is  the  passing  of  a,
♦hing  or  person  into  a  new  part  of  space.


PERICLES.  ^53


Have  not  yon  heard  of  Zeno's  mighty  powers,
Who  could  chan!;o  sides,  yet  changing  triumph'd  still
In  the  tongue's  wars.


But  the  philosopher  with  whom  he  v/as  most  intimatel?
accjuahited,  who  pjave  him  that  force  and  sublimity  of
sentiment  superior  to  all  the  demagogues,  who,  in  short
formed  him  to  that  admirable  ditjrJty  of  manners,  was
Anaxagoras  the  Clazomenian.  This  was  he  whom  the
people  of  those  times  called  nous  or  in^e/ligencc^  either  in
admiration  of  his  great  understanding  and  knowledge  of
the  works  of  nature,  or  because  he  was  the  first  who
clearly  proved,  that  the  universe  owed  its  formation,
neither  to  chance  nor  necessity,  but  to  a  pure  and  umix-
ed  MIND,  Vv'^ho  separated  the  homogeneous  parts  from
the  other  with  which  they  were  confounded.

Charmed  with  the  company  of  this  philosopher,  and
instructed  by  him  in  the  sublimest  sciences,  Fericies  ac-
quired not  only  an  elevation  of  sentiment,  and  a  loftiness
and  purity  of  style,  far  remov'ed  fiom  the  low  expression
of  the  vulgar,  but  likewise  a  gravity  of  countenance  which
relaxed  not  into  laughter,  a  firm  and  even  tone  of  voice,
an  easy  deportment,  and  a  decency  of  dress,  which  no
vehemence  of  speaking  ever  put  into  disorder.  These
things,  and  others  of  the  like  nature,  excited  admiration
in  all  that  saw  him.

Such  was  his  conduct,  when  a  vile  and  abandoned  fel-
low loaded  him  a  whole  day  with  reproaches  and  abuse  ;
he  bore  it  with  patience  and  silence,  and  continued  in
public  for  the  dispatch  of  some  urgent  affairs.  In  the
evening  he  walked  softly  home,  this  impudent  wretch  fol-
lowin!^-,  and  insulting  him  all  the  way  with  the  most  scur-
rilous language.  And  as  it  was  dark  when  he  came  to
his  own  door,  he  ordered  one  of  his  servants  to  take  a
torch  and  light  the  man  home.  The  poet  Ion,  however,
says  he  was  proud  and  supercilious  in  conversation,  and
tiiat  there  was  a  great  deal  of  vanity  and  contempt  of
others  mixed  with  his  dignity  of  manner:  on  the  other  hand
he  highly  extols  the  civility,  complaisance,  and  politeness
of  Cimon.  But  to  take  no  further  notice  of  Ion,  who
perhaps  ^v^puld  not  have  any  great  excellence  appear,
without  a  mixture  of  something  satirical,  as  it  was  in  the


35G  Plutarch's  lives.

ancient  tragedy  ;*  Zeno  desired  those  that  called  the  gra-
vity of  Pericles  pride  and  aiTogance,  to  be  proud  the  same
v/ay ;  telling  them,  the  very  acting  of  an  excellent
pa.rt  might  insensibly  produce  a  love  and  real  imitation
of  it.

These  were  not  the  only  advantai^es  which  Pericles
gained  by  conversing  with  Anaxagoras.  From  him  he
learaed  to  orercome  those  terrors  which  the  various  phe-
nomena of  the  heavens  raise  in  those  who  knov/not  their
causes,  and  who  entertain  a  tormenting  fear  of  the  gods
by  reason  of  that  ignorance.  Nor  is  tliere  any  cure  for
itbu.tthe  study  of  nature,  which  instead  of  the  frightful
extravagancies  of  superstition,  implants  in  us  a  sober  piety
supported  by  a  rational  hope.

We  are  told,  there  v/as  brought  to  Pericles,  from  one  of
his  farms,  a  ram's  head  with  only  one  horn  ;  and  Lampo
the  soothsayer  observing  that  the  horn  grew  strong  and
firm  out  of  the  middle  of  the  forehead,  declared,  that  the
two  parties  in  the  state,  namely  those  of  Thucydides  and
Pericles,  would  unite,  and  invest  the  whole  power  in  him
v/ith  whom  the  prodigy  was  found  ;  but  Anaxagoras  hav-
ing dissected  the  head,  shewed  that  the  brain  did  not  fill
the  whole  cavity,  but  had  contracted  itself  into  an  oval
form,  and,  pointed  directly  to  that  part  of  the  skull
whence  the  horn  took  its  rise.  This  procured  Anaxa-
goras great  honour  with  the  spectators  ;  and  I^ampo  was
no  less  honoured  for  his  prediction,  when,  soon  after,
upon  the  fall  of  Thucydides,  the  administration  was  put
entirely  into  the  hands  of  Pericles.

But,  in  my  opinion,  the  philosopher  and  the  diviner
may  well  enough  be  reconciled,  and  both  be  right ;  the
one  discovering  the  cause  and  the  other  the  end.  It  was
the  business  of  the  former  to  account  for  the  appearance,
and  to  consider  hov/- it  came  about  ;  and  of  the  latter  to

*  Tragedy  at  first  was  oiily  a  chorus  in  honour  of  Bacchus.  Per-
sons dressed  like  satyrs  were  tlie  performers,  and  they  often  broke
out  into  the  most  licentious  raillery.  Afterwards,  when  tragedy  took
a  graver  turn,  something  of  the  former  drollery  was  still  retained,  £s
in  that  which  we  call  tragi-comedy.  In  tim.e,  serious  characters  and
events  became  the  subject  of  tragedy,  without  that  nilxture  ;  but
even  then,  after  exhibiting  three  or  four  serious  tragedies  the  poeis
used  to  conclude  their  con  ention  for  the  prize,  with  a  satirical  one  :
Of  this  sort  is  the  Cyclops  of  Euripides,  and  the  only  cne  remaining.


PERICLES.  S57

sHow  why  it  was  so  formed,  and  what  it  portended

Those  who  say,  that  when  the  cause  is  found  out  the
prodigy  ceases,  do  not  consider,  that  if  they  reject  sucli
sig;ns  as  are  preternatural,  they  must  also  deny  that  arti-
ficial signs  are  of  any  use  :  the  clattering  of  brass  quoits,*
the  light  of  beacons,  and  the  shadow  of  a  sun-dial,  have
all  of  them  their  proper  natural  causes,  and  yet  each  has
another  signification.  But  perhaps  this  question  might
be  more  properly  discussed  in  another  place.

Pericles  in  his  youth  stood  in  great  fear  of  the  people.
For  in  his  countenance  he  was  like  Pisistratus  the  tyrant;
and  he  perceived  the  old  men  were  much  struck  with  a
farther  resemblance  in  the  sweetness  of  his  voice,  the
volubility  of  his  tongue,  and  the  roundness  of  his  periods.
As,  he  was  moreover  of  a  noble  family  and  opulent  for-
tune, and  his  friends  were  the  most  considerable  men  in
the  state,  he  dreaded  the  ban  of  ostracism,  and  therefore
intermeddled  not  with  state-affairs,  but  behaved  with
great  courage  and  intrepidity  in  the  field.  However,  when
Aristides  was  dead,  Themistocles  banished,  and  Cimon
much  employed  in  expeditions  at  a  distance  from  Greece,
Pericles  engaged  in  the  administration.  He  chose  rather
to  solicit  the  favour  of  the  multitude  and  the  poor,t
than  of  the  rich  and  the  few,  contrary  to  his  natural,  dit:-.
po?sition«  which  was  far  from  inclining  him  to  court  po-
pularity.

It  seems  he  was  apprehensive  of  falling  under  the  sus-.
pi'cion  of  aiming  at  the  supreme  power,  and  was  sensible,

*  The  clattering-  of  brass  qijqits  or  plates  was  scmetimes  a  mili-:
tsiry  signal  a,mong-  the  Grecians.  Among  the  Remans  it  was  a  sig-
nal to  call  the  \y;restlers  to  the  ring,

t  The  popular  party  in  Athens  were  continually  making  eRcrts
against  those  omall  remains  of  power  which  were  yet  in  the  hands  of
the  noibility  As  Pericles  could  not  lead  tlie  party  of  the  nobles,
because  Cipion,  by  th.c  dignity  of  his  birth,  the  lustre  of  his  actions,
and  the  largeness  of  his  estate,  had  placed  h-mself  at  their  head;
he  had  no  o*^her  resource  than  to  court  the  populace.  And  he  flac-
tej-ed  tiieir  favourite  passion  in  the  most  agreeable  manner,  by  les-
sening the  power  and  jirivileges  of  the  court  of  Areopagus,  which
was  the  chief  support  ot  the  nobiliry,  and  indeed  of  the  whole  state.
Thus  the  bringing  of  almost  all  causes  before  the  tribunal  of  the
people,  the  mul.iplying  of  gratuities,  which  were  only  another  word
for  bribes,  and'the  giving  the  people  a  taste  for  expensive  pleasure-;,
caused  the  downfall  of  the  Athenian  commonwealth;  though  the
personal  abilities  of  Pericles  supported  it  during  his  time.

H   h  2


358  fPLUTARCIi's    LIVES.

besides  that  Cimon  was  attached  to  the  nobility,  and  ex-
tremely beloved  by  persons  of  the  highest  eminence  ;
and  therefore,  in  order  to  secure  himself,  and  to  find  re-
sources against  the  power  of  Cimon,  he  studied  to  ingra-
tiate himself  with  the  common  people.  At  the  same  time
he  entirely  changed  his  manner  of  living.  He  appeared
not  in  the  streets,  except  v.'hen  he  went  to  the  forum  cr
the  senate-house.  He  declined  the  invitations  of  his
friends,  and  all  social  entertainments  and  recreations  ;
insomuch  that  in  the  whole  time  of  his  administration,
which  was  a  considerable  length,  he  never  went  to  sup
with  any  of  his  friends,  but  once,  which  was  at  the  mar-
riage of  his  nephew  Euryptolemus,  and  he  staid  there
only  until  the  ceremony  of  libation  was  ended.  He  con-
sidered that  the  freedom  of  entertainments  takes  away  all
distinction  of  office,  and  that  dignity  is  but  litt'e  consist-
ent with  familiarity.  Real  and  solid  virtue,  indeed,  the
more  it  is  seen,  the  more  glorious  it  appears  ;  and  there
is  nothing  in  a  good  man's  conduct,  as  a  niagistrate,  so
great  in  the  eye  of  the  public,  as  is  the  general  course
of  his  behaviour  in  private  to  his  most  intimate  friends.
Pericles,  however,  took  care  not  to  make  his  person
cheap  among  the  people,  and  appeared  among  them  only
at  proper  intervals :  Nor  did  he  speak  to  ail  points  that
were  debated  before  them,  but  reserved  himself,  like  the
Saiaminian  galley,*  (as  Critoirais  says)  for  greater  occa-
sions ;  dispatching  business  of  less  consequence  by  other
orators  witl^i  whom  he  had  an  intimacy.  One  of  these,
we  are  told,  was  Ephialtes,  who,  according  to  Plato,
overthrew  the  pov/er  of  the  council  of  Areopagus,  by
giving  the  citizens  a  large  and  intemperate  draught  of
liberty.  On  which  account  the  comic  writers  speak  of
the  people  of  Athens,  as  of  a  horse  wild  and  unmanaged,

"  •    ■  ■   which  listens  to  the  reins  no  more,


But  in  his  madd'ning  course  bears  headlong  down
The  very  friends  that  feed  him.f

*  The  Saiaminian  galley  was  a  consecrated  vessel  which  the
Athenians  never  made  use  of  but  on  extraordinary  occasions.  They
sent  it,  for  instance,  for  a  general  whom  they  wanted  to  call  to  ac-
count, or  with  sacrifices  to  Apollo,  or  some  other  deity.

•j-  The  former  English  translator  takes  no  manner  of  notice  of
^<«x«ii' -ryjy  Ew<90;«»  x:xi  TJi<f  yw«f?  i'JTi'jTY^etVy   ^/fw  Eubcea   and  in-


...


PERICLES.  559

Pericles,  desirous  to  make  his  language  a  proper  ve-*
hide  for  his  sublime  sentiments,  and  to  speak  in  a  man-
ner that  became  the  dignity  of  his  life,  availed  himself
greatly  of  what  he  had  learned  of  Anaxagoras  ;  adorning
his  eloquence  with  the  rich  colours  of  philosophy.  For,
adding  (as  the  divine  Plato  expresses  it)  the  loftiness  of
imagination,  and  all  commanding  energy,  with  v/hich
philosophy  supplied  him,  to  his  native  pov/ers  of  genius,
and  making  use  of  whatever  he  found  to  his  purpose,  in
the  study  of  nature,  to  dignify  the  art  cf  speaking,  he  far
excelled  all  other  orators.*  Hence  he  is  said  to  have
gained  the  surnam.e  of  Olymfiius  ;  though  some  will  have
it  to  have  been  from  the  edifices  with  which  he  adorned
the  city  ;  and  others,  from  his  high  authority  both  in
peace  and  war.  There  appears,  indeed,  no  absurdity  in
supposing  that  all  these  things  might  contribute  to  that
glorious  distinction.  Yet  the  strokes  of  satire,  both  se-
rious and  ludicrous,  in  the  comedies  of  those  times,  indi-
cate that  this  title  was  given  him  chiefly  on  account  of
his  eloquence.  For  they  tell  us  that  in  his  harangues
he  thundered  and  lightened,  and  that  his  tongue  was
armed  with  thunder.  Thucydides,  the  son  of  Milesius,
is  said  to  have  given  a  pleasant  account  of  the  force  of
his  eloquence.  Thuycidides  was  a  great  and  respectable
man,  who  for  a  long  time  opposed  the  measures  of  Pe-
ricles :  And  when  Archidamus,  one  of  the  kings  of  La-
cedaimon,  asked  him,  **  Which  was  the  best  wrestler,
Pericles,  or  he  ?"  he  answered,  "  When  I  throw  him,  he
says  he  was  never  down,  and  he  persuades  the  very  spec-
tators to  believe  so."

Yet  such  v/as  the  solicitude  of  Pericles  when  he  had  to
speak  in  public,  that  he  always  first  addressed  a  prayer
to  the  gods,  t  "  That  not  a  word  might  unawares  escape
him    unsuitable  to  the  occasion."     He   left  nothing  in

suits  the  islands;  though  the  passage  is  pregnant  with  sense....
Athens,  in  the  wantonness  of  power,  insuhed  Eubosa,  which  was
her  granary,  and  the  /Egean  islands,  which  contributed  greatly  to
her  commerce  and  her  weakh.

*  Plato  observes,  on  the  same  occasion,  that  an  orator  as  well  as
a  physician  ought  to  have  a  general  knowledge  of  narure.

f  Qiiintilian  says,  he  prayed,  that  not  a  word  might  escape  him
disagreeable  t^  the  people.  And  this  is  the  more  probable  account
of  the  matter,  because  (according  to  Suidas)  Pericles  wrote  down
his  orations  before  lie  pronounced  them  in  public  ;  and,  indeed  was
the  first  who  did  so.


560  Plutarch's  lives,

writing,  but  some  public  decrees  ;  and  only  a  few  of  his
sayings  are  recorded.  He  used  to  say  (for  instance)  that
"  The  isle  of  ^gina  should  not  be  suffered  to  remain  an
eye-sore  to  the  Pirreus:"  and  that  "  He  saw  a  war  ap-
proaching fix)m  Peloponnesus."  And  when  Sophocles,
who  went  in  joint  command  with  him  upon  an  expedition
at  sea,  happened  to  praise  the  beauty  of  a  certain  boy,
he  said,  "  A  general,  my  friend,  should  not  only  have
pure  hands,  but  pure  eyes."  Stesirnbrotus  produces  this
passage  from  the  oration  which  Pericles  pronounced  in
memory  of  those  Athenians  who  fell  in  the  Samian  Avar,
*'  They  are  become  immortal  like  the  gods :  For  the
gods  themselves  are  not  visible  to  us  ;  but  from  the  ho-
nours they  receive,  and  the  happiness  they  enjoy,  ws
conclude  they  are  immortal ;  and  such  should  those  brave
men  be  who  die  for  their  country."

Thucydides  represents  the  administration  of  Pericles
as  favouring  aristocracy,  and  tells  us  that,  though  the
government  was  called  democratical,  it  was  really  in  the
hands  of  one  wlio  had  engrossed  the  whole  authority....
Many  other  writers  likewise  inform  us,  that  by  him  the
people  were  first  indulged  with  a  division  of  lands,  v/ere
treated  at  the  public  expence  v/ith  theatrical  diversions,
and  were  paid  for  the  most  common  services  to  the  state.
As  this  new  indulgence  from  the  goverment  was  an
impolitic  custom,  v/hich  rendered  the  people  expensive
and  luxurious,  and  destroyed  that  frugality  and  love  of
labour  which  supported  them  before,  it  is  proper  that  v/e
should  trace  the  effect  to  its  cause,  by  a  retrospect  into
the  circumstances  of  the  republic.

At  first,  as  we  have  observed,  to  raise  himself  to  some
sort  of  equality  with  Cimon,  who  was  then  at  the  height
of  glory,  Pericles  made  his  court  to  the  people.  And  as
Cimon  was  his  superior  in  point  of  fortune,  which  he  em-
ployed in  relieving  the  poor  Athenians,  in  providing  vic-
tuals every  day  for  the  necessitous,  and  clothed  the  aged  ;
and,  besides  this,  levelled  his  fences  vv'ith  the  ground,
that  all  might  be  at  liberty  to  gather  his  fruit ;  Peri-
cles had  recoui^e  to  the  expedient  of  dividing  the  public
treasure  ;  v/hich  scheme,  as  Aristotle  informs  us,  was
proposed  to  him  by  Demonides  of  Jos.*     Accordingly.,

*  Jos  was  one  of  the  isjes  called  Sj)orades,  in  the  iEgean  sea,  and
celebrated  fcr  the  tomb  cT  Homer.    But  seme  learned  men  are  of


PERICLES.  361

by  supplying  the  people  with  money  for  the  public  diver-
sions, and  for  their  attendance  in  courts  of  judicnture,*
and  by  other  pensions  and  gratuities,  he  so  inveigled  them
as  to  avail  himself  of  their  interest  against  the  council  of
the  Areopagus,  of  which  he  had  no  right  to  be  a  member,
having  never  had  the  fortune  to  be  chosen  arc/zow,  Thes-
mothctes^  King  of  the  sacred  riteSf  or  Polemarch,  For
persons  were  of  old  appointed  to  these  offices  by  lot ;  and
such  as  had  dischraged  them  well,  and  such  only,  were
admitted  as  judges  in  the  Areopagus.  Pericles,  therefore,
by  his  popularity  raised  a  party  against  that  council,  and,
by  means  of  Ephialtes,  took  from  them  the  cognizance  of
many  causes  that  had  been  under  their  jurisdiction.  He
likewise  caused  Cimcn  to  be  banished  by  the  Ostracism^
as  an  enemy  to  the  people,!  and  a  friend  to  the  Lacedr^;-
monians  :  a  man  v/ho  in  birth  and  fortune  ha.d  no  superior,
who  had  gained  very  glorious  victories  over  the  barba-
rians, and  liiled  the  city  with  money  and  other  spoils,  as
we  have  related  in  his  life.  Such  was  the  authority  of
Pericles  with  the  common  people.

The  term  of  Cimon's  banishment,  as  It  was  by  Ostra-
cism^ was  limited  by  law  to  ten  years.  Mean  time,  the
Lacedxmonians  with  a  great  army  entered  the  territory
of  Tanagra,  and  the  Athenians  immediately  marching
cut  against  them,  Cimon  returned,  and  placed  himself  in
the  ranks  with  those  of  his  tribe,  intending  by  his  deeds
to  v/ipe  off  the  aspersion  of  favouring  the  Laceda;moni-
ans,  and  to  venture  his  life  with  his  countrymen  ;  but  by
a  combination  of  the  friends  of  Pericles  he  was  repulsed

opinion  tha*:  instead  of  In^sv^  we  should  read  O/'jSsi',  and  that  De-
monides  was  notof  the  is^laad  of  Jog,  butof  Oia,  which  was  a  bo-
Tough  in  Attica.

*  There  were  several  courts  of  judica'^ure  in  Athens,  composed
of  a  certain  number  of  the  citizens  ;  who  sometimes  received  one
obohis,  each  for  every  cause  they  tried  ;  and  sometimes  men  wlio
aimed  at  popularity  procured  this  fee  to  be  increased.

f  His  treason  against  the  state  was  pretended  to  consist  in  re-
ceivmg  presents  or  other  gratifications  from  tlie  Macedonian?,
whereby  he  was  prevailed  on  to  let  slip  the  opportunity  he  had  to
enlarge  the  Athenian  conquests,  afrer  he  had  taken  the  gold  mines

of  Thrace Cimon  answered,  that  he  had  prosecuted  tlie  war  to

the  utmost  ofhis  power  against  the  Thracians  and  their  other  ene-
mies ;  but  that  he  had  made  no  inroads  into  Macedonia,  because  he
did  nor  conceive  that  \xc  was  to  act  as  a  public  euemy  :o  mankind.


362  Plutarch's  lives.

as  an  exile.  This  seems  to  have  been  the  cause  that  Pe-
ricles exerted  himself  in  a  particular  manner  in  that  bat-
tle, and  exposed  his  person  to  the  greatest  dangers.  Ail
Cimon's  friends,  whom  Pericles  had  accused  as  accom-
plices in  his  pretended  crime,  fell  honourably  that  day  to-
t^ether  :  And  the  Athenians,  who  were  defeated  upon
their  own  borders,  and  expected  a  still  sharper  conflict  in
the  summer,  grievously  repented  of  their  treatment  of  Ci-
mon,  and  longed  for  his  retvirn.  Pericles,  sensible  of  the
people's  inclinations,  did  not  hesitate  to  gratify  them,  but
proposed  a  decree  for  recalling  Cimon  ;  and,  at  his  re-
turn, a  peace  was  agreed  upon  through  his  mediation.
For  the  Laceda:monians  had  a  particular  regard  for  him,
as  well  as  aversion  for  Pericles  and  the  other  demagogues.
But  some  authors  write,  that  Pericles  did  not  procure  an
order  for  Cimon's  return,  till  they  had  entered  into  a  pri-
vate compact,  by  means  of  Cimon's  sister  Elpinice,  that
Cimon  should  have  tlie  comiTiand  abroad,  and  with  two
hundred  galleys  lay  waste  the  king  of  Persia's  dominions,
and  Pericles  have  the  direction  of  affairs  at  home.  A
story  goes,  that  Elpinice  before  this,  had  softened  the  re-
sentment of  Pericles  against  Cimon,  and  procured  her
brother  a  milder  sentence  than  that  of  death.  Pericles
vv^as  one  of  those  appointed  by  the  people  to  manage  the
impeachment  ;  and  when  Elpinice  addressed  him  as  a
suppliant,  he  smiled  and  said,  "  You  are  old,  Elpinice  :
.much  too  old  to  solicit  in  so  weighty  an  affair."  However,
he  rose  up  but  once  to  speak,  barely  to  acquit  himself  of
his  trust,  and  did  not  bear  so  hard  upon  Cimon  as  the  rest
of  his  accusers.*  Who  then  can  give  credit  to  Idome-
neus,  when  he  says,  that  Pericles  caused  the  orator  Ephi-
aites,  his  friend  and  assistant  in  the  administration,  to  be
assassinated,  through  jealousy  and  envy  of  his  great  char-
acter ?  I  know  not  where  he  met  with  this  calumny,  which
he  vents  with  great  bitterness  against  a  man,  not  indeed,
in  all  respects  irreproachable,  but  who  certainly  had  such
a  greatness  of  mind,  and  high  sense  of  honour,  as  was
incompatible  with  an  action  so  savage  and  inhuman.  The
truth  of  the  matter,  according  to  Aristotle,  is,  that  Ephi-

*  Yet  Cimon  was  fined  fifty  talents,  or  96  87/.  10*.  sterling,  and
narrowly  escaped  a  capital  sentence,  having  only  a  majority  of  three
votes  to  prevent  it.


PERICLES.  363

altes  being  grown  formidable  to  the  nobles,  on  account  of
liis  inflexible  severity  in  prosecuting  all  that  invaded  the
rights  of  the  people,  his  enemies  caused  him  to  be  taken
off  in  a  private  and  treacherous  manner,  by  Aristodicus
of  Tunagra.

About  tlie  same  time  died  Cimon,  in  the  expedition  to
Cyprus.     And  the  nobility  perceivini^  that  Pericles  was
now  arrived  at  a  height  of  authority  which  set  him  far
abovi^  the  other  citizens,  were  desirous  of  having  some
person  to  oppose  him,  who  might  be  capable  of  giving  a
check  to  his  power,  and  of  preventing  his  making  himself
absolute.     For  this  purpose  they  set  up  Thucydides,  of
the  ward  of  Alopece,  a  man  of  great  prudence,  and  brother-
i  in-law  to  Cimon.     He  had  not,  indeed,  Cimon's  talents
for  war,  but  was  superior  to  him  in  forensic  and  political
abilities  ;  and,  by  residing  constantly  in  Athens,  and  op-
posing Pericles  in  the  general  assembly,  he  soon  brought
the  government  to  an  equilibrium.     For  he  did  not  suffer
persons  of  superior  rank  to  be  dispersed  and  confounded
j  with  the  rest  of  the  people,  because  in  that  case  their  dig-
!  nity  was   obscured  and  lost  ;  but  collected  them  into  a
'  separate  body,    by  which  means  their  authority  was  en-
j  hanced,   and  sufficient  weight  thrown  into  their    scale.
There  was,  indeed,  from  the  beginning,  a  kind  of  doubt-
I  ful  separation,  which,  like  the  flaws  in  a  piece  of  iron,  in-
dicated that  the  aristocratical  party  and  that  of  the  com-
monalty were   not  perfectly  one,  though  they  were    not
actually  divided  :  but  the  ambition  of  Pericles  and  Thucy-
dides, and  the  contest  between  them,  had  so  extraordinary
I  an  effect  upon  the  city,  that  it  was  quite  broken  in  two,
I  and  one  of  the  parts  was  called  the  peo/ile^  and  the  other
I  the  nobility.     For  this   reason,  Pericles,  more  than  ever
1  gave  the  people  the  reins,  and  endeavoured  to  ingratiate
!  himself  with  them,  contriving  to  have  always  somt,  show,
I  or  play,  or  feast,  or  procession  in  the  city,  and  to  amuse
I  it  with  the  politest  pleasures.

I  As  another  means  of  employing  their  attention,  \\q  sent
j  out  sixty  galleys  every  year,  manned  for  eight  months,*
I  with  a  considerable  number  of  the  citizens,  who  were  both

j      *  Some  instead  of  ^:iva:r,  read/xva?  ;   and,  according  to  this  read-

I  itig,  the  passagrf  nnist  be  translated,  manned  ivitb tie  citizens,

v:bo&e  payvias  eight  mtjue,  and  i.'ho  at  tie  same  tiwe  ititproveJ,  See.


c


364  Plutarch's  lives.

paid  for  their  service,  and  improved  themselves  as  ma-
riners. He  likewise  sent  a  colony  of  a  thousand  men  to
the  Chersonesus,  five  hundred  to  Naxos,  two  hundred  and
fifty  to  Andros,  a  thousand  into  the  country  of  the  Bisal-
tai  in  Thrace,  and  others  into  Italy,  who  settled  in  Sybaris,
and  changed  its  name  to  Thurii.  These  things  he  did,
to  clear  the  city  of  an  useless  multitude,  who  were  very
troublesome  when  they  had  nothing  to  do  ;  to  make  pro-
vision for  the  most  necessitous  :  and  to  keep  the  allies  of
Athens  in  awe,  by  placing  colonies  like  so  many  garrisons
in  their  neighbourhood.

That  which  was  the  chief  delight  of  the  Athenians  and
the  wonder  of  strangers,  and  which  alone  serves  for  a
proof  that  the  boasted  pov/er  and  opulence  of  ancient
Greece  is  not  an  idle  tale,  was  the  magnificence  of  the
temples  and  public  edifices.  Yet  no  part  of  the  conduct
of  Pericles  moved  the  spleen  of  his  enemies  more  than
this.  In  their  accusations  of  him  to  the  people,  they  in-
sisted, "  That  he  had  brout^htthe  greatest  disgrace  upoa
the  Athenians  by  removing  the  public  treasures  of  Greece
from  Delos,  and  taking  them  into  his  own  custody  :  That
he  had  not  left  himself  even  the  specious  apology,  of
having  caused  the  money  to  be  brought  to  Athens  for  its
greater  security,  and  to  keep  it  from  being  seized  by  the  bar-
barians :  That  Greece  must  needs  consider  it  as  the  highest
insult,  and  an  act  of  open  tyranny,  when  she  saw  the  mo-
ney she  had  been  obliged  to  contribute  towards  the  war,
lavished  by  the  Athenians  in  gilding  their  city,  and  or-
namenting it  with  statues,  and  temples  that  cost  a  thou-
sand talents,*  as  a  proud  and  vain  woman  decks  herseslf
out  with  jewels."  Pericles  ansv/ered  this  charge  by  ob-
serving, *'  That  they  were  not  obliged  to  give  the  allies
any  account  of  the  sums  the)  h-d  received,  smce  they
had  kept  the  barbarians  at  a  distance,  and  cuectually  de-
fended the  allies,  who  had  not  furnished  either  horses,
ships,  or  men,  but  only  contributed  money,  which  is  no
longer  the  property  of  the  giver,  but  of  the  receiver,  if  he
performs  tut  conditions  or.  u  hich  it  is  received.  That  as
the  state  was  provided  with  aii  tlie  necessaries  of  war,  its
superfluous  wealth  should  be  laid  out  en  sucb  works  as,

*  The  Parthenon,  or  temple  of  Minerva,  i»  said  to  have  cost  a
thousand  talents.


p::ricli:s.  365

when  executed,  v/ould  be  eternal  monuments  of  its  glory,
and  which,  during  their  execution,  would  diliuse  an  unL-
versal  plenty  ;  ibr  ay  so  many  kinds  of  labour,  and  such
a  variety  of  instruments  and   materials  were  requisite  to
these   undertakin;^s,  every  art  would  be  exerted,   every
hand  employed,  almost  the  Avhole  city  would  be  in  pay,
and  be  at  the  same  time  both  adorned  and  suppoited  by
itself."     Indeed^   such    as    v/ere    of  a   proper  ag;e  and
strength,  were  wanted  for  the  wars,  and  well  rev/arded  for
their  services  ;  and  as  for  the  mechanics  and  meaner  sort
of  people,  they  went  not  v/ithout  their  share  of  the  public
money,  nor  yet  had  they  it  to  support  them  in  ialeness.
By  the  constructing  of  great  edifices,  which  required  many
arts  and  a  long  time  to  finish  tliem,  they  had  equal   pre-
tensions to  be  considered  out  oftlie  treasury  (though  tiiey
stirred  not  out  of  the  city)  with  the  mariners  and  soldiers,
guards  and  garrisons.     For  the  different  materials,  such
as  stone,  brass,  ivory,  gold,  ebony,  and  cypress,  furnished
employment  to  carpenters,  masons,  brasiers,  goldsmiths,
])ainters,  turners,  and  other  artificers  ;  the  conveyance  of
them  by  sea  employed  merchants  and  sailors,  and  by  land
wheei-wrights,  waggoners,  Curriers,  rope -makers,  leather-
cutters,  paviors,  and  iron-founders  :  and  every  art  had  a
number  of  the  lower  people  ranged  in  proper  subordina-
tion to  execute  it  like  soldiers  under  the  command  of  a
«:eneral.     Thus  bv  the  exercise  of  these  difierent  trades,
plenty  was   diffused    among  persons  of  every  rank  and
condition.  Thus  works  were  raised  of  an  astonishing  mag-
nitude, and  inimitable    beauty  and  perfection,  every  ar-
chitect striving  to  surpass  the  magnificence  of  the  design
with  the  elegance  of  the  execution      yet  still  the  •most
Avonderfui  circumstance  was  the  expedition  v/ith  which
they  were  completed.  Many  edifices,  each  of  which  seinis
to  have  re^iuired  the  labour  of  several  successive  ages,  were
finished  during  the  administration  of  one  prosperous  nun.
It  is  said,  that  when  Agatharcus  the  painter  valued  him-
self upon  the  celerity  and  ease  with  which  he  dispatch-
ed his  pieces  ;  Zeuxis  replied,   '^  If  1   boast,  it  shall  be
of  the  slowness  with  which  I  finish  mine."     For  ease  and
speed  in  the  execution  seldom  give  a  work  any  lar>ting
importance, -or  exquisite   beauty  ;    while,  on  the  other
hand  the  time  which  is  expended  in  labour,  is  reco.ertd
and  repaid  in  the  duration  of  the  performance.     Hence

VOL.    I.  1   i


366  PLUTARCH'S    LIVES.

we  have  the  more  reason  to  wonder*  that  the  structures
reused  by  Pericles  should  be  built  in  so  short  a  time,  and
yet  built  for  ages  :  for  as  each  of  them,  as  soon  as  finish-
ed, had  the  venerable  air  of  antiquity  ;  so,  now  they  are
old,  they  have  the  freshness  of  a  modern  building.  A
bloom  is  diffused  over  them,  which  preserves  their  aspect
untarnished  by  time,  as  if  they  were  animated  with  a  spi-
rit of  perpetual  youth  and  unfading  elegance.

Phidias  was  appointed  by  Pericles  superintendant  of
all  the  public  ediiices,  though  the  Athenians  haa  then
other  eminent  architects  and  excellent  workmen.  The
ParMe7Z'572,or  temple  ofPatos,  whose  dimensions  had  been
a  hundred  feet  square,*  was  re-built  by  Callicrates  and
Ictinus.  Coroebus  began  the  temple  of  Initiation  at  Eleu-
sis,  but  only  lived  to  finish  the  lower  rank  of  columns
with  their  architraves.  Metagenes,  of  the  v/ard  of
Xypete,  added  the  rest  of  the  entablature,  and  the  upper
row  of  columns ;  and  Xenocles  of  Cholargus  built  the
doiTie  on  the  top.  The  long  wall,  the  building  of  which
Socrates  says  he  heard  Pericles  propose  to  tiie  people,
was  undertaken  by  Callicrates.  Cratinus  ridicules  this
work  as  proceeding  very  slowly  :

Stones  upon  stones  the  orator  has  pil'd,

With  swelHng  woi'ds,  but  words  will  build  no  walls.

The  Odeum,  or  music-theatre,  which  was  likewise  built
by  the  direction  of  Pericles,  had  within  it  many  rows  of
seats  and  of  pillars  ;  the  roof  was  of  a  conic  figure,  after
the  model  (we  are  told)  of  the  king  of  Persia's  pavilion....
Cratinus,  therefore,  rallies  him.  again  in  his  play  called
Thrattte  :

As  Jove,  an  onion  on  his  head  he  wears  ;
As  Pericles,  a  whole  orchestre  bears  ;
Afraid  of  broils  and  banishment  no  more,
He  tunes  the  shell  he  trembled  at  befox-e  !

Pericles  at  this  time  exerted  all  his  interest  to  have  a
decree  made,  appointing  a  prize  for  the  best  performer
in  music  during  the  Panathenm. ;   and,  he    was  himself

*  It  was  called  Hecatoinpedon,  because  it  had  been  originally  a
hundred  feet  square.  And  having  been  burnt  by  the  Persians,  it
was  rebuilt  by  Pericles,  and  retained  thax  name  after  it  was  gready

enlarged.


PERICLES.      .  367

appointed  judge  and  distributer  of  the  prizes  ;  he  gave
the  contenclintj;  artists  directions  in  what  manner  to  pro-
ceed, whetlier  their  performance  was  vocal,  or  on  the
flute  or  lyre.  From  tiiat  time  the  prizes  in  music  were  al-
ways coijtended  for  in-  the  odeum.

The  vestibule  of  the  citadel  was  finished  in  five  years
by  Mnesicles  the  architect.  A  wonderful  event  that  hap-
pened while  the  work  was  in  hand,  showed  that  the  god-
.<lc3s  was  not  averse  to  the  work,  but  ratlier  took  it  into
her  protection,  and  encouraged  them  to  complete  it.  One
of  the  best  and  most  active  of  iat  workmen,  missing  his
step  fell  fixmi  the  top  to  the  bottom,  and  was  bruised  irr
such  a"  manner  that  his  life  was  dev>paired  of  by  the  phy-
sicians. Pericles  was  greatiy  concerned  at  this  accident ;
but,  in  the  midst  of  his  alTliction,  the  goddess  appeared  to
him  in  a  dream,  and  infarmed  him  of  a  remedy,  whicli  he
r.pplied,  and  thereby  soon  recovered  the  paiient.  In  me-
mory of  this  cure,  he  placed  in  the  citadel,  near  the  altar,
(which  is  said  to  have  been  there  before)  a  brazen  statue
of  the  Minerva  of  health.  The  golden  statue  of  the  same
goddess,*  v/as  the  v/orkmanship  of  Phicias,  and  hisname
i>  inscribed  upon  the  pedestal,  (as  vve  have  already  ob-
&;  rved)  through  the  friendship  of  Pericles  he  had  the
direction  of  every  thing,  and  all  the  artists  received  his
orders.  For  this  the  one  was  envied,  ond  the  other  slan-
dered ;  and  it  was  in'.iniated  that  Phidias  received  into
his  house  ladies  for  Pericles,  who  came  thither  under
pretence  of  seeing  his  works.  The  comic  poets,  getting
hold  of  tiiis  story,  represented  him  as  a  perfect  libertine.
They  accused  him  of  an  intrigue  with  the  wife  of  Me-
nippus,  his  friend  and  lieutenant  in  the  army  :  and  be-
cause Pyrilampes,  another  intimate  acquaintance  of  hi.-?,
had  a  collection  of  curious  birds,  and  particularly  of  pea'-
cocks,  it  was  supposed  that  he  kept  them  only  for  pre-

*  This  staM'e  was  of  gold  and  ivory.  Pausania^  has  given  us  a
descripfioM  of  jr.  Tiie  goddess  Avas  reprei,emed  stiviKllng,  cloathed
in  a  tunic  that  reached  down  to  the  foot.  On  \\cy  Aegi^,  or  breast-
plate, was  Medusa's  h-r^ad  in  ivory,  and  victoty.  She  held  a  ipear  in
her  hand;  and  at  lier  feet  lay  abuckler,  and  a  dr?.g(in,  supposed  to
be  Erichthonius.  The  sphynx  was  represented  on- the  middle  of
her  li:  linet,  \A'h  a  grirfin  on  each  side.  This  statue  was  thirty-nine
feet  high  ;  tlie  victory  on  the  breast-plate  was  about  fo\ir  cubits  ;
*nd  forty  talents  o(  gold  were  employed  upon  it.


568  J'LUT arch's  lives.

sents  for  those  vronien  vvho  graiited  favciirs  to  rerides.
But  'vbrtt  V,  ciider  is  it,  if  ^nen  cf  a  satyrical  turn,  daily
s?crif!ce  the  characters  of  the  great  to  that  inalevolent
Djcmon,  the  envy  of  the  multitude  ;  Vv-hen  Stesiinbrotus
of  Tha-ios  had  dared  to  lodge  against  Pericles  that  horrid
and  g-roundless  accusation  of  corrupting  his  son's  wife  ?
30  diiiicult  is  it  to  come  at  truth  in  the  walk  of  history  ;
since,  if  the  writers  live  after  the  events  they  relate,  they
can  be  ]>iit  imperfectly  inf^-rmed  of  facts,  and  if  they  de-
scribe the  persons  and  transections  of  their  own  times,
they  are  tempted  by  envy  rnd  hatred,  or  by  interest  and
friendship  to  vitiate  and  pervert  the  truth.

The  craters  of  Tlmcydidei^'s  party  raised  a  clamour
against  Pericles,  asserting,  that  he  wasted  the  public  trea-
sure and  brought  the  revenue  to  nothing.  Pericles  in
his  defence  asked  the  pccplein  full  assembly,  '*  Whether
they  thought  he  had  expended  too  much  ?"  upon  their
answering  in  the  afhrmiitive,  "  Then  be  it,"  said  he,
*'  charged  to  my  account,*  not  yours :  only  let  the  new
edifices  be  inricribed  v/ith  my  name,  not  that  of  the  peo-
ple of  Athens."  Whether  it  was  that  they  admired  the
grcr.tness  of  his  spirit,  or  were  ambitious  to  share  the
glory  of  such  magnificent  \7orks,  tliey  cried  out,  "  That
he  might  spend  as  much  as  he  pleased  of  the  public  trea-
sure, witiout  sparing  it  in  the  least."

At  last  the  contest  camic  on  betv/een  him  and  Thucy-
didtr,  which  of  them  should  be  banished  by  the  osiracism  :
Pericles  gained  the  victory,  banished  his  adversary,  ar.d
entirely  defeated  his  party.  The  opposition  now  being
at  an  end,  and  unanimity  taking  place  amongst  all  ranks

*  It  appeals  from  a  passage  in  Thucydides,  that  the  public
stock  of  the  Athenians,  amounted  to  nine  thousand  seven  hundred
talents,  (oi-cne  million  eight  hundred  andF.evcrty-five  thousand nir.e
hundred  and  ffty  pounds  sterling)  of  which,  Pericles  had  laid  cut
in  those  public  buildings,  three  tjionsand  seven  hundred  talev.ts....
It  is  natural,  therefore,  to  ask,  how  he  could  tell  the  people  that  it
should  be  at  his  own  expence,  especially  since  Plutarch  ttlJs  us  in
the  sequel,  that  he  had  not  in  the  least  improved  the  estate  left  him
by  his  father  ?  To  which  the  true  answer  probably  is,  that  Pericles
was  pcliticisn  enough  to  know  that  the  vanity  ci'  the  Athenians
v/ould  never  let  them  agree  that  he  should  inscribe  the  new  mag-
nificent buildings  with  his  name,  in  exclusion  of  theirs;  or  he  might
venture  to  say  any  thing,  being  secure  of  a  majority  of  votes  to  be
g;i"eu  as  he  pleased-


PERICLES,  369

of  people,  Pericles  became  sole  master  of  Athens,  and
its  dependencies.  The  revenues,  the  army  and  navy  ;
the  islands  and  the  sea  ;  a  most  extensive  territory,  peo-
pled by  barbarians  as  well  as  Greeks,  fortified  with  the
obedience  of  subject  nations,  the  friendship  of  kings  and
alliance  of  princes,  were  all  at  his  command-

From  this  time  he  became  a  diiferent  man  ;  he  was  no
lonp;cr  so  obsequious  to  the  humour  of  the  populace*
which  is  as  wild  and  as  changeable  as  the  winds.  The
multitude  were  not  indulged  or  courted  ;  the  government
in  fact  was  not  popular  ;  its  loose  and  luxuriant  harmony
was  confined  to  stricter  measures,  and  it  assumed  an  aris-
tocratical  or  rather  monarchical  form.  He  kept  the  pub-
lic good  in  his  eye,  and  pursued  the  straight  path  of
honour.  For  the  most  part  gently  leading  them  by  ar-
gument to  a  sense  of  what  M-as  right,  and  sometimes
forcing  them  to  comply  with  what  was  for  their  ov/n  ad-
vantage ;  in  this  respect  imitating  a  good  physician,  who.
in  the  various  symptoms  of  a  long  disease,  sometimes  ad-
ministers medicines  tolerably  agreeable,  and,  at  other
times,  sharp  and  strong  ones,  when  such  alone  are  capable
of  restoring  the  patient.  He  was  the  man  that  had  the
art  of  controuling  those  many  disorderly  passions  which
necessarily  spring  up  amongst  a  people  possessed  of  so.
extensive  a  dominion.  The  two  engines  he  worked  with
were  hope  and  fear  ;  with  these,  repressing  their  violence,
when  they  were  too  impetuous,  and  supporting  their  spi-
rits when  inclined  to  languor,  he  made  it  appear  that
rhetoric  z>  (as  Plato  defined  it)  the  art  of  ruUv.^  the  rtiinda
of  men^  and'that  its  principal  province  consists  in  nioving
the  passions  and  affections  of  the  soul,  which,  like  so
many  strings  in  a  musical  instrument,  require  the  touch
of  a  masterly  and  delicate  hand.  Nor  were  the  powers
of  eloquence  alone  sufficient,  but  (as  Thucydides  ob-
sen'es)  the  orator  was  a  man  of  probity  and  unblemished
reputation.  Money  could  not  bribe  hinri ;  he  was  so
much  above  the  desire  of  it,  that  though  he  added  greatly
to  the  opulence  of  the  state,  which  he  found  not  incon-
siderable, and  though  his  power  exceeded  that  of  many
kings  and  tyrants,  some  of  whom  have  bequeathed  to
their  posterity,  the  sovereignty  they  had  obtained,  yet  he.
added  not  one  drachma  to  his  paternal  estate.

I  12.


.370  "PLUTAPXIi'S    LIVES.

Thucydides,  indeed,  gives  this  candid  account  of  tiie
power  and  authority  of  Pericles,  but  the  comic  writers
abu?e  him  in  a  most  malignant  manner,  giving  his  friends
the  name  of  the  ncvi)  pisistraticl^^  r.nd  calling  upon  him  to
swear  that  he  would  never  attempt  to  make  himself  ab-
solute, since  his  authority  was  alreadymuch  too  great  and
overbearine:  in  a  free  state.  Teleclides  savs,  the  Athe-
nians  had  given  up  to  him

The  tribute  of  the  states,  the  states  themselves.
To  bind,  to  loose  ;  to  build  and  to  destroy  ;
In  pcp.ce,  in  war  to  govern  ;  nay,  to  rule
Their  very  fate,  like  seme  superior  bein^.

And  this  not  only  for  a  time,  or  during  the  prime  and
ilo3ver  of  a  short  administration  ;  but  for  forty  years  to-
sijether  he  held  the  pre-eminence,  amidst  such  men  as
Ephialtej?,  Leocrates,  Myronides,  Cimcn,  Tclmides,  and
Thucydides,  and  continued  it  no  less  than  fifteen  years
after  the  fall  and  banishment  of  the  latter.  The  power
of  the  magistrates,  which  to  them  was  but  annual,  all
centered  in  him,  yet  still  he  kept  himself  untainted  by
avarice :  Not  that  he  was  inattentive  to  his  finances  ;
but,  on  the  contrary,  neither  negligeot  of  his  paternal  es-
tate, nor  yet  willing  to  have  much  trouble  with  it,  as  he
had  not  nnuch  time  to  spare,  he  brought  the  management
of  it  into  such  a  method  as  was  very  easy,  at  the  same  time
that  it  was  exact.  For  he  used  to  turn  a  whole  year's
produce  into  money  altogether,  and  with  this  he  bought
from  day  to  day  all  manner  of  necessaries  at  the  market.
This  way  of  living  was  not  agreeable  to  his  sons  when
grown  up.  and  the  allowance  he  made  the  women  did  not
appear  to  them  a  generous  one ;  they  complained  of  a
pittance  daily  measui'ed  cut  with  scrupulous  ceconomy,
which  admitted  of  ncne  of  those  superfluities  so  common
in  great  houses,  and  wealthy  families,  and  could  not  bear
to  think  of  the  expences  being  so  nicely  adjusted  to  the
income.

The  person  who  managed  these  concerns  with  so  much
exactness,  was  a  servant  of  his  nam.ed  Evangelus,  either
remarkably  fitted  for  the  purpose  by  nature,  or  formed  to
it  by  Pericles.  Anaxagoras,  indeed,  considered  these
lower  attentions  as  inconsistent  v/ith  his  wisdom.  Fol-
lowing the  dictates  ofenthiisiam,  and  wrapt  up  in  subhme


PERICLES.  371

inquiries,  iie  quilted  his  house,  and  left  his  lands  untilled
and  desolate.  But,  in  my  opinion,  there  is  an  essential
difference  between  a  speculative  and  a  practical  philoso-
pher. The  former  advances  his  ideas  into  the  regions  of
science  without  the  assistance  of  any  thing  corporeal  or
external ;  the  latter  endeavours  to  apply  his  great  quali-
ties to  the  use  of  mankind,  and  riches  afford  him  not  only
necessary  but  excellent  assistance.  Thus  it  was  with
Pericles,  who  by  his  v/ealth  was  enabled  to  relieve  num-
bers of  the  poor  citizens.  Nay,  for  Vr^ant  of  such  pruden-
tial regards,  this  very  Anaxagcras,  we  are,  told,  lay  neg-
lected and  unprovided  for,  insomuch  thatthe  poor  old  man
liad  covered  up  his  head  and  vv^as  going  to  starve  himself.*
But  an  account  of  it  being  brought  to  Pericles,  he  was  ex-
tremely moved  at  it,  ran  immediately  to  him,  expostula-
ted, intreated  ;  bewailing  not  so  much  the  fate  of  his
friend  as  his  own,  if  his  administration  should  lose  so  val-
uable a  counsellor.  Anaxagoras,  uncovering  his  face,
replied,  "  Ah  Pericles  !  those  that  have  need  of  a  lamp,
take  care  to  supply  it  with  oil."

By  this  time,  the  Lacedemonians  began  to  express  some
jealousy  of  the  Athenian  greatness,  and  Pericles  willing
to  advance  it  still  higher,  and  to  make  the  people  more
sensible  of  their  importance  and  more  inclinable  to  great
attempts,  procured  an  order,  that  all  the  Greeks,  where-
soever they  resided,  whether  in  Europe  or  in  Asia,  whether
their  cities  were  small  or  great,  should  send  deputies  to
Athens  to  consult  about  rebuilding  the  Grecian  temples
which  the  barbarians  had  burnt,  and  about  providing  those
sacrifices  which  had  been  vowed  during  the  Persian  war,
for  the  preservation  of  (^reece  ;  and  likewise  to  enter  into
such  measures  as  might  secure  navigation  and  maintain
the  peace.

Accordingly  twenty  persons,  each  upwards  of  fifty
years  of  age,  were  sent  with  this  proposal  to  the  different
states  of  Greece.  Five  went  to  the  lonians  and  Dorians
in  Asia,  and  the  islanders  as  far  as  Lesbos,  and  Rhodes  j
five  to  the  cities  about  the  Hellespont  and  in  Thrace,  as
far  as  Byzantium  ;  five  to  the  inhabitants  of  Bosotia,  Pho-

*  It  was  Aistomary  among  the  ancients  for  a  person  who  was  de-
termined to  put  an  end  to  his  lite  to  cover  up  his  head  ;  wheuier  he
devoted  himself  to  death  for  the  service  of  his  country,  or  being
weary  of  his  being,  bade  tlw  world  adieu.


o72  Plutarch's  lives.

cis  and  Peloponnesus,  and  from  thence,  by  Locri  along
the  adjoining  continent,  to  Acarnania  and  Ambracia.
The  rest  were  dispatched  through  Euboea  to  the  Greeks
that  dwelt  upon  Mount  Oetra  and  near  the  MaHac  Bay,
to  the  Phithiotse,  the  Achsans  *  and  Thessalians,  invit-  I
ingthem  to  join  in  the  council  and  new  confederacy  for
the  preservation  of  the  peace  of  Greece. t  It  took  not
effect,  however,  nor  did  the  cities  send  theirdeputies  ;  the
reason  of  which  is  said  to  he  the  opposition  of  the  Lace-
dsemonians,!  for  the  proposal  was  first  rejected  in  Pelo-
ponnesus. But  I  was  v/iiling  to  give  account  of  it  as  a
specimen  of  the  greatness  of  the  orator's  spirit,  and  of  his
disposition  to  form  magnificent  designs.

His  chief  merit  in  war  was  the  safety  of  his  measures.
He  never  willingly  engaged  in  any  uncertain  orverydaji-
gerous  expedition,  nor  had  any  ambition  to  imitate  those
generals  who  are  admired  as  great  men,  because  their
rash  enterprizes  have  been  attended  with  success  ;  he
always  told  the  Athenians,  "  That  as  far  as  their  fate  de-
pended upon  him,  they  should  be  immortal."  Perceiv-
ing thatTolmides,  the  son  of  Tolmxus,  in  confidence  of
his  former  success  and  military  reputation,  was  prepar-
ing to  invade  Bceotia  at  an  unseasonable  time,  and  that,
;  over  and  above  the  regular  troops,  he  had  persuaded  the
■  bravest  and  most  spirited  of  the  Athenian  youth,  to  the
number  of  a  thousand,  to  go  volunteers  in  that  expedition,
he  addressed  him  in  public  and  tried  to  divert  him  from
it,  making  use,  among  the  rest,  of  those  v/ell-known
words,  *'If  you  regard  not  the  opinion  of  Pericles,  yet
wait  at  least  for  the  advice  of  time  v/ho  is  the  best  of  all
counsellors."  This  saying,  for  the  present,  gained  no
great  applause  :  but  when,  a   few  days  after,  news  was

*  By  Achxans  we  are  sometimes  to  understand  the  Greeks  in  ge~
neral,  especially  in  the  writings  of  the  poets  ;  and  sometimes  the
inhabitants  ot  U  particular  district  in  Peloponnesus  :  but  neither  of
these  can  be  the  rneauing  in  this  place.  We  must  here  understand
a  people  of  Thessaly,  called  Achaans.     Vide  Stepb.  Byz.  in  voce

\  It  is  no  wonder  that  the  Lacedaemonians  opposed  this  undertak-
Irig,  since  the  giving  way  to  it  v/ould  have  been  acknowledgnig  the
Athenians  as  masters  of  ail  Greece,  Indeed,  the  Athenians  should
not  have  attempted  it,  without  an  order  cr:  decree  of  the  Amphie-
tyons.


PERICLES.      '  373

brought,  tiiat  Tolmides  was  defeated  and  killed  at  Coro-
iiea,*  toi^ether  v/ith  many  of  the  bravest  citizens,  it  piT)-
cured  Pericles  great  respect  and  love  from  the  people,
who  considered  it  as  a  proof,  not  cnly  of  his  sagacity,  but
of  his  affection  for  his  countrymen.

Of  his  military  expeditions,  that  to  the  Chersonesus
procured  him  riDst  honour,  because  it  proved  very  sahi-
tary  to  the  Greeks  who  dwelt  there.  For  he  not  only
strengthened  their  cities  with  the  addition  of  a  thousand
able-bodied  Athenians,  but  raised  ibrtilications  across  the
Isthmus  from  sea  to  sea ;  thus  guarding  against  the  in-
cursions of  the  Thracians  who  were  spread  about  the
Chersonesus,  and  putting  an  end  to  those  long  and  grie-
vous wars  under  v/hich  that  district  had  smarted  by  rea-
son of  the  neighbourhood  of  the  barbarians,  as  well  as  to
the  robberies  with  which  it  had  been  infested  by  persons
who  lived  upon  the  borders,  or  Vv'cre  inhabitants  of  the
country.  But  the  expedition  most  celebrated  among
strangers,  was  that  by  sea  around  Peloponnesus.  He  set
sail  from  Pegac  in  the  territories  of  Megara  with  an  hun-
dred ships  of  war,  and  not  only  ravaged  the  maritime
cities,  as  Tolmides  had  done  before  him,  but  kiuded  hi^
forces,  and  penetrated  a  good  v/ay  up  the  country.  The
terror  of  his  arms  drove  the  inhabitants  into  their  v/alled
towns,  all  but  the  Sicyonians  who  made  head  against  him
at  Nemea,  and  were  defeated  in  a  pitched  battle  ;  in  me-
mory ofwhich  victory  he  erected  a  trophy.  From  Achaia,
a  confederate  state,  he  took  a  number  of  men  into  his
gallies,  and  sailed  to  the  opposite  side  of  the  continent ;
then  passing  by  the  mouth  of  the  Achelous.  he  made  a
descent  in  Acarnania,  shut  up  the  Oeneadie  within  their
walls,  and  having  laid  waste  the  country,  returned  home.
In  the  whole  course  of  this  affair,  he  appeared  terrible  to
his  enemies,  and  to  his  countrymen  an  active  and  pru-
dent commander ;  for  no  miscarriage  was  committed,  nor
did  even  any  unfortunate  accident  happen  during  tlie
whole  time.

Having  sailed  to  Pontus  with  a  large  and  well  equip-
ped fleet,  he  procured  the  Grecian  dries  there  tdi  the
advLuitages  j:hey  desired,  ai.d  treated  thtin  with  greac  re-

*  This  defeat  happened  in  the  second  year  of  d\e  eighty-thini
Olympiad,  four  hundred  j  id  foity-l.ve  ycais  b.t  .jv  -he  C'iiriiUan
xra.,  a.idmore  than  tweat/  ;iais  liefy^c  the  death  cf  rciicles.


374  i'LUTAKCll's    LIVES.

gard.  To  the  barbarous  nations  that  surrounded  them,
and  to  their  kings  and  princes,  he  made  the  power  of
Athens  very  respectable,  by  shewing  with  what  stcurity
her  iieets  coidd  sail,  and  that  she  was  in  etTtct  mistress  of
the  seas.  He  left  the  people  of  Sinope  thirteen  siiips  un-
der the  command  ofLamachus,  and  a  body  of  men  to  act
against  Fimesileos  their  tyrant.  And  v/hen  the  tyrant
aud  his  party  were  driven  out,  he  caused  a  decree  to  hi
iTii-de,  that  a  colony  of  six  hundred  Athenian  vohmteers
should  be  pl^xed  in  Sinope,  and  put  in  possession  of  those
ho  isesand  lands  which  had  belonged  to  the  tyrants.

Hj  did  not,  however,  p;ive  way  to  the  wild  desires  of
the  citizens,  nor  would  he  indulge  them,  v^'hen  elated
with  their  strength  and  good  fortune,  they  talked  of  re-
covering Egypt,*  a;;d  of  attempting  the  coi,st  of  Persia.
Many  we;  e  likewise  at  this  time  possessed  with  the  unfor-
tunate passion  for  Sicily,  which  the  orators  of  Alcibiades's
party  afterwards  intlamed  still  more.  Nay,  some  even
dreamlof  Hetruridt  and  Carthage,  and  not  v.'ithout  some
-gTou-,d  of  hope,  as  they  imagined,  because  of  the  great
extent  o:'  their  dominions  and  the  successful  course  of  their
aifj.irs.

But  Pericles  restrained  this  impetuosity  of  the  citizens,
and  curbed  thicir  extravagant  desire  of  conquest ;  employ-
mg  the  greatest  part  of  their  forces  in  strengthening  and
securing  their  present  acquisitions,  and  considering  it  as
a  matter  cf  consequence  to  keep  the  Lacedsmonians
within  bounds  ;  whom  he  therefore  opposed,  as  on  other
occasioiis,  so  particularly  in  the  sacred  war.  For  when
tlie  Lacedasraoaians,  by  dint  of  arms,  had  restored  the
temple  to  the  citizens  of  Delphi,  which  had  been  seized

*  For  the  Arhenians  had  been  masters  of  Eg^ypt,  as  we  find  in
the  second  book  of  Thucydides.  They  were  driven  out  of  it  by
■Megabyzus,  Artaxerxes's  lientenant,  in  the  first  year  of  the  eight-
ieth Olympiad,  and  it  was  only  in  the  last  year  of  the  eighty-first
Olympiad  thai."  Pericles  made  that  successful  expedition  about  Fele-
ponr.esus  ;  therefore  it  is  not  strange  ihat  tb.e  Athenians,  now  in  the
heigh i:  of  prosperity,  talked  of  recovering  their  footing  in  a  country
which  they  had  so  lately  lest.

t  Herruria  seems  oddiy  joined  with  Carthage  ;  bvit  we  nm/  con-
sider  that  Hevruria  was  on  one  side  of  Sicily,  and  Carthage  on  the
other.  The  Athenians,  therefore,  after  they  had  devoured  Sicily  in
their  thoughts,  might  think  of  extending  their  conquests  to  the  conn-
tries  on  the  right  and  left ;  in  the  same  manner  as  king  Pyrrhus  in-
dulged his  wild  ambition  to  subdue  Sicily,  Italy,  and  Africa.


PFRICLES.  37S

hy  the  Phocians,  Pericles,  immediately  eifrer  the  depar-
ture of  the  Lacedscmoniuns,  marched  thither  and  put  it
'.  into  the  hands  of  the  Phocians  again.  And  as  the  Lace-
j  dxmonians  had  engraved  on  the  forehead  of  the  brazen
j  wolf  the  privilege  Avhich  the  people  of  Delphi  had  grant-
I  ed  them  of  consulting  the  oracle  first,*  Pericles  caused
the  same  privilege  for  the  Athenians,  to  be  inscribed  on
i    the  wolf's  right  side.

'        The  event  shewed,  that  he  was  right  in  confining  the
Athenian   forces   to  act  within  the   bounds  of  Greece.
For,   in  the  first  place  the  Eubosans  revolted,  and  he  led
an  army  against  them.     Soon  after  news  was  brought
that  jVlegara  had  commenced  hostilities,  aiul  that  the  La-
cedaemonian forces,   under  the  command  of  king  Plisto-
nax,  were  upon  the   borders  of  Attica.      The   enemy
offered  him  battle  ;  he  did  not  choose,  however,  to  risk
an  engagement  with  so  numerous  and  resolute  an  army.
But  as  nistonax  was  very  young,  and  chiefly  directed  by
Cleandrides,  a  counsellor  whom  the  IC/i/iori  had  appointed
him  on  account  of  his  tender  age,  he  attempted  to  bribe
that  counsellor,  and  succeeding  in  it  to  his  vv'ish,  persuad-
ed him  to  draw  off  the  Peloponnesians  from  Attica.    The
soldiers  dispersing  and  retiring  to  their  respective  homes,
the   Laced semonians  were  so  highly  incensed,  that  they
laid  a  heavy  fine  upon  the  king,  and  as  he  v/as  not  able
to  pay  it,  he  withdrew  from  Lacedxmon.     As  for  Clean-
drides,   who  fled  from  justice,  they  condemned  him  to
death.     He  was  the  father  of  Gylipp\is  who  defeated  the
Athenians  in  Sicily,  and  who  seemed  to  have  derived  the
vice   of  avarice  from   him   as  an  hereditary  distemper.
He  was   led  by  it  into  bad  practices,  for  wliich  he  was
banished  with  ignominy  from  Sparta,  as  we  have  related
in  the  life  of  Ly sender.

In  the  accounts  for  this  campaign,  Pericles  put  dov/n
ten  talents  laid  out  for  a  necessary  use,  and  the  people
allowed  it,  without  examining  the  matter  closely  or  pry-
ing into  the  secret.  According  to  some  writers,  and
among  the  rest  Theoprastus  the  philosopher,  Pericles
sent  ten  talents  every  year  to  Sparta,  with  which  he  gained
all  the  magi|tracy,  and  kept  them  from  acts  of  hostility  ;

*  This  wolf  is  said  to  have  been  consecrated  and  placed  by  the  side
of  the  great  ahar,  on  occasion  of  a  wolf's  killing  a  thief  who  had
robbed  tlic  temple,  ri,'v,l  leading  the  Delphians  to  the  place  where  the
treasure  lav.


576  PLUT arch's   liv^es.

not  that  he  purchased  peace  with  the  money,  but  only-
gained  tune,  that  he  might  have  leisure  to  make  prepa-
rations to  carry  on  the  war  afterwards  with  advantage.

Immediately,  after  the  retreat  of  the  Lacedaemonians,
he  turned  his  arms  against  the  revolters,  and  passing  over
into  Euboea  with  fifty  ships  and  five  thousand  men,  he
reduced  the  cities.  He  expelled  the  Hipp^obotcs^  persons
distinguished  by  their  opulence  and  authority  among  the
Chaicidians  ;  and  having  exterminated  ail  the  Hestiseans,
he  gave  their  city  to  a  colony  of  Athenians.  The  cause
of  this  severity  was  their  having  taken  an  Athenian  ship,
and  murdered  the  whole  crew.

^  Soon  after  this,  the  Athenians  and  Lacedsemonians
having  agreed  upon  a  truce  for  thirty  years,  Pericles
caused  a  decree  to  be  made  for  an  expedition  against
Samos.  The  pretence  he  made  use  of  was,  that  the  Sa-
mians,  when  commanded  to  put  an  end  to  the  war  with
the  Milesians,  had  refused  it.  But  as  he  seems  to  have
entered  upon  this  war  merely  to  gratify  Aspasia,  it  may
not  be  amiss  to  enquire  by  v/hat  art  or  power  she  capti-
vated the  greatest  statesmen,  and  brought  even  philoso-
phers to  speak  of  her  so  much  to  her  advantage.

It  is  agreed,  that  she  was  by  birth  a  Milesian,*  and
the  daughter  of  Axiochus.  She  is  reported  to  have  trod
in  the  steps  of  Thargelia  f  who  was  descended  from  the
ancient  lonians,  and  to  have  reserved  her  intimacies  for
the  great.  This  Thargelia,  who  to  the  charms  of  her
person  added  a  peculiar  politeness  and  poignant  wit,  had
many  lovers  am.ong  the  Greeks,  and  drew  over  to  the
king  of  Persia's  interest  all  that  had  approached  her  ;  by
whose  means,  as  they  were  persons  of  eminence  and  au-
thority, she  sowed  the  seeds  of  the  Median  faction  among
the  Grecian  states.

Some  indeed,  say,  that  Pericles  made  his  court  to
Aspasia  only  on  account  of  her  wisdom  and  political  abi-
lities. Nay,  even  Socrates  himself  sometimes  visited  her
along  with  his  friends  ;  and  her  acquaintance  took  their
wives  v/ith  them  to  hear  her  discourse,  though  the  busi-
ness that  supported  her  was  neither  honourable  nor  de-

*  ?ii1cri.ni,  a  city  in  Ionia,  was  famous  for  producing  persons  of
extraordinary  abilities.

t  Tiiis  Thargelia,  by  her  beauty,  obtained  the  sovereignty  of
Thessaly.  However,  she  came  to  au  untimely  end  ;  for  she  was
murdered  by  one  of  her  lovers.


PERICLES.  377

cent,  for  she  kept  a  number  of  courtezans  in  her  house.
jEschines  informs  us,  that  Lysicles,  who  was  a  grazier,*
and  of  a  mean  ungenerous  disposition,  by  his  intercourse
with  Aspasia  after  the  death  of  Pericles,  became  the  most
considerable  man  in  Athens.  And  though  Plato's  Menex-
enus  in  the  beginning,  is  rather  humerous  than  serious,
yet  thus  much  of  history  we  may  gather  from  it,  that
many  Athenians  resorted  to  her  on  account  of  her  skill
in  the  art  of  speaking.f

I  should  not  however,  think  that  the  attachment  of
Pericles  was  of  so  very  delicate  a  kind.  For,  though
his  wife,  (who  was  his  relation,  and  had  been  first  mar-
ried to  Hipponicus,  by  whom  she  had  Callius  the  rich,)
brought  him  two  sons,  Xanthippus  and  Paralus,  yet
they  lived  so  ill  together,  that  they  parted  by  consent.
She  was  married  to  another,  and  he  took  Aspasia,  for
whom  he  had  the  tenderest  regard.  Insomuch,  that  he
never  went  out  upon  business,  or  returned  without  salut-
ing her.  In  the  comedies  she  is  called  the  JVew  Om/i/taley
Deianirctj  and  Juno»  Cratinus  plainly  calls  her  a  pros-,
titute :

-She  bore  this  ^(fio,  this  Aspasia,


Skill'd  in  the  shameless  trade  and  every  art
Of  wantonness.

He  seems  also  to  have  had  a  natural  son  by  her ;  for
he  is  introduced  by  Eupolis  inquiring  after  him  thus :

Still  lives  the  offspring  of  my  dalliance  ?


Pyronides  answers  :

He  lives,  and  might  have  borne  the  name  of  husband,
Did  he  not  dream  that  every  bosom  fair,
Is  not  a  chaste  one.

*  What  the  employments  were  to  which  this  Lysicles  was  ad-
vanced, is  no  where  recorded.

t  It  is  not  to  be  imagined,  that  Aspasia  excelled  in  light  and  a-
morous  discourses.  Her  discourses,  on  the  contrary,  were  not  moro
brilliant  than  solid.  It  was  even  believed  by  the  most  intelligent
Athenians,  amongst  them  by  Socrates  himself,  that  she  composed
the  celebrated  funeral  oration  pronounced  by  Pericles,  in  honour  of
those  that  were  slain  in  the  Samian  war.  It  is  proba'  le  enou^^h,
that  Pericles  ||ndertook  tbat  war  to  avenge  the  quarrel  of  the  Mile-
sians, at  the  suggestion  of  Aspasia,  who  was  of  Milctum  ;  who  is
said  to  have  accompanied  him  in  that  expedition,  and  to  have  builr
a  tcm.ple  to  perpetuate  the  memory  of  bis  victory.        '  ■

VOL.    I.  K    k


2t8  Plutarch's  lives.

Such  was  the  fame  of  Aspasia,  that  Cyrus  who  contend-
ed with  Artaxerxes  for  the  Persian  crown,  gave  the  nan^.e
of  x\spasia  to  his  favourite  concubine,  who  before  was
called  All/to.  This  v/oman  v/as  born  in  Fhocisy  and  was
the  daughter  of  Hermotimus.  When  Cja'us  was  slain
in  the  battle,  she  was  carried  to  the  king,  and  had  after-
wards great  infiuence  over  him.  These  particulars  oc-
curring to  my  memory  as  I  wrote  this  life,  I  thought  it
would  be  a  needless  affectation  of  gravity,  if  not  an  ofience
against  politeness,  to  pass  them  over  in  silence.

I  now  return  to  the  Samian  war,  which  Pericles  is  much
blamed  for  having  promoted,  in  favour  of  the  Milesians,
at  the  instigation  of  Aspasia.  The  Milesians  and  Sami-
ans  had  been  at  war  for  the  city  of  Priene,  and  the  Samians
had  the  advantage,  when  the  Athenians  interposed,  and
ordered  them  to  lay  down  their  arms,  and  refer  the  de-
cision of  the  dispute  to  them ;  but  the  Samians  refused
to  comply  with  this  demand.  Pericles, -therefore,  sailed
with  a  fleet  to  Samos,  and  abolished  the  oligarchical  form
of  government.  He  then  took  fifty  of  the  principal  men,
and  the  same  number  of  children,  as  hostages,  and  sent
them  to  Lemnos.  Each  of  these  hostages,  we  are  told,
offered  him  a  talent  for  his  ransom  ;  and  those  that  were
desirous  to  prevent  the  settling  of  a  democracy  among
them,  would  have  given  him  much  more.*  Fissuthnes
the  Persian,  who  had  the  interest  of  the  Samians  at  heart,
likev'ise  sent  him  ten  thousand  pieces  of  gold,  to  prevail
upon  him  to  grant  them  more  favourable  terms.  Peri-
cles, however,  would  receive  none  of  their  presents,  but
treated  the  Samians  in  the  manner  he  had  resolved  on  ;
and  having  established  a  popular  government  in  the
island,  he  returned  to  Athens.

But  they  soon  revolted  again,  having  recovered  their
hostages  by  private  measure  of  Pissuthnes,  and  made
rew  preparations  for  war.  Pericles  coming  with  a  fleet
to  reduce  them  once  more,  found  them  not  in  a  posture  of
neghgence  or  despair,  but  determined  to  contend  with
liim  for  the  dominion  of  the  sea.  A  sharp  engagement
ensued  near  the  isle  of  Tragia,  and  Pericles  gair.ed  a  glo-

*  Pisnithnes,  the  son  of  Hystaspes,  was  £/vcmcr  of  Saidis,  and
espoused  die  cause  of  the  Saniitr.s  or  cour;e,  becsu.se  i'.«o  \  \\i.k:i\  u\
i.ers'ms  amc>;g  thcrn  wtre  in  ihc  PtiLiau  inicust.


"PERICLES,  379

rions  victory,  having  with  forty-four  ships  defeated  seven-
ty, twenty  of  which  had  soldiers  on  board.

Pursuing  his  victory,  he  possessed  himself  of  the  har-
bour of  Samos,  and  laid  siege  to  the  city.  They  still  re-
tained courage  enough  to  sally  out  and  give  him  battle
before  the  walls.  Soon  after  a  greater  fleet  came  from
Athens,  and  the  Samians  were  entirely  shut  up  ;  where-
upon, Pericles  took  sixty  galleys,  and  steered  for  the  Me-
diterranean, with  a  design,  as  is  generally  supposed,  to
meet  the  Phoenician  fleet  that  was  coming  to  the  relief  of
Samos,  and  to  engage  with  it  at  a  great  distance  from  the
island,

Stesimbrotus,  indeed,  says,  he  intended  to  sail  for  Cy-
prus, which  is  very  improbable.  But  whatever  his  design
was,  he  seems  to  have  committed  an  error.  For  as  soon
as  he  was  gone,  IN'Ielissus,  the  son  of  Ithagenes,  a  man  dis-
tinguished as  a  philosopher,  and  at  that  time  commander
of  the  Samians,  despising  either  the  small  number  of
ships  that  was  left,  or  else  the  inexperience  of  their  offi-
cers, persuaded  his  coimtrymen  to  attack  the  Athenians.
Accordingly  a  battle  was  fought,  and  the  Samians  obtain-
ed the  victory  ;  for  they  made  many  prisoners,  destroyed
the  greatest  part  of  the  enemy's  fleet,  cleared  the  seas,
and  imported  whatever  warlike  stores  and  provisions  thev
wanted.  Aristotle  writes,  that  Pericles  himself  had  been
beaten  by  the  same  Melissus  in  a  former  sea-fight.

The  Samians  returned  upon  the  Athenian  prisoners  the
insult  they  had  received,*  marked  their  foreheads  with
the  figure  of  an  o\vl,  as  the  Athenians  had  branded  them
with  a  Samana^  which  is  a  kind  of  ship  built  low  in  the
fore-part,  and  wide  and  hollow  in  the  sidys.  This  form
makes  it  light  and  expeditious  in  sailing  ;  and  it  was  cal-
;<!  led  i^amana  from  its  being  invented  in  Samas  by  Poly-
!  I  crates  the  tyrant.  Aristophanes  is  supposed  to  have
hinted  at  these  marks,  when  he  says,

The  Samians  are  aletter'd  race.

As  soon  as  Pericles  was  informed  of  the  misfortune  thot
had  befallen  Ms  army,  he  immediately  returned  with  suo

*  We  have  no  account  of  these  reciprocal  barbarities  in  Thu-
Cydides.


iS80  Plutarch's  lives.

cours,*  gave  Melissiis  battle,  routed  the  enemy,  and  blocked
up  the  town  by  building  a  wall  about  it  ;  choosing  to  owe
the  conquest  of  it  rather  to  time  and  expence,  than  to
purchase  it  with  the  blood  of  his  fellow-citizens.  But
when  he  found  the  Athenians  murmured  at  the  time  spent
in  the  blockade,  and  that  it  was  difficult  to  restrain  them
from  the  assault,  he  divided  the  army  into  eight  parts  and
ordered  them  to  draw  lots.  That  division  which  drew  a
white  bean,  v/ere  to  enjoy  themselves  in  ease  and  pleasure
while  the  others  fought.  Hence  it  is  said,  that  those
who  spend  the  day  in  feasting  and  merriment,  call  that  a
nvkite  day  from  the  white  bean,

Ephorus  adds,  that  Pericles  in  this  siege  made  use  of
battering  engines,  the  invention  of  which  he  much  ad-
mired, it  being  then  a  new  one  ;  and  that  he  had  Artemcn
the  engineer  along  with  him,  who,  on  account  of  his  lame-
ness, was  carried  about  in  a  litter,  v/hen  his  presence  was
i^equired  to  direct  the  machines,  and  thence  had  the  sur-
name oiPerijihoretufi,  But  Heraclides  of  Pontus  confutes
this  assertion  by  some  verses  of  Anacreon,  in  which  men-
tion is  made  of  Artemon  Periphoretus,  several  ages  before
the  Samian  war,  and  these  transactions  of  Pericles.  And
he  tells  us  this  Artemcn  v/as  a  person  v/ho  gave  himself
up  to  luxury,  and  was  withal  of  a  timid  and  effeminate
spirit ;  that  he  spent  most  of  his  time  within  doors,  and
had  a  shield  of  brass  held  over  his  head  by  a  couple  of
slaves,  lest  something  should  fall  upon  him.  Moreover,
that  if  he  happened  to  be  necessarily  obliged  to  go  abroad,
he  was  carried  in  a  litter,  which  hung  so  low  as  almost  to
touch  the  ground.,  and  therefore  was  called  Periphoretus,

After  nine  m.onths  the  Samians  surrendered.  Pericles
razed  their  walls,  seized  their  ships,  and  laid  a  heavy  fine
upon  them  ;  part  of  which  they  paid  down  directly,  the
rest  they  promised  at  a  set  time,  and  gave  hostages  for
the  payment.  Duris  the  Samian  makes  a  melancholy  tale
of  it,  accusing  Pericles  and  the  Athenians  of  great  cruelty,
of  which  no  mention  is  made  by  Thucydides,  Ephorus,
or  Aristotle.  What  he  relates  concerning  the  Samian
officers  and  seamen  seems  quite  fictitious  ;  he  tells  us,
that  Pericles  caused  them  to  be  brought  into  the  market-

*  On  his  return,  he  received  a  remforcement  of  four  score  ships,
JlS  Thucydides  tells  us  ;  or  ninety,  according  to  Diodorus.  Vid.
1'hxicyd.  lib.  i.  de  Bell.  Pelopon.  ^  Z)ioc/or.  Skul.\^*  xij.


PERICLES.  381'

piace  at  Miletus,  and  to  be  bound  to  posts  there  for  ten
clays  together,  at  the  end  of  which  he  ordered  them,  b>*
tliat  time  in  the  most  wretched  condition,  to  be  dispatched
with  chibs,  and  refused  their  bodies  the  honour  of  burial.
Duris,  indeed,  in  his  histories,  often  goes  beyond  the  limits  ,
of  truth,  even  when  not  misled  by  any  interest  or  passion,
and  therefore  is  more  likely  to  have  exaggerated  the  suf-
ferings of  his  country,  to  make  the  Athenians,  appear  in
an  odious  light.  *

Pericles  at  his  return  to  Athens,  after  the  reduction  of
Samoo,  celebrated  in  a  splendid  manner  the  obsequies  ox
his  countrymen  who  fell  in  that  war,  and  pronounced
himself  the  funeral  oration,  usual  on  such  occasions. ...This
gained  uini  great  applause  ;  and  whea  he  came  down
from  the  rostrum,  the  women  paid  their  respects  to  him,
and  presented  him  with  crowns  and  cliaplets,  like  a  cham-
pion just  returned  victorious  from  the  lists.  Only  Elpir-
nice  addressed  him  in  terms  quite  different  :  "  Are  these
actions,  then,  Pericles,  worthy  of  crowns  and  garlands,
which  have  deprived  us  of  many  brave  citizens  :  not
in  a  war  with  the  Phcsnicians  and  Medes,  such  as  my
brother  Cimon  waged,  but  in  destroying  a  city  united
to  us  both  in  blood  and  friendship  ?"  Pericles  only
smiled,  and  ansvr^ercd  softly  with  this  line  of  Archikir
chus,.

Why  lavioh  ointments  on  a  head  that's  grey  ?

Ion  informs  us,  that  he  was  highly  elated  with  this  coir--
quest,  and  scrupled  not  to  say,  *'  That  Agamemnon  spent
ten  years  in  reducing  one  of  the -cities  of  the  barbarians,,
whereus  he  had  taken  the  richest  and  most  powerful  city
among  the  lonians  in  nine  monthsi  And  indeed  he  had
reason  to  be  proud  of  this  atchievement ;  for  the  war  wuij
leally  a  dangerous  one,  and  the  event  uncertain,  since,  ac-
cording to  Thucydides,  such  .was  the  power  of  the  Sa-
mians,  that  the  iVthenians  were  in  imminent  danger  of
losing  the  dominion  of  the  sea.

Some  time  after  this,  when  the  Ptloponnesian  war  war, .
ready  to  breakout,  Pericles  persuaded  the  people  to  send

*  Yet  Ciciro  tells  us  this  Duris  was  a  careful  historian,  Homn  in
historia  di!i^en:i.     This  historian  lived  in  the  lime  of  Ptoiomy  PhiiA--
dw'lphus.

Kk3


382  Plutarch's  lives.

succours  to  the  inhabitants  of  Corcyra,  who  were  at  war
with  the  Corinthians  ;*  which  would  be  a  means  to  fix  in
their  interest  an  island  whose  naval  forces  wcvq  consider-
able, and  might  be  of  great  service  in  case  of  a  rupture
with  the  Peloponnesians,  which  they  had  all  the  reason
in  the  world  to  expect  would  be  soon.  The  succours
were  decreed  accordingly,  and  Pericles  sent  Laced jemo-
nius  to  the  son  of  Cimon  with  ten  ships  only,  as  if  he  de-
signed nothing  more  than  to  disgrace  him.f  A  mutual
regard  and  friendship  subsisted  between  Cimon's  family
and  the  Spartans,  and  he  now  furnished  his  son  with  but
a  few  ships,  and  gave  him  the  charge  of  this  affair  against
his  inclination,  in  order  that,  if  nothing  great  or  striking
were  effected,  Lacedsemonius  might  be  still  the  more
suspected  of  favouring  the  Spartans*  Nay,  by  all  ima-
ginable methods  he  endeavoured  to  hinder  the  advance-
ment of  that  family,  representing  the  sons  of  Cimon,  as
by  their  very  names  not  genuine  Athenians,  but  strangers
and  aliens,  one  of  them  being  called  Lacedasmonius,  ano-
ther Thessalus,  and  a  third  Eleus.  They  seem  to  have
been  ail  the  sons  of  an  Arcadian  woman.  Pericles  how-
ever, finding  himself  greatly  blamed  about  these  ten  gal-
lies,  an  aid  by  no  means  sufficient  to  answer  the  purpose
of  those  that  requested  it,  but  likely  enough  to  afford  his
enemies  a  pretence  to  accuse  him,  sent  another  squadron
to  Corcyral,  which  did  not  arrive  till  the  action  was  over.
The  Corinthians,  offended  at  this  treatment,  complain-
ed of  it  at  Lacedremon,  and  the  Megarensians  at  the
same  time  alleged,  that  the  Athenians  would  not  suffer
them  to  come  to  any  mart  or  port  of  theirs,  but  drove
thern  out,  thereby  infringing  the  common  privileges,  and
breaking  the  oath  they  had  taken  before  the  general  as-
sembly of  Greece.  The  people  of  iEgina,too,  privately  ac-
quainted the  LacediXmonians  with  many  encroachments
and  injuries  done  them  by  the  Athenians,    whom  they

*  This  v/ar  v/as  commenced  about  the  little  territory  of  Epidam-
mim,  a  city  in  Macedonia,  founded  by  the  Corcyrians.

f  Tiierc  seems  to  be  very  little  colour  for  this  hard  assertion...,
•  Thucydides  says,  that  the  Athenians  did  not  intend  the  Corcyrians
any  real  assista\ice,  but  sent  this  sraa]l  squadron  to  look  on  while
the  Corinthians  and  Corcyrians  weakened  and  Vv'asted  each  other.

\  But  this   fleet,   which  consisted   of  twenty  ships,  prevented  a
.second  engagement,  for  which  they  were  preparing.


PERICLES.  383

durst  not  accuse  openl7.  And  at  this  very  juncture,  Po-
tidxa,  a  Corinthian  colony,  but  subject  to  the  Athenians,
being  besieged  in  consequence  of  its  revolt,  hastened  on
the  war.

However,  as  ambassadors  were  sent  to  Athens,  and
as  Archidamus,  king  of  the  Lacedxmonians  endeavoured
to  give  a  healing  turn  to  most  of  the  articles  in  question,
and  to  pacify  the  allies,  probably  no  other  point  would
have  involved  the  Athenians  in  war,  if  they  could  have
been  persuaded  to  rescind  the  decree  against  the  Mega-
rensians,  and  to  be  reconciled  to  them.  Pericles,  there-
fore, in  exerting  all  his  interest  to  oppose  this  measure,
in  retaining  his  enmity  to  the  Megarensians,  and  work-
ing up  the  people  to  the  same  rancour  was  the  sole  au-
thor of  the  war.

It  is  said,  that  when  the  ambassadors  from  Laced*emon
came  upon  this  occasion  to  Athens,*  Pericles  pretended
there  was  a  law  which  forbade  the  taking  down  any  tablet
on  which  a  decree  of  the  people  was  written,  "  Then,'*
said  Polyarces,  one  of  the  ambassadors,  "  do  not  take  it
down,  but  turn  the  other  side  outward ;  there  is  no  law
against  that."  Notwithstanding  the  pleasantry  of  this
answer,  Pericles  relented  not  in  the  least.  He  seems,
indeed,  to  have  had  some  private  pique  against  the  Me-
garensians,  though  the  pretext  he  availed  himself  of  in

*  The  Lacedaemonian  ambassadors  demanded  in  the  first  place,
the  expulsion  of  those  Athenians  who  were  st)  led  execrable  on  ac-
count of  the  old  business  of  Cylon  and  his  associates,  because  by
his  mother's  side  Pericles  was  allied  to  the  family  of  Megacles  ;
they  next  insisted  that  the  siege  of  Potidaea  should  be  raised  ;
thirdly,  that  the  inhabitants  of  jEgina  should  be  left  free  ;  and  lastly,
that  the  decree  made  against  the  Megarensians,  whereby  tliey  were
forbid  the  ports  and  markets  of  Athens  on  pain  of  death,  should  be
revoked,  and  the  Grecian  states  set  at  liberty,  who  were  under  the
dominion  of  Athens.

Pericles  represented  to  the  Athenians,  that,  whatever  the  Lace-
daemonians miglit  pretend,  the  true  ground  of  their  resentment  was
the  prosperity  of  the  Athenian  republic  :  that,  nevertheless,  it  might
be  proposed,  that  the  Athenians  would  reverse  their  decree  against
Mcgara,  if  the  Lacedxmonians  would  allow  free  egress  and  regress
in  their  city  to  the  Athenians  and  their  allies  ;  that  they  wculd
leave  all  those  states  free,  who  were  free  at  the  making  of  tlic  last
peace  with  S|larta,  provided  the  Spartans  would  also  leave  all  states
free  who  were  under  their  dominion  ;  and  that  future  disputes
should  be  submitted  to  arbitration.  In  case  these  offers  should  not
prevail,  he  advised  them  to  hazard  a  war.


384  Plutarch's  lives.

public  was,  that  they  had  applied  to  profane  uses  certcjn
parcels  of  sacred  ground  ;  and  thereupon  he  procured  a
decree  for  an  herald  to  be  sent  to  Megara  and  Lacedaj-
mon  to  lay  this  charge  against  the  Megarensians.  This
decree  was  drawn  up  in  a  candid  and  conciliating  man-
ner. But  Anthemocritus,  the  herald  sent  with  that  com-
mission, losing  his  Hfe  by  the  way,  through  some  trea-
chery (as  was  supposed)  of  the  Megarensians,  Charinus
procured  a  decree,  that  an  implacable  and  eternal  enmity
should  subsist  between  the  Athenians  and  them  ;  that  if
any  Megarensian  should  set  foot  upon  Attic  ground,  he
should  be  put  to  death  ;  that  to  the  oath  which  their  ge-
nerals used  to  take,  this  particular  should  be  added,  that
they  would  twice  a  year  make  an  inroad  into  the  terri-
tories of  Megara  ;  and  that  Anthemocritus  should  be  bur
ried  at  the  Thriasian  gate,  now  called  Difiylus.

The  Megarensians,  however,  deny  their  being  con-
cerned in  the  murder  of  Anthemocritus,*  and  lay  the  war
entirely  at  the  door  of  Aspasia  and  Pericles  ;  alleging  in
proof  those  "well-known  verses  from  the  Acharnen^ta  of
Aristophanes,

The  god  of  wine  had  with  his  Ihyrsus  smote

Some  youths,  who  in  their  madness  stole  from  Megara

The  prostitute  Simcetha  :  in  revenge,

Two  females,  liberal  of  their  smiles,  were  stolen

From  our  Aspaslaa  train.

It  is.  noty  indeed,  easy  to  discover  what  was  the  real
origin  of  the  war;  but  at  the  same  time  all  agree,  it  was
the  fault  of  Pericles,  that  the  decree  against  Megara  was
not  annulled.  Some  say,  his  firmness  in  that  case  Wc.s
the  effect  of  his  prudence  and  magnanimity,  as  he  consi-
dered that  demand  only  as  a  trial,  and  thought  the  least
concession  would  be  understood  as  an  acknowledgment
of  weakness  :  but  others  will  have  it,  that  his  treating  the
Lacedaemonians  with  so  little  ceremony,  was  owing  to  his
obstinacy  and  an  ambition  to  display  his  power.


*  Thucydides  takes  no  notice  cf  this  herald  ;  and  yet  it  is  so  cer-
tain that  the  Megarensians  were  looked  upon  as  the  authors  of  the
niuvder,  that  they  were  punished  for  it  many  ages  after  :  for  on
that  account  the  Empen^r  Adrian  denied  them  many  favours  and
privileges  which  he  ^-ranted  to  the  other  cities  of  Greece.


PERICLES.  385

But  the  worst  cause  of  all,*  assigned  for  the  war,  and
which,  notwithstanding,  is  confirmed  by  most  historians,
is  as  follows :  Phidias  the  statuary  had  undertaken  (as
we  have  said)  the  statue  of  Minerva.  The  friendship  and
influence  he  had  with  Pericles  exposed  him  to  envy,  and
procured  him  many  enemies,  who,  willing  to  make  an  ex-
periment upon  him,  what  judgment  the  people  might  pass
on  Pericles  himself,  persuaded  Menon,  one  of  Phidias's
woH^men,  to  place  himself  as  a  suppliant  in  the  Forumy
and  to  intreat  the  protection  of  the  republic  while  he
lodged  an  information  against  Phidias.

The  people  granting  his  request,  and  the  affair  coming
to  a  public  trial,  the  allegation  of  theft,  which  Menon
brought  against  him,  was  shown  to  be  groundless.  For
Phidias,  by  the  advice  of  Pericles,  had  managed  the  mat-
ter from  the  first  with  so  much  art,  that  the  gold  with
which  the  statue  was  overlaid  could  easily  be  taken  off
and  weighed  ;  and  Pericles  ordered  this  to  be  done  by  the
accusers.  But  the  excellence  of  this  work,  and  the  envy
arising  thence,  was  the  thing  that  ruined  Phidias  ;  and
it  was  particularly  insisted  upon,  that  in  his  representa-
tion of  the  battle  with  the  Amazons  upon  Minerva's
shield,  he  had  Introduced  his  own  effigies  as  a  bald  old
man  taking  up  a  great  stone  with  both  hands,!  and  a  high-
finished  picture  of  Pericles  fighting  with  an  Amazon

The  last  was  contrived  with  so  much  art,  that  the  hand,
which  in  lifting  up  the  spear,  partly  covered  the  face,
seemed  to  be  intended  to  conceal  the  likeness,  which  yet
was  very  striking  on  both  sides.  Phidias,  therefore,  was
thrown  into  prison,  where  he  died  a  natural  death  ;|
though  some  say,  poison  was  given  him  by  his  enemies,
who  were  desirous  of  causing  Pericles  to  be  suspected....
As  for  the  accuser  Menon,  he  had  an  immunity  from  taxes
granted  him,  at  the  motion  of  Glycon,  and  the  generals
were  ordered  to  provide  for  his  security.

*  Pericles,  when  he  saw  his  friends  prosecuted,  was  apprehen-
sive of  a  prosecution  himself,  and  therefore  hastened  on  a  rupture
with  the  I'eloponnesians,  to  turn  the  attention  of  the  people  to  war.

t  They  insisted  that  those  modern  figures  impeached  the  credit  of
the  ancientfiistory,  which  did  so  much  honour  to  Athens,  and  their
founder  Theseus.

:j:  Others  say,  that  he  was  banished,  and  that  in  his  eiile  he  made
the  famous  statue  of  Jupiter  at  Olympia.


336  Plutarch's  lives.

About  this  time  Aspasia  was  prosecuted  for  impiety  by
Hermippus  a  comic  poet,  who  likewise  accused  her  of
receiving  into  her  house  women  above  the  condition   of
slaves  for  the  pleasure  of  Pericles.     And  Diopithes  pro-
cured a  decree,  that  those  who  disputed  the  existence  of
the  gods,  or  introduced  new  opinions  about  celestial  ap-
pearances, should  be  tried  before  an  assembly  of  the  peo-
ple.    This  charge  was  levelled  first  at  Anaxagoras,  and
through  him  at  Pericles.     And  as  the  people  admitted  it,
another  decree  was  proposed  by  Dracontides,  that  Peri-
cles should  give  an  account  of  the  public  nnoney  before
the  Prytanes-f  and  that  the  judges  should  take  the  ballots
from  the  altar,*  and  try  the  cause  in  the  city.     But  Agnon
caused  the  last  article  to  be  dropt,  and  instead  thereof,
it  was  voted  that  the  action  should  be  laid  before  the  fif-
teen hundred  judp:es,  either  ioY  jieculaiion^  and  takinj^  tf
bribes^  or  simply  for  corrupt  practices,

Aspasia  was  acquitted,!  though  much  against  the  te-
nor of  the  law,  by  means  of  Pericles,  who  (according  to
j^sciiines)  shed  many  tears  in  his  application  for  mercy
for  her.  He  did  not  expect  the  same  indulgence  for
Anaxagoras,  I  and  therefore  caused  him  to  quit  the  city,
and  conducted  him  part  of  the  way.  And  as  he  himself
was  become  obnoxious  to  the  people  upon  Phidias 's  ac-
count, and  was  afraid  of  being  called  in  question  for  it,
he  urged  on  the  war  which  as  yet  v/as  uncertain,  and  blew
up  the  ilame  which  till  then  was  stifled  and  suppressed.
By  this  means  he  hoped  to  obviate  the  accusations  that
threatened  him,  and  to  mitigate  the  rage  of  envy,  because

*  In  some  extraordinary  cases  where  the  judges  were  to  proceed
with  the  greatest  exactness  and  solemnity,  they  were  to  take  bRJlots
or  billets  from  the  altar,  and  to  inscribe  their  judgment  upon  them;
or  rather  to  take  the  l>lack  and  the  white  bean,  vj/jji'ov.  What  Phi-
tarch  means  by  tryiiig  the  cause  in  the  city,  is  not  easy  to  determine,
unless  by  the  city  we  are  to  understand  the  full  assembly  of  the  people.
Bv  the  fifteen  hundred  judges  mentioned  in  the  next  sentence,  is  pro-
bably meant  the  court  of  Heli.ta,  so  called  because  the  judges  sat  in
the  ojien  air  exposed  to  the  sun  ;  for  this  court  on  extraordinary  oc-
casions consisted  of  that  number.

t    UoXXoe.  TTCCW  TTSipX  TTOV   otxYiy ........

\  Anaxagoras  held  the  unity  of  God ;  that  it  was  onealhvise  In-
telligence which  raised  the  beautiful  structure  of  the  v/or^d  cut  of
the  Chaos.  And  if  such  was  the  opinion  of  the  master,  it  was  na-^
tural  for  the  people  to  conclude,  that  his  scholar  Pericles  was  against
the  Polytheism  of  the  times.


PERICLES.  S87

sucli  was  his  dignity  and  power,  that  in  all  important
alFairs,  and  in  every  great  danger,  the  republic  could
])hice  its  confidence  in  him  alone.  These  are  said  to  be
the  reasons  which  induced  him  to  persuade  the  people
not  to  grant  the  demands  of  the  Lacedaemonians  :  but
what  was  the  real  cause  is  quite  uncertain.

The  Lacedemonians,  persuaded,  that  if  they  could  re-
move Pericles  out  of  the  way,  they  should  be  better  able
to  manage  the  Athenians,  required  them  to  banish  all
execrable  persons   from  among  them  :  and  Pericles  (as
Thucydides  informs  us)  was  by  his  mother's  side  related
to  those  that  Avere  pronounced  execrable^  in  the  affair  of
Cylon.     The  success,  however,  of  this  application  proved
the  reverse  of  what  was  expected  by  those  that  ordered  it.
Instead  of  rendering  Pericles  suspected,  or  involving  him
in  trouble,  it  procured  him  the  more  confidence  and  re-
spect from  the  people,  when  they  perceived   that  their
enemies  both  hated  and  dreaded  him  above  all  others.
For  the  same  reason  he  forewai'ned  the  Athenians,  that  if
Archidamus,  when  he  entered  Attica  at  the  head  of  the
Peloponnesians,    and  lavaged  the   rest  of  the  country,
should  spare  his  estate,  it  must  be  owing  either  to  the
rights  of  hospitality  that  subsisted  between  them,  or  to  a
design  to  furnish  his  enemies  with  matter  of  slander,  and
therefore  from  that  hour  he  gave  his  lands  and  houses  to
the  city  of  Athens.    The  Lacedsemonians  and  confederates
accordingly  invaded  Attica  with  a  great  army  under  the
command  of  Archidamus  ;  and  laying  waste  all  before
them,  proceeded  as   far  as  Acharnac,*  where   they  en-
camped, expected  that  the  Athenians  would  not  be  able
to  endure  them  so  near,  but  meet  them  in  the  field  for
tiie  honour  and  safety  of  their  country.     But  it  appeared
to  Pericles  too  hazardous  to  give  battle  to  an  army  of  sixty
thousand  men,  (for  such  was  the  number  of  the  Pelopon-
nesians and  Boeotians  employed  in  the  first  expedition)
and  by  that  step  to  risk  no  less  than  the  preservation  of
the   city  itself.     As  to  those  that  were  eager  for  an  en-
gagement, and  uneasy  at  his  slow  proceedings,  he  endea-
voured to  bring  them  to  reason  by  obser\  ing,  "That  trees,


4
*  The  borough  cf  Acharnx  was  oulv  fifieeu  hundred  faces  from
the  city.


588  Plutarch's  lives.

when  lopped,  will  soon  grow  again  ;  but  when  men  are
cut  off,  the  loss  is  not  easily  repaired."

In  the  mean  time  he  took  care  to  hold  no  assembly  of
the  people,  lest  he  should  be  forced  to  act  against  his  own
opinion.  But  as  a  good  pilot,  when  a  storm  arises  at  sea,
gives  his  directions,  gets  his  tackle  in  order,  and  then
uses  his  art,  regardless  of  the  tears  and  intreaties  of  the
sick  and  fearful  passengers ;  so  Pericles,  when  he  had
secured  the  gates,  and  placed  the  guards  in  every  quarter,
to  the  best  advantage,  followed  the  dictates  of  his  own
understanding,  unmoved  by  the  clamours  and  complaints
that  resounded  in  his  ears.  Thus  fii'm  he  remained,  not-
withstanding the  importunity  of  his  friends,  and  the
threats  and  accusations  of  his  enemies,  notwithstanding
the  many  scoffs  and  songs  sung  to  vilify  his  character  as
a  general,  and  to  represent  him  as  one  who  in  the  most
dastardly  manner,  betrayed  his  country  to  the  enemy.
Cleon  *  too  attacked  him  with  great  acrimony,  making
use  of  the  general  resentment  against  Pericles,  as  a  means
to  increase  his  own  popularity,  as  Hermippus  testifies  in

these  verses :

*

Sleeps  then,  thou  king  of  satyrs,  sleeps  the  spear,

While  thund'ring  words  make  war  ?  why  boasts  thy  prowess.

Yet  shudder  at  the  sound  of  sharpen'd  swords,

Spite  of  the  flaming  Cleon  ?

Pericles,  however,  regarded  nothing  of  this  kind,  but
calmly  and  silently  bore  all  this  disgrace  and  virulence.
And  though  he  fitted  out  an  hundred  ships,  and  sent  them
against  Peloponnesus,  yet  he  did  not  sail  with  them,  but
chose  to  stay  and  watch  over  the  city,  and  keep  the  reins
of  government  in  his  own  hands,  until  the  Peloponne-
sians  were  gone.  In  order  to  satisfy  the  common  people,
who  were  very  uneasy  on  account  of  the  war,  he  made  a
distribution  of  money  and  lands  :  for  having  expelled  the
inhabitants  of  jEgina,  he  divided  the  island  by  lot  among
the  Athenians.  Besides,  ihe  sufferings  of  the  enemy  af-
forded them  some  consolation.  The  fleet  sent  against
Peloponnesus,  ravaged  a  large  tract  of  country,  and  sacked

*  The  same  Cleon  that  Aristophanc  satirised.  By  his  harangues
and  political  intrigues,  he  got  himself  appointed  general.  See  a  far-
ther account  of  him  in  the  life  of  Nicias.


PERICLES.  389

the  small  towns  and  villages  :  and  Pericles  himself  made
a  descent  upon  the  territories  of  Megara,*  which  he  laid
waste,  Whence  it  appears,!  that  though  the  Pelopon-
nesians  greatly  distressed  the  Athenians  by  land,  yc;t  a3
they  were  equally  distressed  by  sea,  they  could  not  have
drawn  out  the  war  to  so  great  a  length,  but  must  soon
have  given  it  up  (as  pericles  foretold  from  the  beginning)
had  not  some  divine  power  prevented  the  effect  of  human
counsels.  A  pestilence  at  that  time  broke  o\it,\  which  de-
stroyed the  flower  of  the  youth  and  the  strength  of  Athens.
And  not  only  their  bodies,  but  their  very  minds  were
affected,  for,  as  persons  delirious  with  a  fever,  set  them-
selves against  a  physician  or  a  father,  so  they  raved
against  Pericles,  and  attempted  his  ruin  ;  being  persuaded
by  his  enemies,  that  the  sickness  was  occasioned  by  the
multitude  of  out-dwellers  flocking  into  the  city,  and  a
number  of  people  stuffed  together  in  the  height  of  sum-
mer, in  small  huts  and  close  cabins,  where  they  were
forced  to  live  a  lazy  inactive  life,  instead  of  breathing  the
pure  and  open  air  to  which  they  had  been  accustomed.
They  would  needs  have  it,  that  he  was  the  cause  of  all
this,  who,  when  the  war  began,  admitted  within  the
walls,  such  crowds  of  people  from  the  country,  and  yet
found  no  employment  for  them,  but  let  them  continue
pent  up  like  cattle,  to  infect  and  destroy  each  otheri
without  affording  them  the  least  relief  or  refreshment.

Desirous  to  remedy  this  calamity,  and  withal  in  some
degree  to  annoy  the  enemy,  he  manned  an  hundred  and
fifty  ships,  on  which  he  embarked  great  numbers  of
select  horse  and  foot,  and  was  preparing  to  set  sail.  The
Athenians  conceived  good  hopes  of  success,  and  the
enemy  no  less  dreaded  so  great  an  armament.  The
whole  fleet  was  in  readiness,  and  Pericles  on  board  his

*  He  did  not  undertake  this  expedition  until  autumn,  when  the
Lacedemonians  were  retired.  In  the  winter  of  this  year,  the  Athe-
nians solemnized  in  an  extraordinary  manner  the  fimerals  of  such
as  first  died  in  the  war.  Pericles  pronounced  the  oration  on  that
occasion,  which  Thucydides  has  preserved.

T    ti  KXl   OfiXov

\  See  this  plague  excellently  described  by  Thucydides,  who  had  it
himself.     Jdb.  ii,  prop,  init,

VOL.    I.  J.    1


390  Plutarch's  lives.

own  galley,  when  there  happened  an  eclipse  of  the  sun.
This  sudden  darkness  was  looked  upon  as  an  unfavoura-
ble omen,  and  threw  them  into  the  greatest  consternation*
Pericles  observing  that  the  pilot  was  much  astonished  and
perlexed,  took  his  cloak,  and  having  covered  his  eyes  with
it,  asked  him,  "  If  he  found  any  thing  terrible  in  that,  or
considered  it  as  a  sad  presage  ?"  Upon  his  answering
in  the  negative,  he  said,  "  Where  is  the  difference,  then
between  this  and  the  other,  except  that  something  big-
ger than  my  cloak  causes  the  eclipse  ?"  But  this  is
a  question  which  is  discussed  in  the  schools  of  philo-
sophy.

In  this  expedition  Pericles  performed  nothing  w^orthy
of  so  great  an  equipment.  He  laid  siege  to  the  sacred
city  of  Epidaurus,*  and  at  first  with  some  rational  hopes  of
success  ;t  but  the  distemper  which  prevailed  in  his  army,
broke  all  his  measures.  For  it  not  only  carried  off  his
own  men,  but  all  that  had  intercourse  with  them.  As
this  ill  success  set  the  Athenians  against  him,  he  endea-
voured to  console  them  under  their  losses,  and  to  animate
them  to  new  attempts.  But  it  was  not  in  his  power  to
mitigate  their  resentment,  nor  could  they  be  satisfied,  un-
til they  had  shewed  themselves  masters  by  voting  that
he  should  be  deprived  of  the  command,  and  pay  a  fine,
which,  by  the  lowest  account,  was  fifteen  talents  ;  some
make  it  fifty.  The  person  that  carried  on  the  prosecu-
tion against  him,  was  Cleon,  as  Idomeneus  tells  us  ;  or,
according  to  Theophrastus,  Simmias  ;  or  Lacratides,  if
we  believe  Heraclides  of  Pontus.

The  public  ferment,  indeed,  soon  subsided,  the  people
quitting  their  resentment  with  that  blow,  as  a  bee  leaves
its  sting  in  the  wound  :  but  his  private  affairs  were  in  a
miserable  condition,  for  he  had  lost  a  number  of  his  rela-
tions in  the  plague,  and  a  misunderstanding  had  prevailed
for  some  time  in  his  family.  Xanthippus,  the  eldest  of
his  legitimate  sons,  was  naturally  profuse,  and  besides
had  married  a  young  and  expensive  wife,  daughter  to
Isander,  and  grand-daughter  to  Epylicus.     He  knew  not

*  This  Epidaurus  was  in  Argeia,  It  was  consecrated  to  j?>scula-
pius  :  and  Plutarch  calls  it  sacred,  to  distinguish  it  from  another  town
of  the  same  name  in  Laconia.


PERICLES.  •  391

how  to  brook  his  father's  frugality,  who  suppHed  him  but
«iparingly,  and  with  a  Uttle  at  a  time,  and  therefore  sent  to
one  of  his  friends  and  took  up  money  in  the  name  of  Pe-
ricles. When  the  man  came  to  demand  his  money,  Peri-
cles not  only  refused  to  pay  him,  but  even  prosecuted  him
for  the  demand,  Xanthippus  was  so  hi^^^hly  enraged  at
this,  that  he  began  openly  to  abuse  his  father.  First  he
exposed  and  ridiculed  the  company  he  kept  in  his  house,
and  the  conversations  he  held  with  the  philosophers.  He
said,  that  Epitimius  the  Pharsalian,  having  undesignedly
killed  a  horse  with  a  javelin  which  he  threw  at  the  public
games,  his  father  spent  a  whole  day  in  disputing  with
Protogorus,  which  might  be  properly  deemed  the  cause
of  his  death,  the  javelin,  or  the  man  that  threw  it,  or  the
presidents  of  the  games.  Stesimbrotus  adds,  that  it  was
Xanthippus  who  spread  the  vile  report  concerning  his
own  wife  and  Pericles,  and  that  the  young  man  retained
this  implacable  hatred  against  his  father  to  his  latestbreath.
He  was  carried  off  by  the  plague.  Pericles  lost  his  sister
too  at  that  time,  and  the  greatest  part  of  his  relations  and
friends,  who  were  most  capable  of  assisting  him  in  the  bu-
siness of  the  state.  Notwithstanding  these  misfortunes,
he  lost  not  his  dignity  of  sentiment  and  greatness  of  soul.
He  neither  wept,  nor  performed  any  funeral  rites,  nor
was  he  seen  at  the  grave  of  any  of  his  nearest  relations,
until  the  death  of  Paralus,  his  last  surving  legitimate  son.
This  at  last  subdued  him.  He  attempted,  indeed,  then
to  keep  up  his  usual  calm  behaviour  and  serenity  of  mind  ;
but,  in  putting  the  garland  upon  the  head  of  the  deceased,
his  firmness  forsook  him  ;  he  could  not  bear  the  sad  spec-
tacle ;  he  broke  out  into  loud  lamentation,  and  shed  a
torrent  of  tears  :  a  passion  which  he  had  never  before
given  way  to.

Athens  made  a  trial,  in  the  course  of  a  year  of  the  rest
of  her  generals  and  orators,  and  finding  none  of  sufficient
weight  and  authority  for  so  important  a  charge,  she  once,
more  turned  her  eyes  on  Pericles,  and  invited  him  to  take
upon  him  the  direction  of  affairs  both  military  and  civil.
pie  had  for  some  time  shut  himself  up  at  home  to  indulge
his  sorrow,  when  Alcibiades,  and  his  other  friends,  per-
suaded him  to  make  his  appearance.  The  people  mak-
ing an  apology  for  their  ungenerous  treatment  of  him,  he.'


392  PLUrAKCH's    LIVES.

re-assumed  the  reins  of  goveniment,  and  being  appointed
general,  his  first  step  was  to  procure  the  repeal  of  the  law
concerning  bastards,  of  which  he  himself  had  been  the
author  ;  for  he  was  afraid  that  his  name  and  family  would
be  extinct  for  want  of  a  successor.  The  history  of  that
law  is  as  follows  :  Many  years  before,  Pericles  in  the
height  of  his  power,  and  having  several  legitimate  sons,
(as  we  have  already  related}  caused  a  law  to  be  made,  that
none  should  be  accounted  citizens  of  Athens,  but  tho^e
whose  parents  were  both  Athenians,*  After  this,  the
King  of  Egypt  made  the  Athenians  a  present  of  forty
thousand  medimni  of  v^heat,  and  as  this  was  to  be  dividtd
among  the  citizens,  many  persons  were  proceeded  against
as  illegitimate  upon  that  law,  whose  birth  liad  never  be-
fore been  called  in  question,  and  many  were  disgraced
upon  false  accusations.  Near  five  thousand  were  cast,
and  sold  for  slaves  ;t  and  fourteen  thousand  and  forty  ap-
peared to  be  entitled  to  the  privilege  of  citizens.:):
Though  it  was  inequitable  and  strange,  that  a  law,  which
had  been  put  in  execution  with  so  much  severity,  should
be  repealed  by  the  man  who  first  proposed  it,  yet  the  Athe-
nians moved  at  the  late  misfortunes  in  his  family,  by
which  he  seemed  to  have  suffered  the  punishment  of  his
arrogance  and  pride,  and  thinking  he  should  be  treated
with  humanity,  after  he  had  felt  the  wrath  of  Heaven,
permitted  him  to  enrol  a  natural  son  in  his  own  tribe,  and
to  give  him  his  own  name.  This  is  he  Vvho  afterwards
defeated  the  Peloponnesians  in  a  sea-fight  at  Arginusre,
and  was  put  to  death  by  the  people,  together  Mith  his
colleagues  jl  *

*  According  to  Plutarch's  account  at  the  beginning  of  the  life  cf
Themistocles,  this  law  was  made  before  the  time  of  Pericles.  Pe-
ricles, however,  might  put  it  more  strictly  in  execution  than  it  had
been  before,  from  a  spirit  of  opposition  to  Cimon,  whose  children
were  only  of  the  half  blood

j-  The  illegitimacy  did  not  reduce  men  to  a  state  of  servitude  ;  it
only  placed  them  in  the  rank  of  strangers.

:j;  A  small  number  indeed,  at  a  time  when  Athens  had  dared  to
think  of  sending  out  colonies,  humbling  her  neighbours,  subduing
foreigners,  and  even  of  erecting  an  universal  monarchy.

II  "i'he  Athenians  had  appointed  ten  commanders  on  that  occa-
sion. After  they  had  obtained  the  victory  they  were  tried,  and  eight
of  them  were  capitally  condemned,  of  whom  six  that  were  on  tl:e


PERICLES.  393

About  this  time  Pericles  was  seized  with  the  phiguc,
but  not  with  such  acute  and  continued  symptonns  as  it
generally  shews.  It  was  rather  a  lingerinij  distemper,
which,  with  frequent  intermissions,  and  by  slow  degrees,
consumed  his  body,  and  impaired  the  vigour  of  his  mind.
Theophrastus  has  a  disquisition  in  his  Ethics,  whether
men's  characters  may  be  changed  \vith  their  fortune,  and
the  soul  so  affected  with  the  disorders  of  the  body  as  to
lose  her  virtue  ;  and  there  he  relates,  that  Pericles  shevr-
ed  to  a  friend  who  came  to  visit  him  in  his  sickness,  an
amulet  which  the  women  had  hung  about  his  neck,  inti-
mating that  he  must  be  sick  indeed,  since  he  submitted  to
so  ridiculous  a  piece  of  superstition.*

When  he  was  at  the  point  of  death,  his  surviving  friends
and  the  princpal  citizens  sitting  Pvbout  his  bed,  discoursed
together  concerning  his  extraordinary  virtue  and  the
great  authority  he  had  enjoyed,  and  enumerated  his  va-
rious exploits  and  the  number  of  his  victories  :  for,  while
he  was  commander  in  chief,  he  had  erected  no  less  than
nine  trophies  to  the  honour  of  Athens.  These  things
they  talked  of,  supposing  that  he  attended  not  to  what
they  said,  but  that  his  senses  were  gone.  He  took  notice,
liowever,  of  every  word  they  had  spoken,  and  thereupon
delivered  himself  audibly  as  follows,  **  I  am  surprised,
that  v/hile  you  dwell  upon  and  extol  these  acts  of  mine,
though  fortune  had  her  share  in  them,  and  many  other
generals  have  performed  the  like,  you  take  no  notice  of
the  greatest  and  most  honourable  part  of  my  character,
that  no  Athenian,  through  my  means^  ever  put  on  mourn-^

o
spot  were  executed,  and  this  natxiral  son  of  Pericles  was  one  of
them.  The  only  crime  laid  to  their  charge,  was,  that  they  had  not
buried  the  dead.  Xenophon,  in  his  Grecian  history,  has  given  a
large  account  of  this  affair.  It  happened  under  the  archonship  of
Caliias,  the  second  year  of  the  ninety-third  Olympiad,  twenty-four
yeai's  after  the  death  of  Pericles.  Socrates  the  philosopher  was  at
that  time  one  of  the  Prytanes,  and  resolutely  refused  to  do  his  ofiice.
And  a  little  while  after  the  n\adness  of  the  people  turned  the  other
way.

*  It  does  not  appear  by  this  that  his  understanding  was  weaken-
ed, since  he  Iq^ew  the  c.barni  to  be  a  ridiculous  piece  of  superstition,
and  showed  it  to  his  friend  as  such  ;  but  only  that  in  his  extreme
sickness  he  had  not  resolution  enough  to  refuse  what  he  was  sensi-
ble would  do  him  no  good.


394  Plutarch's  lives.

Pericles  undoubtedly  deserved  admiration,  not  only
for  the  candour  and  moderation  which  he  ever  retained,
amidst  the  distractions  of  business  and  the  rage  of  his
enemies,  but  for  that  noble  sentiment  which  led  him  to
think  it  his  most  excellent  attainment,  never  to  have  given
v/ay  to  envy  or  anger,  notwithstanding-  the  greatness  of
his  power,  nor  to  have  nourished  an  implacable  hatred
against  his  greatest  foe.  In  my  opinion,  this  one  thing,
I  mean  his  mild  and  dispassionate  behaviour,  his  unble-
mished integrity  and  irreproachable  conduct  during  his
whole  administration,  makes  his  appellation  of  Olympius,
which  v/ould  be  otherwise  vain  and  absurd,  no  longer
exceptionable,  nay,  gives  it  a  propriety.  Thus  we  think
the  divine  powers^  as  the  authors  of  all  good,  and  natu-
rally incapable  of  producing  evil,  worthy  to  rule  and  pre-
side over  the  universe.  Not  in  the  manner  which  the
poets  relate,  who,  while  they  endeavoured  to  bevvilderus
by  their  irrational  opinions,  stand  convicted  of  inconsist-
ency, by  their  own  writing.  For  they  represent  the
place  which  the  gods  inhabit,  as  the  region  of  security  and
the  most  perfect  tranquillity,  unapproached  by  storms
and  unsullied  with  clouds  ;  where  a  sweet  serenity  for
ever  reigns,  and  a  pure  ainer  displays  itself  without  in-
terruption ;  and  these  they  think  mansions  suitable  to  a
blessed  and  immortal  nature.  Yet,  at  the  same  time,
they  represent  the  gods  themselves  as  full  of  anger,  male-
volence, hatred,  and  other  passions,  unworthy  even  of  a
reasonable  man.     But  this  by  the  by.

The  state  of  public  aifairs  soon  showed  the  want  of
Pericles,*  and  the  Athenians  openly  expressed  their  re-
gret for  his  loss.  Even  those,  who,  in  his  lifetime,  could
but  ill  brook  his  superior  power,  as  thinking  themselves
eclipsed  by  it,  yet  upon  atrial  of  other  orators  and  dema.-
gogues,  after  he  was  gone,  soon  acknowledged  that  where
severity  was  required,  no  man  was  ever  more  moderate
or  if  mildness  was  necessary,  no  man  better  kept  up  his
dignity,  than  Pericles.  And  his  so  much  envied  autho-
rity, to  which  they  had  given  the  name  of  monarchy  and
tyranny,  then  appeared  to  have  been  the  bulwark  of  the

*  Pericles  died  in  the  third  year  of  the  Peloponnesian  war,that  is,
the  last  year  ef  the  eighty- seventh  Olympiad,  and  428  years  before
the  Christian  era.


PKRICLEC.  395

State.  So  much  corruption  and  such  a  rage  of  wicked-
ness broke  out  upon  the  commonwealth  after  his  death
which  he  by  proper  restraints  had  palliated,*  and  kept
from  dangerous  and  destructive  extremities  !

*  Pericles  did  indeed  palliate  the  distempers  of  the  common-
wealth while  he  li\'ed,  buf  (as  we  have  observed  before)  he  sowed
the  seeds  of  them,  by  bribing  the  people  with  their  own  money;
with  v/hich  they  v/ere  as  a^uch  pleased  as  if  it  had  been  his.


END  oy   THE   FIRST  VOLUME.


I
