Please

handle  this  volume

with  care.

The  Univereity  of  Connecticut
Libraries,  Storrs


BOOK     149.3. J724    c.  1

JONES    #    STUDIES    IN    MYSTICAL

RELIGION


3    T153    DOQOBSOt,    2


f


STUDIES  IN  MYSTICAL  RELIGION


MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  Limited

LONDON  •  BOMBAY  •  CALCUTTA  •  MADRAS
MELBOURNE

THE   MACMILLAN   COMPANY

NEW  YORK  •  BOSTON  •  CHICAGO
DALLAS  •  SAN  FRANCISCO

THE  MACMILLAN  CO.  OF  CANADA.  Ltd.

TORONTO


STUDIES


IN


MYSTICAL  RELIGION


BY


RUFUS    M.  JONES,  M.A.,  D.Litt.


HAVERFORD    COLLEGE,    U.S.A.


MACMILLAN    AND    CO.,   LIMITED
ST.    MARTIN'S    STREET,  LONDON


3^


Firsi  Edition  April  1909
Reprinted  September  190Q.  1919


PREFACE

No  one  doubts  to-day  that  one  of  the  main  approaches
to  the  meaning  of  religion  is  through  the  nature  of  the
soul  of  man.  It  would  no  doubt  be  a  mistake  to  push
the  method  of  the  inner  way  to  the  exclusion  of  all  other
methods  of  studying  religion,  but  it  is  certain  that  no-
body can  tell  us  what  religion  is  until  he  has  sounded
the  deeps  within  man,  and  has  dealt  with  the  testimony
of  personal  consciousness.

The    mystics    have   in    all   ages   and    in    all    lands —

semper  et  ubique — been  intent  on  finding  a  direct  way  to

God.     They  have  been  voices,  often  crying  in  the  wilder-

"   .    ness,  announcing  the  nearness  of  God,  and  calling  men

from  the  folly  of  seeking  Him  where,  from  the  nature  of

7       the  case,  he  could  not  be  found.      Their  message  strikes

^        a  note  which  appeals  profoundly  to  our  generation,  and

<^        for  obvious  reasons  there  has  been  a  revival  of  interest  in

^       them.      I   hope  these  studies  of  mine  will  contribute  to

this  interest,  and  will  throw  positive  light  on  the  problems

of  mystical  religion.

I  have  had  before  me,  in  all  my  labour  on  this  volume,

the  desire  to   make  my  work   advance  the  plans  of  my

beloved  friend  John  Wilhelm   Rowntree,  who  is  now  in

^       the  unseen  realm.      He  had  set  before  himself  as  part  of


vi  MYSTICAL  RELIGION

a    larger    purpose    the    task    of   writing    the    history    of

Quakerism,    treating    it    as    an    experiment    in    spiritual

religion,  and  even  before  I  knew  of  his  plans,  I  had  chosen

as  my  special  field  a  study  of  the  mystics  of  ancient  and

modern  times.     We  each  felt  that  our  work  was  toward

the  same  end,  and  we  spent  many  joyous  hours  telling

each  other  of  our  literary  dreams,  always  putting  all  our

emphasis    on    the  way  in   which   these   unborn   books  of

ours  were  to  minister  to  the  larger  spiritual  life  of  our

age.      His  books,  alas,  must  remain  unwritten  !     We  who

were  his  friends  know,  though  the  world  never  can,  what

power  they  would  have  revealed.

"  The  world  which  credits  what  is  done
Is  dark  to  all  that  might  have  been."

Some  of  us  who  loved  him  are  resolved  that  his  work,
so  far  as  possible,  shall  go  on  to  completion,  and  I  have
made  my  volume  function,  in  every  way  I  could  do  so,
toward  the  fulfilling  of  his  interrupted  plans.  There  is
no  sectarian  cast  or  bias  in  it,  but  it  does  prepare  the
way  for  an  intelligent  comprehension  of  the  appearance
in  the  English  commonwealth  of  a  society  of  Christians
who  seriously  undertook  to  live  by  the  Light  within,  and
whose  story  will  be  told  in  later  volumes.

I  am  under  weighty  obligations  to  many  persons  who
have  read  and  criticized  some  of  the  chapters.  I  desire
to  make  particular  mention  of  Professor  Robert  S.
Franks,  Principal  T.  M.  Lindsay,  William  R.  Inge,  D.D.,
Professor  Hastings  Rashdall,  Dr.  J.  Rendel  Harris,  T.
Edmund  Harvey,  Joan  M.  Fry,  and  William  Charles
Braithwaite.  I  wish  to  express  my  debt  also  to  Emily
J.    Hart,    who    assisted    me    in    some   of   my    researches,


PREFACE


vu


though  she  did  not  live  to  see  the  work  completed.
My  greatest  debt  is  due  my  dear  wife,  who  has  rendered
invaluable  help  at  every  stage  of  my  work,  particularly
in  the  sections  dealing  with  German  mystics,  in  the  proof-
reading, and  in  the  preparation  of  the  Index.

Haverford,  Pennsylvania.


CONTENTS


INTRODUCTION

PAGH-

The  Nature  and  Value  of  First-hand  Experience  in

Religion xiii


CHAPTER    I
The  Mystical  Element  in  Primitive  Christianity     .         i^

CHAPTER    n

Ministry  and  Organization  in  the  Early  Church    .       20

CHAPTER    HI
MoNTANiSM  :  A  Return  to  Prophecy    ....       37

CHAPTER    IV
Roots  of  Mysticism  in  Classical  Literature      .         .       57

CHAPTER    V
Mysticism  in  the  Church  Fathers       .         .         ,         .       80


CHAPTER   VI

DiONYSIUS,    "THE    AREOPAGITE  " 98

ix


X  MYSTICAL  RELIGION

CHAPTER   VII

PAGE

A  Great  Light  in   the    Dark   Ages — John  the  Scot,

CALLED    ErIGENA II 3

CHAPTER    VIII
The  Waldenses,  an  Anti-Sacerdotal  Sect  .         .         .     1 30

CHAPTER    IX
St.  Francis  and  the  "Spiritual  Franciscans"  .         .150

CHAPTER   X
A  Group  of  Pantheistical  Mystics      .         .         .         .178

CHAPTER   XI

Brotherhood  Groups  in  the  Thirteenth  Century    .     196

CHAPTER   XII
Meister  Eckhart  .         .         .         .         .         ,         ,         0     217

CHAPTER   XIII
The  Friends  of  God 242

CHAPTER    XIV
The  Brethren  of  the  Common  Life    ....     298

CHAPTER   XV

The  Pre-Reformation    in  England — Wyclif  and  the

Lollards .     333


CONTENTS  xi


CHAPTER   XVI

PAGE

The  Anabaptists 369


CHAPTER    XVH
Anabaptism  in  England 396

CHAPTER   XVHI
The  Family  of  Love 428

CHAPTER   XIX

The  Seekers  and  the  Ranters 449

CHAPTER   XX

Individual   Mystics   in   the   Period  of  the  English

Commonwealth         .         .         ,         .         .         .         .482

APPENDIX 501

INDEX 507


"The  Kingdom  of  God  is  Within  You."1

O  world  invisible,  we  view  Thee,
O  world  intangible,  we  touch  Thee,
O  world  unknowable,  we  know  Thee,
Inapprehensible,  we  clutch  Thee  I

Does  the  fish  soar  to  find  the  ocean,
The  eagle  plunge  to  find  the  air —
That  we  ask  of  the  stars  in  motion
If  they  have  rumor  of  Thee  there  ?

Not  where  the  wheeling  systems  darken,
And  our  benumbed  conceiving  soars  ! —
The  drift  of  pinions,  would  we  harken,
Beats  at  our  own  clay-shuttered  doors.

The  angels  keep  their  ancient  places  ; —
Turn  but  a  stone,  and  start  a  wing  1
'Tis  ye,  'tis  your  estranged  faces.
That  miss  the  many-splendored  thing.

But  (when  so  sad  thou  canst  not  sadder)
Cry  ; — and  upon  thy  so  sore  loss
Shall  shine  the  traffic  of  Jacob's  ladder
Pitched  betwixt  Heaven  and  Charing  Cross.

Yea,  in  the  night,  my  Soul,  my  daughter,
Cry, — clinging  Heaven  by  the  hems  ;
And  lo,  Christ  walking  on  the  water,
Not  of  Gennesareth,  but  Thames.


1  From  the  Poems  of  Francis  Thompson,   with  permission  of
John  Lane  Company,  Publishers.


INTRODUCTION

THE   NATURE  AND   VALUE   OF   FIRST-HAND   EXPERIENCE
IN    RELIGION

Two  great  tendencies  come  into  prominence  in  the  entire
course  of  religious  history, — the  tendency,  on  the  one
hand,  to  regard  reh'gion  as  something  permanent  and
unchanging,  and  on  the  other  hand,  the  equally  fundamental
tendency  to  revivify  and  reshape  religion  through  fresh
and  spontaneous  experiences.  It  is  natural  that  both
tendencies  should  appear,  for  religion  is  both  eternal  and
temporal — it  is  the  child  of  permanence  and  change.  No
religion  can  live  and  be  a  power  in  this  evolving  world
unless  it  changes  and  adjusts  itself  to  its  environment,  and
no  religion  can  minister  to  the  deepest  needs  of  men  unless
it  reveals  permanent  and  time-transcending  Realities.

Religion  has  many  times  lost  its  power  because  one  of
its  two  essential  aspects  has  been  ignored  and  the  other
aspect  has  been  pushed  to  an  absurd  extreme.  It  will  not
do  to  forget  or  to  overlook  the  advantages  of  habit,  custom,
and  system — the  storage  of  the  gains  of  the  race.  The
tendency  to  value  what  has  worked  well  furthers  order
and  stability,  and  keeps  the  future  organic  with  the  past
The  conserving  spirit,  like  an  invisible  mortar,  binds  the
ages  together  and  makes  possible  one  humanity.  It  is  the
very  basis  of  our  social  morality  and  the  ground  of  all
our  corporate  activities.


xiv  MYSTICAL  RELIGION

But,  on  the  other  hand,  as  soon  as  reh'glon  has  closed
up  "  the  east  window  of  divine  surprise,"  and  is  turned
into  a  mechanism  of  habit,  custom,  and  system,  it  is
killed.  Religion  thus  grown  formal  and  mechanical,
though  it  may  still  have  a  disciplinary  function  in  society,
is  no  longer  religion  in  the  primary  sense.  The  spring
of  joy  which  characterizes  true  religion  has  disappeared,
the  heightening,  propulsive  tone  has  vanished.  It  may
linger  on  as  a  vestigial  superstition,  or  a  semi-automatic
performance,  but  it  is  live  religion  only  so  long  as  it
issues  from  the  centre  of  personal  consciousness  and  has
the  throb  of  personal  experience  in  it.

The  creative  periods  in  religious  progress  have  come
when  the  crust  of  custom,  the  mechanism  of  habit,  has
been  broken  up  by  the  impact  of  persons  who  were
capable  of  fresh  and  original  experiences,  persons  who
have  shifted  the  line  of  march  and  brought  new  energies
into  play,  because  they  have  gained  new  visions  and  new
insights.  The  Church,  it  is  true,  has  never  in  any  period
quite  sunk  to  the  level  of  tradition  and  the  automatism  of
habit,  for  it  has  always  had  beneath  its  system  of  organiza-
tion and  dogma  a  current,  more  or  less  hidden  and
subterranean,  of  vital,  inward,  spiritual  religion,  dependent
for  its  power  of  conviction,  not  on  books,  councils,
hierarchies  or  creeds, — not  upon  anything  kept  in  cold
storage, — but  on  the  soul's  experiences  of  eternal  Realities.
But  the  main  weakness  of  organized  Christianity  has  been
the  tendency  to  settle  into  a  "  sacred  "  form  and  system.

Our  generation  has  grown  weary  of  ancient  traditions
and  accumulated  systems.  We  have  discovered  new
worlds  in  all  directions  by  following  the  sure  path  of
experience,  and  we  can  never  again  settle  down  with  a
naive  and  childlike  trust  in  the  house  which  the  past  has
builded.  Our  first  question  in  any  field  is,  not  What  do
the  scribes  and  schoolmen  say  ?  not  What  is  the  unbroken


INTRODUCTION  xv

tradition  ?  but,  What  are  the  facts  ?  What  data  does  ex-
perience furnish  ?  This  shifting  of  centre  from  "  authority  "
to  "experience"  runs  through  all  the  pursuits  of  the
human  spirit  in  the  modern  world,  and,  as  would  be
expected,  religion  has  been  profoundly  affected  by  it.
In  religion  as  in  other  fields  of  inquiry,  the  questions  of
moment  have  come  to  be  those  which  deal  with  life.
We  take  slender  interest  in  dogmatic  constructions ;  we
turn  from  these  with  impatience,  and  ask  for  the  testimony
of  the  soul,  for  the  basis  of  religion  in  the  nature  of  man
as  man.  This  profound  tendency  of  the  modern  world
has  brought  strongly  into  prominence  a  mystical  type
of  religion,  that  is  to  say,  a  type  of  religion  which  is
primarily  grounded  in  experience,^  and  with  the  tendency
has  come  a  corresponding  interest  in  the  mystics  of
the  past.

Mysticism  is  a  word  which  cannot  properly  be  used
without  careful  definition.  To  many  readers  it  carries
no  clear  and  concrete  meaning ;  to  others  it  has  an
ominous  significance  and  a  forbidding  sound,  as  though
the  safe  and  beaten  track,  which  the  defenders  of  the  faith
have  builded,  were  being  left  for  will-o'-the-wisps  and
wandering  lights.  I  shall  use  the  word  mysticism  to
express  the  type  of  religion  which  puts  the  emphasis  on
ini'^nediate  awareness  of  relation  with  God,  on  direct  and
intimate  consciousness  of  the  Divine  Presence.  It  is
religion  in  its  most  acute,  intense,  a?id  living  stage.

Religion  of  this  mystical  type  is  not  confined  to
Christianity,  but  belongs,  in  some  degree,  to  all  forms  of
religion,  for  first-hand  experiences  of  a  Divine  and  Higher
Presence  are  as  old  as  human  personality.  Dr  Brinton  is
undoubtedly  right  in  his  contention  that  "  all  religions
depend    for    their  origin    and    continuance   directly  upon

^   "  The  mystic  is  a  thorough -going  empiricist  "  (Josiah  Royce,  The  World  and
tJie  Individual,  vol.  i.  p.  8i).


xvi  MYSTICAL  RELIGION

inspiration,"  that  is  to  say,  upon  direct  intercourse.^  The
men  who  have  made  religion  a  living  power  for  any
people  are,  as  he  says,  "  persons  who  have  been  face  to
face  with  God,  who  have  heard  His  voice  and  felt  His
presence."^  Dr.  Tylor  has  expressed  much  the  same
view  in  his  account  of  the  origin  of  religious  experience
in  the  primitive  revealers.

"  There  are  times,"  he  says,  "  when  powers  and  im-
pressions out  of  the  course  of  the  mind's  normal  action
and  words  that  seem  spoken  by  a  voice  from  without,
messages  of  mysterious  knowledge,  of  counsel  or  warning,
seem  to  indicate  the  intervention,  as  it  were,  of  a  second,
superior  soul."  ^

This  quotation  from  Dr.  Tylor  puts  the  emphasis  on
an  experience  "  out  of  the  course  of  the  mind's  normal
action,"  and  raises  the  question  whether  mysticism  is
something  normal  or  abnormal.  Both  positions  have
been  strongly  defended.

Canon'  R.  C.  Moberly  says  that  "  Christian  mysticism
is  the  doctrine,  or  rather  the  experience,  of  the  Holy  Spirit
— the  realization  of  human  personality  as  characterized
by  and  consummated  in  the  indwelling  reality  of  the
Spirit  of  Christ,  which  is  God."  "  It  is  Christ,"  he  says,
"  who  is  the  true  mystic  ;  or  if  the  mode  of  expression
be  preferred,  it  is  He  who  alone  has  realized  all  that
mysticism  and  mystics  have  aimed  at — with  more,  or
with  less,  whether  of  disproportion  or  of  success.  And
in  Him  that  perfect  realization  evidently  means  a  harmony,
a  sanity,  a  fitly  proportioned  completeness.  It  is  an
inward  light  which  makes  itself  manifest  as  character ;
a  direct  communion  of  love  which  is  also,  to  the  fullest
extent,  wholly  rational  at  once  and  wholly  practical  ;  it
is  as  much   knowledge  as  love,  and  love  as  knowledge :

*  Brinton's  Religions  af  Primitive  People,  p.  52.  ^  Ibid,  p,  58.

3  Dr.  E.  B.  Tylor,  Primitive  Culture,  vol.  i.  p.  182.     '


INTRODUCTION  xvii

It  is  as  truly  contemplation  as  activity,  and  activity  as
contemplation.  In  being  the  ideal  of  mysticism,  it  is  also
the  ideal  of  general,  and  of  practical,  and  of  all^  Christian
experience.  For  the  most  practical  type  of  Christian
experience  misconceives  itself,  until  it  conceives  itself  as
an  expression,  in  action,  of  a  central  truth, — that  truth  of
transcendent  fact,  which  practical  Christians  are  too  often
content  to  call  *  mystical,'  and,  so  calling  it,  to  banish,  or  to
try  to  banish,  from  the  region  of  practical  life."  ^

In  Canon  Moberly's  conception,  mysticism  is  not  a
special,  exceptional  experience,  but,  rather,  a  life  con-
summated in  the  practice  of  the  Presence  of  God.  It  is
life  in  its  wholeness  as  over  against  a  partial  life,  which
is  shut  up  to  some  narrow  compartment  of  its  true  being.
This  meaning  of  mysticism  is  well  brought  out  by  President
Henry  Churchill  King.  He  says  :  "  The  truly  mystical
may  be  summed  up  as  simply  a  protest  in  favour  of  the
whole  man — the  entire  personality.  It  says  that  men
can  experience,  and  live,  and  feel,  and  do  much  more
than  they  can  formulate,  define,  explain,  or  even  fully
express.      Living  is  more  than  thinking."  ^

Against  this  account  of  mysticism  can  be  put  a  great
array  of  testimony  to  show  that  it  is  an  abnormal  condi-
tion— a  form  of  disease,  a  manifestation  of  hysteria.^
The  reason  for  this  difference  of  view  is  easy  to  find.
The  two  sets  of  writers  are  talking  about  two  different
things,  though  under  the  same  name.  For  one  group  the
i^eal  mystic  is  a  person  who,  by  conformity  to  the  goal
of  life  revealed  in  Christ,  has  realized  his  life  upward  in
full  union  with  God — a  way  of  living  which  is  as  normal
as    healthy   breathing.      For    the    other    group,   the    real

^  Canon  R.  C.  Moberly,  Atonetnent  and  Personality,  pp.  312-16.

2  H.  C.  King's    Theology  and  Social  Consciousness,  p.  ^y.

5  Murisier,  Les  Maladies  du  sentiment  religieux.  Janet,  "  Une  Extatique,"
in  Bulletin  de  V Institut  psyckologique,  Paris,  1901.  Leuba,  "Tendances
fondamentales  des  mystiques  Chretiens,"  in  Revue philosophique,  vol.  liv.


xviii  MYSTICAL  RELIGION

mystic  is  a  person  who  exhibits  a  special  form  of  psychical
dissociation.  He  is  "  obsessed  "  with  the  idea  that  he  is
one  with  God,  or  he  experiences  a  trance  state,  a  state  of
"  second  personality,"  in  which  he  loses  the  boundaries  of
his  "  primary  self,"  or  at  least  is  subject  to  "  incursions "
from  beyond  the  threshold  of  normal  consciousness.  Such
experiences,  we  must  admit,  are  not  normal.

There  is  no  question  that  there  are  "  mystical  ex-
periences," i.e.  experiences  in  which  the  subject  feels  the
Divine  Presence  and  has  an  assurance  of  union  with  God,
which  are  abnormal  and  pathological,  but  there  is  no  more
reason  for  narrowing  the  word  "  mysticism  "  to  cover  this
type  alone  than  there  is  for  using  the  word  "  love "  for
pathological  love  alone.  Every  form  of  human  experience
is  capable  of  an  exaggerated,  an  abnormal  state,  and  there
is  always  a  shadowy  borderland  where  it  is  extremely
difiBcult  to  draw  the  line  between  the  normal  and  the
abnormal.  This  is  peculiarly  true  of  religious  experience,
and  mystical  experience  may  stretch  over  all  the  degrees
from  the  most  perfect  sanity  to  utter  disorganization  of
the  self.

I  shall  first  consider  mysticism  in  its  normal  aspect,
as  a  type  of  religion  which  is  characterized  by  an
immediate  consciousness  of  personal  relationship  with
the  Divine.  Something  of  this  sort  is  familiar  to
the  sanest  and  most  matter-of-fact  person  among  us.
There  is  a  mystical  aspect  in  our  highest  moral  moments.
We  never  rise  to  any  high  level  of  moral  action  without
feeling  that  the  "  call  "  of  duty  comes  from  beyond  our
isolated  self  There  is  an  augustness  in  conscience  which
has  made  men  in  all  ages  name  it  the  voice  of  God  ;  but
however  it  is  named,  everybody  in  these  high  moments  of
obedience  has  an  experience  which  is  essentially  mystical
— an  experience  which  cannot  be  analysed  and  reduced
to  "  explanation  "    in  terms  of  anything  else.      The  great


INTRODUCTION  xix

ethical  writers  of  all  schools  recognize  this.  "What  is
good,"  says  Paulsen,  "  will  in  the  last  analysis  be  decided
by  immediate  incontrovertible  feeling,  in  which  the  inner-
most essence  of  the  being  [i.e.  the  personality]  manifests
itself  It  is  as  impossible  to  force  a  man  by  logical
proofs  to  love  and  admire  an  ideal  of  life  as  it  is  to  make
his  tongue  feel  the  sweetness  or  bitterness  of  a  particular
fruit."  ^  "  The  idea  of  the  Good,"  says  Hastings  Rashdall,
"is  something  simple,  ultimate,  and  unanalysable."  "  Moral
obligation  is  one  of  those  immediate  data  of  consciousness
from  which  the  idea  of  God  may  be  inferred."  ^  Professor
Sidgwick  says  that, "  Right  and  wrong  as  peculiar  to  moral
cognition  are  unique  and  unanalysable."  *  "  Duty,"  says
Martineau,  "  involves  the  discovery  of  something  higher
than  ourselves  that  has  claims  upon  us."  ^

There  is  likewise  a  mystical  element  in  prayer  when-
ever it  rises  to  the  level  of  real  communion,  or,  as  Lowell
puts  it,  when,  "  stirred  below  the  conscious  self,"  the
soul  feels

"  That  perfect  disenthralment  which  is  God.'"'  ^

Everybody  who  prays  knows  the  difference  between  saying
words  and  phrases,  uttering  requests,  proffering  petitions,
and  coming  into  vital  communion  with  God.  There  are
moments  of  prayer  when  the  soul  feels  itself  face  to
face  with  ultimate  Reality  and  in  joyous  fellowship  with
perfect  Personality.  This  latter  experience  is  as  normal
as  the  lower  form  of  prayer  is,  but  they  are  worlds
apart  in  significance  and  value.  It  is  because  prayer
does  rise  to  the  height  of  actual  fellowship  with  a  Divine
Companion    that    men    who    accept    the    conclusions    of

^  Paulsen,  A  System  of  Ethics,  p.  ii.

^  Rashdall,  The  Theory  of  Good  and  Evil,  vol.  ii.  pp.  i03-io6»

2  Mind,  vol.  xxviii.  p.  580.

^  Martineau,  Types  of  Ethical  Theory,  vol.  ii.  p.  104.

^  Lowell,  The  Cathedral.


XX  MYSTICAL  RELIGION

modern  science  go  on  praying,  undisturbed  by  the
reign  of  law.  They  are  not  concerned  about  the
superficial  question,  whether  prayers  are  answered  or  not ;
for  prayer  is  its  own  reward,  is  an  end  in  itself  and
carries  the  person  who  truly  prays  into  a  joyous  state
which  transcends  explanation.  As  S.  T.  Coleridge  has
well  expressed  it : —

"A  sense  o'er  all  my  soul  impressed
That  I  am  weak,  yet  not  unblessed,
Since  in  me,  round  me,  everywhere.
Eternal  strength  and  wisdom  are."

These  mystical  experiences  in  a  perfectly  sane  and
normal  fashion  often  come  over  whole  groups  of  persons
in  times  of  worship.  There  are  times  when,  in  the  hush
and  silence,  with  no  appeal  to  the  senses,  and  with
nothing  outward  to  stir  emotion,  low  breathings  of  a
diviner  life  are  clearly  felt  and  the  entire  group  is  fused
and  baptized  into  one  spirit.  There  comes  the  experience
of  a  great  refreshing,  a  release  of  energy,  as  though  a
hidden  circuit  had  been  closed.

"  For  a  moment  on  the  soul
Falls  the  rest  that  maketh  whole,
Falls  the  endless  peace."  ^

These  are  the  times  when  the  soul  feels  its  real  powers
and  when  the  possibilities  of  life  are  discovered,  and  they
make  the  ordinary  performances  of  religious  service  seem,
in  comparison,  poor  and  dry.  Such  experiences  are
beyond  explanation,  but  they  are  not  abnormal.

There  is,  too,  a  mystical  element  of  this  normal  type
in  any  genuine  faith.  I  am  not  speaking,  of  course,  of  a
faith  which  consists  in  believing  something  on  authority,
for  that  is  faith  of  a  lower  order.  Faith  in  the  primary
sense   is   a   way  of    corresponding  with    Realities  which

^  F.  W.  H.  Myers'  Sunrise.


INTRODUCTION  xxi

transcend  sense-experience.  It  is  an  inward  power  by
which  the  soul  lives  above  the  seen  and  temporal,  and
"overcomes"  the  world  of  the  causal,  mechanical  order.
It  is  a  conviction,  arising  apparently  from  the  very
rationality  of  the  spirit  in  us,  that  there  is  an  inner,
unseen,  spiritual  universe — an  eternal  moral  order.  It  is
the  soul's  vision  of  ivhat  ought  to  be  and  its  confidence
in  the  reality  and  permanence  of  that  estimate  of  worth —
"the  assurance  of  things  hoped  for  and  the  evidence  of
things  not  seen."  It  is  no  mere  product  of  sense-
experience,  but  it  is  the  very  pinnacle  of  rationality
and  as  normal  a  function  as  our  responses  to  ocular
vision.-^

It  is  not  an  uncomrhon  thing  for  persons  who  are
entirely  free  from  abnormality  to  have  an  experience  in
which  the  meaning,  the  significance,  the  worth,  the  rich-
ness of  life,  vastly  transcends  their  concepts  and  descrip-
tions— when  life  vastly  overflows  all  that  can  be  said
about  it.  This  experience  is  marked  by  the  emergence
of  a  sort  of  undifferentiated  consciousness  like  that  well
known  to  us  when  we  rise  to  a  high  appreciation  of
the  beautiful  in  nature  or  art  or  music.  At  the  highest
moments  of  appreciation  there  comes,  not  a  loss  of  con-
sciousness, but  the  emergence  of  a  new  level  of  conscious-
ness in  which  neither  the  /  nor  the  object  is  focused  in
perception  or  thought.^  There  is  in  these  experiences  an
absence  of  self-consciousness,  and  an  absence,  too,  of  the
consciousness  of  any  concrete,  finite  object  contemplated,  a

1  The  question  has  been  raised  whether  Mystical-religion  is  higher  or  lower
than  Faith-religion  (see  article  by  Dr.  Lyman  in  American  Journal  of  Theology
for  July  1904).  It  is  hardly  a  fair  question  to  raise,  since  mysticism  at  every  point
involves  faith  ;  and  any  faith  which  is  really  alive  and  dynamic  is  rooted  and
grounded  in  first-hand  experience.

■^  ' '  The  aesthetic  object  and  the  consciousness  in  which  it  arises  are  no  longer
held  apart.  The  self  becomes  identified  with  the  object  as  peculiarly  its  own."
(Dr.  W.  D.  Furry's  Aesthetic  Experience:  lis  Nature  and  Function  in  Episte-
wo/o^  (Baltimore,  1908),  p.  49.)


xxii  MYSTICAL  RELIGION

penetration  into  a  region  more  real  and  all-inclusive  than
that  of  finite  "  things."  ^

The  poet  Coleridge  has  in  many  passages  called  atten-
tion to  a  type  of  experience  which  is  neither  "  feeling  "  nor
"  knowledge,"  but  something  much  richer  than  either
alone — an  experience  which  he  declares  is  "  the  very
groundwork  "  of  knowledge,  and  which  arises  "  when  we
possess  ourselves  as  one  with  the  whole  " —

"  An  experience  deeper  than  science,  more  certain
than  demonstration,  and  from  which  flows  the  sap  that
circulates  through  every  branch  and  spray  of  demonstra-
tion and  knowledge,  an  experience  which  passeth  all
understanding."  ^

It  is  now  a  commonplace  of  psychology  that  what  we  are
and  what  we  experience  vastly  transcends  our  "  knowledge  "

*  Wordsworth  has  described  a  personal  experience  in  a  beautiful  passage  :

"  Sensation,  soul  and  form
All  melted  into  him  ;  they  swallowed  up
His  animal  being  ;  in  them  did  he  live,
And  by  them  did  he  live  ;  they  were  his  life.
In  such  access  of  mind,  in  such  high  hours
Of  visitation  from  the  living  God,
Thought  was  not ;  in  enjoyment  it  expired.
No  thanks  he  breathed,  he  proflFered  no  request ;
Rapt  into  still  communion  that  transcends
The  imperfect  offices  of  prayer  and  praise,
His  mind  was  a  thanksgiving  to  the  power
That  made  him  ;  it  was  blessedness  and  love.

The  Excursion,  Book  i.

There  is  no  better  first-hand  account  of  such  an  unanalysable  whole  of  experience
than  Mozart's  description  of  the  coming  of  a  symphony  into  his  consciousness.

' '  When  and  how  my  ideas  come  I  know  not,  nor  can  I  force  them.  Those  that
please  me  I  retain  in  my  memory  and  am  accustomed,  as  I  have  been  told,  to  hum
them  to  myself.  If  I  continue  in  this  way,  it  soon  occurs  to  me  how  I  may  turn
this  or  that  morsel  to  account.  .  .  .  All  this  fires  my  soul,  and,  provided  I  am  not
disturbed,  my  subject  enlarges  itself,  becomes  methodized  and  defined,  and  the
whole,  though  it  be  long,  stands  almost  complete  and  finished  in  my  mind,  so
that  I  can  survey  it  like  a  fine  picture,  or  a  beautiful  statue  at  a  glance.  Nor  do
I  hear  in  my  imagination  the  parts  successively,  but  I  hear  theni  as  it  were  all  at
once.  What  a  delight  this  is  I  cannot  express.  All  this  inventing,  this  producing,
takes  place  in  a  pleasing,  lively  dream.  But  the  actual  hearing  of  the  whole
together  is  after  all  the  best.  And  this  is  perhaps  the  best  gift  I  have  my  Divine
Master  to  thank  for"  (Holmes'  Life  and  Correspondence  of  Mozart  (London,
1845).  PP-  317-18.)

2  S.  T.  Coleridge's  The  Friend,  Essay  XI.


INTRODUCTION  xxiii

about  it ;  reality  overflows  at  every  point  our  categories
of  description.  Our  full  self,  our  real  self,  radiates  out
from  a  central  pulse  of  consciousness,  which  is  in  the
focus  of  attention,  and  the  part  of  the  self  that  gets
focalized  and  reduced  to  conceptual  knowledge  is  only  a
very  tiny  fragment.  As  Maeterlinck  has  declared  :  "  There
is  in  us,  above  the  reasoning  portion  of  our  reason,  a
whole  region  answering  to  something  different,  which  is
preparing  for  the  surprises  of  the  future,  and  which  goes

on  ahead  of  our  imperfect  attainments,  and  enables  us  to

*

live  on  a  level  very  much  superior  to  that  of  those  attain-
ments." ^

Now  there  are  times  when  this  underlying  total  whole
of  consciousness  comes  into  power  in  us  in  unusual  fashion,
when  the  stored-up  gains  of  a  lifetime  are  at  our  command,
and  we  seem  to  possess  ourselves  even  down  to  the  roots
of  our  being.  In  truth,  at  times,  we  are  aware  of  a  More
than  "  ourselves  "  impinging  on  the  skirts  of  our  being.
There  is  no  time  in  our  lives,  of  course,  when  we  do  not
draw  upon  this  wider  consciousness  which  is  the  matrix
in  which  our  "  ideas  "  and  concepts  are  born.  We  are  all
aware  how  often  we  arrive  at  conclusions  and  actions
without  reasoning  or  thinking ;  how  often  we  deal  wisely
with  situations,  without  being  able  to  trace  the  source  of
our  wisdom.  The  supreme  issues  of  life  are  settled  for
us,  all  the  way  up  and  down  the  scale,  by  unreasoned
adjustments,  by  intents  rather  than  contents  of  conscious-
ness, by  value-responses,  which  far  overflow  any  knowledge
explanation  which  we  can  give.  It  may,  I  think,  be  said
that  all  great  work,  all  work  which  has  the  touch  of  genius
on  it,  comes  from  persons  who  in  special  degrees  draw  upon
this  matrix  consciousness.  Such  persons  feel  often  as
though  a  Power  not  themselves  were  working  through
them  ;  as  though,  without  tension  or  effort,  the  creation  at

^  Cited  in  Pratt's  Psycho/oijy  of  Belief  ,  p.  27.

C


xxiv  MYSTICAL  RELIGION

which  they  are  working  was  "  given  "  to  them  or  "  brought  "
to  them.  There  are,  I  repeat,  times  when  in  extraordinary
ways  the  dualistic  character  of  ordinary  thought  is  trans-
cended and  the  soul  comes  into  possession  of  itself  as  a
whole,  when  all  we  have  been,  or  are,  or  hope  to  be,
becomes  real ;  and  not  only  so,  but  in  these  deeper  reaches
of  experience  some  higher  Power  than  ourselves  seems  to
work  with  us  and  through  us — a  larger  life,  continuous
with  ourselves,  seems  to  environ  us.  Our  own  con-
sciousness appears  to  be  only  an  effective  centre  in  a
vast  spiritual  environment  which  acts  along  with  us.
As  Matthew  Arnold  has  finely  said :

"  A  bolt  is  shot  back  somewhere  in  our  breast
And  a  lost  pulse  of  feeling  stirs  again.

And  then  he  thinks  he  knows
The  hills  where  his  life  rose
And  the  sea  where  it  goes."  ^

There  are  persons  seemingly  as  normal  as  the  sanest
tiller  of  the  soil,  who  find  themselves  fused  into  union
with  a  wider,  diviner  life  than  that  of  their  common,
everyday  experiences,  who  have  times  when  their  soul
takes  holiday  from  doubt  and  strain  and  perplexity.  A
great  refreshing  floods  them,  they  are  aware  of  a
heightened  energy,  as  though  they  had  pushed  out  into
a  new  compartment  of  being.  It  is  like  the  aesthetic
experience,  in  its  lofty  levels,  only  the  impulse  comes
from  within  instead  of  from  without.  There  could  be  no
better  account  of  this  heightened  life  than  Edward
Dowden  has  given  in  his  Sonnet  on  Awakening.

"  Suddenly,  we  know  not  how,  a  sound
Of  living  streams,  an  odour,  a  flower  crowned
With  dew,  a  lark  upspringing  from  the  sod,
And  we  awake.      O  joy  and  deep  amaze,

^  Arnold's  Buried  Life.


INTRODUCTION  xxv

Beneath  the  everlasting  hills  we  stand,
We  hear  the  voices  of  the  morning  seas,
And  earnest  prophesyings  in  the  land.
While  from  the  open  heaven  leans  forth  at  gaze
The  encompassing  great  cloud  of  witnesses."

Such  lofty  aesthetic  joy  is  perhaps  unusual,  though
some  degree  of  it  has  probably  at  some  time  swept  the
lives  of  the  most  prosaic  of  us,  and  so,  too,  these  floods
of  religious  refreshing  from  within,  these  mystical  ex-
periences, these  times  when  we  seem  to  possess  the  whole
of  ourselves,  may  be  unusual,  but  they  are  not  abnormal
experiences,  nor  are  they  foreign  to  our  true  nature  as
men.

I  have  spoken  of  various  types  of  experience  which
are  in  some  degree  mystical,  and  which  yet  are  well
within  the  line  of  normal  healthy  life.  There  are  other
types  of  mystical  experience  which  may,  and  often  do,
pass  over  the  border-line  of  normality  and  occasionally,
at  least,  exhibit  pathological  phenomena.  Among  all
peoples  that  have  left  any  annals  there  have  been
persons  of  extraordinary  powers  ;  soothsayers,  magicians,
wizards,  witches,  medicine-men,  sibyls,  clairvoyants,  seers,
prophets,  persons  "  possessed "  by  superhuman  spirits.
Such  persons,  sometimes  called  "  divine,"  and  sometimes
called  "demoniac,"  have  played  an  enormous  role  in
human  history.  Dr.  Pierre  Janet  has  well  expressed  the
part  such  men  and  women  have  played  :  "  In  the  develop-
ment of  every  great  religion,  both  in  ancient  and  in
modern  times,  there  have  always  been  strange  persons
who  raised  the  admiration  of  the  crowd  because  their
nature  seemed  to  be  different  from  human  nature.  Their
manner  of  thinking  was  not  the  same  as  that  of  the  others  ;
they  had  extraordinary  oblivions  or  remembrances,  they
had  visions,  they  saw  or  heard  what  others  could  not  see
or  hear.      They  were  illumined  by  odd  convictions  ;  not


xxvi  MYSTICAL  RELIGION

only  did  they  think  but  they  also  felt  in  another  way
than  the  bulk  of  mankind  ;  they  had  an  extraordinary
delicacy  of  certain  senses  joined  to  extravagant  in-
sensibilities, which  enabled  them  to  bear  the  most  dreadful
tortures  with  indifference  or  even  with  delight.  Not  only
did  they  feel,  but  they  also  lived  otherwise  than  other
people  ;  they  could  do  without  sleep,  or  sleep  for  months
together  ;  they  lived  without  eating  or  drinking,  without
satisfying  their  natural  needs.  Is  it  not  such  persons
who  have  always  excited  the  religious  admiration  of
peoples,  whether  sibyls,  prophets,  pythonesses  of  Delphi  or
Ephesus,  or  saints  of  the  Middle  Ages,  or  ecstatics,  or
illuminates?  Now  they  were  considered  as  worthy  of
admiration  and  beatified,  now  they  were  called  witches  or
demoniacs  and  burnt;  but,  at  the  bottom,  they  always
caused  astonishment,  and  they  played  a  great  part  in  the
development  of  dogmas  and  creeds."  ^

The  literature  of  mysticism  abounds  with  cases  of
ecstasy,  of  vision  of  "  light,"  audition  of  "  voices,"  and  there
are  well-authenticated  instances  of  automatisms  and  even
of  "stigmata."  Again  and  again  there  have  come  to
men  and  women  sudden  "  incursions "  or  "  invasions "
from  beyond  the  margin  of  personal  consciousness,  and
these  persons  have/^/^  themselves  environed  with  God  or
even  united  in  one  life  with  Him.^  Are  these  unusual
and    more    or    less    abnormal    experiences    instances    of

1  Janet,  Major  Symptoms  of  Hysteria,  New  York,  1907,  p.  8.

2  It  would  be  quite  easy  to  make  an  entire  volume  of  selections  of  instances.
The  four  instances  given  below  will  illustrate  the  type  I  am  discussing.

Eckhart  declares  :  "  I  am  as  certain  as  that  I  live  that  nothing  is  so  near  to  me
as  God.  God  is  nearer  to  me  than  I  am  to  myself  (Meister  Eckhart's  Mystische
Schriften,  by  Gustav  Landaur,  p.  96).

Jacob  Boehme  says  :  "  In  one  quarter  of  an  hour  I  saw  and  knew  more  than  if  1
had  been  many  years  in  a  university.  I  saw  and  knew  the  being  of  all  things,  the
Byss  and  Abyss."  Jacob  Behmen's  [Boehme]  Theo.  Phil,  by  Edward  Taylor
(London,  1691),  p.  425.

Madame  Guyon,  to  whom  mystic  experiences  were  almost  common  occurrences,
gives  the  following  description  of  one  of  these  :   '*  My  spirit  disenthralled,  became


INTRODUCTION  xxvii

pathology,  cases  of  hysteria,  or  are  they  evidences  of
Divine  Influence  and  Divine  Presence  ?  The  mystic
himself  believes  that  he  has  an  experience  of  God  because
(i)  these  experiences  of  his  come  from  beyond  the
margin  of  his  individual  me ;  (2)  there  is  something
in  the  content  of  his  experience  which  transcends  any-
thing that  normally  belongs  to  him  in  his  finiteness  ;
and  (3)  these  experiences  possess  an  impelling,  coercive
power,  a  higher  unification  of  life  than  he  ordinarily
knows.^

But  does  this  sort  of  subjective  experience  furnish
empirical  evidence  of  God  ?  May  not  what,  in  his  own
personal  vision,  the  mystic  calls  "  an  experience  of  God  "
be  only  the  result  of  an  unconscious  "  suggestion  "  and
no  more  a  proof  of  God  than  everyday,  common  experience
is?  Recent  studies  of  hysteria  and  hypnotism  have
revolutionized  all  our  ideas  of  the  psychological  range  and
scope  and  the  subtle  power  of  suggestion.^  Society
abounds  with  persons  who  are  hyper-sensitive  to
suggestion  and  over  -  acute  to  imitate  attitudes  and
experiences  which  occur  within  their  environment,  or  are
suggested  by  their  reading,  and  there  is  no  lack  of  persons
who  are  swayed  by  impulses  which  seem  to  rise
mysteriously  within  themselves  by  unconscious  auto-
suggestion.

vinited  with  and  lost  in  God.  And  this  was  so  much  the  case  that  I  seemed  to
see  and  know  God  only,  and  not  myself."

James  Russell  Lowell's  "revelation,"  as  he  himself  calls  it,  is  a  very 'good
instance  of  this  experience'.  "  As  I  was  speaking,  the  whole  system  (of  the
universe)  rose  up  before  me  like  a  vague  destiny  looming  from  the  Abyss.  I
never  before  so  clearly  felt  the  Spirit  of  God  in  me  and  around  me.  The  whole
room  seemed  to  me  full  of  God.  The  air  seemed  to  waver  to  and  fro  with
the  presence  of  something,  I  knew  not  what.  I  spoke  with  the  calmness  and
clearness  of  a  prophet  "  {Letters  of  Lowell,  vol.  i.  p.  75).

^  See  Delacroix,  jktude  d'histoire  et  de psychologie  du  Mysiicisme  (Paris,  1908),
pp.  365-66.  This  is  one  of  the  most  important  books  on  mysticism  that  has
appeared  in  recent  years.

2  The  reader  should  consult  Janet's  Major  Symptoms  of  Hysteria,  New  York,
1907.


xxviii  MYSTICAL  RELIGION

Some  aspects  of  the  experience  of  mystics  un-
doubtedly are  due  to  suggestion.  There  have  been
mystics  who  have  possessed  abnormal  constitutions,  who
were  subject  to  strange  psychical  disturbances.  It  is
certain  that  many  of  the  abnormal  phenomena  reported
in  the  lives  of  mystics  are  in  no  way  distinguishable
from  similar  phenomena  in  hysterical  cases.  Trances,
losses  of  consciousness,  automatisms,  vision  of  lights,
audition  of  voices,  "  stigmata,"  and  such-like  experiences,
are  evidences  of  hysteria,  and  they  are  not  in  themselves
evidences  of  Divine  Influence  or  of  Divine  Presence.  In
fact,  many  mystics  have  practised  methods  of  asceticism
which  were  adapted  to  turn  them  into  abnormal  persons
and  to  produce  in  them  hysterical  constitutions.  They
have  "  worked  themselves  up "  to  abnormal  states.  In
the  light  of  these  facts  it  has  been  contended  that  even
those  striking  experiences  of  expansion,  enlargement,
absorption  in  the  Infinite,  freedom  from  all  limits,  ecstatic
joy,  which  mystics  exhibit,  may  be  instances  of  auto-
suggestion.-^ It  is  quite  possible  to  be  so  absorbed  in  a
single  thought  that  all  consciousness  of  body  sensations,
all  awareness  of  an  external  world,  all  things  of  time
and  space,  shall  be  unnoticed  and  be  as  though  they
were  not,  and  when  all  strain  and  muscular  tension  are
absent,  peace  and  joy  and  fulness  of  life  are  the  natural
result.  It  is  easy  to  produce  such  a  state  through
hypnotic  suggestion,  and  it  seems  plainly  within  the  range
of  auto-suggestion.

We  cannot,  therefore,  with  implicit  confidence,  leap  to
the  conclusion  that  every  instance  of  so-called  mystical
experience  furnishes  us  with  a  sure  clue  to  the  God  Whom

'  I  am  dwelling  at  some  length  on  the  place  of  "suggestion"  and  "auto-
suggestion" because  it  has  been  assumed  by  some  recent  writers,  notably  by
Professor  Coe,  that  mystical  experiences  are  only  cases  of  ' '  auto-suggestion  "
(see  Professor  Coe's  article  on  "Sources  of  the  Mystical  Revelation"  in  the
Hibbtrt  Journal  for  January  1908,  pp.  359-72),


INTRODUCTION  xxix

our  eager  souls  seek.  To  the  mystic  himself  the  experience
is  evidence  enough.  It  lights  his  lamp  and  girds  his
loins  for  action  ;  it  floods  him  with  new  power ;  it
banishes  doubt  and  despair  as  the  sunrise  banishes
darkness.  He  no  more  wants  arguments  now  to  prove
God's  existence  than  the  artist  wants  arguments  to  prove
the  reality  of  beauty  or  the  lover  does  to  prove  the  worth
of  love.

But  it  is  useless  to  claim  that  mystical  experiences
have  such  ontological  bearing  that  they  settle  for  every-
body the  reality  of  God.  No  subjective  experience,
however  momentous  and  significant  it  may  be  for  the
person  who  has  it,  can  settle  for  everybody  else  the
question  :  Is  there  in  the  universe  a  God  who  is  personal
and  all-loving  .'*  No  empirical  experience  of  any  sort
can  ever  answer  that  question,  and  to  the  end  of  the
world  men  will  be  called  upon  to  walk  hy  faith^  to  make
their  venture  in  the  light  of  what  ought  to  be  true,  and
in  the  light  of  what  seems  to  them  true,  and  to  live  by
that  faith.

But  while  these  inward  mystical  experiences  cannot
be  pushed  to  the  extreme  of  being  turned  into  com-
pelling ontological  proofs,  they  nevertheless  do  offer
a  very  weighty  ground  for  believing  that  there  is  a  More
of  Consciousness  continuous  with  our  own — a  co- con-
sciousness with  which  our  own  is  bound  up,  and  that
constructive  influences  do  come  into  us  from  beyond  our-
selves.-^ We  must  not  take  fright  at  the  word  auto-
suggestion. It  is  only  a  word,  a  phrase,  which  explains
nothing.  We  have  not  eliminated  God  when  we  conclude,
as  we  must  do,  that  the  physical  universe  has  evolved.
"  Evolution "  is  only  a  fresh  word  for  describing  the
method  of  making  a  universe.  And  when  we  have
named  these  great  spiritual  crises,  which  carry  men  up  to

^  See  James'  Varieties  of  Religious  Expet-ience,  "p.  515.


XXX         f  MYSTICAL  RELIGION

new  levels  of  life  and  power  and  service,  "  auto-suggestive
experiences,"  we  have  only  substituted  one  word  for
another.  We  called  them  "  new  births  "  ;  we  call  them
"  auto-suggestions  "  !  The/^<;/  remains  on  our  hands,  and
the  fact  is  a  momentous  one.

There  have  been  religious  geniuses  in  all  ages  and  in
all  countries,  who  have  had  experiences  of  spiritual
expansion.  They  have  been  made  aware  of  a  Realm  of
Reality  on  a  higher  level  than  that  revealed  through  their
senses.  They  have  sometimes  felt  invaded  by  the  inrush
of  larger  Life ;  sometimes  they  have  seemed  to  push
a  door  inward  into  a  larger  range  of  being,  with  vastly
heightened  energy.  The  experience  is,  as  we  have  seen,
always  one  of  joy  and  rapture  ;  in  fact,  it  is  probably
the  highest  joy  a  mortal  ever  feels.  But  the  significant
fact  is  not  the  sense  of  expansion,  or  of  freedom,  or  of
joy.  It  is  not  something  merely  subjective.  It  is  that
such  experiences  minister  to  life,  construct  personality
and  conduce  to  the  increased  power  of  the  race — energy
to  live  by  actually  does  come  to  them  from  somewhere.
The  universe  backs  the  experience.

We  cannot  lightly  pass  over  the  spiritual  service  of
mystics.  Far  from  being  the  unpractical,  dreamy  persons
they  are  too  often  conceived  to  have  been,  they  have
weathered  storms,  endured  conflicts,  and  lived  through
water-spouts  which  would  have  overwhelmed  souls  whose
anchor  did  not  reach  beyond  the  veil.  They  have
discovered  an  inner  refuge,  where  they  enjoy  the  truce  of
God,  even  amid  the  din  of  the  world's  warfare.  They
have  led  great  reforms,  championed  movements  of  great
moment  to  humanity,  and  they  have  saved  Christianity
from  being  submerged  under  scholastic  formalism  and
ecclesiastical  systems,  which  were  alien  to  man's  essential
nature  and  need.  They  have  been  spiritual  leaders,  they
ar6    the    persons   who    shifted    the    levels    of  life    for  the


INTRODUCTION  xxxi

race.'  They  have  been  able  to  render  these  services  because
they  felt  themselves  allied  inwardly  with  a  larger  personal
Power  than  themselves,  and  they  have  been  aware  that  they
were  in  immediate  correspondence  with  Some  One — a  Holy
Spirit,  a  Great  Companion — who  was  working  with  them
and  through  them.  This  furtherance  of  life  by  incoming
energy,  the  heightening  of  power  by  correspondence  with
what  seems  to  be  God,  is,  however,  by  no  means  confined
to  a  few  chosen  spirits  and  rare  geniuses  ;  it  is  a  wide-
spread fact  to  be  reckoned  with  everywhere.  There  are
multitudes  of  men  and  women  in  out-of-the-way  places,
in  backwoods  towns,  and  on  uneventful  farms,  who  are
the  salt  of  the  earth  and  the  light  of  the  world  in  their
communities,  because  they  have  had  experiences  which
revealed  to  them  Realities  which  their  neighbours  missed,
and  powers  to  live  by  which  the  mere  "  church-goers  "  failed
to  find.

We  have  thus  much  more  to  account  for  and  explain
than  a  few  rare,  subjective  experiences,  a  few  cases  of
heightened  feeling.  We  are  bound  to  realize  that  mystic
experiences  have  a  life-value,  and  validify  themselves  in
action.  Those  who  are  finely  sensitive  to  wider  spheres
of  Reality  impinging  on  their  inner  realm,  and  who  corre-
spond and  co-operate  with  that  More  which  seems  con-
tinuous and  conterminous  with  their  lives,  gain  not  only  in
capacity  to  correspond  and  co-operate,  but  also  in  power
to  overcome  difficulties,  and  to  put  their  lives  into  con-
structive service.  We  have  on  our  hands  experiences
which  have  opened  to  individuals  and  to  the  race  as  a
whole  wider  realms  of  being,  experiences  which  have
heightened  the  quality  of  life  and  which  have  given  new
energy  of  survival,  and  we  are  compelled  to  conclude,
either  that  the  personal  self  is  a  bottomless  affair,  carrying

1  Professor  Royce  has  very  well  treated  the  social  service  of  the  Mystics  in  his
World  and  the  Individual,  vol.  i.  pp.  85-87.


xxxii  MYSTICAL  RELIGION

within  itself  infinite  unexplored  chambers  and  undreamed-
of energies  which  sometimes  come  into  play,  or  that
the  personal  self  is  bosomed  on  a  larger  Realm  of
Consciousness  from  which  we  draw  our  being  into  the
bounds  of  individuality,  and  with  which  we  may  correspond.
It  has  been,  as  we  shall  see,  the  contention  of  mystics  in
all  ages  that  God  Himself  is  the  ground  of  the  soul,  and
that  in  the  deeps  of  their  being  all  men  partake  of  one
central  Divine  Life.  The  facts,  at  any  rate,  all  point  in
this  direction.

It  is  true  that  the  great  mystics  have  often  possessed
peculiar  psychical  constitutions.  They  have  sometimes
exhibited  the  phenomena  of  hysteria,  and  sometimes  they
have,  beyond  question,  been  pathological,  and  have  experi-
enced abnormal  states  due  to  an  unstable  nervous  system.
But  it  is  also  true  that  persons  possessing  such  psychical
constitutions  have  in  unusual  ways,  and  in  heightened
degree,  been  able  to  correspond  with  an  environing
Reality  which  built  up  and  vitalised  their  personal  lives.
Again  and  again  this  "  correspondence "  has  brought
them  health  and  a  unified  and  ordered  will.  They  seem
to  find  themselves  enveloped  in  a  matrix-consciousness  of
far  wider  reach  than  that  of  which  ordinary  persons  are
conscious,  and  they  demonstrate  that  their  "correspond-
ence "  has  life-value  and  a  value  for  the  race.

There  is  thus  some  co-relation  between  these  inward
experiences  and  the  Eternal  Nature  of  Things.  They
have  functioned  to  the  enlargement  of  personal  life  and  to
the  expansion  of  human  society.  It  is  just  these  persons
who  have  had  first-hand  experiences  of  dealing  with
inward  Reality,  that  seems  to  be  God,  who  have  been  the
master  builders  of  religion.  Their  testimony  to  unseen
Realities  gives  the  clue  and  stimulus  to  multitudes  of
others  to  gain  a  like  experience,  and  it  is,  too,  their
testimony  that   makes  God  real  to  the  great  mass  of  men


INTRODUCTION  xxxiii

who  are  satisfied  to  believe  on  the  strength  of  another's
belief.  They  have,  stage  by  stage,  advanced  the  realm  of
spiritual  life  and  the  appreciation  of  it,  just  as  great
musicians  have  enlarged  the  realm  of  sound-harmonies
and  the  appreciation  of  them.

It  is  no  discredit  to  inward,  mystical  religion  to  show
that  social  suggestion,  or  even  auto-suggestion,  has  played
a  great  part  in  the  development  of  it.  Both  have  played
a  great  part  in  the  development  of  all  experiences.  Our
language,  our  moral  ideals,  our  human  fashions,  are  all
what  they  are  because  of  the  conscious  or  unconscious
influence  of  group-suggestion,  for  our  lives  are,  to  a  greater
extent  than  most  persons  realize,  conjunct  with  our
fellows.  And  "  auto-suggestion  "  may  be  only  another
way  of  saying  that  God  and  man  are  conjunct,  and  that
in  the  deeps  of  the  soul,  beyond  our  power  of  knowing
how,  Divine  suggestions  come  to  human  consciousness.
The  fact  is,  that  enlarging,  expanding  power,  constructive
spiritual  energy,  comes  into  certain  persons,  which  makes
them  sure  that  they  are  allied  to  a  Being  who  guarantees
the  ultimate  goodness  of  the  world.     They  hear

"  The  bubbling  of  the  springs
That  feed  the  world,"

and  they  live  more  dynamic  lives  because  of  these
experiences  which  rise  within  them

"  as  mysteriously  as  cape
Of  cloud  grown  out  of  invisible  air."

But  this  experience,  as  soon  as  it  is  valued  and
appreciated,  will,  let  us  grant,  show  the  influence  of
unconscious  suggestion  from  the  social  environment,  and
will  be  found  to  have  a  temporal  element  in  it.  The
actual  mystical  vieivs  of  any  given  period,  the  symbolism
through  which  these  inward  experiences  are  expressed,
the    "  revelations "  which  come  to    mystical   prophets,  all


xxxiv  MYSTICAL  RELIGION

bear  the  mark  and  colour  of  their  particular  age.  There
are  no  "  pure  experiences,"  i.e.  no  experiences  which  come
wholly  from  beyond  the  person  who  has  them  :

"  For  every  fiery  prophet  in  old  time,
And  all  the  sacred  madness  of  the  bard,
When  God  made  music  through  him
Could  but  make  his  music  by  the  framework  and  the  chord."  ^

The  most  refined  mysticism,  the  most  exalted  spiritual
experience  is  partly  a  product  of  the  social  and  intellectual
environment  in  which  the  personal  life  of  the  mystic  has
formed  and  matured.  There  are  no  experiences  of  any
sort  which  are  independent  of  preformed  expectations  or
unaffected  by  the  prevailing  beliefs  of  the  time.  Every
bit  of  our  inner  or  outer  life,  however  much  it  is  our  own,
is  shot  through  with  lines  of  colour  due  to  social  and  racial
suggestions.  All  our  ideals  of  goodness,  all  our  instan-
taneous decisions  of  conscience,  our  most  inward  light,  and
our  most  instinctive  wisdom,  have  come  to  be  what  they
are  because  we  have  been  organic  with  our  particular
social  group  at  this  identical  period  of  human  history.
Mystical  experiences  will  be,  perforce,  saturated  with  the
dominant  ideas  of  the  group  to  which  the  mystic  belongs,
and  they  will  reflect  the  expectations  of  that  group  and
that  period.^

It  is  this  conformation  of  mysticism  to  the  type  of
religion  out  of  which  it  springs,  and  the  fact  that  it  is
always  imbedded  in  the  life  of  a  social  group  that  gives
it  its  sanity  and  safeguard  from  vagaries  and  caprices.
The  greatest  danger  from  mysticism,  and  there  are
dangers,  is  just  this  of  becoming  relatively  detached
from  the  experience  of  the  race,  the  illumination  of  the
great  revealers  of  the  past.  Religion  and  morality  are
the  consummate  gains  of  the  travail  of  the  ages,  and  no

1  Tennyson's  Holy  Grail.
^  This  feature  of  mystical  experience  is  well  treated  in  Delacroix,  op.  cit.


INTRODUCTION  xxxv

person  can  cut  loose  from  the  spiritual  group -life  in
which  he  is  rooted  without  entailing  serious  loss.  To
sever  one's  roots  in  history  and  in  the  slowly-gathered
content  of  religious  faith,  "  to  build  all  inward  "  and  to
have  no  light  but  what  comes  "  pure  "  by  the  inward  way,
is  to  suffer  shrinkage,  and  to  run  the  tremendous  risk  of
ending  in  moral  and  spiritual  bankruptcy,  with  only
vagaries  and  caprices  for  assets.  The  sane  mystic  does
not  exalt  his  own  experiences  over  historical  revelation,
he  rather  interprets  his  own  openings  in  the  light  of
the  master-revelations.  He  does  not  foolishly  conclude,
because  he  has  a  vision  of  his  own,  that  "  the  glory  of
God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ"  is  out -dated  and
unnecessary,  any  more  than  the  artist,  with  a  "  gift "  of
his  own,  concludes  that  he  has  no  need  of  the  inspiring
guidance  of  the  old  masters  ;  or  than  the  musician,  who
has  an  original  creative  power  in  himself,  flies  to  the  con-
clusion that  he  can  ignore  the  men  in  the  past  who  have
revealed  the  nature  and  scope  of  music.  Mystical  religion,
instead  of  making  the  soul  independent  of  Christ  and  of
earlier  revelations,  rather  insists  that  every  hint  of  the  Divine
meaning  that  has  come  in  any  age,  through  any  person,
is  precious,  and  that  the  supreme  unveiling  of  the  nature
and  character  of  God,  the  highest  exhibition  of  the  range
and  scope  of  human  possibility  in  the  person  of  Jesus
Christ,  is  unspeakably  important  for  any  one  whose  main
concern  is  to  be  a  son  of  God.  This  religion  of  first-
hand experience  is  not  a  substitute  for  Christianity  ;  it  is
Christianity  alive  and  vocal  in  personal  experience  and  in
individual  love.

There  has  undoubtedly  been  in  many  mystical  move-
ments an  over-emphasis  on  ecstasy  and  moveless  con-
templation, and  it  is  easy  to  see  that  individual  mystics
have,  perhaps  unconsciously,  employed  methods  now
familiar  to  us  in  hypnotic  experiments.      They  have  used


xxxvi  MYSTICAL  RELIGION

short  cuts  and  unspiritual  aids  to  hasten  their  arrival  at  a
state  of  joyous  absorption.  They  have  exhibited  an  over-
fascination  for  a  suspension  of  all  desire  and  a  loss  of  the
strain  and  struggle,  which  go  with  that  "  slow,  dead  heave
of  the  will "  in  the  great  moral  issues  of  life.  They
have,  too,  sometimes  been  almost  obsessed  with  the  fixed
idea  that  all  the  ills  of  life  and  the  confusions  of  muta-
bility would  disappear  if  only  they  believed  implicitly
enough  in  the  allness  of  God  and  the  unity  of  all  that  is.
This  has  led  them  to  glorify  abstraction  and  to  choose  the
via  negativa,  the  negative  path ;  that  is,  to  win  their
peace  by  refusing  to  take  account  of  multiplicity  and
evil,  sin  and  pain.  They  have  found  their  line  of  least
resistance  to  be  withdrawal  and  negation,  which  is,  at
best,  only  the  backstairs  to  the  Upper  Room.

But  I  prefer  to  dwell  on  the  tremendous  service  of  the
Mystics.  There  are  imperfections  in  all  human  under-
takings, and  there  are  blunderers  wherever  men  seriously
gird  themselves  for  high  endeavours.  We  do  not  scorn
poetry,  though  there  have  been  poetasters  who  became
popular  ;  we  do  not  give  up  our  appreciation  of  great
music,  though  there  have  been  poor  performers  who  got
the  large  gate  receipts.  We  must  recognise  the  limita-
tions and  the  false  trails,  but  we  do  well  to  keep  in  the
goodly  fellowship  of  those  who  have  seen  and  heard  and
handled  the  Word  of  Life,  and  who  have  found  the  inner
way  home.

There  is  no  attempt  in  the  following  chapters  to  give
a  complete  history  of  Christian  mysticism,  nor  are  all  the
movements  herein  studied  properly  called  mystical,  though
they  have  all  helped  to  further  religion  of  this  inward  and
first-hand  type.  There  have  been  momentous  epochs
when  vital,  dynamic  religion  \\^.s  flourished,  when  men  of
creative  power  have  made  new  discoveries  of  the  soul's
capacities,  and  have  become  so  initiated  into  the  mysteries


INTRODUCTION  xxxvii

of  the  kingdom  of  God  that  they  could  open  for  their
fellows  new  doors  into  the  spiritual  life,  and  thus  have
become  centres  of  spiritual  groups.  I  shall  study,  in  the
following  pages,  some  of  these  spiritual  groups,  these
creative  movements,  and  some  of  the  persons  who  have
been  in  a  peculiar  degree  prophets  of  the  soul  by
virtue  of  their  own  direct  experience.  It  is  not  always
possible  to  trace  a  direct  historical  connection  between
these  spiritual  groups,  for  the  literary  data  which  have
survived  are  often  meagre ;  but  the  following  chapters
will  make  it  evident,  I  think,  that  there  has  been  a
continuous  prophetical  procession,  a  mystical  brotherhood
through  the  centuries,  of  those  who  have  lived  by  the
soul's  immediate  vision.  Again  and  again,  as  will  appear,
the  writings  of  a  mystic,  long  dead  and  seemingly
forgotten,  with  no  school  of  disciples  to  disseminate  his
message,  have  reached  an  apt  and  ready  soul,  have
kindled  him  to  glowing  life,  and  have  made  him  again
the  centre  of  a  new  group  ;  and  so  the  torch  has  passed
on  to  a  new  age.

I  have  begun  with  a  brief  study  of  the  inward,  free,  and
untrammelled  type  of  religion  v.hich  prevailed  in  the  early
period  of  the  primitive  Church,  and  I  have,  in  the  most
compact  way  possible,  sketched  the  growth  and  develop-
ment of  the  ecclesiastical  system  which  was  gradually
substituted  for  the  free  and  ox^dsAo,  fellowship  of  the  first
stage  of  Christianity.  The  studies  of  the  mystical  element
in  the  Church  Fathers  and  in  Greek  Philosophy  are
necessarily  inadequate.  I  have  confined  myself  to  the
task  of  gathering  up  the  main  lines  of  influence  which
reappear  in  the  mystical  sects  of  medieval  Europe.
I  have  included  in  these  studies  the  Waldensian,  the
Wyclifite,  and  the  Anabaptist  movements,  though  they
are  mainly  un mystical,  because  of  their  very  great
importance  in     the    general    movement    of    Christianity


xxxviii  MYSTICAL  RELIGION

toward  a  more  inward  and  personal  form  of  religion,  less
ecclesiastical  and  sacerdotal,  and  depending  more  on  the
direct  relation  of  man  to  God.

I  propose,  at  some  later  time,  to  publish  a  volume  on
Jacob  Boehme,  and  I  have  thought  it  best  not  to  crowd
his  contribution  into  an  inadequate  chapter.  My  studies
come  down  only  to  the  end  of  the  English  Commonwealth,
because  this  volume  is  intended  to  be  an  introduction  to  a
series  of  historical  volumes  by  myself  and  others  devoted
to  the  development  and  spiritual  environment  of  a  par-
ticular branch  of  modern  Christianity — The  Society  of
Friends — a  religious  body  which  has  made  a  serious
attempt  to  unite  inward,  mystical  religion  with  active,
social  endeavours,  and  to  maintain  a  religious  fellowship
without  a  rigid  ecclesiastical  system,  and  with  large  scope
for  personal  initiative,  immediate  revelation  and  individual
responsibility.


CHAPTER    I

THE    MYSTICAL    ELEMENT    IN    PRIMITIVE
CHRISTIANITY

I

There  has  been  a  persistent  feeling,  a  perennially
recurring  faith  throughout  all  centuries  of  the  Christian
Church,  that  the  culminating  period  of  religion  was  in
the  Galilean  circle  and  in  the  apostolic  age.  Men  have
steadily  looked  back  to  that  period  as  the  "  golden  age,"
when  the  Divine  and  the  human  were  completely  united
in  one  Life,  and  were  brought  into  joyous  fellowship
in  many  lives.  The  supreme  aspiration  of  the  spiritual
men  and  women  who  have  travailed  for  the  regeneration
of  humanity,  has  been  for  a  return,  a  restoration,  of  that
golden  time.  The  cry,  "Back  to  Christ,"  or  "Back  to
apostolic  Christianity,"  is  not  at  all  a  new  cry.  Every
profound  movement  toward  a  more  spiritual  and  un-
fettered form  of  Christianity  than  that  embodied  in  the
dominant  historical  Church  of  the  period  has  been
initiated  by  a  rediscovery  of  Christ,  or  by  a  fresh  inter-
pretation of  the  Gospel,  and  in  nearly  every  instance  the
leaders  of  reform  have  asserted  their  particular  movement
to  be  a  "  revival  of  primitive  Christianity."

We  are  now,  however,  well  aware,  through  historical
study,  that  there  was  in  the  first  period  of  the  Church
no  one  well  defined  and  fixed  type  of  "  apostolic  Christi-
anity." There  were,  even  in  the  days  of  the  apostles,
many  types  and  varieties  of  Christianity,  almost  as
§  I  B


2  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap

different  from  each  other  as  our  modern  types  are.
Paul's  interpretation  was  the  first  to  receive  literary
expression,  and  through  his  dominating  personality  and
his  vast  missionary  and  literary  labours  Pauline  Christi-
anity became  a  widespread  form  of  early  faith  and
practice.^  A  type  very  unlike  that  of  Paul's  finds  ex-
pression in  the  short  Epistle  of  James,  and  the  concep-
tion expressed  in  that  Epistle  appears  to  have  had  many
adherents  and  to  have  been  "  primitive  Christianity  "  for
a  large  circle  of  the  followers  of  Christ.  Johannine
Christianity  had  many  aspects  unlike  either  that  of  Paul
or  that  of  James.  Its  perspective  of  Christ  is  different,
its  points  of  emphasis  are  very  unlike  those  of  the  two
apostolic  interpreters  already  mentioned.  The  writer  of
the  "  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  "  is  so  unique  in  his  inter-
pretation of  Christ,  that  no  serious  scholar  can  believe
that  Paul  wrote  this  Epistle.  The  three  synoptic  writers,
again,  have  made  their  particular  selection  of  incidents
and  sayings  because  they  have  already  formed  their  own
conception  of  Christ,  and  because  they  have  in  mind  the
peculiar  needs  of  the  groups  of  Christians  to  which  they
belonged.

As  Harnack  has  well  said,  "Jesus  sought  to  kindle
independent  religious  life,  and  He  did  kindle  it ;  yes,  that
is  His  peculiar  greatness,  that  He  led  men  to  God  so  that
they  lived  their  own  life  with  Him."  ^  Primitive  Christi-
anity was  above  everything  else  a  way  of  living,  and  it
exhibited,  as  life  always  does,  freedom,  variety,  personality.
It  is  vain  to  expect  to  revive — i.e.  to  bring  back  in  its
pristine  form,  the  Christianity  of  the  first  century.  There
is  no  possibility,  in  an  evolving  world,  of  bringing  back
any  age,  however  golden  it  may  look  in  retrospect —
the  course  of  humanity  is  always  forward.  What  we  do
want  is  to  penetrate  the  secret  of  the  power  manifested
in  bygone  times,  and  to  discover,  as  far  as  may  be,  what

^  It  should  be  recognized,  of  course,  that  Paul  himself  had  no  fixed  and  un-
varying system  of  doctrine  or  of  practice.  One  who  reads  him  in  the  historic
spirit  sees  that  Paul's  "Christianity"  is,  throughout  the  Epistles,  in  process  of
making.  His  entire  conception  of  the  meaning  of  Christianity  shows  great  advance
between  the  writing  of  i  Thessalonians  and  Philippians.

'^  Das  Wesen  des  Christeiithums,  p.  7.


I     ELEMENT   IN   PRIMITIVE  CHRISTIANITY   3

was  the  spring  of  energy,  the  vital  spirit,  which  possessed
men  in  ages  when  great  things  were  done,  and  when  men
lived  in  joy  and  triumph.

The  great  epochs  in  religion,  and  particularly  this
greatest  epoch,  which  we  call  the  "apostolic  age,"  are
marked  off  and  characterized  by  a  peculiarly  rich  and
vivid  consciousness  of  the  Divine  Presence.  They  are
times  when  in  new,  fresh,  and  transforming  ways
persons  have  experienced  the  real  presence  of  God.
Life  is  always  raised  to  new  levels,  and  receives
a  new  dynamic  quality  whenever  God  becomes  real  in
personal  and  social  experience.  The  battle  has  raged
long  and  bitterly  over  the  metaphysical  relation  of  Christ
to  God  ;  great  rallying  cries  have  grown  out  of  these
battles,  and  different  communions  have  gathered  about
the  various  formulations  of  doctrine  upon  these  and  other
difficult  metaphysical  questions,  but  the  much  more  im-
portant questions  are  questions  of  fact ;  namely,  what
were  the  significant  features  of  Christ's  experience^  what
gave  Him  His  extraordinary  power  over  those  who  were
in  fellowship  with  Him,  and  what  was  it  that  made  His
disciples  in  such  effective  ways  "  the  salt  of  the  earth,  the
light  of  the  world  "  ?  and  these  questions  have  hardly  been
raised  at  all.  The  time  is  coming,  however,  when  the
emphasis  will  shift — it  is  already  shifting — from  questions
of  systematic  theology  to  questions  of  religious  experience,
from  metaphysics  to  psychology.  It  is  a  point  of  the
first  importance  that  the  Gospels  have  given  us  little
or  no  metaphysics  ;  the  language  of  theology  is,  too,
quite  foreign  to  them.  They  have  given  us  instead  the
portrait  of  a  Person  who  had  a  most  extraordinary  experi-
ence of  God  and  of  Oneness  with  Him.  We  may  wish
that  we  had  more  of  the  very  words  of  this  Person,  and
that  our  accounts  of  His  life  were  not  coloured  by  His
reporters  ;  but  we  ought  rather  to  be  grateful  that  these
first  century  biographers  have,  with  unstudied  simplicity,
given  us  so  little  of  themselves,  and  have  opened  to  us
so  many  approaches  to  the  real  life  and  even  the  actual
consciousness  of  the  Person  who  originated  in  the  world


4  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

this  new  and  intimate  fellowship  with  God  which  we  call
Christianity.

We  should  be  very  far  from  depreciating  the  impressive
efforts  of  scholars,  ancient  and  modern,  to  gather  up  and
formulate  the  teaching  of  Jesus,  the  original  message,
for  no  one  can  fail  to  recognize  that  He  was  a  Master,
that  He  taught  disciples,  and  that  His  teachings.  His
dominant  ideas,  have  enormously  influenced  human
thought,  and  have  formed  a  large  factor  in  the  moral
evolution  of  the  race  ;  but  no  summary  of  Christ's  teach-
ings, no  formulation  of  His  dominant  ideas  can  give  us
a  full  account  of  "  primitive  Christianity,"  for  "  primitive
Christianity"  is  supremely  this  unique  Person,  Jesus
Christ,  with  His  experience  of  God,  His  insight  into
the  meaning  of  Life,  His  consecration  to  the  task  of
remaking  man,  and  the  extraordinary  fellowship  which
His  Spirit  produced.

Christianity  in  the  golden  age  was  essentially  a
rich  and  vivid  consciousness  of  God,  rising  to  a  perfect
experience  of  union  with  God  in  mind  and  heart  and
will.  It  was  a  personal  exhibition  of  the  Divine  in
the  human,  the  Eternal  in  the  midst  of  time.  When
we  get  back  to  the  head -waters  of  our  religion  we
come  ultimately  to  a  Person  who  felt,  and,  in  childlike
simplicity,  said  that  "  No  man  knows  the  Father  save  the
Son,"  and  "  I  and  the  Father  are  one."

The  direct  impact  and  power  of  His  life  on  His
followers  is  the  most  extraordinary  thing  in  the  Gospels,
and  the  continued  power  of  His  life  over  men  is  the
most  marvellous  thing  in  human  history.  The  source
of  this  power  is  to  be  found  in  the  fact  that  men  have
found  through  Him  a  direct  way  to  God,  that  by  His
life  and  death  they  have  been  drawn  themselves  into
a  personal  experience  of  God  in  some  degree  like  His
own.  He  always  taught  His  disciples  to  expect  this,  and
it  was  their  attainment  of  this  experience  that  made  them
the  apostles  of  the  new  religion.  Christianity  is  thus  at
its  very  heart  a  mystical  religion — a  religion  which  lives
and  flourishes  because  its  members   experience   what  its


I     ELEMENT   IN  PRIMITIVE  CHRISTIANITY   5

Founder  experienced,  the  actual  presence  of  God  as  the
formative  Spirit  of  a  new  creation.^  As  I  have  said,
every  disciple  was  summoned  to  expect  a  direct  and
conscious  incoming  of  the  Divine  Life.  "Wherever  two
or  three  are  gathered  in  My  name,  there  am  I  in  the
midst,"  ^  was  the  announcement  of  a  mystical  fellowship
which  has  cheered  the  hearts  of  little  groups  of  worshippers
in  all  ages  and  in  all  lands  where  the  words  of  the  Gospel
have  come.  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  always  "  ^  was  a  promise
which  fed  and  watered  the  faith  of  men  in  the  hard  days
of  cross  and  stake,  and  in  the  long,  uneventful  years  when
no  "  sign "  was  given  that  the  fellowship  of  the  saints
would  finally  overcome  the  world.

The  members  of  this  primitive  group  were  taught
in  the  most  impressive  way  to  avoid  anxiety  and  worry,
and,  instead,  to  open  their  souls  to  the  circulation  of
Divine  forces  of  life  which  build  up  the  inward  life  as
noiselessly  and  yet  as  beautifully  as  the  lily's  robe  is
spun  and  the  cubits  are  added  to  the  care -free  child.*
They  were  told  not  to  be  disturbed  about  their  defence
before  judges  and  authorities  in  times  of  strait,  but
to  trust  to  the  springs  of  wisdom  that  would  flow  into
them  from  the  larger  Life  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  which
they  lived.^  The  promise  of  direct  and  inward  fellowship
with  Christ  took  on  wider  scope,  according  to  the  recently
discovered  "saying"  of  Jesus,  ''Wherever  any  man  raises
a  stone  or  cleaves  wood,  there  am  I  "  ;  for  whether  this
is  a  genuine  "saying"  of  Jesus,  or  an  early  Christian
reminiscence  of  an  idea  which  He  taught  in  a  more
general  way,  it  undoubtedly  expresses  in  graphic  language
one  of  the  deepest  truths  which  pervade  the  original
teaching,   namely  that  the  disciple,  whether  gathered   for

^  The  mysticism  of  the  Gospels  and  so,  too,  that  of  the  other  New  Testament
writers  is,  of  course,  very  far  removed  from  that  type  of  religion  historically  known
as  "mysticism."  Strictly  speaking,  the  New  Testament  is  no  more  a  mystical
Book  than  it  is  a  theological  or  metaphysical,  or  ecclesiastical  Book.  The
mysticism  in  it  is  implicit  and  unconscious  ;  it  is  never  subjected  to  reflection  or
made  explicit  in  thought.  But,  nevertheless,  we  have  here  throughout  religion  in
the  intense  stage,  as  immediate  and  first-hand  experience  of  God,  which  is  mysti-
cism at  its  best,  and  in  its  truest  meaning — initiation  into  the  Divine  secret.

2  Matt,  xviii.  20.  ^  Matt,  xxviii.  20.

^  Matt.  vi.  25-34.  ^  Luke  xii.  it.


6  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

worship,  or  defending  himself  before  the  "authorities,"
or  engaged  in  simple  labour  with  his  hands,  is  to  share
a  direct  fellowship  with  Christ,  a  fellowship  which  shall
consecrate  every  spot  of  the  earth  and  hallow  every
occupation.^

The  pictorial  description  of  "the  Judgment  Day"
identifies  God  with  the  least  member  of  the  mystical
fellowship.  There  is  no  other  passage  in  the  New
Testarrient  which  announces  more  positively  the  solidarity
of  the  race  and  the  conjunct  life  of  God  and  man.  He,
the  Head  of  the  Fellowship,  drinks  of  the  cup  put  to
the  lips  of  the  thirsty  child,  and  the  slenderest  ministry
performed  out  of  love  circulates  through  the  whole,  and
touches  the  Infinite  Heart.^  This  description  ought  to
have  softened  the  lurid  colours  which  have  so  often  been
used  to  paint  the  Judgment  Day — supposed  to  be  a  dies
irae ;  but  there  is  unmistakable  evidence  that  the  idea  of
the  solidarity  of  humanity,  the  announcement  that  God
identifies  Himself  with  the  hungry  and  naked  and  per-
secuted— even  the  least — the  teaching  that  every  man  in
the  deeps  of  his  soul  is  bound  in  with  God,  which  are
expressed  in  this  primitive  narrative,  have  exercised  a
marked  influence  on  those  groups  of  Christians  who  have
gone  to  the  Gospel  itself  for  their  illumination.

The  entire  teaching  of  the  Kingdom  of  God  has  its
mystical  aspect.  It  is  a  society,  or  fellowship,  both  in
earth  and  in  heaven,  both  human  and  Divine.  Its  capital
is  not  in  some  foreign  land,  its  King  is  not  a  distant
Sovereign,  for  any  member  of  the  Kingdom  at  any  spot
of  earth  can  see  Him  if  his  heart  is  pure.  The  person
who  belongs  to  the  Kingdom  is  a  person  in  whom  God
lives  and  rules,  and  through  whom  the  contagion  of  a  love,
caught  from  above,  spreads  through  the  world.  The  King-
dom is  the  life  of  God  exhibited  in  human  fellowship,  the

1  This  is  Logion  5  of  the  Oxyrhynchus  Papyri.  It  is  in  full  as  follows  : —
"Jesus  saith,  wherever  there  are  (two),  they  are  not  without  God,  and  wherever
there  is  one  alone,  I  say,  I  am  with  him.  Raise  the  stone,  and  there  thou  shalt
find  Me;  cleave  the  wood,  and  there  am  I."  There  is  a  profoundly  mystical
mying  in  the  second  collection  of  Oxyrhynchus  Papyri,  in  which  Jesus  says  :
•'  Verily  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven  is  within  you,  and  whoever  knoweth  hijnself  ^d^
find  it."  '^  Matt.  xxv.  31-46.


r     ELEMENT   IN   PRIMITIVE  CHRISTIANITY  7

heavenly  life  appearing  here  in  the  midst  of  time,  the
sway  of  God  in  human  hearts ;  it  is  a  human  society
which  grows  on  and  flowers  out  and  ripens  its  fruit,
because  its  unseen  roots  are  in  God  the  Life.

Instead  of  founding  a  Church  in  the  technical  sense,
Christ  brought  a  little  group  of  men  and  women  into
a  personal  experience  of  God,  similar  to  His  own,  and
left  them  baptized  in  a  consciousness  of  the  Spirit's
presence  to  form  the  Church  as  the  conditions  and
demands  of  different  epochs  and  diverse  lands  should
require.  "  I  give  unto  you  the  keys,"  is  said  not  only  to
Peter,  but  to  every  disciple  who  has  reached  the  insight,
not  by  flesh  and  blood,  but  by  spiritual  perception,  that
Christ  is  the  Son  of  the  living  God — the  personal
realization  of  the  life  of  God  in  a  human  life.-^

The  Church  itself,  then,  as  seen  in  its  simplest  con-
ception, is  a  mystical  fellowship,  formed  and  gathered  not
by  the  will  of  man,  nor  schemes  of  flesh  and  blood,  but  by
direct  revelation  from  God  to  the  soul.  The  first  spiritual
stone  in  the  structure,  which  is  to  defy  time  and  death,  is
a  person  who  is  chosen  because  by  revelation  he  has  dis-
covered the  Divine  in  the  human  ;  and  with  only  one
stone  ready,  Christ  sees  the  spiritual  building  of  the  ages
rising  and  reaching  beyond  the  power  of  death.  Each
believer  is  a  mystical  stone.  To  each  person  who  lives
by  his  faith  and  vision  of  the  Son  of  God  the  key  is
given.  In  a  word,  the  authority  is  within  the  spiritual
soul,  and  not  external  to  it.  Each  member  is  crowned
and  mitred.^

The  primitive  Church,  in  its  first  stage,  as  it  is  de-
scribed in  Acts,  was  clearly  a  mystical  fellowship,  i.e.  a
fellowship  bound  together,  not  by  external  organization,
but  by  the  power  of  the  experience  of  the  Divine  presence
among  the  members.  It  is  evident  that  many  were  drawn
into  the  fellowship  {KOLvwvia,  they  called  it)  by  their  ex-
pectation of  an  imminent  return  of  the  Christ  who,  they
believed,  had  disappeared  for  an  interval,  and  would  come

^  Matt.  xvi.  13-20.
^  See  Dante's  Purgatorio,  canto  xxvii.  lines  140-43.


8  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

soon  "  to  restore  all  things  "  and  "  to  give  the  Kingdom  to
Israel."  But  it  is  just  as  evident  that  there  was  at  least
a  nucleus  of  persons  in  the  group  who  were  recipients  of
first-hand  experiences  of  an  extraordinary  sort,  and  who
lived,  not  on  expectation,  but  on  the  actual  experience  of
unwonted  spiritual  visitation.

At  this  stage  of  Christian  consciousness  the  Holy
Spirit  was  thought  of  as  a  power  coming  from  without
into  the  person.  The  Divine  incoming  was  conceived  as
an  invasion — as  a  mighty  rushing  wind — and  the  effects
looked  for  were  miraculous,  sudden,  and  temporary.^  The
little  group  which  gathered  from  house  to  house,  eating
their  bread  together  in  gladness  and  singleness  of  heart,
lived  in  the  borderland  of  ecstasy  and  exhibited  the
extraordinary  phenomena  which  have  appeared  in  some
measure,  wherever  mystical  groups  have  been  formed,  as
we  shall  see  in  the  course  of  this  history.^  "Speaking
with  tongues  "  was  not  confined  to  the  one  occasion  when
the  little  band  felt  the  inrushing  of  the  mighty  wind.  It
was  common  in  the  primitive  Church,  and  seems  to  have
appeared  wherever  the  first  Christians  went.  Paul  treats
it  in  Corinthians  as  though  it  were  a  regular  gift^  which
was  to  be  looked  for  whenever  the  Spirit  came  upon  men.
The  atmosphere  was  charged  with  wonder,  and  men  ex-
pected incursions  from  the  unseen  world  into  the  sphere
of  their  daily  lives.

There  can  be  no  question  that  these  simple  and  un-
studied accounts  of  the  life  of  the  primitive  fellowship
have  played  a  great  rdle  in  the  history  of  the  Church.
The  fellowship  itself,  with  all  things  in  common,  the  agape
or  love  feast,  the  consciousness  of  Divine  invasion,  the
expectation  of  the  marvellous,  the  unconcern  about  the
affairs  of  this  life,  the  experiment  to  form  a  society
governed  from  within  and  guided  by  ecstatic  prophecy,
have   been    in    some   degree    repeated    again    and    again.

1  This  view  is  perfectly  natural.  It  always  seems  to  persons  who  experience
what  may  be  called  mystical  consciousness,  that  the  second  self  of  which  they
become  aware  is  a  distinct  Other  Self,  beyond  the  margin  of  their  own  personal
life.

^  These  phenomena  are  due  to  the  peculiar  functioning  of  the  central  nervous
system,  and  do  not  of  themselves  imply  lofty  inward  spiritual  experience.


I     ELEMENT   IN   PRIMITIVE  CHRISTIANITY  9

The  duration  of  the  primitive  fellowship,  at  least  in  its
simple  and  mystical  form,  was  short.  The  Jerusalem
Church  was  soon  organized  under  a  visible  head — James,
the  brother  of  the  Lord — and  the  whole  basis  of  the
Church  life  and  polity  was  powerfully  affected  by  the
remarkable  missionary  activity  of  Paul,  and  by  the  pro-
clamation of  what  he  himself  called  his  "  Gospel."  ^


II

It  is  possible  to  find  in  the  writings  of  the  Apostle
Paul  almost  anything  one  is  looking  for.  So  universal  a
man  was  he,  so  deeply  did  he  go  down  to  the  elemental
springs  of  human  life,  that  all  the  fundamental  aspects  of
world  religion  are  found  in  him.  The  person  who  comes
to  him  with  a  well-defined  theory  can,  with  a  little  skill,
generally  prove  by  texts  that  this  was  Paul's  "central
idea,"  and  the  next  person  with  an  opposite  theory  can
as  conclusively  prove  that  his  own  hobby  was  manifestly
the  "  central  idea  of  Paul."  Whenever  an  elemental  man
appears  in  history  he  becomes  the  spiritual  father  of  many
very  diverse  children,  and  each  child  is  apt  to  claim  that
he  is  the  very  own  and  only.

I  shall  not  claim  that  Paul  was  exclusively  a  mystic,
for  that  claim  would  be  as  partial  and  one-sided  as  the
claim  that  has  sometimes  been  made  that  he  was  ex-
clusively a  Rabbinical,  scholastic  theologian.  But  I  shall
maintain  that  there  was  a  very  marked  mystical  tendency
in  his  nature,  and  that  there  is  a  strong  mystical  element
in  his  writings.  It  is  no  straining  of  the  facts  to  say  that
Paul's  "Gospel"  was  deeply  grounded  in  an  immediate,
personal  experience  of  the  Divine  Being,  who  impinged
upon  him,  invaded  him,  and  finally  became  the  inward
principle  and  spirit  of  his  very  self  In  a  word,  we  have
here  a  man  whose  religion  was  first-hand.  I  shall  do
little  more  in  this  short  sketch  than  bring  together  the
autobiographical  passages,  which  show  that  he  was  subject
to  incursions  from  beyond  the   circle  and   margin   of  his

^  "  According  to  my  Gospel,"  Rom.  ii.  i6.


10  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

own  self,  and  that  he  attained  a  state  of  life  in  which  he
felt  a  unity  of  being  with  God,  which  made  him  "  able  to
do  all  things."  ^

As  a  young  man,  fresh  from  the  school  of  a  great
Rabbi,  he  came  in  contact  with  the  strange  new  sect —
"  those  of  the  way."  Its  teaching  was  abhorrent  to  him,
and  made  him  a  persecutor.  But  the  power  exhibited
in  the  lives  of  its  saints,  the  assurance  and  triumph  of  its
adherents  whom  he  persecuted,  the  ecstatic  vision  and
shining  face  of  its  first  martyr,  put  goads  in  his  soul.^
He  was  aware  of  a  dual  nature  within  himself,  for  the
seventh  chapter  of  Romans  has  surely  come  out  of  his
own  actual  experience.  There  was  a  dim  glimmering  of
a  new  self  not  yet  born,  rising  above  an  old  self  not  yet
dead,  and  nowhere  could  he  find  any  "  power  of  God,"
any  dynamic  of  salvation,  that  would  give  him  the
victory.  In  this,  the  supreme  issue  of  life,  he  felt  him-
self defeated — "  I  know  that  in  me  dwelleth  no  good
thing " ;  "  what  I  would  not  that  I  do," — and  over
against  this  continuous  defeat  stood  the  steady  triumph
of  victory  of  those  whom  he  was  dragging  to  prison  and
to  death.  Through  the  closed  lids  of  the  man  whom  he
helped  to  bring  to  martyrdom  had  come  the  vision  of
Christ  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  and  he  had  heard  the
vision  announced  in  a  way  that  burned  into  his  soul.
As  he  rode  toward  Damascus  the  goads  became  sharp
within  him,  and  suddenly  the  vision  which  had  come  to
Stephen  came  to  him  ;  he  too  saiv  Jesus  Christ.  That  it
was  an  inward  experience  with  powerful  physical  effects
(such  as  often  accompany  mystical  experiences),  his
own  language  makes  almost  certain.  His  own  earliest
account  of  it  is  in  Galatians  i.  15-16:  "It  pleased  God
to  reveal  His  Son  hi  me"  and  he  is  evidently  referring  to
this  great  event  in  2  Corinthians  iv.  6  :  "  God  who  said,
'  Let  light  shine  out  of  darkness,'  hath  shined  into  our  hearts
to  give  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  in

^  Phil.  iv.  3.

'^  See  his  speech  before  Agrippa  :  "It  is  hard  for  thee  to  kick  against  the
goads"  (Acts  xxvi.  14).  It  is  evident  that  his  better  self  revolted  from  his  course
as  persecutor.


I  ELEMENT   IN  PRIMITIVE  CHRISTIANITY    ii

the  face  of  Jesus  Christ."  ^  We  have,  furthermore,  his
own  testimony  that  the  apprehension  of  Christ  by  sense
is  a  very  small  matter  in  comparison  with  seeing  Him
inwardly  and  spiritually.^

There  are  other  autobiographical  passages  which
plainly  show  that  Paul  was  subject  to  extraordinary
experiences.  Defending  his  apostleship  to  the  Corin-
thians, he  writes  :  "  I  will  come  to  visions  and  revelations
of  the  Lord.  I  knew  a  man  in  Christ  above  fourteen
years  ago  (whether  in  the  body,  I  cannot  tell  ;  or  whether
out  of  the  body,  I  cannot  tell  :  God  knoweth)  ;  ^  such  an
one  caught  up  to  the  third  heaven.  And  I  knew  such
a  man  (whether  in  the  body,  or  out  of  the  body,  I
cannot  tell  :  God  knoweth) ;  how  that  he  was  caught
up  into  paradise,  and  heard  unspeakable  words,  which
it  is  not  lawful  for  a  man  to  utter."  ^  That  this
"  such  a  man "  was  himself  he  forthwith  tells  us  in
verse  7.  In  his  discussion  of  the  relative  importance  of
"  speaking  with  tongues,"  he  informs  us  that  he  possessed
in  high  degree  this  extraordinary  experience  :  "  I  speak
with  tongues  more  thmi  yoii  all"  ^  There  are  other  indi-
cations in  his  epistles,  strongly  supported  by  definite
passages  in  Acts,  that  he  was  the  recipient  of  immediate
and  direct  revelations  of  truths,  whose  origin  he  could  not
trace  to  books,  or  teachers,  or  to  any  human  communica-
tions, and  of  positive  practical  guidance,  which  his  own
"  wisdom  "  could  not  account  for.

It  requires  no  wrenching  of  texts  to  reach  the  conclusion
that  Paul  was  psychologically  possessed  of  a  constitution
plainly  adapted  to  experiences  of  an  unusual  sort.  We  have
not  only  the  extraordinary  events  of  his  sudden  conversion
with  visual  and  auditory  phenomena,  we  have  not  only
the  ecstatic  experience  of  2  Corinthians  xii.  i  ff.,  which
left  him  with  his  physical  system  permanently  affected,
but  his   entire  biography   is   marked   with   similar  events.

^  The  passage  in  i  Cor.  xv.  8,  "  Last  of  all  He  was  seen  of  me  also,"  is  open
to  either  a  subjective  or  an  objective  interpretation,  but  there  can  be  little  doubt
that  he  has  his  Damascus  experience  in  mind.  ^  2  Cor.  v.  16.

^  He  would  undoubtedly  have  said  the  same  of  his  Damascus  experience,  for
he  wavers  between  the  outward  and  the  inward  view.

•*  2  Cor.  xii.  1-4.  5  J  Qqy.  xiv.  18.


12  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

His  first  journey  to  Europe  is  motived  by  a  "  vision  "
which  came  at  the  close  of  a  long  strain  of  uncertainty.
His  journey  from  Antioch  to  Jerusalem  to  meet  the
apostolic  fellowship  and  settle  the  basis  of  his  own  work
among  the  Gentiles  was  the  result  of  "  revelation  "  coming
after  a  mental  tension.  His  "  Gospel "  is  not  a  scholastic
and  carefully  reasoned  "  system  "  of  theology.  It  was
"  received  "  in  a  series  of  insights.  His  message  surged
up,  without  any  conscious  dialectic,  from  the  deeps  of
his  soul.  He  was  eminently  a  person  of  the  prophet
type,  speaking  by  inspiration,  seeing  with  photographic
intuition,  and  therefore  never  constructing  a  solid,  con-
sistent dogma,  but  producing  instead  a  marvellous,  many-
sided  ideal  and  method  of  life,  in  which  are  woven
together  all  the  strands  of  influence  which  shaped  his
own  rich  personal  faith.  Few  more  composite  types
have  ever  existed,  and  it  is  easy  for  the  one-sided  theorist
to  prove  that  Paul  is  always  using  the  forensic  con-
ceptions of  Jewish  theology,  or  the  imagery  of  the
apocalyptic  writers,  or  the  animistic  speech  of  popular
usage,  or  the  symbolism  of  the  Greek  mysteries,  or  the
religious  philosophy  of  the  Hellenistic  schools,  or  the
pantheistic  ideas  of  the  Stoics,  for  all  these  elements  of
culture  are  combined  in  him,  and  are  in  evidence  in  his
epistles.^

But  it  is  also  evident  that  Paul  set  slight  value  on
extraordinary  phenomena.  His  profound  mysticism  is
not  to  be  sought  in  glossolalia  or  in  ecstatic  vision.  His
real  claim  to  be  enrolled  in  the  list  of  mystics  is  found  in
his  normal  experience.  Over  against  a  single  experience
of  being  "  caught  up  into  Paradise  "  in  ecstasy,  in  the  first
stages  of  his  Christian  period,  we  can  put  the  steady
experience  of  living  in  heavenly  places  in  Christ  Jesus
which  characterised  his  mature  Christian  period.  Over
against  the  inrushing  of  a  foreign  power,  which  made  his  lips
utter  words  which  did  not  come  from  himself,  we  can  put
the  calm  but  mighty  transfiguration  of  personality  which  was
slowly  wrought  in  him  during  the  fourteen  years  following

^  See  Pfleirlerer,  Prim.  Christ,  vol.  i.  p.  96.


I  ELEMENT   IN   PRIMITIVE  CHRISTIANITY    13

his  ecstasy  :  "  With  unveiled  face,  beholding  as  in  a  mirror
the  glory  of  the  Lord,  we  are  being  transformed  into  the
same  image,  from  glory  to  glory  (i.e.  gradually)  by  the
Spirit  of  the  Lord."  ^

We  must  be  very  modest  in  making  assertions  about
Paul's  "  central  idea."  But  it  is  well  on  safe  ground  to
say  that  his  "  Gospel "  cannot  be  understood  if  one  loses
sight  of  this  truth  :  The  Christian  must  re-live  Christ's
life,  by  having  Him  formed  within,  as  the  source  and
power  of  the  new  life.

The  autobiographical  passages,  to  begin  with  his  own
first-hand  experience,  give  the  best  illustration  which
we  have  of  this  normal  mystical  life.  The  earliest
passage  which  we  have  comes  out  of  the  great  contest
with  legalism.  His  opponents  say  that  salvation  comes
through  obedience  to  a  divinely  mediated  and  time-
honoured  "  system  "  of  rites  and  ordinances.  He  says  :
"  Christ  lives  in  me "  ;  ^  "I  bear  in  my  body  the  marks
of  the  Lord  Jesus "  ;  ^  "  God  hath  sent  forth  the  Spirit
of  His  Son  into  our  hearts,  crying  Abba,  Father."*  The
Corinthian  troubles  called  out  another  set  of  personal
testimonies  :  "  He  hath  given  us  the  earnest  of  His  Spirit
in  our  hearts."  ^  "  We  are  transformed  into  the  image
of  the  Lord  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord."  ^  "  God  hath
shined  into  our  hearts  to  give  the  light  of  the  knowledge
of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ."  '^  "  We
are  always  bearing  about  in  the  body  the  dying  of  the
Lord  Jesus  that  the  life  also  of  Jesus  may  be  seen  in
our  body."  ^  "  Our  inward  self  is  renewed  day  by  day,"  ^
"  If  we  have  known  Christ  after  the  flesh,  we  know  Him
so  no  more."  ^^  To  the  Roman  Christians  who  had  not
yet  seen  his  face,  he  writes  :  "  The  law  of  the  Spirit  of
Life  in  Christ  Jesus  hath  made  me  free  from  the  law  of
sin  and  death."  ^^  "  The  Spirit  itself  beareth  witness
with  our  spirit  that  we  are  sons  of  God."  ^^

And  finally,  out   of  his  prison   in   Rome   he  tells    his

^  2  Cor.  iii.  i8.  "^  Gal.  ii.  20.  ^  Gal.  vi.  17.

•*  Gal.  iv.  6.  '2  Cor.  i.  22.  ^  2  Cor.  iii.  18.

''  2  Cor.  iv.  6.  ^2  Cor.  iv.  10.  "  2  Cor.  iv.  16.

••*  2  Cor.  V.  16.  ^1   Rom.  viii.  2.  ^^  Rom.  viii.  ib.


14  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

Philippian  friends  :  "For  me  to  live  is  Christ,"^  and  he  sets
forth  as  the  supreme  attainment,  the  goal  of  hope,  "  to  win
Christ," — which  means,  to  "  know  Him  (by  inward  experi-
ence) and  the  power  of  His  resurrection  and  the  fellowship
of  His  sufferings,  being  made  conformable  to  His  death."  ^

The  inward  experience  of  a  new  creation,  the  actual
formation  of  Christ,  as  the  resident  life  within,  "  worked
mightily  "  in  himf  and  he  called  everybody  to  a  similar
experience.  Few  words  have  ever  borne  a  more  touch-
ing appeal  than  that  intimate  personal  call  to  his  wavering
friends  in  Galatia :  "  My  little  children,  I  am  travailing
in  birth  pains  again  for  you  until  Christ  be  formed  in
yoH."^  "As  many  of  you  as  have  been  baptized  into  Christ
have  put  on  Christ."  ^  To  the  Roman  Christians  he  says  :
"  If  any  man  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  he  does  not
belong  to  Him  "  ;  '^  If  Christ  be  in  you,  the  sinful  body
is  dead  "  ;  "  He  that  raised  up  Christ  from  the  dead  shall
make  your  mortal  bodies  alive  by  His  Spirit  that  dwelleth
in  you."  ^  To  the  Corinthian  believers  he  says  :  "  He
that  is  joined  to  the  Lord  is  one  Spirit  with  Him "  ;  ^
"Your  body  is  a  temple  of  the  Holy  Spirit  which  is  in
you  "  ;  ^  "  You  are  the  body  of  Christ "  ;  ^  "  By  one  Spirit
we  are  all  baptized  into  one  body."  ^°  The  Ephesian
prayer  carries  us  almost  beyond  what  can  be  asked  or
thought,  that  "  Christ  may  dwell  in  your  hearts,"  and  that
"  Ye  may  be  filled  to  all  fulness  with  God."  ^^  And  the
Colossian  letter  declares  that  the  riches  of  the  glory  of
the  divine  revelation  is  this  :  "  Christ  in  you."  ^^

It  would  be  easy  to  multiply  texts,  but  the  mystical
aspect  of  Paul's  "  Gospel "  does  not  rest  on  isolated  texts.
It  is  woven  into  the  very  structure  of  his  message.  He
cares  not  at  all  for  the  shell  of  religion.  The  survival  of
ceremonial  practices  are  to  him  "  nothing."  Circumcision,
which  stands  in  his  thought  for  the  whole  class  of  re-
ligious performances,  "  avails  nothing."  Everything  turns
on  a  "  new  creation."      His  aim   is  always  the  creation  of

1  Phil.  i.  21.  2  Phil.  iii.  8-io.  3  Col.  i.  29.

*  Gal.  iv.  19.  *  Gal.  iii.  27.  ^  Rom.  viii.  9-1  x.

'  I  Cor.  vi.  17.  8  I  Cor,  vi.  15  and  19.  ^  i  Cor.  xii.  27.

w  I  Cor.  xii,  13.  11  Eph.  iii.  14-21.  12  CqI.  i,  27


I  ELEMENT   IN   PRIMITIVE  CHRISTIANITY    15

a  "  new  man,"  the  formation  of  the  "  inward  man,"  and
this  "  inward  man  "  is  formed,  not  by  the  practice  of  rite
or  ritual,  not  by  the  laying  on  of  hands,  but  by  the
actual  incorporation  of  Christ — the  Divine  Life — into  the
life  of  the  man,  in  such  a  way  that  lie  who  is  joined  to  the
Lord  is  one  Spirit,  Christ  is  resident  within,  and  thereby
produces  a  new  spirit — a  principle  of  power,  a  source  of
illumination,  an  earnest  of  unimagined  glory.

The  proof  of  this  inwardly  formed  self  is  not  ecstasy,
tongue,  or  miracle.  It  is  victory  over  the  lower  passions,
— the  flesh — and  a  steady  manifestation  of  love.  There
are  ascending  stages  of  "  spiritual  gifts,"  i.e.  of  operations,
which  flow  out  from  the  new  central  self  which  Christ  has
formed  within.  Some  are  striking  and  spectacular,  some
seem  extraordinary  and  "  supernatural,"  but  the  best  gift
of  all,  the  goal  of  the  entire  process  of  the  Spirit,  is  the
manifestation  of  love.  It  is  "  that  which  is  perfect "  and
which  supersedes  knowledge,  and  tongues,  and  ecstatic
prophecies  which  are  "  in  part,"  and  only  mirror-reflec-
tions. Nobody  else  has  ever  expressed  in  equal  perfection
and  beauty  the  fervour  and  enthusiasm  of  the  initiated
mystic,  inspired  by  union  with  God,  as  Paul  has  expressed
them  in  his  two  hymns  of  love — the  hymn  on  the  love  of
God,^  and  the  hymn  on  the  love  of  men.^  Love  is  the
Kingdom  of  God.  It  shows  that,  at  length,  the  body  has
become  a  Temple,  and  that  the  human  face  and  hands  and
feet,  which  move  to  exhibit  love,  are  a  visible  facade  of  a
holy  place  where  God  dwells.  Paul's  "  Gospel "  from
beginning  to  end,  whether  his  sacred  word  is  "  love  "  or
**  faith,"  presupposes  a  human  person  partaking  of  the
Divine  Life,  which  freely  gives  itself,  and  it  points  away  to
a  consummation  in  which  the  Spirit  and  law  of  this  Divine
Life  become  the  Spirit  and  law  of  "  a  new  creature  " — a
man  in  whom  Christ  is  re-lived.  His  *'  new  man  "  is  a
supernatural  inward  creation  wrought  by  the  Spirit  who
is  identical  with  Christ — "  the  Lord  is  the  Spirit  " — who
enters  into  the  man  and  becomes  in  him  power,  and  life,
and  spiritualizing  energy.

^  Rom.  viii.  31  f.  "^  i  Cor.  xiii.


i6  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.


Ill

Jobannine  Christianity  has,  by  many  writers,  been
regarded  as  the  main  source  of  Christian  mysticism,  and
not  infrequently  the  two  expressions  have  been  made
synonymous,  i.e.  Christian  mysticism  and  Johannine
Christianity  have  been  used  interchangeably.  It  must,  I
think,  be  admitted  that  no  other  New  Testament  author
has,  to  the  same  extent  as  John,  made  the  world  at  large
familiar  with  the  principles  of  mystical  religion,  nor  has
any  other  furnished  so  many  expressions  which  have
become  current  coin  in  the  mystical  groups  which
have  formed  during  the  history  of  the  Church.  The
Christianity  of  John  has  generally  been  taken  as  the
type  of  "  heart  religion,"  a  religion  whose  emphasis  is
upon  inward  and  first-hand  experience.

The  fact  is,  however,  that  the  term  "  mystic  "  does  not
as  properly  belong  to  John  as  to  Paul.  Paul's  Christianity
takes  its  rise  in  an  inward  experience,  and  from  beginning
to  end  the  stress  is  upon  Christ  inwardly  experienced  and
re-lived.  John's  emphasis  is  upon  the  Life  and  Work  of
a  historical  Person  whose  teaching  and  commandments
are  dwelt  upon  and  urged  as  words  of  life.  When  he
announces  his  own  first-hand  experience,  it  is  objective
experience  :  "  We  beheld  His  glory."  ^  "  We  have  seen
with  our  eyes,  and  our  hands  have  handled  the  manifested
Word  of  Life."  ^  The  gaze  turns  back  to  a  well-known
Figure,  and  memory  is  busy  with  the  face  and  form  of
Him  who  had,  for  John,  been  the  tabernacle  of  God.
And  yet  it  is  true  that  in  the  Fourth  Gospel  and  the  first
Epistle  of  John  we  have  a  Christianity  which  is  mystical,
a  religion,  the  central  ideas  of  which  are  a  Divine  birth
within,  and  the  permanent  presence  of  the  Divine  Spirit,
imparting  Himself  to  the  human  spirit.  John's  language
is  simpler  than  Paul's.  The  former  puts  the  profoundest
truth  into  a  parable  which  may  be  taken  at  any  height,
according  to  the  spiritual   stature  of  the  reader,  and  his

1  John  i.  14.  '^  I  John  i.  1-2.


I  ELEMENT   IN   PRIMITIVE  CHRISTIANITY    17

most  important  terms  are  themselves  parables — "  Light,"
"  bread,"  "  water,"  "  seed  " — and  so,  like  the  winged  seeds
of  nature,  his  truths  have  floated  across  the  world  and
germinated  in  multitudes  of  hearts,  while  Paul's  deepest
message  has  been  missed  and  the  world  has  got  out  of
him  only  what  the  theologians  formulated.

John  has  many  ways  of  saying  that  spiritual  life  is
the  result  of  the  incoming  of  God  into  human  life.  In
fact,  John's  word,  "  Life,"  itself  means  always  something
divinely  begotten.  It  is  a  type  of  Life,  above  the
"  natural  "  human  life  as  that  is  above  the  animal,  or  as
anim.al  is  above  vegetable.  It  is  Life  "  of  God,"  or  "  from
God  "  ;  Life  "  begotten  of  God,"  or  "  born  of  the  Spirit."
It  is  eternal  Life,  exhibited  in  time,  and  carrying  within
itself  inexhaustible  possibilities.  It  circulates  out  from
God  like  light  from  a  luminous  body,  and  penetrates  every
person  who  comes  into  the  world,  but  it  becomes  the
principle  of  inward  Life  only  for  those  who  "  receive  "  it
by  act  of  will,  i.e.  appropriate  it  by  a  positive  response  of
faith.^  I  call  this  idea  mystical  because  it  is  a  direct  and
immediate  experience  by  which  the  soul  partakes  of
God.

No  word  which  John  uses  conveys  this  truth  better
than  "  seed,"  a  word,  however,  which  he  uses  only  once  :
"  Whoever  is  born  of  God  does  not  commit  sin,  for  His
seed  {aTTepfia)  is  in  him  and  he  cannot  sin  because  he
is  born  of  God."  ^  It  is  a  word  which  mystics  have  again
and  again  adopted  to  express  the  implanting  of  the
Divine  Life  within  the  human  soul.  It  means  that  the
principle  by  which  a  man  lives  unto  God  and  resists  the
tendencies  of  the  flesh  is  a  Divine  germ,  something  of
God,  "  received  "  into  the  soul,  a  new  life-principle  which
expands  and  becomes  tJie  Life  of  the  person.  The  same
idea  is  expressed  in  figure,  by  "water"  and  "bread";
"  The  water  that  I  shall  give  him  shall  be  in  him  a  well
of  water  springing  up  into  everlasting   life."  ^      "  I  am  the

^  John  i.  9.

^  I  John  iii.  9.  The  same  truth  is  expressed  in  i  Peter  i.  23  :  "  Being  born
again  not  of  corruptible  seed  {(xjripfxa)  but  of  incorruptible,  by  the  word  of  God
which  liveth  and  abideth  for  ever."  ^  John  iv.  14.

c


1 8  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

Bread  of  Life."  ^  "  If  any  man  eat  of  this  bread  he  shall
live  forever."^  Through  both  figures — "you  must  drink
me "  ;  "  you  must  eat  me  " — the  profound  truth  is  told
that  man  enters  into  Life,  or  has  Life  in  him,  only  as  he
partakes  of  God,  for  Christ  is  God  in  a  form  which  man
can  grasp  and  assimilate.  We  are  dealing  with  a  process
by  which  the  believer  takes  into  himself  the  Divine  Life,
and  by  an  inward  change  makes  it  his  own,  so  that  he
actually  has  "  God  abiding  in  him."  This  Lord's  Supper
calls  for  no  visible  elements,  no  consecrated  priest.  It
calls  only  for  a  human  heart,  conscious  of  its  needs,  and
ready  to  eat  the  Bread  of  God  on  the  one  momentous
condition,  of  willing  and  loving  what  Christ  wills  and
loves.  It  is  actual  transubstantiation,  but  it  is  not  bread
and  wine  changed  to  literal  body  and  blood  of  Christ.  It
is  finite  human  spirit  feeding  upon  the  bread  and  water  of
God — that  is,  upon  God  expressed  to  us  in  terms  which
fit  our  elemental  human  needs — and  so  being  transformed
into  that  very  Divine  Life  itself :  "  As  the  living  Father
sent  me,  and  I  live  because  of  the  Father,  so  he  that
eateth  me,  he  also  shall  live  because  of  me."  Indeed  it
is  a  "  hard  saying,"  for  it  takes  us  beyond  all  ordinary
biology,  beyond  all  traditional  theology,  and  brings  us  to
a  new  level  of  Life  altogether — human  life  fed  from
within  with  the  Life  of  God,  and  this  is  "  Eternal  Life."  '

I  shall  speak  of  only  one  more  aspect  of  John's
mysticism,  namely  that  of  mystical  union.  It  is  now  a
well-known  fact  that  "  isolated  "  personality  is  an  abstrac-
tion. Nobody  can  live  absolutely  unto  himself.  He  who
is  to  enjoy  the  privileges  of  personality  must  be  conjunct
with  others.  He  must  be  an  organic  member  in  a  social
group,  and  share  himself  with  his  fellows.  Christ  shows
that  this  truth  which  we  know  as  a  human  principle  is  also

1  John  vi.  35-63.  2  John  vi.  35-63.

8  Many  modern  scholars  find  in  the  sixth  chapter  of  John  evidence  of  the  lata
authorship  of  the  book.  They  suppose  that  it  was  written  after  the  Lord's
Supper  had  come  to  be  thought  of  as  a  mystical  Sacrament,  an  actual  partaking
of  the  Body  and  Blood  of  Christ,  and  they  feel  that  in  the  light  of  the  developed
practice  of  the  Sacrament  the  writer  has  consciously  or  unconsciously  expanded  a
simple  discourse  of  Christ  into  this  final  form.  I  am  rather  disposed  to  take  it  as
a  genuine  saying  and  to  see  in  it  the  utterance  of  a  fundamental  principle  of
spiritual  life.


I  ELEMENT   IN   PRIMITIVE  CHRISTIANITY    19

true  of  the  Divine  Life.  God  becomes  conjunct  with
those  who,  by  faith  and  love,  and  the  practice  of  His  will,
abide  in  Him.  The  Divine-human  conjunct  Life  is  illus-
trated in  the  figure  of  the  Vine  and  its  branches.^  The
branch  is  a  branch  because  it  is  in  the  vine,  and
the  vine  is  a  vine  because  it  has  branches.  They
share  a  common  sap,  and  live  by  a  common  circula-
tion. It  is  a  parable  of  an  organic  union  of  God  and
men,  an  interrelation  by  which  believers  live  in  God
and  God  expresses  Himself  through  them — the  Divine
Life  circulating  through  all  who  are  incorporate  with  the
Central  Stock.

The  great  prayer  of  John  xvii.  drops  figures  and  utters
the  naked  truth  of  a  Divine-human  fellowship — a  union
of  spiritual  beings  with  a  spiritual  Head,

"  Two  distincts,  division  none,
Number  there  in  love  is  slain."

We  are  here  beyond  the  competitive  basis  of  self-seeking
individuals.  The  law  is  now  each  for  other — "  all  mine
are  thine,  and  thine  are  mine."  The  very  condition  and
basis  of  such  a  self-denying  fellowship  is  incorporation  in
the  Divine  Life  :  "  I  in  them,  thou  in  me,  that  they  may
be  made  perfect  in  one."  This  is  the  Divine  event
towards  which  all  true  mystical  Christianity  moves.

^  John  XV.


CHAPTER    II

MINISTRY   AND  ORGANIZATION    IN  THE    EARLY    CHURCH

All  our  New  Testament  sources  ^  make  plain  the  fact  that
in  the  first  period  "  those  of  the  way,"  to  use  the  earliest
name  for  the  followers  of  Christ,  formed  a  felloiuship
rather  than  a  Church  in  the  modern  sense.  In  fact  the
writer  of  Acts  has  used  this  word  "  fellowship  "  {jcoivwvia)
to  describe  the  group  of  Jerusalem  Christians.  The
principle  of  union  or  fellowship  was  devotion  to  Christ,  a
belief  in  His  Messiahship,  a  vivid  expectation  of  his  speedy
return,  and  a  consciousness  of  the  continued  presence  of
His  Spirit.  It  was  primarily  fellowship  with  the  Lord,
whose  presence,  though  invisible,  made  out  of  separate
individuals  one  Church :  "  For  in  one  Spirit  were  we  all
baptized  into  one  body,  and  were  all  made  to  drink  of
one  Spirit."  2  Christ  Himself  had  promised,  in  a  striking
"saying,"  that  His  mystical  presence  should  bind  His
believers  into  a  living  fellowship  :  "  Where  two  or  three
are  gathered  together  in  My  name,  there  am  I  in  the
midst  of  them."  ^

Each  local  church,  in  Paul's  conception,  was  a  body  of
which  Christ  was  the  living  Soul  and  governing  Head,
while  each  particular  member  was  "  called  to  be  a  saint,"

^  The  earliest  sources  for  an  historical  picture  of  the  primitive  Church  are
Paul's  Epistles.  The  word  "  Church  "  is  found  in  two  sayings  of  Jesus,  and  the
Book  of  Acts,  though  written  considerably  later  than  Paul's  Epistles,  throws
much  light  both  upon  the  character  of  the  Jerusalem  Church  and  upon  the
development  of  the  Pauline  churches,  especially  the  one  at  Antioch,  where  the
name  "Christian"  originated.

^  I  Cor.  xii.  13.  "In  the  earliest  period  the  basis  of  Christian  fellowship
was  a  changed  life.  ...  It  was  the  unity  of  a  common  relation  to  a  common
ideal  and  a  common  hope."  Hatch,  The  Organization  of  the  Early  Christian
Churches,  p.  187.  3  Matt,  xviii.    20.

?0


CH.  II    MINISTRY   IN   THE   EARLY  CHURCH      21

an  actual  habitation  of  the  Spirit.^  Each  little  society,
thus  vivified  and  dynamized  by  the  streams  of  Life  from
above,  was  like  '*  a  tiny  island  in  a  sea  of  paganism."
The  visible  bond  of  fellowship  was  a  common  meal
together — in  the  earliest  period  a  social  meal,  to  which
each  member  contributed  his  share.  It  was  at  first  eaten
from  house  to  house  and  later  in  some  central  meeting-
place.  It  was  an  occasion  of  joy  and  gladness — at  its
best  a  veritable  love  feast,  an  agape.  Even  in  this
common  meal  there  was  more  than  human  fellowship.
It  was  the  Lord's  Supper,  and  the  partakers  felt  in  a
simple,  mystical  way  that  they  were  eating  with  Him
and  of  Him.^

One  characteristic  feature  of  the  Church  in  the  early
apostolic  days  was  the  consciousness  of  the  believers  that
they  were  possessed  and  endowed  by  the  Holy  Spirit.
The  mysterious  manifestation  of  tongues,  the  miracles
which  were  worked  among  them  and  through  them,  the
fact  that  they  all  felt  themselves  possessed  with  powers
beyond  their  own — these  things  were  unmistakable  signs
to  them  that  the  Spirit  of  God  had  come  upon  them
in  an  unusual  degree.

But  an  even  more  convincing  proof  of  the  Divine
Presence — more  convincing,  at  least,  to  the  highest  minds
among  them — was  the  directing  and  controlling  power  of
the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  ordinary  religious  exercises  of
the  Church.  While  the  high  tide  of  the  Pentecostal
enthusiasm  lasted,  the  meetings  of  the  Church  were
extraordinary  occasions.  There  was  no  machinery,  no
routine.  An  organization  existed  at  all  only  so  far  as  the
life  of  the  Church  itself  produced  it ;  it  was  elastic  and
adjustable,  and  as  fluid  as  the  inward  life  of  the  Church
itself^  Every  believer  was  an  organ  of  the  Spirit,  and
every  form  of  the  manifestation  of  religious  life,  at  least
in  the  Pauline  circle,  was  thought  of  as  a  direct  gift  of  the

1  For  an  illustration  of  the  way  in  which  Paul  assumed  the  presence  of  Christ
in  a  Church,  see  i  Cor.  v.  4.

^  See  I  Cor.  x.  16,  17.      "  The  bread  which  we  break  is  it  not  a  communion  ol
the  body  of  Christ."

2  The    only    oflficials    we    hear  of  in   the  earliest    period    of    the    Jerusalem
Church  are  a  committee  of  seven  to  distribute  the  supplies.


22  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap

Divine  Spirit.  It  was  a  central  idea  of  Paul  that  "  he
that  is  joined  to  the  Lord  is  one  spirit "  and  so  a  partaker
of  Divine  power  and  heavenly  wisdom.  To  be  of  Christ's
way  was  to  become  a  spiritual  organ  of  some  sort,  a
person  with  a  gift  of  some  kind  and  some  degree.^  The
ideal  of  the  Church  in  the  early  apostolic  days  was
unmistakably  an  organic  fellowship  of  persons  who  were
mutually  helpful  because  they  were  all  living  in  a  common
Divine  Life.

Many  of  the  earliest  churches  were  "  house-churches."  ^
The  believers  frequently  met  in  the  house  of  some
prominent  member,  and,  until  the  fellowship  grew  too
large  for  it,  the  meetings  were  held,  and  the  common
meal  was  eaten,  in  the  large  family  room  of  a  private
house.  The  earliest  church-buildings,  as  excavations  are
proving,  were  even  modelled  on  the  plan  of  the  large
audience  hall  of  the  wealthy  burgher,  and  the  earliest
liturgies  direct  mothers  when  to  take  up  their  babies.^
But  it  is  a  still  more  important  fact  that  the  Church  itself
was  to  a  large  degree  modelled  on  the  idea  of  the  family
group.  The  leaders  in  this  primitive  Church  were  not
"  officials  "  in  the  technical  sense ;  they  were  persons  who
had  influence  and  authority  by  reason  of  their  age  and
spiritual  qualifications,  as  a  father  has  in  his  home.  The
"  differences "  of  the  members  were  not  to  be  settled  in
Roman  law  courts  but  rather  within  the  fellowship  itself,
as  family  *'  differences  "  were  settled.^

There  were  of  course  from  the  first  some  who  were
peculiarly  gifted,  and  they  naturally  came  to  the  front.
The  apostles  were  for  many  reasons  pre-eminent  in  what-
ever community  they  found  themselves.  They  spoke  with
the  authority  which  one  who  has  seen  and  heard  and
handled  always  possesses.  But  they  appear  never  to
have  had  any  authority  beyond  that  which  attached  by
right  to  their  spiritual  gifts  and  qualifications.  The  same
can  be  said  of  the  prophets  and  teachers,  the  evangelists

^  "  Unto  each  one  of  us  was  the  grace  given  according  to  the  measure  of  the
gift  of  Christ  "  (Eph.  iv.  7.)

2  See  Lindsay's  Church  and  Ministry  in  the  Early  Centuries,  chap.  ii.

3  Lit5dsay,  p.  43.  ■*  See  i  Cor.  vi.


II        MINISTRY   IN  THE  EARLY  CHURCH      23

and  pastors  which  appear  in  Paul's  list  of  "  gifts."  ^  They
are  not  officials — they  are  simply  gifted  members  who
are  qualified  for  the  work  of  "  perfecting  saints,"  and  who
edify  the  body,  because  in  a  peculiar  way  they  make
themselves  channels  for  the  Spirit.  They  are  not  elected
officers ;  they  are  living  personalities.  Everywhere  in
Paul's  writings  (exclusive  of  Timothy  and  Titus)  we  find
a  Church  composed  of  spiritual  priests,  a  fellowship  of
brothers  and  equals  in  the  faith — each  person  contribut-
ing, according  to  the  measure  of  his  gifts,  to  the  life  and
power  of  the  whole.  Throughout  the  apostolic  period
leadership  depended  on  edifying  service^  and  capacity  for
service  of  every  sort  was  considered  a  "  gift  "  of  the  Spirit.
All  the  names,  which  in  a  later  time  became  official  titles,
were,  at  the  period  of  which  I  am  speaking,  the  names
of  "  gifts."  There  was  no  laity  ;  there  was  no  clergy,
and  if  the  sense  of  the  presence  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  which
filled  the  lives  of  the  first  Christians,  had  lasted,  there
never  would  have  been  a  distinction  of  clergy  and  laity.

The  most  extraordinary  of  these  "  gifts,"  and  the  one
placed  by  Paul  next  after  the  "  apostolic  gift,"  was  that
of  the  prophet.  The  New  Testament  prophet  was  a
person  gifted  with  an  immediate  revelation  of  the  mind
of  the  Spirit  for  the  congregation.  He  was  first  and
foremost  a  revealer,  who  uttered,  by  inspiration,  truths
which  lay  beyond  the  ken  of  his  listeners,  but  which  came
with  a  conviction  of  reality  when  they  were  heard.  The
prophet's  chief  qualification  was  vision,  rather  than  logical
power  or  learning.  He  was  a  person  who  saw  the  way
along  which  the  Spirit  wished  individuals  and  the  Church
to  go,  but  he  was  not  a  foreteller  of  events,  or  at  least
only  rarely  so.  His  speaking  was  apparently  unpre-
meditated— a  rapturous  utterance,  as  though  a  power  not
himself  were  using  him  as  a  vehicle  of  communication.

Wherever  Christianity  went  in  the  apostolic  period
there  seems  to  have  been  an  outbreaking^  of  the  spirit
of  prophecy.  It  was  not  confined  to  men,  though  the
prophecy  of  women  was  apparently  not  encouraged.     But

1  I  Cor.  xii.  28-29  ;  Eph.  iv.  ii.


24  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

there  was  a  height  of  enthusiasm,  a  quality  of  faith,  and
a  contagion  of  the  Spirit  which  undoubtedly  carried  both
men  and  women  beyond  their  normal  powers,  and  which
resulted,  so  long  as  the  flood  was  on,  in  an  uninterrupted
succession  of  prophecy,  and  this  prophetic  ministry  was
one  of  the  great  creative  agencies  in  the  formation  and
development  of  the  early  Church.  Paul  himself,  from  his
own  experience,  has  given  us  an  impressive  account  of  the
power  of  this  type  of  ministry  :  "  If  all  prophesy,  and  if
there  come  in  an  unbelieving  person,  or  an  unlearned  one,
he  is  convicted  by  all,  he  is  judged  by  all  ;  the  secrets  of
his  heart  are  made  manifest,  and  so  he  will  fall  down  on
his  face  and  worship  God,  declaring  that  God  is  among
you."  1

There  were  from  the  nature  of  the  case  dangers  in  this
prophetic  ministry.  Enthusiasm  always  carries  men  up  to
the  perilous  edge.  The  difficulty  is  to  unite  calm  judgment
and  balance  with  this  subliminal  activity  and  creative
energy.  So  long  as  there  was  a  high  degree  of  spiritual  life
in  the  congregation,  the  prophet  was  "  kept  in  his  place  "
by  the  controlling  power  and  common  wisdom  of  the
group.  The  spirit  of  a  prophet  was  subject  to  the
prophets.^  There  was  a  corresponding  "  gift  of  discern-
ment "  in  the  people,  by  which  the  prophet's  message  was
tested.  As  this  spiritual  insight  waned,  many  curious
tests  were  formulated  to  "  try "  the  prophets.  "  The
Teaching  of  the  Twelve  Apostles  "  says  :  ^  "  Not  every
one  that  speaketh  in  the  Spirit  is  a  prophet,  but  only  if
he  have  the  behaviour^  or  ivays,  of  the  Lordl'  ^  which  is  an
excellent  test.  The  *'  Didache,"  however,  goes  on  to  offer
other  tests  :  "  No  prophet  that  orders  a  table  in  the  Spirit
eats  of  it  (himself)  unless  he  is  a  false  prophet "  ;  "  And
every  prophet  who  teaches  the  truth,  if  he  does  not
practise  what  he  teaches  is  a  false  prophet "  ;  "  Whoever
says   in   the  spirit :   Give   me   money  or  any  other  thing,

^    I  Cor.  xiv.  24-25.  2  J  Qq^c.  xvi.  32.

'  "The  Teaching  of  the  Twelve  Apostles,"  often  called,  from  the  first  Greek
word  of  its  title,  the  Didache,  was  discovered  in  Constantinople  in  1873.  It  is
one  of  the  earliest  and  most  valuable  documents,  outside  the  New  Testament
canon,  for  a  study  of  the  character  and  organization  of  the  early  churches.

*  "  Teaching,"  xi.  8,


II        MINISTRY   IN   THE   EARLY  CHURCH       25

ye  shall  not  listen  to  him."  ^  It  is  evident  that  by  this
time  the  waters  of  prophecy  were  beginning  to  run  low.

The  best  example  we  have  of  early  prophecy  is  our
Book  of  Revelatioft,  or  The  Apocalypse.  The  writer  of  it
was  in  the  Spirit,  i.e.  in  ecstasy,  on  the  Lord's  day,  and
was  granted  a  series  of  visions  for  the  Churches.  He
does  not  speak  as  a  man,  in  his  own  name  or  authority.
His  human  personality  is  passive  and  merely  transmissive.
The  real  author  is  the  Spirit,  and  what  comes  is  a
"  revelation."  ^

While  prophecy  was  at  its  height  there  was  no  fixed
and  rigid  organization  in  the  Church.  It  was  held
together  by  inspired  personalities  and  not  by  officials.
There  was  at  least  in  the  Corinthian  circle  an  un-
trammelled liberty,  and  Paul  declares,  as  a  permanent
principle,  that  "  where  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  there  is
liberty."  The  one  principle  of  restraint  which  Paul  lays
down  is  that  every  gift  shall  be  exercised  so  as  to  edify
believers  and  to  construct  the  Church.^  A  Christian
Church  at  this  period,  in  so  far  as  it  had  expanded
beyond  the  family  group,  was  a  self-governing  republic.
The  influences  which  came  from  without  the  local  Church
were  suggestive  and  hortatory,  not  mandatory.  There
was  plainly  a  peripatetic,  or  itinerant,  ministry,  which
played  a  great  part  in  the  development  of  the  Churches.
The  apostles  "  planted "  and  gave  the  little  groups,  or
fellowships,  their  ideals,  but  under  the  Spirit,  and,  with
the  advice  of  the  apostolic  evangelist,  they  formed  their
own  organization  and  worked  out  their  own  destiny.

Before  considering  the  causes  which  led  to  the  differ-
entiation of  a  class  of  professional  officials,  we  must  consider
first  the  persons  who  came  the  nearest  to  being  officials  in
the  primitive  Church,  namely,  the  bishops,  presbyters,  and
deacons.  Paul  never  uses  any  of  these  terms  before  the
Philippian  epistle.  He  alludes  to  the  local  ministers  in
Thessalonians   as   *'  those  who   labour   among  you,"    and

^   "  Teaching,"  xi.  9-12.

2  See  Wernle,  Beginnings  of  ChristiaTiity,  vol.  i.  p.  360.

^  That  principle  would,  if  applied  strictly,  soon  limit  the  exercises  and  work
out  a  survival  of  the  fittest.


26  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

"  those  who  are  over  you  in  the  Lord."  ^  The  Epistle  to
the  Romans  enumerates  many  kinds  of  ministry,  but  no
technical  terms  are  used  to  designate  settled  officials.^
Philippians,  however,  makes  use  of  two  terms  for  local
ministers  which  were  destined  to  have  a  remarkable  history.
The  words  are,  "  To  the  saints  in  Christ  Jesus,  which  are
at  Philippi  with  the  Bishops  and  Deacons."^  There  is
every  reason  for  concluding  that  when  this  epistle  was
written  these  terms  were  used  in  a  general  way  for  the
persons  in  the  church  who  were  especially  gifted  in  guiding
affairs,  i.e.  "  overseeing "  and  in  "  serving  "  (which  is  the
root  meaning  of  ScaKovla).  The  names  are  not  yet  titles.
Paul  himself  nowhere  uses  the  term  "  presbyters "  or
"  elders,"  though  in  the  accounts  which  the  Book  of  Acts
gives  of  the  founding  of  the  Pauline  Churches,  Paul  is
everywhere  represented  as  ordaining  presbyters.^  The
difference  between  the  accounts  in  Acts  and  the  state  of
things  revealed  in  Paul's  own  letters  has  always  been  felt
to  be  a  real  difficulty.  But  the  solution  seems  fairly  easy.
Those  who  are  called  "  overseers  "  and  "  helpers  "  by  Paul,
i.e.  those  who  were  marked  out  as  distinctively  gifted  for
governing  and  ministering  in  the  new  Churches,  would  for
the  most  part  be  those  who  were  literally  "  elders  " — the
older  members.  So  that  during  Paul's  lifetime  "overseers"
and  "  elders  "  were  synonymous  terms,  and  "  deacon  "  was
a  term  used  for  less  important  helpers  in  the  affairs  of  the
Church.  But  when  Acts  was  written,  the  word  "  presbyter"
was  already  crystallizing  into  an  official  title,  and  is
generally  used  in  this  book  to  designate  the  governing
officials  of  the  Church,  who  in  chap.  xx.  28  are  also  called
"  overseers,"  as  if  the  two  terms  meant  much  the  same
thing.^

The   word    "  pastor "    is    used    in    the    letter    to    the
Ephesians,  but   here  again   in   a  general   and   untechnical

1   I  Thess.  V.  12.  ^  Rom.  xii.  6-8.

3  Phil.  i.  I.

*  The  writer  of  Acts,  looking  back  from  his  later  standpoint,  and  viewing  the
natural  growth  and  development  in  the  Pauline  Churches  regarded  it  all  as  due  to
the  direct  appointment  of  Paul.

5  See  Hatch,  op.  cit.  Lecture  II.,  and  A.  V.  G.  Allen's  Christian  Institutions,
chaps,  iii.  and  vi.


II        MINISTRY   IN   THE  EARLY  CHURCH       27

sense,  suggesting  the  duty  of  "  feeding  the  flock,"  which
had  also  been  emphasized  in  Paul's  farewell  to  the  elders
of  Ephesus.^  This  word  did  not,  however,  become  an
official  term  in  the  early  Church,  because  the  bishop
rapidly  absorbed  into  himself  all  the  functions  which  found
expression  in  Paul's  enumeration  of  gifts,  and  there  was
no  place  left  for  the  ministry  of  a  separate  "  pastor."

As  soon  as  we  turn  to  the  Pastoral  Epistles  we  are  in
another  world — the  entire  situation  has  changed.  The
period  of  free,  spontaneous,  uprushing,  spiritual  life  has
passed  away.  The  prophet  with  his  message  freshly
breathed  by  the  Holy  Spirit  has  wellnigh  disappeared,
and  the  writers  of  these  Epistles  are  busy  with  problems
of  organization  and  discipline.  The  "  teacher,"  who  was
a  person  of  importance  in  the  early  apostolic  churches  has
fallen  into  disrepute  (see  especially  i  Tim.).  Error,
heresy,  "  false  teaching,"  are  the  things  which  most  concern
the  writer  of  First  and  Second  Timothy  and  Titus.^  The
way  out  of  these  dangers  seemed  to  the  builders  of  the
Church  in  that  age  to  be  the  establishment  of  an  authori-
tative hierarchy.  The  bishop  here  appears  as  a  technical
official,  whose  business  it  is  to  rule  the  Church  and  to
teach  as  a  pastor,  and  above  everything  he  is  to  preserve
untainted  the  faith  which  has  been  delivered.  The  Second
and  Third  Epistles  of  John  reveal  a  similar  situation.  In
these  Epistles  the  presbyter  is  an  authoritative  person,
and  Church  organization  is  pretty  well  fixed.

We  come  now  to  the  question  why  this  free,  spontane-
ous, enthusiastic  Christianity,  which  we  have  been  studying,
changed  into  an  ecclesiastical  system  ?  Why  did  this
inward,  spiritual  faith — faith  which  was  the  immediate
response  of  the  soul  to  a  Person — change  into  a  doctrine
which  is  henceforth  called  "the  faith?"  Why  did  the
prophet  speaking  by  revelation  yield  to  the  bishop  ruling
with  authority  t

1  ' '  Take  heed  to  all  the  flock  over  which  the  Holy  Spirit  has  made  you  over-
seers to  feed  the  Church  of  the  Lord  vi'hich  He  purchased  with  His  own  blood"
(Acts  XX.  28).

'^  It  is  difficult  to  believe  that  the  "  Pastoral  Epistles,"  often  ascribed  to  Paul,
can  have  been  written  at  least  in  their  entirety  in  his  lifetime.


28  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

It  would  require  an  entire  volume  to  write  the  answer.
I  can  only  roughly  outline  the  reasons  in  this  brief
chapter  : —

1.  There  is  a  fundamental  principle  oi  habit ^  both  in
individuals  and  in  society,  which  always  tends  to  organize
any  movement  whatever  into  a  fixed  form  of  expression.

2.  Christianity  had  to  work  itself  out  through  the
prevailing  ideas  of  the  world  in  which  it  was  planted.  It
had  to  meet  the  Hellenic  spirit  and  the  Roman  genius.
It  could  satisfy  the  Greek  only  by  developing  a  thought
system.  It  could  win  the  Roman  only  by  the  exhibition
of  an  ecclesiastical  system,  suited  to  his  genius  for  law  and
organization.

3.  As  time  went  on,  prophecy  itself  degenerated,
inspiration  ran  dry.  Prophetic  ministry  grew  weak  and
poor  and  "second-hand."  The  conviction  of  a  direct
fellowship  with  Christ  waned.  Little  men,  claiming
infallible  guidance,  proved  a  menace,  where  men  of  the
first  rank  in  the  preceding  period  had  been  creative.
People  began  to  be  suspicious  that  under  a  claim  of  Divine
inspiration  prophets  were  uttering  their  own  words  and
voicing  their  own  wishes.  Many  of  the  prophets,  too,
fell  below  the  lofty  moral  standard  which  befitted  a
prophet.  An  itinerant  ministry  of  prophets  had  its
dangers  and  difficulties.^

4.  The  fading  away  of  the  glowing  expectation
of  an  imminent  return  of  Christ  had  much  to  do  with
the  change  which  occurred  in  the  character  of  the
Church.  While  that  expectation  lasted  it  fused  the
Christian  members  together,  and  they  saw  no  need  of
elaborate  organization,  but  as  this  faith  faded  away  they
had  to  prepare  for  the  work  of  the  world.

5.  The  sacraments  became  indispensable  rites  by  which
Divine  grace  was  believed  to  be  mysteriously  and  magically
conveyed,  and  as  this  view  developed,  the  importance  of
the  officials  who  administered  them  increased.

6.  The  early  Church,  even  before  it  lost  its  first  leaders,

^  The  reader  will  find  plenty  of  confirmation  of  the  above  position  in   '  *  The
Teaching  of  the  Twelve  Apostles  "  and  in  "  The  Shepherd  of  Hermas,  "


II        MINISTRY   IN  THE  EARLY  CHURCH       29

was  forced  to  meet  a  drift,  or  wave,  of  speculation  which
threatened  to  swamp  the  ship  at  the  very  beginning  of  its
voyage.^  The  Church  saw  no  way  to  meet  this  specula-
tion except  with  a  doctrine  buttressed  by  hierarchical
authority.

There  are  four  great  documents  out  of  the  early  post-
apostolic  period,  i.e.  belonging  to  the  first  half  of  the
second  century,  which  show  the  gradual  development  of
an  official  priesthood  and  the  steady  waning  of  the
fundamental  idea  of  the  apostolic  Church — the  priesthood
of  believers,  the  ministry  of  "  gifts."  These  documents  are
the  Epistle  of  Clement  of  Rome  to  the  Corinthians,  "  The
Didache,"  or  "  Teaching  of  the  Apostles,"  "  The  Shepherd
of  Hermas,"  and  the  Epistles  of  Ignatius.  Clement,  writing
about  the  year  100,  already  makes  the  Jewish  priesthood
the  analogy  for  the  Christian,  and  he  already  speaks  of
the  laymen  as  a  class  distinct  from  the  ministers  or  priests.
He  declares  that  the  Old  Testament  gives  warrant  for  the
system  of  bishops  and  deacons,  and  in  confirmation  he
quotes  Isaiah  Ix.  17,  "I  will  appoint  their  bishops  in
righteousness  and  their  deacons  in  faith."  ^  His  epistle  is
written  to  further  the  establishment  of  Church  organiza-
tion. Already  the  idea  of  the  Church  as  a  spiritual
fellowship,  a  congregation  of  persons  inspired  by  the
invisible  Christ,  was  yielding  to  the  idea  of  a  Church
which  was  founded  by  Christ,  and  left  in  the  care  of
vicars,  whose  authority  came  by  ordination.

"  The  Shepherd  of  Hermas"  ^  shows  that  the  change  was
not  effected  without  struggle.  The  old  contest  between
prophet  and  priest,  which  ended  so  tragically  in  later
Hebrew  history,  was  repeated  in  the  formative  period  of
the  Christian  Church,  with  the  same  result — the  suppression
of  the  prophet.  The  author  of  "  The  Shepherd  of
Hermas "  belongs  to  the  order  of  the  prophets.  He
makes     known    the    will     of    God     for    the    times,    not

^  I  refer  of  course  to  Gnosticism.  2  Epjstie  of  Clement,  chap.  xlii.

'  This  is  an  allegory,  or  religious  romance,  written  probably  very  early  in  the
second  century.  It  speaks  of  all  the  apostles  as  already  dead  (Sim.  ix.  16),  and
it  is  quoted  by  Irenaeus  (who  lived  between  a.d.  120  and  200)  a!>  though  it  were
Scripture.      Harnack  dates  it  between  A.D.  140  and  145.


30  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

by  reasoning  or  speculation,  but  by  inward  revelation.
He  has  a  series  of  "  visions "  for  the  illumination  of
the  Church.  His  sympathies  are  with  those  who
speak,  not  because  they  are  appointed  to  speak,  but
because  the  Holy  Ghost  wishes  to  speak  through  them.
He  has  discovered  that  "  those  who  preside  over  the
Church  love  the  first  seats,"  and  even  sometimes  "  plunder
widows  and  orphans  of  their  livelihood,  and  gain  posses-
sions for  themselves  from  the  ministry  which  they  have
received."  "  I  speak  "  (the  Church  personified  as  a  very
old  woman  is  speaking  to  him  in  a  vision),  "  I  speak  unto
you,  the  leaders  and  presidents  of  the  Church,  be  ye  not
like  unto  sorcerers  ;  for  sorcerers  carry  their  drugs  in
boxes,  but  you  carry  your  drug  and  your  poison  in  your
hearts  ;  ye  are  hardened  and  will  not  cleanse  your  hearts
nor  purify  your  minds  in  unity  of  spirit."  ^  But  it  is  clear
through  his  pages  that  the  prophets  are  dying  out,  and
that  the  ordained  priests  are  gaining  the  ascendancy.

There  is  every  indication  that  the  "  Teaching  of  the
Twelve  Apostles "  is  a  very  early  document,  and  that  it
comes  out  of  a  period,  or  at  least  a  locality,  in  which  the
ministry  was  still  fluid  and  the  organization  not  rigidly
formed.^  The  apostle  and  prophet  and  inspired  teacher
still  have  a  dignified  standing,  and  yet  careful  provision  is
also  made  for  the  more  professional  officials.  The  prophet's
claim  to  inspiration  is  to  be  carefully  sifted.  We  come
across  amusing  tests  for  discerning  the  false  and  the  true
apostle  and  prophet,  of  which  the  following  is  a  good
example :

"  Every  apostle  who  cometh  to  you,  let  him  be  received  as  the
Lord ;  but  he  shall  not  remain  more  than  one  day ;  if,  however,
it  need  be,  then  the  next  day ;  but  if  he  remains  three  days,  he
is  a  false  prophet.  When  the  apostle  departeth  let  him  take
nothing  except  bread  enough  till  he  lodge  again ;  but  if  he  ask
money  he  is  a  false  prophet."

"  Whoever,  in  the  Spirit,  says,  '  Give  me  money,  or  something

1  Vision  II.  chap.  ix.

2  It  does  not  seem  probable  that  the  *'  Teaching"  can  have  been  written  later
than  A.  D.  I20.  For  the  reasons  for  this  conclusion  see  Teaching  of  the  Twelve
Apostles,  edited  by  Hitchcock  and  Brown  (London,  1885),  Introduction,  pp.
xc.-xcix.


II        MINISTRY   IN   THE  EARLY  CHURCH       31

else,'  ye  shall  not  hear  him ;  but  if  for  others  in  need  he  bids  you
give,  let  no  one  judge  him."  ^

The  account  goes  on  to  deal  with  the  case  of  the
prophet  who  is  not  itinerant :

"  But  every  true  prophet  who  will  settle  among  you  is  worthy
of  his  support  ('likewise  the  true  teacher').  Every  first  fruit,
then,  of  the  products  of  the  winepress  or  of  the  threshing  floor,
of  oxen  and  of  sheep,  thou  shalt  take  and  give  to  the  prophets ;
for  they  a7'e your  high  priests.  But  if  ye  have  no  prophet,  give  it
to  the  poor."  '^

The  condition  of  the  Church  out  of  which  this  docu«
ment  came  seems  to  have  been  such  that  a  free,  spontaneous
ministry  existed  side  by  side  with  a  system  of  Church
officials  who  were  to  give  large  place  for  the  prophet  if
he  proved  to  be  genuinely  sent.  The  Church  may  appoint,
as  occasion  requires,  bishops  and  deacons,  who  apparently
are  to  perform  both  the  functions  of  governing  the  Church
and  of  ministering  to  it  as  pastors.

"  Now  appoint  for  yourselves  bishops  and  deacons  worthy  of
the  Lord,  men  meek  and  not  avaricious,  upright  and  proved ;  for
they  too  render  you  the  service  of  the  prophets  and  teachers.
,  .  .  They  are  to  be  honoured  of  you,  together  with  the  prophets
and  teachers."^

It  should  be  noted  that  up  to  this  time  there  is  a
plurality  of  bishops  in  each  Church,  and  the  single
bishop  as  head  and  pastor  of  the  local  flock  has  not
yet  appeared,  either  in  practice  or  as  the  ideal  for  the
Church.

When  we  pass  over  to  the  Epistles  of  Ignatius  we
leave  prophets  and  inspired  teachers  in  the  dim  back-
ground, for  the  entire  stress  of  this  impassioned  man,  who
writes  on  his  way  to  die  in  the  Roman  arena,  is  upon  the
establishment  of  the  single  bishop  as  the  authoritative
minister  and  head  of  the  local  Church.*      Ignatius  was

1  "Teaching,"  chap.  xi.  ^  /^^-^  chap.  xiii.  ^  Ibid.  chap.  xv.

*  Ignatius'  life  and  work  is,  as  Westcott  says,  "enveloped  in  pitchy  darkness. "
He  was  condemned  to  death  in  Antioch  and  sentenced  to  be  exposed  to  beasts  in
the  amphitheatre  at  Rome.  The  sentence  was  executed,  as  \\'estcott  thinks,
about  A.D.  no.  The  seven  Epistles  believed  to  be  genuine  are:  To  the
Ephesians  ;  To  the  Magnesians  ;  To  the  Trallians  ;  To  the  Romans  ;  To  the
Philadelphians  ;  To  the  Smyrnaeans  ;  To  Polycarp.  They  were  written  on  the
journey  from  Antioch  to  Rome,


32  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

possessed  of  a  passion  to  leave  behind  him  an  authoritatively-
organized  Church.  He  had  no  faith  that  a  body  gathered
together  on  the  loose  basis  of  brotherhood  and  fellow-
ship and  obedience  to  an  invisible  Head  could  survive
in  the  midst  of  chaotic  beliefs  and  growing  heresies.
He  puts  the  bishop — who,  according  to  his  conception,
is  to  be  the  head  of  the  local  Church — in  the  place  of
Christ.  He  even  says,  "Your  bishop  presides  in  the
place  of  God."  ^  And  again  :  "  Ye  are  subject  to  the
bishop  as  to  Jesus  Christ."  ^  Again  :  "  Reverence  the
deacons  as  appointed  by  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  bishop  as
Jesus  Christ."^  He  writes  to  the  Philadelphians  that,
"  the  Spirit  proclaims  these  words,  *  Do  nothing  without  the
bishop.' "  '

It  takes  little  study  of  Ignatius  to  see  that  the  thing
which  has  raised  the  professional  minister — i.e.  the  bishop
— to  such  importance  in  the  mind  of  Ignatius  was  the
great  importance  which  he  attached  to  the  sacrament  of
the  Lord's  Supper.  Already,  even  as  early  as  the  first
quarter  of  the  second  century,  the  sacramental  bread  is
called  "  the  medicine  of  immortality "  ;  ^  baptism  is  the
medicinal  bath  of  regeneration.  It  was  vain  to  expect  to
maintain  a  spiritually  conceived  ministry  when  the  loftiest
figure  in  the  Church  had  already  laid  the  foundation  for
the  substitution  of  an  incomprehensible  magic  in  place  of
the  direct  work  of  the  Divine  Spirit  upon  the  human  soul.
It  is  a  long  way  from  Paul's  conception  of  the  believer  as
a  living  temple  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  the  belief  that
spiritual  life  is  imparted  in  a  magical  way  to  those  who
eat  the  Lord's  Supper  at  the  hands  of  a  divinely  appointed
priest  who  has  taken  the  place  of  the  absent  Christ — but
all  that  transformation  came  in  one  century.^  As  soon  as
the  celebration  of  the  Supper  became  the  central  point  in
worship  there  was  no  longer  any  possibility  of  maintain-
ing  the   old   order   of  a   spiritually-directed    community.

^  Magnesians,  chap.  vi.  ^  Trallians,  chap.  ii.

*  Trallians,  chap.  iii.  ■*  Phil.  chap.  vii.

"  Ephesians,  chap.  xx.

'^  It  is  not  likely  that  the  bishop  was  yet  explicitly  thought  of  as  invested
through  his  ordination  with  mysterious  and  mira'-ulous  power,  as  came  to  be  the
case  in  the  third  century.


II        MINISTRY   IN   THE  EARLY  CHURCH       33

A  visible  head  was  now  a  necessity.  Note  the  logic  of
Ignatius  :  "  There  is  but  one  Eucharist.  For  there  is
one  flesh,  and  one  cup  into  the  unity  of  His  blood  ;  one
altar,  as  there  is  one  bishop."  ^  "  Let  there  be  a  proper
Eucharist  which  is  administered  by  the  bishop,  or  by  one
to  whom  he  has  entrusted  it."  .  .  .  "  It  is  not  lawful  without
the  bishop  either  to  baptize  or  to  celebrate  a  love  feast."  ^
Another  influence  which  counted  for  almost  more  than
did  this  exaggerated  importance  of  the  sacrament  toward
the  complete  change  of  the  ministry,  and  the  elevation
of  the  minister  to  a  priest  with  Divine  authority,  was
the  necessity  which  came  upon  the  Church  of  dealing
authoritatively  with  false  doctrine.  This  tendency  to
formulate  a  fixed  doctrine  is  already  decidedly  apparent
in  the  Pastoral  Epistles.  Faith  was  beginning  to  be
regarded  as  a  definite  body  of  doctrine  to  be  held  and
handed  on.  The  original  idea  of  faith  as  the  heart's
attachment,  and  the  obedience  of  the  will,  to  Christ,  was
passing  away  and  giving  place  to  the  lower  view.  Then,
as  in  every  age  since,  there  were  men  who  taught  doctrine
which  did  not  ring  true  to  the  ears  of  those  who  were
fighting  the  battles  of  the  faith.  The  second  century  was
remarkably  prolific  in  speculation.  New  ideas  sprang  up
like  mushrooms.  The  air  was  full  of  fantastic  theories.
While  the  Church  was  still  in  its  swaddling  clothes  it
found  itself  in  a  life-and-death  struggle  with  gnosticism.
It  was  one  of  the  most  serious  enemies  which  has  ever
confronted  Christianity.  It  was  certainly  a  part  of  the
intellectual  environment  when  the  two  Epistles  to  Timothy
were  written,  and  we  hear  already  of  the  dangerous  ''gnosis,
falsely  so  called."  ^      How  should  this  and  kindred  heresies

1  Philadelphians,  chap,  iv,  2  Sm}Tnaeans,  chap.  viii.

3  It  is  difficult  to  decide  when  Gnosticism  first  appeared  in  the  Christian  field,
but  Christianity  is  face  to  face  with  it  in  the  Pastoral  Epistles.  For  actual  origin
it  goes  back  to  the  amalgamation  of  the  religions  of  Babylonia  and  Persia  after
the  conquests  of  Alexander.  The  world  of  Light,  of  Persian  religion,  became  the
"  Pleroma"  of  the  Gnostics,  and  the  planetary  gods  of  the  Babylonian  religion
became  the  aeons  of  the  descending  emanations  down  to  the  lower,  material
world,  so  that  it  was  from  the  beginning  a  purely  dualistic  system.  It  was  an
intellectual  construction  out  of  mythologies.  There  were  many  phases  and  types
of  Gnostic  doctrine,  not  one  consistent  and  orthodo.x  form  of  it.  It  borrowed  from
Christianity  a  colouring  and  some  ideas,  but  it  remained  throughout  a  form  of

D


34


MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.


be  met  ?  was  the  problem.      By  the  proclamation  of  the
truth  and  the  power  of  the  light,  Christ  would  have  said.
By  the  demonstration  and  power  of  the  everliving  Spirit,
and  by  teaching  and   argument,    Paul  would   have  said.
But  already  faith  in  the  conquering  power  of  the   Spirit
was  dying  out.      Christians  did  not  dare  to  rest  their  case
on  the  mere  announcement  of  truth  which  rested  solely
on  their  heart's  conviction  of  its  truth.     They  fell  back  to
the  basis  of  official  authority  and  the  authority  of  tradi-
tion.     "The  faith"  assumed  the  importance  of  a  fetish.
It  was  the  sacred   thing  which  had  come  to  the  world
from   the  heavens.      Christ  had  tented  among  men  for  a
few  brief  years,  but  the  tent  was  folded  and  He  was  gone.
But  the  one  communication  which  God  had  made  through
Him  was  in  the  hands  of  the  Church.      The  possession  of
it,  they  believed,  made  the  Church  a  Church.      Now,  how
could   it   be    kept   absolutely  pure  and    unchanged   in   a
world  where  error  and   heresy  were  as  thick  as  thistle-
down in  the  early  summer  ?      A  way  to  accomplish  that
must  be  found.

The  authoritative  clergy  seemed  the  only  way.  The
appeal  was  first  made  to  the  authority  of  the  apostles.
But  the  apostles  were  mortal,  and  when  they  were  dead
it  was  possible  to  interpret  their  writings  in  diverse  ways.
There  could  be  no  ground  of  certainty  unless  there  was
somebody  still  in  the  Church  who  could  speak  with  the
same  authority  that  the  apostles  possessed,  and  who  could

thought.     For  the  most  part  the  Gnostic  based  his  "  knowledge  "  on  the  literature
of  revelation  and  mythology,  which  he  interpreted  by  the  allegorical  method.
The  main  ideas  of  the  movement  may  be  summarized  as  follows  : —

1.  God  is  above  all'thought,  and  therefore  an  unknown  and  unknowable  God,
who  is  the  Pleroma,  or  fulness.

2.  Between  this  unknowable  God  and  the  visible  universe  there  is  a  chain  of
spiritual  beings — a  descending  hierarchy  called  <Bons.  They  are  emanations  from
the  Pleroma.  The  Jehovah  of  the  Old  Testament  is  only  one  of  these  aeons,  and
not  God  Himself.

3.  There  is  an  absolute  dualism  between  good  and  evil.  Good  has  its  source
in  Spirit ;  evil  is  inherent  in  matter.  This  world  of  matter  is  the  realm  of  evil,  or
Satan's  world.  Redemption  can  come  only  by  enlightenment,  which  comes
down  from  God  by  means  of  the  aeons.  Christ  in  some  of  the  systems  is  one  of
these  aeons.

4.  The  basis  of  their  morahty  was  asceticism,  escape  from  evil  matter,  and
particularly  from  body.  For  an  exhaustive  study  of  the  movement  see  Bousset's
Hauptprobleme  der  Gnosis,  Gottingen,  1907,


II        MINISTRY   IN   THE   EARLY  CHURCH       35

guarantee  that  the  doctrine  of  the  Church  had  come  down
unchanged.  Already  in  Irenaeus,  who  died  at  the  end
of  the  second  century,  we  are  told  that  "  truth  has  come
down  by  means  of  the  succession  of  the  bishops."  When
the  Church  emerged  from  its  battle  with  Gnosticism  the
bishop  was  supreme,  and  the  idea  of  his  succession  in  the
apostolic  line  was  well  established,  and  with  it  the  view
that  faith  is  the  deposit  of  truth  received  through  the
apostles  and  preserved  by  the  hierarchy  of  the  Church.^

There  was,  however,  one  great  uprising  during  the  first
three  centuries  against  the  officialism  and  ecclesiasticism
which  was  slowly  taking  the  place  of  the  immediate
working  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  which  was  banishing  the
prophet  and  spiritual  teacher  from  the  Church.^  There
is  some  evidence  that,  in  spite  of  the  remarkable  growth
of  the  power  and  authority  of  the  hierarchy,  there  still
was,  throughout  the  second  century,  a  sporadic  lay
ministry  and  groups  of  persons  who  held  for  prophecy
against  priesthood.  But  one  sees  at  once  how  difficult
it  would  be  for  both  to  live  in  the  same  house.  What  is
to  happen  if  a  prophet  speaking  with  the  inspiration  of
God  conflicts  with  a  priest  who  has  the  inherited  authority
of  an  apostle?  How  shall  the  Church  exercises  be
orderly  if  the  entire  administration  of  worship  may  at
any  time  be  interrupted  by  the  voice  of  a  prophet  who
has  received  a  message?  The  Apostolic  Constitutions
were  apparently  written  to  settle  the  final  authority  upon
the  clergy.  Here  is  a  passage  from  Book  III.  chap.  x. :
"  We  do  not  permit  the  laity  to  perform  any  of  the
offices  belonging  to  the  priesthood,  as,  for  instance,  neither
the  sacrifice,  nor  baptism,  nor  laying  on  of  hands  ...  for
no  one  taketh  this  honour  to  himself  but  he  that  is  called
of  God.  A  person  who  seizes  upon  such  an  office  him-
self shall  undergo  the  punishment  of  Uzziah."  The
punishment  of  Korah  is  also  cited.

^  ' '  The  conception  of  a  mutilated  sacerdotalism,  where  one  part  of  the  Christian
worship  is  alone  thought  of  as  the  true  sacrifice,  and  a  small  portion  of  the
fellowship,  the  ministry,  is  declared  to  be  the  priesthood,  did  not  appear  until  the
time  of  Cyprian,  and  was  his  invention"  (Lindsay,  p.  37).

2  I  shall  study  this  uprising,  under  the  title  of  Montanism,  in  the  next
chapter.


36  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap,  ii

It  needs  but  a  word  in  conclusion.  The  Church
became  an  ecclesiastic  system,  an  order  of  priests,  because
men  lost  the  experience  of  and  faith  in  the  continued
presence  of  Christ  through  the  Holy  Spirit.  So  long  as
Christians  knew  that  they  were  living  and  moving  and
having  their  being  in  God,  they  were  all  possessed  of  gifts,
and  they  all  had  something  to  share.  As  soon  as  the
sense  of  the  Divine  presence  vanished  from  men's  hearts,
the  religion  which  Christ  had  initiated  underwent  a  com-
plete transformation.  Magic  and  mystery  took  the  place
of  the  free  personal  communication.  The  real  presence
of  Christ  was  sought  in  the  bread  and  wine  and  in  the
bath  of  regeneration,  rather  than  within  the  soul  itself.
With  this  change  of  faith  the  administration  of  these  rites
became  supremely  important.  Once  the  "  Lord's  Supper  "
had  been  a  common  joyous  meal,  now  it  became  a
mysterious  rite  by  which  immortality  was  imparted.  Once
faith  had  been  the  soul's  response  to  a  Divine  Presence.
Now  it  became  the  acceptance  of  a  communication  once
delivered  to  men  and  passed  on  through  a  regularly
ordained  line.  As  faith  changed  to  a  deposit  of  doctrine,
and  as  the  Supper  became  a  magic  rite,  the  authoritative
official  became  a  necessity.


CHAPTER    III

MONTANISM:    A    RETURN    TO    PROPHECY

We  saw  in  the  last  chapter  the  beginnings  of  tendencies
which  finally  formed  the  imperial  system  of  the  Catholic
Church.  By  gradual,  but  irresistible,  movements  —
sometimes  an  unconscious  drift,  sometimes  a  purpose
clearly  conceived  —  the  entire  nature  of  Christianity
underwent  transformation.  The  simple  fellowship  of
believers,  held  together  by  a  common  trust  in  Christ,  their
living  Head,  changed  into  a  "  sacred  "  and  rigid  ecclesi-
astical organization,  which  became  the  indispensable
mediator  of  salvation.  Faith,  which  at  first  was  inward
trust  and  immediate  response  to  Christ,  was  turned  into
"  the  faith,"  which  became  a  formulated  set  of  doctrines,
a  fixed  "  deposit  "  of  truth,  the  dogma  of  orthodoxy.  The
meal  of  love  and  fellowship,  eaten  in  joyous  memory  of
Christ's  redeeming  love  and  sacrifice,  grew,  partly  under
pagan  influences,  into  a  mysterious  magical  rite  in  which
Christ's  actual  body  and  blood  were  believed  to  be
miraculously  reproduced  and  "  sacrificed "  on  a  priestly
altar.  The  free  and  spontaneous  exercise  of  spiritual
"  gifts "  in  the  church-fellowship  gave  place  to  a  new
priesthood  working  under  an  inflexible  system  of  form
and  ritual.  Even  before  the  third  century  opened  the
Church  had  begun  to  draw  a  sharp  distinction  between
the  epoch,  or  dispensation,  of  revelation,  and  all  later,  less
divine  epochs.  The  first  period  was  set  apart  in  an  order
all  by  itself  as  an  unapproachable  ideal.  That  extra-
ordinary nearness  of  God,  which  the  apostles  knew,  was
regarded  as  a  brief  temporal  span  of  excessive  light,  with

37


38  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

darkness  before  it  and  twilight  after  it.  The  then  present
age  was  connected  with  this  peculiar  epoch  of  revelation
by  the  line  of  bishops,  and  by  holy  Scripture,  which  was
already  coming  to  be  thought  of  as  the  instrument  of
divine  communication.^

But  these  momentous  changes  were  not  effected  with-
out protest  and  reaction.  Our  literary  remains  from  the
second  century  are  too  meagre  to  show  conclusively  that
there  was  a  continuous,  even  though  slender,  stream  of
simple,  apostolic  Christianity  carrying  steadily  on  the
ideas  and  the  spirit  of  the  first  epoch  ;  but  there  are  many
internal  indications  in  the  literature  which  we  possess  that,
at  least  in  some  districts,  a  Christianity  something  like
that  of  the  early  days  persisted.  There  were  many,  in
districts  remote  from  the  large  cities,  who  were  "  old-
fashioned,"  and  who  clung  to  the  freer  ways  which  the
traditions  of  country  localities  preserved.  There  was,
however,  no  current  of  primitive  faith  sufficient  to  stem
the  steadily  waxing  power  of  ecclesiastical  Christianity.
In  the  middle  of  the  second  century,  with  the  suddenness
almost  of  a  new  Pentecost,  a  movement  of  reaction  was
inaugurated  and  a  return  to  the  supremacy  of  the  prophet
as  against  the  priest  attempted.  The  movement  originated
in  Phrygia,  not  far  from  the  region  of  Paul's  Galatian
churches,  and  it  was  started  by  a  man  named  Montanus,^
who  is  said  to  have  been  a  native  of  Ardaban,  in  Phrygia,
and  who  is  reported,  by  those  who  denounced  his
prophecies,  to  have  had  an  ante-Christian  period  when  he
was  a  pagan  priest — possibly,  as  epithets  imply,  a  priest
of  Cybele.  The  movement  spread  through  Asia  Minor
with  the  rapidity  of  contagion.  There  was  a  sibylline
strain  in  these  simple,  naive,  rural  people  which  made
them  ready  for  religious  fervour  and  ecstatic  visions,  and
entire  communities   received    the  new  prophets  with  en-

^  The  "new  prophecy"  of  Montanism  had  a  decided  influence  in  hastening
the  formation  of  the  New  Testament  canon,  as  a  fixed  and  final  revelation  (see
Harnack's  History  of  Dogma,  vol.  ii.  p.  io8).

^  Those  who  took  up  the  "  new  prophecy  "  are  variously  called  "  Montanists,"
' '  Kataphrygians, "  and  ' '  Priscillianians. "  Eusebius  has  preserved  a  contemporary
account  by  an  anonymous  but  very  violent  anti-Montanist  (Eusebius,  Church
History,  v.  i6).


Ill  MONTANISM:  A  RETURN  TO  PROPHECY   39

thusiasm.  The  movement  first  came  to  the  attention  of
the  Western  Church  in  the  year  177,  when  the  Roman
Bishop  supported  the  Phrygian  authorities  in  their  con-
demnation of  the  new  prophecy,^  and  it  probably  arose
about  the  opening  of  that  decade.  Its  spread,  however,
was  not  checked  by  opposition.  It  appealed  powerfully
to  the  common  people,  and  it  won  to  its  support  the
greatest  exponent  of  Christianity  of  that  period,  namely
Tertullian  (born  about  145,  died  220),  whose  writings
give  us  about  the  only  sympathetic  account  of  the  move-
ment that  has  come  down  to  us.  It  gathered  a  large
following  in  North  Africa  where  Tertullian  lived,  and  it
also  developed  strong  centres  of  influence  in  Europe.
Some  scholars  are  inclined  to  make  a  pretty  marked
distinction  between  earlier  and  later  Montanism,  that  is
(i)  the  Montanism  of  "  first-hand  "  prophecy,  and  (2)  the
Montanism  which  was  content  to  accept  at  second-hand
the  "  oracles  "  of  the  Montanist  prophets  who  had  spoken
a  generation  or  more  earlier.  This  distinction  is,  however,
true  of  all  movements  of  a  similar  type  in  the  history  of
the  Church.

Montanism  did  not  introduce  new  doctrines  ;  it  was
not  a  new  conception  of  God,  nor  of  the  world,  nor  of
salvation.  It  was  rather  an  attempt  to  realise  in  the
Church  the  promise  of  Christ  that  the  Paraclete  should
come  to  lead  men  into  all  truth  and  to  enable  them  to  do
greater  things  than  He  did.^  In  the  spirit  of  the  Hebrew
prophets  they  raised  to  a  point  of  intensity  the  passion
for  purity  and  holiness  in  the  people  of  God,  and  with  this
passion  they  joined  a  vivid  expectation  of  the  annihilation
of  the  wicked  pagan  world  by  the  miraculous  arrival  of
the  New  Jerusalem  from  heaven.

Montanus  was  evidently  a  man  subject  to  trance  and

^  The  Bishop  of  Rome  was  at  first  on  the  point  of  recognizing  the  Montanists  as
in  true  and  full  communion  with  the  Church,  but  he  was  influenced  against  them,
according  to  Tertullian,  by  the  false  reports  of  a  certain  Praxeas  (see  Tertullian's
Treatise  agahut  Praxeas).

2  The  Montanists  took  this  promise  in  its  naked  literalness.  There  is  a
passage  in  a  treatise,  falsely  ascribed  to  Tertullian,  which  says  :  "  The  Paraclete
has  revealed  greater  things  through  Montanus  than  Christ  revealed  through  the
Gospel"  [Pseudo- Tertullian,  52).


40  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

ecstasy,  and  it  is  more  than  probable  that  his  emphasis
on  the  importance  of  ecstatic  prophecy  had  its  basis  in
personal  experience — in  the  discovery,  by  an  immediate
experience,  of  unusual  and  extraordinary  powers  within
himself.  The  anonymous  opponent  of  the  movement
reported  in  Eusebius  says  of  Montanus :  "  He  became
beside  himself,  and  being  suddenly  in  a  sort  of  frenzy  and
ecstasy  he  raved  and  began  to  babble  and  utter  strange
things,  prophesying  in  a  manner  contrary  to  the  constant
custom  of  the  Church,  handed  down  by  tradition  from  the
beginning."  ^  This  is  evidently  written  with  hostile
animus,  but  it  seems  fairly  certain  that  the  fact  of  ecstasy
is  not  fabricated,  as  it  fits  the  teaching  of  Montanus.^

Among  the  few  brief  sayings  of  Montanus  which
have  been  preserved,  there  is  one  which  gives  his
conception  of  prophecy  so  plainly  that  it  is  impossible
to  miss  his  meaning.  "Man,"  he  says,  "is  like  a  lyre,
and  I  [the  Holy  Spirit]  play  on  him  like  a  plectrum
[stick  with  which  the  lyre  is  struck].  Man  sleeps  ;  I  [the
Holy  Spirit]  am  awake.  See  ;  it  is  the  Lord  who  takes
men's  hearts  out  of  their  breasts  and  gives  to  men  a  heart."  '

Montanus  asserted  that  while  in  this  ecstatic  con-
dition the  Divine  Spirit  took  the  place  of  his  own
consciousness  and  spoke  with  his  lips.  There  are  three
fragments  to  this  effect :  "  Montanus  said :  '  I  am  the
Lord  God  Almighty  appearing  in  man ' "  ;  again  he  says,
"  Neither  as  angel  or  ambassador  came  I,  but  the  Lord
God,  the  Father "  ;  "  Montanus  said  :  '  I  am  the  Father
and  the  Son  and  the  Paraclete.'  "  *     These  "  sayings  "  of

1  Eusebius'  Church  History,  v,  i6.

2  The  contemporaries  of  Montanus  seem  to  have  had  no  idea  that  ecstatic
prophecy  existed  in  apostolic  days.  Clement  of  Alexandria  regards  ecstasy  as  the
mark  of  a  "false  prophet"  {Stromata,  i.  17).  Renan  finds  evidence  of
Glossolalia  among  the  Montanists  (see  chapter  on  Montanists  in  his  Histoire  des
origines  du  christianisme,  tome  vii. ).

3  Weinel  in  Die  Wirkungen  des  Geistes  und  der  Geisier  (1899),  p.  92,  makes
the  following  comment  on  this  saying  :  "  It  is  with  a  man  in  this  state  as  if  he
slept,  or  as  if  his  heart,  according  to  oriental  ideas  the  seat  of  consciousness,  was
taken  out  of  his  breast  and  an  alien  power  had  put  another  into  its  place  so  long
as  this  power  speak  from  out  him."

*  The  "sayings"  of  Montanus  and  the  prophetesses  are  preserved  by
Epiphanius,  whose  two  chapters,  xlviii.  and  xlix,,  in  Contra  JIaereses  are  the
main  source  of  our  information.


Ill   MONTANISM  :  A  RETURN  TO  PROPHECY  41

Montanus  are  not  to  be  interpreted  in  too  literal  a  sense.
They  are  not  as  blasphemous  as  they  sound  in  their
isolated  nakedness.  He  does  not  mean  that  he,
Montanus,  a  mere  man,  is  God.  He  is  rather  asserting
that  the  human  can  fall  into  the  background,  or  fall  off
entirely,  and  that  God  can  take  the  man's  place  and  utter
Himself  through  the  lips  that  formerly  were  the  man's,
and  Montanus  declares  that  this  substitution  of  selves  has
occurred  in  him.

He  was  soon  followed  in  this  manifestation  of  ecstatic
utterance  by  two  women,  named  Priscilla,  or  Prisca,  and
Maximilla,  who  became  widely  reverenced  as  prophetesses.
These  women  left  their  husbands  and  became  "  virgins "
in  the  Montanist  Church,  in  which  they  gained  an  authority
little  short  of  infallible.  Like  their  leader  they  believed
in  divine  "possession,"  and  absolute  self- suppression.
Priscilla  had  a  vivid  "  vision,"  much  like  those  which  St.
Catherine  of  Siena  experienced  later,  in  which  she  said
that  Christ  assumed  the  form  of  a  woman  in  bright
apparel,  and  came  to  her  side  and  put  wisdom  into  her,
and  showed  her  that  the  place  where  she  lived  (Pepuza)
was  holy,  and  that  there  Jerusalem  would  come  down
from  heaven.  Of  Maximilla's  sayings  we  have  only  a  few
fragments  :  "  Do  not  listen  to  me,  listen  to  Christ  "  ;  "  The
Lord  sent  me  -^  as  the  adherent  in  thy  persecution  and  in
the  covenant  and  promise,  and  as  their  exponent  and
interpreter,  and  compelled  willing  and  unwilling  to  learn
the  knowledge  of  God " ;  "I  am  pursued  like  a  wolf
among  sheep,  but  I  am  no  wolf;  I  am  the  Word,  and
the  Spirit  and  power "  ;  "  After  me  there  shall  be  no
more  prophetess,  but  the  end  shall  come."  ^

The    few  actual    sayings    of   the    Montanist  prophets

^  The  me  in  this  saying  refers  to  the  Spirit.

2  Bonwetsch,  who  has  given  us  a  very  searching  and  valuable  study  of
Montanism,  holds  that  ecstatic  speaking  was  probably  confined  to  Montanus  and
the  two  prophetesses,  Priscilla  and  Maximilla.  He  thinks  that  the  "  revelations  "
of  later  Montanism  were  received  in  visions  during  sleep,  and  communicated
during  waking  condition.  This  position  rests  on  slender  evidence,  but,  even
if  it  were  well  founded,  it  would  introduce  no  new  principle  of  revelation.  The
psychological  basis  is  the  same  in  both  types,  for  Montanus  and  the  two
prophetesses  were  evidently  subject  to  hypnotic  or  sleep  ' '  states "  brought  on
by  auto-suggestion  (see  Bonwetsch's  Alontanismus,  pp.  67-68).


42  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

which  have  been  preserved  are  so  meagre  and  frag-
mentary that  the  student  is  tempted,  on  the  face  of  the
returns,  to  dismiss  the  movement  as  an  aberration,  or  at
least  as  of  slight  significance.  Such  a  conclusion  is,
however,  too  hasty.  The  movement  was  widespread.  It
swept  entire  communities  into  fellowship  with  the  new
prophets,  and  we  must  remember  that  we  can  study  it
only  from  its  fragments  and  in  its  cooled-down  stage.
It  emphasized  truths  which  the  age  needed.  It  developed
a  new  type  of  Christianity  which  appealed  to  some  of
the  best  spirits  of  the  age,  notably  Tertullian  ;  it  is  a
valuable  historical  illustration  of  the  contagious  character
of  ecstatic,  or  charismatic,  manifestations  ;  it  grew  into  a
powerful  protest  against  a  secularized  Church ;  and  it
presents,  with  sharp  emphasis,  the  mixture  of  truth  and
error,  of  divine  illumination  and  human  frailty,  which
were  bound  to  appear  in  all  early  attempts  to  exhibit  a
religion  of  the  Spirit.

The  most  striking  feature  of  Montanism — the  feature
which  first  demands  attention — is  its  revival  of  prophecy,
the  attempt  to  put  the  authority  of  the  Christian  Church
in  a  succession  of  divinely  inspired  prophets.  The
Church  was  settling  down  on  a  basis  of  officialism.  The
sublime  truth  that  God  communicated  His  will  directly  to
man  as  man  was  well-nigh  lost  Church  leaders  were
busy  constructing  an  authoritative  system,  and  were
losing  the  vision  of  an  unbroken  procession  of  the  Holy
Ghost  through  human  temples.  Montanism  once  more
returned  to  prophecy  as  the  basis  of  Church  fellowship,
and  as  the  method  of  arriving  at  fuller  truth  and  purer
life.  Its  prophets  taught  essentially  the  priesthood  of
believers,  both  male  and  female.  They  insisted  that
ministers  are  made  by  God  alone,  and  they  undertook  to
form  a  Church  of  saints — a  Church  which  should  be  in
truth  the  community  of  the  faithful  and  holy.  Surely  a
noble  task  in  any  age  !

The  movement  claimed  to  be  the  beginning  of  a
new  dispensation — the  dispensation  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
the  Paraclete,  who  was   to   be   now   and  henceforth   the


Ill  MONTANISM:  A  RETURN  TO  PROPHECY  43

Head  of  the  Church,  governing,  directing,  and  leading
through  divinely  chosen  prophets.  It  was  now  to  be
made  plain  that  revelation  was  not  finished  but  rather
only  well  begun,  and  that  the  "  greater  things  "  promised
by  Christ  were  to  appear  in  the  dispensation  of  the
Paraclete.

One  of  the  names  given  to  the  movement  by  the
originators  of  it  themselves  was  "the  Spirituals,"  or
the  "  Spiritual  people  "  They  insisted  on  the  progressive
character  of  revelation,  and  they  originated  the  idea  of
well-marked  stages  in  revelation,  an  idea  which  comes
up  again  and  again  with  the  rise  of  mystical  societies
in  the  history  of  the  Church.  They  assumed  three
stages  : —

(i)  In  the  Old  Testament  revelation  was  in  its
infancy,  and  God  dealt  with  men  as  parents  do  with
children  of  feeble  insight.

(2)  Christ  and  the  apostles  advanced  revelation  to  the
stage  of  youth.  The  great  Master  was  still  unable  to
give  the  complete  and  final  truth.  He  had  many  things
to  say,  for  which  even  His  nearest  followers  were  not
ready,  and  He  tempered  His  message  and  His  commands
to  the  weakness  of  flesh.

(3)  In  Montanus  and  his  prophets,  revelation  comes
to  its  culmination  and  full  glory — it  is  the  stage  of  man-
hood, and  no  "  provision "  is  any  longer  made  for  the
"flesh."

This  progressive  character  of  revelation  gets  its  loftiest
expression  in  the  Passion  of  Saint  Perpetua,  a  Montanist
book  of  martyrdom  and  of  prophetic  visions,  written
early  in  the  third  century,  possibly  by  Tertullian  himself.
This  book  describes  the  noble  and  heroic  constancy  of  a
little  band  of  saints  from  the  village  of  Thuburbo,  near
Carthage,  who  died  in  the  arena  for  their  faith.  The
narrative  is  the  literary  gem  of  Montanism,  and  has  left
behind  an  undying  fragrance,  and  has  put  an  indelible
touch  of  glory  on  this  early  effort  to  realise  on  earth  a
Church  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Whatever  criticism  one  may
have    in    his    head    for    Montanism,    he    must    have    a


44  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

sympathetic  beat  of  the  heart  for  these  "  brave  and  blessed
martyrs,  called  and  selected  to  the  glory  of  Christ."  ^  The
little  group  of  Montanist  martyrs  (for  I  assume  they  were
Montanists)  from  Thuburbo  consisted  of  Saturninus  and
Secundus  ;  ^  Revocatus  and  Felicitas ;  Saturnus  and  a
noble  lady,  Vivia  Perpetua.  They  were  all  young.  Two
of  them,  Perpetua  and  Felicitas,  were  women  ;  and  two
of  them,  Felicitas  and  Revocatus,  were  slaves.  A  child
was  born  to  Felicitas  in  prison,  and  Perpetua  was  already
a  mother  when  she  was  apprehended.

The  "  Acts "  or,  as  the  narrative  is  more  properly
called,  the  Passion  of  Saint  Perpetua^  was  evidently
written  by  a  contemporary  Christian,  and  it  supplies
one  of  the  most  precious  documents  now  in  existence  for
the  study  of  Montanism.  The  writer  begins  his  narrative
by  insisting  that  the  revelation  of  God  is  still  going  on,
and  that  a  new  addition  to  this  growing  revelation  has
been  made  through  the  "  visions  "  of  Perpetua  and  her
companions.      He  says  :

"  Let  those  look  to  it  who  judge  of  the  Holy  Spirit  according
to  the  successive  ages  of  time ;  whereas  they  ought  to  regard
what  is  new,  nay,  what  is  newest,  as  most  full  of  power,  inasmuch
as  it  participates  in  that  exuberance  of  grace  which  is  promised
for  the  latter  days.  '  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  the  last  days
(saith  the  Lord)  that  I  will  pour  out  of  My  Spirit  upon  all  flesh ;
and  their  sons  and  their  daughters  shall  prophesy,  and  upon  all
My  servants  and  handmaids  will  I  pour  out  of  My  Spirit,  and  the
young  men  shall  see  visions  and  the  old  men  shall  dream  dreams.'
And  therefore  we  who  acknowledge  and  honour  recent  prophecies
and  visions  as  being  as  much  the  outcome  of  God's  promise  as
the  old,  and  who  reckon  all  the  operations  of  the  Holy  Spirit  as
part  of  the  endowment  of  the  Church — for  to  her  was  He  sent,
to  administer  all  gifts  to  all  members,  according  as  God  has
apportioned  to  each — we,  I  say,  of  necessity  both  record  these
things  and  recite  them  in  public  to  the  honour  of  God  ;  lest  men

1  Dr.  Rendel  Harris,  in  his  valuable  Introduction  to  the  Greek  text  of  The  Acts
of  the  Martyrdom  of  Perpetua  and  Felicitas,  edited  by  himself  and  Dr.  Seth  K.
Giflford  (London,  1890),  thinks  that  the  martyrdom  occurred  in  A.D.  203  (see
op.  cit.  pp.  8-13).  Dean  J.  Armitage  Robinson  holds  that  the  martyrs  here
considered  were  from  the  city  of  Carthage,  and  not  from  the  village  of  Thuburbo
(see  the  Passion  of  Saint  Perpetua,  edited  with  notes,  by  J.  Armitage  Robinson
(Cambridge,  1891),  pp.  22-26).

2  Secundus  died  in  orison  before  the  day  of  martyrdom  arrived.


Ill  MONTANISM:  A  RETURN  TO  PROPHECY  45

of  weak  or  pusillanimous  faith  should  suppose  that  the  grace  of  God
worked  only  of  old  either  unto  constancy  in  suffering  or  unto  wonder
of  revelations ;  whereas  He  worketh  always  as  He  promised.'''^

Tertullian,  too,  who  is  very  careful  not  to  impair  the
full  authority  of  the  New  Testament,  nevertheless  holds
that  there  are  stages  of  revelation,  and  he  maintains  that
the  dispensation  of  the  Paraclete — the  epoch  of  new
prophecy — holds  the  same  relation  to  the  apostles  as
Christ  does  to  Moses.  He  is  very  bold,  and  positively
announces  that  a  new  Church  Order  has  come — the  final
stage  of  revelation,  the  dispensation  of  the  Paraclete.  He
says  to  those  who  will  follow  the  new  prophecy :  "  You
will  thirst  for  no  instruction — no  questions  will  perplex
you."

The  Church  henceforth  is  to  be  "  the  Church  of  the
Spirit  by  means  of  a  spiritual  man  {i.e.  the  prophet) ;
not  the  Church  which  consists  of  a  number  of  bishops."
He  rises  to  the  insight  that  the  key  was  conferred  upon
Peter  only  because  he  was  spiritual,  and  that  the  true
successor  in  apostolic  authority  is  the  person  who  has  the
Holy  Spirit.  "  The  Church  in  the  proper  and  pre-
eminent sense  is  the  Holy  Spirit  Himself,  in  whom  is  the
trinity  of  the  One  Divinity — Father,  Son,  and  Holy
Spirit.  .  .  .  And  thus  from  this  time  onward  every
collection  of  persons  who  have  come  together  in  this
faith  is  accounted  *  a  church.' "  ^

Cardinal  Newman  finds  overwhelming  objection  to
the  movement  in  the  fact  that  "  the  very  foundation  of
Montanism  is  development,"  ^  and  there  can  be  no  doubt
that  this  was  a  central  idea.  Tertullian,  in  a  remarkable
passage,  declares  that  truth  is  progressive,  and  the  grace
of  God  "  operates  and  advances  to  the  end."

"What  kind  of  a  supposition  is  it,"  he  cries  out,  "that,  while
the  devil  is  always  operating  and  adding  daily  to  the  ingenuities
of  iniquity,  the  work  of  God  should  either  have  ceased  or  else

1  Passio  S.  Perfetuae,  i.

2  Tertullian,   On  Modesty,    chap.   xxi.       I   have  used  the  translation  in  the
volumes  of  the  Ante-Nicene  Fathers.

'^  An  Essay  on  Christian  Development,  pp.  349-50.


46  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

have  desisted  from  advancing}  The  reason  why  the  Lord  sent
the  Paraclete  was  that  since  human  mediocrity  was  unable  to  take
in  all  things  at  once,  discipline  should,  little  by  little,  be  directed
and  ordained,  and  carried  to  perfection,  by  that  Vicar  of  the  Lord^
the  Holy  Ghost.  Nothing  is  without  stages,  and  the  Holy  Spirit
is  ever  advancing  towards  better  things."  ^

The  stages  of  development  are  well  defined.  First,
there  viras  a  rudimentary  stage  when  men  lived  under
"  a  natural  fear  of  God."  From  that  stage  the  race
"  advanced,  through  the  law  and  the  prophets,  to
infancy  ;  from  that  stage  it  passed,  through  the  Gospel,
to  the  fervour  of  youth ;  now  through  the  Paraclete
it  is  settling  into  maturity.  He  will  be,  after  Christ,  the
only  one  to  be  called  and  revered  as  Master.  He  is  the
only  prelate,  because  He  alone  succeeds  Christ.  They
who  have  received  Him  set  truth  before  custom."  ^

According  to  the  Montanist  theory,  the  Holy  Spirit
may  come  upon  any  person,  of  any  rank,  and  of  either
sex.  In  this  respect  it  was  a  return  to  the  freedom  of
apostolic  days — to  a  priesthood  not  of  flesh  and  blood,
nor  the  will  of  man,  but  a  priesthood  of  believers.
Firmilian,  Bishop  of  Csesarea,  in  Cappadocia,  in  a  letter
cites  the  case  of  a  prophetess  who  came  into  his  diocese,
and  both  baptized  and  consecrated  the  Eucharist.
Tertullian  gives  a  very  interesting  account  of  the
performance  of  sacerdotal  rites  by  a  woman  :

"  We  have  now  among  us  a  sister  whose  lot  it  has  been  to  be
favoured  with  sundry  gifts  of  revelation,  which  she  experiences  in
the  Spirit  by  ecstatic  vision  amid  the  sacred  rites  of  the  Lord's
day  in  the  church :  she  converses  with  angels,  and  sometimes
even  with  the  Lord ;  she  both  sees  and  hears  mysterious  com-
munications ;  some  men's  hearts  she  understands,  and  to  them
who  are  in  need  she  distributes  remedies.  Whether  it  be  in  the
reading  of  Scriptures  or  in  the  preaching  of  sermons,  or  in  the
offering  up  of  prayers,  in  all  these  religious  services  matter  and
opportunity  are  afforded  to  her  of  seeing  visions.  .  .  .  For  her
witness  (of  her  vision)  there  was  God ;  and  the  apostle  most
assuredly  foretold  that  there  were  to  be  '  spiritual  gifts '  in  the
Church."  3

1  On  the  Veiling  of  Virgins,  chap.  i.  ^  /^/^   chap.  i.

^  Tertullian,  Treatise  on  the  Soul,  chap.  ix.


Ill  MONTANISM  :  A  RETURN  TO  PROPHECY  47

Epiphanius  says  that  in  a  Montanist  church  seven
virgins  used  to  come  in,  in  white  raiment,  bearing  torches  ;
that  they  would  then  prophesy  to  the  people,  and  move
them  to  repentance  and  to  tears  by  their  powerful  appeals.
He  says,  further,  that  women  were  priests  and  even
bishops.  The  first  condition,  however,  of  rising  to  place
and  position  in  the  Montanist  Church  was  the  possession
of  spiritual  power,  i.e.  ecstatic  prophecy.  The  new  Church
was  to  be,  as  Tertullian  said  in  the  words  already  quoted,
a  Church  of  the  Spirit,  manifested  through  a  spiritual
person,  who  might  be  any  person  whom  the  Spirit
selected.

The  Montanist  leaders  were  "  possessed "  with  the
idea  that  the  promises  in  John  xiv.-xvii.  were  now  being
fulfilled  in  them.  The  Holy  Spirit  was  now  given  ;  He
had  come  in  wholly  unique  fashion,  and  the  new  prophets
spoke  in  loftier  tone  and  with  higher  assumption  than
any  apostle  in  the  primitive  Church  had  done.  The
idea  was  lofty,  the  purpose  of  the  movement  was  right,
and  the  Montanist  leaders  were  feeling  after  something
which  inherently  belongs  to  the  religion  of  Christ.  But
Montanist  prophecy  was  not  a  return  to  the  New  Testa-
ment type,  and  it  did  not  have  in  it  the  potentiality  of
a  developing,  conquering  Christianity.  Its  type  of  pro-
phecy was  abnormal,  and  far  too  narrow.  There  was,  to
be  sure,  an  element  of  ecstasy  in  the  Apostolic  Church,
and  the  prophet  of  the  first  period  sometimes  received
visions  when  he  was  "  out  of  himself";  but  in  the  main  the
New  Testament  prophet  was  a  highly  gifted,  spiritually
developed  person  who  lived  on  a  lofty  level  of  experience,
practised  the  truth  which  he  knew,  and  he  saw^  by
profound  spiritual  insight,  the  divine  things  which  God
had  to  reveal  to  his  age.  Instead  of  suppressing  his
powers  and  obliterating  his  reason,  instead  of  sinking
to  a  passive  instrument  to  be  played  upon  by  an  outside
Force,  he  made  himself  an  organ  of  an  inward  Spirit
who  had  become  the  Life  of  his  life,  and  who  flooded
all  his  faculties  with  energy.  The  prophet  was  a  man
still,  using  the  powers  which  belonged  to  him   as  a  man,


48  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

and  he  was  different  from  other  men  only  in  that  he
co-operated  better  than  others  did  with  the  Divine  Spirit,
to  Whom  his  h'fe  was  consciously  allied.

Montanist  prophecy,  on  the  other  hand,  was  modelled
on  heathen  oracles  and  frenzied  soothsaying.  In  so  far
as  it  was  a  "  return,"  it  was  a  return  to  types  which
prevailed  in  most  primitive  religions — "  the  sacred
madness  of  the  bard,"  the  type  out  of  which  Hebrew
prophecy  evolved,  the  type  which  Christian  prophecy
left  far  behind.^

The  human  recipient  is,  in  the  Montanist  view,  a  mere
passive  instrument^  swept  and  moved  by  the  incoming
Divine  Spirit.  Human  reason  must  retire  and  conscious-
ness must  be  absent  before  any  revelation  can  come.
The  prophet  is  used  as  a  inedium.  He  imparts  nothing
of  his  own  ;  he  adds  nothing.  His  one  service  is  to  take
himself  out  of  the  way — to  sleep — and  let  the  Divine
Spirit  have  his  lips  to  use  as  the  musician  uses  the
lyre.  Reason  is  thus  thoroughly  discredited,  and  is
replaced  by  supernatural  oracles.  There  is  here  a  sharp
dualism  between  the  human  and  the  divine,  the  natural
and  the  supernatural.  Every  "  natural  "  process,  every
mental  activity,  is  undivine,  and  truth  comes  best  when
man  himself  has  most  withdrawn.  Personality  counts
for  nothing.  There  can  be  no  "  revelation "  through  a
person  in  his  normal  activities.  Finite  nature,  personal
characteristics,  must  be  suppressed  for  the  time  being,
and  then  God  can  work  unhindered.  All  the  fragments
preserved  from  Montanus  and  his  followers  support  this
view  of  prophecy  as  an  overpowering  of  the  soul  by  the
Spirit,  attended  by  a  condition  of  motionless  rapture  or
ecstasy.

Even  in  its  most  beautiful  expression,  in  the  visions
of  Perpetua,  one  feels  that  this  is  prophecy  of  the
second,  not  of  the  first  order.  Perpetua's  visions  are
excellent  illustrations  of  the  fact  that  in  ecstatic  vision
the  mind  still   uses,  though  sub-consciously,  the   material

^  For  a  somewhat  different  estimate  of  Montanist  prophecy,  see  Weinel,  op,
cit.  p.  95-


Ill   MONTANISM:  A  RETURN  TO  PROPHECY  49

of  experience,   and    has    by    no    means    shaken    off   the
human  element^

Montanus  and  his  two  prophetesses  claimed  that  the
Holy  Spirit  had  come  upon  them  in  wholly  unique
fashion.  They  put  themselves,  as  we  have  seen,  even
above  the  prophets  of  the  primitive  Church.  They  held
themselves  to  be  the  bearers  of  the  last  and  greatest
revelation  of  divine  truth.  They  figured  as  the  instru-
ments of  the  dispensation  of  the  Paraclete.  But,  in  fact,
they  exhibited  a  type  of  prophecy  which  was  of  a  lower
order  than  the  primitive  Christian  one,  and  they  pro-
posed a  basis  of  leadership  no  less  dangerous  than
that  which  was  being  formed  under  the  ecclesiastical
system.  They  proposed  a  church  guided  by  men  and
women,  speaking  in  ecstatic  states,  whose  "  oracles  "  were
to  form  "  a  new  law,"  and  whose  utterances  were  to  have
the  infallibility  belonging  to  the  last  word  of  the  Holy
Spirit.^  The  door  for  caprice  and  vagary  was  wide  open.
The  prophet  suppressed  his  reason  to  become  a  passive
lyre  for  the  Spirit,  and  whatever  might  come  through  his
lips  in  this  state  was  oracular.  His  listeners  were  bound
to  suppress  their  reason,  too,  for  the  revelation  was  by
hypothesis  above  reason,  and  they  were  to  take  the
"  word "  without  question  as  the  will  of  the  Paraclete.
It  was  the  oracular  prophecy  of  Dodona  and  Delphi
in  a  new  dress  and  baptized  with  a  new  name.  It  gave
extraordinary  place  to  those  pathological  persons  who
abound   in   all  ages   and  countries,  and  who,  in  response

^  Perpetua  says  :  ' '  One  day  my  brother  said  to  me,  '  Dear  lady  and  sister,
you  are  now  in  such  high  favour  (with  God)  that  if  you  ask  for  a  vision  it  would
be  granted  you,  whereby  you  may  know  whether  death  or  liberty  awaits  you.'  "
The  beautiful  "vision"  which  was  granted  her  has  undoubtedly  an  "other
worldly"  element  in  it,  but  it  comes  in  the  material  and  the  setting  of  Perpetua's
dominant  ideas.  For  instance,  when  she  is  welcomed  to  heaven  by  ' '  the  white-
haired  man  of  great  stature,  in  the  guise  of  a  shepherd,  milking  sheep,"  she  is
g^ven  "bread  and  cheese"  to  eat,  which  Rendel  Harris,  quite  rightly,  I  think,
believes  is  a  reference  to  a  simplified  form  of  the  Commimion  meal,  which  some
of  the  Montanists  wished  to  introduce  ;  and  "  the  kiss  of  peace,"  which  holds  an
important  place  in  the  "visions,"  was  another  dominant  idea  in  Montanist
practice.

2  It  is  quite  likely,  as  Hamack  says  {Hist,  of  Dogma,  vol.  ii.  p.  98,  n.  4),
that  the  Montanist  prophets  themselves  did  not  intend  their  inspired  words  to
be  turned  into  precise  "laws,"  but  that  is  what  actually  happened  in  later
Montanism,  and  it  has,  too,  been  the  course  in  many  other  religious  movements
since  !


50  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

to  suggestion,  and  by  the  influence  of  imitation,  fall  into
trance,  or  ecstasy,  and  utter  words  automatically.  Not
thus  is  the  dispensation  of  the  Paraclete  realized.  Not
thus  comes  the  Church  of  the  Spirit  to  supplant  the
ecclesiastical  Church.

The  inherent  weakness  of  Montanist  prophecy  lay  in
its  suppression  of  personality,  in  the  annihilation  of  those
very  faculties  through  which  a  personal  God  could
reveal  Himself.  There  was  left  no  test  of  truth,  no
criterion  of  revelation,  no  principle  of  continuous  expan-
sion.^ It  gave  no  solid  basis  for  historical  development
by  the.  orderly  unfolding  of  a  steadily  maturing  plan.
In  short,  it  was  non-spiritual,  as  any  movement  must  be
which  undertakes  to  overleap  the  barriers  of  human
nature  and  attain  truth  at  a  bound,  instead  of  winning  it
as  a  possession  of  conscious  personality  by  making  it  the
inward  spring  and  power  of  a  transformed  will.  Ecstatic
prophecy,  calling  for  the  annihilation  of  human  reason
and  reducing  the  prophet  to  a  blind  instrument,  was  at
best  a  dangerous  experiment,  and  it  would  have  been  a
feeble  substitute  for  the  imperial  Church  to  which  it  was
opposed.

There  was  another  structural  weakness  in  Montanism.
Instead  of  receiving  the  message  of  its  prophets  as
spiritual  illumination,  and  as  inspiration  for  free  and
continuous  personal  intercourse  with  God,  the  Montanist
fellowship  treated  the  communications  as  "  oracles "  to
be  obeyed  as  a  new  law.  These  new  prophets  did  not
conceive  the  Church  as  a  living  organism,  penetrated
and  unified  by  an  inward,  formative  Spirit,  and  growing
continuously  by  conserving  in  a  true  spiritual  way  the
gains  of  the  past,  so  that  the  later  members  would  be
capable  of  higher  insight  as  a  result  of  the  insight  of
their  predecessors.  The  truth  was,  rather,  to  be  found
in  the  "  oracle  "  of  an  ecstatic  prophet,  and  this  "  truth  "
was   to   be    accepted    and    practised    as  the   will    of   the

1  So  far  as  a  test  was  proposed,  it  was  conformity  to  the  revelations  which
had  been  given  in  the  apostolic  period,  but  the  fundamental  assumption  of  the
"new  prophecy"  was  that  it  was  an  advance  upon  all  that  was  given  in  the
past,  and  consequently  the  new  could  not  consistently  be  judged  by  the  old.


Ill  MONTANISM:  A  RETURN  TO  PROPHECY   51

Paraclete.  The  entire  collection  of  "  revelations  "  would
form  the  ultimate  law  of  Christianity,  higher  than  that
of  Sinai,  and  higher  even  than  that  of  the  Gospel.^

The  radical  error  lay  in  the  conception  of  Christianity
as  law.  It  was,  of  course,  a  well-nigh  universal  blunder.
The  religion  of  Christ  which  called  for  a  new  man,  and
which  asked  for  a  life  in  Christ  Jesus,  had  already  given
place  to  a  substitute  religion^  which  was  of  a  thoroughly
legal  character.  It  was  submission  to  a  sy stern  which
regulated  belief  and  practice.  Montanism  did  not  rise
above  this  legalism.  It  only  substituted  another  kind
of  legalism.  Imperial  Christianity  was  turning  the  Gospel
and  the  apostolic  teaching  into  a  law- system,  complete
and  final.  Montanism  put  in  the  place  of  that  law-system
a  "  new  law,"  composed  of  revelations  of  the  Paraclete,
spoken  through  prophets.  It  failed  to  introduce  a  truly
spiritual  religion,  grounded  in  the  direct  relation  of  man
as  spirit  to  God  as  Spirit.

Montanism  as  a  "  new  law  "  was  a  movement  toward
much  sterner  discipline  and  a  very  much  stricter  moral
life.  It  pushed  to  the  extreme  the  tendency  already
under  way  toward  asceticism  and  toward  severe  Church
discipline.  The  new  law,  which  Montanist  prophecy
furnished,  was  to  regulate  daily  life  and  purify  the  Church.
The  later  writings  of  Tertullian  are  full  of  insistence  on
a  strict  moral  life.  In  fact,  it  was  the  puritanic  character
of  Montanism  that  attracted  Tertullian  to  it.  He  was
opposed  to  every  pursuit  of  life  which  would  bring
Christians  into  contact  with  heathen  idolatry,  and  he
urged  a  complete  separation  from  the  contamination
of  the  world.  He  emphatically  declares  the  incompati-
bility of  Christianity  and  war.  It  is  unbecoming  for  any
man  "  to  range  himself  under  the  standard  of  Christ  and
also  under  that  of  the  devil,  to  bivouac  in  the  camp
of  light  and  also  in  the  camp  of  darkness."      "  The  Lord

*  It  must,  however,  be  remembered  that  the  ideal  of  the  Montanist  leaders
was  progressive  development,  unending  revelation.  Tertullian  at  his  best,  as  we
have  seen,  seems  to  have  had  an  idea  of  a  growing  spiritual  body  of  believers,
but  he  also  treats  the  "revelations"  of  prophets  and  prophetesses  as  final  and
authoritative.


52  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

disarmed  Peter,  and  in  doing  so  unbuckled  the  sword  of
every  soldier."  -^  He  also  opposes  the  exercise  of  public
office  as  being  contaminating.  It  is,  he  says,  impossible
to  hold  an  office  without  presiding  at  spectacles,  withv
out  taking  an  oath,  without  passing  judgment  of  life  or
death.^  Tertullian  also  urges  that  sinners  guilty  of  gross
immorality  should  not  be  reinstated  in  the  Church,  or,
at  least,  should  be  absolved,  not  by  official  authority,
but  by  the  decision  of  the  Spirit,  speaking  through  a
prophet.

But  the  two  distinctly  new  regulations  which  Montanism
introduced  were  (i)  new  laws  about  marriage,  and  (2)  new
laws  about  fasts.  There  is  an  "  oracle  "  of  Priscilla  which
says  :  "  Only  the  holy  minister  can  minister  sanctity,  for
purity  unites  (with  the  Spirit),  and  they  (the  pure)  see
visions,  and,  bowing  their  faces  downward,  they  hear
distinct  words  spoken."  This  oracle  means,  according  to
Tertullian,  that  '*  purity,"  or  virginity,  is  the  true  con-
dition for  receiving  a  revelation.  Virginity  is  the  highest
stage  of  life,  but,  as  marriage  is  permitted  by  Divine
authority,  and  is  essential  to  the  propagation  of  the  race,
Montanism  did  not  require  celibacy.  Its  new  command
was  that  there  should  be  single  marriage.  It  allowed
second  marriage  on  no  condition  whatever.  This  custom
of  avoiding  second  marriage  had  already  prevailed  in
the  case  of  bishops  ;  Montanism,  on  the  basis  that  all
Christians  are  under  a  Divine  ordination,  widened  the
custom  into  a  law  for  all.  The  change  of  attitude  worked
in  two  ways.  On  the  one  hand,  it  raised  marriage  to  a
higher  level  by  making  it  a  union  for  time  and  eternity  ;
on  the  other  hand,  by  over-emphasizing  the  sexual  side  it
led  to  the  degradation  of  marriage,  and  prepared  the  way
for  the  monstrosity  of  a  celibate  priesthood.

Montanists  claimed  that  no  complete  system  of  fasts
was  laid  down  in  the  primitive  Church,  because  the
Church  was  then  in  its  infant  stage,  and  man  "not  able
to  bear  "  the  whole  system  of  religious  perfection.  This
completer  change  was  introduced  through  their  prophets.

1  Tertullian,  On  Idolatry,  chap.  xix.  ,  ^  /^/^^  chap,  xviii.


Ill  MONTANISM:  A  RETURN  TO  PROPHECY   53

The  revelations  of  the  new  prophecy  provided  that  there
should  be  a  new  fast  of  two  weeks'  duration  (called  the
"  Xerophagy,"  which  means  eating  dry  food).  During
this  period  there  was  to  be  abstinence  not  only  from
flesh  and  wine,  and  from  bathing,  but  also  from  all  succu-
lent food  and  juicy  fruit.  Furthermore,  the  regular  weekly
"half-fast,"  which  the  Church  observed  only  until  three
o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  was  prolonged  by  the  Montanists
until  evening.  More  than  this,  one  finds  in  the  Montanist
movement  an  undue  feeling  of  the  im.portance  of  abstin-
ence for  its  own  sake.  The  strict  Montanists  felt  that
those  who  obeyed  the  new  teaching  belonged  to  a  higher
class  than  that  to  which  the  ordinary  Christian  belonged
— they  formed,  in  fact,  a  "  peculiar  people."  They  called
themselves  "  Spirituals,"  and  set  themselves  over  against
ordinary  Christians,  who  were  called  "  Psychical,"  or
carnal.  One  serious  outcome  of  this  ascetic  spirit  was
the  tendency  to  set  "  this  world  "  over  against  the  King-
dom of  God  as  a  supernatural  world.  "  That  world  "  is
to  be  reached  only  by  escaping  from  "this  world."  This
attitude  led  to  an  excessive  zeal  for  the  martyr's  death
— a  zeal  which  lasted  throughout  the  entire  period  of
Montanism.  TertuUian  quotes  with  approval  an  "  oracle  "
of  the  Paraclete  through  a  Montanist  prophet :  "  Let  it
not  be  your  wish  to  die  in  your  beds  in  the  pains  of
childbirth,  or  in  debilitating  fever ;  but  desire  to  die
as  martyrs,  that  He  may  be  glorified  who  died  for  you."  ^
In  his  treatise  on  the  soul,  TertuUian  holds  that  departed
souls  are  detained  in  Hades  until  the  resurrection,  but
that  the  souls  of  martyrs  are  received  at  death  directly
into  Paradise.  He  quotes  in  confirmation  erf  this  that
Perpetua  saw  in  a  vision  only  those  in  Paradise  who
had  died  in  martyrdom,  and  he  adds  :  "  The  sole  key  to
unlock  Paradise  is  your  own  life's  blood."  ^

Another  outcome  of  their  undue  emphasis  on  the
supernatural  was  their  eager  expectation  of  the  millennium.
"  This  world,"  with   its   temptations,   its   imperfections,   its

^  TertuUian,  On  Flight  in  Persecution,  sec.  9  ;  and  A  Treatise  on  t/u  Soul
chap.  Iv.

^  Id.  A  Treatise  on  the  Soul,  chap    iv.


54  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

evils,  was  to  end,  and  the  perfect  reign  of  the  heavenly
King  was  to  come  by  miracle — it  was  to  come  then
and  there.  Montanus  undertook  to  gather  all  those  of
his  faith  together  into  one  great  community  about  the
town  of  Pepuza,  in  Phrygia.  He  named  the  locality
"Jerusalem."  The  members  were  to  sever  their  former
connections  with  the  world  and  society,  to  form  an  un-
divided Christian  Commonwealth,  where,  living  pure,  holy
lives,  the  "  spiritual  "  were  to  wait  for  the  descent  of  the  new
Jerusalem  from  above.^  An  oracle  of  Prisca  says  :  "  Christ
came  to  me  and  showed  me  that  this  place  (Pepuza)
is  holy,  and  here  Jerusalem  will  come  down  from  heaven."
Maximilla  also  said  :  "  After  me  there  shall  be  no  more
prophetess,  but  an  end."  This  glowing  expectation  of
the  visible  coming  of  the  heavenly  Jerusalem  appears
with  unabated  vividness  in  the  writings  of  Tertullian.
Here  is  his  extraordinary  account  of  its  imminent
appearing  :

"  The  word  of  the  new  prophecy,  which  is  a  part  of  our  belief,
attests  how  it  foretold  that  there  would  be,  for  a  sign,  a  picture  of
this  very  city  exhibited  to  view  previous  to  its  manifestation.
This  prophecy,  indeed,  has  been  very  lately  fulfilled  in  an
expedition  to  the  East.  For  it  is  evident  from  the  testimony
even  of  heathen  witnesses  that  in  Judea  there  was  suspended  in
the  sky  a  city,  early  every  morning  for  forty  days.  As  the  day
advanced,  the  entire  figure  of  the  walls  would  wane,  and  some-
times it  would  vanish  instantly."  ^

The  movement,  as  we  have  already  seen,  early  came
into  sharp  collision  with  the  Church.  Its  prophecy  was
pronounced  not  only  contrary  to  that  of  the  apostolic
days,  but  a  delusion  of  the  evil  spirit.  Its  "fasts"  and
its  stricter  discipline  were  denounced  as  innovations,  and,
when  other  "  argument "  failed,  the  moral  character  of  the
prophets  was  assailed.  Like  all  contagious  movements,
it  flourished  on  persecution,  and,  as  we  have  seen,  martyr-
dom grew  into  a  holy  passion.  In  the  first  stages,  when
the  movement  was  borne  on  by  an  irresistible  enthusiasm,

'^  See  Eusebius'  Church  History,  chap,  xviii,  ;  see  also  Harnack's  History  of
Dogma,  vol.  ii.  p.  95.

^  Tertullian,  Agaiitst  Marcion,  chap.  xxv.


Ill   MONTANISM  :  A  RETURN  TO  PROPHECY   55

the  Church  made  little  headway  in  the  effort  to  crush
it  out.  But  in  the  later  stages,  as  it  settled  down  into  a
system  outside  the  "  great  Church,"  the  merciless  perse-
cution which  was  made  against  it  began  to  be  effective.
One  gets  in  the  story  of  the  annihilation  of  Montanism
startling  exhibitions  of  ecclesiastical  hate.  An  anonymous
writer,  quoted  in  Eusebius,  says  that  when  members  of  the
"  great  Church "  and  Montanists  were  brought  together
in  prisons,  by  a  common  anti- Christian  persecution,  the
former  refused  all  intercourse  with  the  latter.  Cyril  of
Jerusalem  shows  an  excess  of  ecclesiastical  slander.  He
reports  that  one  of  the  rites  of  the  Montanists  is  the
sacrifice  of  an  infant  child,  and  the  eating  of  his  flesh  !
Under  Constantine,  edicts  were  issued  depriving  Mon-
tanists of  their  meeting-places  and  forbidding  their  form
of  worship.  The  penal  laws  against  them  were  steadily
increased  in  severity,  and  finally,  in  the  reign  of  Justinian,
the  "  sect "  was  practically  crushed  out  of  existence.
Procopius  has  preserved  an  appalling  picture  of  one  of
the  last  scenes  in  this  spiritual  drama.  Surrounded
everywhere  by  the  coils  of  hate  and  persecution,  the  last
little  remnant  of  the  "  spiritual  fellowship,"  in  despair,
gathered  together — men,  women,  and  children — in  their
own  place  of  worship,  set  fire  to  the  house,  and  so  went
to  find  the  New  Jerusalem,  for  which  they  had  waited  on
earth  in  vain.

Montanism,  as  a  movement,  "  failed  "  ;  its  books  were
destroyed,  its  prophets  were  thrown  to  the  beasts.  Both
the  world  and  the  "  Church  "  arrayed  themselves  against
it,  and  finally  stamped  it  out.  It  would  have  "  failed,"
however,  without  the  stern  methods  which  were  used
against  it,  for  it  had  not  within  itself  the  inherent  power
of  ministering  to  the  condition  of  the  world  and  the  soul
of  man.  It  was,  at  best,  a  crude  and  imperfect  type  of
the  religion  of  the  Spirit,  and  there  were  to  be  weary
centuries  of  moral  and  spiritual  discipline  before  the  truth
could  set  men  free.  But,  in  another  sense,  Montanism
did  not  "  fail " — the  blood  of  its  martyrs  revivified  faith
m  the  real  presence  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  its  prophetic


56  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap,  m

word  about  the  unending  development  and  progress  of
spiritual  revelation  was  too  quick  and  powerful  to  be
silenced  by  the  beasts  of  the  arena.  That  word,  once
well  uttered,  was  to  grow  in  the  hearts  of  men  until  a
type  of  the  religion  of  the  Spirit  could  be  born,  virile
enough  to  succeed.


CHAPTER    IV

ROOTS    OF    MYSTICISM    IN    CLASSICAL    LITERATURE

I  HAVE  already  pointed  out  that  primitive  Christianity
was  mystical  at  its  very  heart  and  centre.  The  highest
revelation  which  Christ  makes  is  the  exhibition  of  the
fact  that  God's  nature  is  such,  and  man's  nature  is  such,
that  there  can  be  a  true  union  of  God  and  man  in  a
personal  life.  Paul  and  John  set  forth  a  type  of  religion
grounded  in  the  soul's  own  experience  of  God.  There
was,  too,  a  strong  mystical  strain  in  the  writings  of  the
Church  Fathers.  Christianity,  then,  whenever  it  went
back  to  its  primitive  literature  for  its  inspiration,  was
almost  certain  to  become  mystical.  But  there  were
other  powerful  influences  which  largely  determined  the
type  of  mysticism  which  actually  appeared.  The  fact
cannot  be  too  often  pressed  that  historical  Christianity
is  a  product  of  many  movements,  a  religion  woven  out
of  many  strands  of  faith  and  thought  and  practice.  The
river  of  water  of  life  which  flowed  from  Christ  was
eventually  changed  and  coloured  by  streams  from  all
lands  and  peoples  and  religions.  What  is  true  of
ecclesiastical  Christianity  is  also  true  of  mystical
Christianity.  It  has  many  sources,  not  one  single
source.  No  origin  can  ever  be  found  for  man's  highest
spiritual  insights.  Behind  each  apparent  beginning
there  was  an  earlier  movement  ;  at  the  back  of  every
prophet  there  was  some  one  whose  human  hand,  however
feebly,  passed  on  the  touch  to  him.  Every  person's  ex-
perience, even  in  the  highest  reaches  of  it,  is  affected  by

57


58  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

what  some  other  soul  has  already  experienced,  for
human  life  is  profoundly  organic.

Platonic  philosophy  was  by  far  the  greatest  pre-
Christian  influence.  In  fact  it  may  be  said  that
Plato  is  the  father  of  speculative,  as  distinguished  from
simple,  implicit,  unreflective  mysticism.  It  has  fallen
to  the  lot  of  few  mortals  to  beget  so  large  a  spiritual
progeny  as  this  Greek  who  left  no  physical  child  to
propagate  his  line,  and  one  does  not  wonder  that  the
Greek  Christian  Fathers  put  him  in  the  list  of  the
great  prophets  of  the  eternal  Word,  or  that  he  was  called
"  the  Attic  Moses."

The  mysticism  of  the  Platonic  movement  in  reality
goes  back  behind  Plato  himself,  and  had  its  creative
source  in  Socrates,  and  to  a  lesser  extent  in  Pythagoras
and  the  Pythagorean  school.^  Socrates  belongs  to
the  order  of  the  prophets.  He  is  in  that  class  of  persons,
appearing  in  all  ages,  who  feel  their  connection  with  the
Divine,  and  who  speak  and  act  with  an  insight  far  beyond
the  range  of  their  own  account  of  it.  During  his  entire
life  he  was  conscious  of  an  inner  guide  which  he  called
"the  divine  something  in  his  breast."  Intimations,  upon
numerous  occasions  of  his  life,  came  to  him  with  an  inward
compelling  power,  and  he  had  direct  revelations  of  the
suitable  course  for  him  to  pursue,  and  these  experiences
made  him  feel  that  he  was  in  an  unusual  sense  under
divine  care  and  under  divine  orders.  Feelings,  sugges-
tions, incursions,  whose  origin  he  could  not  trace  or
discover,  exercised  over  him  irresistible  control.  There
was,  too,  as  many  of  his  disciples  declare,  an  extra-
ordinary gift  of  personal  magnetism  in  him,  due  in  some
measure  to  the  belief  of  his  contemporaries  that  he  was
in  intimate  relations  with  higher  powers.

"  When  I  hear  him  speak,"  says  Alcibiades  in  the  Symposium^
"my  heart    leaps  up  far   more  than   the  hearts   of  those   who

^  There  are  many  legends  which  connect  Plato  with  the  Far  East,  and  there  is
DO  doubt  that  such  a  universal  mind  as  Plato's  was  would  absorb  something  from
India,  Persia,  and  Egypt,  even  though  the  stories  of  oriental  travel  are  legendary.
But  the  evidence  of  direct  influence  upon  him  from  the  religions  of  these  countries
is  very  slight.


IV  MYSTICISM  IN  CLASSICAL  LITERATURE   59

celebrate  the  Corybantic  mysteries ;  my  tears  are  poured  out  as
he  talks — a  thing  I  have  seen  happen  to  many  others  besides
myself.  ...  I  stop  my  ears,  therefore,  as  from  the  Sirens,  and
flee  away  as  fast  as  possible,  that  I  may  not  sit  down  beside  him
and  grow  old  listening  to  his  talk."

These  inward  experiences,  however  we  may  account  for
them  now,  were  of  very  great  importance  to  the  foremost
disciple  of  Socrates,  Plato,  who  came  to  him  in  his  youth
and  who,  under  the  spell  of  his  enchanting  talk,  burned
his  poems  and  turned  all  his  powers  to  the  problems  of
the  soul.  He  did  not  himself  possess  a  psychical  constitu-
tion of  the  type  of  his  master's ;  that  is  to  say  he
was  not  in  the  same  way  subject  to  incursions  and
intimations  which  broke  in  upon  him,  and  which  seemed
to  come  to  him  from  a  foreign  source, — but  he  continued
and  carried  still  farther  than  his  master  the  belief  that
there  are  germs  of  truth,  dormant  within  all  men,  waiting
only  to  be  quickened  and  started  growing  to  come  into
full  power  within  the  mind.  Socrates  had  playfully
called  himself  a  mental  midwife,  whose  service — a
"  divinely  ordained  service,"  he  says — was  to  help  men
bring  their  own  embryonic  ideas  and  truths  to  full
birth.  This  doctrine  of  the  soul's  native  capacity  to  rise
to  truth  and  beauty  and  goodness,  in  short  to  find  the
realm  of  divine  reality,  suggested  by  Socrates,  is  vastly
expanded  by  Plato  and  is  one  of  his  greatest  religious  con-
tributions. Nobody  has  insisted  with  stronger  emphasis
than  he  on  the  divine  origin  of  the  soul.  It  is  a  pre-
supposition of  his  entire  philosophy  that  the  soul,  even
while  an  alien  in  this  worlds  is  always  within  sight  of  the
real,  ie.  the  eternal,  world  because  it  is  unsevered  from
its  source.      He  sa^^s  (through  the  mouth  of  Socrates) :

"Those  who  pass  their  time  with  me  have  never  learnt  any-
thing fromx  me,  but  have  discovered  for  themselves  in  their  own
minds  treasures  manifold  for  their  possession.  Of  this  birth  I
under  heaven  am  the  cause."  ^

1  Theaetetus,  150.  It  will  be  seen  as  this  chapter  progresses,  that  I  do  not
consider  the  "  two- world  "  interpretation,  so  frequently  given,  a  correct  under-
standing, but  rather  a  misunderstanding  of  Plato's  teaching.


6o  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

Plato  often  seems  to  set  the  tvy>  worlds  sharply
against  each  other — the  world  of  truth,  of  unity,  of
permanence  yonder ;  the  world  of  error,  of  variety,  of
mutability  here.  There  is  reality,  here  is  only  show ;
there  is  the  pattern,  here  is  only  mimic  copy  ;  there  the
One,  here  the  many.

As  there  are  two  worlds,  so,  too,  there  seem  to  be  two
distinct  levels  of  experience.  On  the  level  of  sense  a
person  deals  only  with  this  show-world.  Sense  can  give
only  the  transitory,  only  the  contingent,  only  what  is  in
endless  flux  of  becoming  and  decaying.

"  We  must  make  a  distinction,"  he  says  in  the  Timaeus,  "of  the
two  great  forms  of  being,  and  ask  :  what  is  that  7vhich  is  and  has
no  becoj?nng,  and  what  is  that  which  is  always  becoming  and  never
is}  The  latter,  which  is  apprehended  by  opinion  through
irrational  sensation,  is  ever  coming  into  being  and  perishing,
but  never  really  is."

The  other  level  is  pure  knowledge,  or  intelligence,
by  which  the  mind  reaches  the  realities  of  the  world
yonder  ;  the  abiding,  unchangeable  realities  which  are
freed  from  everything  transitory  and  contingent.  As
Plato  himself  puts  it  in  this  same  passage  of  the
Timaeus  :  "  The  world  apprehended  by  Reason  or  Thought
is  ever  changeless  and  one  with  itself."

Plato  used  the  word  Ideas  not  to  indicate  something
conceived  in  the  mind  as  we  use  the  word,  but  to  indicate
those  permanent  realities  which  stay  unchanged  in  all
the  welter  of  mutation,  like,  for  example,  the  Idea  man
or  the  universal  man,  regardless  of  the  changes  which
happen  to  particular  men,  such  as  John  and  Peter  and
Henry  ;  or  like  the  law  of  gravitation  through  all  the
flux  of  infinite  particles  of  matter.  "  Ideas  "  are  in  short
types  or  laws.  Sense  never  gives  us  these  immutable,
permanent  realities — these  "  Ideas  "  which  abide  ;  it  gives
only  a  "  this  "  or  a  "  that,"  only  a  contingent  something,
nothing  which  is  just  itself  for  ever.

Where  then  did  the  mind  get  these  permanent  truths?
It  got  them,  Plato  tells  us  in  poetical  and  mythical
language,  from  a  supersensuous  world  where  before  birth


IV  MYSTICISM  IN  CLASSICAL  LITERATURE  6i

it  lived  and  dwelt  in  the  presence  of  pure  being,  and
where  it  contemplated  every  day  these  ultimate  and
unchanging  realities.  The  soul  was  at  home  there  in
the  real  world  and  saw  that  ivhich  is.  In  a  myth  of
exceeding  beauty  he  has  told  us  how  the  soul  fared  in
that  other  realm,  and  how  it  fell  from  that  world  of
reality  to  this  world  of  shadows  :

"The  region  above  the  heavens  is  the  place  of  true  knowledge.
There  colourless,  formless,  and  intangible  being  is  visible  to  the
mind,  which  is  the  only  lord  of  the  soul.  And  as  the  divine
intelligence  and  that  of  every  other  soul  which  is  rightly  nourished
is  fed  upon  mind  and  pure  knowledge,  such  an  intelligent  soul  is
glad  at  beholding  being;  and  feeding  on  the  sight  of  truth  is
replenished."  ^

But  whenever  a  soul  is  unable  to  maintain  its  vision
of  truth  and  fails  to  nourish  its  wings  with  the  sight  of
pure  being,  that  soul  falls  to  this  lower  world  and  lives
here  among  the  shadows.  But  it  never  altogether  forgets
the  realities  it  has  seen  in  the  eternal  home.  Deep  in  its
memory  it  holds  those  realities  it  has  known  and,  when  it
sees  the  shadow-image  of  the  real  thing,  it  remembers  the
"  Idea "  which  it  knew  in  the  other  sphere,  so  that  all
true  knowledge  is  reminiscence.

In  another  figure  ^  he  has  compared  this  lower  life  of
sense  experience  to  human  beings

*'  living  in  an  underground  cave,  with  their  faces  turned  toward
the  back  of  the  cave ;  they  have  been  there  from  their  child-
hood, and  have  their  legs  and  necks  chained  that  they  cannot
move,  and  can  only  see  before  them ;  for  the  chains  are  arranged
in  such  a  manner  as  to  prevent  them  from  turning  round  their
heads.  Above  and  behind  them  the  light  of  a  fire  is  blazing  at
a  distance,  and  between  the  fire  and  the  prisoners  there  is  a
raised  w^ay  \  and  you  will  see,  if  you  look,  a  low  wall  built  along
the  way  .  .  .  over  which  puppets  are  shown."

The  chained  men  within  never  see  anything  but  the
shadows  of  these  puppets.  Their  world  is  "just  nothing
but  the  shadows  of  images."

Here  in   Plato,  taken  in  a  prosaic  and  literal  sense,  we

1  Phaedrus,  247.  *  Republic,  opening  of  Book  VII.


62  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

have  the  beginning  of  that  tendency,  which  has  played
such  .a  mighty  part  in  Western  speculation,  and  which
appears  in  almost  every  school  of  mysticism  —  the
tendency  to  treat  the  sense  world  as  unreal,  shadowy,
and  undivine.  The  temporal  is  in  sharp  antithesis  to  the
eternal.  The  latter  is  the  realm  of  being  \  the  former  is
"  the  other  " — a  cave  of  shadows.  But,  even  when  taken
at  its  face  value  and  in  its  superficial  meaning,  Plato's
doctrine  is  never  consistently  dualistic,  for  he  finds  it
impossible  to  treat  tJiis  world  as  a  stubborn,  foreign
"other,"  unrelated  to  that  which  is  and  to  the  mind
which  perceives  it.  The  soul — i.e.  the  spiritual  principle
in  man — lives  in  both  worlds  and  can  always  find  a
suggestion  of  that  which  is  in  that  which  appears.  In
the  "  cave-myth  "  some  of  the  dwellers  in  the  cave  "  turn
their  necks  round "  and  "  go  up  and  lock  at  the  light."
At  first  "  the  glare  of  the  light  distresses  them "  and
they  are  unable  to  "  see  the  realities  of  which  they  have
before  been  seeing  the  shadows."  But  gradually  "  they
grow  accustomed  to  the  sight  of  the  upper  world."  And
when  they  remember  their  "  old  habitation  and  the
wisdom  of  the  cave  and  their  fellow -prisoners  they
felicitate  themselves  on  the  change,"  and  they  desire
"  to  descend  again  among  the  prisoners  of  the  cave "  to
help  them  to  get  liberated  and  "  to  see  realities."

Plato  tells  us  the  entire  allegory  means  that  the  prison
is  the  world  of  sense,  and  that  the  ascent  and  vision  of
things  above,  i.e.  realities,  is  *'  the  upward  progress  of  the
soul  into  the  intellectual  world,  where  it  gains  beatific
vision  "  ;  for  "  our  argument  shows,"  he  adds,  "  that  the
power  of  knozving  reality  is  already  in  the  soul  when  the
eye  of  the  soul  is  turned!'     Or  as  he  puts  it  in  the  Phaedo  :

"  When  the  soul  returns  into  itself  and  reflects,  it  passes  into
another  region  (than  that  of  the  world  of  sense),  the  region  of
that  which  is  pure  and  everlasting,  immortal  and  unchangeable ;
and,  feeling  itself  kindred  thereto^  it  dwells  there  under  its  own
control,  and  has  rest  from  its  wanderings,  and  is  constant  and
one  with  itself  as  are  the  objects  with  which  it  deals."  ^

1  The  Phaedo,  7^  C.


IV  MYSTICISM  IN  CLASSICAL  LITERATURE  63

This  means  that  the  soul  has  within  itself,  whether  by
reminiscence  or  otherwise,  the  power  of  rising  above  the
transitory  to  that  which  is  permanent,  and  that  there  is
something  in  the  soul  kindred  to  the  Reality  which  it
contemplates.  He  repeatedly  says  in  the  Republic  that
the  essential  thing  in  virtue  and  vice,  in  goodness  and
badness,  is  the  disposition  of  the  soul  which  they  reveal.^

As  Plato's  conception  developed,  he  dwelt  more  and
more  upon  the  one  ultimate  Reality  which  binds  all
subordinate  realities  into  an  organic  whole — the  supreme
unity  of  all  that  is.  This  he  called  the  "  Idea  of  the
Good."  Through  the  "  Idea  of  the  Good "  all  special
spheres  of  reality  are  united  in  One  Ultimate  Real.  This
is  the  Source  and  Goal  of  all  things — the  Alpha  and
Omega.  Toward  It  all  that  is  moves.  It  is  the  end
and  Final  Cause  in  the  entire  circuit  of  the  universe —
"  the  one  far-off  divine  event  to  which  the  whole  creation
moves."  Whatever  comes  to  any  degree  or  stage  of
being  does  so  through  the  attraction  of  the  Idea  of  the
Good.  The  universe  in  all  its  parts  is  realizing  an  End
which  is  Good  and  the  end  or  Goal  functions  in  the
entire  process.  As  the  idea  of  a  loved  one  moves  the
lover  toward  her  whom  he  loves,  so  the  Idea  of  the  Good
moves  the  many  parts  of  the  universe  toward  Itself,  the
One  Reality — the  Absolute  Good.

The  great  question  now  for  the  interpreter  of  Plato  is
this :  Does  Plato  seriously  mean  that  the  permanent
realities,  and  above  all  the  One  Reality,  are  actually  off  in
another  world,  and  that  our  only  knowledge  of  them  is
by  Reminiscence,  or  is  the  ultimate  Reality,  the  Absolute
Good,  immanent  in  the  universe,  and  immanent,  too,  in
the  mind  that  knows  it  ?  It  is  obvious  to  everybody  who
thinks  about  it,  that,  if  through  these  Ideas,  or  permanent
realities,  we  truly  know  anything,  then  there  must  be
some  organic  unity  between  our  minds  and  those  things
which  we  know.  If  they  are  apart  from  the  mind  in
another  world,  they  are  of  no  use  to  us,  and  Plato  cannot
possibly  have  thought  that  they  could  have  been  actually

*  The  Republic,  358  B  ;   361  E  ;   367  E,


64  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

perceived  by  sense  in  some  earlier  world,  or  in  some  world
higher  up.  An  Idea  to  have  any  value  must  unify
thought  and  being  and  be  manifested  in  both  ;  it  must
be  both  within  and  beyond  the  mind  that  knows  it.

The  passages  I  have  already  quoted  show  that  Plato
was  fully  aware  of  this  :  "  When  the  mind  returns  into
itself  (from  the  confusion  of  sense)  it  is  in  the  region  of
that  which  is  pure  and  everlasting  and  is  kindred  thereto."
The  "  Cave  figure  "  leads  to  the  same  conclusion,  namely
that  "  the  power  of  beholding  Reality  is  already  in  the
soul,"  and  the  ascent  to  the  vision  of  the  One  Reality —
"  the  beatific  vision,"  he  calls  it — is  always  possible  to
the  dwellers  in  the  cave  if  they  tur7i  the  soul's  eye.  Even
the  "  Reminiscence  myth  "  of  the  Phaedrus  may  have  a
much  deeper  meaning  than  that  which  is  usually  drawn
from  it.  It  may  be  a  pictorial  way  of  saying  that  the
soul  has  a  native  power,  or  faculty,  of  apprehending  the
Real.  The  soul  does  not  receive  the  truth  ab  extra^
whether  in  this  world  or  any  other.  As  soon  as  it  rises
above  sense  and  comes  up  to  its  real  self  it  finds  a  per-
manent object  of  thought,  that  which  is,  which  was  always
there,  though  only  implicit  or  potential.  It  is  called  up
from  the  soul's  own  deep,  for  if  the  soul  had  not  this
inherent  capacity  of  rising  to  permanent  truth,  there  could
be  no  knowledge,  only  the  welter  of  sense.  There  would
be  no  gain  in  going  back  to  a  world  before  birth  where
the  truth  was  seen,  for  this  gives  us  a  sense  perception
again  only  on  a  higher  level.  The  myth  suggests  not  a
regress  into  the  temporal  past,  but  a  regress  into  the
soul's  native  capacity  for  truth,  and  so  native  kinship  and
unity  with  the  Real.^

Plato  very  often  implies  that  this  ivorld — the  so-called
shadow-world — is  a  real  reflection  of  the  truly  Real,  and
so  is  more  than  a  phantom  ;  is  in  fact  a  divine  world,
with  genuine  beauty  and  goodness  in  it.  In  the  Timaeus
it  is  called  a  "  second  god  " — an  "  only  begotten  son  "  of
the  first  God.      It  is  thus  "  an  image  of  its  Maker,"  and

^  See  Edward  Caird's  Evolution  of  Theology  in  the  Greek  Philosophers,
vol.  i.  Lecture  VIII.


IV  MYSTICISM  IN  CLASSICAL  LITERATURE  65

"  the  most  beautiful  and  perfect  of  all  creatures."  And
he  also  implies  that  there  is  something  in  the  very  nature
of  the  soul  which  enables  it  to  find  the  eternal  in  the
temporal,  and  to  rise  through  the  sight  of  the  seen  to  the
Reality,  unseen  and  abiding.  This  faculty  of  soul  he
calls  Love  (e/jw?),  a  mystic  passion  which  begins  when
the  soul  catches  sight  of  the  world  of  Reality  through  an
object  of  beauty  which  opens  a  window  into  the  eternal
realm.  The  temporal  object  suggests  the  eternal,  and  the
soul  in  a  rapture  sees  through  the  transitory  and  con-
templates absolute  Beauty  and  so  finds  itself  at  home.

The  steps  of  this  divine,  mystic  passion  are  given  in  a
beautiful  passage  of  the  Symposium.  The  lover  soon  gets
beyond  the  satisfaction  which  physical  nearness  to  the
beloved  object  can  give.  There  is  still  "  an  intense
yearning,"  which  "  does  not  appear  to  be  the  desire  of
intercourse,"  but  "  something  else  which  the  soul  desires
and  cannot  tell,  and  of  which  she  has  only  a  dark  and
doubtful  presentiment."  The  soul  takes  satisfaction  in
progeny  only  because  it  finds  in  offspring  a  visible
image  of  some  everlasting  possession.  It  rises  steadily
to  ever  higher  types  of  progeny — lofty  thoughts,  poems,
statutes,  institutions,  laws — the  fair  creations  of  the  mind.
But  the  highest  stage  of  Love  comes  when  the  soul  sees
Beauty  itself  which  is  everlasting,  "not  growing  and
decaying,  not  waxing  and  waning."  He,  who  under  the
influence  of  Love  rises  to  see  that  Beauty,  is  not  far
from  the  end^  "  for  the  true  order  of  going  to  the  things
of  Love  is  to  use  the  beauties  of  earth  as  steps  along
which  one  mounts  upward  for  the  sake  of  that  other
Beauty,  going  from  one  to  two,  and  from  two  to  all  fair
forms,  and  from  fair  forms  to  fair  actions,  and  from  fair
actions  to  fair  notions  until  from  fair  notions  he  arrives
at  the  notion  of  absolute  Beauty  and  at  last  knows  what
the  essence  of  Beauty  is."  This  is  the  ascent  of  the  soul
from  the  temporal  to  the  eternal,  where  it  is  one  with  that
which  it  beholds.  The  final  end  toward  which  the  soul
moves  is  the  Good — the  Ultimate  Reality — the  apex  of
Being.

F


ee  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

On  this  interpretation,  the  Good  is  the  immanent
rational  principle  which  unifies  all  intelligible,  i.e.  think-
able, things  and  unites  them  in  a  living  whole  with
the  mind  which  knows  them.  It  is  the  substance  of
all  manifestation,  the  unifying  principle  of  all  finite
experience.  It  is  involved  in  all  reality,  and  equally
involved  in  all  thought.  It  is  never  "  beyond  "  except
in  the  sense  in  which  the  life  of  any  organism  is
"  beyond  "  any  single  member  of  the  organism.  On  this
view  the  eternal  world,  the  spiritual  realm,  is  not  "another
world "  to  which  we  ascend  by  leaving  "  this  world "
behind  ;  the  Eternal  world  is  rather  the  immanent  Reality
which  is  the  ground  and  explanation  of  the  temporal
world.

Plato  did  not  consistently  develop  this  view,  though
it  is  possible  to  find  it  sketched  and  adumbrated  through-
out his  later  works,  but  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  he
consistently  and  unvaryingly  "  keeps  the  faith "  that  the
soul  has  in  itself  an  eye  for  divine  Reality^  arid  that  the
mind  has  a  native  capacity  for  beatific  vision.  This  doctrine
has  had  mighty  influence  and  is  of  vast  import.  The
view  which  Plato's  successors  and  the  later  mystics  found
in  his  teaching  was  rather  an  ultimate  Reality  "  beyond  "
the  universe,  and  "  above "  mind  ;  "  beyond  being "
and  "  above  knowledge."  It  is  to  be  reached  only  by
a  sublime  process  which  negates  all  finiteness ;  all
multiplicity,  all  particularity.  On  this  basis  the  Absolute
Reality  is  nothing  knowable  or  thinkable  —  it  is  the
Divine  Dark  to  be  reached  only  when  the  mind  has
transcended  itself  in  ecstasy.^

^  It  should  be  said  that  Plato  does  not  give  in  his  Dialogues  one  consistent
and  unvarying  exposition  of  a  well-settled  system.  On  the  contrary  his
position  constantly  shifts,  and  his  doctrine  is  always  in  the  making,  never  a  fixed
system.    He  remains  throughout  a  great  artistic  creator  rather  than  a  system-maker.

J.  A.  Stewart  in  his  Myths  of  Plato  (1905)  holds  that  the  mysticism  of  Plato
is  ^feeling  mysticism.  Plato's  myths— which  J.  A;  Stewart  very  rightly  says  are
organic  parts  of  the  dialogues  in  which  they  appear — are,  he  thinks,  told  to
produce  a  state  of  "Transcendental  feeling,"  through  which  the  soul  comes  in
contact  with  reality,  with  timeless  existence,  "  that  which  the  soul  is  and  was  and
shall  be."  The  myth  induces,  just  as  sublime  poetry  does,  a  dream -consciousness
— a  profound  feeling  state,  by  which  the  soul  transcends  the  world  of  the  senses,
and  scientific  understanding,  and  has  an  experience  of  ultimate  reality.

This  theory  is  beautifully  worked  out  in  the  work  cited,  and  it  has  an  important


rv  MYSTICISM  IN  CLASSICAL  LITERATURE  67

Aristotle  also  exerted  a  profound  influence  on  the
types  of  mysticism  which  prevailed  from  the  third  to
the  fifteenth  centur>\  It  is  strange  that  this  cold,  analytic,
unmystical  philosopher,  who  would  have  none  of  Plato's
myths,  and  who  sought  to  bring  everything  in  the  universe
under  exact  and  scientific  description,  should  have  pro-
duced a  great  succession  of  mystics  as  his  intellectual
progeny,  but  such  is  the  fact  It  seems  paradoxical  that
the  beginner  of  exact  observ^ation  of  empirical  phenomena
should  have  inspired  in  his  disciples  a  glowing  passion
for  contemplation^  but  such,  again,  is  the  historical  fact
Aristotle  sharply  separates  God  from  the  world.  God
is  the  Absolutely  Real — remote  from  all  that  is  finite,
mutable,  imperfect,  and  potential.  He  is  not  to  be  found
here.  He  is  wholly  yonder,  beyond  the  world,  its  "  un-
moved Mover."  He  is  self-contained,  one  with  Himself,
a  moveless  Energy.  He  dwells  in  the  peace  of  His  own
completeness.  "  He  thinks  His  own  thoughts."  He  feels
nothing,  needs  nothing,  seeks  nothing,  goes  never  out  to
find  any  "  other."  All  things  are  drawn  upward  by  His
perfection  and  their  imperfection.  But  man  has  one
possible  path  open  to  God — it  is  the  way  of  pure  con-
templation {dewpia).

By  pure  contemplation  the  mind  may  rise  above
the  transitory  and  contingent,  may  get  beyond  space
and  time  and  contemplate  the  Absolute.  This  attain-
ment is  possible  because  man  possesses  at  the  "top
of  his  mind "  an  active  reason,  that  is  to  say,  "  a
pure  self-consciousness."  In  his  De  Anima,  or  "  Psy-
chology," Aristotle  distinguishes  two  levels  of  reason,
which  he  calls  the  active  and  the  passive  reason.  The
active  reason  has  no  finite  origin,  is  not  bound  up  with,
or  dependent  on,  the  body.  It  is  "pure,"  i.e.  not  mixed
with  desire  or  passion,  and  does  not  receive  its  content

bearing  on  some  types  of  mysticism,  but  it  does  not,  I  thdnk,  fit  Plato's  teaching,
Plato  always  treats  the  feeling  experience  as  a  low  stage.  He  puts  its  seat  in  the
lower  soul  and  reserves  for  Intellect  alone  a  direct  apprehension  of  That  which  is.
Those  who  make  mysticism  consist  in  feeling  experience  cannot  bring  Plato  into
their  category.  For  him  the  perception  of  the  Divine  is  in  the  Intellect.  We
shall  see,  too,  that  his  greatest  interpreter,  Plotinu5,  puts  mind  above  heart  in
the  ladder  of  ascent  to  God.


68  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

through  sense.  The  lower  or  passive  reason  is  wholly-
dependent  for  its  content  on  the  body.  It  begins  with
the  body  and  ends  with  it.  The  active  reason^  not  being
dependent  on  sense  impressions  from  without,  is  not
determined  by  anything  outside  itself;  does  not  proceed
in  its  truth  from  finite  aspect  to  finite  aspect,  as  one
proceeds  in  ordinary  experience,  but  attains  its  "object,"
reaches  its  goal,  by  a  supreme  act  of  vision  in  which  the
mind  sees  the  whole,  the  unity,  without  contrast  or
difference.  It  "  thinks  its  own  thoughts,"  like  God.
The  particular  disappears  and  the  mind  rises  to  the  un-
broken one.  Some  finite  object  may  be  the  "  occasion  "
for  this  ascent  of  reason,  but  sense  does  not  supply  the
"  object "  which  the  mind  beholds.  The  sense  impression
is  only  the  "  occasion "  for  a  free  activity  of  reason  by
which  it  mounts  to  a  vision  of  forms  and  realities  that
are  not  in  space  and  time,  but  are  one  with  its  own
deepest  nature.  This  "  faculty  "  does  not  belong  to  man
as  finite  man — as  "  mere  man,"  but,  as  Aristotle  says  in
his  Ethics^  it  belongs  to  man  only  "  as  there  is  something
divine  within  him."  ^  He  nowhere  explains  how  there
comes  to  be  "  something  divine  within  man,"  but  he
implies  that  the  active  reason  at  the  top  of  mind  is  one
with  that  Divine  Reason  which  in  beholding  beholds
Itself,  for  in  contemplation  the  mind  is  at  home  with
itself  and  is  one  with  what  it  beholds  in  unbroken  unity .^
The  following  is  one  of  Aristotle's  great  passages  in
praise  of  contemplation  as  man's  highest  function  : —

"  If  then  reason  is  divine  in  comparison  with  man's  whole
nature,  the  life  according  to  reason  must  be  divine  in  comparison
with  human  life.  Nor  ought  we  to  pay  regard  to  those  who
exhort  us  that,  as  we  are  men,  we  ought  to  think  human  things

^  Weldon's  Ethics  of  Aristotle,  p.  337.

2  Aristotle  himself  has  nowhere  worked  out  a  consistent  theory  of  the  relation
between  the  two  types  of  reason,  nor  of  the  relation  between  the  active  reason  and
the  Divine  Reason.  His  great  commentator,  Alexander  of  Aphrodisias,  who
flourished  about  a.d.  200,  took  a  very  important  step  which  was  to  have  far-
reaching  consequences.  Alexander  explicitly  identifies  active  reason  with  Divine
Reason,  Active  reason,  he  holds,  has  no  finite  origin.  It  is  of  God  and  remains
in  God,  and  the  ideas  which  it  presents  to  passive  human  reason  are  in  reality
Divine  Ideas — thoughts  which  God  thinks.  This  interpretation  of  Aristotle  had
a  remarkable  history  and  will  meet  us  again.


IV  MYSTICISM  IN  CLASSICAL  LITERATURE   69

and  to  keep  our  eyes  upon  mortality  :  rather,  as  far  as  we  may,
we  should  endeavour  to  rise  to  that  which  is  immortal  in  us  and
do  everything  to  live  in  conformity  with  what  is  best  for  us ;  for
if  in  bulk  it  is  small,  yet  in  power  and  dignity  it  far  exceeds  every-
thing else  which  we  possess.  Nay,  it  may  even  be  regarded  as
constituting  our  very  individuahty,  since  it  is  the  supreme  element,
and  that  which  is  best  in  us.  And  if  so,  then  it  would  be  absurd
for  us  to  choose  any  life  but  that  which  is  properly  our  own.  .  .  .
Such,  therefore,  to  man  is  the  life  according  to  reason  since  it  is
this  that  makes  him  man."  ^

From  this  passage  the  natural  inference  is  that  that  vi^hich
makes  man  really  man  is  something  divine  in  him.

Aristotle's  influence  has  always  been  in  the  direction
of  a  negative  mysticism,  that  is  a  mysticism  which  mounts
upward  towards  reality  by  negativing  all  finite  creatures
and  appearances.  God  is  a  One  beyond  the  many.  The
soul  attains  its  vision  only  when  it  leaves  behind  every-
thing by  which  it  could  mark  off  and  characterise  the
object  of  its  vision.  At  the  end  of  its  ascent  the  soul
finds  that  it  has  no  way  of  distinguishing  the  All  from
the  Nothings  because  it  has  risen  above  all  finites  all  the
marks  and  names  which  give  character  and  reality  to
our  world  of  experience.  It  has  come  home^  but  with
empty  hands.  We  shall  often  enough  find  mystics
travelling  such  a  via  negativa.

The  influence  of  Stoic  philosophy  was  far-reaching
during  the  entire  formative  period  of  the  Christian  Church
and  the  Christian  ideas.  Its  doctrine  of  an  immanent
Spirit,  alike  in  the  world  and  in  man — a  soul  of  the
universe — could  not  fail  to  impress  the  pillar  Christians
of  the  first  centuries  who  came  in  contact  with  the
doctrine.

"  A  divine  force,"  writes  Seneca,  "  has  come  down  to  earth,  a
heavenly  power,  by  which  the  soul,  with  its  splendid  powers  of
thought,  raises  itself  above  all  lower  things.  As  the  rays  of  the
sun  touch  the  earth  indeed,  but  have  their  true  home  in  that  place
whence  they  come  forth,  so  it  is  with  the  great  and  holy  Spirit
which  is  sent  down  hither  in  order  that  we  may  learn  to  know  the
Deity  better."  2

^  V^eldon's  Ethics  of  AHstotle,  pp.  337-38.  ^  Ep.  xli.


70  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

Again  he  says  :

"  God  comes  to  man,-  yea,  He  comes  closer,  till  He  enters  into
men.  No  dispofition  is  good  apart  from  God.  Seeds  of  the
divine  are  planted  in  human  bodies  ;  if  they  are  well  tended,  they
germinate  and  grow  up  into  the  likeness  of  That  from  whence  they
sprang."^

The  teaching  that  there  is  a  germinative  principle —
a  seed  of  God  in  the  human  soul — was  a  fundamental  idea
with  the  Stoics.  This  doctrine,  interpreted  at  its  best,
offers  a  basis  for  mystical  religion,  and  was  very  suggestive
to  the  primitive  Christians.  Stoicism,  too,  proclaimed  the
doctrine  that  the  inner  spirit  must  free  itself  completely
from  everything  individual  and  particular  in  order  to
identify  itself  with  the  Universal  Reason.  The  path
to  the  One  and  All  is  a  path  of  surrender — one  comes
to  the  universal  Spirit  only  by  leaving  behind  all  that
is  one's  "  own."

But  the  greatest  outside  influence  in  mystical  directions
was  from  the  school  of  philosophy  generally  known  as
Neoplatonic.  It  became  for  many  generations  a  necessary
part  of  the  intellectual  environment  of  the  Graeco-Roman
world,  and  most  of  the  Christian  thinkers  knew  their
Plato,  not  directly  but  through  the  interpretation  of
Neoplatonism.  We  cannot  understand  the  spiritual
travail  of  later  centuries  without  first  coming  to  close
quarters  with  this  last  great  intellectual  effort  of  paganism.

The  master  mind  of  the  movement  was  Plotinus.  He
was  the  profoundest  thinker  between  the  flowering  period
of  Greek  philosophy  and  the  creators  of  modern  philosophy
in  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries,  and,  though
he  lacked  that  peculiar  quality  of  style  which  carries  a
system  of  truth  into  the  very  life-blood  of  humanity  and
makes  it  the  possession  of  the  race  for  ever,  he  has  a
passion  and  enthusiasm  which  makes  his  difficult  book
a  live  one  even  after  more  than  fifteen  centuries.  He  was
born,  as  near  as  we  can  fix  the  date,  at  Lycopolis  in
Egypt  in  A.D.  205.  His  biographer  Porphyry,  a  third
century  Boswell,  has  given  us  much  detail  and  gossip,  but

^  Ep.  Ixxiii.  14.


IV  MYSTICISM  IN  CLASSICAL  LITERATURE   71

he  could  not  give  the  date  of  the  birth  of  Plotinus  for  the
reason  that  Plotinus  himself  refused  to  have  it  known.
"  He  seemed  ashamed  of  his  body,"  and  was  unwilling
that  any  one  should  ever  celebrate  the  event  of  his  birth.
Origen,  who  was  a  fellow-student  with  Plotinus,  had  a
similar  objection  to  birthdays,  and  he  supports  the  notion
by  pointing  out  that  in  the  Bible  only  bad  men  are
reported  as  having  kept  their  birthdays  !  The  teacher
who  first  "  spoke  to  the  condition "  of  Plotinus  was
Ammonius  Saccas  of  Alexandria.  When  the  young
inquirer  found  him  he  said,  "  This  is  the  man  I  am
seeking."  Ammonius  was  a  Christian  in  his  youth,  but
turned  from  his  religion  to  the  pursuit  of  philosophy.
His  name  "Saccas"  means  "porter"  and  tradition  repre-
sents him  as  a  self-taught  man.  We  know  almost  nothing
of  him,  or  of  his  system,  except  through  the  effects  of  his
ten  years  of  teaching  on  his  famous  disciple.  Plotinus
settled  in  Rome  in  244,  where  he  became  the  centre  of  a
group  of  eager  seekers  after  truth.  Porphyry  has  given
us  a  human  and  charming  picture  of  the  man,  who  w^as
evidently  much  more  than  a  dry  and  bloodless  meta-
physician.

"  Many,"  he  says,  "  of  the  noblest  men  and  women,  when  death
drew  near,  brought  to  him  their  boys  and  girls,  and  property,  and
entrusted  all  to  him  as  to  a  holy  and  divine  guardian.  His  house
was  full  of  boys  and  maidens,  among  whom  was  Polemo,  for  whose
education  he  was  so  careful  that  Ae  would  listen  to  his  schoolboy
verses.  He  endured  even  to  go  through  the  accounts  of  his  wards'
possessions,  and  was  most  accurate  and  business-like,  saying  that,
until  they  became  philosophers,  their  property  and  revenues
ought  to  be  kept  intact  and  secure."

Popular  anecdotes  about  him  give  the  impression  that
he  was  a  man  of  unusual  psychical  disposition,  which  has
important  bearing  on  his  teaching  that  the  highest  stage
of  truth  is  ecstasy — an  experience  which.  Porphyry  tells
us,  was  four  times  granted  to  him.  He  wrote  extensive
treatises,  which  Porphyry  collected  into  six  books  called
Enneads.  He  died  in  the  Roman  Campagna  in  269,
saying  to  his  companion  as  he  passed  away  :  "  Now  the


72  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

divine  in  me  is  struggling  to  reunite  with  the  divine  in
the  All."

The  attempt  has  often  been  made  to  trace  the  doctrines
of  Plotinus  to  oriental  influences.  It  is  true  that  he
travelled  through  the  Far  East,  and  it  is  also  true  that
Alexandria  was  a  meeting-place  'for  all  types  of  men  and
of  ideas  ;  it  is,  further,  true  that  Gnosticism,  which  was  a
semi-philosophy,  partly  formed  by  oriental  speculation,
was  in  the  air  at  the  time,  as  thick  as  thistledown  in  the
summer  breeze.  His  interpretation  of  his  great  Greek
masters  was  no  doubt  coloured  by  the  atmosphere  of  the
time,  but  his  system  is,  in  the  main,  a  direct  development
of  classical  Greek  philosophy.  He  is  the  culmination  of
the  movement  whose  three  greatest  exponents  were
Socrates,  Plato,  and  Aristotle,  though  he  brings  together,
as  every  great  philosophical  genius  does,  all  the  converging
lines  of  thought  before  him,  and,  through  the  creative
work  of  his  own  spirit,  utters  a  wo7^d  which  is  neither  new
nor  old.  It  is  not  my  purpose  here  to  give  any  technical
exposition  of  Plotinus.  I  shall  point  out,  in  as  unscholastic
language  as  possible,  the  mystical  features  of  his  system,
and  indicate  how  these  Neoplatonic  ideas  come  over  into
the  stream  of  Christian  thought.

"  God  is  not  external  to  any  one."  He  is  "  the  root
of  the  Soul,"  the  "  centre  "  of  the  mind,  and  the  way  home
to  Him  is  within  every  person.  This  is  the  heart  of  the
mysticism  of  Plotinus.  There  is  in  the  universe,  as  he
conceives  it,  a  double  movement — the  way  down  and  the
way  up.  The  way  down  is  the  eternal  process  of  the
Divine  emanation,  or  outgoing  of  God  towards  the  circum-
ference.^ At  the  centre  of  all  is  God,  the  One,  the  Good.
The  One  is  a  Unity  above  all  difference,  an  Absolute  who
transcends  all  thought,  who  is,  in  fact,  even  beyond  being.
Thought  implies  a  contrast  of  knower  and  known  ;  Being
implies  a  substance  with  qualities  or  characteristics,  and
each  quality  limits  the  substance.  For  example  redness
necessitates  the  negation,  or  absence,  of  all  other  colours,

^  These  spatial  words  "centre"  and   "circumference"  are  used  only  meta-
phorically, not  literally.


IV   MYSTICISM  IN  CLASSICAL  LITERATURE   Ji

and  so  on  with  all  qualities.  The  Perfect  God,  then,  must
be  above  all  division  of  known  and  knower  ;  beyond  all
limitation  of  qualities,  an  undivided  One,  too  supreme  and
lofty  to  be  expressed  by  any  word,  but  containing  in
Himself  All,  with  no  contrasts  of  here  or  there,  no
oppositions  of  this  and  that,  no  separation  into  change
and  variation.  He  is  divested  of  every  likeness  to  any-
thing in  the  heavens  above,  or  in  the  earth  beneath,  or  in
the  waters  under  the  earth.  He  is  dependent  on  nothing,
in  need  of  nothing,  and  every  description  of  Him  must  be
an  everlasting  Nay.  From  the  Perfect  One  there  flows  or
radiates  out  a  succession  of  emanations  of  decreasing
splendour  and  reality.

The  first  emanation  from  the  One  is  Mind  (Nous),
which  is  the  second  name  in  the  Trinity  of  Plotinus.
This  first  sphere  of  being  is  an  overflow  from  God — a
"by-product,"  as  it  were,  which  leaves  Him  as  He  was
before  with  no  decrease.  "  Mind  "  radiates  from  God  as
light  does  from  a  luminous  bod}^  which  floods  the  dark-
ness, but  loses  none  of  itself  by  the  outflow ;  or  like
goodness  in  a  person,  which  by  going  out  in  service  to
others  does  not  lessen  the  original  amount  of  goodness.
This  highest  circle  of  being  is  the  world  of  Ideas — the
universal  principles,  the  archetypes  and  patterns,  after
which  our  world  of  things  is  framed.  It  is  the  Over-
Mind  of  the  Universe  of  whom  all  minds  partake  and  in
whom  is  everything  which  is  real  and  intelligible.  God,
therefore,  as  the  ground  of  the  world  is  Intelligence.

Mind,  again,  overflows  into  a  second  sphere  of  being —
the  third  name  in  this  Trinity — Soul.  This  is  Universal
Soul,  or  Oversoul,  and  enfolds  in  itself  all  individual  souls,
so  that  all  souls  are  both  distinct  and  yet  one.  Soul  is
the  outer  rim  of  reality.  It  pours  and  streams  out,  and,
as  through  myriad  rivulets,  it  floods  the  world,  in  fact,
makes  the  world.  Matter  by  itself  is  nothing.  It  is  the
limit  which  Soul  comes  to,  the  outer  husk  or  barrier — the
dark  into  which  the  outflowing  divine  light  rushes,  so  that
what,  in  its  origin,  was  one  is  splashed  and  broken  into
endless  multiplicity.      Soul  has  both  a  higher  and  a  lower


74  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

side,  or,  as  a  recent  interpreter  puts  it,  Soul  is  "an
amphibious  being  who  belongs  to  both  worlds,  and  who,
therefore,  can  climb  to  the  highest  or  sink  to  the  lowest."
The  lower  soul  desires  a  body  and  lives  in  the  stage  of
sense  and  deals  with  objects  seen  partially  and  temporarily;
in  a  word,  is  as  far  out  at  the  rim  of  being  as  it  is
possible  to  go.  The  higher  soul,  on  the  other  hand,
transcends  the  body,  '*  rides  upon  "  it,  as  the  fish  is  in  the
sea  or  as  the  plant  is  in  the  air.  This  higher  soul  never
absolutely  leaves  its  home,  its  being  is  not  here  but
"  yonder,"  or,  in  the  language  of  Plotinus :  "  The  soul
always  leaves  something  of  itself  above."

It  is  possible  for  every  soul  to  retrace  the  process  of
its  descent  and  return  home.  The  first  step  on  "  the  way
upward "  is  for  the  soul  to  come  to  itself.  "  God  is
present,"  says  Plotinus,

"even  with  those  who  do  not  know  Him,  though  they  may  escape
out  of  Him,  or  rather  out  of  themselves^  and  therefore  are  not
able  to  see  Him  from  whom  they  have  exiled  themselves.  Having
thus  lost  themselves,  how  shall  they  find  another  being  ?  A  child
who  is  frenzied  and  out  of  his  mind  will  not  know  his  father.
But  he  who  has  learnt  to  know  himself  will  also  know  the  Being
from  whom  he  comes."  ^

Again  he  says :

■'  When  we  carry  our  views  outside  the  Principle  on  which  we
depend,  we  lose  consciousness  of  our  unity,  and  become  like  a
number  of  faces  which  are  turned  outward,  though  inwardly  they
are  attached  to  one  head.  But  if  one  of  us,  like  one  of  those
faces,  could  turn  round  either  by  his  own  effort,  or  by  divine  aid,
he  would  behold  at  once  God,  himself  and  the  whole.  At  first,
indeed,  he  might  be  able  to  see  himself  as  one  with  the  whole,
but  soon  he  would  find  that  there  was  no  boundary  he  could
fix  for  his  separate  self  .  .  .  He  would  attain  to  the  Absolute
whole,  not  by  going  forward  to  another  place,  but  by  abiding  in
that  Principle  on  which  the  whole  universe  is  based."  ^

This  means  that  the  first  stage  on  the  journey  home  is
for  the  soul  to  be  completely  restored  to  the  unity  of  the
universal  soul,  "  attaching  itself  to  that  centre  to  which  all
souls  ought  to  cling."      The  quest  is  furthered  whenever

^  Ennead,  vi.  9,  7.  2  /^/^   yj^  ^^  y^


IV  MYSTICISM  IN  CLASSICAL  LITERATURE  75

one  realises  that  all  souls  have  a  common  origin  and
ground  :  "  When  thou  reverest  the  soul  in  another  thou
art  revering  thyself."  But  this  is  only  the  first  stage.
The  next  step  is  to  rise  to  Mind  (or  Nous).

"Since,  then,"  says  Plotinus,  "soul  is  so  precious  and  divine
a  thing,  believing  that  thou  hast  a  strong  helper  in  thy  quest  after
God  ...  go  up  to  Him  who  is  yonder.  And  of  a  truth  thou
wilt  fi7id  Him  not  far  off ^  for  there  is  not  much  between.  Grasp
then  what  is  diviner  than  this  divine  {i.e.  diviner  than  Soul),  the
Soul's  neighbour  above  {i.e.  Mind),  after  whom  and  from  whom
the  soul  is."  ^

By  withdrawal  from  desires,  and  from  objects  of  sense
to  the  contemplation  of  the  true  patterns  of  things,  ie.  to
the  world  of  pure  thought,  one  reaches  a  higher  unity  than
was  possible  to  the  soul.  Here  in  calm  contemplation
the  highest  unity  is  reached  that  is  possible  to  a  self-
conscious  being.  It  is  a  unity  in  which  the  thinker  and
the  thought  are  not  foreign  to  each  other,  though  there
still  remains  a  distinction  of  subject  and  object,  without
which  self-consciousness  would  cease.

The  first  manifestation  of  God  is  thought — the  act  by
which  He  thinks  the  patterns  of  things — and  so,  too,  the
summit  of  human  consciousness  is  thought,  by  which  man
arrives  at  the  height  of  thinking  God's  thoughts.  In  this
realm  of  pure  thought  the  self  finds  its  true  ground  of
unity  with  the  All.  Each  mind  is  like  an  open  book  to
all  other  minds  ;  each  spirit  is  transparent  to  all  the
others.

"They  see  themselves  in  others,"  says  Plotinus,  "for  all  things
are  transparent,  and  there  is  nothing  dark  or  resisting,  but  every
one  is  manifest  to  every  one  internally.  .  .  .  For  every  one  has
all  things  in  himself  and  again  sees  all  things  in  another,  so  that
all  things  are  everywhere,  and  all  is  all,  and  each  is  all,  the  glory
is  infinite."  2

But  this  is  not  the  End  ;  the  soul  is  not  yet  at  home,
but  where  is  the  ladder  to  mount  above  thought,  and  so
become  one  with  the  One  }    The  last  stage  of  the  journey

^  Ennead,  v.  i,  3.  2  /^/^_  y_  3,  4,


T6  mystical  religion  chap.

cannot  be  told  in  plain  words.  It  can  be  divulged,  says
our  mystic,  only  to  those  who  are  initiated.  "  Our  teaching
reaches  only  so  far  as  to  indicate  the  way  in  which  the
Soul  should  go,  but  the  vision  itself  must  be  the  soul's
own  achievement."  There  is  in  everybody  a  centre  at
the  summit  of  the  mind  which  is  inalienably  conjoined
with  the  One,  or,  as  Plotinus  puts  it,  "  God  is  not  external
to  any  one,"  so  that  the  last  mount  is  the  complete  return
to  this  Divine  centre,  to  a  vision  in  which  subject  and
object,  known  and  knower,  are  one.  But  that  is  a  state
beyond  consciousness  \  that  is,  beyond  the  subject -object
type  of  consciousness.^  Plotinus  calls  it  "  a  mode  of
vision  which  is  ecstasy,"  when  the  soul,  "  energising
enthusiastically,  becomes  established  in  quiet  and  solitary
union."  It  is,  as  he  says,  "  the  flight  of  the  alone  to  the
Alone,"  and  in  this  highest  experience  of  actual  contact^
and  union  with  God,  when  the  soul,  one  with  what  it  loves,

"  In  undivided  being  blends,"

self-consciousness  is  transcended.  This  state  is  suggested
rather  than  described  in  a  great  passage  in  Ennead,  vi.
9,  lo:—

"  But  to  see  and  to  have  seen  that  vision  is  reason  no  longer,
but  more  than  reason,  and  before  reason,  and  after  reason ;  as
also  is  that  vision  which  is  seen.  And  perchance  we  should  not
speak  of  sight.  For  that  which  is  seen — if  we  must  need  speak
of  the  seer  and  the  seen  as  twain  and  not  as  one — that  which  is
seen  is  not  discerned  by  the  seer  nor  conceived  by  him  as  a
second  thing ;  but  becoming,  as  it  were,  other  than  himself,  he  of
himself  contributeth  naught,  but,  as  when  one  layeth  centre  upon
centre,  he  becometh  God's  and  one  with  God.  Wherefore  this
vision  is  hard  to  tell  of.  For  how  can  a  man  tell  of  that  as  other
than  himself  which,  when  he  discerned  it,  seemed  not  other,  but
one  with  himself  indeed  ?  "  ^


1  We  often  have  such  experiences  in  some  degree.  All  our  high  moments  of
experience  of  beauty,  or  of  love,  or  of  worship  are  experiences  beyond  the  subject-
object  type  of  consciousness.

2  He  uses  the  phrase  "  intellectual  contact"  {votpb,  iwacpifi).

*  It  would  be  an  error  to  suppose,  as  is  often  done,  that  the  mind  in  ecstasy  is
necessarily  a  mental  blank.  To  dispel  such  a  view  one  needs  only  to  study  the
personal  experiences  recorded  by  Tennyson  where  he  came  upon  That  which  is.


IV  MYSTICISM  IN  CLASSICAL  LITERATURE   ^7

It  is  not  possible  to  follow  in  any  detail,  in  this  present
study,  the  spiritual  history  of  later  Neoplatonism.  There
was  an  unbroken  succession  of  teachers,  or,  as  they  them-
selves called  it,  "  a  Hermaic  chain/'  from  Plotinus  to  the
closing  of  the  Athenian  school  of  Philosophy  by  order  of
Justinian  in  the  year  529.  The  movement  was  marred
by  many  vagaries,  and  it  became  so  intimately  allied  with
the  vain  effort  to  revive  the  ancient  religion  of  the  pagan
world,  and  by  it  to  conquer  the  ever-expanding  religion
embodied  in  the  Christian  Church,  that  it  exposed  itself  to
the  corrupting  influences  of  superstition  and  magic,  and
lost  in  some  degree  its  lofty  primitive  mood.  The  move-
ment had  its  moment  of  triumph  in  the  person  and  in
the  reign  of  Julian,  nicknamed  "  the  Apostate."  Many
attempts  were  made  to  construct  by  myth  and  imagination
a  "  philosophic  master,"  who  should  captivate  the  imagina-
tion of  the  multitude  and  become  a  rival  to  Christ.-^
There  is,  however,  a  noble  side  to  Neoplatonism  even
down  to  its  end,  and  Eunapius,  one  of  its  chroniclers  in
later  times,  could  say  with  some  truth,  "  The  fire  still
burns  on  the  altars  of  Plotinus."  It  completely  failed  in
its  chief  ambition  to  maintain  the  imperial  spiritual
supremacy  of  Rome,  and  Julian  spoke  words  of  truth  and
soberness  when  he  said,  "  Thou  hast  conquered,  Galilean,"
for  the  blood  of  youth  was  in  the  veins  of  Christianity,
while  Neoplatonism  was  an  attempt  to  revivify  a  dead
past.  But  the  successive  masters  in  the  long  line  of
Neoplatonic  thought  kept  burning  the  torch  which  Plato
had  lighted,  and  passed  it  on  for  the  Christian  scholars  to
take  up  when  they  were  ready  for  it.

The  last  great  name  in  the  "  Hermaic  chain "  was
Proclus  (b.  410,  d.  485),  who  taught  once  more  in  Athens,
where  the  torch  was  first  lighted.  It  is  said  that  when  he
arrived  in  Athens,  and  came   late  at  night   to   knock   for

It  is,  however,  true  that  no  description  can  be  given  of  anything  which  transcends
subject-object  experience.  The  rush  of  memor}',  by  which  a  drowning  man  ' '  sees
his  whole  life,"  is  doubtless  a  real,  though  certainly  an  indescribable,  experience.
Plotinus  gives  a  wonderful  description  of  the  antecedent  conditions  of  ecstasy  in
En.  V.  i.  2,  3,  4.

^  The  two  most  famous  pagan   "gospels"  are  the  lives  of  "  Apollonius  of
Tyana"  and  "  Pythagoras."


78  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

admission  into  the  school  of  philosophy,  the  porter  said
to  him,  "  If  you  had  not  come,  I  should  have  shut  the
gates,"  which  indicates  that  there  was  already  a  foreboding
that  the  school  was  on  the  perilous  edge  of  extinction.
Proclus  was  a  man  of  extraordinary  mental  powers,  and
under  happier  conditions  might  have  begun  an  era  instead
of  ending  one.

He  follows  Plotinus  in  holding  that  everything  emanates
from  the  One,  the  Absolute  First  Principle,  but  this
emanation  is  a  much  more  complicated  process  than
appears  even  in  the  system  of  Plotinus.  Everything
coming  forth  from  the  One  differentiates  into  a  descending
series  of  triads,  by  which  the  manifestation  of  the  finite  is
made.  That  which  comes  forth  is  both  like  and  unlike
its  higher  cause.  In  so  far  as  it  is  like  its  cause,  it
remains  in  it ;  in  so  far  as  it  is  different  from  it,  it  goes
out  and  separates  from  it ;  and  can  return  only  by
becoming  like  that  next  above  itself  on  the  way  back
towards  the  One.  The  soul  can  always  withdraw  from
those  things  which  separate  it,  and  return  into  its  own
inner  sanctuary,  where  it  finds  an  indwelling  God.  Life
is  at  its  best  when  it  is  caught  up  by  the  upward  sweep
of  a  holy  enthusiasm,  which  Proclus  often  calls  "  faith,"
and  sometimes  "  divine  madness."

About  forty  years  after  the  death  of  Proclus  (in  the
year  529)  the  edict  of  a  Christian  emperor  closed  the
doors  of  the  Academy,  and  drove  the  little  band  of
philosophers  out  into  exile.  There  were  seven  of  the
band,  and  they  took  their  beloved  books  and  started  out,
from  the  famous  seat  of  philosophy,  to  seek  a  quiet  retreat
in  Persia — the  wise  men  of  the  West  going  toward  the
East  with  no  star  for  guide.  It  is  a  pathetic  end.  The
mighty  stream  of  truth  seemed  at  last,  after  eight  hundred
years  of  luminous  flood,  to  be  losing  itself  in  the  desert
sand.  The  Church  would  brook  no  rival  in  the  field  of
truth,  and  it  proposed  to  ban  all  unbaptized  teachers,  and
to  taboo  all  streams  of  truth  which  did  not  flow  from  the
canon.  The  Christian  emperor  reckoned  ill  if  he  thought
he  could  suppress  the  contribution  of  Greek  wisdom  by


IV  MYSTICISM  IN  CLASSICAL  LITERATURE   79

lock  and  key.  He  could  banish  the  feeble  relic  of  the
school,  and  then  settle  down  in  the  fond  belief  that  the
world  was  now  rid  of  the  philosophic  brood.  Not  so.
Before  Justinian  was  in  his  grave,  this  Neoplatonic
philosophy  was,  as  we  shall  see,  translated  into  Christian
terms,  and  was  made  into  the  spiritual  bee -bread  on
which  many  Christian  generations  fed.


CHAPTER  V

MYSTICISM    IN    THE    CHURCH    FATHERS

The  Fathers  were  not  "  mystics  "  in  the  ordinary  sense
of  the  word.  Their  type  of  religion  was  mainly  objective
and  historical,  rather  than  subjective  and  inward.  Their
great  task  was  the  construction  of  an  authoritative  Church,
and  the  formation  of  a  permanent  universal  dogma,  known
as  "  the  Faith."  Some  of  them  were  pre-eminently  of  the
statesman  type  ;  others  were  of  the  philosophical  type  ;
some  of  them  combined  both  types.  They  all  used  the
historical  material  which  lay  at  their  hands,  and  they
built  this  material,  as  best  they  could,  into  the  great
world-structure,  the  Church — which  was  always  in  their
thought.  Very  few  of  them  have  given  us  powerful
descriptions  of  their  own  inward  experience — Augustine
is  the  striking  exception  —  but  there  are  scattered
passages  in  the  writings  of  almost  all  of  them,  from
the  earliest  apostolic  Fathers  down,  that  express  the
kind  of  direct  and  inward  religious  experience  which  I
have  been  calling  "  mystical."

There  is  a  striking  passage  in  the  homily  known  as
II.  Clement,  chapter  xiv.,  which  presents  in  a  profound
way  the  primacy  of  the  invisible  Church  :

"  Wherefore,  brethren,  if  we  do  the  will  of  God  our  Father,
we  shall  be  of  the  first  Church  which  is  spiritual,  which  was
created  before  the  sun  and  the  moon.  .  .  .  So,  therefore,  let  us
choose  to  be  of  the  Church  of  life,  that  we  may  be  saved.  And
I  do  not  suppose  we  are  ignorant  that  the  living  Church  is  the
body  of  Christ.  .  .  .  And  the  books  of  the  apostles  plainly
declare  that  the  Church  existeth  not  now  for  the  first  time,  but

80


V    MYSTICISM   LN  THE   CHURCH   FATHERS    8i

hath  been  from  the  beginning,  for  she  was  spiritual  as  our  Jesus
was  spiritual."

The  writer  is  contrasting  the  Church  of  Christ,  thought  of
as  pre-existing  and  eternal,  with  the  Jewish  Church,  which
was  a  temporal  institution.

Irenaeus  sets  forth  a  lofty  stage  of  religious  experience
— above  the  legal  stage  and  the  stage  in  which  the
dominion  of  the  flesh  renders  the  life  imperfect — an
attainment  to  the  freedom  of  the  spirit,  wrought  by  the
indwelling  of  the  Divine  Spirit  in  the  man.

"The  Lord,"  he  says,  "Who  redeems  us  by  His  own  blood
gives  us  His  soul  for  our  soul,  His  own  flesh  for  our  flesh,  and
pours  out  the  Spirit  of  the  Father  for  the  union  and  communion
of  God  and  man,  imparting  God  to  man  through  the  Spirit,  and
raising  man  on  the  other  hand  to  God."  ^

This  higher  life  of  spiritual  religion  he  everywhere
attributes  to  the  direct  "  impartation  of  God,"  or  to  the
soul's  "  participation  in  God."      He  says  :

"  It  is  impossible  to  live  without  life,  but  the  means  of  life
come  from  participation  in  God.  But  participation  in  God  is  to
see  God  and  to  enjoy  His  goodness.  .  .  .  TAe  glory  of  God  is  a
living  mafij  and  the  life  of  man  is  the  vision  of  God."  ^

There  is  a  noble  passage  in  Tertullian  which  goes
down  beneath  all  the  superficial  grounds  of  evidence  for
the  reality  of  Christianity,  and  which  announces  the  soul's
first-hand  evidence  :

"I  call  in,"  he  writes,^  "a  new  testimony;  yea,  one  that  is

^  Against  Heresies,  Book  V.  chap.  i.  sec.  i.

^  Ibid.  Book  IV,  chap.  xx.  sec.  5-7.  It  must,  however,  be  said  that  this
"impartation  of  God  to  men"  which  Irenaeus  teaches  is  not  something  mystical
or  spiritual,  in  our  modern  sense.  He  does  not  conceive  of  man,  as  the  mystic
does,  as  having  a  native  capacity  for  God  and  as  possessing  within  himself  a
meeting-place  with  God.  He  thinks  rather  of  a  miraculous  impartation  made
possible  through  the  Incarnation  and  mediated  through  the  Eucharist.  He  is
thinking  of  a  way  by  which  the  Jesh  can  be  immortalized.  Harnack  sums  up
the  teaching  of  Irenaeus  as  foHows.  He  taught  ' '  restoration  of  the  image  of
God  in  man,  destruction  of  dtath,  union  of  man  with  'God,  adoption  of  men  to
the  status  of  sons  of  God  and  gods,  communication  of  the  spirit,  imparting  of
knowledge,  culminating  ^n  the  vision  of  God,  imparting  of  immortal  Hfe.
All  these  goods  are  oniy  the  different  sides  of  one  and  the  same  good,  which,
since  it  is  of  divine  character,  can  oniy  be  brought  to  us  by  God  and  implanted
in  our  nature  "  (Harnack's  Hist,  of  Dogma,  vol.  ii.  p.  29:2).

^  Tertullian,  De  TestimoJiio  Animae,  chap.  i.

3


/lin


82  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

better  known  than  all  literature,  more  discussed  than  all  doctrine,
more  public  than  all  publications,  greater  than  the  whole  man —
I  mean  all  which  is  man's.  Stand  forth,  O  soul,  whether  thou
art  a  divine  and  eternal  substance,  or  whether  thou  art  the
very  opposite  of  divine,  and  a  mortal  thing ;  whether  thou
art  received  from  heaven,  or  sprung  from  earth ;  whether  thine
existence  begins  with  that  of  the  body,  or  thou  art  put  into  it  at
a  later  stage ;  from  whatever  source,  and  in  whatever  way,  thou
makest  man  a  rational  being,  in  the  highest  degree  capable  of
thought  and  knowledge — stand  forth  and  give  thy  witness."

He  goes  on  to  say  that  it  is  the  soul's  testimony  in
the  "  plain  man,"  the  ordinary,  common  man,  that  he
wants  :

"  I  call  thee  not  as,  when  fashioned  in  schools,  trained  in
libraries,  fed  up  in  Attic  academies  and  porticoes,  thou  belchest
forth  thy  wisdom.  I  address  thee,  simple  and  rude,  uncultured
and  untaught,  such  as  they  have  thee  who  have  thee  only ;  that
very  thing  pure  and  entire,  of  the  road,  the  street,  the  workshop.
/  want  thy  experie7ice.  I  demand  of  thee  the  things  thou
bringest  with  thee  into  man,  which  thou  knowest  either  from
thyself,  or  from  thy  author,  whoever  he  may  be."

And  then  he  draws  out,  with  a  flash  of  real  prophetic
fire,  the  soul's  silent,  subconscious  witness  to  the  God  in
whom  it  lives  and  moves,  and  has  its  being  :

"  Even  with  the  garland  of  Ceres  on  thy  brow,  or  wrapped  in
the  purple  cloak  of  Saturn,  or  wearing  the  white  robe  of  Isis,  thou
invokest  God  as  Judge.  Standing  under  the  statue  of  Aesculapius,
adorning  the  brazen  image  of  Juno,  arraying  the  helmet  of
Minerva  with  dusky  figures,  thou  never  thinkest  of  appealing
to  any  of  these  deities.  In  thine  own  forum  thou  appealest
to  a  God  who  is  elsewhere.  .  .  .  Though  under  the  oppressive
bondage  of  the  body,  though  led  astray  by  depraving  customs,
though  enervated  by  lusts  and  passions,  though  in  slavery  to  false
gods  ;  yet,  whe?iever  the  soul  comes  to  itself,  as  out  of  a  surfeit,  or
a  sleep,  or  a  sickness,  and  attaifts  sofnething  of  its  natural  sound-
Ties  s,  it  speaks  of  God.^''

And  he  ends  his  treatise  with  the  sweeping
declaration  :

"There  is  not  a  soul  of  man  that  does  not,  from  the  light


V   MYSTICISM   IN  THE  CHURCH   FATHERS    83

that  is  in  itself  .  .  .  proclaim  God,  though,  O  soul,  thou  dost
not  seek  to  know  Him."  ^

The  Greek  Fathers  were  all  influenced  by  the
philosophy  of  Greece,  and  from  the  time  of  Origen
(a.D.  185-254)  there  is  a  strong  Neoplatonic  flavour  in
all  their  work.  The  immanence  of  God  is  the  very  warp
and  woof  of  their  thinking.  "  God  mingles  with
humanity  as  the  salt  with  the  sea,  as  the  perfume  with
the  flower."  God  has  always  been  in  the  world  "  work-
ing it  up  to  better."  The  unwearied  Divine  Instructor  has
in  all  ages  identified  Himself  with  the  growing,  struggling
race,  and,  in  the  fulness  of  time,  became  incarnate  in  one
Life,  and  ever  since  has  been  the  inward  Spirit  in  all  men
who  would  receive  Him.  This  Divine  Word  is  ever
being  born  anew  in  the  hearts  of  saints.^

Clement  of  Alexandria  carries  his  doctrine  of  imman-
ence into  every  aspect  of  his  religion.  Prayer,  he  says,  is
direct  intercourse  with  God.  "  Faith  is  a  divine  and
human  mutual  and  reciprocal  correspondence."  Clement's
"  harmonized  man,"  the  goal  of  human  perfection  here  on
earth,  is  a  person  who  has  the  Divine  Life  so  formed
within  that  goodness  and  holiness  have  become  "  second
nature" — the  man  is  holy  even  in  his  dreams!  Clement's
Platonism  comes  out  beautifully  in  the  following  passage,
which  is  a  good  example  of  mysticism  :

"  It  is,  then,  the  greatest  of  all  lessons  to  know  oneself.  For
if  one  knows  himself  he  will  know  God,  and  knowing  God,  he
will  be  made  like  God."  ^

It  is  possible  to  pick  out  such  occasional  passages
in  Clement,  Origen,  and  Athanasius,  but  they  do  not
prove  that  these  men  were  mystics.  They  were,  rather,
profound  thinkers,  who  were  interpreting  Christianity
to  the  Greek  mind  through  the  historical  forms  of  Greek
thought,  and  who  in  high  moods  hit  upon  elemental  facts

1  I  have  greatly   condensed   TertuUian's   "testimony,"  but  the  substance  is
accvu-ately  and  correctly  given.

2  See  The  Instructor  of  Clement  of  Alexandria  and  the  anonymous  Epistle  to
Diognetus.

*   The  Instructor,  Book  III.  chap.  i.


84  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

of  universal  religious  experience.  Here  is  a  famous
passage  from  Athanasius  which  shows  that,  like  Elias,
he  could  be  "  very  bold  " — as  bold  as  the  highest
mystic :  "  God  became  man  that  we  might  be  made
Divine,"  ^  but  the  trend  of  Athanasius'  thought  was  not
that  of  a  mystic.^

A  somewhat  better  case  can  be  made  out  for  the
great  Cappadocian,  Gregory  of  Nyssa  (born  about  A.D.
33  5  ;  died  about  395).  His  famous  brother,  Basil,
explained  that  he  made  him  bishop  of  an  insignificant
place  because  he  wanted  Gregory  to  confer  distinction  on
the  city  rather  than  receive  it  from  the  city,  and  Gregory
fully  justified  the  expectation.  He  came  upon  a  stormy
scene.  Arianism  was  rending  Christendom,  and  the
Church  was  on  a  stormy  sea  when  this  lover  of  quiet
thought  was  plunged  into  the  tasks  of  active  life.  He
was  not  over-wise  in  practical  wisdom,  but  he  was  at
home  in  the  calmer  occupation  of  formulating  the  truth
for  his  age.  His  elaborate  system  of  theology  does  not,
fortunately,  concern  us  now.^  We  are  interested  only  in
noting  the  mystical  aspect  of  his  Christianity,  and  the
more  so  because  his  influence  on  later  centuries  was  very
great  Gregory's  Christianity  is  still  objective,  and  he
does  not  ground  it  in  the  inward  structure  of  the  soul  as
the  genuine  mystic  does,  nor  does  he  give  any  such  pro-
found analysis  of  consciousness  as  is  frequent  in  Augustine.

^  Athanasius,  De  Inca7-7iatio7ie.  Irenaeus  also  said  :  "  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,
who,  because  of  His  great  love,  was  made  what  we  are,  that  He  might  bring  us
to  be  even  what  He  is  Himself."     Irenaeus,  Against  Heresies,  Book  V.,  Preface.

2  I  have  found  it  impossible  in  the  limits  of  this  book  to  include  an  extended
study  of  the  Greek  Fathers.  Their  doctrine  was  not  Mysticism  in  the  proper
sense  of  the  word,  but  rather  what  the  German  scholars  call  "  mystic-gnostic."
Mysticism  and  Gnosticism  are  not  in  opposition  in  the  Greek  fathers,  but  just  as
in  Neoplatonism  (and  the  Greek  mysteries  whence  the  whole  attitude  is  historically
derived)  closely  associated.  On  the  one  hand  we  have  the  knowledge  of  God
thought  of  as  the  highest  thing  possible  to  man  ;  on  the  other,  the  feeling  that
such  knowledge  is  different  from  ordinary  knowledge  and  is  communicated  b\
mysterious  and  transcendent  processes.  There  are  differences,  of  course,  among
the  Fathers.  Clement  and  Origen  are  more  of  gnostics,  and  lay  stress  on  the
communion  of  God  by  the  Logos.  Athanasius  thinks  of  a  real  and  literal  com-
munication of  God  which,  as  with  Irenteus,  is  mediated  through  the  Eucharist.
This  idea  is  further  elaborated  by  Gregory  of  Nyssa,  whose  view  I  shall  briefly
study.

^  Ueberweg,  in  his  Histoyy  of  Philosophy,  says  that  Gregory  of  Nyssa  "was
the  first  who  sought  by  rational  consideration  to  establish  the  whole  complex  of
orthodox  doctrines."


J


V    MYSTICISM   IN   THE   CHURCH   FATHERS    85

But  he  does  dwell  with  strong  emphasis  upon  the  possi-
bility of  a  union  of  the  Divine  and  the  human,  and  he
has  put  forth  more  forcibly  than  any  other  Christian
Father  the  truth  that  the  entire  outward  universe  is  a
visible  symbol,  or  parable,  of  a  real,  though  invisible,
world.

He  holds,  though  not  always  clearly  and  consistently
that  a  Divine  element  belongs  to  the  original  constitution
of  man — a  mind's  eye.  This  mind's  eye,  when  not
filmed  by  low  passion,  gets  glimpses  of  the  transcendent
Good — "  the  first  Good  " — though  no  mortal  lips  can  tell
to  other  ears  what  has  been  beheld  within  the  depths  of
consciousness.  Gregory  says  that  this  is  what  the  "  great
David  "  meant  when  he  said  :  "  All  men  are  liars  !  "  i.e.
any  attempt  to  tell  the  ineffable  vision  is  a  "  lie  !  "  ^  In
a  noble  chapter,^  in  true  Platonic  spirit,  he  describes  the
spiritual  ladder  by  which  one  climbs  up  to  the  prospect  of
Supernal  Beauty,  mounting  into  the  heavens  upon  that
"  inward  likeness  to  the  descending  Dove,  whose  wings
David  also  longed  for."  The  goal,  he  says,  "  is  to  become
oneself  as  beautiful  as  the  Beauty  which  he  has  touched
and  entered,  and  to  be  made  bright  and  luminous  oneself
in  communion  with  the  real  Light."  "  We  can,"  he  cries
rapturously,  "  be  changed  into  something  better  than  our-
selves." The  eye,  purged  of  all  discolouring  stain,  can
see  God,  the  Archetype  of  all  Beauty  and  of  all  Reality.

I  will  give  only  one  illustration,  among  many,  of  the
kindred  nature  of  man  and  God  :

"  As  every  being  is  capable  of  attracting  its  like,  and  humanity
is,  in  a  way,  like  God,  as  bearing  within  itself  some  resemblance
to  its  Prototype,  the  soul  is  by  a  strict  necessity  attracted  to  the
kindred  Deity.  In  fact,  what  belongs  to  God  must,  by  all  means
and  at  any  cost,  be  preserved  for  Him."^

He  goes  on  to  tell  in  a  graphic  illustration  how  God
draws  and  pulls  the  soul  toward  Himself.

"  The  Divine  Power,  God's  very  love  of  man,  drags  that  which
belongs  to  Him  from  the  ruins  of  the  irrational  and  material,  just

1  On  Virginity,   chap.  x.  2  /^^-^  chap.  xi.

^   The  Soul  and  the  Resurrection.


86  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

as  after  an  earthquake  bodies  are  drawn  from  mounds  of  rubbish
—so  God  draws  that  which  is  His  own  to  Himself."  ^

The  actual  deification  of  man,  however,  comes  in
Gregory's  teaching,  not  by  the  mystical  vision,  nor  by
the  successful  drawing  of  God.  It  comes  in  a  much  more
material  way.  It  is  effected,  so  he  teaches,  by  the  sacra-
ments. An  actual  Divine  nature  is  born  within  by  the
mediation  of  the  baptismal  water.  The  first  birth  is  an
allegory  of  this  stupendous  change.  The  first  birth  is
mediated  by  moist  seed  in  which  no  eye  can  detect  the
unborn  person,  but  by  Divine  power  that  moisture
becomes  a  human  being.  So,  too,  God  uses  water  in  an
equally  mysterious  and  miraculous  way  to  recreate  the
"  once  born  "  man,  and  to  produce  in  him  Divine  nature.
The  Divine  process  begun  in  baptism  is  carried  on  in  the
Eucharist.  The  bread  and  the  wine  are  Divine  body  and
blood,  and  they  "nourish"  the  Divine  life,  which  at
baptism  began  within  the  man,  so  that  by  "  communion
with  Deity  mankind  may  be  deified,"  and  "  by  a  union
with  the  immortal  may  be  a  sharer  in  incorruption."

This  magical,  mystical  view  of  the  sacraments  finally
came  to  be,  in  one  form  or  another,  throughout  Christen-
dom the  prevailing  view.  It  was  an  attempt  to  satisfy
two  tendencies — the  great  material  tendency  of  the  age
for  something  tangible,  and  the  unstilled  yearning  of  the
soul  for  the  "real  presence"  of  God — for  God  within
the  personal  life.  This  compromise  seems  to  the  modern
mind  woefully  crude,  but  it  seems  much  less  so  to  one
who  studies  it  in  its  historical  setting,  and  this  is  to
be  said  for  it :  it  enabled  the  Church  to  keep  alive  in
the  minds  of  multitudes  of  semi-Christians,  who  were  at
the  same  time  semi -pagans,  the  ideal  of  having  God
within.  This  mystical  view  of  Gregory  is  unquestionably
a  serious  drop  from  Paul,  or  even  from  Plato,  and  it  led
to  a  low  and  perverted  mysticism  of  a  second  order  in
his  successors — some  such  degeneration  as  Neoplatonism
underwent  during  the  same  period.

There    is,   however,    a    very   lofty  side    to    Gregory's

1   On  the  Soul  and  Resurrection.


V    MYSTICISM   IN  THE  CHURCH   FATHERS   87

mysticism,  and  he  must  be  judged  in  the  light  of  his
time — not  in  the  light  of  these  riper  centuries.  He  is  at
his  finest  and  loftiest  when  he  strikes  his  great  theme  of
the  double  universe — that  which  is  seen  and  that  which
is  not  seen — the  world  within  the  world  we  see.  The
seen  is  a  symbol  of  the  unseen,  the  material  a  parable  of
the  real  The  visible  world  is  the  garment  and  drapery
of  God.^

The  real  father  of  Catholic  mysticism,  however,  is  St.
Augustine.^  He  is,  of  course,  the  father  of  many  other
things  also.  He  is  one  of  those  extraordinary  persons
who  have  dominated  the  minds  of  men  with  a  sway  which
makes  the  rule  of  world  conquerors  look  cheap  and  puny.
He  shows  better  than  almost  any  other  great  religious
teacher  how  impossible  it  is  to  separate  "  religion  of
authority  "  and  "  religion  of  the  Spirit "  into  two  sharply-
divided  groups.  He  is  in  both  groups,  and  he  is  entirely
unaware  that  they  are  inconsistent  with  each  other.  No
other  man  has  done  more  to  construct  an  authoritative
Church  than  he.  The  architectural  plan  was  already
there  when  he  joined  the  Church,  and  he  did  not  "  create  "
the  imperial  design,  but  he  saw  with  the  genius  of  a
statesman-philosopher  how  to  fulfil  the  beginnings  and
the  tendencies  of  the  great  Latin  system.  When  his
work  was  done  the  Roman  Catholic  Church  was  organized
for  its  mighty  task  of  making  a  new  empire  on  the  ruins
of  the  old  one.

While  Rome  was  being  sacked  by  hordes  of  bar-
barians, and  the  empire  was  tottering  before  the
irresistible  onset  of  races  of  vast  potential  power,
St.  Augustine,  in  his  African  retreat,  was  working  out
a  new  imperial  system — a  City  of  God — compared
to  which  the  old  empire,  even  under  the  greatest
Caesars,  was  a  slender  affair.       St.   Augustine's  theology

1  See  especially  On  Infants  Early  Deaths.

2  Harnack  says  :  "St.  Augustine  became  the  father  of  that  mysticism  which
was  naturalized  in  the  Catholic  Church,  down  to  the  Council  of  Trent"  {History
of  Dogma,  vol.  v.  p.  86).  Harnack  also  speaks  of  Augustine  as  the  first  modern
man  and  the  first  real  psychologist.  It  is  his  psychological  analysis  that  makes
the  peculiarity  of  his  mysticism  (see  a  long  note  in  Harnack's  History  of  Dogma,
voL  V.  p.  loi).


88  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

made  the  Church — the  City  of  God  as  it  now  is  on
the  earth — the  only  door  to  the  City  of  God  as  it  is
to  be  in  the  heavens.  To  Augustine  the  theologian,  man
as  man  was  a  depraved  being,  corrupt,  root  and  branch —
ruined,  lost,  possessed  of  nothing  of  his  own  which  could
minister  to  his  salvation.  The  Church,  with  its  mysterious
sacraments,  was.  an  indispensable  channel  of  Divine
Grace.^  In  a  world  of  sin  and  ignorance  and  error,  in  a
world  where  no  man  could  find  any  salvation  for  himself,
it  had  pleased  God  to  found  and  construct  a  City  of
Refuge,  through  which  one  might  flee  into  the  City  of
Eternal  Rest.

It  seems  strange  to  call  him  a  mystic.  More  than
any  other  man  he  forged  the  iron  system  of  dogma  and
authority.  He  taught  that,  since  the  "  fall,"  the  entire
sphere  and  form  of  every  (once  born)  man  are  sin  and
depravity.  He  made  Saving  Grace  depend  absolutely
upon  external  channels.  How  is  he  a  mystic  ?  Like
many  another  great  rhan  his  life  had  two  compartments.
There  were  two  "  selves  "  within  him— somewhat  incon-
sistent with  each  other,  though  not  recognized  by  him  as
being  so.^  He  was  first  of  all  a  living,  throbbing  inan^
facing  life  in  his  own  human  way.  He  had  first-hand  ex-
periences of  his  own,  and  a  wonderful  power  of  penetrating
and  describing  inward  spiritual  states.  He  has  given  us
"  a  portrait  of  the  soul,"  which  in  a  profound  and
elemental  way  fits  all  generations  of  men.  "  I  seem  to
be  reading  the  history  of  my  own  wanderings  and  not
another's,"  was  Petrarch's  penetrating  comment  as  he  read
the  Confessions.

On  the  other  hand,  he  was  a  theologian-statesman,  an
architectural  genius,  whose  supreme  task  was  the  con-
struction of  an  imperial  system — a  Catholic  Church — as
the  mysterious  instrument  of  Grace  in  the  midst  of  a
ruined  world.      His  mysticism  was  primary  ;  his  theology

^  Augustine  calls  baptism  "the  water  of  salvation,"  and  he  says  in  his
Confessions  that  his  own  most  horrible  and  deadly  sins  were  remitted  in  the  holy
water.

'^  Since  writing  this  I  have  found  the  same  thing  said  in  Sabatier's  Religions  of
Authority.  "  There  were  in  this  great  doctor  two  men  :  the  son  of  Monica  and
the  orthodox  bishop,  the  man  of  the  Spirit  and  the  man  of  authority."     P.  484.


V   MYSTICISM   IN  THE  CHURCH   FATHERS    89

was  secondary.  I  mean  by  that,  that  his  mysticism
belonged  to  his  very  nature  as  a  man,  and  had  no  depend-
ence upon  his  particular  brand  of  theology.  Theologically
he  held  that  man  was  depraved  ;  his  own  human  experience
told  him  that  man  and  God  are  kindred,  are  meant  for
each  other,  and  that  man  has  within  himself  a  direct  path-
way to  the  living  God.

The  famous  sentence  in  the  opening  chapter  of  the
Co7ifessions  announces  a  universal  truth :  "  Thou  hast
made  us  for  Thyself,  and  our  heart  is  restless,  until  it
rests  in  Thee."  It  is  the  announcement  of  a  truth  which
grounds  religion  in  the  very  nature  of  the  soul  itself,  and
annuls  at  once  the  depravity  doctrine  of  the  theologian.
The  positive,  inward  push  of  the  soul  Godward  is
frequently  asserted  in  the  Confessions,  and  Augustine
bears  steady  testimony  to  an  upward  pull  within  himself
which  fits  badly  with  the  theory  that  man  is  a  worm  of
the  dust.  Speaking  of  his  life  during  his  pre-Christian
period,  he  says  :  "  By  inward  goads  Thou  didst  rouse  me,
that  I  should  be  ill  at  ease  until  Thou  wert  manifested  to
my  inward  sight."  ^

"  Thou  wert,"  again  he  says,  during  the  period  of
his  search,  "  more  inward  to  me  than  my  most  inward
part.  I  awoke  in  Thee  and  saw  Thee  infinite,  and  this
sight  was  not  derived  from  the  flesh."  ^  Nobody  has
more  beautifully  expressed  the  double  nature  of  man —
with  the  upward  pull  and  the  downward  drag — than  he  has
expressed  it  in  the  famous  sentence  :  "  I  tremble  and  I
burn  ;  I  tremble,  feeling  that  I  am  unlike  Him  ;  I  burn,
feeling  that  I  am  like  Him."  ^

No  other  man  before  modern  times  ever  studied  human
nature  with  such  profound  insight  as  Augustine  shows,  and
he  constantly  discovers  not  only  these  momentous  yearn-
ings towards  God,  but  he  finds  also  experiences  which,  to
him,  imply  direct  intercourse  between  the  soul  and  God.
He  says  that  his  mother  could  discern  God's  revela-
tions to  her  by   "  a  certain  indescribable  savour!'  *      He

^  Confessions,   p.    121.       The  page  references  to   the   Confessions  are  to  the
edition  of  it  in   "  Ancient  and  Modern  Library  of  Theological  Literature."
2  Ibid.  p.  126.  8  Ibid.  Book  VIII.  chap.  x.  *  Ibid.  p.  10-7


90  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

himself,  even  before  his  actual  "  conversion,"  beheld
with  the  eye  of  his  soul  the  Light  Unchangeable — the
Light  which  Love  knoweth,  the  knowledge  of  which  is
eternity.^  He  has  thus,  in  the  Confessions^  used  the  sense-
analogy  of  taste  and  sight  ;  in  the  City  of  God  he  has  a
great  passage  in  which  the  sense-analogy  of  hearing  is
used  :

"God  speaks  with  a  man,  not  by  means  of  some  audible
creature  dinning  in  his  ears,  so  that  atmospheric  vibrations
connect  Him  that  makes  with  him  that  hears  the  sound ;  nor
even  by  means  of  a  spiritual  being  with  the  semblance  of  a  body,
such  as  we  see  in  dreams  or  similar  states ;  for  even  in  this  case
he  speaks  as  if  to  the  ears  of  the  body,  and  with  the  appearance
of  a  real  interval  of  space.  Not  by  these,  then,  does  God  speak,
but  by  the  truth  itself,  if  any  one  is  prepared  to  hear  with  the
viind  rather  than  with  the  body.  He  speaks  to  that  part  of  man
which  is  better  than  all  else  in  him,  and  than  which  God
himself  alone  is  better."  ^

More  commonly,  however,  he  does  not  use  sense-
analogy.  He  was  too  much  of  a  Platonist  to  put  much
emphasis  on  sense-experience.  Consciousness  in  its  very
elemental  structure  may  apprehend  God.  Sometimes  it
is  the  heart  that  finds  Him — "  I  heard  as  the  heart
heareth,  nor  was  there  any  room  to  doubt" — sometimes
it  is  the  will\  sometimes,  in  true  Platonic  fashion,  it  is
the  mind.  In  his  Epistles  he  says  :  "  We  cannot  go  to
God  afoot,  but  by  our  character  "  ("  heart  ").  "  He  (Christ)
departed  from  our  eyes  that  we  might  return  into  our
hearts  and  there  find  Him."  ^  "  Man  is  a  huge  abyss,  and
his  hairs  can  be  more  easily  counted  than  the  affections
and  stirrings  of  his  heart  can  be  fathomed."  ^  One
of  the  finest  of  all  his  sayings  is  in  one  of  his  sermons  :
"  Our  whole  work  in  this  life  is  to  heal  the  eye  of  the
heart  by  which  we  see  God,"  ^  and  in  a  passage  which
has  a  very  modern  note  in  it  he  says  :  "  A  good  man  is
a  man  of  good  will."  ^

He  says,  in  the   City  of  God,  that :   God  makes  holy

^  Confessions y  p.  123.  ^  City  of  God,  Book  XI.  chap,  ii.

2  Confessions,  p.  61.  *  Ibid.  Book  IV.  chap,  xiv.

^  Sermon  xviii. ,  De  Verb.  Dam.  secundum  Matt.  chap.  xxx.

'  De  Gratia,  xix.


V   MYSTICISM   IN  THE   CHURCH   FATHERS   91

souls  His  friends,  and  "  noiselessly  informs  them  "  of  His
purpose.^  It  is  strange  to  find  the  man  who  forged  the
doctrine  of  election  making  the  will — "  the  momentous
will,"  to  use  his  own  expression — the  way  to  God.
"Thither"  (toward  God),  he  says,  in  Confessions,  p.  148,
"  one  journeyeth  not  in  ships,  nor  in  chariots,  nor  on
foot  ;  for  to  journey  thither,  nay,  even  to  arrive  there,  is
nothing  else  but  to  will  to  go."  There  is  no  keener
psychological  analysis  in  all  his  writings  than  the
penetrating  study  of  "  the  momentous  will "  in  Book
VIIL,  especially  chapters  viii.  and  ix.  He  takes  up  the
subject  again  in  the  City  of  God,  Book  XIV.  chap.  vi.
Like  Paul,  he  recognizes  two  wills  ;  one  the  slave  of  habit,^
the  other  the  momentous  will,  which  has  the  key  to
eternal  reality.     "  To  will  God  entirely  is  to  have  Him  I "

The  general  type  of  his  mysticism  is,  however,
Platonic.  The  mind  itself,  or  at  least  that  which  is
"  at  the  top  of  the  mind,"  may  directly  apprehend  God.
There  are  many  lofty  passages  which  illustrate  this
aspect  of  Augustine's  religion.  Throughout  the  period
of  his  search  for  God,  Augustine's  fundamental  error  was
the  conception  of  God  as  a  substance  which  filled  space,
Le.  as  a  finer  kind  of  material  being.  In  one  of  his  most
powerful  passages,  describing  his  idea  of  God  at  this
stage,  he  says :

"I  set  before  the  sight  of  my  spirit  the  whole  creation,
whatsoever  is  visible  in  it,  .  .  .  and  whatsoever  in  it  is  invisible.
.  .  .  And  this  mass  I  made  huge,  not  as  it  was,  which  I  could
not  know,  but  as  large  as  I  chose,  yet  bounded  on  every  side
{i.e.  finite) ;  but  Thee,  O  Lord,  I  imagined  on  every  part
surrounding  and  penetrating  it,  but  in  every  direction  infinite  :
as  if  there  were  a  sea,  everywhere  and  on  every  side,  through
unmeasured  space,  one  only  infinite  sea ;  and  it  contained
within  it  some  sponge,  huge  but  finite ;  that  sponge  must  needs,
in  all  its  parts,  be  filled  from  that  unmeasured  sea  :  So  I  imagined
Thy  finite  creation  full  of  Thee,  the  Infinite."  ^

"So    did    I    endeavour,"    he    says    in    another    place,^  "to

^  City  of  God,  Book  XI.  chap.  iv.

2  "  Of  a  froward  will  a  lust  is  made  ;  by  lust  habit  is  formed  ;  and  habit  not
resisted  becomes  a  necessity"  [Confessions,  p.  141).

'^  Confessions,  p.  115.  *  Ibid.  p.  iii.


92  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

conceive  of  Thee,  Life  of  my  life,  as  vast,  through  infinite  space
on  every  side  penetrating  the  whole  mass  of  the  universe,
and  beyond  it,  through  immeasurable  boundless  spaces;
so  that  the  earth  would  have  Thee,  the  heavens  have  Thee,
all  things  have  Thee ;  they  be  bounded  in  Thee,  and  Thou
bounded  nowhere."

But  he  came  to  discover  that  the  mind,  which  forms
images  of  spatial  objects,  is  itself  not  a  thing  of  dimen-
sions, and  not  to  be  conceived  in  terms  of  space  ;  and  that
God  is  a  substance  of  the  same  nature  as  mind,  or  spirit,
"  not  present  in  the  several  portions  of  the  world,  piece-
meal, large  in  the  large,  little  in  the  little — not  such
art  Thou."  ^  And  little  by  little  he  rose  to  the  insight
that  God  is  the  Eternal  Reality,  mirrored  and  veiled
in  the  visible,  changeable  world,  but  to  be  found  as
He  is  with  the  eye  of  the  mind.  "  In  one  trembling
glance,"  he  says,  speaking  of  the  mind's  highest  faculty,
"  it  arrived  at  That  which  Is" ^  At  this  period,  which
was  before  his  conversion,  he  "  lacked  strength  to  fix
his  gaze  thereon,"  but  afterwards  he  learned  "  the  way
to  that  beatific  country,  which  is  not  only  to  be  gazed
upon,  but  to  be  dwelt  inj'  ^

The  truth  that  God  is  the  inner  Reality,  and  so  one
with  the  hidden  life  of  man,  finds  frequent  utterance
in  his  Confessions.  He  anticipates  the  great  word  of
Pascal  :  "  Thou  wouldst  not  seek  Me  if  thou  hadst  not
already  found  Me."  He  tries  to  explain  why  men  seek
God  and  desire  the  blessed  life,  and,  after  a  long,  acute
psychological  analysis,  he  exclaims  :  "  We  could  not  love
it  unless  we  knew  it !"  *

"Thy  God  is  unto  thee,  O  my  soul,  even  the  Life  of
thy  life,"  is  the  conclusion  which  he  reaches  after  he  has
searched  the  universe  for  God.  Here  is  a  fragment  of
the  noble  passage  which  describes  the  search  :

'  See  Confessions,  Book  VII.  chap.  i.

'^  Ibid.  Book  VIII.  chap.  xvii.      Compare  the  r6  ^aTiv  del  of  Plotinus.

*  Augustine  says  in  Confessions,  Book  VIII.  chaps,  xviii.-xxi.,  that  the  new  fact
that  enabled  him  to  find  the  way  to  the  blessed  country  was  the  Incarnation.
As  a  natural  mystic  (Neo-Platonist)  he  could  discern  the  land  of  Peace,  but  not
find  the  way  thither  (see  especially  the  close  of  chap.  xxi. ).

*■  Confessions,  Book  X.  chap.  xx.


V    MYSTICISM   IN   THE  CHURCH   FATHERS   93

"What  do  I  love  when  I  love  Thee?  Not  beauty  of  the
body,  not  harmony  of  line,  nor  brilliancy  of  light,  so  pleasant  to
these  eyes,  nor  sweet  melodies  of  every  kind  of  song,  nor  the
sweet  scent  of  flowers  and  perfumes  and  spices,  not  manna  and
honey,  not  limbs  inviting  to  fleshly  embrace.  Not  these  do  I
love  when  I  love  my  God ;  and  yet  I  love  a  kind  of  light  and
melody  and  fragrance  and  food  and  embrace,  when  I  love  my
God — the  light,  melody,  food,  fragrance,  embrace  of  my  inward
man  :  where  there  shineth  upon  my  soul  what  space  containeth
not,  and  where  resoundeth  what  time  stealeth  not  away,  where
is  fragrance  which  a  breath  scattereth  not,  where  there  is  flavour
that  eating  lesseneth  not,  and  where  there  is  an  embrace  that
satiety  rendeth  not  asunder.      This  I  love,  when  I  love  my  God.

"  I  asked  the  earth  for  God,  and  it  answered  me  :  '  I  am  not
He ' ;  I  asked  the  sea  and  the  depths  and  the  creeping  things,
and  they  answered  :  '  We  are  not  thy  God,  seek  thou  above  us ' ;
I  asked  the  breezy  gales,  and  the  airy  universe,  and  all  its
denizens  replied:  'Anaximenes  is  mistaken.  I  am  not  God';
I  asked  the  heaven,  sun,  moon,  stars  :  '  Neither  are  we,'  say
they,  'the  God  whom  thou  seekest.'  And  I  said  unto  all
things  which  stand  about  the  gateways  of  my  flesh  (the  senses)  :
*  Ye  have  told  me  of  my  God,  that  ye  are  not  He ;  tell  me
something  of  Him.'  And  they  cried  with  a  loud  voice :  '  He
made  us.' "

And  so  the  search  goes  on  until  the  "inward  self"  is
questioned,  and  the  answer  is,  "  Thy  God  is  unto  thee  even
the  Life  of  thy  life."  ^

There  is  another  passage,  even  nobler  still,  in  which
St.  Augustine  describes  how  he  and  his  mother,  Monica,
together  climbed  up  through  inner  thought,  came  to  their
minds,  and  passed  beyond  them  to  That  which  Is — the
Self-Same.      I  quote  the  passage  in  full.^

"As  now  the  day  drew  near,  on  which  she  was  about  to
depart  out  of  this  life,  which  day  Thou  didst  know  though  we
knew  it  not,  it  fell  out,  as  I  believe,  through  Thy  Providence,
working  in  Thy  hidden  ways,  that  she  and  I  alone  together,  were
standing  leaning  upon  a  certain  window,  from  which  there  was  a
view  of  the  garden  within  the  house  which  sheltered  us,  there  at
Ostia,  on  the  Tiber,  w^here  apart  from  the  throng,  from  the
fatigue  of  our  long  journey  we  were  recruiting  ourselves  for
our  voyage.     Together  we,  too,  held  converse  very  sweet,  and

1   Confessions,  Book  X.  chap.  vi.  '  Ibid.  Book  IX.  chap,  x.


94  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

'forgetting  those  things  which  were  behind,  and  reaching  forth
unto  those  things  which  were  before'  (Phil.  iii.  13),  we  were
discussing  between  us  in  the  presence  of  the  truth,  which  Thou
art,  of  what  kind  would  be  that  eternal  life  of  the  Saints,  which
'eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither  hath  it  entered  into
the  heart  of  man'  (i  Cor.  ii.  9).  But  with  the  mouth  of  our
heart  we  were  panting  for  the  heavenly  streams  of  Thy  fount,  '  the
fountain  of  life,  which  is  with  Thee '  (Ps.  xxxvi.  9),  that  be-
sprinkled thence  according  to  our  capacity  we  might  in  some
measure  meditate  upon  so  great  a  matter.  And  when  our
converse  drew  to  such  an  end,  that  the  utmost  delight  of  the
bodily  senses,  in  the  clearest  material  light,  by  the  side  of  the
enjoyment  of  that  life  seemed  unworthy  not  only  of  comparison
with  it,  but  even  to  be  named  with  it ;  raising  ourselves  with  a
more  glowing  emotion  towards  the  '  Self-same  '  (Ps.  iv.  8,  Vulg.),
we  wandered  step  by  step  through  all  material  things,  and
even  the  very  heaven  whence  sun  and  moon  and  stars  shed  their
light  upon  the  earth.  And  further  still  we  climbed,  in  inner
thought  and  speech,  and  in  wonder  of  Thy  works,  and  we
reached  to  our  own  minds,  and  passed  beyond  them,  so  as  to
touch  the  realm  of  plenty,  never  failing,  where  Thou  feedest
Israel  for  ever  in  the  pasture  of  the  truth,  and  where  life  is  that
Wisdom,  by  which  all  things  are  made,  both  those  which  have
been,  and  those  which  shall  be  ;  and  Itself  is  not  made,  but  is
now  as  it  was  and  ever  shall  be;  or  rather  in  it  is  neither  'hath
been  '  nor  '  shall  be,'  but  only  '  is,'  since  It  is  eternal.  For  '  hath
been'  and  'shall  be'  spell  not  eternity.  And  while  we  thus
speak  and  pant  after  it,  with  the  whole  stress  of  our  hearts
we  just  for  an  instant  touched  it,  and  we  sighed,  and  left  there
bound  the  'first  fruits  of  the  spirit'  (Rom.  viii ;  23),  and  then
returned  to  the  broken  murmurs  of  our  own  mouth,  where  the
word  hath  its  beginning  and  its  end.  And  what  is  like  unto  Thy
Word,  our  Lord,  Who  abideth  in  Himself,  nor  groweth  old,  and
maketh  all  things  new  ?  We  were  saying  then  :  If  to  any  one
should  grow  hushed  the  tumult  of  the  flesh,  hushed  the  images
of  earth,  and  of  the  waters,  and  the  air,  hushed,  too,  the  poles,
and  if  the  very  soul  should  be  hushed  to  itself,  and  were  by
cessation  of  thought  of  self  to  pass  beyond  itself;  if  all  dreams,
and  imaginary  revelations,  every  tongue  and  every  token,  were
hushed,  and  whatsoever  falls  out  through  change ;  if  to  any,  such
should  be  wholly  hushed  to  silence,  since  could  any  hear  them,
they  all  say :  '  We  made  not  ourselves,  but  He  made  us,  who
abideth  for  ever,'  and  this  said,  if  now  they  should  cease  to  speak,
because  they  had  inclined  our  ears  to  Him,  who  made  them,  and
He  Himself  by  Himself  should  speak,  not  through  them,  but  of


V   MYSTICISM   IN   THE  CHURCH   FATHERS    95

Himself,  that  so  we  should  hear  His  Word,  not  uttered  by  a
tongue  of  flesh,  nor  by  a  voice  of  angel,  nor  by  thunders  of  a
cloud,  nor  by  a  parable  of  comparison,  but  Himself,  whom  in
these  we  love ;  if,  I  say,  we  should  hear  Him,  without  these,  as
now  we  strained  ourselves,  and  in  the  flight  of  thought  touched
upon  the  Eternal  Wisdom  that  abideth  over  all  things  ;  if  this  were
continued,  and  other  visions  of  a  nature  by  far  inferior  were  taken
away,  and  this  one  alone  should  ravish,  and  absorb,  and  enwrap
the  beholder  of  it  amid  inward  joys,  so  that  life  everlasting  might
be  of  such  a  kind,  as  was  that  one  moment  of  comprehension  for
which  we  sighed ;  were  not  this  an  '  Enter  thou  into  the  joy  of
thy  Lord'?  (Matt.  xxv.  21).  And  when  shall  that  be?  Shall  it
be  when  '  we  all  shall  rise  again,  but  shall  not  all  be  changed '  ?  "
(i  Cor.  XV.  51,  Vulg.).

It  is  clear  from  this  great  passage  that  Augustine
looks  for  the  truly  Real  above  and  beyond  all  that
appears  ;  a  view  which  finds  its  plainest  utterance  in
his  well-known  words  :  "  God  is  best  adored  in  silence  ;
best  known  by  nescience  ;  best  described  by  negatives."  ^
This  negative  mysticism  will  meet  us  again  and  again,
and  can  be  permanently  transcended  only  by  a  truer
psychology  than  that  which  was  possible  in  the  ancient
and  medieval  world.

The  vision  of  God  is,  however,  not  the  goal  and  end
of  Augustine's  mystical  striving.  His  highest  word  is
union — union  of  being  with  the  Eternal  Reality  :  I  heard,
as  the  heart  heareth,  Thy  voice,  "  I  am  the  food  of  them
that  are  full  grown  ;  grow  and  thou  shalt  feed  upon  Me,
nor  shalt  thou  transmute  Me  into  thee,  as  thou  didst  food
into  thy  flesh,  but  thou  shalt  be  transmuted  into  Me."^  In
the   City  of  God^   he  says  that  "the   man   Christ  Jesus

^  This  view  of  the  "self-same,"  to  which  the  mind  may  rise  as  contrasted
with  the  fleeting  things  which  sense  gives,  is  one  of  Augustine's  inheritances  from
Platonic  philosophy.  He  wrote  in  one  of  his  early  Epistles:  "We  are,  I
suppose,  agreed  that  all  things  with  which  our  bodily  senses  acquaint  us  are
incapable  of  abiding  unchanged  for  a  single  moment,  but,  on  the  contrary,  are
moving  and  in  perpetual  transition,  and  have  no  present  reality — that  is,  to
use  the  language  of  Latin  philosophy,  do  not  exist.  Accordingly,  the  true  and
divine  philosophy  [Platonic  philosophy]  admonishes  us  to  check  and  subdue
the  love  of  these  things  as  dangerous  and  disastrous,  in  order  that  the  mind,
even  while  using  the  body,  may  be  wholly  occupied  and  warmly  interested  in
those  things  which  are  the  same  for  ever,  and  which  owe  their  attractive  power
to  no  transient  charm.  "  The  great  passage  quoted  in  the  text  is  plainly  influenced
by  a  passage  in  Plotinus's  Enneads,  V.  i.  2,  3,  4.

2  Confessions,  p.  124.  3  City  of  God,  Book  XXI.  chap.  xvi.


96  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

became  a  partaker  of  our  own  mortality  that  He  might
make  us  partakers  of  His  divinity."  Again  he  says,  com-
menting on  Psalm  xlix.  :  "  He  called  men  gods  as  being
deified  by  His  grace,  not  as  born  of  His  substance."

It  will  be  noted  that  Augustine,  in  his  mystical
passages,  is  decidedly  personal  and  subjective.  He
thinks  of  man  as  an  isolated  individual,  who  may
hold  high  intercourse  with  God,  and  who  at  the
highest  stage  of  experience  may  come  into  a  union
of  life  with  God,  but  he  has  discovered  no  social
principle  ;  he  does  not  rise  to  the  conception  of  a
mystical  corporate  life^a  living  group  with  many
members  joined  together  by  one  Spirit.  "  God  and
the  soul,"  he  cries  out  in  his  Soliloquies,  "  this  and  this
only  !  "  ^  And  this  individualism  which  is  characteristic
of  Augustine  continues  throughout  the  whole  history  of
Roman  Catholic  mysticism,  though  in  both  St.  Paul
and  St.  John  the  social  and  corporate  aspect  is  strongly
marked,  and  will  appear  again  in  the  groups  treated  in
our  later  chapters.

It  would  be  interesting,  and  perhaps  profitable,  to
inquire  how  far  Augustine's  doctrine  of  grace  is  mystical,
but  it  would  lead  us  through  a  large  and  mazy  research.
One  fact,  at  least,  is  clear  in  the  doctrine,  namely,  that
something  divine  comes  into  man  so  that  he  who  was
before  "  without  merit "  has  now  within  himself  God's
bestowed  grace — which  is  reckoned  as  merit.  The  doc-
trine, however,  is  not  the  fruit  of  personal  experience,  it
is  rather  a  product  of  historical  influence  and  of  logic.
It  is  on  a  distinctly  lower  plane  than  the  personal  religiojt
of  St.  Augustine,  to  which  this  chapter  has  been  largely
devoted.  It  is,  of  course,  a  fact  that  the  man  cannot  be
separated  from  the  bishop,  his  religious  experience  cannot
be  sharply  divided  from  his  theology,  but  I  believe  this
mystical  side  of  the  great  African  saint  can  be  emphasized
without  doing  any  historical  injustice  to  the  Church  Father.
For  the  present  purpose  we  may  ignore  the  fact  that  he
taught  that   God   of  His  own  will  determines  the  destiny

'  See  Caird's  Evolution  of  Theology  in  Greek  Philosophy,  vol.  ii.  p.  i66.


V   MYSTICISM   IN  THE  CHURCH   FATHERS    97

of  "  everything  from  angel  to  worm."  ^  Nor  are  we  now
concerned  with  the  fact  that  he  formulated  the  dogma :
"  No  salvation  outside  the  Church/'  -  What  concerns
us  is  his  utterance  of  the  great  facts  of  inward  ex-
perience, and  his  personal  testimony  that  the  soul  is
ever  on  a  divine  trail,  has  direct  vision  of  its  supreme
Goal,  and  may  come  into  immediate  contact  and
union  with  That  Which  Is.  The  man,  with  his  mighty
human  experience,  is  always  in  evidence.  Through  the
hard  crust  of  cooled  theology  the  warm  religious  life
ever  and  anon  breaks  out.  Among  the  arid  blocks  of
logic  the  flowers  of  the  heart  again  and  again  appear.
In  fact,  it  is  love,  not  logic,  which  builds  the  City  of  God,
though  at  times  the  logic  seems  overworked.  "  The  two
cities  have  been  formed  by  two  loves :  the  earthly  by
the  love  of  self,  even  to  the  contempt  of  God  ;  the
heavenly  by  the  love  of  God,  even  to  the  contempt  of
self." '

^  Confessions,  p.  140.  2  City  of  God,  Book  V.  chap,  xviii.

^  Ibid.  Book  XIV.  chap,  xxviii.


H


CHAPTER  VI

DIONYSIUS,    "THE    AREOPAGITE"

At  the  end  of  the  chapter  on  "  The  Classical  Roots  of
Mysticism,"  I  said  that  in  spite  of  the  attempt  to  end  the
reign  of  Neoplatonic  philosophy,  it  was  brought  over  into
the  Church  and  became  "  spiritual  bee-bread  "  for  many
centuries.  Gregory  of  Nyssa  and  St.  Augustine  were
profoundly  influenced  by  the  philosophy  of  this  school,
as  we  have  seen,  and  through  them  many  of  the  loftiest
teachings  of  Plato  and  Plotinus  were  translated  into
Christian  thought.  The  mysticism  of  the  school  trickled
in  through  these  Fathers,  but  about  a  century  later  it
came  full  flood  through  an  anonymous,  mysterious  man,
whose  story  and  message  we  must  now  try  to  spell  out.

At  a  Council  held  at  Constantinople,  in  the  year  533,^
the  "  Severians,"  a  sect  of  Christians  who  held  that  Christ
had  a  single  nature,  produced  in  support  of  their  views
writings  bearing  the  authorship  of  Dionysius,  who
professed  to  be  the  convert  of  Paul  in  the  Areopagus,  the
first  Bishop  of  Athens,  the  friend  and  companion  of
apostles.  The  authenticity  of  the  works  of  the  famous
Dionysius  was  at  once  challenged  by  the  orthodox  party.
Hypatius,  Bishop  of  Ephesus,  pointed  out  that,  if  genuine,
these  works  could  not  have  escaped  the  notice  of  Cyril
and  Athanasius,  and  he  declared  that  no  one  of  the
ancients  had  ever  quoted  them.^  But  almost  from  the
first  these  works  of  Dionysius  had  a  remarkable  vogue  in

1  Harnack  says  that  Severus  quoted  the  Dionysian  writings  at  a  Council  at
Tyre,  about  the  year  513,  and  he  is  indined  to  push  their  authorship  back  to  a
period  previous  to  A.U,  400  (see  Hist.  Dog.  vol.  iv.  p.  282).

'^  This  is  based  on  an  extant  letter  written  by  Innocentius,  Bishop  of  Maronia.

98


CH.  VI     DIONYSIUS,  "THE  AREOPAGITE"  99

the  East.  The  great  Aristotelian  physician,  Sergius,  made
a  Syriac  version  of  them  early  in  the  sixth  century,  and
there  were  frequent  commentaries  made  upon  them  by
Syrian  scholars  in  the  sixth  and  seventh  centuries.  They
found  a  great  admirer  in  Maximus  "the  Confessor"
(580-662),  who  edited  them  with  brief  notes  and  gave
them  the  stamp  of  his  approval.  With  here  and  there
a  notable  exception,  the  writings  of  Dionysius  were,  from
the  time  of  Maximus,  accepted  in  the  Eastern  Church  as
genuine,  and  their  influence  became  very  great,  partly
because  their  readers  felt  through  them  the  genius  of  a
master  mind,  and  partly  because  they  found  in  them
cogent  arguments  and  proofs  in  favour  of  existing  Church
institutions  and  ecclesiastical  authority.'^

The  first  extant  reference  to  them  in  the  West  is  a
casual  one  made  by  Gregory  the  Great  (in  his  Homily  on
Luke  XV.  I- 10),  about  the  year  600.  They  are  first
quoted  in  a  letter  of  Pope  Adrian  I.,  written  to
Charlemagne.

In  827  a  set  of  the  Dionysian  writings  was  sent  to
Louis  I.,  son  of  Charlemagne,  who  turned  them  over  to
the  Abbey  of  St.  Denis,  near  Paris.  By  a  confusion,
either  unconscious  or  designed,  Dionysius  the  Areopagite
was  identified  with  St.  Dionysius,  or  St.  Denis,  the  martyr
and  patron  saint  of  Paris.  This  created  a  great  interest
in  the  books,  which  were  not  very  readable  in  their
peculiarly  difficult  Greek.  Then  to  cap  the  climax  the
arrival  of  the  books  was  marked  by  striking  miracles —
nineteen  invalids  were  suddenly  cured  of  various  maladies  !
This  aroused  the  Abbot,  Hilduin,  to  the  duty  of  preparing
a  version  of  the  Greek  text  of  the  writings,  but  his
scholarship  proved  too  slight  for  the  task.

During  the  reign  of  Charles  the  Bald  (843-76),  the
great  Irish  scholar,  John  Scotus  Erigena,  received  a  royal
command  to  translate  the  works  of  Dionysius  into  Latin.
He  not  only  made  the  Latin  version  (which  was  published,
contrary  to  custom,  without  the  Pope's  sanction),  but  he
also  wrote  an  original   work  which   was  permeated   with

1  See  Frothingham's  Stephen  Bar  Sudaili,  Leyden,  1886,  p.  3.


100  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

Dionysian  views  and  which  was  destined  to  have  a  great
influence  on  later  generations.

Nearly  every  great  medieval  scholar  made  use  of  these
writings,  and  the  authority  of  the  ancient  and  venerable
convert  on  Mars  Hill  came  to  be  almost  final.  A
modern  writer  says  that  even  the  Summa  Theologiae  of
Thomas  Aquinas — the  angelic  doctor — is  but  "  a  hive
in  whose  varied  cells  he  duly  stored  the  honey  which  he
gathered  "  from  the  writings  of  Dionysius,  and  he  became,
as  we  have  said,  the  bee -bread  on  which  all  the  great
mystics  fed.^  Dulac  says  {CEuvres  de  S.  Denys
r Areopagzte)  :  *'  If  the  works  of  Dionysius  had  been  lost,
they  could  be  almost  reconstructed  from  the  works  of
Aquinas."

Where  did  these  writings  originate  ?  Who  was
"Dionysius"?  Modern  scholarship  has  settled  the  fact
that  Dionysius  the  Areopagite  has  no  historical  connection
with  St.  Dionysius  of  Paris,  notwithstanding  the  miracles
worked  by  the  arrival  of  his  books !  It  has,  too,  settled
the  fact  that  these  writings  did  not  come  into  existence
until  centuries  after  Paul's  Athenian  convert  slept  the  long
sleep.  The  theology  and  the  ecclesiastical  system  pre-
supposed throughout  the  writings  are  unmistakably  not
of  the  first  or  even  second  century.  They  are  the  product
of  long  historical  development.  The  writer  in  one  passage
refers  to  Ignatius,  and  quotes  the  words  of  his  epistle  :
"My  own  love  is  crucified."^  He  refers  to  "Clement
the  philosopher"  (evidently  Clement  of  Alexandria,  who
died  A.D.  220).^  There  is  an  unmistakable  stamp  of
late  Neoplatonic  thought  everywhere  apparent  in  the
Dionysian  writings.  In  fact,  it  is  almost  certain  that  the
writer  was  either  a  pupil  of  Proclus  or,  as  is  more
probable,  of  Damascius,  the  second  in  succession  from
Proclus,  and  the  last  teacher  of  the  Athenian  school.  It
was  natural  that,  when  he  became  a  Christian  writer,  he
should  assume  a  name   which   had  sacred    memories  of

^  The  following  is  a  complete  list  of  the  extant  Dionysian  writings  : — I.  On  the
Celestial  Hierarchy  \  II.  Oft  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy;  III.  On  the  Divine
Names ;   IV.  On  Mystical  Tlieology ;  and  V,  Ten  Letters.

*  Divine  Names,  iv.  12.  '  /did.  v.  g.


VI  DIONYSIUS,  "THE   AREOPAGITE"        loi

Athenian  faith,  and  which  was  also  a  link  with  Greek
culture.  It  is  impossible  to  say  whether  he  intended  to
deceive  his  readers,  or  whether  the  name  was  a  guileless
pseudonym.  His  letters  and  books  have  a  slender  thread
of  historical  fiction  woven  into  them.  They  are  addressed
to  "  my  fellow  presbyter  Timothy,"  to  "  Titus,"  to
"  Polycarp,"  to  "  John  the  divine,  apostle  and  evangelist,
exiled  in  Patmos,"  etc.  In  the  letters  to  Polycarp,  he
asks  him  to  remind  Apollophanes,  a  violent  opponent  of
the  Christian  faith,  how  when  they  were  fellow  students
together  at  Heliopolis,  they  had  beheld  the  total  darkness
which  covered  the  world  at  the  time  of  the  crucifixion.
In  any  case,  there  was  as  yet  no  social  conscience  formed
against  the  assumption  of  a  famous  name  by  an  author.

In  the  book  on  the  Divine  Names,  Dionysius  relates
how  he  "  with  James,  the  brother  of  the  Lord,  and  Peter,
the  chief  and  noblest  head  of  the  inspired  apostles,"  gazed
upon  the  dead  body  of  "  her  who  was  the  beginnmg  of
life  and  the  recipient  of  God,"  i.e.  the  Virgin  Mary.
There  are  numerous  references  in  the  writings  to  his
great  mystic  master  and  inspired  guide,  "  Hierotheus."
He  says  that  the  works  of  "  Hierotheus "  were  to  him
"  a  second  Bible."  He  says  in  Divine  Names  that  his
great  master,  "Hierotheus,"  has  already  unfolded  the  truth,
having  learned  it  by  an  experience  in  divine  things,  "  and
by  being  made  perfect  in  mystical  union."  This  "  Hiero-
theus "  may  possibly  give  us  a  clue  to  the  locality
and  date  of  the  Dionysian  writings.  "  Hierotheus "  is
apparently  an  assumed  name  under  which  a  famous
Eastern  mystic  of  Edessa  named  Stephen  Bar  Sudaili,
a  scribe  and  monk,  wrote  near  the  close  of  the  fifth
century.^  This  Stephen  Bar  Sudaili  held  that  all
Nature    is    consubstantial     with     the     Divine      Essence,

^  Gregory  Bar  'Ebraia,  monophysite  patriarch  of  the  twelfth  century,
declared  that  the  work  of  Stephen  Bar  Sudaili  was  entitled  the  Book  of  Hiero-
thetis,  and  he  supports  his  assertion  on  the  statement  of  Kyriakos,  patriarch  of
Antioch  (793-817),  who  says  that  "  the  book  entitled  i?co/^  of  Hierotheus  is  not  by
him,  but  probably  by  the  heretic,  Stephen  Bar  Sudaili."  John,  Bishop  of  Dara,
a  noted  mystic,  who  Uved  in  the  eighth  and  ninth  centuries,  says  positively  that
the  Book  of  Hierotheus  was  written  by  Stephen  Bar  Sudaili,  and  there  was  a  steady
Syriac  tradition  to  this  effect  (Frothingham,  op.  cit.  pp.  63-66).


I02  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

and  that  in  a  final  consummation  God  will  become
all  in  all,  and  all  things  will  be  one  nature  with
God.  Contemporary  accounts  connect  him  with
Egyptian  influence,  where  extreme  mystical  views
prevailed  among  many  of  the  monks.  Bar  Sudaili
claimed  for  himself  direct  divine  revelations,  and  believed
himself  to  be  an  inspired  man.  He  declares  that  more
than  once  he  has  attained  the  highest  stage  of  mystical
union  with  the  One — "  the  Arch-Good,"  as  he  calls  Him,
the  goal  of  all  ascent.  Already  in  this  Book  of  Hierotheus
there  appears  an  account  of  the  mystical  ladder  by  which
the  soul  makes  its  glorious  homeward  ascent,  (i)  The
soul  must  unite  the  spark  of  Good  Nature  {i.e.  the  Divine
Principle)  which  belongs  to  it  with  the  Universal  Essence
from  which  it  has  sprung,  by  purifying  itself  of  every
opposing  principle,  and  by  being  absorbed  in  its  spiritual
goal  ;  then  it  becomes  like  a  new-born  child  which  passes
from  darkness  into  light.  (2)  It  reaches  the  holy  place
of  the  Cross,  where  it  endures  a  passion  and  suffers  a
crucifixion  in  the  same  manner  that  Christ  suffered,  for
unless  the  soul  undergoes  all  that  Christ  underwent  it
cannot  be  perfected.  (3)  At  a  higher  stage  it  receives
a  baptism  of  the  Spirit  and  of  fire,  without  which  there  is
no  life^  and  thereupon  it  enters  into  complete  Sonship.
(4)  There  remains  a  yet  higher  experience  when  the  soul
is  utterly  and  wholly  absorbed  into  its  luminous  Essence
and  gets  beyond  the  distinction  of  self  and  Other — this
is  the  Ultima  Thule  of  mystical  experience.  In  this
stage  there  is  a  mysterious  silence,  a  mystical  quiet  when
the  soul  understands  without  knowledge  and  without
words.

It  is  not  improbable  that  this  "Hierotheus"  is  the  mystic
master  of  our  author,  and  if  so,  it  is  likely  that  these
Dionysian  writings  first  saw  the  light  between  A.D.  475
and  525,  so  that  perhaps  the  ripe  seeds  of  Greek
philosophy  were  being  planted  in  the  soil  of  the  Church
almost  exactly  at  the  time  Justinian  was  banishing  the
last  cultivators  of  the  garden  of  the  Academe.

It  has  long  been  the  custom  of  critics  to  belabour  this


VI  DIONYSIUS,  "THE  AREOPAGITE"        103

monk-philosopher  for  his  "turgid"  style,  for  his  hierarchies
of  "  bloodless  abstractions,"  and  for  his  "  inscrutable  anony-
mous God,"  but,  after  all,  there  is  something  genuinely
human  in  him,  and  he  was  doing  his  best  to  "  utter  him-
self" in  the  terms  of  thought  which  were  the  current  stock
of  his  time.  There  is  a  real  throb  of  heart  even  under
these  "turgid"  sentences.

There  is  a  fine  passage  in  the  eighth  Letter  which
reveals  a  generous,  sympathetic  spirit,  and  which  indicates
that,  however  he  might  soar  into  realms  of  abstraction,
he  still  knew  the  tender,  loving  Christ  of  the  Gospel
records.  The  Letter  relates  how  Dionysius  had  felt  it
his  duty  to  rebuke  a  monk  for  his  lack  of  mercy,  and
he  tells  an  incident  to  carry  conviction  to  the  stern  and
unforgiving  monk.  "  I  will  recount,"  he  says,  "  a  divine
vision  of  a  certain  holy  man,  and  it  is  a  true  story."  ^

"  When  I  was  once  in  Crete,  the  holy  Carpus  entertained  me
— a  man,  of  all  others,  most  fitted,  on  account  of  great  purity  of
mind,  for  Divine  Vision.  Now,  on  a  certain  occasion,  an  un-
believer had  grieved  him  by  leading  a  Christian  astray  to
Godlessness.  And  when  he  ought  to  have  prayed  for  both,
he  allowed  rancorous  enmity  and  bitterness  to  sink  into  his
heart.  In  this  evil  condition  he  went  to  sleep,  for  it  was  evening,
and  at  midnight  (for  he  was  accustomed  at  that  appointed  hour
to  rise,  on  his  own  accord,  for  the  Divine  melodies)  he  arose,
not  having  enjoyed,  undisturbed,  his  slumbers,  which  were
continually  broken ;  and  when  he  stood  collected  for  the  Divine
Converse,  he  was  guiltily  vexed  and  displeased,  saying,  that  it
was  not  just  that  godless  men,  who  prevent  the  straight  ways  of
the  Lord,  should  live.  And,  whilst  saying  this,  he  besought
Almighty  God,  by  some  stroke  of  lightning,  suddenly,  without
mercy,  to  cut  short  the  lives  of  them  both.  But,  whilst  saying
this,  he  declared  that  he  seemed  to  see  suddenly  the  house  in
which  he  stood,  first  torn  asunder,  and  from  the  roof  divided  into
two  in  the  midst,  a  sort  of  gleaming  fire  before  his  eyes  (for  the
place  seemed  now  under  the  open  sky),  borne  down  from  the
heavenly  region  close  to  him ;  and,  the  heaven  itself  given  way,
and  upon  the  back  of  the  heaven,  Jesus,  with  innumerable  angels,
in  the  form  of  men,  standing  around  Him.  This,  indeed,  he
saw  above,  and  himself  marvelled ;  but  below,  when  Carpus
had  bent  down,  he  affirmed  that  he  saw  the  very  foundation

*  I  have  here  used  the  translation  of  John  Parker,  London,  1897.


104  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

ripped  in  two,  to  a  sort  of  yawning  and  dark  chasm,  and  those
very  men,  upon  whom  he  had  invoked  a  curse,  standing  before
his  eyes,  within  the  moulh  of  the  chasm,  trembhng,  pitiful,  only
just  not  yet  carried  down  by  the  mere  sHpping  of  their  feet ;  and
from  below  the  chasm,  serpents  creeping  up  and  ghding  from
underneath  around  their  feet,  now  contriving  to  drag  them
away,  and  weighing  them  down  and  lifting  them  up,  and  again
inflaming  or  irritating  them  with  their  teeth  or  their  tails,  and  all
the  time  endeavouring  to  pull  them  down  into  the  yawning  gulf;
and  that  certain  men  also  were  in  the  midst,  co-operating  with
the  serpents  against  these  men,  at  once  tearing  and  pushing  and
beating  them  down.  And  they  seemed  to  be  on  the  point  of
falHng,  partly  against  their  will,  partly  by  their  will ;  almost  over-
come by  the  calamity,  and  at  the  same  time  resigned.  And
Carpus  said  that  he  himself  was  glad,  whilst  looking  below,  and
that  he  was  forgetful  of  the  things  above ;  further,  that  he  was
vexed  and  made  light  of  it,  because  they  had  not  already  fallen,
and  that  he  had  often  attempted  to  accomplish  the  fact,  and  that,
when  he  did  not  succeed,  he  was  irritated,  and  cursed.  And,
when  with  difficulty  he  raised  himself,  he  saw  the  heaven  again,
as  he  saw  it  before,  and  Jesus,  moved  with  pity  at  what  was
taking  place,  standing  up  from  His  supercelestial  throne,  and
descending  to  them,  and  stretching  a  helping  hand,  and  the
angels,  co-operating  with  Him,  taking  hold  of  the  tw^o  men,  one
from  one  place  and  another  from  another,  and  the  Lord  Jesus
said  to  Carpus,  whilst  His  hand  was  yet  extended :  *  Strike
against  Me  in  future,  for  I  am  ready,  even  again,  to  suffer  for
the  salvation  of  men ;  and  this  is  pleasing  to  Me,  provided  that
other  men  do  not  commit  sin.  But  see  whether  it  is  well  for
thee  to  exchange  the  dwelling  in  the  chasm,  and  with  serpents,
for  that  with  God,  and  the  good  and  loving  angels.'  These  are
the  things  which  I  heard  myself,  and  believe  to  be  true."

It  is  a  bold  undertaking  to  endeavour  to  put  into
plain  English  the  difficult  njystical  system  of  this  Greek
monk-philosopher,  who  speaks  in  a  language  quite  foreign
and  unknown  to  the  Protestant  Christian  of  the  twentieth
century.  Peradventure,  however,  there  is  enough  of  the
Pentecost  spirit  in  his  words  for  us  to  hear  something
in  our  own  tongue.  The  central  point  of  the  whole
system  is  the  point  common  to  all  classical  mysticism,
namely,  that  the  Godhead  is  a  Unity,  a  One,  beyond  all
difference,  above  all  qualities  or  characters.  He  is  (if
a  hybrid  word  may  be  allowed)  "  super-everything  "  which


VI  DIONYSIUS,  "THE   AREOPAGITE "        105

can  be  named  or  conceived.  The  Godhead  Himself,  from
whom  the  revelation  comes,  is  beyond  all  revelations  that
are  made  or  can  be  made  of  Him.  Beyond  all  effects
there  is  the  Cause  of  causes,  above  all  that  originates
there  is  a  "  super -original  Origin,"  behind  the  created
there  is  an  Uncreated  or  Hidden  Deity.  To  say  it
finally  in  Dionysius'  most  "  turgid "  fashion  :  "  He  is
the  all-super-Deity  ! "

This  unrevealed  Godhead,  the  Hidden  Dark,  is  not
only  ''  above  things  manifest "  ;  He  is  also  above  thought,
since  thought  can  deal  only  with  what  is  differentiated
and  related.^

But  though  He  cannot  be  known,  He  can,  nevertheless,
be  reached  and  experienced.  There  are  two  ways  which
lead  "  yonder " — the  affirmative  way  and  the  negative
way.  By  the  affirmative  way  the  seeker  follows  after  the
"  beneficent  progression  of  God,"  and  gathers  up  what
light  he  can  from  the  revelations  and  manifestations,  as
God  unveils  Himself  by  going  out  of  His  Hiddenness.
The  Book  on  the  Heavenly  Hierarchy  tells  us  of  this
"  progression,"  down  through  the  ninefold  ranks  of  angelic
beings,  and  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy  continues  the
stages  of  Divine  revelation  through  the  ninefold  order
of  sacred  symbols  and  ministers.  "  The  way  down  "  from
the  Godhead  is  a  Divine  progression.  "  The  way  up "
is    a    celestial  ladder  which   leads    back    to    God.       This

^  Tennyson  has  beautifully  expressed  this  idea  of  the  Nameless  Deity,  thf)
Hidden  Dark,  in  his  poem  Tlie  Ancient  Sage  : —

"  If  thou  wouldst  hear  the  Nameless,  and  wilt  dive
Into  the  Temple-cave  of  thine  own  self,
There,  brooding  by  the  central  altar,  thou
Mayst  haply  learn  the  Nameless  hath  a  voice,
By  which  thou  wilt  abide,  if  thou  be  wise,
As  if  thou  knewest,  tho'  thou  canst  not  know  ;
For  knowledge  is  the  swallow  on  the  lake
That  sees  and  stirs  the  surface-shadow  there.
But  never  yet  hath  dipt  into  the  abysm,
The  Abysm  of  all  Abysms,  beneath,  within
The  blue  of  sky  and  sea,  the  green  of  earth,
And  in  the  million-millionth  of  a  grain
Which  cleft  and  cleft  again  for  evermore.
And  ever  vanishing,  never  vanishes,
Tome,  my  son,  more  mystic  than  myself,
Or  even  than  the  Nameless  is  to  me.
And  when  thou  sendest  thy  free  soul  thro'  heaven.
Nor  understandest  bound  or  boundlessness,
Thou  seest  the  Nameless  of  the  hundred  names.
And  if  the  Nameless  should  withdraw  from  all
Thy  frailty  counts  most  real,  all  thy  world
Might  vanish  like  thy  shadow  in  the  dark."


io6  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

progression  is  an  unveiling  of  the  glory  and  goodness  of
God,  and  shows  the  steps  of  return  to  Him,  for  salvation
is  nothing  short  of  being  made  divine.  "  To  be  made
divine,"  he  says,  in  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy,  i.  3,  "is  to  be
made  like  God,  as  far  as  may  be,  and  to  be  made  one
with  Him."

The  first  stage  of  progression  from  the  hiddenness
to  the  light  is  made  through  the  "  Great  Intelligences "
which  are  nearest  God,  namely,  the  Seraphim,  who,
though  not  wholly  "  like  Him "  (no  being  can  be  like
Him),  are  completely  turned  toward  His  Oneness,  receive
directly  His  illuminations,  imitate  Him,  and  so  reflect
the  Divine  Glory.-^  These  beings  have  first-hand  illu-
minations, they  "  participate  in  the  One  Himself,  and
have  the  feast  of  the  beatific  vision,  which  makes  divine
all  who  strain  aloft  to  behold  it "  ;  and  the  Divine  energy
which  "  bubbles  forth "  from  the  Godhead  is  passed
on  by  them  to  the  next  rank,  and  so  on  down,  until
"  every  existing  thing  participates  in  the  Beautiful,"  i.e.  in
the  Godhead.

The  order  of  ranks  of  the  celestial  revealers  is  as
follows: — (i)  Seraphim,  Cherubim,  Thrones  ;  (2)  Domi-
nations, Virtues,  Powers  ;  (3)  Principalities,  Archangels,
Angels.  The  highest  are  at  "the  vestibule  of  the  God-
head," they  have  "  the  unsullied  fixity  of  Godlike  identity,'^
and  they  ray  forth  the  highest  manifestation  of  the  God-
head which  those  below  are  capable  of  contemplating.^

"  It  is  never  lawful,"  says  our  author,  "  to  cast  to  swine
the  bright,  unsullied,  beautifying  comeliness  of  intelligible
pearls  ! "  or,  as  he  says  again,  "  it  is  impossible  that  the
beams  of  the  Divine  Source  can  shine  upon  us,  unless
they  are  shrouded  in  the  manifold  texture  of  sacred  veils."

Though  this  descending  line  of  Divine  Intelligences
is    not    original   with    Dionysius,   it  was    his   formulation

^  Heavenly  Hierarchy,  xii.  3.

^  The  Book  of  Hierotheus  already  contains  nine  orders  of  celestial  essences
which  have  in  graded  being  emanated  from  the  All-Comprehensive  One,  so  that
Dionysius  seems  not  to  be  the  originator  of  this  famous  conception.  The  hieraixhy
of  Great  Intelligences,  arranged  in  three  triads,  is  plainly  constructed  after  the
triads  of  Proclus  and  his  followers,  though  Dionysius  has  renamed  them  from
Scripture.


VI  DIONYSIUS,  ''THE  AREOPAGITE "        107

of  the  celestial  order  which  fed  the  imagination  of  the
Middle  Ages,  and  it  was  his  "  taper's  radiance "  which
furnished  Dante  with  "  the  nature  and  the  ministry
angelical."  It  was  here,  too,  that  Spenser  got  those
"  trinal  triplicities  "  which

"About  Him  wait  and  on  His  will  depend."

And  we  get  an  echo  of  our  monk-philosopher  in  Tenny-
son's lines  :

"  The  Great  Intelligences  fair
That  range  above  our  mortal  state."

The  ninefold  order  of  the  heavenly  hierarchy  came  to
be  as  much  a  necessary  part  of  human  thought  as  the
pictorial  facts  of  the  Gospel  were.  Nobody  presumed  to
question  the  reality  of  this  descending  chain  of  heavenly
revealers,  so  that  not  only  the  poets  and  theologians  made
general  use  of  this  Dionysian  order  of  progression  from
God,  but  it  was,  as  well,  taken  up  everywhere  by  the
popular  mind.  The  "  celestial  ladder "  leading  back  to
God  became,  too,  the  common  property  of  all  later  mystics,
and  there  is  hardly  a  single  mystical  writer  who  does  not
have  somewhere  in  his  book  a  description  of  "  the  upward
steps "  by  which  the  soul  flees  from  the  world  and  the
flesh  to  an  inexpressible  union  with  the  One  Reality  who
is  above  knowledge.

The  ninefold  order  of  the  ecclesiastical  hierarchy
continues  the  transmission  of  Divine  Light  downward.
Here  the  "  mirrors "  are  no  longer  Godlike  "  Intelli-
gences," but  signs  and  symbols  which  lead  the  soul
to  Christ,  Who  is  at  the  head  of  this  series,  as  the  God-
head is  at  the  summit  of  the  celestial  series.  He  (Christ),
by  His  incarnation,  wrought  out  a  unifying  fellowship
between  us,  having  supremely  united  our  lowly  nature
with  His  most  divine  nature,  in  order  that  we  might
come  into  spotless  and  divine  life.  He  calls  the  race  of
man  to  participation  in  Himself  by  union  with  His  divine
life,  so  that  we  shall  truly  have  fellowship  with  God.^

^  This  is  a  free  interpretation  of  sections  12  and  13  of  the  third  division  of
chapter  iii.  of  the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy.


io8  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

The  long  treatise  on  the  Divine  Nantes  carries  out
further  the  idea  that  God  in  His  inmost  nature  is  hidden
and  nameless,  but  that  there  are  partial  revelations,  through
veils  and  symbols  and  illuminating  names,  which  manifest
Him.  The  discovery  of  the  truth  through  manifestations
is,  as  I  have  said,  the  affirmative  way.  It  consists  in
gathering  up  the  holy  crumbs  which  fall  from  the  Divine
table.  There  is  a  super -abundance  of  the  Godhead,
an  excess  of  substance,  an  overflow  of  being,  and  in
the  outgoing  of  God  we  can  discover  the  attributes
which  in  the  Godhead  "  at  home "  are  swallowed  up  in
the  unity  of  His  perfect  self  "  He  goes  forth,"  says
Dionysius,  "  in  an  unlessened  stream  into  all  things  that
are,  though  in  things  divided  He  remains  undivided."^
The  Scriptures  (the  "Divine  Oracles"  he  calls  them)
have  given  us  many  names  for  the  "  Nameless  who  is
above  every  name,"  and  each  name  reveals  some  truth,
some  aspect  of  "the  super-essential  One,"  the  Deity
above  attributes.  But  by  this  method  Dionysius  thinks
that  we  are  at  best  in  the  condition  of  the  person  who
knows  his  friend  only  by  the  shadow  he  casts,  or  by  the
distant  echo  of  his  voice.  The  affirmative  way  never
carries  the  seeker  beyond  "  reflections "  of  the  ultimate
reality.

The  affirmative  truths  of  Christianity,  the  doctrines  of
the  Church,  the  faiths  of  the  creeds,  are,  for  Dionysius,
on  a  lower  level  than  mystical  experience,  through  which
the  soul  rises  into  union  with  the  unknowable  God.  They
all  give  only  relative  knowledge.  To  arrive  at  the  real
goal,  "  knowledge  "  must  be  transcended.

"  We  ought  to  know  that  our  mind  has  the  power  for  thought,
through  which  it  views  things  intellectual,  but  that  the  union
through  which  it  is  brought  inlo  contact  with  things  beyond  itself
surpasses  the  nature  of  the  mind.  We  must,  then,  contemplate
things  Divine  by  union,  not  in  ourselves,  but  by  going  out  of
ourselves  entirely  and  becoming  wholly  of  God."  ^

He,    therefore,    prefers    the    negative    zvny,    which    he


Divine  Names,  ii.   ti.  '^  Ibid.  chap.  vii.  sec.  i.


VI  DIONYSIUS,  "THE  AREOPAGITE"        109

skilfully  illustrates  by  the  figure  of  a  sculptor :  The
Godhead  is  reached  by  the  negation  of  all  existing
things,

"just  as  those  who  make  a  lifelike  statue  chip  off  all  the
encumbrances,  cut  away  all  superfluous  material,  and  bring  to
light  the  Beauty  hidden  within.  So  we  abstract  (negate)  every-
thing in  order  that  without  veils  we  may  know  that  Unknown
which  is  concealed  by  all  the  light  in  existing  things."  ^

In  another  figure  he  compares  mystical  theology  to
"  that  ladder  on  which  the  angels  of  God  ascended  and
descended."  The  descending  angels  stand  for  the  affirmative
way,  and  the  ascending  angels  for  the  negative  way,  which
takes  the  soul  up  to  God.  That  God,  who  is  super-every-
thing,  "  dwells  in  the  super-luminous  gloom  of  silence,"  and
must  be  found  with  "  the  eyeless  mind."

There  is  an  illuminative  passage  in  Dionysius'  address
to  "  dear  Timothy,"  in  the  opening  of  Mystical  Theology,
which  furnishes  the  method  of  mystical  progress  up  into
the  Divine  Dark — dark  with  excess  of  Light :

"  O  dear  Timothy,  by  thy  persistent  commerce  with  mystic
visions,  leave  behind  sensible  perceptions  and  intellectual  efforts,
and  all  objects  of  sense  and  of  intelligence,  and  all  things  being
and  not  being,  and  be  raised  aloft  above  knowledge  to  union,  as
far  as  is  attainable,  with  Him  who  is  above  every  essence  [or
attribute]  and  knowledge.  For  by  a  resistless  and  absolute  ecstasy
from  thyself  and  everything,  thou  wilt  be  carried  up  to  the  super-
essential  ray  of  the  Divine  Dark — when  thou  hast  cast  away  all
and  become  free  from  all."  ^

"  By  laying  aside  all  mental  energies,"  and  "  by  all-pure
contemplation,"  the  soul  participates  "  with  unimpassioned
and  immaterial  mind  "  in  "  that  super-essential  Light,  in
which  all  knowledge  pre-exists,"  and  enters  into  a  union
above  thought,  above  states  of  consciousness,  above  know-
ledge.^ This  is  ecstasy,  which  is  the  final  refuge  of  all
negation  mysticism.  He  describes  it  thus  in  Mystical
Theology :     "  By    ecstasy    thou    wilt     be     carried    to    the

^  Mystical  Theology,  chap.  ii.  i.  2  /^/^_  chap.  i.  x.

^  See  Divine  Names,  chap.  i.  4,


no  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chak

super -essential  Ray  of  divine  darkness";  and  again,
"  By  the  inactivity  of  all  knowledge  one  is  united,  in  his
better  part,  to  the  altogether  Unknown,  and  by  knowing
nothing,  knoivs  above  mind"  ^

In  one  of  the  most  beautiful  passages  of  his  writings,
Dionysius  tells  how  "  pure  prayer  "  draws  the  soul  toward
that  Divine  Union  which  is  the  mystic  goal.  Our  prayers
elevate  us  to  "  the  high  ascent,"

"  as  if  a  luminous  chain  were  suspended  from  the  celestial  heights,
and  we,  by  ever  clutching  this,  first  with  one  hand  and  then
with  the  other,  seem  to  draw  it  down,  but  in  reality  we  are  our-
selves carried  upwards  to  the  high  splendours  of  the  luminous
rays.  Or  as  if,  after  we  have  embarked  on  a  ship  and  are  holding
on  to  the  cable  reaching  to  some  rock,  we  do  not  draw  the
rock  to  us,  but  draw,  in  fact,  ourselves  and  the  ship  to  the
rock."  2

This  short,  untechnical  sketch  presents  the  main
features  of  the  famous  system  of  the  anonymous  Greek.
It  is  far  removed  from  the  simplicity  of  the  primitive
message.  It  has  few  marks  of  the  apostolic  word.  It  is
a  religion  of  ripe  speculation,  and,  spite  of  the  abundance
of  Bible  texts  throughout  the  writings,  it  is,  in  fact,  Neo-
platonic  philosophy  slightly  sprinkled  with  baptismal  water
from  a  Christian  font.  But  whatever  its  origin,  it  early
became  the  form  and  type  of  mystical  religion  within  the
Church,  and  its  influence  is  discernible  in  every  mystical
sect  of  Christendom.  We  already  have  in  these  writings
the  Christianity  of  the  Cloister.  The  path  upward  is  a
solitary  path  which  the  soul  travels  by  itself  alone.  The
goal  is  beatific  gazing,  absorption  in  the  Godhead.  The
world,  with  its  tasks  and  calls,  is  left  behind  and  forgotten.
Salvation  is  thoroughly  individualistic.  We  hear  enough
of  "  love,"  but  it  is  no  longer  the  love  which  fills  the
primitive  message.  The  "  love "  of  this  monk  is  not  a
word  which  means  self- sharing  and  self- giving.  It  is
rather  an  emotional,  sensuous  thrill,  an  exhilaration,  in-
toxication even,  which  the  person  experiences  from  Divine

^  Mystical  Theology,  chap.  i.  i  and  3.

2  Divine  Names,  iii.  i.     This  is  almost  certainly  a  memory  of  the  beautiful
passage  in  Clement  of  Alexandria.


VI  DIONYSIUS,  "THE  AREOPAGITE"        iii

contact — and  it  descends  easily  to  unwholesome  dreams
and  pathological  states.  His  first  great  interpreter  in  the
West,  John  Scotus  Erigena,  seized  the  pantheistical  aspect
of  the  system  and  brought  to  full  emphasis  the  doctrine  of
the  "  progression  of  God  "  into  all  things,  and  the  return
of  all  things  into  God — a  doctrine  which  brought  forth
strange  fruit  when  the  times  were  ripe.  Even  in  the
system  of  Dionysius  there  is  no  place  for  genuine  evil.
"  All  things  that  exist,  so  far  as  they  exist,  are  good  ;  so
far  as  they  are  deprived  of  the  good,  they  are  not  existent"^
Everything  that  is,  radiates  out  from  God,  and  there-
fore evil  is  nothing  but  a  defect,  a  negation.  The  ground
of  the  mysticism  is  in  the  faith  that  the  soul  itself  is
Divine,  is  an  outflow  of  God,  and  therefore  needs  only  "  to
come  wholly  to  itself,"  to  come  wholly  to  Him.

One  sees  at  once  that  we  are  here  far  away  from  the
simplicity  and  concreteness  of  the  Gospels.  We  are
dealing  not  with  the  Father  whom  Christ  has  revealed,
but  with  the  ''  Absolute  One "  of  metaphysics  who  is
beyond  all  revelations.  We  have,  too,  passed  from  the
Pauline  conception  of  an  immanent  God  in  whom  men
live  and  move  and  are,  to  a  mysticism,  based  on  emana-
tions from  a  hidden  centre.  The  mischief  of  turning
away  from  the  concrete  to  the  abstract,  from  the  God
who  is  known  to  an  unknowable  Deity,  is  fully  committed
in  these  writings,  and  the  groping  of  centuries  after  a  God
who  hides  is  the  pitiful  result.

But  in  many  ways  this  anonymous  monk,  who  was  to
teach  the  foremost  Christians  for  ten  centuries  to  come,
served  the  truth.  He  kindled  in  multitudes  of  souls  a
pure  passion  for  God,  and  taught  very  dark  ages  that  the
oite  thing  ^ovth  seeking  with  the  entire  being  is  God.  He
iterated  and  reiterated  that  God  Himself  is  the  ground  of
the  soul,  and  that  there  is  an  inward  way  to  Him  open  to
all  men.  He  insisted  on  personal  experience  as  the
primary  thing  in  religion,  and  so  became  the  father  of  a
great  family  of  devout  and  saintly  mystics,  who  advanced
true  religion   in   spite  of  errors  of  conception.      And   he

1  Divine  Names,  iv.  20.


112  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap,  vi

did  well  in  maintaining  that  there  is  an  experience  of
Reality  which  transcends  mere  head-knowledge — a  find-
ing of  God  in  which  the  whole  being,  heart,  will,  and
mind,  are  expanded  and  satisfied,  even  though  language
cannot  formulate  what  is  being  experienced.


CHAPTER    VII

A    GREAT    LIGHT    IN    THE    DARK    AGES

John  the  Scot,  called  Erigena

"There  are  as  many  unveilings  of  God  {Theophanies)  as
there  are  saintly  souls."  Thus  wrote  John  the  Scot,  often
called  "  Erigena,"  in  the  ninth  century.^  It  is  a  great
saying.  It  takes  us  far  away  from  the  formulation  of
"  false  decretals,"  which  were  stirring  the  world  in  those
days,  and  far  from  the  contentions  of  ecclesiastics,  and
fixes  our  thought  on  the  truth  that  every  person  may
become  a  revealing  place  for  God,  or,  as  a  present-day
writer  has  well  put  it,  "  A  saintly  life  makes  a  man  an
auditory  nerve  of  the  Eternal."  ^

There  have  been  few  more  luminous  illustrations  of
the  truth  of  his  saying  than  John  the  Scot  himself
Prophets  do  not  come  in  any  age  by  observaiion^  nor  is
there  any  astronomy  which  can  calculate  the  curve  of  the
prophet's  movements,  but  John  the  Scot  is  in  an  unusual
degree  a  surprise.  He  had  to  do  his  work  in  that  gloomy
period  when  European  civilization  was  hard  beset  by  the
ravages  of  the  Norsemen,  when  both  England  and  France
were  forced  to  meet  that  last  great  inroad  of  barbarian
invaders.  Certainly  an  inauspicious  age  for  philosophy.
His  coming  and  his  course  are  as  incalculable  as  the
appearance  of  a  meteor.  He  is  a  fulfilment  of  the  word,
"  The  Spirit  bloweth  where  He  listeth."  It  is  no  wonder
that  his  generation   did   not   understand   him,  or  that   the

^  De  Divisione  Naturae,  iv.  7.
2  Brierley  in  Ourselves  and  the  Uniterse,  p.  233.

113  I


114  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

guardians  of  orthodoxy  failed  to  find  the  shibboleth  in  his
message,  for  he  was  a  spiritual  alien  in  the  Latin  Church
of  the  ninth  century — fighting  the  battles  of  truth  with
strange  weapons,  and  using  the  spiritual  coinage  of  other
realms  and  other  dates.  It  is  quite  worth  our  while  to
get  acquainted  with  him,  for  he  is  one  of  the  torch-bearers
in  the  long  line  of  teachers  of  mystical  religion.

The  material  for  the  story  of  his  life  is  very  scanty,
and  the  authorities  are  conflicting.  He  is  variously  reputed
to  have  been  born  in  England,  Ireland,  Scotland,  and
Wales.  It  is  now,  however,  fairly  well  settled  that  he
was  a  native  of  Ireland.  He  was  known  to  his  con-
temporaries as  Joannes  Scotus,  or  John  the  Scot.  The
term  "  Scot "  at  this  period  would  mark  him  as  a  native
either  of  Scotland  or  of  Ireland,  which  was  the  original
Scotland.  He  designates  himself,  in  his  translation  of
Dionysius,  as  John  lerugena.  This  name  alternates  in
early  manuscripts  with  Eriugena,^  and  considerably  later
becomes  fixed  as  Erigena.  It  seems  to  mean  "  Erin-born,"
and  one  of  his  contemporary  opponents,  Prudentius  of
Troyes,  says  that  Hibernia  produced  him,  and  speaks  of
his  "  Celtic  eloquence."  Since  the  sixteenth  century  he
has  been  generally  called  John  Scotus  Erigena,  and  the
unwary  have  often  confused  him  with  the  great  schoolman
of  the  thirteenth  century,  John  Duns  Scotus.

I  have  called  Erigena  a  surprise^  and  I  have  said  that
he  came  upon  his  age  like  a  meteor,  but,  as  happens  in
every  case,  on  close  analysis  we  find  that  even  he  was  a
part  of  a  movement,  and  when  we  come  to  examine  his
religious  environment  during  the  formative  years  of  his  life,
he  turns  out  to  be  less  meteoric  than  we  first  supposed.

Irish  Christianity  has  a  history  apart  from  the  main
lines  of  the  Roman  Church,  and  it  has  unique  and  distinct
characteristics  of  its  own.  The  planting  of  Christianity  in
Ireland  is  a  beautiful  story  of  missionary  effort,  even  when
the  halo  of  legend  is  removed.      Celtic  pirates  from  Ireland

1  The  old  name  for  Ireland  was  Eriu,  of  which  Erin,  the  name  that  has  come
down  to  us,  is  a  dative  case,  and  should  be  spelled  Erinn.  See  article  on
"Joannes  Scotus  Erigena,"  by  William  Larminie,  in  Contemporary  Review,  vol.
Ixxi.  p.  559.


VII     A  GREAT  LIGHT  IN  THE  DARK  AGES     115

carried  away  with  them,  from  a  raid  on  the  coast  of  Gaul,
a  boy  of  sixteen  named  Patricius,  or,  in  modern  form,
Patrick.^  For  ten  years  he  was  a  slave,  a  keeper  of  kine,
but  during  these  years  of  servitude  he  came  into  possession
of  a  great  spiritual  experience,  which  had  already  begun
to  dawn  in  his  boyhood  home  in  Gaul.  He  writes  in  his
Confessions  that,  even  in  those  days  of  slavery,  amidst
the  frost  and  snow,  he  felt  no  ill,  "  nor,"  says  he,  "  was
there  any  sloth  within  me,  because  the  Spirit  was  burning
within  me."  After  ten  years  among  the  flocks  he  fled
from  his  slavery,  and  wandered  back  to  his  native  land,
but  now  there  came  upon  him  a  call  to  a  service  of  another
sort.      In  a  beautiful  passage  of  the  Confessions  he  says  :

"  In  the  dead  of  night,  I  saw  a  man  coming  to  me  as  if  from
Ireland,  whose  name  was  Victorinus,  and  who  bore  countless
letters.  And  he  gave  me  one  of  them,  and  I  read  the  beginning
of  it,  which  contained  the  words  :  '  The  voice  of  the  Irish.'  And
while  I  was  repeating  the  words  of  this  beginning,  I  thought  I
heard  the  voice  of  those  who  were  near  the  wood  Foclut,  which
is  nigh  to  the  western  sea ;  and  they  cried  thus  :  '  We  pray  thee,
holy  youth,  to  come  and  live  among  us  henceforth.'  And  I  was
greatly  pricked  in  heart  and  could  read  no  more."

The  actual  facts  of  his  missionary  labours  are  pretty  well
shrouded  in  the  "  dim  magnificence  of  legend,"  but  out  of
the  consecrated  work  of  his  life  there  sprang  a  very  noble
form  of  Christianity,  and  the  missionary  passion  of  its
founder  was  a  striking  characteristic  of  the  leaders  of  Irish
Christianity.

The  Irish  Church  from  the  first  was  organized  on  a
different  basis  from  that  of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church.
The  organization  of  the  former  was  of  a  primitive  and
tribal  type,  suited  to  a  rural  and  somewhat  crude  society.^
It  was  monastic  rather  than  episcopal,  and  its  emphasis
was  upon  right  living  rather  than  upon  elaborate  theology.
An  old  chronicler  of  the  seventh  century  says  that  "  Ireland
was  full  of  saints."     The  Irish  monastery  was  in  reality  a

1  There  was  undoubtedly  9.  plant mg  of  Christianity  in  Ireland  even  before  the
coming  of  St.  Patrick.

2  See  for  details,  Hodgkin's  Political  History  of  England,  chap.  ix.  ;  and
Gxtt.\\s  Maki'/ig  of  England,  pp.  278-81,


ii6  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

Christian  colony,  "  a  holy  experiment "  for  the  practice  of
brotherhood.  It  had  its  stern  and  fanatical  aspect,  but  it
had  also  a  very  human  and  practical  side.  Under  the
leadership  of  the  noblest  of  her  missionaries,  Columba,^
one  of  these  "  Christian  colonies  "  sprang  up  on  the  little
island  of  Hy,  afterwards  called  lona,  off  the  coast  of
Scotland,  and  from  this  centre  Celtic  Christianity  spread
across  the  British  Island,  transforming  the  rude  inhabitants
of  Mercia  and  Northumbria,  and  producing,  in  Aidan  and
Oswald,  beautiful  flowers  of  sainthood.

But  the  missionary  zeal  of  these  Celtic  Christians  was
not  limited  to  their  group  of  islands.  It  has  been  said
that  "  the  Celt  yielded  not  to  the  Northman  in  his  passion
for  travel."  ^  It  was,  however,  not  passion  for  travel  so
much  as  passion  for  human  souls  that  drove  these  men
from  their  quiet  monasteries  to  face  dangers  and  difficulties
incident  to  the  task  of  planting  Christianity  in  the  neglected
spots  of  the  Continent.  Three  of  these  Irish  travellers,
Saint  Columban,  Saint  Gall,  and  Saint  Kilian,  stand  forth
among  the  most  devoted  missionaries  in  the  long  history
of  Christian  activity.  They  founded  their  colonies  in  the
strongholds  of  barbarism,  and  made  the  slender  beginnings
of  a  new  civilization,  a  new  art,  and  a  new  learning.^  Their
passion  for  learning  was  as  absorbing  as  their  missionary
zeal.  In  fact,  it  was  in  the  Celtic  schools  that  classical
learning  was  preserved  through  the  Dark  Ages.  When  the
narrow  spirit  of  a  dogmatic  Church  was  decrying  "  the
idle  vanities  of  secular  learning,"  *  and  Europe  was  sinking

1  Dr.  Hodgkin,  op.  cit.  p.  150,  says  of  Columba  :  "A  man  of  somewhat  hot
temper  in  his  youth,  softened  and  controlled  in  later  life,  with  a  stately  beauty  of
features  which  seemed  to  correspond  with  his  princely  descent,  and  with  a  kind
of  magnetic  power  of  attracting  to  himself  the  devotion  of  his  followers  ;  a  lover  of
animals  and  beloved  by  them."  "  A  great  open-air  preacher,  an  organizer  and  a
poet,  he  might  perhaps  not  unfittingly  be  called  the  Wesley  of  the  sixth  century."

2  Poole's  Illustrations  of  the  History  of  Mediceval  Thought  {^owAow,  1884),  P-  lo-

3  ^addan  says  {Remains,  p.  265)  :  "  Between  the  latter  years  of  the  sixth  and
the  early  ones  of  the  eighth  centuries,  the  missionary  work  of  the  Scot  stretched
along  the  border  of  then  existing  Christendom,  from  the  Orkneys  to  the  Thames,
and  from  the  sources  of  the  Rhine  and  the  Danube  downwards  to  the  shores  of
the  Channel,  from  Seine  to  Scheldt,  while  at  Bobbio,  near  the  River  Trebia  in
Italy,  was  planted  a  Catliolic  Irish  colony  in  the  midst  of  Arian  Lombards  ;  and
unknown  but  not  less  zealous  missionaries  bore  the  Gospel  northwards,  over
stormy  and  icy  seas,  even  to  the  Faroe  Islands  and  the  shores  of  Iceland."

^  Letter  of  Pope  Gregory  the  Great  to  the  Bishop  of  Vienne.


VII     A  GREAT  LIGHT  IN  THE  DARK  AGES     117

into  ignorance  of  the  very  language  in  which  the  world's
noblest  literature  was  written,  Celtic  Christians  in  the
monasteries  of  Ireland  were  the  guardians  of  classical
culture,  and  they  remained  untouched  by  the  invasion  of
barbarism,  which  well-nigh  swamped  the  rest  of  Europe.
They  continued  to  learn  and  to  teach  the  Greek  language,
and  to  cherish  their  Greek  manuscripts  of  the  New
Testament,  and  they  kept  aflame  a  passion  for  classical
h'terature.^

Bede  describes  a  plague  which  occurred  in  Ireland  in
664,  and  he  says  that

"many  of  the  nobility  and  of  the  lower  ranks  of  the  English
nation  were  there  at  the  time,  who  in  the  days  of  the  Bishops
Finan  and  Colman,  forsaking  their  native  island  retired  thither,
either  for  the  sake  of  divine  studies,  or  of  a  more  continent
life.  Some  of  them  devoted  themselves  to  a  monastical  life,
others  chose  rather  to  apply  themselves  to  study,  going  about
from  one  master's  cell  to  another.  The  Scots  [i.e.  the  Irish]
willingly  received  them  all,  and  took  care  to  supply  them  with
food,  as  also  to  furnish  them  with  books  to  read  and  their
teaching  gratis."  ^  Bede  also  tells  of  the  missionary  undertakings
in  Friesland  of  Wicberht,  who  was  "  famous  for  his  contempt  of
the  world  and  for  his  knoivledge^  for  he  had  lived  many  years  a
stranger  in  Ire  land  J'  ^

Wherever  these  Irish  missionaries  went  their  learning
went  with  them,  and  their  centres  of  culture  sprang  up
like  oases  in  the  desert.  A  monkish  chronicler,  writing
from  a  cell  in  the  monastery  of  St.  Gall,  has  left  a  semi-
legendary  account  of  the  way  in  which  Irish  learning
invaded  the  realm  of  Charlemagne,  and,  though  not  to  be
taken  at  its  face  value,  the  kernel  of  the  story  is  historically
correct.      The  chronicler  says  :

"When  the  illustrious  Charles  had  begun  to  reign  alone  in
the  western  parts  of  the  world,  and  the  study  of  letters  was
everywhere  well-nigh  forgotten,  in  such  sort  that  the  worship  of
the  true  God  declined,  it  chanced  that  two  Scots  from  Ireland
lighted  with  the  British    merchants  on   the   coast  of  Gaul,  men

1  See  A.  W.  Haddan's  Remains  (Oxford  and  London,  1876),  pp.  271-73  ;
and  Poole's  Illustrations  of  Mediceval  History,  pp.  11  seq.  and  p.  57.

'^  Giles'  edition  of  Bede,  Ecclesiastical  History  of  England  (London,  1840),
p.  185.  3  Bede,  p.  285.


ii8  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

learned  without  compare  as  well  in  secular  as  in  sacred  writings ;
who,  since  they  showed  nothing  for  sale,  kept  crying  to  the
crowd  that  gathered  to  buy  :  '  If  any  man  is  desirous  of  wisdom,
let  him  come  to  us  and  receive  it ;  for  we  have  it  to  sell.'  Their
reason  for  saying  that  they  had  it  for  sale  was  that,  seeing  them
inclined  to  deal  in  saleable  articles  and  not  to  take  anything
gratuitously,  they  might  by  this  means  either  rouse  them  to
purchase  wisdom  like  other  goods  or,  as  the  events  following
show,  turn  them  by  such  declaration  to  wonder  and  astonishment.
At  length  their  cry,  being  long  continued,  was  brought  by  certain
that  wondered  at  them  or  deemed  them  mad,  to  the  ears  of
Charles  the  King,  who  was  always  a  lover  and  most  desirous
of  wisdom ;  who,  when  he  had  called  them  with  all  haste  into
his  presence,  inquired  if,  as  he  understood  by  report,  they  had
wisdom  verily  with  them.  *  Yea,'  said  they,  '  we  have  it,  and  are
ready  to  impart  to  any  that  rightly  seek  it  in  the  name  of  the
Lord.'  When,  therefore,  he  had  inquired  what  they  would  have
in  return  for  it,  they  answered :  '  Only  proper  places  and  noble
souls  and  such  things  as  we  cannot  travel  without,  food  and
wherewith  to  clothe  ourselves.' "  ^

So  great  was  the  invasion  of  Irish  scholars  that  a  writer
in  the  reign  of  Charles  the  Bald,  grandson  of  Charlemagne,
declares  that  "  almost  all  Ireland,  regardless  of  the  barrier
of  the  sea,  is  flocking  to  our  shores  with  a  troop  of
philosophers."  Of  these  bearers  of  learning  and  devotees
of  philosophy,  John  the  Scot  was  easily  foremost  in  original
power  and  in  learning.  We  are  in  the  dark  in  reference
to  his  early  life.  We  simply  find  him  in  the  court  of
Charles  the  Bald,  about  847,^  without  knowing  how  he
came  to  be  there.

His  first  publication  was  a  tract  on  "  Predestination,"
written  in  851.  It  was  occasioned  by  the  teaching  of
the  monk  Gottschalk,  who  had  pushed  the  Augustinian
doctrine  of  Predestination  to  such  an  extreme  that  there
was  practically  no    function    left  for  the   Church.      The

1  This  account  is  found  in  the  opening  chapter  of  Gesta  Karoli  Magni.  It  is
published  in  Peitz'  Monumenta  Germaniae  Historica,  vol.  ii.  pp.  731  seq.

2  Piudentius,  who  was  Bishop  of  Troyes,  by  the  year  847  speaks  of  a  former
intimate  friendship  for  John  the  Scot,  a  friendship  formed  in  the  palace  of  Charles.
In  his  dedication  to  the  treatise  on  Predestination,  Erigena  says  :  "Amid  the
waves  of  the  sail-covered  sea  of  the  dominion  of  our  lord,  the  most  glorious
Charles,  even  though  we  have  gained  the  calm  of  his  haven,  yet  scarce  have  we
been  allowed  the  shortest  interval  to  gaze  upon  the  traces  of  wisdom,"  which
seems  to  imply  only  a  short  residence  in  France.


VII     A  GREAT  LIGHT  IN  THE  DARK  AGES     119

destiny  of  every  individual,  by  the  teaching  of  Gottschalk,
was  settled  by  divine  decree — a  predestination  in  two
kinds  :  on  the  one  hand  to  eternal  joy,  on  the  other  to
eternal  woe.  There  was  in  the  Church  no  power  to
change  the  outcome  of  these  infinite  decrees.  The  monk
was  declared  a  heretic  at  the  Council  of  Chiersey,  in  849,
and  his  doctrine  was  condemned,  but  the  condemnation
did  not  settle  the  vexing  question  which  had  been  raised  ;
and  Hincmar,  Archbishop  of  Rheims,  bethought  himself
of  the  Irish  scholar  in  the  royal  court,  and  appealed  to
the  philosopher  to  see  if  reason  could  not  settle  the
problem,  which  would  not  disappear  even  before  dread
anathemas.  The  Archbishop  soon  discovered  that  the
man  to  whom  he  had  appealed  was  more  dangerous  than
the  original  heretic.  Instead  of  a  plain  answer  which
silenced  the  advocates  of  extreme  predestination  and  built
up  the  breach  which  the  enemy  had  opened,  John  the
Scot  started  a  train  of  argument  with  which  no  church-
men of  the  period  could  cope,  and  dragged  into  the
fold  of  the  Western  Church  the  long-forgotten  specula-
tions of  the  Greek  thinkers.  If  ever  a  cuckoo's  egg  was
hatched  in  the  theological  nest,  here  certainly  was  one.

In  the  front  of  his  tract  Erigena  announced  that  true
philosophy  and  true  religion  are  identical,  and  he  asserted
that  the  presentation  of  the  truth  is  the  proper  method
of  combating  heresy.  His  central  position  is  the
absolute  unity  of  God,  which  implies  a  unity  both  of  will
and  knowledge.  Now,  if  God  predestined  to  evil,  He
would  of  necessity  know  (i.e.  foreknow)  evil,  and  that
would  mean  that  His  nature  is  a  duality  of  good  and  evil,
and  not  a  unity.  Therefore,  from  His  very  nature  God
could  not  predestinate  to  evil.  "  The  truth  is,"  says  this
bold  follower  of  Plato,  "  evil  is  merely  a  negation,  and  lies
entirely  outside  the  knowledge  of  God,  who  only  knows
and  wills  the  good."  Neither  sin  nor  punishment  can
thus  have  any  ground  in  the  will  of  God.  If  evil  were
predestinated  it  would  mean  that  there  was  some  power,
or  fate,  above  God,  determining  His  will.  The  conclusion
is  that  evil  has  no  ground   except  in  the  free  choice  of


120  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

human  will.  Sin  is  simply  perverted  individual  will.  It
is  always  due  to  absence  of  God — that  is  to  say,  to
ignorance  of  the  truth.  It  is,  too,  its  own  damnation,  its
own  Nemesis.  God  does  not  punish — the  sinner  punishes
himself.  Sin,  then,  being  due  to  the  apparent  separation
of  the  individual  from  God,  must  vanish  when  "that
which  is  in  part "  comes  home  into  the  one  unity — God.
For  God,  who  is  the  source  of  all  Reality,  evil  is  not.  It
has  meaning  only  in  the  sphere  of  time,  God  is  not  in
time,  and  evil  therefore  has  no  place  in  the  eternal  order.

This  tract  on  Predestination  was  twice  condemned  by
Church  Councils — at  Valence  in  855  and  at  Langres  in
859.  John  was,  of  course,  refuted  by  the  theologians
of  the  day.  One  attack  on  his  tract  finds  seventy-seven
heresies  in  it,  and  a  later  polemic  raises  the  count  to  one
hundred  and  six  !  His  old  friend,  Prudentius,  Bishop  of
Troyes,  calls  his  argument  the  product  of  a  "  poison-
infected  mind  "  and  a  "  barbarous  barking."

John's  part  in  the  great  contemporary  controversy  on
Transubstantiation  is  not  so  easily  made  out,  because  no
tract — at  least  none  proved  to  be  from  his  pen — has  come
down  to  us.  It  had  long  been  held  that  some  mystic
change  was  wrought,  by  priestly  consecration,  in  the
"  sacred  elements."  But  the  specific  nature  of  the  change
had  been  left  vague.  No  dogma  on  this  subject  had  yet
been  established,  and  there  was  no  teaching  which
prevailed  semper  et  ubique.  The  sacred  word  "Transub-
stantiation "  was  not  yet  adopted.  The  famous  controversy,
which  finally  led  to  the  settlement  of  the  doctrine  of
Transubstantiation,  was  opened  by  the  monk  Radbertus,
who,  in  the  year  844,  dedicated  to  Charles  the  Bald  an
edition  of  his  book  on  the  Sacrament  of  the  Body  and
Blood  of  Christ.  Radbertus  presented  the  extreme  view
that  at  consecration  the  Bread  is  completely  transformed
into  the  very  Body  that  was  born  of  the  Virgin  Mary,
and  the  Wine  into  the  actual  Blood  of  that  Body.  This
view,  of  course,  exalted  the  priest,  and  carried  with  it  the
necessity  for  a  hierarchy.  It  was  a  position  which  at
once   found   favour  with   the  clergy.      It  was,  however,  a


VII     A  GREAT  LIGHT  IN  THE  DARK  AGES     121

view  which  carried  the  Church  over  to  a  crude  materialism,
and  it  was  therefore  an  issue  that  called  for  a  re-affirmation
of  the  spiritual  aspect  of  religion.  The  times  needed  a
champion  of  idealism.  There  seems  little  doubt  that  our
Irish  philosopher  went  into  the  contest  on  the  idealistic
side  of  the  issue.  In  1050  a  book  dealing  with  this
subject,  and  bearing  his  name,  was  condemned  by  the
Church.^  A  book  was  also  written  by  Adrevalt  against  the
errors  of  John  the  Scot  on  the  Body  and  Blood  of  Christ,
and  John's  name  is  persistently  associated  with  the  anti-
materialistic  side  of  this  controversy.

Though  no  special  treatise  from  John  the  Scot  on  this
subject  has  survived,  we  know  what  he  thought  of
"  matter  "  in  general,  and  he  has  not  left  us  in  doubt  as
to  what  position  he  took  in  reference  to  sacraments.
He  says  :  "  There  is  nothing  in  the  visible  and  material
world  which  does  not  signify  something  immaterial  and
reasonable,"  ^  so  that  everything  is  a  symbol^  and  has  a
sacramental  significance.  Matter  is  only  a  concourse  of
accidents  or  qualities^  no  real  being}  It  is  wholly
dependent  on  thought  for  its  existence,  and  therefore  it
would  be  absurd  to  say  that  the  "  material "  Bread  and
Wine  are  more  than  symbols.  The  value  of  a  sacrament
for  John  could  only  be  an  inward  and  spiritual  value — a
value  for  faith.  There  is  a  striking  passage  in  his
Exposition  of  the  Celestial  Hierarchy  of  Dionysius  in
which  he  expresses  the  view,  now  so  familiar  among
English  Protestants,  that  the  sacrament  of  the  bread  and
wine  is  an  outward  and  visible  sign  of  an  inward  and
spiritual  grace,  which  grace  is  a  direct  participation  in
spirit  with  Christ,  Whom  we  taste  with  our  minds  and
Whom  we  receive  in  the  inner  man  for  our  salvation  and
spiritual  increase,  until  we  come  through  His  presence
to  an  unspeakable  deification ;  this  idea  of  deification
being,  of  course,  an  inheritance  from   his   Greek   masters.'*

^  It  is  now  generally  held,  though  the  point  is  not  proved,  that  this  particular
book  was  written  by  Ratramnus.

'■^  De  Divisione  Naturae,   v.  3.  ^  Ibid.  i.  62.

*  The  passage  reads  in  the  original  as  follows: — ''  Seqicifur  et  Jesu  partici-
fationis  ipsam  divinisshnae  eiicharistae  assumptionem  [italics  in  the  text].      Intuere,


122  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

This  position  that  a  sacrament  is  only  an  outward  sign  of
an  inward  event,  plainly  comes  out  in  what  he  says  on
Baptism  :  "  When  any  faithful  persons  receive  the  sacra-
ment of  baptism,  what  happens  but  the  conception  and
birth  in  their  hearts  of  God  the  ivord,  of  and  through  the
Holy  Ghost?  Thus  every  day  Christ  is  conceived  in  the
womb  of  faith  as  in  that  of  a  pure  mother,  and  is  born
and  nourished."  ^  He  says  elsewhere :  "  We  who  do
believe  in  Him  (the  Christ),  do  in  our  spirits  sacrifice
Him  and  in  our  mifzds — not  with  our  teeth — eat  of
Him"  "  The  pious  mind  tastes  inwardly  the  body  of
Christ,  the  stream  of  sacred  blood,  and  the  ransom  price
of  the  world."  ^

We  may  safely  conclude  that  though  his  arguments
were  powerless  to  beat  back  the  set  of  materialistic
tendencies,  which  fastened  Transubstantiation  on  the
Church,  bringing  with  it  the  blight  of  moral  character  and
the  supremacy  of  the  priestly  order,  there  was  at  least  a
champion  there  of  the  other  view  of  religion.  There  was
— the  hostility  of  officialdom  to  John  shows  it — a  voice
crying  in  the  wilderness  that  the  seat  of  religion  is  in  the
soul  of  man.

John  continued  in  a  very  positive  way  the  idea  of  a
progressive  revelation,  already  taught  by  the  Montanists.
He  marked  out  in  his  Commentary  on  the  Gospel  of  fohn
three  stages  of  priesthood.  The  first  stage — that  of  the
priesthood  of  the  Old  Testament — was  transitory,  and  it
saw  the  truth  only  through  the  thick  veils  of  mysterious
types.  The  second  priesthood,  that  of  the  New  Testament,
had  a  greater  light  of  truth,  but  still  obscured  by  symbols.
The  third  priesthood,  that  which  is  to  come,  will  see  God

quam  pulchre,  quam  expresse  asserit  visibilem  banc  eucharistiam  ;  quam  quotidie
sacerdotes  ecclesiae  in  altari  conficiunt  ex  sensibili  materia  panis  et  vini,  quam-
que  confectam  et  sanctificatam  corporaliter  accipiunt,  typicam  esse  similitudinem
spiritualis  participationis  Jesu,  quern  fideliter  solo  intellectu  gustanius,  hoc  est,
intelligimus  inque  nostrae  naturae  interiora  viscera  sumimus,  ad  nostram  salutem,
et  spirituale  incrementum,  et  ineffabilein  deificationem "  (Migne,  vol.  cxxii.
p.  140  b).

^  De  Divisione  Nahirae,  ii.  33.

^  The  last  two  quotations  are  takenfrom  Alice  Gardner's  valuable  book,  Studies
in  John  the  Scot,  p.  84.  Compare  this  last  quotation  with  George  Fox's
testimony  :   "I  saw  the  blood  of  Christ  how  it  came  into  the  heart."


VII     A  GREAT  LIGHT  IN  THE  DARK  AGES     123

face  to  face.  To  the  first  corresponds  the  law  of  condem-
nation, to  the  second  the  law  of  Grace  ;  the  third  will
be  the  kingdom  of  God.  The  first  assisted  human  nature,
which  was  corrupted  by  sin  ;  the  second  ennobled  it  by-
faith  ;  the  third  will  illumine  it  with  direct  contemplation.
The  Church  of  the  present  will  be  swallowed  up  by  the
light  of  the  Church  of  the  future,  when  souls  will  actually
possess  God  by  direct  communion  with  Him  by  the  Spirit.
The  Church  of  the  New  Testament  is  only  a  symbolic
image  of  this  Church  of  the  Spirit — the  eternal  Church,
which  is  to  come  into  existence  when  the  revelation  of
the  Spirit  has  fully  come.^

It  is  for  us  the  most  interesting  fact  in  the  story
of  John's  life  that  he  made  a  translation  of  the  writings
of  Dionysius  the  Areopagite,  a  translation  which
became  the  great  book  of  devotion  for  mystical  souls
for  many  generations.  He  undertook  the  work  at  the
command  of  Charles  the  Bald.  The  translation  was  a
somewhat  slavish  Latin  parallel  of  the  Greek  rather  than
a  free  translation,  but  it  served  its  purpose  and  enabled  the
Middle  Ages  to  read  these  mystical  books.  The  Roman
Librarian,  Anastasius,  expressed  his  amazement  at  "  that
barbarian  from  the  ends  of  the  earth  having  the  intellect
to  grasp  and  the  skill  to  render  such  things  into  another
tongue."  The  Pope,  however,  was  not  so  well  pleased
over  the  triumph  of  learning.  He  complained  to  the
King  that  a  copy  of  the  work  had  not  been  sent  to  him
for  his  approval,  and  he  adds  significantly  that  "  this
Johannes  was  formerly  reported  not  to  have  shown  true
wisdom  in  some  matters."  He  also  translated  another
profoundly  mystical  work — Selections  from  the  writings
of  the  Confessor  Maximus?

It  was  on  this  mystical  literature  that  John  fed
his  soul,  and  out  of  it  he.  constructed  his  own
world-view ;    and   we   must   now   turn   to   the    book    into

^  Joannis  Scoti  Comment,  in  Evang.  sec,  Joan,  in  Migne's  Patrologiae  Cursus
Completus,  vol.  cxxii.  pp.  308-309.

2  Maximus  (580-662),  monk  and  martyr  in  the  Eastern  Church  ;  a  disciple
of  Dionysius  and  of  Gregory  of  Nyssa  ;  author  of  a  commentary  on  the  writings  of
Dionysius  Areopagita,  and  of  the  Mystagogia.      Opera  (Paris  Edition),  1671;.


124  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

which  John's  life  went,  the  book  which  marks  a  philo-
sophical epoch,  and  which,  together  with  the  Dionysian
literature,  turned  the  stream  of  Greek  Mysticism  into
Christian  Scholasticism — the  book  On  the  Division  of
Nature}  The  work,  composed  of  five  "  books,"  is
written  in  the  Platonic  dialogue  style,  the  dialogue  being
between  a  Master  and  a  Learner.  I  shall  not  undertake
to  give  the  "  system  "  of  Erigena  in  full.  For  that  I  will
refer  my  readers  to  the  valuable  essay  by  Thomas
Whittaker  in  his  volume  Apollonius  of  Tyana,  and  other
essays.  I  shall  select  the  aspects  of  his  teaching  which
have  special  bearing  on  subsequent  mystical  movements.
For  Erigena  the  univere  is  a  divine  procession.  In  fact,
he  traces  the  very  word  for  God  (Oeos:)  to  the  Greek  verb
6e(t),  which  means  to  rujt  or  flow,  i.e.  to  go  out.  God
is  both  the  Alpha  and  Omega,  the  cause  and  the  end,  the
source  and  the  goal,  of  everything  that  is.  In  the
procession  there  are  four  stages,  or  "  types,"  which  are  the
four  "  divisions  of  nature  " — "  nature  "  meaning  here  every-
thing that  is.  The  first  type,  or  stage,  is,  "  That  which
creates  and  is  not  created  "  ;  the  second  is,  "  That  which
is  created  and  creates "  ;  the  third  is,  "  That  which  is
created  and  does  not  create  "  ;  the  fourth  is,  "  That  which
neither  creates  nor  is  created."  The  first  type  is  God  as
the  ground  and  principle  of  all  things — the  primal,
undifferentiated  Unity.  This  takes  us  back  to  God
before  He  "goes  out "  of  Himself,  and  reveals  Himself.
What  God  the  Alpha — God  in  Himself — may  be,  mind
can  never  grasp.  In  the  presence  of  this  mystery
intellect  is  dumb.  At  this  height  (or  in  this  depth)  there
are  no  attributes,  for  "  attributes  "  appear  only  when  God
"  goes  out "  to  reveal  Himself — only  when  He  proceeds
out  of  unity  into  differentiation.  God  as  Principle  is
"  above  "  all  contrasts  and  distinctions.  He  is  "  beyond  "
all  that  we  can  say  about  Him.  Every  utterance  of
ultimate  truth  about  Him  must  be  an  "  everlasting  nay,"
every  road   a  via  negativa.       God   is  not  any  finite  thing,

^  It  was  written  in  Greek  with  the  title  ITe/si  ^i^crewj  /xepLa-fxou.  The  title  of  the
Latin  translation  is  De  Divisions  Naturae.  The  Oxford  edition  of  1681  was
edited  by  Thomas  Gale.


VII     A  GREAT  LIGHT  IN  THE  DARK  AGES     125

no  matter  how  long  the  catalogue  ;  nor  is  He  completely
known  by  any  finite  thing  or  quality.^

But  there  is  a  divine  "  procession "  by  which  God
reveals  Himself  in  an  unfolding  universe.  He  cannot
be  "seen"  in  Himself;  He  can  be  "seen"  in  His
creation.  The  second  of  the  four  "  divisions  " — that
which  is  created  and  creates — is  the  immaterial  world
of  Ideas,  of  prototypes.  These  perfect  patterns  of  things
have  their  origin  in  God,  they  are  His  thoughts.  "  God,"
so  Erigena  says,  "  does  not  know  things  because  they  are
— they  are  because  He  knows  {i.e.  thinks)  them."  ^  That
which  is  real  in  any  object,  what  is  called  the  essence  of
the  object,  is  the  Divine  Idea,  which  the  object  manifests,
and  this  Idea,  or  pattern,  creates  the  object,  so  that  our
visible  world  is  all  only  a  "  copy "  of  a  perfect  Divine
pattern.  These  patterns  are  themselves  dynamic — they
are  Divine  wills^  as  well  as  Divine  thoughts  ;  that  is  to
say,  when  God  thinks,  things  are.

The  third  "  division  " — that  which  is  created  and  does
not  create — is  the  visible  universe,  the  world  of  time  and
space.  This  is  only  an  "  appearance,"  or  shadow,  of  the
real  world  of  changeless  patterns.  Creation  for  Erigena,
means  only  a  local  and  temporal  exhibition  of  eternal
essences.  The  visible  world  is  nothing  but  the  appearance
of  invisible  primordial  Causes.  Take  away  from  any
object  in  this  visible  world  all  that  can  be  thought  about
it,  i.e.  its  Idea,  which  constitutes  its  "  primordial  cause,"
and  nothing  is  left.  In  the  last  analysis  everything
turns  out  to  be  immaterial.  "  Matter,"  so-called,  is
no  real  being  ;  it  is  only  an  aggregation  of  "  qualities."
Remove  the  "  qualities "  which  thought  can  seize,
and     nothing    remains.       So     that    even    now^    and     not

^  Note  how  a  modern  poet  has  expressed  this  view  :

"  O  Thou  that  in  our  bosom's  shrine
Dost  dwell — unknown  because  divine;

I  will  not  frame  one  thought  of  what
Thou  mayest  either  be  or  not ;
I  will  not  prate  of  thus  or  so,
Nor  be  profane  with  yes  or  no  ',
Enough  that  in  our  soul  and  heart
Thou,  whatsoe'er  Thou  mayest  be,  art."

Arthur  Hugh  Clough.
'•  De  Divisione  Naturae,  ii.  28,  page  84  of  Gale's  edition.


126  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

merely  in  some  remote  consummation,  the  Divine
Ideas  are  all  that  is.  The  whole  creation  is  thus  a
revelation  of  God.  The  real  nature  of  things  is  God,
and  there  is  nothing  "  outside "  the  nature  of  things —
God  is  all  and  in  all.  Time  and  space,  which  change
eternal  realities  to  local  and  temporal  appearances,  are
conditions  only  of  our  finite  minds.  As  soon,  however,
as  mind  rises  from  sense  to  pure  thought  it  finds  within
itself  the  eternal  prototypes.  It  leaves  behind  the  world
of  "  broken  parts,"  and  sees  the  immutable  whole,  "  the
perfect  round  "  of  reality.  He  gives  one  curious  instance
of  the  way  in  which  the  "  broken  parts "  are  divinely
united.  Man  was  originally  a  "  sexless  unity "  ;  by  the
"  fall,"  i.e.  by  temporal  creation,  he  was  divided  into  two
sexes,  but  in  Jesus  Christ,  by  whom  God  is  revealed  in  a
supreme  theophany,  the  unity  is  restored,  for  in  Him  is
"  neither  male  nor  female  "  !  ^

The  fourth  "  division  " — that  which  is  not  created  and
does  not  create — is  God,  the  Omega,  the  goal  of  all  that
is.  When  John  comes  to  treat  of  the  consummation,  or
return,  of  all  things  into  God,  he  says  that  the  difficulty
of  telling  it  is  so  great  that  in  comparison  all  that  has
gone  before  is  "  like  plain  sailing  in  an  open  sea."  In
reality  the  primal  and  the  ultimate  are  identical — God
the  source  and  God  the  goal  are  one.  The  temporal
process,  the  vast  evolutionary  scheme,  is  only  a  theophany
or  revelation  of  God.  The  web  of  unity  seems  to  be
unravelled,  but  only  that  its  separate  threads  may  be
discovered,  and  then  again  the  threads  are  woven  back
into  the  total  seamless  piece.  As  we  have  seen,  the
reality  of  all  things  even  in  this  visible  world  is  God,  and
thus  the  final  issue  must  be  upward,  until  everything  ends
in  Him  as  it  began  in  Him.  "This  is  the  end  of  all
things  visible  and  invisible,  when  all  visible  things  pass
into  the  intellectual,  and  the  intellectual  into  God,  by  a
marvellous  and  unspeakable  union."  "  Everything  that  is
shall  return  into  God  as  air  into  light.  For  God  shall  be
all  things  in  all  things,  when  there  shall   be  nothing  but

*  De  Divisione  Naturae,  iv,  20.


VII     A  GREAT  LIGHT  IN  THE  DARK  AGES     127

God  alone."  ^  As  evil  is  a  negation,  an  unreality,  it  has
no  place  or  being  in  the  final  consummation.  Evil  will
prove  to  have  been  nothing  but  the  buffer  to  try  the
soul's  strength — the  stage-setting  for  the  spiritual  drama.
When  the  denouement  comes,  both  stage  and  stage
scenery  fall  away.  But  it  is  important  to  note  that  John
does  not  teach  the  re-absorption  of  the  soul  into  the
Absolute.  He  holds  to  the  permanence  of  the  spiritual
self — as  he  puts  it,  "  without  any  confusion  or  destruction
of  essence!^  "  The  air,"  he  says,  "  is  still  air,  though  it
appears  to  be  absorbed  into  the  light  of  the  sun  and  to
be  all  light.  The  voice  of  man,  or  of  pipe,  or  of  lyre,
loses  not  its  quality  when  several  by  just  proportion
make  one  harmony  in  unity  among  themselves."^  He  is
not  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  word  a  pantheist.  He
never  surrenders  personal  individuality,  and  he  does  not
teach  that  God  is  merely  the  totality  of  things.  We
know  God,  he  would  say,  only  through  the  procession  of
the  universe,  which  is  a  theophany  or  Divine  revelation  ;
but  God,  as  He  truly  is,  is  above  all  revelation  and  know-
ledge, and  not  to  be  confused  with  things  that  appear.

His  mysticism  appears  especially  in  his  root  conception
of  man's  soul.  There  is  an  ultimate  ground  of  truth  in
the  depth  of  personal  consciousness.  Man  is  an  epitome
of  the  universe,  a  meeting-place  of  the  above  and  the
below,  a  point  of  union  for  the  heavenly  and  the
sensuous.  We  understand  the  world  only  because  the
forms  or  patterns  of  it — the  Ideas  which  it  expresses —
are  in  our  own  minds.  So  that  a  mind  which  wholly
fathomed  itself  would  thereby  fathom  everything,  and  we
can  rise  to  Divine  contemplation  because  God  is  the  ground
and  reality  of  our  soul's  being.  In  very  truth  the  soul  is
always  in  God,  and  by  contemplation  it  may  rise  above  the
mutable  and  become  that  which  it  beholds.  In  a  remark-
able passage  in   the  Fourth  Book,^  he  says  :

*' Whoever  rises  to  pure  understanding  becomes  that  which
he  understands.     We,  while  we  discuss  together,  in  turn  become

1  De  Divisione  Naturae,  v.  8.  "^  Ibid.  v.  8.  ^  Ibid.  iv.  9.


128  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

one  another.  For,  if  I  understand  what  you  understand,  I
become  your  understanding,  and  in  a  certain  unspeakable  way
I  am  made  into  you.  And  also  when  you  entirely  understand
what  I  clearly  understand  you  become  my  understanding,  and
from  two  understandings  there  arises  one."

Man,  at  the  depth  (or  height)  of  contemplation,  finds
God,  because  in  this  state  God  is  finding  Himself  in  man.
Like  knows  like,  and  the  soul  is  what  it  sees.  God  is
found  in  the  deeps  of  the  soul,  because  the  soul  at  bottom
is  of  God.  It  is  just  because  of  his  central  faith  that  the
soul  is  a  revelation  of  God,  that  he  uttered  the  words
with  which  this  chapter  began  :  "  There  are  as  many
theophanies  of  God  as  there  are  souls  of  the  faithful."

This  strange  book  ends  with  a  beautiful  ettvoi  to  the
reader.

"  Nothing  else,"  he  says,  "  is  to  be  desired  except  the  joy  that
comes  from  truth ;  nothing  is  to  be  shunned  except  its  absence.
Take  from  me  Christ :  no  good  will  remain  to  me,  and  no
further  torment  can  affright  me.  I  commit  my  work  to  God.
Hereafter,  when  these  words  of  mine  come  into  the  hands  of
those  who  are  truly  seeking  wisdom,  with  glad  mind  they  will
kiss  them  as  if  they  were  their  own  kinsmen  coming  back  to
them.  But  if  they  should  fall  among  those  who  blame  rather
than  sympathize,  I  should  not  much  contend  with  them.  Let
every  one  use  the  light  he  has  until  that  Light  comes  which  will
make  darkness  out  of  the  light  of  those  who  philosophize
unworthily,  and  which  will  turn  the  darkness  of  those  who
welcome  It  into  light."  ^

The  speculations  of  this  bold  thinker  of  the  Dark  Ages
made  little  stir  in  the  busy  world  in  which  he  lived.
There  was  a  strong  current  setting  in  toward  materialism
in  religion,  and  this  Irish  scholar  was  a  voice  crying  in
the  wilderness.  There  came  another  age,  however,  to
which  this  voice  spoke^  and  it  awoke  movements  of  vast
significance.  There  can  be  no  question  that  John's
message  verged  on  dangerous  ground.  He  had  a  mighty
vision  for  unity  and  for  the  oneness  of  all  Reality,  but  he
dealt  feebly  with  the  great   facts  of  sin   and   evil,  change

*  Taken,  with  omissions,   from  the  end  of  the   "Division  of  Nature."     De
Division e  Naturae,  v.  40,


VII     A  GREAT  LIGHT  IN  THE  DARK  AGES     129

and  multiplicity.  He  blurred  over  the  unescapable
chasm  between  the  good  and  the  bad,  the  light  and  the
darkness,  and  he  hurried  too  easily  into  a  crude  monism
which  was  bound  to  breed,  as  it  did,  a  crop  of  pantheistic
errors.  But  there  was  in  him  a  loftiness  of  spirit,  a  bold-
ness of  vision,  a  virile  idealism,  which  were  sure  to  be  an
inspiration  to  many  noble  minds  in  later  ages  who  were,
as  he  was,  consecrated  to  the  service  of  the  Invisible
Church.


K


CHAPTER    VIII

THE    WALDENSES,    AN    ANTI-SACERDOTAL    SECT

The  Roman  Church  achieved  its  world  supremacy  only
to  find  itself  incapable  of  satisfying  the  inner,  spiritual
hunger  of  vast  multitudes  of  people  within  its  wide  fold.
The  twelfth  century,  which  marked  the  culmination  of  the
apparent  power  of  the  Church,  also  marks  the  beginning
of  a  revolt  against  its  supremacy  which  finally  ended  in
the  Protestant  Reformation  four  centuries  later.  The
ecclesiastical  hierarchy— claiming  its  authority  from  Christ
Who  said  :  "  He  that  would  be  first  shall  be  servant  of  all  "
— had  become  the  most  centralized  organization  in  the
world.  Every  earthly  power  had  to  bow  before  its
authority,  and  every  member  of  its  own  complex  body
had  to  be  submissively  obedient  to  the  papal  head  or  be
ruthlessly  cut  off.  Every  member  of  its  mighty  priest-
hood wielded  more  than  royal  power,  for  by  his  ordination
he  was  believed  to  be  possessed  of  extraordinary  super-
natural powers.  He  could  open  or  shut  the  celestial  gates
to  the  laity.  He  could  work  the  miracle  of  the  Mass
and  give  or  withhold  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ.  But
the  Church  had  won  its  apparent  supremacy  at  too  great
a  sacrifice  of  moral  and  spiritual  power.

Gradually  the  gap  between  clergy  and  laity  had
become  a  wide  chasm.  They  used  different  courts  of
justice  and  different  standards  of  ethics.  The  celibacy
of  those  who  were  ordained  had  become,  after  a  long,
hard  struggle,  a  settled  fact.  They  neither  married  nor
were  given  in  marriage,  but  were  supposed  to  be  like
the  angels  in  heaven.      They,  however,  were   not.      The

130


CHAP.  VIII  THE   WALDENSES  131

immorality  of  the  clergy,  from  the  highest  rank  to  the
lowest  order,  was  universally  recognised.  So  general  was
vice  and  so  widespread  the  scandal  that  a  man  making
confession  to  a  priest  of  an  illicit  amour  was  forbidden  to
name  the  partner  of  his  guilt  for  fear  the  priest  might  be
tempted  by  a  knowledge  of  the  woman's  frailty.^  The
Church  was  honeycombed  with  Simony,  which  is  the
ecclesiastical  name  for  what  we  now  call  **  graft."  There
were  thousands  of  positions  within  the  gift  of  the  Church
which  appealed  to  selfish  ambition,  and  these  positions
were  bought  and  sold.  Men  sat  in  the  Bishop's  seat  and
wore  the  Cardinal's  hat  not  because  they  bore  the  mark^
of  the  Lord  Jesus,  but  because  they  had  wealth  and
influence.  As  fast  as  Simony  spread  it  ate  out  the  heart
and  life  of  the  Church,  and  as  worldliness  came  in,
spiritual  power  went  out.  "  Thou  seest,"  said  the  Pope
to  Dominic,  as  he  showed  him  the  papal  treasures,  "  thou
seest  that  the  time  is  past  when  Peter  can  say,  '  Silver
and  gold  have  I  none.' "  "  Yes,"  said  the  bold  saint,
"  and  the  time  has  gone,  too,  when  Peter  can  say  to  the
lame  man  '  rise  up  and  walk.' "  The  steady  growth  of
supernaturalism  had  left  little  place  in  the  Church  for
moral  and  rational  appeal.  Preaching  had  become  well-
nigh  a  lost  art,  a  forgotten  function.  The  priest  was  not
a  preacher.  He  was  a  mediator  between  God  and  man,
possessed  of  supernatural  power.  He  brought  cure  to
sin-sick  souls  not  by  revealing  the  source  of  spiritual
power,  but  by  the  exercise  of  magic  rites.  He  professed
to  be  able  to  produce  before  his  flock  the  literal  body  and
blood  of  the  Saviour  and  to  perform  anew  a  sacrifice  for
their  sins.  He  claimed  the  power  to  shorten  the  period
of  purgatory  by  his  prayers.  He  could  say,  through  the
magic  gift  of  his  ordination,  "  Son,  thy  sins  are  forgiven
thee."

It  was  most  natural  that  such  awful  claims  should  be
abused.  It  would  have  needed  Seraphim  and  Cherubim
to  exercise  such  power  without  abuse,  and  priests  were,  in
spite   of   supernatural    claims,    only   frail    men.      It  is  no

1  See  Lea's  History  of  the  Inquisition,  vol.  i.  p.  31,


132  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

marvel  that  the  enormous  system  of  salvation  by  barter
crept  in.  The  line  of  least  resistance  led  straight  to  the
sale  of  indulgences.  The  Church  had  at  its  disposal  all
the  merits  accumulated  by  Christ's  sacrifice  and  by  the
extra-merit,  the  superfluous  goodness  of  the  long  line  of
saints.  The  Church  was  the  sole  hydrant  through  which
the  stored-up  waters  of  salvation  could  flow  out  to
humanity,  and  it  could  fix  at  will  the  conditions  upon
which  this  supply  of  Grace  should  be  applied  to  individual
need.  In  an  evil  moment  it  took  the  false  step  and
decided  that  indulgences  for  sin  could  be  granted  in
return  for  money-payments  or  in  return  for  unusual  works
and  services  rendered  to  the  Church  in  her  times  of  need.
For  example,  the  promise  of  plenary  indulgence  was
made  in  the  first  crusade  to  all  who  should  fall  in  the
service  of  the  Church,  and  as  time  went  on  this  extra-
. ordinary  power  was  used  in  capricious  ways.  Honorius
III.,  at  the  request  of  Francis  of  Assisi,  granted  a  sweep-
ing indulgence  which  promised  to  all  persons  who  visited
the  church  of  Santa  Maria  de  Portiuncula,  between  the
vespers  of  August  ist  and  August  2nd  of  any  year,
complete  remission  of  all  sins  committed  since  their
baptism.  The  popularity  of  the  indulgence  may  be
judged  from  the  vision  which  was  granted  to  one  of  the
faithful  in  which  it  was  revealed  to  him  that  this  in-
dulgence was  depopulating  hell.

It  could  not  but  work  havoc  and  disaster  to  put  the
issues  of  the  soul  on  such  an  unethical  basis,  and  by  an
eternal  principle  the  Institution  which  thus  took  the  risk
of  sowing  to  the  wind  was  bound  sooner  or  later  to  reap
the  whirlwind.  The  prophetic  spirits  of  the  time  all  felt
that  the  Church  had  largely  lost  its  vision  and  was  unable
to  minister  to  the  deepest  needs  of  the  soul.  St.  Bernard,
the  most  loyal  churchman  of  the  century,  cries  out  in
sadness  :  "  Whom  can  you  show  me  among  the  prelates
who  does  not  seek  rather  to  empty  the  pockets  of  his
flock  than  to  subdue  their  vices?"  Gilbert  of  Gamblours
says  :  "  The  prelates  enter  the  Church  not  by  election,
but  by  the  use  of  money  and  the  favour  of  princes  ;  not


viii  THE  WALDENSES


133


to  feed,  but  to  be  fed  ;  not  to  minister,  but  to  be  ministered
to  ;  not  to  sow,  but  to  reap  ;  not  to  labour,  but  to  rest  ;
not  to  guard  the  sheep  from  wolves,  but,  fiercer  than
wolves,  to  tear  the  sheep."  ^

As  soon  as  the  pulsations  of  the  deeper  life  of
humanity  became  clearer  and  stronger,  there  was  sure  to
be  a  mighty  issue  between  this  system  and  the  prophets
of  the  race  who  voiced  the  aspirations  of  the  human
heart  The  rank  and  file  of  the  hierarchy  might  settle
down  at  peace  with  a  system  which  filled  their  bellies,
satisfied  their  worldly  ambitions  and  gave  them  magic
control  of  invisible  powers,  but  the  Church  had  sooner
or  later  to  reckon  with  that  unstilled  hunger  and  thirst
of  man  for  a  reality  which  satisfies  his  deeper  self
Prophets  and  apostles  of  the  soul's  inalienable  right  to
God  were  sure  to  come  and  they  were  certain  to  refuse
the  stone  offered  for  bread,  the  scorpion  for  the  fish.
The  gigantic  system  of  mediating  supernatural  supplies
of  Grace  was  hardly  organized  in  its  completeness
when  the  hand  on  the  wall  began  to  write  "  mene."
Just  when  the  clouds  of  superstition  seemed  covering
the  sky,  the  red  fingers  of  a  new  dawn  ran  up  in
the  east.

In  the  twelfth  century  the  church  began  a  battle  with
"  heresy,"  which  has  not  ended  yet.  These  "  heresies,"
even  in  their  earlier  stages,  were  many-sided,  hard  to
describe  in  any  fixed  and  general  form.  They  took  a
variety  of  shapes  according  to  their  local  habitat  and  the
peculiar  influences  of  their  local  leaders,  and  went  under
many  names  and  often  with  strange  battle-cries.  The
spirit  of  a  new  age  was  confronting  an  old  system,  and
man  was  slowly  winning  his  right  to  think  and  his  power
to  be  his  own  priest.  The  Waldensian  movement  was
one  of  the  most  significant  of  the  many  revolts  against
the  worldliness  of  the  Church  and  one  of  the  most
genuine  attempts  to  revive  apostolic  Christianity.

It  was  for  a  long  time  supposed  that  the  Waldenses,
or  Vaudois,  had  an  unbroken  history  down  from  apostolic

*  Quoted  from  Lea's  History  of  the  Inquisition,  vol,  i.  p.  53.


134  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

days.  It  has  often  been  claimed  that  in  the  quiet
retreats  of  their  Alpine  valleys  they  preserved  the  original
Gospel  uncontaminated  and  uncorrupted.  There  are  other
traditions  which  hold  that  there  was  a  band  of  Christians
who  protested  against  the  action  of  Pope  Sylvester  in
receiving  temporal  possessions  from  Constantine  in  the
fourth  century,  and  that  this  band  of  purer  spirits  formed
an  independent  sect,  withdrew  to  the  Vaudois  valleys,
and  continued,  in  isolation  from  Rome,  to  cherish  a
Christianity  free  from  secular  corruptions.  These  are,
however,  only  traditions  which  have  had  their  birth  in  the
common  tendency  of  peoples  to  push  back  their  origin,
and,  if  possible,  to  connect  it  with  a  sacred  person  or  a
momentous  event.  The  belief  that  they  are  connected
in  origin  in  some  way  with  a  "  new  faith  "  of  the  twelfth
century,  often  called  Catharism,  which  had  come  from  the
East  and  had  slowly  permeated  the  West,  is  much  more
solidly  grounded  because  the  Waldensian  movement
undoubtedly  did  spread  rapidly  in  sections  of  Europe
where  Catharism  had  flourished.

Catharism  was  a  revised  form  of  Manichaeism.^  It
first  showed  its  appearance  in  Bulgaria  about  the  middle
of  the  ninth  century,  where  the  Eastern  and  Western
Churches  were  both  struggling  for  converts.  It  seems  to
have  come  into  Bulgaria  from  Armenia,  where  sects  of
Paulicians  ^  held  similar  views.

Cathari  (the  word  means  "  pure  men  "  or  "  puritans  ")
were  certainly  widespread  in  Europe  by  the  middle  of
the  eleventh  century,  and  there  were  many  complaints  of

^  Manichaeism  (named  from  its  founder  Manes,  born  about  A.D.  216)  was
a  dualistic  system  with  two  co-ordinate  principles  of  good  and  evil,  light  and
darkness,  God  and  Satan,  eternally  at  war  with  each  other,  both  in  the  world
and  within  man.  It  was  a  union  of  Mazdean  and  Gnostic  ideas  with  a
sprinkling  of  ideas  from  the  doctrines  of  Christianity.  St.  Augustine  was  in  his
younger  period  a  Manichaean.

2  The  Paulicians,  probably  named  from  Paul  of  Samosata,  as  a  separate  sect
date  from  the  middle  of  the  seventh  century.  The  birthplace  of  the  sect  seems
to  have  been  Samosata,  not  far  from  the  ancient  "  Ur  of  the  Chaldees."  The
patriarch  of  the  sect  was  a  certain  Constantine,  who  had  come  under  Gnostic
and  Manichaean  influences.  He  was  given  a  copy  of  St.  Paul's  Epistles  in  which
he  thought  he  found  his  own  Gnostical  ideas.  By  allegorical  interpretation  he
harmonized  Paul's  Christianity  with  Oriental  theosophy  and  the  product  was
"  Paulicianism  "  in  the  East  and  later  became  "  Catharism  "  in  the  West.


VIII


THE  WALDENSES  135


the  prevalence  of  the  "  heresy  "  both  from  Germany  and
Italy  before  the  end  of  the  century.  It  did  not  appeal
much  to  the  subtle  minds  of  the  Church.  It  was  seized
upon  rather  by  the  humble  poor  folk — those  who  laboured
and  were  heavy  laden  and  who  felt  that  the  Church  did
not  "  speak  to  their  condition."  They  were  feeling,  how-
ever blunderingly,  after  a  reformed  and  purified  Church.
The  Cathari  held,  in  varying  degrees  according  to  locality,
that  there  are  two  ground  principles  in  the  universe — a
good  God  who  is  the  creator  of  the  spiritual  world,  and
an  evil  god  (Satan)  who  is  the  creator  of  the  material
world.  Between  these  two  beings,  and  between  these  two
worlds,  there  is  truceless  antagonism.  The  battle  has  been
carried  even  into  heaven,  and  some  of  the  celestial  host
have  been  won  over  to  the  side  of  the  evil  being.  This
visible  world  is  the  sphere  of  the  activity  of  his  forces.
The  aim  of  the  Cathari  was  to  get  deliverance  from  the
power  of  this  evil  being,  and  so  from  everything  belonging
to  the  material  world  which  is  his  world.  They  were
therefore  naturally  extremely  ascetic.  They  required
abstinence  from  sexual  intercourse,  from  all  meats,  eggs,
cheese,  and,  in  a  word,  from  everything  that  involves
sexual  intercourse  among  animals.  They  stoutly  opposed
oaths.  They  condemned  war,  and  they  held  that  punish-
ment by  death  was  wicked.  They  contended  not  only
against  infant  baptism,  but  against  water  baptism
altogether,  even  asserting  that  this  rite  was  introduced  by
Satan  who  used  John  the  Baptist  as  his  instrument.^
They  pointed  out  that  in  apostolic  times  those  who  had
received  water  baptism  were  still  imperfect  until  they
received  the  Holy  Ghost  (Acts  viii.  15,  16).  They
carried  their  opposition  to  external  things  to  the  point
of  holding  that  God  dwells  not  in  houses  made  with
hands.  A  house  of  stone  is  not  a  church  ;  a  company  of
good  persons  only  is  the  Church.

They  were  divided  into  two  groups — a  larger  and  a
smaller,  called  respectively  "  believers "  and  "  perfects."
The  "  perfects  "  were  initiated,  by  the  sacrament  of  laying

^  See  Neander's  History  of  the  Christian  Religiott,  vol.  iv.  p.  575.


136  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

on  of  hands  (the  consolamentum),  into  the  circle  of  those
who  were  the  elect  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  group  of  the
"  pure."  To  those  "  initiated "  heaven  was  assured.
There  is  no  question  that  the  Cathari,  both  in  their  early
stages  and  in  their  later  period  when,  especially  in
France,  they  are  called  "  Albigenses,"  ^  held  beliefs  which
were  crude  and  far  removed  from  the  teaching  of  the
Gospel.  Their  dualism  led  them  to  a  belief  in  Satan  as
only  a  less  powerful  being  than  God — a  belief  not  yet
wholly  outgrown  and  suppressed.  Their  asceticism  was
largely  due  to  their  wild  and  unsound  philosophy,  and
while  revolting  from  some  of  the  superstitions  which
prevailed  in  the  Church,  they  were  themselves  a  prey  to
other  superstitions  which  made  it  impossible  for  their
movement  to  bring  a  real  spiritual  deliverance  to  Europe.
They  did,  however,  teach  with  powerful  emphasis  the
importance  of  pure,  moral  living  and  a  severely  simple  life.
They  formed  rallying-points,  wherever  they  flourished,  for
those  who  were  grieved  over  the  immorality  of  the  clergy,
and  who  were  hostile  to  the  sacerdotalism  and  secularity
of  the  Church.^

It  is  worth  our  while  to  pause  for  a  moment  and  ask
why  it  was  that  this  formulation  of  Manichaean  doctrines
has  so  persistently  appealed  to  human  interest  and  to
human  need.  What  was  it  in  Manichaeism,  Paulicianism,
Catharism,  and  Albigensianism  that  so  fascinated  the
people  of  so  many  countries  and  of  so  many  epochs,  and
made  them,  in  the  strength  of  these  faiths,  go  bravely
to  dungeon  and  to  death  ?  It  is  not  quite  safe  to  raise
such  questions  or  to  try  to  answer  them,  for  the  outside  view
at  this  safe  distance  is  wholly  unlike  the  inside  view  by
which  these  men  lived  and  died,  and  the  spiritual  attitude
of  those  who  form  a  religious  movement  is  so  rich  and
complex   as   to  defy  analysis.      But  the  central  principle

^  So  named  from  Albi  in  France  where  they  flourished,

2  The  Waldenses  did  not  directly  spring  out  of  Catharism.  It  is  not  possible
to  trace  the  origiti  of  Waldensianism  to  the  teaching  of  the  Cathari.  In  fact
the  Waldenses  considered  the  Cathari  to  be  heretics.  But  nevertheless  there  was
much  in  common  in  the  two  movements,  and  it  is  extremely  probable  that  the
anti-sacerdotal  spirit  and  the  moral  standards  of  the  earlier  movement  had  a
weighty  influence  on  the  later  one.


viii  THE  WALDENSES  137

of  this  vast  movement,  which  under  many  names  has
dominated  men,  seems  to  be  its  simple  solution  of  the
mystery  of  good  and  evil,  which  is  the  mystery  that
weighs  heaviest  upon  the  spirit  of  man.  Manichaeism,  in
its  constantly  appearing  varieties,  seems  to  us  doubtless
a  crude  solution  of  the  mystery,  but  to  multitudes  of  men
it  has  seemed  the  last  word  of  revelation.  Evil  is  foreign
to  God — it  is  the  work  of  an  enemy  who  has  stolen  a
march  and  is  making  terrible  havoc,  but  God — our  God —
is  incessantly  at  war  with  this  monster  enemy  and  in  the
long  run  will  outwit  him,  and  bring  His  loyal  subjects  into
the  fruits  of  His  own  victory.  It  is  the  exact  opposite
of  the  view  which  appealed  so  mightily  to  the  mind  of
the  mystic.  The  latter  found  his  mystery  solved  and  his
spirit  delivered  in  the  faith  that  everything  is  Divine.
Evil  is  only  a  finite  illusion,  only  a  temporal  dream.
Return  into  God,  and  the  illusion  vanishes  as  the  dream
does  at  waking.  Both  of  these  views,  though  diametrically
opposed  to  each  other,  made  their  way  because  they  were
so  transparently  simple  and  adequate  to  the  minds  that
adopted  them.  They  came  as  a  welcome  release  to  the
strain  and  tension  of  the  perplexed  and  groping  mind.
"  God  is  all  there  is,"  said  the  mystic,  "  enter  His  allness
and  be  at  rest."  "  God  is  at  war  with  His  enemy  and
ours,  and  when  He  wins  the  victory  and  chains  the
monster  of  darkness,  we  shall  live  in  the  light,  let  us
join  in  this  battle  of  Armageddon,"  said  the  Cathari.
They  both  felt  that  they  had  found  a  clue  to  the  mystery,
that  they  had  a  principle  by  which  they  could  conquer
world,  flesh,  and  devil,  and  in  this  organizing  faith  lay
their  power.

The  Waldenses  as  a  separate  sect  owe  their  origin  to
Peter  Waldo,  a  merchant  of  Lyons,  who  about  1 1 7  3
experienced  a  religious  crisis  which  radically  transformed
him,  and  set  him  forth  on  a  unique  spiritual  experiment.
Waldo,  like  Melchizedec,  is  without  traceable  earthly
lineage.  His  origin  and  ancestry  are  unknown.  He  had
come  to  Lyons  about  1 1  5  5  to  make  his  way  in  life,  and,
according  to  an  early  chronicle  had  amassed  great  wealth


138  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

as  a  money-lender,  and  was  everywhere  recognized  as  a
successful  and  prosperous  man.  The  story  which  has
come  down  to  us  to  account  for  his  spiritual  crisis  is  as
follows  :  ^  He  was  a  man  living  in  the  enjoyment  of  his
prosperity  and  good  fortune,  when  suddenly  one  day  a
dear  friend  fell  dead  before  his  eyes.  This  experience
produced  a  profound  impression  on  him,  and  this
impression  was  deepened  by  another  experience  which
followed  hard  upon  the  first  one.  Coming  home  one  day
from  mass  he  heard  a  minstrel  singing  to  a  crowd  and
reciting  the  story  of  St.  Alexis — a  sad  tale  ending  with
a  complaint  of  the  condition  of  the  Church  and  the
degeneracy  of  the  present  compared  with  the  good  old
times.  Waldo  took  the  minstrel  home  with  him,  and  was
so  moved  by  the  impression  his  visitor  made  upon  him
that  he  went  next  morning,  not  to  his  business,  but
instead  to  consult  a  spiritual  guide — "a  Master  of
Theology " — whom  he  knew  in  the  city.  He  told  his
guide  that  he  was  eager  to  find  the  true  way  to  heaven.
The  guide  told  him  that  the  surest  way  was  to  obey  the
words  of  the  Master  :  "  If  thou  wilt  be  perfect,  sell  all
thou  hast  and  give  to  the  poor  and  come  and  follow  me."
The  words  struck  home,  and  Waldo  took  them  literally.
He  settled  up  all  his  business  affairs,  provided  for  his
daughters,  and  placed  them  in  the  Abbey  of  Fontevraud,
fixed  a  proper  share  of  his  worldly  goods  on  his  wife,
and  began  at  once  to  use  his  own  part  of  the  property  to
feed  the  poor  and  to  spread  the  truth.  Like  St.  Francis,
whom  he  precedes  by  a  generation,  he  went  to  living  as
the  birds  do,  with  no  care  or  anxiety,  and  going  about
from  house  to  house,  visiting  the  sick,  helping  the  poor,
and  reading  the  Gospels  to  them.^  He  met  with  little
groups  in  workshops  and  at  street  corners,  and  showed

1  There  arc  two  early  accounts  of  Waldo's  Conversion  ;  one  in  Anecdotes
historiques,  Ugendes  et  apologues,  tiris  du  recueil  inidit  d  ktienne  de  Bourbon,
dominicain  du  XII I^  sUcle,  publics  pour  la  Soci^td  de  I'Histoire  de  France  par  A,
Lecoy  de  la  Marche,  Paris,  1877,  pp.  290  seq.  ;  and  the  other  in  the  Chronicon
anonymi  Canonici  Laudunensis  in  Bouquet's  Recueil,  tome  xiii.  pp.  680-82.

2  Waldo's  wife,  when  she  heard  that  he  was  living  on  the  charity  of  the
neighbours,  went,  with  tears,  to  the  Archbishop  and  claimed  her  right  to  feed  her
husband,  and  the  Archbishop  ordered  that  he  should  eat  with  her  when  he  was  in
Lyons.     A  quite  similar  story  was  related  of  Raimund  Lull,  who  was  born  in  the


VIII  THE  WALDENSES  139

them  through  the  Scriptures  the  simplicity  of  the  Gospel
message  and  the  character  of  the  primitive  Church.  He
employed  a  translator  at  his  own  expense,  who  put  the
Gospels  and  other  parts  of  the  Bible  into  the  vernacular
Provencal,  and  he  made  a  collection  of  extracts  from  the
Fathers,  known  as  "  Sentences."  ^  The  idea  which  pos-
sessed Waldo  was  the  necessity  of  literally  following
Christ,  and  the  main  basis  of  his  movement  was  the  "  new
law "  of  Christ  which  he  found  in  the  Gospels.  Those
who  formed  the  nucleus  of  his  followers  were  obscure
men,  mechanics,  people  "  of  whom  the  Church  took  little
count,  except  to  tax  when  they  were  orthodox,  and  burn
when  heretic."  They  called  themselves  "  the  poor  of
Christ  "  or  "  the  poor  men  of  Lyons."  ^  They  were  brave,
obedient  to  their  light,  and,  like  the  early  Franciscans,
naive  and  childlike.  They  preached  the  Gospel  in  the
streets,  in  the  fields,  and  in  market-places,  and  they  went
from  house  to  house  telling  their  message  to  everybody
in  the  city.  Their  simple  lay -preaching,  backed  up  by
their  pure  lives  and  their  spirit  of  kindness,  appealed  to
the  people,  but  it  brought  them  into  collision  with  the
officials  of  the  Church.  The  Archbishop  ordered  Peter
to  stop  casting  his  pearls  before  swine,  and  to  cease
usurping  the  office  of  preacher  which  belonged  only  to
the  ordained.  Waldo  appealed  to  the  Gospel  for  his
authority,  but  made  no  impression  on  the  Archbishop.
The  "  poor  men  "  thus  found  themselves  forced  to  choose
whether  they  would  obey  their  clergy  or  their  precious
Gospel.  In  this  dilemma  Waldo  took  the  apostolic  words
as  his  own,  and  announced  as  his  decision  :  "  We  must
obey  God  rather  than  men."  The  Archbishop  thereupon
expelled  Waldo  and  his  followers  to  the  number  of  some
thousands  from  the  city,  and  in  doing  so  expanded  the
movement  from  a  local  affair  to  continental  dimensions.
At  the  Lateran  Council,  held  in  1 179,  the  "  poor  men  "

island  of  Majorca  in  the  year  1236.  He  had,  however,  come  under  Franciscan
influence,  and  was  undoubtedly  taking  St.  Francis  as  his  model.

^  According  to  the  other  account — that  of  Etienne  de  Bourbon — the  work  of
translating  the  Scriptures  was  under  way  before  the  Alexis  incident  occurred.

2  They  were  sometimes  called  Insabbatati,  which  means  "the  Shoed,"  froir
the  fact  that  they  wore  peculiar  sandals  in  imitation  of  the  Apostles.


140  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

in  person  presented  a  petition  to  have  their  vow  of
poverty  confirmed,  which  was  granted.  They  presented
also  their  translations  of  the  Scriptures,  and  tried  to
secure  permission  to  preach  as  laymen.  This  per-
mission was  granted  with  a  proviso  which  nullified  it,
namely  that  they  must  first  secure  the  permission  of  their
local  clergy,  and  be  under  the  oversight  of  a  local  Bishop.
At  this  Lateran  Council,^  Walter  Mapes,  the  famous
Englishman  from  the  court  of  Henry  II.,  was  called  in  to
question  the  "  poor  men,"  and  to  examine  their  transla-
tions. He  found  great  sport  in  confusing  them  with  his
fine-spun  arguments,  and  he  made  much  fun  of  their
naivete  and  simplicity.

The  anathema  of  the  Church  fell  upon  them  with
force  at  the  Council  of  Verona  in  1 1 84.  The  anathema
includes  the  Cathari,  the  Paterines,  those  falsely  called
"  the  humble,"  or  "  the  Poor  at  Lyons,"  the  Passagians,
Josephites,  Arnaldists — "  these  are,"  the  decision  reads,
"  eternally  anathema,  and  we  include  in  the  same  perpetual
anathema  all  zvJio  shall  have  presumed  to  preachy  either
publicly  or  privately^  either  being  forbidden  or  not  sent,  or
not  having  the  authority  of  the  Apostolic  See  or  of  the
Bishop  of  the  diocese"^  This  decree  further  says  that
"  heresies  have  begun  in  these  modern  times  to  break
forth  in  most  parts  of  the  world,  so  that  the  power
of  the  Church  ought  to  be  aroused."  Henceforth  the
Waldenses  were  compelled  to  give  up  all  hope  of  re-
forming the  Church  from  within,  and  to  face  the  hazard
of  forming  a  Church  separate  from  "  the  Church."  ^

About  the  year  11 90  the  Waldenses  held  a  public
disputation  in  the  Cathedral  of  Narbonne,  and  the
subjects  discussed  at  this  disputation  give  a  very  definite
idea  of  their  views  at  this  period.  The  most  important
points  to  be  combated  are  the  following  : —

^  The  Lateran  Council  of  1179  condemned  the  Cathari  and  put  them  under
an  anathema.

2  Decree  of  Pope  Lucius  III.,  in  the  Council  of  1184  [M^iilSind's  Facts  and
Documents,  p.   177).

8  There  were,  however,  many  members  of  the  Waldensian  group  who  still
retained  a  nominal  membership  in  the  Church.  It  took  a  whole  century  of
persistent  persecution  to  shake  their  loyalty  and  to  drive  them  into  "separation."


VIII  THE  WALDENSES  141

1.  They  refuse  obedience  to  the  Pope  and  prelates.

2.  Everybody,  even  laymen^  can  preach.

3.  That    according    to    the    Apostles,    God    is    to    be

obeyed  rather  than  man.

4.  That  womefi  may  preach

5.  That  masses,  prayers,  and  alms  for  the  dead  are  of

no    avail  ;   while    some   deny   that    there    is   any
purgatory.

6.  That  prayer   in    bed,    or   even    in    a   stable,    is    as

efficacious  as  in  a  church.^

Bernard  of  Fontcaud,  who  gives  us  these  points  under
discussion  at  Narbonne,  makes  much  of  the  fact  that
these  "  poor  men  "  allowed  all  their  members,  regardless
of  age  or  position,  to  preach,  and,  as  we  have  seen,
extended  the  privilege  to  women.

One  of  the  earliest  references  to  the  apostolic  preach-
ing of  the  Waldenses  is  found  in  the  Edict  of  King
Alfonso  of  Aragon  dated  1192,  in  which  his  subjects  are
forbidden  to  harbour  or  shelter  Waldenses,  Insabbatati
("  sandled  men  "),  or  Poor  Men  of  Lyons,  and  they  are
warned  against  hearing  them  preachy  giving  them  food,  or
showing  them  any  kindness.^

Further  light  on  their  views  and  practices  is  shed  by
a  Tract  prepared  not  far  from  this  date  at  the  request  of
the  pope,  by  Alain  de  I'lsle,  who  was  called  the  "  universal
Doctor."  The  great  doctor  finds  them  a  dangerous  people,
because  they  hold  dangerous  doctrines  and  are  determined
to  practise  their  teachings,  and  carry  them  out  in  daily
life.  He  says  that  they  preach  without  permission,
assuming  themselves  to  be  successors  of  the  apostles  ;
that  they  take  women  about  with  them  and  allow  them
to  preach  in  public  assemblies,  and  that  they  support
themselves  by  the  work  of  their  hands.  He  complains
that  they  teach  that  only  ministers  who  live  godly,
apostolic  Hves  have  the  power  to  loose  and  bind,  that
spiritual  power  is  dependent,  not  on  ordination,  but
on   inward   life  and   character,   and   that  the  ministration

1  These  points  are  given  in  a  Tract  by  Bernard,  Abbot  of  Fontcaud,  written
about  the  year  1200.

■•^  Miiller,  Die  Waldenser  (Gotha,  1886),  p.  12.


142  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

of  sinful  priests  is  invalid, — teachings  which  would
woefully  cripple  the  power  of  the  Church.  He  also
finds  that  they  strike  another  blow  at  the  Church  by
claiming  that  confession  to  a  good  layman  is  just  as
availing  as  confession  to  a  priest.  And  finally  they
reject,  as  devoid  of  any  efficacy,  the  whole  system  of
indulgences, — a  system  against  which  Luther  aimed  his
first  blow  three  centuries  later.^

There  is  a  steady  testimony,  from  all  our  reliable
sources,  to  the  purity  of  the  life  and  the  strict  moral
character  of  the  Waldenses,  both  in  their  earlier  and  in
their  later  periods.  They  took  the  Gospel  literally,  and
made  a  very  serious  attempt  to  live  it  as  the  law  of  their
daily  life.  They  practised  apostolic  simplicity,  even  to
the  wearing  of  sandals  to  be  like  the  apostles.  They
refused  to  swear,  and  the  stricter  members  of  the  group —
"  the  faithful  "  or  "  perfect  " — would  accept  death  before
they  would  take  an  oath.  Lea  reports  the  case  of  an
old  woman  who  was  given  the  chance  to  escape  the
sentence  of  death  as  a  heretic  if  she  would  take  an  oath.
She  refused  to  save  herself  on  that  condition.  They
opposed  war  and  even  judicial  homicide,  standing  literally
by  the  command,  "  Thou  shalt  not  kill."  The  passwords
of  the  sect  were,  "  Saint  Paul  says,  *  Lie  not ' ;  Saint  James
says,  '  Swear  not ' ;  Saint  Peter  says,  *  Do  pot  render  evil
for  evil.'"  When  one  of  their  members  was  being
"  examined "  before  the  Inquisition  of  Toulouse,  he  was
asked  what  his  religion  had  taught  him.  His  noble
answer  was  that  it  had  taught  him  "  that  he  should
neither  speak  nor  do  evil ;  that  he  should  do  nothing
to  others  that  he  would  not  have  done  to  himself;  and
that  he  should  not  lie  or  swear."

An  interesting  account  of  the  errors  of  the  Waldenses
is  given  by  a  contemporary  monk  of  Citeaux,  Peter  of
Vaux-Sernai.      He  says  that :

"  Their  errors  consisted  chiefly  in  four  things,  viz.  in  wearing
sandals  after  the  manner  of  the  Apostles  ;  in  saying  that  it  is  not

1  See  Miiller,  op.  cit.  p.  14  ;  Lea,  op.  cit.  p.  79  ;  Alain  de  I'lsle  died  1202.


VIII  THE   WALDENSES  143

lawful  on  any  account  to  swear ;  or  to  kill ;  and  moreover  in  this
— that  they  asserted  that  any  individual  of  the  sect,  in  case  of
necessity,  if  he  only  had  on  sandals,  without  having  received
orders  from  a  bishop,  could  make  the  body  of  Christ  [perform
the  miracle  of  transubstantiation].

When  any  one  went  over  to  the  heretics,  he  who  received
him  said,  '  Friend,  if  you  wish  to  be  one  of  us,  it  behoves  you
to  renounce  the  whole  faith  that  is  held  by  the  Roman  Church,'
and  he  must  answer,  '  I  renounce ' ; — '  Then  receive  the  Holy
Spirit  from  good  men ' — and  he  breathes  seven  times  in  his  face.
Also  he  says  to  him,  'You  must  renounce  the  cross  made  on
you  in  baptism,  on  your  breast,  and  on  your  shoulders,  and  on
your  head,  with  oil  and  chrism.'  He  must  answer,  '  I  renounce
it'  *  Do  you  believe  that  water  could  work  your  salvation  ? '
He  answers,  '  I  do  not  believe  it.'  "  ^

It  was  not  an  uncommon  thing  for  persons  in  the
twelfth  century  to  be  suspected  of  heresy  when  they
were  discovered  to  be  living  lives  of  extraordinary  purity
and  simplicity.  In  fact  a  "  heresy  hunter  "  of  the  period
who  knew  the  marks  of  heresy  says :

"  Heretics  are  recognizable  by  their  customs  and  speech,  for
they  are  modest  and  well  regulated.  They  take  no  pride  in
their  garments,  which  are  neither  costly  nor  vile.  They  do  not
engage  in  trade,  to  avoid  lies,  and  oaths,  and  frauds,  but  live  by
their  labours  as  mechanics — their  teachers  are  cobblers.  They
do  not  accumulate  wealth,  but  are  content  with  necessaries.  They
are  chaste,  and  temperate  in  meat  and  drink.  They  do  not
frequent  taverns  or  dances  or  other  vanities.  They  restrain
themselves  from  anger.  They  are  always  at  work;  they  teach
and  learn  and  consequently  pray  but  little.  They  are  to  be
known  by  their  modesty  and  precision  of  speech,  avoiding
scurrility  and  detraction,  light  words,  lies,  and  oaths.  They  do
not  even  say  vere  or  certe,  regarding  them  as  oaths."  ^

One  of  the  most  beautiful  monuments  of  the  high
ethical  spirit  of  the  Waldenses  is  the  old  Provencal
poem,  entitled,  "  La  Nobla  Leyczon," — the  Noble  Lesson.
It  was  long  supposed  to  be  a  production  of  about  the  year
I  100,  as  the  poem  itself  declares  that  eleven  centuries
have    passed   since   it    was   said  :    "  We   live   in    the    last

*  Quoted  from  Maitland's  Facts  a?id  Documents,  pp.  395-96.
"^  Quoted  in  Lea,  op.  cit.  vol.  i.  p.  85.


144  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

times."  But  scholars  are  now  agreed  that  these  lines
have  been  tampered  with  and  that  the  poem  was  written
probably  by  a  Waldensian  "  master "  not  far  from  the
year  1400.  The  poem  is  permeated  with  the  spirit  of
evangelical  Christianity  and  with  the  ethical  ideas  of  the
Sermon  on  the  Mount.  It  makes  religion  consist  in
following  Christ,  and  in  the  maintenance  of  a  pure,  clean
life  ;  and  it  complains  that  if  a  person  is  found  who  neither
curses,  swears,  lies,  commits  adultery,  murders,  possesses
himself  of  another's  goods,  nor  revenges  himself  on  his
enemies,  the  false  shepherds  say,  "  He  is  a  Waldensian."  ^

Their  form  of  organization  was  very  simple  and  as
apostolic  as  they  could  make  it.  They  made  the  smallest
possible  distinction  between  clergy  and  laity.  There  was
a  certain  number  of  the  members  who  renounced  all
property,  who  devoted  all  their  time  to  religious  teaching
and  the  propagation  of  the  Gospel :  these  persons  were
called  "  majorales  "  or  sometimes  the  "  perfected,"  and  in
later  times  "  barbes."  They  supported  themselves  by
some  menial  occupation  such  as  cobbling,  tinkering,  or
peddling.^  Where  they  devoted  their  entire  time  to
the  Gospel  they  lived  in  a  simple  way  on  voluntary
contributions.  Many  of  the  Waldenses,  especially  their
ministers  and  missionaries,  were  skilful  leeches.  They
were  always  ready  to  use  their  skill  in  medicine  and
surgery  to  open  the  door  for  applying  their  remedy  for
the  cure  of  souls.  They  refused  all  payment  for  such
service,  and  silently  taught  the  lesson  that  "  It  is  more
blessed  to  give  than  to  receive."

They  seem  not  to  have  had  any  settled  teaching,  at
least  in  the  earlier  stages  of  the  movement,  on  the
doctrine  of  transubstantiation.  At  first  they  took  the
position  that  the  bread  and  wine  became  the  Body  and
Blood  of  Christ  only  in  the  hands  of  spiritual  priests,  but
they   gradually   came    to   question,    and    frequently  they

^  Trench  has  pointed  out  in  his  Medicsval  Church  History,  pp.  247  ff. ,  that
there  is  a  thinness  of  quahty  in  all  the  literature  of  the  Waldenses.  He  notes  too
the  fact  that  in  the  five  hundred  lines  of  the  Noble  Lesson  only  one  line  refers  to
redemption  by  Christ.  It  has  also  often  been  noted  that  their  Christianity  is  of
the  type  of  St.  James  rather  than  of  the  type  of  St.  Paul.

2  See  Whittier's  poem,  "The  Vaudois  Teacher."


VIII


THE  WALDENSES  145


even  denied,  the  reality  of  transubstantiation.  There  is
evidence  that  some  of  the  inquisitors  used  transubstantia-
tion as  a  decisive  test  when  examining  those  suspected  of
being  Waldenses,  and  it  clearly  appears  that  very  often
laymen,  especially  the  heads  of  the  families,  administered
in  simple  form  the  communion  supper.^

In  the  early  part  of  the  fourteenth  century  we  get  a
fairly  full  account  of  the  Waldenses  of  that  period  from
their  great  persecutor,  Bernard  Gui,  who  was  inquisitor  at
Toulouse.  This  account  by  the  great  inquisitor  shows
that  the  Waldenses  had  kept  straight  on  their  original
lines  throughout  the  century  and  a  half  of  persecution.
He  says  that  they  form  a  society  or  brotherhood,  that
they  maintain  evangelical  simplicity  and  poverty.  Those
who  preach  have  no  property  of  their  own,  but  go  from
place  to  place  and  are  fed  and  sheltered  by  those  who
form  the  society.  They  teach  that  transubstantiation  is
effected  only  when  the  ministrant  is  a  pure  and  holy
person.  Supernatural  powers  are  not  conferred  by
ordination^  but  all  spiritual  powers  come  directly  from
Christ  to  the  individual.  Transubstantiation  may  be
worked,  and  absolution  may  be  given  by  any  spiritual
person,  either  man  or  woman.^

Persecution  steadily  drove  them  into  sharper  opposition
to  the  Church,  and  forced  them  to  realize  that  the  Church
could  not  be  reformed  from  within,  so  that  they  finally
came  to  think  of  themselves  as  "  the  true  Church,"  and  of
the  great  Church  as  apostate,  or,  as  they  put  it,  a  "  house
of  lies."  They  organized  schools  of  their  own  in  which
their  peculiar  doctrines  and  practices  were  taught.  They
had  their  cemeteries  set  apart  for  their  own  dead,  and
they  had  a  vigorous  band  of  missionaries  whose  zeal  and
courage  knew  no  bounds.

1  See  the  account  from  Peter  of  Vaux-Sernai,  quoted  above.  There  was,  even
in  the  lifetime  of  Waldo,  a  breach  between  the  "  poor  of  Lyons  "  and  the  "  poor
of  Lombard)'."  The  latter  were  much  more  sharply  anti-church  in  their  attitude
than  the  former.  The  "  poor  of  Lyons  "  put  the  great  stress  on  the  necessity  for
those  who  exercise  apostolic  functions  to  live  like  the  Apostles.  While  on  the
other  hand  it  was  the  tendency  for  the  Lombard  branch  of  the  "poor"  to
denounce  the  Roman  Church  as  the  whore  and  to  reject  its  Sacraments.

'^  Gui,  Practica  i/iquisitionis,  public  par  Douai  (Paris,  1885).


146  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

The  Waldensian  missionary  who  swam  the  Ipsis  River
on  a  winter  night  to  carry  a  Gospel  message  to  a  CathoHc
on  the  mere  chance  of  converting  him  is  only  one  instance
of  the  spirit  which  made  these  "  poor  men "  such  an
evangelical  force  in  the  thirteenth  and  fourteenth  centuries,
and  each  new  convert  became  at  once  a  missionary  to
others.

The  records  of  the  Inquisition  show  that  they  existed
in  large  numbers  throughout  France  and  Germany —
especially  Southern  Germany.  We  get  a  telling  proof  of
their  great  numbers  in  Lorraine,  even  in  the  twelfth
century,  for  in  the  year  1 192  the  Bishop  of  Toul  ordered
all  Waldensians  in  his  bishopric  to  be  captured  and
brought  to  him.  His  promises  to  the  "  hunters  "  indicate
that  the  "  heretics "  were  numerous.  He  promises  re-
mission of  sins  to  all  who  perform  this  service,  and  he
further  promises,  that  if  any  are  driven  from  their  homes
because  they  engage  in  this  service^  he  will  provide  them
with  food  and  clothes.  The  document  now  generally
known  as  the  Narrative  of  the  "  Anonymous  of  Passau,"
written  about  1260,  gives  conclusive  evidence  that  in  the
vast  diocese  of  Passau,  the  Waldenses  existed  in  great
numbers,  and  they  seem  almost  to  have  captured  the
rural  districts  from  the  Church.  They  are  here  shown  to
be  mostly  peasants  and  simple  mechanics,  but  they  are
thoroughly  familiar  with  the  Scriptures  and  possess  a
passion  for  making  converts.

They  were  not  mystics  like  most  of  the  sects  studied
in  this  volume.  They  were  unspeculative,  simple
Christians,  sternly  hostile  to  the  corruption  and  sacer-
dotalism of  the  Church,  concerned  for  a  return  to  Gospel
simplicity  and  consecrated  to  the  proclamation  of  an
evangel  which  the  poorest  and  most  illiterate  could  under-
stand. The  most  wholesome  characteristic  of  the  move-
ment is  its  social  aspect.  It  had  no  social  propaganda^
such  as  characterised  many  of  the  later  religious  uprisings,
but  it  was  marked  throughout  by  a  genuine  feeling  of
human  love  and  brotherhood.  The  Waldenses  often  called
themselves    "  Friends,"    and    better    still    they   exhibited


VIII  THE  WALDENSES  147

the  traits  of  friendship.  The  spirit  of  Waldo  himself,
who  sold  all  he  had  in  order  to  turn  his  possessions
into  channels  of  love  and  service,  is  typical  of  the  entire
movement.  The  Waldensian  ministers,  under  whatever
name  they  are  called,  were  moved  by  sympathy  and  love
for  the  poor  and  the  burdened.  They  would  take  no
salary  ;  they  worked  for  men  out  of  love  for  them  and  for
Christ.  They  studied  healing  arts  to  relieve  pain  and
suffering,  and  they  resisted  successfully  the  temptation  to
make  their  "  gifts  "  a  means  to  wealth  and  promotion.  It
was  one  of  their  counts  against  the  Church  that  the  Clergy
used  the  terrors  of  superstition  to  force  money  from  those
who  were  already  poor  and  hungry.  They  denounced
pilgrimages  and  the  sale  of  indulgences,  because  of  their
moral  and  social  effects.  They  declared  purgatory  to  be
an  invention,  and  they  taught  the  people  that  prayers  and
offerings  to  saints  were  of  no  avail.  In  the  place  of  these
expensive  superstitions  they  called  for  lives  of  love  and
service,  and  they  set  the  standard  themselves  by  follow-
ing the  Master  in  going  about  doing  good.  It  is  possible,
as  Harnack  suggests,^  that  if  the  movement  had  come  a
generation  later,  it  might  have  been  taken  up  into  the
Church  and  incorporated  with  it,  as  the  Franciscan  move-
ment actually  was.  There  is  no  question  that  Waldo  and
his  Lyonese  followers  wished  to  be  an  organic  part  of  the
Catholic  Church,  and  only  sought  the  privilege  of  living
like  the  apostles.  The  inherent  difficulty  was  that  the
Church  of  the  twelfth  century  had  no  provision  in  its
system,  and  no  place  in  its  fold,  for  those  who  practised
Gospel  simplicity  and  lived  like  the  apostles.  The  Church
had  not  yet  awakened  to  its  social  duties,  and  it  was  deaf
to  the  half  articulate  cry  of  its  submerged  masses.  Then
further,  it  had  no  place  in  its  elaborate  machinery  for  lay
ministry.  It  could  not  utilize  the  gifts  of  the  unordained,
even  though  they  had  discovered  how  to  heal  the  broken-
hearted, and  to  give  the  oil  of  joy  for  mourning.  Still
less  could  it  tolerate  those  who  joined  to  their  unusual
activities  teachings  which   threatened  the  entire  sacerdotal

1  History  of  Dogma,  vol.  vi,  p.  92.


148  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

structure.  The  very  existence  of  the  Church  was  staked
on  the  theory  that  transubstantiation  and  absolution  of
sins  were  supernaturally  effected,  not  by  the  holiness  of
the  ministrant,  but  by  the  magical  power  conferred
through  ordination.  The  priest  was  a  supernatural  instru-
ment, a  channel  of  divine  power,  and  the  miracles  of
Grace  were  wrought  through  him  independently  of  the
manner  of  his  life.  This  position  the  Waldenses  boldly
challenged  and,  in  doing  so,  entered  upon  an  irreconcilable
contention  with  the  historic  Church.

But  it  would  be  a  mistake  to  conclude  that  Europe
was  at  this  period  ripe  for  a  Reformation,  or  that  the
Waldenses  had  attained  to  an  insight  or  embodied
principles  which  qualified  them  to  be  the  bringers  of  a
genuine  Reformation.  The  Great  Head  of  the  Church  is
"the  God  of  all  patience,"  and  His  world  was  not  yet
ready  for  the  larger  freedom  which  the  Reformation
brought,  nor  could  these  "  poor  men  "  have  led  the  world
into  a  type  of  spiritual  Christianity  such  as  would  have
been  the  fulfilment  of  the  long  travail  of  the  ages.  In
spite  of  the  fact  that  they  represent  a  movement  toward  a
more  ethical  type  of  religion,  it  cannot  be  overlooked  that
we  still  have  in  them  morality  in  an  infant,  negative  stage.
They  did  not,  and  their  age  probably  could  not,  get
beyond  a  more  or  less  refined  legalism,  Christianity  for
them  was  still  a  new  law,  and  not  yet  a  new  life,  lived  by
the  inspiration  and  power  of  an  inward,  divine  Person.

We  may  well  adopt  the  words  of  Sir  James  Stephen,
used  by  him  in  reference  to  the  defeat  of  the  Albigenses  :

"  The  mind  of  man  has  not  as  yet  passed  through  the  indis-
pensable preliminary  education.  The  scholastic  philosophy,
extravagant  as  it  may  have  been  in  some  of  its  premises  and
some  of  its  purposes,  had  yet  a  great  task  to  accomplish — the
task  of  training  the  instructors  of  the  Church  in  the  athletic  use
of  all  their  mental  faculties.  Philology,  and  criticism,  and
ecclesiastical  antiquity  were  still  uncultivated.  The  Holy
Scriptures,  in  their  original  tongues,  were  almost  a  sealed  volume
to  the  scholars  of  the  West.  The  vernacular  languages  of
Europe  were  unformed.  The  arts  of  printing  and  paper-making
were  undiscovered.     Such  an  age  could  neither  have  produced


viir


THE  WALDENSES  149


nor  appreciated  a  Wyclif  or  a  Hus ;  still  less  could  Melancthon,
or  Luther,  or  Calvin,  or  Beza  have  borne  their  fruit  in  such
times,  if  such  men  had  been  living.  Above  all,  the  world,  as  it
then  was,  could  no  more  have  fostered  minds  like  those  of
Cranmer,  or  Ridley,  of  Jewell  or  Hooker,  than  it  could  have
trained  up  chemists  to  rival  Cavendish,  or  mechanists  to
anticipate  Watt.  If  they  had  succeeded  in  their  designs, — if
they  had  reclaimed  the  nations  from  the  errors  of  Rome, — they
must  infallibly  have  substituted  for  her  despotism,  an  anarchy
breaking  loose  from  all  restraints,  divine  and  human,  an  anarchy
far  exceeding,  in  presumptuous  ignorance  and  audacious  self-
will,  the  wildest  of  the  sects  which  perplexed  and  disgraced  the
Reformation  of  the  sixteenth  century."  ^

•  James  Stephen's  Lechires  on  the  History  of  France  (London,  1867),  voL  L
p.  S53.


CHAPTER    IX


ST.   FRANCIS   AND    THE  "SPIRITUAL    FRANCISCANS


"  All  religions  must  be  again  and  again  rejuvenated  by  a  return
to  their  original  principle.  Christianity  would  have  become  en-
tirely extinct  had  not  St.  Francis  and  St.  Dominic  renewed  its  life
and  kindled  it  afresh  in  the  hearts  of  men  by  their  imitation  of
Jesus  Christ.     They  saved  religion^  but  they  destroyed  the  Church.^^

Thus  wrote  the  Florentine  Machiavelli  in  his  Discourse
on  Livy,

The  attempt  to  rejuvenate  Christianity  by  a  return  to
its  original  principle  has  been  made  more  or  less  seriously
by  many  Christian  prophets  through  the  centuries.  All
these  rejuvenators  of  Christianity  have  seized  some  partial
aspect  and  set  it  out  of  balance  and  proportion  with  the
other  equally  essential  aspects  of  primitive  Christianity.
They  have  all  borne  unmistakably  the  temporal  quality —
the  mark  of  a  particular  age — while  Christ's  religion  is  in
a  unique  sense  eternal.  But  I  believe  that  nobody  has
come  so  near  gaining  the  feeling,  the  attitude,  the  abandon
to  the  Divine  Father,  the  spirit  of  human  love  and  fellow-
ship which  characterised  the  Galilean  circle  as  has  Francis
of  Assisi.  Among  the  prominent  reformers  of  the  Church
his  life  is  as  near  an  approach  to  the  Divine  Model  as  the
world  has  seen  since  the  apostolic  days.  Once  more  there
came  an  apostle  who  knew  nothing  save  Jesus  Christ  and
Him  crucified,  and  whose  great  prayer  was  that  he  might
fill  up  in  his  body  what  was  lacking  of  the  sufferings  of
Christ  "  O  Lord  my  Saviour,"  he  prayed  at  Alverna,
"  I  ask  two  favours  before  I  die.  Let  me  feel  in  my  soul,
in  my  body  even,  all  the  bitter  pains  which  Thou  hast  felt.

ISO


CHAP.  IX  THE  ''SPIRITUAL  FRANCISCANS''      151

And  in  my  heart  let  me  feel  that  immeasurable  love  which
made  Thee,  Son  of  God,  endure  such  sufferings  for  us,  poor
sinners."  ^

There  is  an  account  of  a  night  spent  in  prayer  which
lets  us  almost  see  behind  the  veil  and  witness  a  child  face
to  face  with  his  Father.  If  one  wants  an  example  of  the
loftiest  type  of  mysticism,  he  has  it  here  :

"St.  Francis  .  .  .  rose  up  from  his  bed  and  set  himself  to
pray,  lifting  up  his  hands  and  eyes  unto  heaven,  and  with
exceeding  great  devotion  and  fervour  said,  '  My  God,  my  God  ! '
and  thus  saying  and  sorely  weeping,  he  abode  till  morning,
always  repeating,  '  My  God,  my  God '  and  naught  beside."  ^

"  He  saved  religion,  he  destroyed  the  Church,"
Machiavelli  tells  us.  The  statement  is,  of  course,  an
exaggeration,  but  it  aims  at  a  truth.  He  did  carry
religion  once  again  into  the  hearts  of  the  people.  He,
more  than  any  other  medieval  prophet,  made  Christianity
once  again  a  lay  religion.  The  Church  and  the  world
had  lost  all  hope  of  heaven,  except  by  works  and  by
purchase.  The  only  key  which  could  open  the  door  to
the  Kingdom  of  God  was  in  the  hands  of  the  priest.
Francis  made  a  fresh  discovery  of  the  universal  love  and
Fatherhood  of  God.  He  felt  again,  as  men  had  felt  in  the
days  of  apostolic  faith,  that  the  veil  was  rent,  and  that
there  was  free  access  for  even  the  poorest,  meanest  soul
to  go  direct  to  the  Father.  One  day  he  heard  a  tender
voice,  which  said  :  "  Francis,  there  is  not  a  single  sinner
in  the  world  whom  God  will  not  pardon  if  he  comes
to  Him."

He  restored  the  joy  of  religion.  He  prayed  out  of
sheer  joy,  and  not  because  prayer  was  enjoined  as  a
duty.  In  the  first  rules  of  his  order  he  put  as  much
emphasis  on  joy  as  on  chastity  and  obedience.  In  an
age  burdened  with  its  load  of  gloomy  superstitions,  an
age  in  which  the  heavens  seemed  as  brass  and  the
earth  as  bars  of  iron,  an  age  when  the  main  hope  lay
in  an  apocalyptic  catastrophe  which  should  bring  a
new  heaven   and   a  new  earth   by  miracle,  Francis  came

^  Little  Flowers,  chap.  liv.  ^  Ibid.  p.  4.


152  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

as  a  holy  optimist,  throbbing  with  joyous  enthusiasm
and  with  unlimited  faith  in  man  and  in  God.  He  once
said  to  a  novice :  "  Before  me  and  before  thy  brothers
here,  always  show  a  face  shining  with  holy  joy.  It  is  not
fitting,  when  one  is  in  God's  service,  to  have  a  gloomy  face
or  a  chilling  look."

In  no  other  trait  did  he  come  so  near  the  primitive
attitude  as  in  his  spontaneous  uncalculating  love  for  men.
He  did  not  in  the  least  have  the  theologian's  attitude,
which  views  man  in  the  abstract — as  an  offspring  of
Adam,  the  inheritor  of  sin,  with  a  soul  to  be  speculated
about — he  loved  concrete  men  and  gave  them  his  love,
shared  himself  with  them  in  a  way  that  is  unparalleled,
except  in  the  Galilean.  When  Francis  ate  with  the  leper
and  kissed  him  out  of  pure  love  for  a  suffering  human
fellow,  he  had  discovered  the  true  way  to  rejuvenate
Christianity.  It  was  the  beginning  of  the  Reformation,
because  it  was  a  genuine  recognition  of  a  new  centre.
The  Church  was  no  longer  the  pivot — man  himself,  with
his  human  hopes  and  his  human  needs,  was  the  centre,
and  religion  here  began  again  in  earnest  to  be  life — a
way  of  living.  Francis'  first  and  deepest  interest  was  not
in  popes  or  priests,  nor  in  the  Church  as  an  entity,  it  was
an  elemental  interest  in  man — in  common  men.  One
day  some  robbers  broke  into  one  of  the  retreats  of  the
order,  and  were  forcibly  driven  away  by  the  guardian
of  the  place.  Francis  heard  of  it,  and  immediately  sent
to  the  robbers  the  bread  and  wine  which  had  been  pre-
pared for  his  own  meal,  with  such  gentle  words  of  kind-
ness that  they  came  and  fell  down  at  his  feet  and  asked
to  be  taken  into  the  Order.^  He  reversed  the  traditional
idea  that  the  Church  alone  could  save  men's  souls,  by
acting  on  the  belief  that  the  Church  itself  was  to  be  saved
by  the  faith  and  work  of  the  common  people.

It  is  a  bold,  and  possibly  a  rash,  undertaking  to  write
a  chapter  on  the  Franciscan  movement.  The  story  has
been  told  from  almost  every  point  of  view,  it  has  been
a  theme  which  has   attracted   many  noble  spirits   in   our

^  Little  Flowers,  chap.  xxvi.


IX  THE  ''SPIRITUAL   FRANCISCANS"       153

times,  and  it  is  withal  a  subject  which  demands  an  inter-
preter who  has  not  only  mastered  the  historical  facts,  but
who  has  so  saturated  himself  with  the  atmosphere  of
thirteenth  century  Italy,  and  so  relived  the  Franciscan
gospel  of  love  and  poverty,  that  it  has  all  become  as  real
to  him  as  the  colours  of  the  sky  and  hills  which  he  sees
out  of  his  window.  All  the  material  with  which  the
historian  of  Francis  must  work  is  crowded  with  legend.
No  man  now,  be  he  ever  so  gifted  with  critical  acumen,
can  find  where  to  draw  the  line  between  cold  historical
fact  and  warm  poetical  imagination.  Francis  belongs
as  much  to  art  and  poetry  as  he  does  to  religion,  and
they  have  vied  with  each  other  in  weaving  such  a  veil  of
fancy  about  him  that  the  naked  personality  cannot  be
discovered,  and  the  only  thing  to  do  is  to  submit  and
accept  the  man  as  art  and  poetry  and  religion  have  trans-
mitted him  to  us.^

Francis,  the  son  of  Pietro  Bernadone,  a  rich  cloth
merchant  of  Assisi,  was  born  in  1182.  "He  was,"  the
Three  Companions  say,  "  merrier  than  his  father  and  more
generous,  given  unto  jests  and  songs,  going  around  the
city  of  Assisi  day  and  night  in  company  with  his  like,
most  free-handed  in  spending.  Even  in  his  clothes  he
was  beyond  measure  sumptuous.  Yet  was  he  by  nature
courteous,  never  speaking  a  harmful  or  shameful  word  of
any."  ^  There  was  much  of  the  troubadour  in  him,  not
only  in  his  youth,  but  even  throughout  his  life.  His
friends  call  him  "God's  jongleur"  as  well  as  "God's  little

^  Sabatier  thinks  that  The  Mirror  of  Perfection  was  written  by  Brother  Leo
in  1227.  If  so,  this  is  the  earhest  collection  of  Franciscan  stories.  Thomas  of
Celano  wrote  the  earliest  life  of  him.  This  was  written  by  order  of  the  Pope,
three  years  after  the  death  of  Francis — in  1229.  Later,  after  the  fall  of  Brother
Elias,  a  second  life  (from  an  entirely  different  standpoint)  was  written  by  Thomas
of  Celano,  and  later  still  a  supplement  was  added  to  it.  In  1247,  three  of
Francis'  companions  —  Leo,  Rufino,  and  Angelo  —  wrote  a  memorabilia,  or
Legends  of  The  Three  Companions,  which  is  singularly  free  from  the  miraculous.

In  1263,  Bonaventura  made  a  collection  of  legends,  gathered  up  from  the  last
survivors  of  the  first  generation  of  Franciscans.  This  was  a  compromise  biography
written,  deliberately  written,  to  be  the  official  biography,  and  all  other  biographies
were  ordered  to  be  destroyed.

In  the  fourteenth  century  the  book  of  Little  Flowers  was  anonymously  pro-
duced. It  is  a  popular,  naive,  and  unrestrained  collection  of  stories  about  the
Franciscan  "  apostolic  age."

2   The  Three  Companions,  chap.  i.


154  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

poor  man,"  and  the  former  epithet  fits  him  as  well  as  the
latter.  He  possessed  in  a  peculiar  degree  the  tempera-
ment of  a  poet,  and  it  is  more  than  probable  that  the
songs  of  the  wandering  troubadours  or  jongleurs  exercised
a  powerful  and  refining  influence  upon  him.

The  gaiety  of  his  youth  was  interrupted  by  a  year  of
captivity  as  a  prisoner  of  war  in  Perugia,  but  even  this
captivity  did  not  break  his  jubilant  spirit,  for  he  was
living  on  bright  dreams  of  a  great  future.  "  You  will  see
one  day,"  he  frequently  said  to  his  companions,  "  that
I  shall  be  adored  by  the  whole  world."  ^

After  his  return  to  Assisi,  at  twenty- two,  he  plunged
again  into  the  gay  life  of  the  city.  This  time  his  dis-
sipation was  interrupted  by  a  serious  illness,  which  left  him
strangely  altered.  As  he  gradually  came  back  to  health
he  found  himself  met,  as  so  many  before  him  and  since
have  found  themselves  met,  with  shifted  values  of  life.
Nature  no  longer  gladdened  him,  there  was  no  appeal
in  companionship,  the  emptiness  of  life  oppressed  him.
The  mystery  of  himself  broke  in  upon  him.  The  inex-
haustible resources  of  his  life  seemed  suddenly  shut  away
and  the  key  lost.

Italy  was  an  eternal  battlefield,  and  Francis  joined
in  an  expedition  then  on  foot  in  the  hope  that  the  excite-
ment of  battle,  under  a  captain  of  renown,  would  give  him
back  his  old  sense  of  radiant  joy.  It  was  not  to  be.
Something  had  risen  in  him  which  spoiled  all  his  pleasures
and  made  them  illusory.  All  accounts  of  this  period  in
his  life  are  meagre'.  There  are  hints  at  illness  and
allusions  to  dreams  and  visions ;  and,  acquainted  with
Francis'  psychic  nature,  as  we  now  are,  through  the  events
of  his  later  life,  we  have  no  doubt  that  he  was  at  the  time
undergoing  profound  physical  and  mental  disturbances,
which  made  him  a  puzzle  to  himself  and  to  everybody
else.  He  suddenly  gave  up  the  campaign,  tried  to  resume
his  old  life,  but  would  fall  into  solitary  meditation  even
in  the  midst  of  gaiety.  "  Francis,  what  art  thou  thinking
of?    Art  thou  thinking  of  taking  a  wife?"  his  companions

*   The  Three  Companions,  chap.  i.


IX  THE  "SPIRITUAL  FRANCISCANS"       155

questioned.  "  In  truth  I  am,"  he  answered,  "  I  am  think-
ing of  taking  a  bride,  richer  and  nobler  and  fairer  than  ye
have  ever  seen."

His  biographers  say  that  this  was  his  '*  Lady  Poverty,"
but  this  interpretation  is  perhaps  too  restricted.  The
bride  for  whom  his  perplexed  heart  yearned  was  an  ideal
bride,  not  yet  shaped  into  concrete  form  in  his  mind —
something  which  would  unify  the  life  of  this  dreamy,
chivalrous  youth,  and  furnish  a  powerful  motive  for  his
restless  will.

It  was  in  the  little  church  of  St.  Damian,  near  Assisi,
that  he  had  a  first  revelation  of  the  higher  companionship
which  he  was  vaguely  feeling  after.  He  was  praying
before  the  crucifix  on  the  poor  little  altar,  when  suddenly
he  found  that  he  could  not  take  his  eyes  away  from  those
of  Jesus.  The  holy  figure  on  the  cross  was,  too,  becoming
alive,  and  was  speaking  in  the  silence  with  a  voice  which
reached  the  inmost  depth  of  his  being.  And  this  Jesus,
who  had  suddenly  become  alive  again,  was  asking  for
his  life!^

This  story  must  not  be  dismissed  as  a  mere  legend.
It  undoubtedly  tells  us  of  an  experience  which  was  real
and  momentous  for  Francis.  He  was  in  a  psychic  con-
dition in  which  such  an  experience  could  happen  without
any  improbability,  and  some  such  crisis  seems  necessary
to  account  for  the  new  and  triumphant  Francis  who  comes
before  us  from  this  time  on.  We  are  dealing  here  with
a  person  of  the  most  extraordinary  mystical  nature,  with  a
body  capable  of  being  swept  from  within  as  a  musician
sweeps  the  strings  of  his  instrument,  and  our  psychological
laboratories  have  given  us  evidence  enough  that  persons
of  this  type  may  overpass  the  normal  and  the  ordinary
without  any  necessity  of  calling  in  miracle.  There  are
within  reach  of  us  all  reservoirs  of  energy  if  we  only  knew
how  to  tap  them  !  There  are  vast  stores  of  power  for
the  higher  uses  of  life  if  we  could  only  find  the  key  !
Happy  are  those  persons  who  at  the  crisis  of  their  lives
suddenly  break  through  some  mysterious   wall  and   find

^  Bonaventura,  chap.  i.


156  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

the  storehouse  of  energy  !  The  release  of  energy  often
comes  as  the  result  of  a  great  surrender,  for  not  seldom
the  surrender  seems  to  melt  away  a  middle  wall  of
partition  within,  which  was  dividing  the  life  in  sunder,
and  lets  the  whole  of  one's  power  go  out  in  a  single
direction.

There  were  many  distinct  stages  in  the  march  of
Francis'  spirit  toward  his  great  surrender,  but  the  final
crisis,  when  all  the  moorings  with  the  old  life  were  cut,
came  on  the  memorable  day  of  his  "  choice  of  Father."
He  had  already,  in  a  moment  of  impulse  of  human  love,
kissed  a  leper.^  He  had  made  trial  of  poverty  by  donning
a  ragged  garb  in  Rome  and  standing  all  day  in  a  line  of
beggars.  He  had  been  chased  by  the  rabble  of  Assisi
and  hooted  at  as  a  madman.  The  final  test  came  when
his  father,  whose  love  had  now  turned  to  wrath,  demanded
that  Francis  should  surrender  all  claim  to  inheritance.
The  "  case  "  was  brought  before  the  bishop,  and  the  public
of  Assisi  had  come  to  hear  the  disinheritance  pronounced.
Suddenly  Francis  appeared  absolutely  naked,  with  his
clothes  rolled  in  a  little  bundle  and  with  what  little  money
still  remained  to  him  ;  and  with  words  which  must  have
sent  a  thrill  through  the  throng  of  listeners,  he  said  :
"  Until  to-day  I  have  called  Pietro  Bernadone  my  father,
but  from  henceforth  I  desire  to  say  nothing  else  than  *  Our
Father  who  art  in  heaven.' "  ^

It  was  still  somewhat  later,  while  he  was  at  work  as  a
labourer  repairing  the  little  church  of  the  Portiuncula
("  Church  of  the  little  portion  ")  that  he  received  the  vision
of  his  career.  At  the  celebration  of  the  Mass  on  a  certain
day  in  the  church  of  St.  Nicholas,  near  the  market-place
of  Assisi,  the  priest  read  the  passage :  "  Wherever  ye  go,
preach,  saying  *  the  kingdom  of  God  is  at  hand.'  Heal
the  sick,  cleanse  the  lepers,  cast  out   devils.      Freely  ye

^  Bonaventura  tells  this  incident  as  follows: — "There  came  in  his  way  a
certaine  leper  :  upon  whose  sodaine  aspect,  he  conceived  in  mind  an  especial
horror  and  loathing.  But  returning  to  his  already  resolved  purpose  of  perfection,
and  considering  that  he  ought  of  necessity  first  to  overcome  himself,  if  he  would
become  a  soldier  of  Christ,  he  presently  alighted  down  from  his  horse  and  went
to  kisse  him."

^  The  Three  Companions,  chap.  vi.


IX  THE  "SPIRITUAL  FRANCISCANS"       157

have  received,  freely  give.  Provide  neither  silver  nor  gold
nor  brass  in  your  purses,  neither  scrip,  nor  two  coats,  nor
shoes,  nor  staff,  for  the  labourer  is  worthy  of  his  meat."
The  words  seemed  to  him  to  come,  not  from  the  priest,
nor  from  the  book,  but  with  Divine  authority  from  that
Christ  Who  had  fastened  His  eyes  on  him  and  asked  for
his  whole  life  in  the  chapel  of  St.  Damian.  With  him  to
see  a  truth  was  to  practise  it,  and  from  this  time  he  took
the  gospel-call  literally  and  went  about  the  world  preach-
ing, as  his  friend  Thomas  of  Celano  says,  "  in  words  like
fire,  penetrating  the  heart."

There  never  was  a  more  gentle  revolutionist.  He  did
not  come  with  the  fire  and  sword  of  heresy.  He  did  not
flourish  the  scourge  of  the  ascetic.  He  did  not  flay  men's
sins  like  the  fanatical  reformer.  He  told  in  powerful
words  of  the  Father's  love.  He  asked  men  to  follow  the
Divine  Saviour,  and  he  practised  the  love  and  tenderness
which  were  the  warp  and  woof  of  his  message,  St.
Bonaventura  says  that  it  seemed  as  though  the  Spirit  of
God  was  speaking  through  his  mouth.  His  intimate
experience  of  the  heart's  need,  his  manifest  sympathy
with  the  poor,  his  simple,  popular  language,  full  of
anecdote  and  parable,  his  mastery  of  the  springs  of
laughter  and  tears,  his  spontaneous  gesture,  his  absolute
conviction,  made  his  preaching  effective  to  an  extraordinary
degree.  It  was  in  sharp  contrast  to  the  formal,  barren
services  in  the  churches,  where  preaching  had  become  a
lost  art.  It  is  no  wonder  that  legends  abound  which  tell
how  the  multitudes  flocked  to  hear  him  when  he  came  to
hamlet,  village,  or  city,  so  that  vineyards,  and  fields,  and
public  squares,  under  the  bright  Italian  skies,  were  crowded
with  eager,  enthusiastic  listeners,  who  tried  to  get  near
enough  to  touch  his  rough  garments,  or  to  carry  away
some  little  relic  from  the  man  they  loved.^  It  was  some-
thing new  to  hear  an  optimistic  gospel  in  that  dark  century,
and  to  find  that  religion  was  a  radiantly  joyous  affair !

^  A  legend  preserves  a  vision  that  St.  Francis  had  of  crowds  coming  to  his
banner  :  "I  saw,"  he  says,  "a  multitude  coming,  and  lo,  the  sound  of  their  foot-
steps still  echoes  in  my  ears.  I  saw  them  coming  from  every  direction,  filling  all
the  roads."


158  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

There  is  a  charming-  story  which  tells  how  one  Christmas
night  he  invited  all  the  peasants  and  shepherds  of  the
neighbourhood  to  come  to  a  stable,  and  there  in  the
manger,  while  all  knelt,  Francis  read  the  story  of
the  Nativity  according  to  Luke,  and  then  preached  to
his  peasant  listeners  of  the  Saviour  and  His  Gospel  to  the
poor.  No  wonder  that  some  of  the  moved  listeners
believed  that  they  saw  the  image  of  the  Child  in  the
manger  come  to  life  and  open  His  arms !  It  was,  indeed,
something  like  a  real  revival  of  the  primitive  Gospel.

His  directions  to  the  band  of  missionaries  whom  he
sent  out  show  how  completely  he  had  gained  the  spirit  of
brotherhood.  Even  the  rich  are  to  be  treated  as  brothers.
Note,  too,  the  important  discovery  that  it  is  a  great  part
of  a  man's  business  to  carry  blessing  to  others  rather  than
to  save  his  own  soul  :  "  Go,  teach.  God  in  His  goodness
has  called  us  not  alone  for  our  own  salvation,  but  for  the
salvation  of  the  people.  Do  not  judge  nor  despise  the
rich  who  live  at  ease  and  who  wear  fine  clothes,  for  God
is  their  Saviour  as  well  as  ours.  We  ought  to  honour
them  as  our  brothers,  for  we  all  have  the  same  Creator.
Go,  preach  peace  to  men,  and  preach  repentance  for  the
remission  of  sins.  Some  will  receive  you  with  joy  and
will  gladly  hear  you  ;  others,  evil-minded  and  full  of
pride,  will  denounce  you  and  oppose  you.  But  in  little
time  many  nobles  and  wise  men  will  join  you.  Be  patient
in  tribulation,  fervent  in  prayer,  courageous  in  labours,
modest  in  speech,  grave  in  demeanour,  and  grateful  for
the  blessings  which  come  to  you.  The  kingdom  of  heaven
will  be  your  reward."

The  little  band  of  men  who  joined  him,  at  first  one  by
one,  steadily  grew  in  numbers,  and  the  plan  of  the  Order
of  poor  little  brothers  slowly  shaped  itself  in  Francis*
mind  after  the  model  of  the  Gospels.  About  12  lo,  the
simple  plan,  or  rule,  was  allowed  by  Pope  Innocent  III.,
to  whom  Francis  with  his  companions  had  submitted  it.
They  simply  asked  the  privilege  of  leading  the  apostolic
life.  The  boon  was  granted,  with  the  reservation  that
the  Church  was   to  be  their  supreme  authority.      For  the


IX  THE  "SPIRITUAL  FRANCISCANS"       159

moment,  Francis  saw  in  this  condition  no  bond  or  shackle,
and  he  returned  from  Rome  to  his  mission  with  a  spirit  of
joy,  which  the  perilous  journey,  the  fever  that  laid  him
low,  his  half-starved  condition,  and  the  rudeness  of  the
lazar  barrack  which  served  for  his  dwelling,  could  not
dampen.

In  1 2  I  2  the  second  Order — the  Poor  Clares,  or  Clarisses
— was  founded.  Like  everything  else  in  the  early  Franciscan
movement,  the  founding  of  an  Order  for  women  was  spon-
taneous and  unplanned.  It  is  an  event  full  of  the  romantic
and  the  unusual.  Francis'  preaching  had  come  as  a  revela-
tion to  Clara,  the  daughter  of  a  prominent  citizen  of  Assisi,
when  as  a  girl  at  the  age  of  sixteen  she  first  heard  him  in
the  Cathedral  of  Assisi.  His  message  and  his  personality
penetrated  the  depths  of  her  inner  being.  The  transforma-
tion wrought  in  her  was  like  that  wrought  in  Galahad  by
the  pale  nun  in  the  "  Holy  Grail "  :

"  She  sent  the  deathless  passion  in  her  eyes
Thro'  him,  and  made  him  hers,  and  laid  her  mind
On  him,  and  he  believed  in  her  belief."

The  idle,  empty,  trivial  life  of  a  rich  lady  became
henceforth  impossible  for  her.  A  love  had  come  into
her  life  so  wonderful  and  strange  that  we  almost  need  a
new  word  to  name  it.  It  was  a  mystical  love  whose
roots  were  in  the  invisible  and  eternal,  and  which  drew
both  lives  not  so  much  to  each  other  as  to  the  one
Fountain  of  love  and  to  their  common  tasks  of  love.

According  to  the  later  legends,  only  once  did  Francis
and  Clara  break  bread  together,  and  the  story,  which
throws  a  mystical  cover  over  the  event,  must  be  given  :

"When  St.  Francis  was  at  Assisi,  oftentimes  he  visited  St.  Clara
and  gave  her  holy  admonishments.  And  she,  having  exceeding
great  desire  once  to  break  bread  with  him,  oft-times  besought  him
thereto ;  but  he  was  never  willing  to  grant  her  this  consolation  :
wherefore  his  companions,  beholding  the  desire  of  St.  Clara,  said
to  St.  Francis,  '  Father,  it  doth  appear  to  us  that  this  severity
accordeth  not  with  heavenly  charity,  since  thou  givest  no  ear  to
Sister  Clara,  a  virgin  so  saintly,  so  beloved  of  God — who  through
thy  preaching   abandoned  the  riches  and   pomps  of  the  world.


i6o  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

And  of  a  truth,  had  she  asked  of  thee  a  c^reater  boon  than  this,
thou  oughtest  so  to  do  unto  thy  spiritual  plant.'

Then  spake  St.  Francis,  'Since  it  seems  good  to  you,  it
seems  so  hkewise  to  me.  But  that  she  may  be  the  more  consoled,
I  will  that  this  breaking  of  bread  take  place  in  St.  Mary  of  the
Angels,  for  she  has  been  so  long  shut  up  in  St.  Damian  that  it
will  rejoice  her  to  see  again  the  house  of  St.  Mary,  where  her
hair  was  shorn  away  and  she  became  the  bride  of  Jesus  Christ,
and  there  let  us  eat  together  in  the  name  of  God.'

When  came  the  day  ordained  by  him,  and  the  hour  of  break-
ing bread  being  come,  they  sat  down  together,  St.  Francis  and
St.  Clara,  and  one  of  the  companions  of  St.  Francis  with  the
companion  of  St.  Clara,  and  all  the  other  companions  took  each
his  place  at  the  table  with  all  humility.  And  at  the  first  dish
St.  Francis  began  to  speak  of  God  so  sweetly,  so  sublimely,  and
so  wondrously,  that  the  fulness  of  Divine  grace  came  down  on
them,  and  they  all  were  rapt  in  God.  And  as  they  were  thus
rapt,  with  eyes  and  hands  uplift  to  heaven,  the  folk  of  Assisi  and
the  country  round  about  saw  that  St.  Mary  of  the  Angels,  and
all  the  house,  and  the  wood  that  was  hard  by  the  house,  were
burning  brightly,  and  it  seemed  as  it  were  a  great  fire  that  filled
the  church  and  the  house  and  the  whole  wood  together.  For
which  cause  the  people  of  Assisi  ran  thither  in  great  haste  to
quench  the  flames — but  coming  close  up  to  the  house  and  find-
ing no  fire  at  all,  they  entered  within  and  found  St.  Francis  and
St.  Clara  and  all  their  company  in  contemplation  rapt  in  God  and
sitting  around  that  humble  board.  Whereby  of  a  truth  they
understood  that  this  had  been  a  heavenly  flame,  and  no  earthly
one  at  all,  which  God  had  let  appear  miraculously,  for  to  show
and  to  signify  the  fire  of  love  divine  with  which  the  souls  of  those
holy  brothers  and  holy  nuns  were  all  aflame ;  therefore  they  got
them  gone  with  great  consolation  in  their  hearts  and  with  holy
edifying."  ^

The  later  Franciscan  chroniclers,  w^ith  rigid  views  of
asceticism,  tried  to  make  their  founder  an  ascetic  like
themselves,  and  this  legend'  shows  that  influence.  But
whenever  we  get  back  to  the  real  person  behind  the
later  pictures  we  find  a  man  dependent  upon  human
sympathy,  thriving  only  in  an  atmosphere  of  affection,
and  enjoying  to  the  full  everything  in  God's  world  which
enlarged  his  true  life,  everything  which  he  could  use
without  lessening  another's  share.      The  earliest  accounts

*  Little  Flowers,  chap.  xv.


IX  THE  "SPIRITUAL  FRANXISCANS"       i6r

tell  how  the  brothers  and  sisters  shared  their  meals  to-
gether, and  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  refining  influence
of  Clara  upon  Francis  was  one  of  the  most  wholesome
forces  which  came  into  his  life.

A  still  more  imiportant  step  was  the  formation  of  a
third  Order  for  those  who  wanted  to  lead  a  distinctly
religious  life  at  home.  The  members  of  this  Order  were
called  Tertiaries,  or  Brethren  of  Penitence.  It  was  an
attempt  to  carry  this  practical  gospel  of  love  and  devotion
into  the  home.  It  was  the  mission  of  Francis,  as  Werner
has  well  said  in  his  Duns  Scotus^  "  to  awaken  in  Christian
souls  everywhere  a  striving  after  holiness  and  perfection  ;
to  keep  the  example  of  a  direct  following  of  Christ  before
the  eyes  of  the  world  as  a  continuous  living  spectacle  ;  to
comfort  all  the  wretched  with  the  consolation  of  Christian
mercy ;  and,  by  self-sacrificing  devotion,  to  become  all
things  to  the  spiritually  abandoned  and  physically
destitute."  ^

The  third  Order,  like  the  second,  was  forced  upon
Francis  by  the  situation.  It  was  formed  to  meet  the
need  of  the  multitudes  which  flocked  to  him  as  soon  as
the  extraordinary  power  of  his  preaching  made  itself  felt.
Whole  villages  crowded  about  him,  and  all  the  inhabitants
— men,  women,  and  children — begged  to  be  taken  into
his  Order  of  Little  Brothers,  The  very  crowd  of  appli-
cants threatened  to  defeat  his  purpose.  He  wanted  his
Order  to  be  a  band  of  apostolic  men,  living  and  preaching
in  the  world  as  the  Galilean  band  had  done  before,  and
he  never  meditated  turning  the  entire  world  into  an
Order  of  Little  Brothers.  He  had  no  desire  to  invade
the  home  and  despoil  it  ;  he  wanted  rather  to  penetrate
it  with  a  fragrant  spirit  of  love,  and  to  make  all  Christian
hearts  channels  of  love  and  happiness.

The  Order  of  the  Tertiaries  was  formed  to  meet  the
need  of  the  eager  multitude  ;  it  was  a  religious  brother-
hood, open  to  the  devout  of  both  sexes.  The  members
were  not  asked  to  give  up  houses  or  lands,  home  or  family.
It  is  not  possible  to  decide  when  the  Order  actually  came

1  Quoted  from  Harnack's  History  of  Dogvia,  vol.  vi.  p.  88.

M


1 62  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

into  being,  though  Sabatier  holds  that  it  was  an  essential
part  of  the  original  apostolic  mission  of  Francis.^

The  rules  of  the  Order  were  gradually  made  more
ascetic  under  Roman  influence,  and  the  Tertiaries  of
later  history  can  hardly  be  called  the  creation  of  Francis'
genius.  The  movement,  however,  grew  into  a  powerful
social  force.  In  fact,  the  founding  of  this  Order  has  been
called  "  one  of  the  greatest  events  in  the  Middle  Ages."  '^
It  brought  to  Europe  a  new  truce  of  God  ;  for  the
members  of  it  were  forbidden  to  bear  arms  in  offensive
warfare,  and  until  the  rule  was  altered  by  Pope
Nicholas  V.,  they  might  not  bear  arms  at  all ;  and  they
were  allowed,  though  vassals,  to  refuse  military  service
to  their  suzerains.  The  most  important  feature  of  the
movement  was  the  cultivation  of  a  group  spirit  and  the
formation  of  a  system  of  organization  among  the  artizans
and  working-men,  which  developed  into  one  of  the  powerful
forces  that  finally  led  to  the  disintegration  of  the  feudal
system.

There  is  a  charming  legend  in  the  Little  Flozvers
which  catches  the  beauty  of  this  group  spirit,  and  which
shows  how  the  invisible  bonds  of  brotherhood  bound
together  members,  separated  most  widely  by  station,  into
one  spirit  of  fellowship.  The  story  says  that  once
St.  Louis,  clad  as  a  poor  pilgrim,  knocked  at  the  door
of  a  Franciscan  convent,  and  asked  for  brother  Giles.
A  hint  from  the  keeper  of  the  convent,  or,  as  other
accounts  say,  a  Divine  revelation,  gave  Giles  the  secret
that  his  visitor  was  no  less  a  person  than  the  King  of
France.  Giles  ran  to  meet  his  guest.  They  embraced
and  knelt  together  in  perfect  silence.  Then,  without
having  broken  the  silence,  Louis  arose  from  his  knees
and  went  on  his  journey.  When  Giles  came  back  to
his  cell,  all  the  brothers  reproached  him  for  not  having
said  anything  to  his  royal  visitor.  With  fine  simplicity
Giles  answered  :   "  I  read  his  heart,  and  he  read  mine."  ^

The  real  tragedy  of  Francis'  life  was  his  awakening

1  Sabatier,  Life  of  St.  Francis,  p.  155  and  p.  265.

2  Av^de  Barine,  in  the  Revue  des  deux  Mondes  for  1891,  p.  782.

^  Little  Flowers,  chap,  xxxiv.


IX  THE  "SPIRITUAL  FRANCISCANS"       163

to  the  fact  that  his  beautiful  creation,  the  child  of  his
soul,  his  family  of  brothers — was  being  transformed,  and
in  measure  destroyed,  at  the  hands  of  those  whose
thoughts  centred  in  the  institution  and  in  outward
means  and  influence  rather  than  in  the  ideal  and  its
inward  transforming  power.  Ideals  of  simplicity  and
poverty  were  graven  on  his  heart.  He  had  seen  his
attempt  to  imitate  Christ  spread  by  contagion.  He  had
perfect  faith  that  the  inward  Kfe  and  joy  which  bubbled
up  so  freshly  and  spontaneously  in  the  first  years  of  the
movement  would  continue  for  ever.  He  was  a  poet,  a
holy  child,  a  fool  in  the  wisdom  of  the  world.  And  he
had  to  submit  to  the  authority  of  cool  organizers  who
looked  before  and  after.  He  saw  visions  and  dreamed
dreams,  and  far-sighted  men  with  scheming  minds  wove
the  visions  and  dreams  into  sails  for  the  rigging  of  the
ecclesiastical  ship.  In  his  first  period,  in  the  days  of
inspiration,  he  girded  himself  and  went  whither  he  would  ;
in  his  later  period  others  girded  him  and  carried  him  and
his  movement  whither  he  would  not.  Francis  himself
had  an  instinctive  fear  of  rigid  organization,  and  he  had
a  horror  of  any  system  which  could  occasion  a  scramble
for  place  or  position,  or  which  could  give  scope  for  selfish
ambition  in  any  direction.  He  did  not  want  to  found
an  "  Order "  like  the  monastic  Orders  ;  he  wanted  to
bring  back  the  apostolic  spirit^  and  to  have  it  propagate
itself  unhampered  and  unrestrained.  His  ideal  was  as
impossible  in  the  actual  world  of  the  thirteenth  century
as  Christ's  was  impossible  in  the  actual  Jerusalem  of  the
year  30.  It  was  an  ideal  which,  with  the  given  environ-
ment, involved  tragedy,  as  Christ's  involved  tragedy
twelve  hundred  years  earlier.  The  Church  would  not
permit  a  movement  which  could  not  be  drawn  into  its
scheme,  and  as  the  Franciscan  brotherhood  expanded,
the  ecclesiastical  authorities  went  cautiously  to  work  to
fit  it  into  the  architectural  plan  of  the  papal  Church.  It
was  done  with  velvet  gloves,  but  Francis  felt  the  cold
steel  beneath  the  gloves.  The  man  who  changed  his
simple   ideal    into  an   Order  of  Friars,  with  a  system   of


i64  MYSTICAL   RELIGION  chap.

fixed  rules,  was  Cardinal  Ugolini,  afterwards  Pope
Gregory  IX.  He  was  Francis'  friend  and  protector,
and  he  used  most  gentle  methods  to  transform  the
Franciscan  ideals,  so  gentle  that  the  simple-minded
Francis  hardly  knew  that  he  was  losing  his  ideal  until
it  was  gone.

When  the  poor  saint  awoke  to  the  fact  that  his
brotherhood  was  to  be  forged  into  an  organization  under
the  rule  and  direction  of  the  papal  chair,  he  retired  to
pray,  and  seemed  to  hear  God  say  to  him  :  "  Poor  little
man  !  I  govern  the  universe  ;  thinkest  thou  that  I  cannot
overrule  the  concerns  of  thy  little  Order  ?  "

There  can,  however,  be  no  doubt  that  while  he  adopted
as  his  own  "  rule "  the  principle  :  "  He  that  would  save
his  own  life  must  lose  it,"  and  though  he  was  ready  to
practise  his  own  precept,  that  "  when  an  inferior  sees
things  that  would  be  better  and  more  useful  to  his  soul
than  that  which  his  superior  commands  him,  the  inferior
should  offer  the  sacrifice  of  his  will  as  to  God  " — still  the
sacrifice  which  he  was  called  upon  to  make  involved  an
agony  which  reached  the  very  citadel  of  his  being,  and
together  with  profound  physical  difficulties  under  which
he  suffered,  prepared  the  way  for  his  experience  of  the
Stigmata  in  1224.  This  is  the  simple  story  :  For  weeks
he  had  been  going  over  in  his  thoughts  the  memories  of
Calvary.  His  Bible  opened  of  itself  to  the  story  of
Christ's  passion.  The  love  and  suffering  of  Jesus  had
burned  themselves  into  his  heart.  He  had,  too,  been
fasting  for  weeks,  and  the  thought  of  the  approaching
feast  of  the  Exaltation  of  the  Cross  was  constantly
before  his  mind.  He  had  spent  the  entire  night —
September  14th — in  prayer,  when  a  vision  came  to  him
with  the  rising  sun.

"  A  seraph  with  outspread  wings  flew  towards  him  from  the
edge  of  the  horizon,  and  bathed  his  soul  in  raptures  unutterable.
In  the  centre  of  the  vision  appeared  a  cross,  and  the  seraph  was
nailed  upon  it.  When  the  vision  disappeared,  he  felt  sharp
sufferings  mingled  with  ecstasy  in  the  first  moments.  Stirred  to
the  very  depths  of  his  being,  he  was  anxiously  asking  the  meaning


.X  THE  "SPIRITUAL  FRANCISCANS"       165

of  it  all,  when  he  perceived  upon  his  body  the  Stigmata  of  the
Crucified."  ^

The  entire  biography  of  Francis  is  full  of  incidents
and  accounts,  artlessly  and  naively  told,  which  convince
a  careful  student  of  them  that  he  was  possessed  of  an
extraordinary  psychic  nature.  He  was  swept  b}^  powerful
emotions,  which  sometimes  caused  automatisms  and
hallucinations.  He  possessed  telepathic  powers,  and  his
influence  over  others  was  of  a  sort  which  implies  hypnotic
suggestion  and  contagion.  He  also  exercised  undoubted
power  over  certain  forms  of  disease.  They  are  all  traits
which  are  familiar  to  any  one  who  has  worked  in  a  modern
psychological  laboratory  or  who  has  read  the  literature
of  psychical  research.

Under  the  power  of  suggestion,  at  the  opening  of  his
mission,  Francis  had  seen  the  figure  on  the  crucifix  take
life,  and  had  felt  Christ's  piercing  gaze  upon  him  and
had  heard  Him  speak.  It  is  only  another  step  in  the
same  direction  when  under  the  power  of  auto-suggestion
— which  may  just  as  well  be  called  a  Divine  suggestion —
under  an  inward  ground-swell  of  love  and  sacrifice  which
swept  him  as  the  wind  sweeps  the  aeolian  strings,  his
body  received  the  marks  of  crucifixion.^

The  modern  interpreter,  however,  unlike  the  medieval
disciple,  finds  this  event,  if  it  is  admitted,  a  point  of
weakness  rather  than  a  point  of  strength.  Instead  of
proving  to  be  the  marks  of  a  saint,  the  Stigmata  are
the  marks  of  emotional  and  physical  abnormality.  The
"  wonder "  which  moves  us  in  him  is  the  fresh  and
living  fountain  of  joy  and  love  which  Christ  opened
through  him  for  that  age  of  gloom  and  superstition  ;
not  that  he  had  motor  automatisms  of  this  extra-
ordinary sort.

He  knew  himself  where  the  real  miracle  lay,  as  one
of   the    most    beautiful    of   the    legends    shows :     Brother

^  The  Three  Companions,  chap.  xvii.  ;  Little  Flowers,  chap.  hv.  ;  Bonaventura,
chap.  xiii.  For  a  discussion  of  the  historical  evidence— Sabatier,  St.  Francis  of
Assisi,  pp.  433-43-

"^  Those  who  wish  to  read  an  account  of  a  modern  case  of  stigmatization,
should  read  the  case  of  Louise  Lateaii.  It  may  be  found  in  Myers'  Human
Personality  and  its  Su7-vlval  after  Death,  vol.  i.  pp.  492-3.


i66  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

Masseo  came  to  him  one  day  with  a  half-jesting
question  :  "  Why  after  thee  ?  Why  after  thee  ?  Thou
art  not  a  man  comely  of  form,  thou  art  not  of  much
wisdom,  thou  art  not  of  noble  birth.  Whence  comes
it,  then,  that  it  is  after  thee  that  the  whole  world
doth  run  ?  "

"Hearing  this,"  says  the  chronicle,  "St.  Francis,  all  over-
joyed in  spirit,  knelt  him  down  and  rendered  thanks  and  praises
unto  God  ;  and  then  with  great  fervour  of  spirit  turned  him  to
Brother  Masseo  and  said  :  '  Thou  wishest  to  know  why  it  is  I
whom  men  follow  ?  Thou  wishest  to  know  ?  It  is  because  the
eyes  of  the  Most  High  that  continually  watch  the  good  and  the
wicked  have  not  found  among  sinners  any  smaller  man,  nor  any
more  insufficient  and  more  sinful,  therefore  He  has  chosen  me
to  accomplish  His  marvellous  work.  He  chose  me  because
He  could  find  no  one  more  worthless,  and  He  wished  by  me
to  confound  the  nobility  and  grandeur,  the  strength  and  beauty
and  the  learning  of  the  world.'  "  ^

The  finest  of  all  the  LiUle  Flowers  is  the  conversa-
tion with  Brother  Leo  on  "  perfect  joy."  They  were
travelling  in  the  spring,  to  St.  Mary  of  the  Angels,  and
the  day  was  bitterly  cold.  For  full  two  miles  Francis
insisted  vehemently  that — though  the  Brothers  Minor
should  give  sight  to  the  blind,  and  cast  out  devils,  and
make  the  deaf  to  hear,  and  even  raise  the  dead  ;  though
they  should  know  all  tongues,  all  sciences,  all  scriptures,
and  reveal  things  to  come ;  though  they  should  speak
with  the  tongues  of  angels,  and  preach  so  as  to  win  all
infidels  to  the  faith  of  Christ — in  none  of  these  achieve-
ments would  there  be  "  perfect  joy."  And  Brother  Leo,
having  given  heed  to  these  sayings,  asked,  naturally
enough,  wherein  "  perfect  joy "  did  consist.  And  St.
Francis  thus  made  answer :

"  When  we  come  to  St.  Mary  of  the  Angels,  all  soaked  as  we
are  with  rain  and  numbed  with  cold  and  besmeared  with  mud
and  tormented  with  hunger,  and  the  porter  comes  in  anger  and
says,  *  Who  are  ye  ? '  and  we  say,  '  We  are  two  of  your  brethren,'
and  he  says,  *  Ye  be  no  true  men ;  nay,  ye  be  two  rogues  that
gad  about  deceiving  the  world  and  robbing  the  alms  of  the  poor ;

1  Little  Flowers,  chap.  x.


IX  THE  "SPIRITUAL  FRA^XISCANS"       167

get  ye  gone,'  and  thereat  he  shuts  the  door,  and  makes  us  stand
without  in  the  snow  and  the  rain,  cold  and  hungered,  till  night-
fall ;  if  there  withal  we  patiently  endure  such  wrong  and  such
cruelty,  without  being  disquieted,  and  with  patience  and  charity
— Oh,  Brother  Leo,  write  that  herein  is  perfect  joy.  And  if  we,
still  constrained  by  hunger,  cold,  and  night,  knock  yet  again —
and  pray  him  with  much  weeping  for  the  love  of  God  that  he
will  open  and  let  us  in,  and  he  yet  more  enraged  should  say  :
'These  be  importunate  knaves,  I  will  pay  them  well  as  they
deserve,'  and  should  rush  out  with  a  knotty  stick  and  throw  us
upon  the  ground,  and  beat  us  with  all  the  knots  of  that  stick,
if  with  patience  and  gladness  we  suffer  all  these  things,  thinking
on  the  pains  of  the  blessed  Christ — Oh,  Brother  Leo,  write  that
herein  is  perfect  joy  ! — Above  all  graces  and  gifts  that  Christ
giveth  to  His  beloved,  is  the  grace  and  gift  willingly  for  His  love
to  endure  pains  and  insults  and  shame  and  want ;  insomuch  as
in  all  other  gifts  of  God  we  may  not  glory,  since  they  are  not
ours  but  God's,  but  in  the  cross  of  tribulation  and  affliction  we
may  boast  since  this  is  ours ;  and  therefore  saith  the  apostle,  I
would  not  that  I  should  glory  save  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord
Jesus  Christ."^

Here  we  come  in  sight  of  the  "  secret  "  of  Francis*
life  and  powder.  He  discovered  again  the  meaning  of
love,  and  he  made  his  life  a  continuous  exhibition  of
it.  "  Art  thou  Brother  Francis  of  Assisi  ? "  said  a
peasant  to  the  saint  one  day.  "  Yes,"  replied  Francis.
"  Then,  try  to  be  as  good  as  all  people  think  thee  to
be,  because  many  have  faith  in  thee,  and  therefore  I
admonish  thee  to  be  nothing  less  than  people  hope
of  thee."  Francis  immediately  kneeled  and  thanked
the  peasant.^  What  an  inimitable  story  !  It  perfectly
fits  the  life  of  this  childlike  lover  of  men.  In  him  we
have  once  again  religion  of  the  first-hand  type.  Fellow-
ship with  God,  the  imitation  of  Christ,  enthusiasm  and
love  and  joy  springing  out  of  the  life  because  God  has
come  into  it — these  things  take  the  place  of  rites  and
ceremonies,  which  drop  to  a  place  of  subordinate
importance.

But   the  beautiful   Franciscan    ideal    was    short-lived
It  had  to  take  its  chances  in   a  very  harsh  and  stubborn

^  Little  Flowers,  chap.  viii.  2  /^/^_  chap.  liv.


i68  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

world.  One  glimpse  into  the  kind  of  world  which  existed
in  the  second  half  of  the  thirteenth  century  will  suffice.
It  is  from  the  powerful  pen  of  Brother  Salimbene,  a
Franciscan  friar  of  the  next  generation  after  Francis  :  ^

"  Near  the  towns  armed  soldiers  guarded  the  labourers  all  day
long ;  this  was  necessary  on  account  of  the  bandits,  who  had
increased  beyond  measure.  For  they  would  take  men  and  carry
them  off  to  their  dungeons ;  and  those  who  did  not  redeem
themselves  with  money,  them  they  would  hang  up  by  their  feet
or  by  the  hands,  or  pull  out  their  teeth.  For  they  were  more
cruel  than  devils  ;  and  he  that  went  by  the  way  would  as  lief
meet  the  devil  as  meet  his  fellow-man.  For  one  ever  had
suspicion  of  another,  lest  he  might  purpose  to  carry  him  off  to
prison ;  and  the  land  became  a  desert,  wherein  was  neither
husbandman  nor  wayfarer.  And  evil  was  multiplied  upon  the
earth ;  and  the  birds  and  the  beasts  of  the  field  increased  beyond
measure,  for  they  found  no  household  beasts  in  the  villages  to
eat  according  to  their  wont,  since  the  villages  were  altogether
burnt.  Wherefore  wolves  came  thronging  thick  together  round
the  city  moats,  howling  horribly  for  intolerable  anguish  of  hunger ;
and  they  crept  by  night  into  the  cities,  and  ate  men,  women,  or
children  that  slept  under  the  porticoes  or  in  wagons ;  nay,  at
times  they  even  broke  through  the  walls  of  houses  and  throttled
babes  in  their  very  cradles.  No  man  could  believe,  but  if  he
had  seen  it  with  his  own  eyes,  as  I  did,  the  terrible  deeds  that
were  done  at  that  time,  both  by  men  and  by  divers  kinds  of
beasts."

This  fearful  picture  of  social  conditions  is  hardly  more
sombre  than  the  dark  pictures  of  the  moral  condition  of  the
clergy,  high  and  low,  which  are  found  everywhere  in  this
chronicle,  that  covers  a  period  of  more  than  seventy
years.^  Francis  was  hardly  in  his  grave  before  the
powerful  influences  of  a  society  like  that  and  the  influences
of  a  degenerate  Church  began,  to  work  degeneration  in
the  Order.  One  does  not  need  to  go  to  Chaucer  or  Lang-
land  or  Erasmus  for  evidence  of  the  decay  of  the  Order
and  of  the  corruption  of  the  friars.  It  appears  already
in  the  writings  of  those  who  loved  the  Order  as  they  did

^  Brother  Salimbene  di  Adamo  was   born  of  a  noble   family   of  Parma   in

I22I.

2  It  has  been  condensed  and  edited  by  G.  G.  Coulton,  under  the  title  From
St.  Francis  to  Dante.     The  above  quotation  is  taken  from  this  book,  p.  56.


IX  THE  "SPIRITUAL   FRANXISCANS"       169

their  very  lives.  St.  Bonaventura,  himself  minister-general
of  the  Order  and  official  biographer  of  St.  Francis,  tells
how  the  friars  have  already,  by  the  }'ear  1260,  become
"  legacy  hunters  "  ;  extravagant  alike  in  public  buildings
and  in  private  expenses ;  '•  contemptible  in  divers  parts
of  the  world  "  on  account  of  their  familiarity  with  women,
and  feared  by  the  wayfarer,  as  armed  robbers  were  feared.
He  cries  out :  "  I  would  willingly  be  ground  to  powder,  if
so  the  brethren  might  come  to  the  purity  of  St.  Francis
and  his  companions,  and  to  that  which  he  prescribed
for  his  Order."  "  Francis  himself,"  he  says,  "  cries  aloud
for  reform."

Matthew  Paris,  a  witness  from  the  same  period,  gives
the  same  testimony.      He  says  :

"It  is  horrible,  it  is  an  awful  presage,  that  in  three  or  four
hundred  years,  even  in  more,  the  old  monastic  Orders  have  not
so  entirely  degenerated  as  these  fraternities.  The  friars,  who
have  been  founded  hardly  twenty-four  years,  have  built,  even  in
the  present  day  in  England,  residences  as  lofty  as  the  palaces  of
our  kings.  These  are  they  who,  enlarging  day  by  day  their
sumptuous  edifices,  encircling  them  with  lofty  walls,  lay  up
within  them  incalculable  treasures,  imprudently  transgressing  the
bounds  of  poverty,  and  violating,  according  to  the  prophecy  of
the  German  Hildegard,  the  very  fundamental  rules  of  their  pro-
fession. These  are  they  who,  impelled  by  the  love  of  gain,  force
themselves  upon  the  last  hours  of  the  lords,  and  of  the  rich  whom
they  know  to  be  overflowing  with  wealth,  and  these,  despising  all
rights,  supplanting  the  ordinary  pastors,  extort  confessions  and
secret  testaments,  boasting  of  themselves  and  of  their  Order,  and
asserting  their  vast  superiority  over  all  others.  So  that  no  one  of
the  faithful  now  believes  that  he  can  be  saved  unless  guided  and
directed  by  the  preachers  or  Minor  Friars.  Eager  to  obtain
certain  privileges,  they  dwell  in  the  courts  of  kings  and  nobles,
as  counsellors,  chamberlains,  treasurers,  bridesmen,  or  notaries
of  marriages  ;  they  are  the  executioners  of  the  papal  extortions."  ^

There  was,  however,  an  unbroken  succession  of
spiritual  sons  of  St.  Francis  who  fought  manfully  to
stem   the   degeneracy  of  the    Order  and   to   preserve  the

1  Matthew  Paris'  Chronicle  from  the   Years  i2j^  to  127 j.  Translated  from

the    Latin  by  the    Rev.    J.    A.    Giles,    London,    1852,   vol.    i.  p.   475.      There

are  many  other  passages  in  the  Chronicle  which  show  the  imperfections  of
the  Friars.


170  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

ideal  of  the  founder.  The  Church  had  begun,  even
before  Francis'  death,  as  we  have  seen,  to  remould  the
Order  to  fit  ecclesiastical  schemes,  and,  as  soon  as  he
was  in  his  grave,  it  went  to  work  to  construct  a
traditional,  conventional  "  St.  Francis."  By  a  decree
of  1266,  all  the  early  legends  of  St.  Francis,  which  did
not  fit  the  portrait  of  him  made  by  Bonaventura  in  1263,
were  suppressed  as  far  as  possible,  and  everything  was
done  to  embarrass  and  defeat  the  "spiritual  Franciscans,"
who  clung  tenaciously  to  the  simple  life  and  the  ideal
of  poverty.  Two  parties  appeared  in  the  Order,  even
from  the  time  of  Ffancis'  death.  One  party  admitted
that  the  Franciscan  ideal  was  beyond  the  reach  of  mortal
powers,  and  would  require  superhuman  beings  to  realise
it.  This  party  favoured  loose  construction  of  the  Rule
of  Francis,  or  the  softening  of  it  by  papal  dispensation.
The  head  of  this  party  and  the  master-mind  in  its
councils  in  the  first  period  after  Francis'  death  was
Brother  Elias  of  Cortona.  The  other  party,  which  finally
developed  into  open  schism  under  various  names,  believed
that  the  ideal  of  poverty  was  a  new  revelation  of  God,
a  new  stage  in  the  spiritual  life  of  the  race.  In  their
thought  Francis  was  a  divinely  endowed  being,  the
founder  of  a  new  epoch,  whose  rule  was  at  least  of  equal
authority  with  the  Gospel.  Brother  Leo  was  the  head  of
this  party,  which  came  later  to  be  known  as  the  party  of
the  "  Spirituals."  This  party,  whose  members  stood  for
the  strict  observance  of  the  rule  of  poverty  and  simplicity,
always  endeavoured  to  show  that  they  were  the  true,
"  original "  Franciscans,  and  that  there  was  no  break  in
the  spiritual  succession  between  them  and  their  founder.
The  Mirror  of  Perfection  was  written  to  show  this
spiritual  succession.^  The  "  Spirituals "  had  a  short
period  of  triumph  under  the  minister-generalate  of  John
of  Parma  from  1247  to  1257.  He  was  sincerely  devoted
to  the  task  of  "  restoring  "  the  Order  to  its  primal  purity

^  Sabatier,  in  the  face  of  much  opposition,  has  made  a  very  strong  case  for
the  view  that  the  Mirror  of  Perfection  was  written  in  1227,  probably  by  Brother
T^eo.  Speculu7n  Per/ectionis  seu  S.  Fraiicisci  Assisiensis  Legenda  Antiquissima
Auctore  Fratre  Leone,  edited  by  Paul  Sabatier,  Paris,  1898.


IX  THE  "SPIRITUAL  FRANCISCANS"       171

and  simplicity.  Salimbene,  who  knew  him  like  a  brother,
says  that  "  his  face  was  as  an  angel's  face,  gracious  and
ever  bright  of  cheer.  .  .  .  He  was  full  of  power  and
wisdom,  and  God's  grace  was  with  him.  .  .  .  He  was  a
mirror  and  an  example  to  all  that  beheld  him,  for  his
whole  life  was  full  of  honour  and  saintliness,  and  good
and  perfect  manners,  gracious  both  to  God  and  man."  ^
The  old  friends  of  Francis  were  full  of  joy  over  the
election  of  John  of  Parma.  "  It  is  well,"  cried  Brother
Egidis  ;  "  thy  coming  is  happy,  but  thou  comest  very
late."  He  was,  however,  forced  from  office  in  1257.
From  that  time  on  the  "  Spirituals  "  became  more  and
more  a  party  of  opposition,  pushed  evermore  in  the
direction  of  separation  and  revolt  from  the  dominant  and
governing  part  of  the  Order,  and  were  subjected  to  a
steadily  increasing  persecution.  "  It  was,"  writes  D.  S.
Muzzey,  in  his  illuminating  monograph,^  "  a  prolonged
moral  struggle  for  supremacy  between  the  party  of
accommodation  to  prevailing  ecclesiastical  standards  and
the  party  of  uncompromising  fidelity  to  the  lofty  ideal  of
self-abandonment  and  self-emptying  which  was  set  up  by
the  Poverello.  The  party  of  accommodation  won  when
they  overthrew  John  of  Parma."

It  was  during  the  generalate  of  John  of  Parma  that  a
movement  of  extraordinary  interest  and  significance  broke
forth  under  the  name  of  "  the  Eternal  Gospel,"  and  which
played  an  important  role  in  the  history  of  the  "  Spiritual
Franciscans."  "  The  Eternal  Gospel  "  was  the  creation  of
a  little  group  of  "  Spirituals  "  who  held  to  the  ideal  of
Francis.  The  book  itself,  in  which  the  new  Gospel  is
set  forth,  came  to  the  light  in  1254,  and  in  its  final  form
was  the  work  of  a  young  friar  named  Gerard  de  Borgo
San  Donnino,  but  the  ideas  embodied  in  it  had  a  long
history  of  development,  and  for  their  real  origin  go  back
to  a  predecessor  of  Francis — Joachim  of  Floris.  Joachim
was  the  founder  of  a  new  Order  of  monks,  stricter  and
more  ascetic  even  than  the  Cistercians,  living  in  strict
chastity  and  extreme  poverty.      The  mother-house  of  the

^  op.  cit.  p.  101.  8  The  Spiritual  Franciscans,  New  York,  1907,  p.  14.


172  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

Order,    an    Order   never   very    widespread,   was   at   Fiori,
or    Floris,  in    Calabria,    and    there    Joachim    died    about

I202.

As  a  child  he  had  been  of  a  solitary  and  meditative
type  ;  as  a  young  man  he  journeyed  through  the  East
and  visited  the  scenes  in  the  life  of  the  Saviour,  dreaming
even  then  of  a  revived  and  transformed  Christianity.  As
he  grew  to  manhood  he  felt  a  prophetic  mission  laid  upon
him.  He  devoted  himself  to  the  study  of  the  Scriptures
and  gradually  drew  from  them  his  message  of  relief — a
vision  of  a  new  Church  and  a  new  age.  He  profoundly
felt  that  his  times  were  out  of  joint,  and  that  the  Church
was  being  wrecked  by  worldliness.  He  took  refuge  from
the  hard  present  in  the  apocalyptic  visions  of  the  Old
and  New  Testament,  and  he  left  behind  him  three  books
in  Latin  :^  (i)  A  Harmony  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament,
(2)  A  Commentary  on  the  Apocalypse,  and  (3)  The  Psaltery
of  Ten  Strings.  He  was  always  on  the  watch  for  parallel-
isms between  the  "  old  dispensation  "  and  the  "  new,"  and
by  a  strained  exegesis  he  hit  upon  a  scheme  of  "  three
ages  " — two  already  past,  and  the  third,  or  age  of  the
Holy  Ghost,  just  about  to  dawn.  The  first  age  is  the
age  of  the  Father,  beginning  with  Adam,  coming  to  its
clarescence  in  Abraham,  and  ending  with  Zacharias.  The
second  stage,  the  Church  of  the  Son,  dawned  before  the
first  age  ended,  had  its  clarescence  in  Christ,  and  was  now
about  to  end,  and  the  third  stage,  that  of  the  Holy  Spirit,
to  begin.  The  Church  of  the  Father  was  a  stage  of  law.
The  Church  of  the  Son  is  still  an  imperfect  stage,  with
priests  and  sacraments,  a  stage  typified  by  Hagar,  who
neglects  her  children  !  The  third  stage  is  typified  by
Sarah,  the  true  mother,  an  era  without  priests  or  sacra-
ments, without  altar  or  sacrifice,  an  era  of  direct  con-
templation or  perfect  liberty.  The  first  age  was  the  age
of  slaves,  the  second  of  sons,  the  third  will  be  of  friends  ;

^  There  is  a  legend  that,  while  in  the  Holy  Land,  Joachim  was  overcome  with
thirst  in  a  trackless  desert.  In  his  dire  strait,  he  had  a  vision  of  a  man  standing
by  a  river  of  oil,  and  saying  to  him  :  "  Drink  of  this  stream."  At  once  he  drank
to  his  full  satisfaction,  and  when  he  awoke  he  found  that  he  had  a  complete
knowledge  of  Scripture,  though  previously  he  had  been  illiterate  1


IX  THE  "SPIRITUAL  FRANCISCANS"       173

the  first  period  was  an  age  of  fear,  the  second  of  faith,
the  third  will  be  one  of  love.  The  first  was  an  age  of
starlight,  the  second  of  dawn,  the  third  will  be  full  day.
The  first  was  winter,  the  second  spring,  the  third  will  be
glorious  summer.  The  first  bore  nettles,  the  second
roses,  the  third  will  bear  lilies  !  It  will  be  a  time  of
peace  and  truth  over  the  whole  earth.

The  new  era,  which  Joachim  calculated  would  begin
in  1260,^  would,  he  believed,  witness  a  sudden  spiritual
expansion — there  would  come  a  new  order  of  men  who
would  possess  a  mystical  consciousness  and  know  within
themselves  the  mind  and  will  of  the  Spirit.  They  would
be  no  longer  slaves  to  the  letter  of  Scripture,  because
they  would  see  face  to  face,  and  have  unbroken  com-
munion with  God.  The  machinery  of  the  Church  would
be  unnecessary,  for  all  men  "  from  sea  to  sea  "  would  then
have  direct  access  to  God  by  the  Spirit.  This  new  religion
of  liberty,  of  contemplation,  of  direct  revelation,  Joachim
called  the  "  spiritual  Gospel  of  Christ,"  or  sometimes  the
"  Gospel  of  the  kingdom,"  and,  in  a  famous  passage
commenting  on  the  Apocalypse,  he  uses  the  phrase,
which  was  later  revived  with  far-reaching  significance,  the
"  Eternal  Gospel."

"  I  saw  the  angel  of  God,  who  flew  into  the  middle  of  heaven,
having  the  eternal  Gospel.  This  gospel  is  called  eternal  by
John  because  that  which  Christ  and  the  apostles  have  given  us
is  temporal  and  transitory  so  far  as  concerns  the  form  of  the
sacraments,  but  eternal  in  respect  to  the  truths  which  these
signify."  '^

Still  more  important  than  the  books  he  wrote  was  the
little  group  of  disciples  whom  he  left  behind  him.  They
believed  that  their  abbot  had  been  a  supernaturally
inspired  prophet,  they  piously  cherished  his  ideals  of
simplicity  and  holiness,  they  produced  a  number  of  pro-
phetical books,  written  in  the  style  and  spirit  of  their
master    and    in    his    name,    and    which    contained    vivid

^  He  counted  between  Adam  and  Christ  forty-two  generations  of  thirty  years
each,  which  gave  him  1260  years,  and  he  assumed  that  the  age  of  the  Son  would
be  of  the  same  length.

-  Gebhart's  Z,'//a/z>  viystiq^ie  (fifth  ed.,  Paris,  1906),  p.  72.


174  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

descriptions  of  events  then  transpiring,  as  though  foreseen
and  foretold  by  Joachim.  In  1240  an  old  abbot  of
Floris,  fearing  that  his  convent  would  be  pillaged  by  the
soldiers  of  Frederick  II.,  who  was  regarded  as  the  arch-
enemy of  the  Church,  carried  away  to  Pisa  the  Joachim
writings  of  his  convent,  and  begged  the  Friars  of  Pisa  to
guard  them  safely.  The  Friars  of  Pisa  began  to  read
these  precious  books,  and  lo,  they  found  in  them  exact
and  striking  "  prophecies  "  of  events  which  were  happen-
ing before  their  eyes.^  The  astonished  readers,  supposing
that  they  were  all  genuine  books  by  Joachim,  believed
that  he  was  a  prophet  of  the  first  order — the  beginner  of
a  new  epoch.  Under  his  inspiration,  or  rather  under  the
inspiration  of  the  '*  Joachim  writings,"  there  sprang  up
a  small  "  school  of  prophets "  within  the  Franciscan
circle.  They  carried  the  idea  of  the  three  ages  to  its  full
development,  and  gave  vivid  and  concrete  pictures  of  the
glory  of  the  new  age,  just  breaking.  Joachim  had  drawn
a  parallel  between  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  with  his
twelve  sons,  and  Zachariah,  John  the  Baptist,  and  Christ
with  His  twelve  disciples.  The  Joachimite  prophets  of
the  thirteenth  century  carried  this  idea  farther,  and
pictured  the  third  and  final  stage — the  dispensation  of
the  "  Eternal  Gospel,"  or  religion  of  the  Spirit — with
Joachim,  Dominic,  and  Francis,  and  with  the  twelve
apostles  of  Francis  as  the  divine  initiators  of  it.

This  system  was  fully  developed  and  given  to  the
world  by  Gerard  of  San  Donnino,  who  was  studying  in
the  University  of  Paris,  and  had  gathered  about  him
a  Joachimite  circle,  in  which  apocalyptic  ideas  and
expectations  flourished,  and  in  1254  he  put  forth  the
famous  book  on  the  "  Eternal  Gospel."  It  was  a
composite  work,  made  up  of  extracts  from  the  genuine
works  of  Joachim,  with  an  Introduction  (which  contained
the  "  Eternal  Gospel  "  proper)  and  Notes  on  the  collected
extracts   from   Joachim,  both  the   Introduction  and   Notes

^  The  "Joachim  Writings"  include  commentaries  on  Jeremiah,  on  Isaiah,
on  Ezekiel,  Daniel,  and  the  Minor  Prophets.  All  these  are  spurious,  i.e.  they
were  written  after  Joachim's  death,  and  the  exact  "prophecies"  of  events  were
in  fact  written  after  the  events  had  transpired.


IX  THE  "SPIRITUAL  FRANCISCANS"       175

being  by  Gerard.^  The  Introduction  and  Notes  show
intense  hostility  to  the  papacy,  a  similar  hostility  to  the
corrupt  and  wealthy  clergy,  a  loss  of  faith  in  the  existing
Church,  and  a  vivid  expectation  of  the  end  of  the  age  in
1260,  which  was  to  usher  in  the  new  age  of  the  Ete7'72al
Gospel  The  "  new  age  "  is  to  be  far  superior  to  all  ages
that  have  preceded  it.  The  New  Testament  is  to  be
superseded  as  the  Old  Testament  had  been.  Monks  who
are  samtly  and  go  barefooted  are  to  take  the  place  of
easy -living  priests;  the  entire  sacerdotal  system  of  the
imperfect  Church  is  to  be  swept  away  and  the  religion  of
the  Spirit  will  take  its  place.

Few  more  startling  books  have  ever  appeared  to
disturb  the  peace  of  an  infallible  Church,  and  a  papal
commission  consisting  of  three  Cardinals  was  summoned
to  deal  with  it.  The  commission  sat  at  Anagni,  in  1255,
and  condemned  the  Eternal  Gospel  as  "  heretical,"  and
ordered  it  burned.  John  of  Parma  was  forced  from  office,
and  the  Joachimites  were  everywhere  suspected  and
pursued  with  persecution,  though  the  idea  of  a  new  age
and  a  coming  religion  of  the  Spirit  was  never  killed  out
Whenever  the  "  Spirituals  "  were  pushed  to  the  verge  of
despair  by  the  fury  of  their  persecutors  they  continually
revived  these  "  visions  of  relief,"  these  apocalyptic  hopes,
and  as  the  issue  grew  sharper  between  the  "  Spirituals  "
and  the  party  of  accommodation,  the  former  came  to
regard  the  Church  as  apostate,  and  to  consider  themselves
as  the  Divine  "  Remnant,"  the  only  true  Church.

There  formed,  in  succession,  out  of  this  "  left  wing  "
of  the  Franciscans,  a  host  of  tiny  sects,  which,  like  an
army  of  gnats,  continually  annoyed  and  disturbed  the
peace  of  the  Church.  As  the  gap  widened  between
themselves  and  the  persecuting  Church,  these  groups
more  and  more  came  to  claim  direct  revelation,  and  to
believe  themselves  special  organs  of  the  Spirit.  They
came  to  assume  that  they  were  the  only  true  followers
of   Christ    and    imitators  of  St.   Francis,   who    for    many

1  See  Renan's  valuable  monograph,  Joachim  de  Flore  et  I'&vangile  dtemel.
The  same  conclusion  is  reached  by  Denifle  in  Archiv fiir  Literatur  tind  Kirchen-
geschichte,  vol.  i.  1885.


176  MYSTICAL   RELIGION  chap.

of  these  "  Spirituals "  was  on  a  level  with  Christ
Himself/

The  most  important  of  the  many  groups  of  Zealots
were  those  who  received  the  name  of  "  Fraticelli,"  or
"  Little  Brothers."  The  name  was  first  used  in  an
opprobrious  sense  for  the  "  Spirituals  "  of  Tuscany,  who,
separated  entirely  from  the  larger  Franciscan  community,
elected  their  own  officers,  as  the  true  Franciscan
"  Remnant,"  and  practically  defied  the  Church.  The
term,  however,  was  soon  extended  to  cover  any  Italian
groups  of  "  Spiritual "  Franciscans  in  revolt  from  the
authority  of  the  Church.^  Like  the  Beghards  and
Beguines  of  Germany,  with  whom  they  had  many  points
in  common,  they  practised  poverty  outside  the  convent,
and  became  more  or  less  infected  with  the  popular
mysticism  of  the  time — a  widespread  belief  in  man  as  an
incarnation  of  the  Holy  Spirit.^

Like  many  other  spiritual  revivals,  the  Franciscan
movement  both  succeeded  and  failed.  It  failed  to
produce  an  organization  which  adequately  embodied  the
ideal  of  the  saint  of  Assisi.  He  himself  was  incapable  of
organizing  a  permanent  society.  He  was  a  mystic,  a
poet,  a  prophet  ;  he  could  inspire,  kindle,  quicken.
He  could  fuse  men  into  a  spiritual  group  by  the  personal
power  of  his   own    vision  and  ideal,  and  send  them   into

^  Angelo  Clareno  writes  :  "  The  blessed  Francis  was  in  the  world  under  the
form  of  Christ  cruciiied.  He  humiliated  himself,  therefore  Christ  has  exalted
him."  Brother  Angelo  Clareno,  who  died  at  an  advanced  age  in  1337,  and  who
had  endured  sixty  3'ears  of  persecution,  was  one  of  the  great  leaders  of  the
"  spiritual  group  "  ;  and  he  developed  in  his  History  of  the  Seven  THbulations
of  the  Church,  and  in  his  extraordinary  Epistles^  the  view  that  the  true  followers  of
St.  Francis  form  the  Church  within  the  Church — "  the  only  true  Church."  He
did  not  hesitate  to  put  the  papal  Church  on  a  lower  level  than  this  Church  of
the  Spiritual  Franciscans.  "  Seek,"  he  writes  to  the  spiritual  flock,  "  the  things
above  ;  desire  spiritual  things  ;  scorn  earthly  things  ;  follow  those  things  which
are  before  ;  forget  those  things  which  are  behind.  It  is  our  vow  to  imitate
Christ,  the  pledge  of  our  immortality  ;  to  observe  the  rule  [of  St.  Francis]
perfectly,  against  which  neither  law  nor  decree  can  prevail,  and  to  which  every
authority  and  power  should  give  way.  ...  If  a  king  or  a  pope  orders  us  to  do
anything  contrary  to  this  faith,  we  must  obey  God  rather  than  men. "  "  Let  us
pray  from  repentant  hearts  that  Grace  may  cleanse  us  of  our  sins,  and  we  shall
liave  a  remission  and  inward  absolution  greater  than  those  who  would  absolve  us
could  understand.  All  fear  will  be  expelled  from  our  hearts,  and  we  shall  have
the  witness  of  the  Spirit  within  us  "   {L' llalie  mystique,  pp.  189  and  191).

'  See  Muzzey,  op.  cit.  pp.  41-47.

^  See  chapter  xi.  on  Brotherhood  Groups  in  the  Thirteenth  Century.


IX  THE  "SPIRITUAL  FRANCISCANS"       177

world-wide  missionary  activity.  But  he  could  not
construct  a  system.  The  Franciscan  Order,  as  we  know
it  in  history,  is  not  his  creation.  It  is  a  mongrel  offspring.
It  is  the  bungling  attempt  of  the  Church  to  catch  and
use  for  its  purposes  the  extraordinary  energy  developed
by  this  band  of  men  who  rediscovered  the  apostolic  idea.
The  "  Order  "  was,  from  the  nature  of  things,  doomed  to
failure,  and  it  failed.

The  movement  itself,  however,  was  a  mighty  spiritual
force,  which  influenced  thousands  of  lives,  and  has  not
spent  itself  yet.  Its  supreme  saint  bore,  in  a  very  dark
age,  a  real  likeness  to  his  Divine  Master.  He  entered
deeply  into  the  meaning  of  redeeming  love,  felt  its
unparalleled  power,  and  was  himself  melted  into  radiant
love  by  its  warmth.  He  exhibited  religion  with  selfish-
ness washed  out  of  it,  and  he  revealed,  by  its  contrast
with  his  own  pure  life,  the  spiritual  poverty  and  naked-
ness of  the  Church.  The  inspiration  of  his  life  and
holiness  produced  a  literature  of  sainthood  which  is
unsurpassed,  and  it  produced  an  influence  on  art  second
only  to  that  of  the  inspiration  of  Christ  Himself.  Again
and  again  kindred  souls  have  gone  back  to  this  "  little
poor  man  "  of  Assisi  for  their  model  ;  they  have  caught
again  from  his  story  the  passion  of  humanity  ;  they  have
"believed  in  his  belief,"  have  seen  his  vision,  and  have
felt  the  same  fountain  of  love  open  in  their  hearts — and
so  he  has  succeeded.


N


CHAPTER    X

A    GROUP    OF    PANTHEISTICAL    MYSTICS^

We  have  seen  how  John  Scotus  Erigena  brought  to  light
in  the  ninth  century  a  conception  of  God  and  of  man,
based  upon  the  philosophy  of  the  Platonic  School  and  the
mystical  teaching  of  Dionysius,  a  conception  which  fitted
very  badly  with  the  dominant  theology  of  the  Western
Church.  The  Church  authorities  were  puzzled  over  his
profound  expositions,  but  the  Church  of  that  century  had
forged  no  weapons  for  fighting  such  daring  speculations.
Their  attempted  refutations  of  the  solitary  scholar  are
ridiculous.  There  was,  however,  little  need  of  refuting
him.  The  age  which  followed  him  could  not  understand
him,  and  his  works  fell  into  an  innocuous  oblivion.  A
dim  halo  of  fame  hung  about  his  name,  and  legend  made
him  the  founder  of  two  universities — the  University  of
Paris  and  that  of  Oxford, — associated  him  with  the  great
Alfred,  and  wove  a  tragic  tale  of  his  death  in  the  school
of  Malmesbury,  where  he  is  said  to  have  been  stabbed  by
the  pens  of  his  scholars.  For  three  centuries  he  appears
to  have  been  well-nigh  forgotten.  The  battles  which  he
fought  seemed  all  settled,  and  settled  adversely  to  his
positions.  An  occasional  theologian  or  schoolman  cites
his  writings,^  but  he  was  in  no  sense  an  influence  to  be
reckoned  with.

^  I  am  indebted  in  the  preparation  of  this  chapter  to  Haur^au's  De  la  philo-
Sophie  scolastique  ;  Jourdain's  Mimoire  sur  les  sources  fhilosophiques  des
hdrisies  d Amaury  de  Chartres  et  de  David  de  Dlnan  ;  Delacroix'  Essai  sur  le
mysticistne  spdculatif  en  Allemagne  au  xiv.  sikcle  \  and  Jundt's  Histoire  dv  pan-
thdistne  populaire.

2  Wibald,  the  abbot  of  the  Monastery  of  Corvey,  writing  to  Manegold  of
Paderborn  about  the  middle  of  the  twelfth  century,  speaks  of  Erigena  as  closing

178


X     GROUP   OF  PANTHEISTICAL  MYSTICS     179

Suddenly,  toward  the  end  of  the  twelfth  century,  this
submerged  influence  broke  out  in  a  widespread  popular
movement  which  startled  the  ecclesiastical  authorities.
The  first  sign  of  trouble  was  the  discovery  that  a  cele-
brated master  in  the  University  of  Paris  was  teaching
"  that  every  man  ought  to  believe,  as  an  article  of  his
faith  without  which  there  is  no  salvation,  that  each  one
of  us  is  a  tnember  of  the  Christr  ^  To  the  theologians
of  the  day  that  "  article  of  faith  "  had  a  dangerous  ring
to  it — it  was  "  new  theology "  to  them,  and  they  set
vigorously  to  work  to  silence  the  teaching.

The  man  who  thus  drew  the  suspicious  attention  of
the  Church  upon  himself  was  Amaury  (often  given  in  its
Latin  form,  Amalrich).  He  was  a  native  of  Bene,  a  small
village  in  the  diocese  of  Chartres.  He  had  studied  theo-
logy in  Paris,  and  at  length  became  a  master  in  the  uni-
versity and  a  person  of  wide  and  commanding  influence.
At  about  the  opening  of  the  thirteenth  century  his  methods
and  his  views  came  under  the  suspicion  of  the  University
authorities,  and  he  was  by  them  condemned  in  1204.
He  appealed,  however,  to  the  Pope,  Innocent  III.,  who
also  condemned  his  teaching  in  1205.  He  died  soon
after  this  decision,  his  death  being  hastened  by  his  grief
over  his  condemnation.  But  like  many  another  teacher
he  had  scattered  far  and  wide  the  seeds  of  his  doctrine,
and  these  seeds  went  on  germinating  in  spite  of  the
master's  condemnation  and  death.  A  few  years  after  his
voice  was  hushed  the  Archbishop  of  Paris  got  a  clue,
which  led  to  the  revelation  that  there  was  in  and  about
Paris  a  vigorous  "  society  "  propagating  the  views  of  the
dead  master,  and  threatening  the  very  foundations  of
orthodoxy.  The  central  idea  which  this  "  society "
expressed  was  the  actual  reign  of  the  Holy  Spirit  now  in
the  hearts  of  men.  Those  who  formed  the  group  of  new
disciples — apparently  following  the  teaching  of  Amaury

the  line  of  great  masters  which  began  with  Venerable  Bede — "Men,"  he  says,
"most  learned,  who  by  ^^Titing  and  reasoning  left  in  the  Church  of  God  illus-
trious monuments  of  their  genius"  (see  Poole,  op.  cit.  p.  78).

^  Gesta  Philippi  Augusti  by  Guillaume  le  Breton   in  Bouquet's  Recueil  da
historiens,  tome  xvii.  p.  83.


i8o  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

— insisted  that  God  is  not  far  off  in  the  sky,  but  lives  and
moves  and  has  His  real  being  in  the  lives  of  those  who
open  themselves  to  Him.  And  as  soon  as  He  becomes
a  present  life  within  any  person  that  person  is  at  once
raised  above  rules  and  forms  and  rites,  which  have  a  use
only  for  those  who  are  on  a  lower  spiritual  level.  The
supreme  attainment  in  religious  experience,  they  held,  is
the  joy  of  finding  oneself  free  in  God,  and  of  feeling  His
life  palpitate  within  one's  own  being.  In  order  to  arrive
at  this  culminating  experience  the  members  of  this
society  encouraged  silence  and  cultivated  the  appreciation
of  the  inward  Presence.  This  is  the  way  the  sect  was
discovered  :  ^

A  certain  William,  a  goldsmith — one  of  the  leaders  of
the  new  society,  called  in  the  Chronicle  one  of  their
prophets — went  to  Raoul  of  Namours  and  told  him  that
he  had  been  sent  by  God  to  instruct  him,  and  then
revealed  to  him  the  views  of  his  society,  which  were  as
follows  :  "  That  God  the  Father  had  acted  in  Old
Testament  times  under  forms  of  law ;  that  God  the
Son  had  worked  through  certain  forms,  such  as  the
sacrament  of  the  altar  and  baptism,  but  that  as  the
coming  of  the  Son  had  ended  the  legal  system,  so,  too,
all  the  forms  through  which  Christ  had  worked  were  now
to  cease  and  the  Person  of  the  Holy  Spirit  was  to
manifest  Himself  in  those  in  whom  He  was  incarnating
Himself,"  namely  in  the  members  of  the  new  society.
Raoul  was  quick  to  scent  the  heresy  lurking  in  what  he
heard,  but  he  was  cool-headed  enough  to  see  the
importance  of  gathering  within  his  net  as  many  of  the
dangerous  group  as  possible.  He  therefore  made  use  of
a  stratagem  too  often  used  to  save  the  Ark.  He  said  to
the  unsuspicious  William,  "  I  have  been  informed  by  the
Holy  Ghost  that  a  certain  priest  and  I  ought  to  preach
this  new  doctrine,"  and  he  asked  to  be  taken  into  the
group.  As  soon  as  he  had  left  William,  he  ran  at  once
to    the   ecclesiastical    authorities   and    told    them    of   his

^  The  following  account  is  taken  from  the  Chronicle  of  Caesar  of  Heisterbach,
{Illustrium  miraculorum  et  hist,  memor.  a  Caesario  Heisterbachensi  (1591),
Book  V,  chap.  xxii. )


X    GROUP  OF  PANTHEISTICAL  MYSTICS     i8i

discovery.  They  planned  an  elaborate  scheme  for  captur-
ing the  entire  group.  Raoul  and  his  companion-priest
joined  themselves  with  the  members  of  the  "  society,"  and
lived  among  them  for  three  months,  going  through  all  the
four  dioceses  where  there  were  members  of  the  sect.
Raoul  proved  an  adept  at  deceiving  the  "  elect."  He
would  pretend  to  fall  into  ecstasy,  with  his  rapt  face
turned  toward  heaven,  and  then,  recovering  consciousness,
would  impart  to  the  group  the  visions  which  had  been
granted  to  him,  which  means,  of  course,  that  the  new
"  society "  was  trying  to  revive  a  prophetic  type  of
ministry.

When  Raoul  had  gathered  all  the  information  needed,
he  returned  to  Paris  and  helped  the  Bishop  cast  his
ecclesiastical  net  over  the  leaders  of  the  movement
They  were  seized,  thrown  into  the  episcopal  prison,  and
put  through  a  rigorous  examination,  a  provincial  council
having  been  called  for  the  purpose.  They  were  found
guilty  of  heresy,  were  stripped  of  their  clerical  robes
before  the  multitude,  and,  in  due  time,  those  who
remained  "  obstinate "  were  put  to  the  stake,  "  without
showing  any  sign  of  repentance."  The  chronicler's
account  of  the  execution  is  such  a  characteristic  picture
of  the  times  that  I  give  it  here  : —

"  When  the  victims  were  led  to  their  punishment,,  a  furious
wind  arose,  provoked,  no  doubt,  by  the  spirits  of  hell  who,  being
the  authors  of  the  error  of  these  men,  were  also  the  authors  of
their  tragic  end.  And,  during  the  following  night,  the  leader  of
the  heretical  group  came,  and  knocked  at  the  cell  of  a  recluse,
and  bitterly  confessed  his  error,  saying  that  he  had  been  received
in  hell  as  a  person  of  importance  and  was  condemned  to  the
eternal  fires."

A  peculiarly  interesting  item  comes  out  in  the  ancient
chronicle  from  which  I  am  quoting,  namely  that  many  of
the  members  of  the  little  society  of  these  disciples  of  the
Holy  Spirit  were  prominent  persons  in  the  Church.  It
was  not  a  group  of  the  Paris  rabble,  but  a  serious
company  of  highly-trained  and  enlightened  men,  un-
doubtedly with   a  large  nucleus   of   university    students.


1 82  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

Some  are  called  in  the  report  "  naive  and  credulous."
There  were  also  some  women  members  seized,  but  they
were  pardoned  on  the  ground  that  they  had  been  led
astray  by  their  simple  credulity.

The  Council,  which  was  held  in  Paris  in  1209,  was
not  content  with  burning  the  living  alone.  They  ordered
the  bones  of  Amaury  of  Bene  to  be  dug  up  and  thrown
into  unconsecrated  ground,  or  even  burned  as  some
accounts  would  have  it,  and  then  they  struck  at  those
longer  dead  who  were  believed  to  be  the  source  of  the
new  and  dangerous  thought.  The  Council  condemned
the  works  of  Aristotle  On  Physics  and  the  commentaries
upon  them,  forbidding  the  reading  of  those  works,  and,
according  to  the  Chronicle  of  Martin  of  Pologne,  it
condemned  a  book  called  Periphysion  (Greek  for  De
Naturd).  This  last-named  work  is  evidently  the  book  on
the  Division  of  Nature  by  our  philosopher,  John  the  Scot.
This  old  chronicler,  Martin  of  Pologne,  did  not  know
apparently  who  wrote  the  "  wicked  book,"  Periphysion^
but  his  account,  written  in  shocking  Latin,  shows  what
was  thought  of  the  sect  in  1271.  He  is  reporting  the
papal  condemnation  : —

"  We  condemn  Amaury  who  has  declared  that  the  ideas  which
are  in  the  Divine  Mind  create  and  are  created.  He  has  declared
also  that  God  is  called  the  End  of  all  things,  because  all  things
are  to  return  into  Him  and  to  remain  unchangeable  in  Him.
Just  as  the  nature  of  Abraham  is  not  different  from  the  nature  of
Isaac,  but  the  same  nature  is  common  to  both,  so,  according  to
Amaury,  all  beings  are  at  bottom  one  being  and  all  beings  are
God.  He  holds  that  God  is  the  essence  of  every  creature,  and
the  ultimate  reality  of  everything  that  is.  He  also  teaches  that
as  the  light  cannot  be  perceived  in  itself,  but  in  and  by  means  of
the  air,  so  God  cannot  be  seen  in  Himself,  either  by  angel  or  by
man.  He  can  be  seen  only  in  His  creatures.  It  is  further  one
of  the  views  of  Amaury  that,  if  it  had  not  been  for  sin,  there
would  have  been  no  distinction  of  sexes,  but  men  would  have
multiplied  without  the  process  of  generation,  after  the  manner  of
the  angels ;  and  that  after  the  resurrection,  the  two  sexes  will  be
reunited,  as  they  were  at  creation."^

^  Chronicle  of  Martinus  Polonus  (Antwerp,  1574),  p.  393.


X     GROUP   OF  PANTHEISTICAL   MYSTICS     183

Every  one  of  these  views  is  distinctly  and  definitely
taught  by  John  the  Scot.  Cardinal  Henry  of  Ostia  in
his  account  carries  the  "  heresy  "  back  to  its  true  source.
He  says  :  "  The  doctrine  of  the  wicked  Amaury  is  com-
prised in  the  book  of  the  Master  John  the  Scot,  which  is
called  Periphysio7i^  which  the  said  Amaury  followed,"  ^  and
he  repeats  the  charges  already  made.

It  would  seem  that  Amaury,  in  the  pursuit  of  his
philosophical  studies,  had  unearthed  a  forgotten  book,  and
had  interpreted  it  to  his  university  classes  with  oral  com-
ment, as  other  scholars  were  doing  with  Aristotle.  The
passages  selected  for  condemnation,  as  noted  above,  are
evidently  not  so  much  the  views  of  Amaury  as  passages
which  he  had  selected  from  De  Divisione  Naturae  for
comment  in  his  classes.  It  is  doubtful  whether  he  would
have  been  disturbed  in  his  teaching  if  no  one  had  drawn
any  practical  conclusions  from  the  doctrine.  But  the
moment  these  ideas  came  down  from  the  realm  of  pure
metaphysics,  and  began  to  receive  practical  application,  as
they  did  in  the  spiritual  "society"  discovered  in  Paris,
the  storm  broke.  A  few  years  later,  in  1225,  the  pope,
Honorius  III.,  issued  a  bull  of  final  condemnation  on  the
writings  of  John  the  Scot,  having  heard  from  the  Arch-
bishop of  Paris  that  "the  worms  of  this  abominable  heresy"
had  wriggled  out  of  the  said  Periphysion.

One  reason  that  the  authorities  of  the  Church  showed
such  vigour  in  their  attack  on  the  author  of  the  Division
of  Nature  apparently  is  to  be  found  in  the  fact  that
numerous  copies  of  his  book  were  found  among  the
Albigenses  in  the  south  of  France,  who  at  this  particular
epoch  were  occupying  the  focal  point  in  the  attention  of
the  Church.

"  Since  as  we  have  heard,"  the  bull  runs,  *'  that  this  book  is
to  be  found  in  various  monasteries,  and  other  places,  and  several
monastic  and  scholastic  persons,  being  unduly  attracted  by  novelty,
give  themselves  eagerly  to  the  study  of  the  said  book,  thinking  it

^  This  is  found  in  Lectura  sive  apparatus  domini  Hostiensis  super  quinque
libris  decretalium.  I  have  taken  this  citation  from  Preger's  Geschichte  det
deutschen  Mystik,  vol  i.  p.  i66.


1 84  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  c^ap.

a  fine  thing  to  utter  strange  opinions — though  the  apostle  warns  us
to  avoid  profane  novelties — we,  in  accordance  with  our  pastoral
duty,  endeavouring  to  oppose  the  power  of  corruption  which  a
book  of  this  kind  might  exercise,  command  you  all  and  several,
straightly  enjoining  you  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  you  make  diligent
search  for  that  book,  and  wherever  you  succeed  in  finding  the
same,  or  any  portion  thereof,  that  you  send  it,  if  it  may  be  done
with  safety,  without  delay  to  us  to  be  solemnly  burned ;  or  if  this
is  impossible  that  you  do  yourselves  publicly  burn  the  same,"^

Before  entering  upon  our  study  of  the  character  and
significance  of  the  sect  which  sprang  from  Amaury's
teaching,  and  which  seemed  so  dangerous  to  the  officials
in  the  thirteenth  century,  we  must  say  a  few  words  in
reference  to  the  strange  condemnation  of  the  works  of
Aristotle  coupled  with  this  condemnation  of  Amaury  and
John  the  Scot.  There  is  no  indication  that  Amaury  had
sucked  any  poison  from  Aristotle.  But  a  certain  David
of  Dinant,  of  equal  fame  with  Amaury,  was  denounced  by
this  same  Council  of  1209,  and  his  books  burned.
According  to  Albert  the  Great,  who  was  a  contemporary,

"David  of  Dinant  held  that  God,  inteUigence,  and  matter  are
identical  in  essence,  and  unite  in  a  single  substance,  that  con-
sequently everything  in  nature  is  one — that  consequently  individual
qualities  which  distinguish  beings  are  only  appearances  due  to  an
illusion  of  sense."

Saint  Thomas  Aquinas,  who  was  a  disciple  of  Albert
the  Great,  gives  this  further  account  of  David's  doctrine  :

"  David  of  Dinant  divided  the  beings  of  the  universe  into  three
classes — bodies,  souls,  and  eternal  substances.  He  said  that
matter  is  the  first  and  indivisible  element  which  constitutes  bodies,
that  intelligence  {nous)  is  the  first  and  indivisible  element  which
constitutes  souls,  and  that  God  is  the  first  and  indivisible  element
which  constitutes  eternal  substances ;  and  finally  that  these  three
— God,  intelligence,  and  matter — are  a  single  things  one  and  the
same.  From  which  it  follows  that  everything  in  the  universe  is
essentially  one."

Here,  then,  was  another  teacher  of  extreme  pantheism,
who  also  had  a  following.  He,  too,  as  we  know,  had  been
reading  John  the  Scot,  but  he  had  also  been  reading  the

^  Quoted  from  Alice  Gardner's  Studies  in  John  the  Scot,  pp.  139-40,


X    GROUP  OF  PANTHEISTICAL  MYSTICS     185

works  of  Aristotle,  which  had  just  freshly  come  to  light
in  Europe.  Until  the  middle  of  the  twelfth  century
Europe  possessed  of  Aristotle's  writings  only  a  part  of
the  Logic,  in  a  Latin  translation  ascribed  to  Boethius.
The  other  works  of  the  great  Greek  master  came  first  to
the  knowledge  of  the  Christian  scholars  through  the
Arabians,  who  for  more  than  three  centuries  had  produced
a  succession  of  interpreters  and  commentators  of  his
writings.  The  earliest  collection  of  Aristotle's  physical
and  metaphysical  works  which  came  into  the  hands  of
Christian  readers,  was  a  Latin  translation  made  from
Arabic.  Bound  up  with  this  collection  there  were  also
books  and  commentaries  by  the  foremost  Arabian
philosophers,  and  some  of  these  commentaries  were  at
first  believed  to  be  works  by  Aristotle  himself.  There
was  a  very  strong  tinge  of  Neoplatonic  mysticism  in  the
Arabian  interpretation,  and  it  is  well-nigh  certain  that  in
this  Aristotelian  collection  there  was  some  particular  book
on  physics  which  gave  a  basis  for  David's  doctrine.^  It
is  probable  that  one  of  the  sources  of  the  teaching  both  of
David  and  Amaury,  and  through  them  of  the  mysticism
which  followed,  was  the  writings  of  Alexander  of
Aphrodisias,  the  great  commentator  of  Aristotle  in  the
second  century.  Alexander  taught  that  the  active  reason
in  man  is  Divine,  and  all  the  ideas  which  are  the  proto-
types of  the  universe  have  their  origin  in  this  "  active
reason,"  and  thus  have  their  origin  in  God,  so  that
everything  real  is  Divine.  Caesar  of  Heisterbach,  in
his  account,  says  that  the  Council  of  1209  forbade  the
reading  of  Aristotle  for  three  years.  But  it  is  certain
that  the  Lateran  Council,  held  in  121  5,  repeated  the  ban
on  the  Aristotelian  books,  and  Pope  Gregory  the  Ninth,
in  a  bull  of  the  year  123 1,  declared  that  the  books  of
Aristotle  On  Nature^  "  the  reading  of  which  has  already
been  forbidden  by  a  provincial  Council,  shall  not  be  read
until  they  have  been  examined  and  purged  of  every
suspicion    of    error."       This    interdict    on    the    physical

^  For  an  extended  discussion  of  the  subject  the  reader  is  referred  to  Haur^au,
Philosophic  scolastique,  and  Jourdain,  Excursions  historiques  et  philosophiques.


i86  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

writings  of  the  great  philosopher  fell  quickly  into  oblivion,
for  as  soon  as  the  leading  scholars  of  the  time  succeeded
in  discovering  the  real  Aristotle,  purged  of  Arabian
colouring,  he  was  found  to  be  the  greatest  buttress  of  the
faith  of  the  Church  ;  and  before  the  end  of  the  thirteenth
century  he  was  settled  in  his  place  as  the  "  official
philosopher,"  whose  ipse  dixit  could  not  be  contradicted
without  accusation  of  heresy.

The  facts  warrant  us  in  concluding  that  as  the  first
effect  of  the  revival  of  the  teaching  of  John  the  Scot,
coupled  with  the  study  of  the  Aristotle  of  the  Arabs,
there  appeared  in  Paris  two  powerful  teachers  who  had
arrived  at  the  conviction  that  everything  in  the  universe,
in  the  last  analysis,  is  God.  The  point  in  common  in
their  teaching  is  the  negation  of  any  principle  of  dis-
tinction— everything  is  one  because  everything  is  God.  It
is  easy  now  to  see  why  the  authorities  found  so  much
danger  in  the  words  of  Amaury,  words  that  sound  to  us
so  apostolic :  "  Every  man  ought  to  believe  as  an  article
of  his  faith  that  each  one  of  us  is  a  member  of  the  Christ,"
for  he  evidently  used  the  words  in  a  pantheistical  sense.

The  teaching  found  ready  listeners,  and  could  not  be
suppressed  by  papal  bulls,  by  martyr  fires,  or  by  pious
stories  relating  how  the  chief  heretics  were  faring  in  hell.
This  type  of  religious  thought  has  a  fascination  for  many
minds,  primarily  because  there  is  an  elemental  tendency
in  us  to  arrive  at  an  all-embracing  Unity,  and  it  has
played  a  mighty  r61e  in  man's  spiritual  history.  It  cannot
be  dismissed  by  the  easy  method  of  tagging  the  oppro-
brious nickname  of  "  pantheism  "  upon  it.  We  have  here
the  outbreaking  of  a  mystical  movement  which  had
momentous  possibilities  for  good  and  for  evil,  and  which
can  give  us  much  instruction  as  to  where  the  danger  in
mysticism  lies,  and  where  its  safeguards  are  to  be  sought.

There  was  already  by  1209  a  widespread  "  society"  in
and  about  Paris,  evidently  loosely  held  together,  and  yet
showing  some  indications  of  internal  organization.  We
learn  of  specific  ministry  through  "  prophets,"  and  we  find
an  important  stress  put  upon   ecstasy  and   inspirational


X     GROUP  OF  PANTHEISTICAL  MYSTICS     187

speaking.  The  members  of  the  sect  rejected,  as  suited
only  to  the  condition  of  the  ignorant  and  unspiritual,  the
traditional  formulae,  rites,  and  ceremonies  of  the  Church.
They  denounced  as  superstition  the  worship  of  saints  and
the  veneration  of  relics.  Goodwill  and  spiritual  insight,
they  held,  are  more  efficacious  than  the  sacraments.

*'They  denied,"  says  the  Chronicler  Caesar  of  Heisterbach,^
"  the  resurrection  of  the  body.  They  taught  that  there  is  neither
heaven  nor  hell,  as  places,  but  that  he  who  knows  God  possesses
heaven^  and  he  who  commits  a  mortal  sin  carries  hell  within
himself  just  as  a  man  carries  a  decayed  tooth  in  his  mouth.
They  treated  as  idolatry  the  custom  of  setting  up  statues  to
saints,  and  of  burning  incense  to  images.  They  laughed  at  those
who  kissed  the  bones  of  martyrs."

The  movement  was  marked  by  a  bold  freedom  of  spirit
toward  traditional  religion.  In  fact,  the  disciples  of
Amaury  believed  that  they  were  inaugurating  a  new  era
of  spiritual  experience  and  a  new  epoch  of  revelation.
They  taught,  as  we  have  already  seen,  that  there  are  three
distinct  dispensations.  In  the  earliest  the  Father  worked
alone,  without  the  Son  and  without  the  Holy  Spirit,  until
the  incarnation  of  the  Son.  The  Father,  they  taught,  was
incarnated  in  Abraham  ;  the  Son  in  the  child  of  Mary's
womb ;  and  the  Holy  Spirit  has  become  incarnated  in  them?
The  dispensation  of  the  Son  lasted  until  the  time  then
present,  and  the  dispensation  of  the  Holy  Spirit  was
beginning  then.  The  reign  of  the  Father  was  a  reign  of
law,  and  was  stern  and  severe.  The  reign  of  the  Son  was
milder  and  gentler,  for  he  was  born  of  a  woman.  He
abolished  the  law,  destroyed  the  temple,  and  gathered
about  Himself  those  of  goodwill.  But  the  "  new  law  "  of
the  Son  was  also  a  burden  to  be  borne,  and  it  had  its
limitations.      The  reign  of  the  Holy  Spirit  frees  humanity

^  Book  V.  chap.  xxii.  p.  386.

2  There  is  in  these  teachings  an  unmistakable  likeness  to  the  prophetic  ideal  of
Joachim  of  Floris,  and  there  was  possibly  a  direct  influence  of  the  Calabrian  prophet
on  the  followers  of  Amaury,  though  such  a  conclusion  is  not  necessary.  The
idea  of  three  ' '  dispensations  "  was  ver}'  ancient,  certainly  as  old  as  the  Montanists,
and  there  are  furthermore  very  marked  differences  between  the  two  conceptions
of  the  "  Dispensation  of  the  Holy  Spirit,"  as  held  respectively  by  Joachim  and  by
the  followers  of  Amaury.


1 88  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

from  all  burdens  and  servitude.  In  Him  all  laws  and
commandments  are  at  an  end.  There  is  no  more  need  of
confession,  of  baptism,  of  the  eucharist  There  is  no  place
for  sacrifices  to  win  over  God,  and  there  is  no  need  of  a
mediator  between  God  and  man.  The  direct  inivard  work
of  the  Holy  Spirit  brings  salvation,  without  any  exterior  act
or  ceremony.  They  believed  that  every  man  is  a  temporal
manifestation  of  Divinity,  that  there  is  something  in  man
which  the  fall  and  sin  have  not  destroyed  ;  that  the  Spirit
is  everywhere  and  in  everything,  but  that  He  is  especially
incarnate  in  the  members  of  their  sect.  Their  faith  in  the
eternal  and  indestructible  Divine  Life  within  themselves
made  them  scorn  persecution  and  misery.  One  of  the
members  even  declared  that  he  could  not  be  burnt,  because
there  was  something  of  God  in  him.  They  held  that
children  born  of  parents  belonging  to  the  sect  had  no  need
of  baptism,  for  there  was  no  original  sin  in  such  a  child.
Already  the  spring  flowers  of  the  kingdom  of  the  Holy
Spirit  were  appearing,  and  of  the  increase  of  holiness  and
goodness  there  was  to  be  no  end.  The  final  achievement
of  God  is  the  manifestation  of  Himself  in  the  hearts  of  men,
and  the  highest  achievement  of  man  is  the  inner  consciousness
of  God}

Gerson  (1363 -1429),  who  was  Chancellor  of  the
University  of  Paris  and  himself  a  mystic,  reports  that
Amaury  taught  that  "  the  creature  is  changed  into  God,
and  that  each  person  finds  in  Him  his  own  peculiar  being
and  ideal."  He  says  that  Amaury's  disciples  believed
with  him  that  "  the  soul,  when  it  has  risen  to  God  by
means  of  love,  sloughs  off  its  own  particular  nature,  and
finds  in  God  its  eternal  and  immutable  essence.  Such  a
soul  loses  its  own  being,  and  receives  the  being  of  God,  so
that  it  is  no  longer  a  *  creature,'  it  no  longer  sees  and  loves
God  (as  a  foreign  object),  but  it  becomes  God  Himself,  the
object  of  all  contemplation  and  love."  ^

These     doctrines  —  that    the    universe    is    a    Divine

1  The  data  on  the  views  of  the  sect  are  :  Martene  et  Durand,  Thesaurus  Novus
Anecdotorum  \  Caesar  of  Heisterbach,  Hist.  Mentor.;  Guillaume  le  Breton,  De
Gestis  Phil.  Aug.

2  Quoted  from  Jundt's  Histoire  du  panthiisme  populaire,  pp.  25-26.


X     GROUP  OF  PANTHEISTICAL  MYSTICS     189

Emanation,  that  God  is  being  incarnated  in  man,  that  each
person  may  rise  to  a  substantial  union  with  God,  that
external  law  is  abolished  and  ceremonial  practices  out-
dated, that  the  final  revelation  of  God  is  being  made
through  man  himself — these  doctrines  are  loaded  with
dangerous  possibilities  as  soon  as  they  receive  popular
interpretation.

It  is  wellnigh  certain  that  Amaury,  and  David  as  well,
were  led  on  by  purely  philosophical  interests,  and  there
are  no  reliable  charges  against  them  except  charges  of
error  in  doctrine.  The  case  is  not  so  plain  in  reference
to  their  disciples.  There  is  no  lack  of  charges  of  im-
morality in  our  original  accounts  of  the  sect.  On  this  point
Caesar  of  Heisterbach  reports  :  "  They  said  that  if  any  one
possessing  the  Holy  Spirit  commits  the  sin  of  fornication,
or  defiles  himself  in  any  other  manner,  his  act  is  not
imputed  to  him  as  sin,  because  he  has  written  within  him
the  Holy  Spirit  who  is  God,  and  because  everything  in  us
is  done  by  the  Holy  Spirit."  ^  In  the  same  line  Guillaume
le  Breton  says  :  "  They  used  the  virtue  of  charity  in  such
a  broad  sense  that  they  claimed  that  an  act  usually
considered  sin  was  no  longer  sin  if  done  in  the  virtue  of
charity.  Thus  in  the  name  of  charity  they  committed  the
grossest  sins.  They  held  out  to  those  who  did  sin  com-
plete forgiveness  on  the  ground  that  God  is  goodness  and
not  justice."  ^  We  must  remember,  however,  that  this  is
hostile  testimony,  written  by  men  who  have  a  horror  of
heresy,  and  who  easily  catch  up  any  damaging  charge
that  happens  to  be  afloat.

It  is  true  that  the  principles  enunciated  by  this  sect  are
open  to  an  immoral  practical  application.  If  the  law  is
abolished,  if  the  believer  holds  that  God  does  through  him
whatever  he  does,  if  he  has  lost  all  standards  of  distinction,
so  that  he  asserts  that  "  God  spoke  through  Ovid  as  much
as  through  Augustine,"  as  one  chronicler  says  they  taught,
the  step  down  into  an  immoral  life  is  very  easy.  But
there  is   no  proof  that   the   disciples  of  Amaury  actually

^  Caesar  of  Heisterbach,  op.  cit.  p.  386.
"^  Guillaume  le  Breton,  op.  cit.  p.  83.


IQO  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

took  this  step.  There  is  no  such  charge  in  the  earliest
account  of  the  sect,  and  the  charges  increase  in  virulence
as  the  writers  are  more  remote  in  time  from  the  facts
which  they  record.  In  the  first  stage  of  the  movement
the  lofty,  serious  purpose  of  the  sect  would  keep  the
members  from  drawing  practical  consequences,  into  which
a  lower  type  of  members  might  easily  fall  in  the  second
and  third  generation.  The  doctrine  of  spiritual  freedom
and  of  Divine  Immanence  does  not  necessarily  involve  the
reign  of  caprice  and  immorality,^  and  we  need  more  proof
before  we  conclude  that  the  members  of  this  mystical
group  turned  their  freedom  into  licence  and  used  their
new  faith  in  the  presence  and  goodness  of  God  as  an
excuse  for  taking  the  path  of  least  resistance.  The  aim
and  purpose  of  Amaury  seem  to  have  been  to  raise  men
to  such  a  spiritual  height  that  sin  would  no  longer  be
possible  to  them.

The  martyrdom  of  the  leaders  in  1209  did  not  stop
the  movement,  which  had  already  spread  through  four
dioceses  about  Paris.  Persecution  that  made  it  difficult
for  the  members  of  the  society  to  live  in  Paris  drove  them
abroad  into  regions  where  the  authorities  were  less  on
their  guard.  Two  years  later,  in  1 2 1 1,  one  of  the  leaders
of  the  sect  of  Amaurians  named  Godin,  was  found  in
Amiens,  and  was  burned  at  the  stake  there.  A  heretic
was  burned  at  Troyes  in  1220  on  the  charge  that  he
claimed  to  be  an  incarnation  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  St.
Thomas  Aquinas  speaks  of  a  knight  of  this  period  who,
when  asked  to  do  penance  for  his  sins,  replied  :  "  If  St.
Peter  was  saved  I  shall  be,  for  the  same  Spirit  dwells  in
me  that  dwelt  in  him."  ^  Before  this  period  there  is  little
trace  of  mystical  sects  in  Strasbourg  and  the  cities  of  the
Rhine.  From  this  time  on  they  are  continually  in  evidence,
and  they  all  bear  the  family  marks  which  are  characteristic
of  this  Paris  "  society  "  founded  by  Amaury.  There  is  no
documentary  evidence  which  indisputably  fixes  a  direct
connection    between   Amaury  and    the    mystical   sects  of

^  See  for  a  good  statement  of  this  position  Delacroix,  Essai  sur  le  mysticisme
spdculatif,  p.  37.  '^  Jundt,  op.  cit.  p.  31.


X     GROUP  OF  PANTHEISTICAL  MYSTICS     191

Strasbourg  and  the  Rhine  countries,  or  the  similar  groups
in  Southern  France  and  Italy,  but  there  is  an  overwhelm-
ing probability  that,  however  submerged  the  stream  of
influence,  there  was  a  connection.  We  get  a  graphic
account  from  a  famous  inquisitor — Stephen  of  Borbone —
of  a  sect  in  Lyons  which  looks  like  a  union  of  the  disciples
of  Amaury  with  the  Waldenses.  The  sect  exhibits  the
strict  morality  of  the  latter,  and  the  pantheistic  metaphysics
of  the  former.  Stephen  of  Borbone  made  his  investigation
between  1223  and  1235.    He  describes  the  sect  as  follows :

"  They  absolutely  refuse  obedience  to  the  Roman  Church,  which
they  call  the  unholy  Babylon  of  the  Apocalypse.  They  hold  that
all  good  persons,  according  to  some,  even  women,  are  priests,
having  received  direct  ordination  from  God,  while  ecclesiastics
receive  it  only  from  men.  All  good  persons,  even  women,  can
pronounce  absolution,  and  can  consecrate  the  bread.  They
teach  that  it  is  sufficient  to  confess  sins  to  God,  and  that  God
alone  is  able  to  excommunicate."

Then  follows  an  account  of  moral  and  anti-sacerdotal
teaching  characteristic  of  the  Waldenses,^  and  the  account
continues  with  a  description  of  an  extreme  form  of
mysticism  :

"  They  pretend  that  every  man  is  a  Son  of  God  in  the  same
manner  that  Christ  was.  Christ  had  God  or  the  Holy  Spirit  for
soul,  and  they  say  that  other  men  also  have.  They  believe  in
the  incarnation,  the  birth,  the  passion,  and  the  resurrection  of
Christ,  but  they  mean  by  it  the  Spiritual  conception,  Spiritual
birth,  Spiritual  resurrection  of  the  perfect  man.  For  them  the
true  passion  of  Jesus  is  the  martyrdom  of  a  holy  man,  and  the
true  sacrament  is  the  conversion  of  a  man,  for  in  such  a  conversion
the  body  of  Christ  is  formed.  In  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity,
the  Father  is  he  who  converts  a  stranger  to  their  doctrine.  The
Son  is  he  who  is  converted,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  is  the  truth  by
means  of  which  the  conversion  is  accomplished.  This  is  what
they  mean  when  they  say  that  they  believe  in  the  Father  and  the
Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost.  They  declare  that  the  soul  of  all  men
since  Adam  is  the  Holy  Spirit.  ...  It  is  because  God  thus
dwells  in  them  that  all  good  men  are  priests.  It  is  God  who
works  through  them  and  gives  them  power  to  loose  and  bind."  ^

1  See  chapter  on  the  Waldenses.
^  Jundt,  Histoire  du  panthHsme  populaii-e,  pp.  31-32.


192  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap

Only  a  few  years  after  the  death  of  Amaury  a  powerful
sect  came  to  light,  with  mystical  and  pantheistical  ideas
which  seem  like  a  propagation  and  expansion  of  the  views
of  this  group  that  we  have  been  studying.  It  was  called
in  its  earlier  stages  the  "  Sect  of  the  New  Spirit,"  though
this  name  was  soon  superseded  by  the  name  Brethren  of
the  Free  Spirit.  The  sect  appears  to  have  sprung  up  in
the  city  of  Strasbourg,  and  to  have  owed  its  origin  to
a  man  named  Ortlieb,  who  was  almost  certainly  an
Amaurian.  Among  the  eighty  "  heretics "  burned  at
Strasbourg  in  i  2  i  5  there  were  a  few  who  held  the  views
of  the  Amaurian  sect,  and  a  Swiss  chronicler  of  the  time
says  that  this  heresy  already  had  advocates  both  in  Alsace
and  in  Switzerland.^  About  all  we  know  of  Ortlieb  is
the  fact  that  he  lived  in  Strasbourg,  and  was  condemned
by  Pope  Innocent  III.  for  having  taught  that  "A  man
ought  to  give  up  all  externals  and  follow  the  leadings  of  the
Spirit  within  himself^  ^  There  are  various  spellings  of
the  name,  such  as  "  Ordevus,"  "  Orclenus,"  "  Ortlevus,"  and
"  Ortlibus,"  but  the  manuscript  of  Mayence  (see  note)
gives  the  name  "  Ortlibus,"  i.e.  Ortlieb,  and  says  definitely
that  he  was  the  founder  of  the  "  Sect  of  the  New  Spirit.'
The  sect  is  often  mentioned  under  the  name  Ortlibenses
or  Ordibarii,  i.e.  "  Ortliebiens,"  though  the  founder's  name
was  soon  forgotten.  The  document  by  the  "  Anonymous
of  Passau  "  contains  ninety-seven  propositions  setting  forth
the  docrines  of  the  Sect  of  the  New  Spirit.^  These  pro-
positions indicate  that  there  were  grades  and  degrees  of
perfection,  and  that  the  teaching  of  the  sect  was  tempered
to  fit  the  degree  of  spiritual  illumination  attained  by  the
members.       The    newly    initiated    were    not    expected    to

1  Nauclerus'  Chronica,  p.  912  (cited  in  Jundt,  op.  cit.  p.  40).

2  The  main  document  for  the  study  of  this  movement  is  a  compilation  of  the
history  of  the  rehgious  sects  of  the  period.  It  is  by  an  unknown  author.  It  was
formerly  supposed  to  have  been  written  by  Reiner  Sacchoni,  who  wrote  Sunima
de  Catharis  et  Leonistis,  and  who  died  in  1259.  The  writer  of  it  is  now  generally
called  the  Anonymous  of  Passau.  There  are  two  MSS.  of  it  in  the  Library  of
Munich,  and  also  a  MS.  in  the  Library  of  Mayence.  Preger  publishes  this  com-
pilation in  his  Geschichte  der  deutschen  Mystik  im  Mittelalter,  vol.  i.  pp.  461-71.

3  These  ninety-seven  propositions  have  been  traced  back  to  Albert  the  Great,
and  were  evidently  in  their  earliest  form  drawn  up  by  him.  See  Preger,  op.  cit
vol.  i.  pp.  168-73,  and  Delacroix,  op.  cit.  pp.  55-57-


X    GROUP  OF  PANTHEISTICAL  MYSTICS     193

break  at  once  with  the  traditions  and  customs  of  their
former  religion  as  members  of  the  Roman  Church.  They
were  rather  led  by  slow  steps  into  a  life  of  freedom,  in
which  they  could  finally  dispense  entirely  with  the  practices
of  the  Church.  Like  most  of  the  sects  of  a  similar
character  they  had  a  lower  and  a  higher  state — a  religion
for  the  ignorant  and  a  vastly  higher  type  for  the  perfect.
For  the  former,  traditions,  sacraments,  symbols,  and  forms
had  a  place.  For  the  perfect^  these  things  had  no  place  at
all.  They  evidently  had  books  and  tracts  in  the  language
of  the  people  through  which  the  doctrines  of  "  the  New
Spirit "  were  propagated  ;  but  these  popular  books,  if  they
ever  existed,  are  all  lost,  and  we  are  forced  to  form  our
notions  as  best  we  can  from  the  reports  of  their  bitter
enemies  and  persecutors.

According  to  the  propositions  preserved  by  the
Anonymous  of  Passau,  they  pushed  the  doctine  of  Divine
Immanence  to  its  limits.  Every  man  is  of  the  same  sub-
stance as  God,  and  therefore  every  man  is  capable  of
becoming  Divine.  There  is  nothing  that  can  hinder  a
person  from  rising  to  union  with  God  if  he  puts  forth  the
will  to  rise.  As  soon  as  he  reaches  this  state  of  union  he
attains  a  glorious  freedom.  He  may  then  reject  all
externals,  and  follow  the  promptings  of  the  Spirit  within
himself.  Rules  and  commandments  drop  away.  Sup-
plications, fasts,  sacrifices  of  every  sort  are  seen  to  be  use-
less. It  is  possible  even  to  pass  in  holiness  all  who  have
been  counted  saints  in  earlier  dispensations,  not  excepting
her  who  by  the  Church  has  been  called  the  Mother  of
God.  Nay,  even  he  who  acts  like  Christ  can  become
equal  to  Him.  Man  in  his  own  nature — man  as  man —
is  capable  of  becoming  Divine.  But  at  whatever  height
he  reaches  he  is  still  man,  for  God  works  in  him  in
human  form.  Man  can  take  on  the  Divine  quality  with-
out in  the  least  losing  his  humanity.  They  denied  the
doctrine  of  the  resurrection  as  the  Church  taught  it,
because  they  said  that  the  free  man  who  possesses  the
Spirit  has  already  experienced  the  resurrection.  In  this
state  of  perfection  there  is  no  law.      What  the  vulgar  call

O


194  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

sin  is  now  impossible.  The  Holy  Spirit  circulates  within
and  carries  holiness  through  the  life  so  that  there  can
be  no  sin.  Sin  is  the  will  to  offend  God,  and  he  whose
will  has  become  God's  will  cannot  offend  God.  His  will
is  God's  will,  and  God's  will  is  his  will.  A  man  may
become  so  completely  Divine  that  his  very  body  is
sanctified,  and  then  what  it  does  is  a  Divine  act.  In
this  state  the  instincts  and  impulses  of  the  body  take  on
a  holy  significance.  In  fact  a  powerful  instinct,  an  in-
satiable energy,  was  believed,  for  the  very  reason  that  it
was  irresistible,  to  be  of  spontaneous.  Divine  origin.

These  views  would  easily  lead  to  a  scandalous  life  as
soon  as  they  were  carried  out  in  practice  by  persons  of  weak
moral  power.  The  members  of  the  sect  were  charged —
though  the  charge  has  the  look  of  a  hostile  inference  from
their  central  principle — with  holding  that,  as  the  earth  is
the  Lord's,  any  man  who  has  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  in  him
may  take  anything  he  wants,  wherever  he  finds  it.  The
charges  of  immoral  practice,  which  run  through  these  pro-
positions, must  be  taken  with  much  caution.  They  are
probably  hostile  inferences  from  the  principles  rather  than
actual  reports  of  practices,^  though  it  would  not  be  long
before  persons  of  looser  life  and  weaker  control  would
seize  upon  the  principles  as  a  cover  for  vice.  Even  this
hostile  report  implies  that  they  allowed  nothing  which  in
its  results  would  have  bad  social  effects.

In  the  primitive  stage  of  the  movement — in  the  life-
time of  Ortlieb  at  least — it  was  almost  certainly  not  a
religion  of  licence,  but  a  serious  effort  to  reach  a  religion
of  the  Spirit.  The  real  offence  was  that  the  members  of
the  sect  put  their  inward  experience  of  God  in  the  place
of  all  the  so-called  external  means  of  grace  which  the
Church  supplied.  It  seems  probable  from  the  scanty
data  at  hand  that  the  general  movement  which  we  are
here  studying — pantheistical  mysticism  in  the  thirteenth
century — gradually  divided  into  two  wings  ;  on  the  one
hand    a  wing  with    marked    ascetic    tendencies ;    on    the

^  The  earliest  accounts  of  the  sect  do  not  contain  definite  charges  of  immoraJ
practice.


X    GROUP  OF  PANTHEISTICAL  MYSTICS     195

other  hand  a  wing  with  a  dangerous  tendency  toward
licence.  Wherever  groups  of  these  mystics  came  under
Waldensian  influence  they  would  feel  the  stricter,  moraliz-
ing influences  of  that  sect,  and  where  the  seeds  of  the
doctrine  fell  into  bad  soil  they  produced  a  corresponding
crop  of  weeds.  The  principles  of  the  doctrine  are  capable
of  being  put  to  the  highest  conceivable  moral  ends,  as
they  are  unfortunately  capable  of  being  dragged  down  to
serve  as  an  excuse  for  a  life  which  is  at  the  mercy  of
natural  instincts.  The  principles  undoubtedly  developed
in  both  directions,  and  we  shall  see  when  we  come  back,
in  a  later  chapter,  to  study  the  Brethren  of  the  Free
Spirit  in  their  maturer  stage,  that  there  was  a  harvest  of
weeds  as  well  as  of  wheat.  My  conclusion,  however,  is  that
the  Amaurians  in  Paris  and  the  Ortliebiens  in  Alsace  in
the  early  half  of  the  thirteenth  century  were  children  of
the  Spirit.  They  were  endeavouring,  with  the  dim  light
at  their  command,  to  find  the  spiritual  trail  to  the  Father's
house.  "  Every  man  ought  to  be  a  member  of  the  Christ,"
is  the  gospel  of  the  leader,  Amaury.  '*  Every  man  ought
to  follow  the  Divine  Spirit  within  himself"  is  the  gospel
of  the  disciple,  Ortlieb.  For  both,  the  true  earthly  life
is  a  personal  manifestation  in  the  flesh  of  the  Divine  life
— a  finite  personalization  of  God.  They,  and  the  groups
that  gathered  about  them,  undervalued  the  external,  the
historic,  the  social  embodiments  of  truth  and  of  Divine
revelation.  They  were  excessively  individual,  gave  too
much  chance  for  caprice,  and  launched,  without  sufficient
store  of  charts  and  compasses,  on  the  dangerous  sea  of
Spiritual  Freedom.  But  they  do  not  deserve  to  be
forgotten,  for  they  belong  to  the  brave  list  of  those  who
have  grandly  trusted  the  soul  and  who  have  helped,  even
at  great  risk  and  cost,  to  set  it  free.


CHAPTER    XI

BROTHERHOOD   GROUPS   IN   THE   THIRTEENTH    CENTURY

With  the  thirteenth  century  there  came  a  strange  period
of  incubation.  Europe  had  not  yet  come  to  full  self-
consciousness,  but  already  the  long  period  of  infancy  and
of  instinct  was  drawing  to  a  close.  Man  was  beginning
to  discover  himself  and  to  assert  himself.  In  every  phase
of  life  during  this  century  there  are  signs  of  the  coming
of  a  new  epoch.  The  spirit  of  democracy  is  apparent  in
almost  all  the  movements  of  the  time.  The  people  are  no
longer  dumb  and  obedient ;  they  are  restless,  and  on
occasion  clamorous  for  rights  and  privileges.  There  is
at  work,  at  first  silently  and  then  vocally,  a  spirit  of
revolt  from  authority  and  a  growing  consciousness  that
the  personal  soul  ought  to  work  out  its  own  salvation.
A  hidden  leaven  seems  to  be  fermenting  beneath  the
surface,  for  there  break  out,  almost  simultaneously  in
widely  sundered  places,  movements  which  are  strangely
alike.  Once  more  the  Pentecost  Spirit  is  abroad,  and  the
Rhine  dweller,  the  Italian  peasant,  the  French  weaver  all
speak  the  same  spiritual  tongue.

The  most  characteristic  religious  note  of  the  popular
movement  was  the  call  to  follow  Christ.  It  occurred  to
multitudes,  as  it  did  to  St.  Francis,  that  traditional
Christianity  had  lost  the  way  the  Master  made  for  it,  and
was  on  a  bypath.  Throughout  all  Christendom  pro-
phetic spirits  were  striving  to  restore  apostolic  and
evangelical  piety  and  to  discover  how  to  bring  religion
vitally  into  the  lives  of  the  people.  It  was  a  time  of
vast  upheaval  and  ferment,  like  that  which  appeared  four

196


CHAP.  XI  BROTHERHOOD  GROUPS  197

centuries  later  in  the  English  commonwealth,  and  the
swarms  of  sectaries  which  fill  the  period  is,  to  say  the
least,  confusing.  Cathari  and  Waldenses  are  already
numerous.  The  Franciscan  and  Dominican  movements
are  the  most  powerful  expressions  of  the  profound  desire
for  a  return  to  the  religion  of  the  Galilean.  Simultaneously
with  the  rise  of  these  two  great  popular  orders,  there
sprung  up  another  type  of  religious  society  hardly  less
remarkable,  or  less  influential  historically,  than  the
Franciscan  movement  itself, — the  sisterhoods  of  Beguines
and  brotherhoods  of  Beghards.

The  sisterhoods  came  first  in  the  order  of  time.  The
Crusades,  and  incessant  wars,  had  left  the  women  of
Europe  in  pitiable  plight  There  were  orphans  and
widows  everywhere,  who  had  no  protectors,  and  who  had
no  means  of  livelihood.  There  was  no  choice  for  these
women  except  between  beggary  and  shame  or  the
convent.  The  result  was  that  every  city  had  its  hordes
of  ragged  women  who  thronged  the  market-place  and
uttered  their  mournful  cry :  "  Bread,  for  God's  sake "
(Brod  durch  Gott)  ;  "  Give  us  bread."  This  serious  social
and  economic  situation  gave  rise  to  the  new  type  of  sister-
hood, quite  unlike  that  of  the  convent.

The  man  whose  insight  first  formulated  the  plan  and
put  it  into  operation  was  a  certain  pious  priest  of  Flanders,
of  the  city  of  Li^ge,  named  Lambert.^  An  annal  of  the
year  1 1 80,  quoted  by  Du  Cange,^  says  :  "  God  stirred  up
the  spirit  of  a  certain  holy  priest,  a  man  of  religion,  who
was  called  Lambert  le  Begue  (because  he  was  a
'  stammerer ')  of  St.  Christopher  in  Liege,  from  whose
surname  women  and  girls,  who  propose  to  live  chastely,
are  called  Beguines,  because  he  was  the  first  to  arise  and
preach  to  them  by  word  and  example  the  reward  of
chastity."

^  Lea  in  his  History  of  the  Inquisition,  vol.  ii.  p.  351,  says  that  there  is  a
charter  extant  for  a  convent  of  the  Beguine  type  at  Vilvorde  near  Brussels  that
dates  from  1065.  Very  much  has  been  made  of  this  document,  especially  by  the
adherents  of  St.  Begga  (daughter  of  Pepin  von  Landen),  who  wish  to  regard  her
as  the  foundress  of  the  Beguines.  But  the  Vilvorde  document  is  almost  certainly
spurious.

2  Du  Cange,  Glossarium  mediae  et  infimae  Latinitatis,  under  the  word
"  Beguine."     This  annal  is  given  also  in  Gieseler's  Ecc.  Hist.  vol.  iii.  p,  264.


198  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

The  names  "  Beguine "  and  "  Beghard  "  have  given
rise  to  much  discussion,  and  lively  etymological  battles
have  been  waged  over  them  The  view  maintained  by
Mosheim  and  Jundt  that  these  names  were  derived  from
a  Flemish  verb  beggen  to  beg,  has  been  repeated  with
approval  by  many  writers.  Some  have  construed  the
begging  literally,  others  metaphorically,  and  one  is  often
told  that  the  Beghards  were  so  named  because  they
were  powerfully  prevailing  in  prayer, — they  were  men  who
"  begged  hard  "  of  God.^  This  view  is,  however,  entirely
constructed  out  of  imagination.  The  overwhelming  ob-
jection to  it  is  the  fact  that  no  such  Flemish  verb  as
beggen  ever  existed.  It  is  much  more  likely  that  the
verb  "  to  beg "  is  derived  from  "  Beguine "  than  that
"  Beguine  "  is  derived  from  some  continental  word  mean-
ing to  beg.^  It  is  in  fact  now  established,  practically
beyond  dispute,  that  the  name  "  Beguine  "  is  derived  from
Lambert's  nickname  "  le  Begue "  which  means  "  the
stammerer."  Beghard  is  only  a  masculine  variant  from
Beguine.  What  Lambert  did  was  to  gather  the  needy
but  pious  women  of  his  region,  both  virgins  and  widows,
into  an  association,  half  religious,  half  secular — a  society  of
demi-nuns — and  to  settle  them  in  a  common  living-place
under  religious  oversight  The  common  living-place  was
in  Lambert's  day  an  ordinary  house,  somewhat  enlarged  and
adapted.  But  as  the  movement  grew,  the  living-place
expanded  into  a  B^guinage^  which  was  a  sort  of  present-day
"  model  village."  It  consisted  of  a  group  of  little  houses
built  around  a  church.  Generally  there  would  be,  too,
near  the  centre  of  the  "  village  "  a  hospital  for  the  sick
and  aged,  and  near  by  a  little  cemetery  where  the  sisters
laid  away  their  dead.

They  had  all  the  advantages  of  the  monastery  without

^  Mosheim  says  Beghard  "  signifies  to  beg  for  anything  earnestly  and  heartily.
The  syllable  'hard,'  which  is  a  frequent  termination  of  German  words,  sub-
joined to  the  verb  beggen,  produces  the  name  Beggehard  which  denotes  a  person
who  begs  often  and  importunely"  (Mosheim,  Ecc.  Hist.  p.  461).  Mosheim  in
his  monograph  on  the  Beghards  and  Beguines  {De  Deghardis  et  Beguinabus  Com.'
mentarius,  Leipzig,  1790),  which  is  one  of  the  most  valuable  sources  in  existence,
discusses  the  origin  of  the  word,  pp.  96-98.

■■*  For  a  detailed  etymological  discussion  see  the  Oxford  Dictionary.


XI  BROTHERHOOD  GROUPS  199

its  disadvantages.  They  had  protection  and  support ;
they  had  leisure  for  meditation  and  prayer ;  they  had
great  opportunities  for  society  and  fellowship,  the  heighten-
ing of  their  religious  experience  through  the  group-feeling)
and  they  had  common  tasks  and  occupations  provided  for
them.  On  the  other  hand  they  were  not  actually  cut  off
from  the  world.  They  did  not  renounce  all  property  ;
they  could  leave  the  Beguinage  if  they  wished,  and  go
back  to  their  old  life  again  ;  they  were  not  asked  to  take
a  vow  against  marriage.  They  were,  in  short,  groups  of
pious,  virtuous  women,  who  devoted  themselves  to  charity
and  religion,  and  divided  their  time  between  religious
practices,  works  of  industry,  and  deeds  of  mercy.

This  movement,  thus  inaugurated  in  1 1  80,  spread,  as
so  many  other  things  did  in  this  century,  like  contagion.
Matthew  Paris,  a  half  century  later,  says  that  the  rapid
progress  of  the  movement  is  one  of  the  wonders  of  his
age.  By  the  middle  of  the  thirteenth  century  there  were
societies  of  Beguines  in  almost  every  large  city,  and  already
the  example  set  by  the  women  was  everywhere  being
imitated  by  the  men.

The  Beghards,  who  were  often  called  "  apostolic  men,"
sometimes  also  "  poor  men,"  were  first  organized  in  Louvain
in  1220.^  They  were  bands,  or  brotherhoods,  of  pious
laymen  who,  without  entering  monasteries,  devoted  them-
selves to  religion.  They  went  about  the  country  perform-
ing deeds  of  mercy,  preaching  in  the  vulgar  tongue,  and
performing  any  kind  of  service  which  their  hands  found
to  do.  In  Frankfort,  for  instance,  they  took  care  of  the
sick  without  pay,  they  carried  the  dead  to  their  graves,
and  they  administered  spiritual  comfort  to  condemned
persons  who  were  to  be  executed.^  In  some  cities  they
took  care  of  the  insane.  They  lived  on  charity,  and  formed
an  order  of  religious  individuals  who  were  sort  of  half
monks.  They  were  distinctly  more  secular  than  the
friars,  as  they  might  at  any  time  marry  and  take  up
the    secular    life,   and,   even    while   they   were    living    as

^  Gieseler,  Ecc.  Hist.  vol.  iii.  p.  266.
'^  Delacroix,  Essai  sur  le  mysticisme  spiculatif  en  Allemagne,  p.  83.


200  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  cha^

Beghards,  they  often  spent  part  of  their  time  in  secular
occupations.  Then,  furthermore,  these  associations,  both
of  brothers  and  sisters,  in  their  early  stages,  were  not
under  rigid  ecclesiastical  rule  and  control  as  the  orders
of  friars  were.  Both  the  Beguines  and  Beghards  lived
partly  by  labour  and  partly  by  begging.

Delacroix  ^  has  pointed  out  that  there  were  three  well-
defined  classes  of  Beguines.  There  was  (i)  a  class  of  rich
women  who  went  into  the  Beguinage  to  live  the  simple
life,  i.e.  to  get  free  from  the  cares  and  burdens  of  the
world.  These  women  did  not  beg,  but  contributed  of
their  means  to  the  support  of  the  Beguinage  to  which  they
belonged.  Then  (2)  there  were  Beguinages  founded  and
maintained  by  rich  patrons,  which  were  homes  for  poor
women  who,  like  the  first  class,  lived  without  begging.
There  was  everywhere  in  Europe  at  this  period  an  extra-
ordinary cult  of  poverty.  Those  who  did  not  actually  prac-
tise poverty  were  eager  to  assist  those  who  did  practise  it.
There  was  an  almost  hypnotic  spell  on  men's  minds  as  to
the  peculiar  merits  of  poverty,  and  many  a  rich  man
quieted  his  conscience,  and  hoped  he  was  smoothing  the
road  to  heaven  by  contributing  liberally  to  homes  for
sisterhoods.  The  Counts  of  Flanders  were  lavish  in  their
gifts  to  maintain  Beguinages  in  their  region,  and  seemed
never  weary  of  putting  money  into  this  charity.^  The
Beguinage  of  the  thirteenth  century  appealed  to  the
sympathies  of  the  pious  rich  much  as  the  colleges  and
universities  of  the  twentieth  century  appeal  to  the  charit-
able instincts  of  present-day  money  kings.

There  was  finally  (3)  a  third  class  of  Beguinages
which  were  retreats  for  poor  women  who  lived  solely  by
work  and  begging,  with  the  emphasis  on  the  latter
occupation.  These  women  came  from  the  great  lower
class — women  who  did  not  "  take  up  "  poverty  as  a  cult,
but  who  had  it  thrust  upon  them.  Even  they  suddenly
found  that  there  was  a  religious  career  open  for  them.
They  had  very  simple  rules,  and  they  lived  a  somewhat
free  and  unrestrained  life.      During  the  early  period  while

1  op.  cit.  pp.  81-82.        2  See  Lea,  History  of  the  Inquisition,  vol.  ii.  p.  352.


xt  BROTHERHOOD  GROUPS  201

poverty  and  begging  were  in  high  favour,  and  Beguinism
had  not  yet  developed  any  heretical  tendencies,  the  move-
ment seemed  to  have  solved  one  of  the  most  difficult
social  problems  of  the  age.  Instead  of  hordes  of  ragged
women,  crying  up  and  down  the  streets,  "  For  the  love  of
God  give  us  bread,"  each  city  now  had  its  band  of  well-
housed  sisters,  dressed  in  "  simple  smock  and  great  veil-like
mantle,"  living  in  an  atmosphere  of  religion,  doing  the
pastoral  work  of  the  neighbourhood,  and  taking  up  the
tasks  which  were  unsuitable  for  the  priests.  When  they
begged  they  begged  in  an  orderly  fashion,  which  suited
the  dignity  of  their  sisterhood,  and  their  poverty  took  on
a  sacramental  touch.-^

But  these  fellowships  of  men  and  women,  organized  for
the  cultivation  of  personal  piety  and  for  the  practice  of
social  religion,  soon  degenerated.  In  the  first  place  it
was  extremely  difficult,  in  that  age  of  loose  morals,  to
guard  the  purity  of  the  life  of  the  Beguines.  They  were
exposed  in  numerous  ways  to  temptations,  and  the  moral
dangers  which  beset  the  lives  of  these  women  were  not
sufficiently  foreseen  and  forestalled  when  the  system  was
framed.  We  find  the  authorities  busy  in  almost  every
section  devising  rules  to  meet  this  moral  situation.  Even
as  early  as  1244  the  Archbishop  of  Mayence  forbade  any
Beguine  association  to  admit  a  woman  under  forty  years
of  age.  Before  the  end  of  the  thirteenth  century  the
ecclesiastical  authorities  were  everywhere  at  work  bringing
these  associations  under  the  care  of  the  Franciscans  or  the
Dominicans.  The  Council  of  Vienne  in  1 3 1 1  discovered
that  the  Beguines  were  following  the  religious  life  without
having  promised  obedience,  and  without  having  adopted
any  approved  rule.  They  had  a  special  garb,  and  they
had  self-chosefi  superiors.  They  were  actually  preaching
on  such  subjects  as  the  Trinity  and  Divine  Guidance,  and
the  report  adds  that  they  were  endangering  the  faith  of
many,  and  hazarding  their  eternal  salvation.  These
associations     naturally    provoked     clerical     hostility    and

^  This  was  the  ideal,  and  was  not  always  realized,  and  in  most  communities
begging  soon  became  a  public  nuisance.  In  Mayence  the  Beguines  were  forbidden
to  beg  by  Act  of  Council  in  1310.


202  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap

jealousy.  They  cut  into  the  Orders  of  Friars  both  in
membership  and  donations,  because  being  less  strict  they
were  extremely  popular.  They  were  a  disadvantage  to
the  local  clergy  in  their  neighbourhoods,  because  the
burials  and  masses  of  the  Beguines  were  conducted
independently  of  the  local  priest,  and  he  missed  the  fees.
They  were  thus  almost  ceaselessly  worried,  harried,  and
persecuted,  so  that  even  in  1261  Pope  Urban  IV.  wrote
to  an  authority  in  Louvain  to  protect  the  Beguines  against
"  rash  persons  who  afflict  them,"  and  he  urges  him  "  not  to
allow  any  one  to  injure  them,  either  in  person  or  in  goods."  ^
And,  secondly,  the  associations  were  rapidly  permeated
by  the  "  new  thought "  of  that  age,  which  quickly  made
them  centres  of  "  heresy  "  and  brought  them  under  general
suspicion.  What  I  have  here  called  "  new  thought "  was
really  the  popular  product  of  the  speculations,  studied  in
earlier  chapters  of  this  book.  The  somewhat  abstract
doctrines  of  Dionysius,  Erigena,  and  Amaury  had  now
filtered  down  into  the  common  mind,  and  were  being
changed  from  academic  truths  to  practical  truths.  They
began  to  be  translated  from  their  safe  place  in  books  into
the  dangerous  stuff  of  human  life.  So  long  as  the  teach-
ing of  the  Allness  of  God  and  the  possibility  of  every
person  being  an  expression  of  His  nature  was  wrapped
away  in  the  difficult  verbiage  of  a  philosophical  treatise,
matters  went  on  as  though  the  book  had  never  been
written,  but  the  situation  was  mightily  altered  when  those
views  spread  through  the  world  and  became  a  popular
doctrine,  as  they  now  did.  Amaury  and  Ortlieb  began
the  dangerous  business  of  making  these  views  popular,
but  the  movement  begun  on  this  small  scale  gathered
volume,  and  soon  became  the  spirit  of  the  epoch.  It
worked  like  leaven  through  every  rank  of  society,  and
affected  every  sect  and  party.  The  movement  had  many
aspects  and  variations  as  it  ran  its  course,  and  no  simple
phrase  covers  all  its  forms  ;  but  I  shall  for  the  present  deal
with  the  spread  of  the  doctrine  among  groups  of  men  and
women  who  were  called  the  "  Brethren  of  the  Free  Spirit."

^  Mosheim,  De  Beghardis  et  Beguinabus,  p.  141.


XI  BROTHERHOOD  GROUPS  203

The  societies  of  Beguines  and  Beghards  offered  splendid
opportunity  for  the  spread  of  the  leaven  of  "  Free  Spirit,"
as  the  popular  doctrines  evolved  from  the  teachings  of
Amaury  and  Ortlieb  were  called.  There  were  among
these  Beghard  and  Beguine  groups  many  persons  of  in-
telligence, who  devoted  much  time  to  reading  and  thought,
and  they  became  influential  instructors  of  the  rest.  There
was  always  in  these  societies  a  spirit  of  independence  ;
they  were  not  under  strict  watch  and  guard  ;  there  was
much  leisure  for  meditation  ;  the  group  spirit  was  attained
to  a  high  degree,  so  that  any  powerful  movement  which
affected  the  leaders  was  sure  to  become  contagious.
Pantheism  and  mysticism  had  been  brought,  as  I  have
said,  from  abstruse  treatises  into  popular  books  and
sermons.  Such  ideas  admirably  fitted  the  psychological
temper  and  climate  of  the  age.  Here  was  a  situation
which  was  most  favourable  to  the  spread  of  the  leaven,
and  before  the  authorities  were  aware  of  it,  the  societies
of  Beghards  and  Beguines  were  being  transformed  into
"  Brethren  of  the  Free  Spirit."  The  Church  suddenly
awoke  to  the  danger  it  was  facing,  and  by  the  opening  of
the  fourteenth  century  the  authorities  use  the  words
"  pest  "  and  "  heresy"  with  great  frequency  as  a  description
of  these  brotherhood  movements.

Unfortunately  we  are  compelled  to  study  the  doctrine
of  the  "  Free  Spirit "  wholly  through  the  reports  of  its
enemies.  It  was  an  anti-ecclesiastical  movement ;  it  was
a  popular  uprising  for  larger  liberty  ;  it  was  a  powerful
exhibition  of  lay  religion,  and  from  the  nature  of  the  case
we  cannot  look  for  a  calm,  impartial,  judicial  account  of
the  "  pest "  from  the  ecclesiastics  who  investigated  it.
The  lurid  colours  in  these  descriptions  must  be  taken  with
much  caution.

Albert  the  Great  had  already,  in  1250,  written  such
dreadful  details  of  the  beliefs  and  doings  of  "heretical"
Beghards  that  a  later  author,  who  has  Albert's  Manual
before  him,  declines  to  write  out  the  description.^  But  it
was   not   until   the   early  years  of  the  fourteenth  century

^  Jundt,   fanthiisme  populaire,  p.  48.


204  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

that  this  "  pestiferous  liberty  of  spirit "  was  discovered  to
be  widespread,  and  to  have  permeated  the  brotherhoods
and  sisterhoods.  In  1306  the  Archbishop  of  Cologne,
Henry  of  Virnebourg,  issued  an  edict  against  "  heretical "
Beghards  and  Beguines.  He  describes  them  as  "  people
practising  a  new  kind  of  life  under  the  pretext  of  poverty  " ;
they  "  beg  instead  of  working,"  to  the  injury  of  "  Christi-
anity," i.e.  to  the  detriment  of  the  begging  friars  ;  they
"  preach  publicly  though  they  are  only  lay-people  "  ;  they
"  wear  long  tabards,  tunics,  and  cowls,"  and  they  teach  the
following  "  heresies  "  :  "  Those  who  are  led  by  the  Spirit
of  God  are  no  longer  under  law,  for  the  law  is  not  imposed
on  the  good,  on  those  who  live  without  sin  " ;  "  He  who
follows  me  {i.e.  becomes  a  member  of  this  sect),  they  say,
can  be  saved,  for  I  do  not  commit  sin  "  ;  "  These  truths
have  been  given  to  them,  they  say,  by  divine  revelation."^
The  threats  of  excommunication  and  persecution  which
the  Archbishop  levelled  against  them  did  not  accomplish
anything.  On  the  contrary  they  grew  in  numbers  and
power  to  such  an  extent  that  the  regular  "  Orders "
materially  decreased,  and  it  was  decided  to  see  what
argument  and  persuasion  would  do.  The  greatest  theo-
logian of  the  age,  Duns  Scotus,  was  brought  to  Cologne
to  confound  them,  but  his  untimely  death  in  1308  removed
the  great  schoolman  from  his  difficult  task,  leaving  it
unaccomplished.  We  hear  a  little  later  that  "  almost  the
entire  city  is  infected  with  heresy."  The  Council  of  Treves
in  1 3 1  o  gives  an  interesting  picture  of  the  Beghards,
though  it  throws  little  or  no  light  on  the  prevailing  ideas

of  the  movement :

•

"  In  the  diocese  of  Treves  there  are  a  number  of  lay-
people  called  Beghards.  They  appear  in  public  clothed  in  long
tunics  and  with  cowls,  and  they  avoid  all  manual  labour.  At
certain  times  they  hold  meetings^  in  which  they  give^  in  the  presence
of  their  believing  members^  the  appearance  of  being  profound  inter-
preters of  Holy  Scripture.  We  disapprove  of  their  society  as
foreign  to  every  type  of  congregation  recognized  by  the  Church."  ^

^  See  Jundt,  op.  cit.  p.  49,  and  Lea,  History  of  the  Inquisition,  vol.  ii.   pp.
367-68.

2  Mosheim,  De  Beghardis  et  Bcguinabus,  p.  235.


XI  BROTHERHOOD  GROUPS  205

The  "  heresy  of  the  Free  Spirit "  was  the  absorbing
question  before  the  Council  of  Vienne  in  131 1.  Pope
Clement  IV.  had  become  greatly  disturbed  over  the  spread
of  the  Free  Spirit,  and  under  his  direction  the  famous
Council  of  Vienne  set  itself  to  the  task  of  finding  out  the
character  of  the  "  heresy  "  and  of  exterminating  it.  The
decrees  of  this  Council  are  called  Clemcfitines,  and  they
give  us  a  very  full  description  of  the  "  errors."

"We  have  learned,"  says  the  first  Clementine  decree,  "that
there  are  many  Beguines,  smitten  apparently  with  madness,  who
give  discussions  and  sermons  on  the  Trinity  and  on  the  Divine
Essence,  and  who  are  heterodox  on  the  articles  of  faith  and  the
sacraments  of  the  Church.  They  lead  many  simple,  credulous
persons  into  error,  and  under  the  veil  of  sanctity  they  do  many
things  which  endanger  the  soul."  ^

All  this  is  indefinite  enough,  but  the  second  decree  is
more  precise.  We  read  that  "these  perverted  men  and
faithless  women,  vulgarly  called  Beghards  and  Beguines,"
hold  the  following  views  :

"  This  is  the  dispensation  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  a  dispensation
of  liberty  for  one  to  do  whatever  he  pleases.  .  .  .  Man  can  arrive
here  in  the  present  life  to  the  fulness  of  divine  blessedness.  .  .  .
Every  intellectual  being  possesses  within  himself  by  his  very
nature  perfect  blessedness.  .  .  .  The  soul  has  no  need  of  Divine
Light  {i.e.  beyond  what  he  has  within  himself)  to  rise  to  a  con-
templation of  God.  .  .  .  Man  can  attain  in  this  life  such  a  degree
of  perfection  that  he  will  become  incapable  of  sinning,  and  that
he  can  make  no  further  progress  in  divine  grace,  for  if  he  were
able  to  progress  further  he  might  attain  a  greater  perfection  than
that  of  Jesus  Christ.  .  .  .  When  a  person  has  attained  the  highest
degree  of  perfection  there  is  no  more  need  of  fasting  or  praying,
for  the  senses  are  now  so  completely  subject  to  reason  that  the
body  may  be  given  absolute  liberty.  .  .  .  Those  who  live  in  this
state  of  perfection,  and  are  moved  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  are  no
longer  under  any  law  or  ecclesiastical  regulation,  for  where  the
Spirit  of  God  is  there  is  liberty.  ...  He  who  must  still  practise
virtues  is  an  imperfect  person.  The  perfect  soul  has  got  beyond
virtues.  .  .  .  When  the  body  of  Christ  is  presented  in  divine
service  it  is  not  necessary  to  rise  or  to  show  any  respect  for  the
host,  for  it  would  be  a  sign  of  imperfection  to  come  down  from

^  Mosheim,  p.  245.


2o6  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

the  heights  of  pure  contemplation  to  dwell  on  thoughts  of  the
sacrament  or  the  passion  of  the  Saviour."  ^

The  metaphysics  of  this  movement  are  quite  plain  and
simple,  for  every  time  we  get  a  glimpse  of  the  doctrine
the  central  idea  is  the  same.  God  is  all.  He  goes  out
of  His  unity  into  plurality  and  differentiation.  In  this
universe  of  multiplicity  everything  real  is  divine.  The
end  of  all  things  is  a  return  to  the  divine  unity,  Man
has  within  himself  the  possibility  of  return  —  he  can
become  like  Christ,  like  God.  He  can  even  become  God.
In  man's  state  of  perfection  God  does  all  in  him  that  he
does.  The  Church  therefore  is  unnecessary.  Man  him-
self is  a  revelation  of  God.  Heaven  and  hell  are  allegories.
God  is  in  man  and  in  all  things  as  much  as  in  the  conse-
crated bread  and  wine.^

The  question  of  the  moral  outcome  of  the  doctrine
and  its  extravagancies  will  be  discussed  later.  The
urgent  issue  to  the  Church  was  its  own  supremacy.  This
doctrine  made  the  Church  unnecessary,  made  ecclesiastical
supremacy  a  mere  assumption.  It  was  a  life  and  death
issue  on  which  there  could  be  no  compromise.  The
Council  of  Vienne  called  for  the  entire  suppression  of  the
Beguinages.  It  decreed  the  abolition  of  the  "  Orders  "  of
Beghards  and  Beguines.  These  decrees,  however,  though
passed  in  131 1,  were  not  actually  published  until  13  17,
under  the  new  Pope  John  XXII.  The  reason  for  the
delay  apparently  was  that  many  of  the  groups  of  Beghards
and  Beguines  were  free  from  taint  of  heresy,  and  were
orthodox  and  loyal  Catholics.  It  seemed  a  shame  to
smite  all  alike,  while  on  the  other  hand  it  was  a  hopeless
task  to  separate  the  sheep  from  the  goats.  It  was  easy
to  describe  the  "  heresy  "  on  paper ;  it  was  extremely  diffi-
cult to  mark  the  distinction  of  orthodox  and  heterodox  in
dealing  with  persons.

Wherever  the  edicts  of  Vienne  were  actually  executed
the  results  were  pitiable.  The  Beghards,  being  men,
could  shift  for  themselves,  and  flee  from  persecution  to
some   safer  part   of  the   world.      The   women,  who   were

1  Jundt,  op.  cit.  pp.  50-51.  '^  See  Jundt,  op.  cit.  p.  55.


XI  BROTHERHOOD  GROUPS  207

deprived  of  their  Beguinage  and  turned  adrift  without
means  of  support,  and  forbidden  to  beg,  were  compelled
to  die  of  want,  or  to  find  husbands,  or  to  sink  to  a  life  of
prostitution.  The  tragedy  of  this  situation  deeply  im-
pressed the  popular  mind,  and  it  became  current  report
that  on  his  death-bed  Pope  Clement  had  bitterly  repented
of  his  attack  on  the  Beguines.-^

The  most  precious  document  for  gaining  a  knowledge
of  the  principles  of  the  "  Free  Spirit "  is  a  letter  written
in  1 3  1 7  by  the  Bishop  of  Strasbourg,  and  addressed  to
his  subordinates.  His  facts  were  gathered  through  an
inquisitorial  commission  which  had  carried  its  investiga-
tion through  the  diocese.^     The  letter  reads  :

"  There  are  found  in  this  city  and  in  this  diocese  many
sectaries  who  are  popularly  called  '  Beghards '  and  '  begging
sisters'  (Schwestrones  Bred  durch  Gott),  and  who  call  themselves
'  the  Sect  of  the  Free  Spirit,'  and  '  brothers  and  sisters  of  poverty.'
Among  their  number,  we  are  sorry  to  say,  there  are  monks  and
priests,  and  many  married  persons.  We  condemn  all  the  doctrines
and  ceremonies  of  the  sect.  We  order  that  these  heretics  be  driven
from  their  abodes,  and  that  the  houses  used  for  their  meeting-
places  be  sold  for  the  benefit  of  the  Church.  The  books  which
contain  their  doctrines  are  to  be  turned  over  to  the  priests  within
fifteen  days  and  burnt.^  All  who  do  not  repent  and  give  up
their  garb  within  three  days  will  be  excommunicated,  and  those
who  give  them  charity  will  be  dealt  with  likewise.  Exception
will  be  made  of  Beghards  who  accept  the  Third  Order  of  the
Franciscan  rule,  or  who  come  under  some  Order  approved  by
the  Church.  Exception  is  also  made  of  Beguines  who  lead  a
pure  and  pious  life."

Here  follows  the  statement  of  doctrine  :

"God  is  in  form  everything  that  is.*  They  claim  to  be
divine  by  nature,  and  they  make  no  distinction  between  God  and
themselves.  Man  can  be  so  united  to  God  that  man's  will,
power,  activity,  become  God's  will,  power,  and  activity.       Every

1  It  was,  however,  as  we  have  seen,  under  John  XXII.  that  the  edicts  were
published  and  executed.

2  Mosheim  and  Jundt  say  that  this  letter  was  written  by  John  of  Ochsenstein,
who,  they  suppose,  was  Bishop  of  Strasbourg.  It  has,  however,  been  settled
that  John  of  Durbheim  was  bishop  at  the  time  and  author  of  this  letter  (see
Delacroix,  op.  cit.  p.  92).      Mosheim  gives  the  text  of  the  letter,  pp.  253-61.

3  Not  a  copy  has  escaped,  more's  the  pity.

*  This  tneans  that  the  essence  or  idea  in  everything  is  a  thought  of  God's,


2o8  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

man,  they  say,  can  by  virtue  of  his  nature  become  as  perfect  as
Christ,  and  can  acquire  even  greater  merit  than  Christ.  Many
of  them  say  that  they  are  more  perfect  in  the  three  virtues  than
St.  Paul  or  the  Virgin.  All  divine  perfections  are  joined  in  them  ;
they  claim  that  they  have  eternity  in  the  depths  of  their  own
souls,  and  are  living  in  eternity  here  below.  The  Catholic
Church  is  folly  and  vanity.  The  perfect  man  is  under  no  obliga-
tion to  obey  commandments,  not  even  that  which  imposes
respect  for  parents.  In  virtue  of  their  liberty  they  nullify  the
teaching  of  the  clergy  and  the  statutes  of  the  Church.  They
show  no  respect  for  the  body  of  Christ  in  the  sacrament,  and  say
blasphemously  that  the  body  of  the  Saviour  is  found  equally  in  all
bread  as  in  the  consecrated  wafer.  They  say  that  any  pure  layman
can  consecrate  the  elements  as  well  as  the  priest,  that  it  is  not
necessary  for  salvation  to  confess  to  priests,  that  the  acceptance  of
a  consecrated  wafer  from  the  hands  of  a  layman  brings  deliver-
ance to  a  departed  soul  as  much  as  priestly  mass  does.^  There
is  neither  hell  nor  purgatory  as  a  place.  There  is  no  last
judgment ;  man  is  judged  at  the  moment  of  death.  The  Spirit
will  then  return  to  God  and  become  so  completely  united  with
Him  that  He  alone  will  remain  as  He  was  from  eternity.
Nobody  will  be  lost,  not  even  Jews  or  Saracens,  because  their
spirits  will  return  to  God.  Scripture  contains  many  poetical
passages  which  are  not  to  be  taken  as  literal  truth.  If  all  the
books  of  the  Catholic  Faith  were  destroyed,  the  members  of  this
sect  could  compose  better  ones.  For  this  reason  more  faith
should  be  given  to  the  things  which  come  from  the  human  heart
than  to  the  gospels ;  the  soul's  Inward  Voice  is  safer  than  the
truths  preached  in  the  Church.  Many  among  them  have  attained
such  a  degree  of  perfection  they  say  that  they  cannot  sin.  They
pretend  that  all  things  are  the  common  property  of  all,  and  that
any  one  may  take  what  he  likes.  They  say  that  one  should  have
no  creaturely  desires,  not  even  the  desire  for  the  kingdom  of
heaven.  They  hold  themselves  immovable  on  the  summit  of  the
ninth  rock,^  and  neither  rejoice  nor  lament ;  and  if  they  could  by
a  single  word  banish  all  mortal  woes,  they  would  not  speak  the
word."

The  most  impartial  testimony  v^hich  vi^e  have  of  the
views,  teaching,  and  practices  of  those  u^ho  professed  these

1  This  is  in  every  respect  like  the  teaching  of  the  Waldenses.  No  sharp  line
can  be  drawn  between  these  various  sects.

2  This  is  a  mystical  symbol  for  the  highest  degree  of  union  with  God,  cf  which
union  there  were  nine  stages.  The  Book  of  the  Nine  Rocks  will  be  discussed
in  the  chapter  on  the  "Friends  of  God."  There  seem  to  have  been  other
books  besides  this  famous  one,  and  evidently  the  conception  of  the  "Nine
Rocks  "  was  gradually  developed  by  the  mystics  of  the  time.


XI  BROTHERHOOD  GROUPS  209

extreme  principles  of  "  divine  unity  "  and  "  freedom  "  is
from  the  great  mystic  preacher,  John  Tauler.  In  one  of
his  sermons  he  contrasts  spurious  spiritual  freedom  with
sound  spiritual  freedom,  and  gives  a  description  of  the
type  of  "  Free  Spirit "  which  we  are  studying.  He
says  :

"  They  stand  exempt  from  all  subjection,  without  any  activity
upward  or  downward,  just  as  a  tool  is  passive  and  waits  until  its
master  wishes  to  use  it,  for  it  seems  to  them  that  if  they  do  any-
thing then  God  will  be  hindered  in  His  work ;  therefore  they
count  themselves  above  all  virtues.  They  wish  to  be  so  free
that  they  do  not  think,  nor  praise  God,  nor  have  anything,  nor
know  anything,  nor  love  nor  ask  nor  desire  anything ;  for  all  that
they  might  wish  to  ask  'they  have  (according  to  their  notion).
And  they  also  think  that  they  are  poor  in  spirit  because  they  are
without  any  will  of  their  own  and  have  renounced  all  possessions.
They  also  wish  to  be  free  of  all  practice  of  virtue,  obedient  to  no
one,  whether  pope,  or  bishop,  or  priest.  They  wish  to  be  free  of
everything  with  which  the  Church  has  to  do.  They  say  publicly
that  so  long  as  a  man  strives  after  virtues,  so  long  is  he  imperfect
and  knows  nothing  of  spiritual  poverty,  nor  of  this  spiritual
freedom.

They  consider  themselves  to  be  higher  than  the  Angels  and
above  the  stage  of  human  merit  and  human  faith,  so  that  they
cannot  increase  in  virtue  nor  yet  commit  sin.  Whatever  nature
desires,  according  to  their  notion,  they  can  do  freely  without  sin
because  they  have  reached  the  highest  innocence,  and  no  law  or
commandment  is  put  upon  them.  Whenever  their  nature  urges
them  in  any  direction  they  follow  the  impulse^  so  that  the  freedom
of  the  spirit  may  be  unhindered."  ^

As  time  went  on  the  rigours  of  persecution  steadily
increased,  and  the  Church  resolved  on  the  annihilation  of
all  begging  sects  not  affiliated  with  the  established  Orders,
and  on  the  extermination  of  all  pantheistical  heresies.
The  final  blow  of  extermination  of  these  associations,
which  fell  early  in  the  fifteenth  century,  was  largely  due,
as  the  persecution  throughout  had  been,  to  the  influence
of  the  established  Orders  —  especially  the  Dominican
Order.  All  the  powers  of  the  Inquisition  had  for  a  half
century  been  let  loose  on  these  suspected  religious  sects,

*  Preger,  Geschichte  der  deutschen  Mystik  im  Mittelalter,   vol.  iii.  p.   133.

P


2  10  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

and  the  wonder  is  that  they  existed  at  all  through
the  pitiless  storm  of  persecution.  In  many  places  the
"  houses "  of  the  Beghards  were  turned  into  prisons  for
"heretics,"  and,  by  a  shameful  stretch  of  persecuting
fanaticism,  the  inquisitors  were  authorized  in  1369,  both
by  the  Emperor  Charles  IV.  and  Pope  Gregory  XL,  to
burn  all  books,  tracts,  and  sermons  written  in  the  vulgar
tongue.  This  outrageous  edict  swept  away  a  precious  mass
of  popular  literature.  Anything  popular  was  apparently
dangerous.

Among  the  many  Beghard  martyrs  there  is  one  name
which  has  had  a  great  place  in  the  history  of  *' the  Friends  of
God  " — that  of  Nicholas  of  Basle.  .  He  was  long  believed
to  be  "  the  Friend  of  God  from  the  Oberland,"  who  is  in
history  intimately  associated  with  the  life  of  John  Tauler.
This  belief  is  wholly  without  historical  foundation.  Nicholas
of  Basle  was  a  prominent  Beghard,  who  travelled  widely  as
a  missionary,  and  propagated  the  teachings  of  the  sect.
For  many  years  he  succeeded  in  escaping  the  Inquisition,
though  he  was  vigorously  sought  after.  He  was  finally
seized  in  Vienna  about  1397,  and  was  there  burned  at
the  stake  with  two  of  his  "  disciples,"  John  and  James.

We  now  come  to  the  difficult  task  of  estimating  the
significance  and  value  of  this  movement.  The  societies
of  Beghards  and  Beguines,  in  their  primitive  stage,  were
an  expression  of  the  spirit  of  the  epoch,  a  form  of  that
hypnotic  spell  which  carried  men  and  women  in  all
Christian  lands  into  an  unreasoned  exaltation  of  poverty,
an  obsession  of  renunciation.  The  peculiarity  which
marks  off  these  associations  from  the  other  groups  which
practised  the  cult  of  poverty  is  the  tendency  toward  pan-
theistical ideas  and  mystical  views  which  prevailed  among
them.^      There  were  throughout  their  history  many  "  ortho-

1  It  is  true,  as  we  have  implied  throu,o:hout  this  chapter,  that  it  is  often  diffi-
cult to  distinguish  Beghards  from  Waldenses.  They  mutually  influenced  each
other,  and  with  our  scanty  historical  material  are  easily  confused.  For  example,
the  inquisitor  Garin,  who.  with  the  Bishop  of  Metz,  "  investigated"  the  Beghards
in  1334,  has  given  a  description  which  reveals  many  Waldensian  traits.  He
says:  "These  impious  men  call  themselves  brothers  of  poverty,  and  they  claim
that  they  imitate  Christ  and  follow  the  gospel.  They  say  that  they  do  not  even
own  their  clothes  and  the  other  things  which  they  use,  but  that  God  is  the  Master
of  all  their  goods."      He  says  that  their  meetings  are  held  at  the  movijig  of  thi


XI  BROTHERHOOD  GROUPS  211

dox  "  Beghards  and  many  societies  even  which  continued
to  be  "  untainted  "  by  the  doctrine  of  "  Free  Spirit,"  but
there  was  a  very  great  element  in  the  groups,  throughout
the  fourteenth  century,  which  held  a  pantheistical  form  of
mysticism.  The  doctrine  was  based,  as  I  have  already
said,  on  the  fundamental  idea  that  God  is  all,  and  that
man  may  become  a  revelation  of  Him.  These  popular
mystics  differed  from  Dionysius  and  Erigena  only  in  their
crudeness  and  in  the  boldness  of  the  application  of  their
doctrine.

The  fatal  weakness  of  this  entire  mystical  movement,
all  the  way  back  from  its  popular  form  in  the  fourteenth
century  to  its  lofty  formulation  in  Plotinus  and  Plato,
is  the  negative  and  abstract  feature  of  it.  God,  the
Divine  Reality,  is  reached  by  a  process  of  negation.  He
is  everything  that  finite  things  are  not.  He  is  Absolute —
but  without  any  qualities  or  characteristics  by  which  we
can  know  Him.  He  is  an  indeterminate  Absolute.  He
is  an  abstract  Universal  in  which  all  finite  particulars  are
swallowed  up  and  lost,  not  a  self-revealing  Spirit  who
explains  all  finite  particulars.  All  roads  lead  to  Him,
but  no  one  comes  back  with  any  light  which  explains  the
finite,  or  which  gives  illumination  for  the  daily  tasks  of  a
concrete  life.  When  the  "  Beghard,"  with  the  "Free
Spirit "  ideas,  believed  that  he  was  "  Divine,"  he  had  no
way  of  thinking  out  what  it  meant  to  be  "  Divine."  God
was  an  indefinite  All,  which  had  swallowed  him  up  and
merged  him  into  His  Allness.  He  had  no  will  of  his
own  any  more.  He,  too,  like  God,  became  indeterminate^
with  his   finite  likes   and  dislikes,  his   particular  choices.

Holy  Spirit.  They  claim  a  state  of  perfection  which  puts  them  above  the  pope
and  the  clergy — and  above  excommunication.  He  does  not  charge  them  with
impure  Hfe,  but  says  that  they  deny  the  right  to  any  one  to  inflict  capital  punish-
ment, and  they  refuse  to  swear.  He  says  they  refuse  to  "  confess,"  claiming  that
they  have  not  committed  sin.  Even  in  the  death  hour  they  refuse  to  call  upon
the  Virgin  or  the  saints,  ' '  which  proves  that  they  continue  in  their  malicious
errors"  (see  Delacroix,  op.  cit.  pp.  1 15-16).  Wasmod  of  Hamburg,  Inquisitor
of  Mayence,  in  his  tract  written  at  the  very  end  of  the  fourteenth  century,  gives
similar  traits.  He  says  the  Beghards  reduce  the  Church  to  their  own  cijxle  :
they  say  that  the  clergy  have  no  power  to  pardon  sins,  because  they  are  in  a  state
of  sin  themselves  ;  they  say  that  the  priest,  who  is  in  a  state  of  mortal  sin,  cannot
consecrate  the  sacrament,  and  that  one  may  perform  priestly  functions  without
consecration.


212  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

desires,  and  volitions  annulled.  He  would  now  do  nothing
except  what  the  Allness  did  through  him.  But  how  could
he  know  what  a  God  of  this  Absolute  sort  would  do  ?
Eckhart,  in  one  of  his  sermons,  has  a  keen  analysis  of
this  negative  freedom  which  comes  from  making  God
indeterminate.

"  There  are  persons  who  say,  '  I  have  God  and  His  love,  I
can  do  what  I  wish.'  This  view  shows  an  ignorance  of  true
liberty.  When  thou  wishest  to  do  a  thing  contrary  to  the  will  of
God  and  His  law,  thou  hast  not  the  love  of  God,  even  though
thou  endeavourest  to  make  the  world  believe  that  thou  hast.
That  man  who  has  established  himself  in  the  will  of  God  and  in
the  love  of  God  does  what  God  loves  and  leaves  undone  what
He  forbids.  It  is  as  impossible  for  him  to  do  what  God  does
not  will  as  it  is  not  to  do  what  He  wills.  The  man  whose  feet
are  bound  cannot  walk,  and  the  man  who  lives  in  the  will  of
God  cannot  sin."  ^

With  no  positive  vision  of  the  Divine  Character,  with
a  conception  of  liberty  which  meant  freedom  to  do  any-
thing, the  mystic  of  the  "  Free  Spirit "  type  was  at  the
mercy  of  his  strongest  impulses.  Whatever  pressed  upon
him  urgently  and  powerfully  would  be  taken  as  the  lead-
ing of  the  Absolute  with  which  he  was  united.  He  believed
himself  absolutely  free,  because  he  believed  that  his  will
had  become  God's  will,  but  when  he  came  to  select  a
particular  thing  to  do,  the  selection  would  always  be  due
to  some  prepotent,  some  dominating  impulse  or  idea.
By  surrendering  his  will  to.  an  indeterminate  Absolute  he
thus  opened  wide  the  door  for  caprice  and  vagary.

There  were  two  quite  distinct  tendencies  which  flowed
out  of  this  abstract  pantheism,  this  negative  mysticism,
both  of  them  the  natural  outcome  of  the  psychological
situation  just  outlined.  They  were  (i)  a  tendency  to
asceticism  and  (2)  a  tendency  to  libertinism.  We  find
among  these  brotherhood  and  sisterhood  associations
groups  of  both  types.  It  is  a  natural  inference  from  the
Allness  of  God  to  conclude  that  the  finite  is  vain  and
illusory.      On  this  inference  the  "  perfect  man  "  will  with-

1  Pfeiflfer,  Meister  Eckhart,  p.  232.


XI  BROTHERHOOD  GROUPS  213

draw  as  far  as  he  can  from  all  finite  satisfactions  and
from  all  dependence  on  illusory  joys.  He  will  mortify
his  body,  and  kill  out  his  vain  desires.  He  will
approximate  to  his  ideal  of  a  life  unmoved  and  un-
disturbed— a  passive,  indeterminate  life  in  which  will  is
annulled.  Where  the  Brethren  of  the  "  Free  Spirit  "  came
under  Waldensian  influences  they  swung  toward  this
ascetic  extreme.  Ruysbroek  has  given  a  good  account
of  this  extreme  Asceticism  of  one  branch  of  the  Brethren
of  the  Free  Spirit :

"We  are,"  they  say,  ''sent  into  the  world  to  live  the  con-
templative life,  which  is  superior  to  the  active  life  of  Christ.  By
withdrawing  into  ourselves,  and  by  separating  ourselves  from  all
forms,  all  images,  all  particular  qualities,  we  feel  within  ourselves
the  eternal  wisdom  of  God.  If  the  Saviour  had  lived  longer
He  would  have  reached  the  same  height  of  the  contemplative
life  to  which  we  have  attained."  ^

The  other  easy  inference  from  this  central  doctrine
was  the  conclusion  that  any  urgent  impulse  was  Divine.
This  led  to  Libertinism.  The  only  basis  of  right  and  of
truth,  they  held,  is  the  immediate  revelation  within.
Whenever  an  impulse  to  act  surges  up  within,  it  is  a
revelation  of  the  Divine  will,  God,  they  believed,  is  no
more  revealed  in  the  moral  system  of  Sinai  than  in  the
present  prompting  of  man's  heart,  for  this,  too,  is  Divine.
God  is  no  more  revealed  in  the  teachings  of  the  Mountain
Sermon  than  in  a  present  urgent  impulse  which  springs
out  of  man's  nature,  for  this,  too,  is  Divine.  This  view,
when  pushed  to  its  extreme  consequences,  left  no  moral
standards  and  no  moral  distinctions.  Right  and  wrong,
high  and  low,  were  blurred.  Whatever  a  person  in  his
"  perfect  state "  wanted  to  do  was  as  right  as  anything
else.

It  is  by  no  means  certain  that  the  members  of  these
societies  actually  carried  out  their  dangerous  doctrines
into  their  practical  consequences,  though  the  testimony
pointing  toward  immorality  is  too  steady  and  universal  to

^  Quoted  from  Jundt,  op.  cit.  p.  99.


214  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

be  ignored.^  There  would  at  any  rate  be  some  persons
who  would  take  advantage  of  views  which  gave  carte
blanche  to  the  weakness  of  the  flesh,  while  the  religious
emotions  which  go  with  this  highly- wrought  type  of
religion  would  tend,  as  we  now  know,  to  produce  a  lax
control  over  sexual  passion.  The  moral  standards  of  the
period  were,  too,  extremely  low.  Some  of  the  most
famous  churchmen  of  the  time  were  living  lives  of  shock-
ing immorality,  and  it  is  more  than  likely  that  there  were
orgies  of  immorality  in  some  groups  which  were  affected
with  **Free  Spirit"  ideas.  The  particular  stories,
however,  which  the  inquisitors  tell  are  decidedly  open  to
suspicion,  and  it  is  a  noteworthy  fact  that  the  Beghards
and  Beguines  generally  had  the  sympathy  and  support  of
the  common  people.

The  stories  which  tell  how  the  members  of  these  sects,
both  men  and  women,  met  by  night  in  a  cave  called
"  Paradise,"  and  gave  rein  to  their  passions,  are  thoroughly
unreliable.  They  are  without  local  details,  and  they  are
built  on  the  traditional  model  which  has  been  used  in
every  epoch  when  men  wished  to  besmirch  and  disgrace
a  hated  religious  sect.  The  famous  "  confession  "  of  John
de  Brunn  is  wholly  worthless  as  evidence  against  the
moral  character  of  the  Beghards.  This  John  claimed
that  he  had  lived  the  Beghard  life  for  twenty-eight  years.
At  first  he  was  put  through  a  very  stern  training,  under
strict  discipline,  until  he  attained  "the  liberty  of  the
Spirit,"  when  "  God  was  totally  formed  in  him,  and  all  his
movements  became  Divine."  He  now  gave  himself  up  to
"  a  practice  of  liberty  "  of  the  most  disgusting  sort.  At  the
end  of  twenty-eight  years  he  was  smitten  with  repentance,
and  joined  the  Dominican  Friars.  They  imposed  as  a
penance  upon  him  that  he  should  tell  all  the  secrets
of  the  association  to  which  he  had  belonged.  His  "  con-
fession," which  is  collaborated  by  the  Inquisitor,  is  lurid
with  revelations  of   depravity.      The  "  confession "  bears

1  The  most  damaging  testimony  to  the  erratic  character  and  the  lax  Hfe  of
these  sectaries  is  found  scattered  through  the  pages  of  Eckhart,  Tauler,  Suso,  and
Ruysbroek,  who  were  themselves  profoundly  mystical,  but  who  were  solidly
anchored  in  the  reality  of  moral  distinctions.


XI  BROTHERHOOD  GROUPS  215

all  the  marks  of  being  the  work  of  a  "  degenerate."  It  is
no  more  reliable  than  the  testimony  of  a  condemned  witch
to  the  existence  of  witchcraft  in  the  community.  There
is  a  strange  fascination  for  such  persons  in  telling  a  morbid
tale,  and  this  John  knew  that  his  own  standing  with  the
Dominicans  would  be  improved  by  his  ability  to  make  out
a  powerfully  damaging  case  against  their  enemies  the
Beghards.^  The  very  methods  by  which  the  "perfect
state"  was  to  be  attained  tended  to  produce  the  de-
generate type,  and  the  "  revelations  "  which,  under  pressure,
were  drawn  out  of  this  man  of  abnormal  traits,  seem  to
me  of  no  more  value  than  the  account  of  a  highly  wrought
man  who  has  been  to  a  seance.  The  specific  incidents
which  the  Inquisition  furnishes  are  not  convincing,  but
our  study  of  the  movement  itself  leaves  us  with  a  serious
impression  of  its  moral  dangers.

There  is  perhaps  no  greater  religious  task  to  be
worked  out  in  the  history  of  the  race  than  the  achieve-
ment of  true  spiritual  liberty.  It  is  manifestly  not  enough
to  destroy  tradition  and  law  and  authority.  Be  they  ever
so  heavy  a  weight  on  the  spirit,  they  are  better  than  sheer
liberty,  which  is  not  grounded  in  the  vision  of  a  concrete
moral  goal.  "  Love  God  and  then  do  what  thou  wilt,"  is
St.  Augustine's  famous  declaration  of  spiritual  emancipa-
tion. It  is  sound  and  wise,  if  only  one  puts  enough
meaning  into  the  two  words  "  love  God,"  but  just  there  is
the  crux.  If  God  is  for  thought  only  an  Infinite-Nothing-
in-particular,  if  He  is  as  much  one  thing  as  another  thing,
if  He  is  vague,  empty,  and  characterless,  "  love  for  Him  "
will  easily  focus  into  "  love  for  what  I  myself  like,"  and
"  liberty "  will  degenerate  into  meaning  "  liberty  to  do
what  I  with  my  impulses  please."  The  great  achievements
of  the  soul  do  not  come  along  the  easy  negative  paths.
The  spirit  of  man  is  never  free  until  the  man  himself  is  a
good  man,  and  the  supreme  task  of  spiritual  religion  is
this  positive  task  of  discovering  how  a  man  like  one  of  us
can   go   up   into  a  vision   of    God   and   come  back    with

1  The  Confession  will  be  found  in  Wattenbach,  "  Ueber  die  Sekte  der  Briider
vom  freien  Geiste"  {Besitzungsberichte  der  k.  Akademie  zu  Berlin,  1887),  pp.
523-37-


2i6  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap,  xi

power  for  the  transformation  of  his  human  desires,  his
finite  will,  and  his  daily  activities.  The  true  freedom
that  goes  with  complete  love  of  God  is  a  freedom  that
has  been  won  through  the  discipline  of  the  spirit  by-
habitual  conformity  to  the  will  of  God,  as  revealed  in
Christ ;  in  the  moral  message  of  the  Scriptures  ;  and  in
the  socially  tested  morality  of  the  race.  It  is  no  empty
will-lessness  that  is  to  be  sought,  no  capricious  freedom
"  to  do  anything  we  like,"  but  the  "  liberty  of  the  sons  of
God,"  who  have  been  made  free  by  the  peifect  Son — "  Ye
shall  know  the  truth,  and  the  truth  shall  make  you  free."


CHAPTER    XII

MEISTER    ECKHART

One  soon  finds  that  he  cannot  even  touch  the  surface
of  fourteenth  century  mysticism  in  Germany  without
making  up  accounts  with  Eckhart  He  is  one  of  those
great  watershed  personaHties,  to  be  found  in  epoch
periods,  who  gathers  up  into  himself  the  influences  of
preceding  centuries,  and  gives  new  direction  to  the
spiritual  currents  of  succeeding  generations.  By  tempera-
ment and  by  intellectual  training  he  was  able  to  absorb
the  mystical  teaching  of  his  great  predecessors,  Augustine,
Dionysius,  Erigena,  Albertus  Magnus,  and  Thomas
Aquinas,  and  by  his  real  endowment  of  genius  and  his
fertility  of  mind  he  was  able  to  become  the  interpreter  of
this  mystical  message  to  the  people.  He  is  a  remarkable
example  of  the  union  of  a  profoundly  speculative  mind
and  a  simple  childlike  spirit.  No  mystic  has  ever  dropped
his  plummet  deeper  into  the  mysteries  of  the  Godhead,
nor  has  there  ever  been  a  bolder  interpreter  of  those
mysteries  in  the  language  of  the  common  people.  He
was  at  the  storm  centre  of  heretical  mysticism  —  the
mysticism  of  the  "  Free  Spirit "  ;  he  pushed  his  specu-
lations up  to  the  perilous  edge,  "beyond  the  flaming
bounds  of  time  and  space,"  and  for  an  entire  generation,
with  the  boldest  of  freedom,  he  preached  to  the  multitudes
in  the  German  tongue  on  topics  bristling  with  difficulties
for  the  orthodox  faith.

The  wonder  is,  not  that  the  Church,  after  he  was  dead,
found  twenty-eight  questionable  "  items  "  in  his  sermons,
but  rather  that  he  was  allowed  all  those  years  to  preach

217


2i8  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

unhindered  ;  and  even  greater  still  is  the  wonder  that  the
common  people  of  Germany  in  the  fourteenth  century
should  have  crowded  to  hear  these  sermons  of  Eckhart —
sermons  which  would  be  beyond  the  depth  of  the  vast
majority  of  those  who  go  to  hear  sermons  to-day  !  There
has  in  recent  years  been  much  excellent  work  done  on
Eckhart,  especially  by  German  and  French  scholars.-^
These  scholarly  researches  have  helped  to  rediscover  this
great  mystical  teacher,  and  though  they  present  a  variety
of  possible  interpretations,  as  is  bound  to  be  the  case  with
a  message  like  Eckhart's,  they  have  brought  him  out  of
the  dark  ^  and  have  made  him  once  more  a  living  person-
ality, shaping  the  spiritual  attitude  of  his  contemporaries.
Even  yet,  however,  we  are  compelled  to  use  the  words
"  probably  "  and  "  about  "  quite  frequently  in  telling  the
story  of  his  life.

Heinrich  Eckhart  was  born  probably  at  Hochheim  in
Thuringia,  somewhat  before  the  year  1260.^  He  entered,
not  earlier  than  his  fifteenth  year,  a  Dominican  convent,
most  likely  in  Erfurt  The  course  of  studies  for  a
Dominican  priest  was  arranged  in  ascending  order,  with
dogmatics  at  the  top,  and  required  at  least  nine  years.
Eckhart's  earlier  studies  were  pursued  at  Erfurt,  his  higher
studies  were  probably  carried  on  in  the  "  High  School "
at  Cologne,  where    Albert   the    Great   (1193-1280)  had

'^  The  best  of  the  works  referred  to  are  :  Lasson,  Meister  Eckhart,  der
Mystiker,  Berhn,  1868  ;  Preger,  Geschichte  der  deutschen  Mystik  im  Mittelalter,
vol.  i.,  Leipzig,  1874;  Pfeiffer,  Meister  Eckhart,  Leipzig,  1857;  Denifle,
Archiv  fur  Literatur  und  Kirchengeschichte  des  Mittelalters,  Berlin,  1885.  It
was  Denifle  who  made  the  discovery  of  Eckhart's  Latin  writings,  which  were
practically  unknown  until  1880.  Biittner,  Meister  Eckeharts  Schriften  und
Predigten,  aus  de7n  Mittelhochdeutschen  iibersetzt  und  herausgegeben,  erster
Band  (Leipzig,  1903).  Jundt,  Essai  sur  le  mysticisnie  sficulatif  de  Mattre
Eckhart,  Strasbourg,  1871  ;  and  Paiithiisme  populaire  by  the  same  author,
Paris,  1875  ;  Delacroix,  Essai  sur  le  mysticisme  spdcnlatif,  Paris,  1900.  In
English  the  best  contributions  are  those  by  Karl  Pearson,  "  Meister  Eckhart  the
Mystic,"  in  Mind,  vol.  xi.  p.  20  ;  and  by  Josiah  Royce,  "  Meister  Eckhart,"  in
Studies  of  Good  and  Evil,  New  York,  1898.

2  As  late  as  1829  Gorres,  in  his  Introduction  to  the  works  of  Suso,  calls
Eckhart  "  a  wonderful  figure,  half  veiled  in  the  mist,  and  almost  mythical."

^  The  questions  of  date  and  birthplace  are  argued  at  length  in  Jundt,  Preger,
and  Delacroix.  Jundt  strenuously  holds  to  the  position  that  Eckhart  was  born  in
Strasbourg.  Delacroix  presents  the  most  recently  discovered  data,  and  decides,
rightly,  I  think,  for  Hochheim.  Denifle  discovered  a  sermon  in  Latin  preached  in
Paris,  which  ends  with  this  note,  also  in  Latin:  "This  sermon  was  reported
from  the  lips  of  Eckhart  of  Hochheim."


XII  MEISTER   ECKHART  219

just  before  this  period  been  the  most  renowned  teacher  of
the  age,  where  his  influence  was  still  paramount,  and
where  his  great  pupil  Thomas  Aquinas  (i 225-1 274),  by
his  writings,  was  beginning  his  rule  over  the  minds  of
men.  Albertus,  the  one  scholar  of  the  Middle  Ages
who  received  the  title  "  Magnus,"  generally  reserved  for
great  warriors,  was  himself  a  mystic  and  a  prolific
fountain  of  mysticism  in  the  generation  following.  He
begins  his  treatise  De  Adhaerendo  Deo  with  these
words  :

"  When  St.  John  says  that  God  is  a  Spirit,  and  that  He  must
be  worshipped  in  spirit,  he  means  that  the  mind  must  be  cleared
of  all  images.  When  thou  prayest,  shut  thy  door — that  is,  the
doors  of  thy  senses.  Keep  them  barred  and  bolted  against  all
phantasms  and  images.  Nothing  pleases  God  more  than  a  mind
free  from  all  occupations  and  distractions.  Such  a  mind  is  in  a
manner  transformed  into  God,  for  it  can  think  of  nothing,  and
love  nothing,  except  God  ;  other  creatures  and  itself  it  only  sees
in  God.  He  who  penetrates  into  himself,  and  so  transcends
himself,  ascends  truly  to  God.  He  whom  I  love  and  desire  is
above  all  that  is  sensible,  and  all  that  is  intelligible ;  sense  and
imagination  cannot  bring  us  to  Him,  but  only  the  desire  of  a
pure  heart.  This  brings  us  unto  the  darkness  of  the  mind,
whereby  we  can  ascend  to  the  contemplation  even  of  the  mystery
of  the  Trinity.  Do  not  think  about  the  world,  nor  about  thy
friends,  nor  about  the  past,  present,  or  future ;  but  consider
thyself  to  be  outside  of  the  world  and  alone  with  God,  as  if  thy
soul  were  already  separated  from  the  body  and  had  no  longer
any  interest  in  peace  or  war,  or  the  state  of  the  world.  Leave
thy  body  and  fix  thy  gaze  on  the  uncreated  Light.  Let  nothing
come  between  thee  and  God.  The  soul  in  contemplation  views
the  world  from  afar  off,  just  as,  v>-hen  we  proceed  to  God  by  the
way  of  abstraction,  we  deny  to  Him,  first  of  all,  bodily  and
sensible  attributes,  then  intelligible  qualities,  and,  lastly,  that
being  {esse)  which  would  keep  Him  among  created  things."

This  is  mysticism  of  the  extreme  negative  type,  and  it
was  teaching  which  profoundly  influenced  Eckhart  and
his  group  of  followers.

Eckhart  was  certainly  a  student  in  the  great  school  of
theology   in    Paris    in    1302.^       But   already,    before   the

1  He  is  enrolled  as  "Brother  Aychardus,  a  German  "  (Teutonicus).


220  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

period  of  study  in  Paris,  he  had  been  elected  Prior  of  the
Dominican  convent  at  Erfurt  and  Vicar  for  the  district  of
Thuringia.  It  is  believed  by  many  that  his  famous
Treatise  on  Distinction  was  written  during  the  Erfurt
period.  If  so,  it  is  the  earliest  work  we  have  from  him,
and  the  first  glimpse  we  get  of  his  inner  life.  It  deals
with  the  distinctions  between  the  essential  and  the
unessential.  The  treatise  lays  great  emphasis  on  the
fact  that  the  essential  thing  which  characterises  a  man's
will  is  the  spirit  of  it  rather  than  the  overt  deed  which
the  man  does.  There  is  no  virtue  in  the  mere  act  of
fasting  nor  in  the  fact  that  one  has  a  heavenly  rapture.
"  Even  if,"  he  says,  "  one  were  in  a  rapture,  like  Paul's,
and  there  were  a  sick  man  who  needed  help,  I  think  it
would  be  far  better  to  come  out  of  the  rapture  and  show
love  by  serving  the  needy  one."  There  is  already  here
in  this  early  venture  of  his  spirit  that  "  sincere  tone  of
personal  experience"  which  characterises  him  to  the  end
of  his  life,  joined  with  that  profound  penetration  of  mind
which  is  so  evident  in  the  work  of  his  mature  years.

The  years  of  study  in  Paris  brought  him  the  title,  by
which  he  has  ever  since  been  called,  "  Meister,"  but  he
does  not  appear  to  have  been  at  all  impressed  with
the  art  of  threshing  theological  straw,  in  which  too
many  schoolmen  indulged,  or  with  the  value  of  mere
head  learning.  There  are  scanty  references  in  the
sermons  to  events  in  his  own  life,  but  there  are  at
least  three  passages  that  give  a  clue  to  his  estimates  of
scholastic  learning.  He  says  in  one  place  :  "  I  was  asked
in  the  school  at  Paris  how  one  can  completely  fulfil  the
Scripture,  then  I  answered,  *  He  who  would  fulfil  the
Scriptures  must  see  to  it  that  he  does  not  miss  God  in
his  own  soul.' "  ^  And  again  in  another  sermon,  which
was  almost  certainly  an  early  one,  he  says  :  "  There  are
many  masters  among  us  who  have  used  the  Bible  for
thirty  years  or  more  and  who  understand  it  now  in  its
unity  as  little  as  a  cow  or  a  horse  would."  ^  There  is  a
third  passage  preserved  among  the  "  sayings  "  of  Eckhart,

^   Pfeiffer,  op.  cit.  p.  352,  line  27.  2  Preger,  op.  cit.  p.  335.


XII  MEISTER   ECKHART  221

which  runs :  "  If  I  were  looking  for  a  master  of  the
Scriptures,  I  should  seek  him  in  Paris  in  the  schools,  but
if  I  wished  to  learn  about  the  perfect  life,  he  could  not
teach  me  about  that."  ^  On  leaving  Paris,  probably  in
1303,  he  was  chosen  Provincial-Prior  of  the  Dominican
Order  for  Saxony.  His  territory  stretched  from  Thuringia
to  the  North  Sea,  and  from  Utrecht  to  Dorpat  in  Livonia,
and  included  fifty-one  monasteries  and  nine  nunneries.
In  1307  he  was  chosen  Vicar-General  for  Bohemia,  and
also  re-elected  Provincial-Prior  for  Saxony.  In  i  3 1 1  he
returned  to  his  studies  in  Paris,  and  now,  with  his  fully
developed  powers,  he  seems  to  have  devoted  himself  to
mastering  the  men  of  earlier  times  who  were  kindred  in
spirit  to  him.  At  least  when  he  left  Paris  for  his  great
career  as  a  preacher  in  Strasbourg,  he  certainly  carried
away  with  him  as  a  part  of  himself  the  mystical  world-
view  of  Dionysius  and  Erigena  which  he  was  to  translate
in  scores  of  sermons  to  the  people  of  Strasbourg.  This
city  was  at  this  period  the  foremost  religious  centre  in
Germany.  Every  type  of  Christian  society  and  every
form  of  piety  was  to  be  found  in  Strasbourg.  There
were  seven  Dominican  convents  in  the  city.  Scholars  had
gathered  there,  and  so,  too,  had  the  heretical  sects  which
were  disturbing  the  peace  of  the  Church.  It  was  a  rule
of  the  Dominican  Order  that  the  intellectual  and  spiritual
training  of  the  sisters  of  the  Order  should  be  in  the  care  of
"  highly  learned  brothers,"  and  it  is  probable  that  Eckhart
would  be  one  of  these  "  highly  learned  brothers "  who
would  teach  and  instruct  and  counsel  the  "  sisters  "  of  the
Strasbourg  convents.  There  is  a  curious  poem,  written
by  a  Dominican  nun  of  this  period,  which  tells  how  "  wise
Master  Eckhart  speaks  to  us  about  Nothingness.  He
who  does  not  understand  that,  in  him  has  never  shone
the  light  Divine."  ^  This  poem  is  only  one  indication
among  many  that  Eckhart  preached  much  to  the  convent
women  of  the  city,  and  we  know  that  there  was  at  this
period  a  predisposition  in  the  convents  for  mystical  teach-
ing, which  would  make  Eckhart  a  favourite  preacher.

^  Pfeiffer,  p.  599.  2  Preger,  vol.  ii.  p.  138.


222  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

There  is  a  very  famous  account  of  "  S wester  Katrei  " —
Sister  Katharine — called  in  the  narrative  "  Eckhart's
Strasbourg  Daughter."  This  narrative  is  published  by
Pfeiffer  (p.  448)  among  Eckhart's  writings.  It  is  an
extreme  example  of  morbid  quietistic  mysticism,  running
over  the  line  of  safety  into  pathological  states.  This
spiritual  "  daughter,"  who  is  instructed  by  her  confessor
in  the  difficult  mystical  path  to  perfection,  finally  outstrips
the  confessor  himself,  attains  to  the  goal  of  perfection,
and  then  in  her  turn  becomes  instructor  to  her  former
spiritual  "  father."  She  makes  the  attainment  of  spiritual
indifference  the  mark  of  perfection.  She  says  that  "  not
even  desire  of  heaven  should  tempt  a  good  man  toward
activity."  On  one  occasion  she  became  cataleptic,  and
was  being  carried  to  burial  for  dead.  Her  confessor,
just  in  time,  discovered  that  it  was  trance  instead  of
death,  and  awoke  her.  Katharine  exclaimed  :  "  Now  I
am  satisfied,  for  I  have  been  dead  all  through."

It  seems,  however,  improbable  that  "  Sister  Katharine  "
is  a  real  person,  or  that  this  account  is  to  be  taken  for
biographical  history.  The  "  story,"  is  most  likely  one  of
many  similar  pieces  of  "  tendency "  fiction,  written  to
show  how  the  priest  or  confessor  needs  to  learn  perfection
from  a  spiritual  lay-person.  This  was  a  favourite  idea
with  the  "  Friends  of  God,"  as  we  shall  see,  and  they
produced  many  stories  of  this  type.  It  is  probably
written  later  than  Eckhart's  time,  though  it  is  possible
that  there  was  some  actual  experience  in  Eckhart's  life
which  furnished  the  nucleus  of  the  story,  and  it  may  throw
some  light  on  his  convent  work,  but  it  must  not  be  taken
as  an  exposition  of  his  mystical  teaching.-^

The  Beghards  and  Beguines  of  Strasbourg  were  at
this  time  "  suspected,"  and  under  the  watch  and  guard  of
the  officials  of  the  Church.  It  would  be  extremely
interesting  to  know  what  attitude  Eckhart  took  toward
his  fellow  mystics,  but  unfortunately  we  are  largely  in  the
dark  on  the  subject.  Karl  Schmidt  has  endeavoured
to    show    that    the    great    mystical    preacher    had    close

1  See  Delacroix,  op,  cit.  p.  145.


XII  MEISTER  ECKHART  223

relations  with  the  Beghards,  but  there  are  few  historical
facts  to  support  his  claim.^  The  assertions  made  by
Preger  to  prove  that  Eckhart's  sympathy  with  these
mystical  heretics  brought  upon  him  the  stern  displeasure
of  the  bishop  are  equally  without  foundation.^  It  is
quite  possible  that  Eckhart's  views  underwent  a  change
as  his  experience  enlarged  and  as  he  saw  the  moral
danger  involved  in  the  teaching  of  the  sects,  and  that,  as
he  matured,  he  pushed  down  to  a  more  solid  moral
foundation.  There  is  a  passage  in  one  of  his  Strasbourg
sermons  ^  which  is  in  hearty  sympathy  with  some
religious  people,  who  seem  to  have  views  much  like  the
Brethren  of  the  Free  Spirit.      It  is  as  follows  : —

"  That  person  who  has  renounced  all  visible  creatures  and  in
whom  God  performs  His  will  completely — that  person  is  both
God  and  man.  His  body  is  so  completely  penetrated  with
Divine  light  and  with  the  soul  essence  which  is  of  God  that  he
can  properly  be  called  a  Divine  man.  For  this  reason,  my
children,  be  kind  to  these  men^  for  they  are  strangers  and  aliens
in  the  world.  Those  who  wish  to  come  to  God  have  only  to
model  their  lives  after  these  men ;  no  one  can  know  them  unless
he  has  within  him  the  same  light,  the  light  of  truth.  Those
who  are  on  the  way  to  the  same  God  and  have  not  yet  arrived
will  do  well  to  become  acquainted  with  these  people  who  have
attained."

In  a  later  sermon,  however,  we  have  this  beautiful
passage  which  shows  that  Eckhart  has  grasped  the
distinction  between  false  liberty  and  true  liberty  :

"The  perfect  spirit  cannot  will  anything  except  what  God
wills,  and  that  is  not  slavery  but  true  freedom.  There  are
people  who  say,  if  I  have  God  and  His  love,  I  may  do  what  I
like.  That  is  a  false  idea  of  liberty.  When  thou  washest  a
thing  contrary  to  God  and  His  law  thou  hast  not  the  love  of
God  in  thee."  *

He  says  again  :

"  There  are  those  who  do  not  consider  sin  as  sin,  who  do
not  practise  Christian  virtues,  who  do  not  know  Christ  in  the

1  See  Schmidt,  Tlieol.  Studien  und  Kritiken,  1839,  pp.  663-744.

2  Preger    has    confounded    our    Meister   with   another    brother    Eckhart    (see
Delacroix,  of.  cit.  p.  140).

'  Pfeiffer,  p.  127,  hne  38  ff.  *  Ibid.  p.  232,  line  25  ff.


224  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

nobility  of  His   nature,  and  who   prate  of  intimate  life  in   the
bosom  of  God  although  in  fact  that  life  is  foreign  to  them."  ^

Here  is  a  splendid  passage  which  has  the  right  moral
ring,  and  in  which  Eckhart  shows  himself  to  be  wholly
out  of  the  bog  of  Antinomianism  :

"It  is  necessary  to  be  on  the  guard  against  false  wisdom,
against  believing  that  one  can  sin  without  any  fear  of  con-
sequences. One  is  never  free  of  consequences  until  he  is  free  of
sin.  When  one  is  free  of  sin,  then  only  do  the  consequences
of  sin  disappear.  As  long  as  one  is  able  to  sin,  the  distinction
of  right  and  wrong  must  be  scrupulously  maintained."  ^

Eckhart  had  a  second  great  period  of  influence  in
Cologne,  whither  he  went,  perhaps,  about  1320.  The
immediate  intellectual  and  spiritual  stimulus  of  his
teaching  in  Cologne  was  very  marked.  There  gathered
about  him  here  a  group  of  disciples  who  caught  his  spirit,
and  who  taught  in  his  "  manner "  to  such  an  extent  that
we  cannot  always  be  sure,  with  a  given  sermon,  whether
it  is  from  the  Master  himself  or  from  one  of  his  disciples.
I  shall  speak  of  Eckhart's  final  collision  with  the  guardians
of  orthodoxy  and  of  the  close  of  his  life  after  I  have
presented  an  outline  of  his  teaching.

One  of  the  old  scribes  has  given  us  a  couplet  which
reads :

"  This  is  Meister  Eckhart
From  whom  God  kept  nothing  hid."

He  was  the  profoundest  of  all  German  mystics,  and  is
much  the  most  difficult  to  interpret,  but  we  shall  find
him  in  the  main  following  the  lines  of  thought  which  are
now  familiar  to  us  in  the  great  systems  of  Plotinus,
Dionysius,  and  Erigena.  In  his  profoundly  original  style
of  speech  we  shall  hear  again  of  the  undifferentiated
Godhead,  the  Divine  Procession,  and  of  tlie  soul's  return
home.

The  first  point  which  must  be  grasped  is  the  dis-
tinction between  "  God  "  and  the  "  Godhead."  There  is
— and  this    is  the   core    of   Eckhart's    entire   doctrine —

1  Jundt,  op.  cit.  (Appendix,  Eckhart's  Sermons,  p.  255).
2  pfeiffer,  p.  664,  line  6.


XII  MEISTER  ECKHART  225

there  is  a  central  mystery  which  for  ever  lies  beyond  the
range  of  knowledge.  He  whom  we  call  "  God "  is  the
Divine  Nature  manifested  and  revealed  in  personal
character,  but  behind  this  Revelation  there  must  be  a
Revealer — One  who  makes  the  revelation  and  is  the
Ground  of  it,  just  as  behind  ourself-as-known  there  must
be  a  self-as-knower — a  deeper  ego  which  knows  the  me
and  its  processes.  Now  the  Ground  out  of  which  the
revelation  proceeds  is  the  central  mystery — is  the
Godhead,  It  cannot  be  revealed  because  it  is  the
Ground  of  every  revelation,  just  as  the  self-as-knower
cannot  be  known  because  it  is  precisely  that  which  does
the  knowings  and  this  cannot  itself  be  caught  as  object.

This  unrevealable  Godhead  is  the  Source  and  Fount
of  all  that  is,  and  at  the  same  time  the  consummation  of
all  reality,  but  it  is  above  all  contrasts  and  distinctions.
It  is  neither  this  nor  that,  for,  says  Eckhart,  in  the
Godhead,  "  all  things  are  one  thing  " — all  the  fulness  of
the  creatures  {ix.  created  things)  can  as  little  express  the
Godhead  as  a  drop  of  water  can  express  the  sea.^

"  All  that  is  in  the  Godhead  is  one.  Therefore  we  can  say
nothing.  He  is  above  all  names,  above  all  nature.  God  works  ;
so  doth  not  the  Godhead,  Therein  they  are  distinguished — in
working  and  not  working.  The  end  of  all  things  is  the  hidden
Darkness  of  the  eternal  Godhead,  unknown  and  never  to  be
known."

Nobody  has  gone  farther  than  Eckhart  in  the  direction
of  removing  all  anthropomorphic  traits  from  God,  i.e.
the  Godhead,  but  the  result  is  that  He  is  left  with  no
thinkable  characteristics.  He  is  not  an  "  object "  for
human  understanding.  He  utterly  transcends  knowledge,
and  everything  one  says  of  Him  is  untrue.  "  Be  still,"
he  says  in  a  sermon,^  ''  and  prate  not  of  God  {i.e.  the
Godhead),  for  whatever  you  prate  in  words  about  Him  is
a  lie  and  is  sinful."  "  If  I  say  God  is  good,  it  is  not  true  ;
for  what  is  good  can  grow  better ;   what  can  grow  better

^  Pfeiffer,  p.  173.  This  shows  that  Eckhart  is  not  properly  called  a  pantheist,
for  he  never  holds  that  the  sum  oi  all  things  is  God  ;  in  fact  in  the  above  passage
he  says  precisely  the  opposite  of  that.

-  Pfeiffer,  p.  319.

Q


226  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

can  grow  best.  Now  these  three  things  (good,  better,
best)  are  far  from  God,  for  He  is  above  all,"  i.e.  all
such  distinctions.  No  word  that  voices  distinctions  or
characteristics,  then,  may  be  spoken  of  the  Godhead.
Eckhart's  favourite  names  are  :  "  the  Wordless  Godhead  "  ;
«  the  Nameless  Nothing  "  ;  "  the  Naked  Godhead  "  ;  "  the
Immovable  Rest "  ;  '*  the  Still  Wilderness,  where  no  one
is  at  home."  All  mystics  have  insisted  that  God  in  His
essence  is  beyond  "  knowledge,"  for  "  knowledge "  must
deal  with  a  finite  "  this,"  or  a  finite  "  that,"  while  God  in
His  absolute  reality  must  be  above  any  "  this "  or  any
"  that."  Eckhart's  "  nameless  Nothing "  is  only  a  bold
way  of  saying  that  the  Godhead  must  be  above  everything
that  limits  or  defines — above  everything  that  can  be
"  thought,"  or  envisaged.  As  he  himself  says  :  "  In  the
Naked  Godhead  there  is  never  form  nor  idea,"  i.e.  there
is  nothing  thought  can  seize.  "  He  is  an  absolute,  pure,
clear  One'' — "the  impenetrable  Darkness  of  the  eternal
Godhead."  The  unoriginated  Being,  the  Ground  of
all  that  is,  is  the  central  mystery,  and  he  who  would
fathom  this  mystery  must  transcend  knowledge,  must
have  recourse  to  some  other  form  of  experience  than
that  which  defines  and  differentiates  as  the  knowing
process  does.

The  reader  who  finds  himself  somewhat  dazed  in  this
height  of  speculation  would  run  up  into  the  same  difficulty
himself,  if  he  should  undertake  strenuously  to  think  out
what  is  involved  in  the  word  Infinite  which  he,  without
giving  it  much  thought,  applies  to  God.  He  supposes
that  he  glorifies  God  by  calling  Him  "infinite"  or
"  absolute,"  but  in  doing  it  he  has,  whether  he  realizes  it
or  not,  raised  Him  above  "  knowledge  "  and  has  "  reduced  "
Him  to  an  empty  indeterminate  abstraction  which  for
thought  is  as  truly  "nothing"  as  it  is  "everything."
"  Infinite  Being  "  is  the  emptiest  of  all  conceptions.  It  is,
however,  a  method  of  thought  by  no  means  confined  to
ancient  mystics.  Few  of  us,  like  Eckhart,  have  either
the  desire  or  the  intellectual  power  to  think  our  thoughts
through  to  the  bottom.      We  avoid  many  difficulties  because


XII  .    MEISTER  ECKHART  227

we  do  not  feel  the  necessity  of  universalizing  our  concepts.
We  rest  satisfied  with  the  bare  words,  and  save  ourselves
a  deal  of  trouble  by  not  asking  the  further  questions
which  are  involved  in  our  words  about  God  1

To  return  to  Eckhart,  God — the  personal  God — is  the
self  realization,  or  revelation,  of  the  Godhead,  the  forth-
coming of  the  Godhead  into  personalization  and  mani-
festation. The  Godhead  is  the  "  U7inatured  A'^ature"  i.e.
the  unoriginated  Reality,  the  Ground  of  all  revelation  ;
God  is  the  "  nattired  Nature^'  i.e.  the  Divine  expressed  in
Personal  Form.  The  Godhead  is  the  Wordless  One ;
God  is  the  uttered  Word,  The  procession  of  God,  in
Eckhart's  system,  is  by  no  means  the  same  thing  as  the
Divine  Emanations  in  the  system  of  Plotinus  and  his
followers.  For  Eckhart  there  is  no  mere  "  overflow "  of
the  Godhead — his  idea  is  much  subtler  than  that.  The
forthcoming  of  God  is  in  this  wise.  The  Godhead,  "  the
unnatured  Nature,"  in  an  "  Eternal  Now,"  beholds
Himself,  i.e.  becomes  an  object  of  consciousness  to
Himself,  and  thus  He  becomes  revealed  to  Himself  This
is  the  beginning  of  the  process  of  revelation.  This  is
called  "  the  begetting  of  the  Son,"  the  uttering  of  the
Divine  "  Word."  When  God  becomes  conscious  of  Him-
self, there  is  differentiation  into  subject  and  object,  or,  as
Eckhart  says,  into  Father  and  Son.  But  we  must  not
suppose  that  it  happened  at  a  temporal  moment,  before
which  the  Son  was  unborn  and  God  was  not  yet  God.
That  view  is  too  crude.  Eckhart  insists  that  the  Son  is
eternally  begotten  ;  "  He  beholds  himself  in  an  Eternal
Now  "  ;  "  God  is  ever  working  in  one  Eternal  Now,  and
His  working  is  a  giving  birth  to  His  Son.  He  bears
Him  at  every  instant."  ^

The  divine  differentiation  into  personality  and  self-
expression  is  thus  no  accident,  no  capricious  overflow.
It  belongs  to  the  very  constitution  of  the  Godhead  to
become  self-conscious,  i.e.  to  be  a  Father  with  a  Son,^
This   is   the  genesis  of  the  personal  God,  for  there  can  be

^  Pfeiffer,  p.  254.

'^  It  is  only  another  way  of  saying  that  God  is  Love,  for  if  He  is  Love  He
must  eternally  beget  a  Son — there  must  be  a  real  "  Other  "  for  Love  to  be  real.


228  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

no  personality  until  there  is  differentiation  into  subject
and  object,  until  there  is  a  sundering  into  "Self"  and
**  Other."  Instead  of  "  the  Wilderness,  where  no  one  is  at
home,"  we  now  have  Father  and  Son  united  in  the  bond
of  love,  which  is  personalized  as  the  Holy  Spirit.  The
Trinity  is  thus  the  eternal  process  of  the  Divine  Self-
consciousness.  So  also  is  the  World  an  eternal  process.
Creation  is  not  a  temporal  act  any  more  than  the  procession
of  the  Trinity  is.  As  soon  as  God  beholds  Himself  in  that
Eternal  Now,  He  beholds  within  Himself  the  forms  or
Ideas  of  the  entire  universe  —  all  that  has  essential
reality  in  the  universe.  In  fact  for  Eckhart,  the  Son,  the
Word,  stands  for  the  total  unity  of  the  Divine  Thought,
the  forthcoming  of  God  into  expression,  the  utterance  of
Himself,  so  that  he  often  calls  God's  thinking  the
archetypal  forms,  or  Ideas,  "  the  begetting  of  the  Son."
These  archetypal  forms,  the  expressions  of  God's  thought,
are  "  the  natured  Nature,"  and  these  forms,  projected  into
space  and  time,  are  our  world  of  nature — the  "  world  of
creatures."  God  is  like  a  perfect  architect  who  thinks
his  structure  and  it  is  done.  There  are  no  stages  in  it,
no  before  and  after.  God  thinks  and  Creation  is.  The
world  which  is  thus  uttered  into  being  has  two  faces,
one  turned  out  toward  differentiation  and  multiplicity
and  the  other  turned  in  toward  God  and  unity — in  very
fact  all  reality  is  in  God,  and  "  if  God  drew  back  His  own
into  Himself,  all  the  creatures  would  become  nothing  at
all."  ^  The  real  world  is  the  world  of  archetypes — divine
Ideas — and  that  world  is  not  created,  it  always  is.
"  God,"  he  says,  "  creates  the  world  and  all  things  in  an
ever-present  now "  {Got  schopfet  die  welt  tmd  elliu  Dine
in  eine  gegenwurtigen  Nun).  So  that  by  a  temporal
regress  we  should  never  get  back  to  a  ti7ne  when  God
existed  alone  as  a  naked  Godhead,  for  without  the  Word,
i.e.  without  the  Son,  without  the  expression  of  Himself,
God  would  not  be  God.  This  Divine  procession  is
therefore  not  an  "  event "  in  time,  and  this  temporal
world,  characterized  by  multiplicity  and  change,  this  world,

^  Pfeiffer,  p.  51.


XII  MEISTER  ECKHART  229

in  sundered  heres  and  nows,  is  only  a  show  world,  a  shadow
of  the  Real — the  Real  read  through  the  goggles  of  space
and  time.-^  "  In  the  Godhead,"  he  says,  "  there  is  no
number  for  He  is  One,  but  in  time  and  space  there  are
divisions — parts.  If  my  face  were  eternal,  and  I  held
it  before  a  time-mirror,  it  would  be  received  by  the
mirror  in  time,  yet  it  would  in  itself  be  eternal."  So,
too,  the  real  world  is  an  eternal  unity  in  God  ;  the
temporal  world  is  a  show  or  reflection,  but  a  reflection
of  an  eternal  reality.

We  have  found  that  Eckhart  starts  out  with  the
assumption  of  an  unnatured  Nature  in  God — His  Ground
and  Essence.  So  also,  when  he  turns  from  God  to  man,
he  starts  out  with  the  assumption  that  there  is  in  us  an
unnatured  nature — the  essence  and  ground  of  the  soul.
"  There  is  in  the  soul  something  which  is  above  the  soul,
divine,  simple,  rather  unnamed  than  named."  This
unoriginated  essence  Eckhart  calls  by  various  names,
though  he  insists  that  names  are  of  little  value.  He
calls  it  "Funklein,"  le.  "Spark";  "  Kleine  Ganster,"
or  "  Little  Glimmer  of  the  Soul "  ;  "'  The  Soul's  Eye '' ;
"  The  Inmost  Man  "  ;  "  the  Ground  of  the  Soul  "  ;
"  Synteresis"  i.e.  Moral  Conscience,  and  "  Active  Reason."
But,  as  Eckhart  tells  us,  names  help  us  very  Httle  ;  we
must  try  to  grasp  what  he  has  to  teach  us  of  the
real  nature  of  the  soul,  for  it  is  Eckhart's  main  contri-
bution to  mysticism.  In  his  lower  consciousness  {i.e.
passive  reason)  man  is  dependent  on  the  experience  of
the  senses.  His  knowledge  is  mediated  by  images,  and
is  always  marked  by  a  here  and  a  now.  It  is  necessarily
"  in  part,"  in  "  sundered  portions,  and  in  divers  manners."  If
one  thought  is  present,  any  other  thought  must  stay  out
and  wait  its  turn.  This  lower  consciousness  is  able  to  deal
only  with  the  particular  and  finite  —  its  sphere  is  the
show  world,  where  experience  never  gets  beyond  the  this
and  that.  It  is  this  lower  consciousness  of  ours  which  ties
us  down  to   a  stage  of  mutability,  a  welter  and  flux  of

1  Karl  Pearson  has  pointed  out  that  there  are  many  points  in  which  Eckhart's
system  resembles  Kant's.  For  both,  the  real  world  is  not  in  time  or  space,  the
world  of  appearance  is  a  show  world.


2  30  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

*'  images."  The  life  in  this  lower  stage  is  always  restless
and  unsatisfied,  for  it  is  endeavouring  to  anchor  upon
fleeting,  vanishing  things.  "  If  I  had  everything  that  1
could  desire,  and  my  finger  ached,  I  should  not  have
everything,  for  I  should  have  a  pain  in  my  finger  and,
as  long  as  that  remained,  I  should  not  enjoy  full
comfort.  Bread  is  comfortable  for  men  when  they  are
hungry  ;  but  when  they  are  thirsty  they  find  no  more
comfort  in  bread  than  a  stone.  So  it  is  with  clothes  ;
they  are  welcome  to  men  when  they  are  cold,  but  when
they  are  too  hot  clothes  give  them  no  comfort.  And  so
it  is  with  all  the  creatures  {i.e.  things  in  the  show  world).
The  comfort  which  they  promise  is  only  on  the  surface,
like  froth,  and  it  always  carries  with  it  a  want."  -^

The  "  way "  to  peace,  to  reality,  to  God  is  complete
renunciation  of  this  world  of  finite  objects,  this  temporal
experience  through  images  of  the  now  and  here.  The
soul  must  die  to  "  creature  knowledge "  before  it  can  be
born  to  the  blessedness  of  mystical  contemplation.
Nobody  ever  took  the  beatitude  of  "  the  poor  in  spirit "
more  seriously  than  Eckhart.

"A  man  shall  become  as  truly  poor,"  he  says,  "and  as  free
from  his  creature  will  as  he  was  when  he  was  born.  And  I  say
to  you,  by  the  eternal  truth,  that  as  long  as  ye  desire  to  fulfil  the
will  of  God,  and  have  any  desire  after  eternity  and  God,  so  long
are  ye  not  truly  poor.  He  alone  hath  true  spiritual  poverty  who
wills  nothing,  knows  nothing,  desires  nothing."

The  soul  must  withdraw  not  only  from  possessions  and
"  works,"  but  it  must  also  withdraw  from  all  sense
experience,  from  everything  in  time  and  space,  from  every
image  of  memory,  every  idea  of  the  understanding  into  an
experience  above  this  lower  form  of  consciousness — an
experience  in  which  "  all  things  are  present  in  one  unified
now  and  here."  ^

Such  an  experience  is  possible,  he  believes,  because  the
soul  possesses  inalienably  a  faculty  of  higher  consciousness.

1  Pfeiffer,  p.  300.      I  have  used  the  translation  made  by  W.  R.  Inge,  va.  Light,
Life,  and  Love.

2  AUe  miteinander  in  eime  BHcke  und  in  eime  Punte  "  (Pfeiffer,  p.  20).


XII  MEISTER  ECKHART  231

This  higher  consciousness  is  the  Active  or  Creative  Reason.
There  are  running  through  Eckhart's  writings  two  views
which  are  never  quite  reconciled  by  hinn.  Sometimes  the
Divine  "  Spark,"  by  which  the  soul  rises  to  "  new  birth  "
and  to  contemplation,  in  "  an  Eternal  Now,"  is  thought
of  as  the  unoriginated  essence,  or  ground,  of  the  soul.
It  remains  in  the  Godhead,  it  has  never  "  come  out "
from  God  ;  it  is  the  point  in  common  between  the  soul
and  its  Divine  Ground.  Eckhart  says  in  a  bold  passage  :
"  The  eye  with  which  I  see  God  is  the  same  eye  with
which  He  sees  me."  At  other  times  he  speaks  as  though
the  soul's  "  Spark  "  were  a  created  faculty,  above  all  the
other  faculties  of  man.  It  has  come  from  God,  to  be
sure,  but  it  is  not  the  identical  essence  of  God — it  is  the
centre  of  a  separate  personality,  and  will  remain  separate
for  ever.  In  a  famous  sermon,  which  he  says  he  must
have  preached,  even  though  nobody  had  been  present,  and
he  had  had  only  a  stick  for  hearer,  he  uses  a  fine
illustration  of  the  reflection  of  a  mirror  to  show  how  "  God
goes  out  of  Himself  into  Himself"      He  says  :

"  I  take  a  vessel  of  water  and  put  a  mirror  in  it  and  place  it
in  the  sunlight.  The  sun  sends  out  its  light  without  losing  any
of  its  substance,  and  the  reflection  of  the  mirror  sends  back  sun-
light. Sun  and  reflection  are  the  same  thing.  So  it  is  with
God.  God  with  His  own  nature,  His  essence,  His  Godhead  is
in  the  soul,  and  yet  He  is  not  the  soul  {i.e.  He  is  infinitely  more
than  the  soul).  The  soul  sends  back  a  divine  reflection  to  God,
so  that  they  both  are  the  same  light.  The  Word  or  expression
of  God  becomes  God."  ^

He  apparently  taught  in  his  earlier  period  that  the
Active  Reason,  or  Soul's  Eye,  is  a  God-given  Light,  a
spark  which  has  come  from  God,  and  by  which  the  soul
can  return  to  God,  a  faculty  which  brings  man  face  to  face
with  God.  It  is  so  near  to  God  that  it  makes  with  Him
"  an  inseparably  unified  one."  At  this  period  of  his
teaching  the  "  Spark "  is  still  Reason,  it  is  that  in  the
soul  into  which  God  shines  and  which  reflects  Him  back
to     Himself.       In  his    later    teaching   the  "  Spark "  is  a

'  Pfeiffer,  p.  180-81.


232  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

hidden  higher  Ground  of  the  soul,  above  Reason  (for
Reason  knows  before  and  after).  It  is  thought  of  as  an
unoriginated  essence,  beyond  all  distinctions  of  before
and  after,  a  naked,  nameless  entity,  stripped  of  change,
bare  of  qualities,  freed  of  all  desire,  transcending  Reason
and  will.  "  It  is,"  he  says,  "  higher  than  knowledge,
higher  than  love,  higher  than  grace,  for  in  all  these  there
is  distinction."  This  peak  of  the  soul  is  one  with  the
Godhead,  and  would  remain  unlost,  even  if  the  soul  were
in  hell.  We  need  not,  however,  make  much  of  the
difference  between  the  earlier  and  the  later  teaching.  In
any  case  Eckhart  holds  that  at  bottom  (or  at  top)  the
soul  and  God  belong  together.  "  The  Father,"  he  says,
"knows  no  difference  between  thee  and  Himself" — "The
Father  makes  me  Himself  and  Himself  me."  ^  The
return  of  the  soul  to  its  Divine  centre,  to  its  "Spark,"  is
blessedness — is  salvation.  Eckhart  calls  it  "  the  begetting
of  the  Son  "  in  man.^  It  is  the  process  by  which  the  soul
gets  free  of  sense  and  lower  consciousness  and  rises  to  an
immediate  experience  of  God.  This  experience  comes
as  soon  as  the  soul  withdraws  into  its  Ground,  for  there
God  and  the  soul  are  one.  He  who  would  enter  into
the  inmost  essence  of  the  Godhead,  and  come  into  union
with  That  which  is  above  changes  and  determinations,  must
of  necessity  rise  above  "knowledge."  So  long  as  the
soul  dwells  at  the  level  of  finite  distinctions  it  has  not
come  into  its  own  highest  region  nor  to  the  point  where
it  could  find  the  undifferentiated  nameless  Godhead.  But
by  a  Divine  birth  the  soul  may  rise  to  a  mystical  insight,
which  is  above  knowledge  and  which  is  union — an
experience  beyond  subject-object.  So  only  does  the  soul
escape  from  the  show-and-shadow  world.  He  only  can
arrive  at  reality  who  can  rise  to  the  Ever-present  Now  in
which  all  things  are  together.  "All  the  truth  which  any
master  ever  taught  with  his  own  reason  and  understanding,

^  Pfeiffer,  pp.  291  and  205.  ,

2  There  is  a  double  "begetting  of  the  Son"  in  Eckhart.  He  uses  the
expression  for  the  process  by  which  God  goes  out  of  Himself  into  a  natured  nature,
and  for  the  process  by  which  the  soul  rises  into  union  with  God.  It  is  thus  a
circular  process.


XII  MEISTER  ECKHART  233

or  ever  can  teach  to  the  last  day,  will  not  in  the  least
explain  this  knowledge.'  ^

Again  and  again  he  says  that,  when  the  soul  rises  into
its  own  Ground,  it  becomes  one  with  the  Godhead  in  an
Eternal  Now.  The  twain  become  a  single  One.  He  even
says  that  then — in  this  union — God  brings  to  birth  His
Son  in  Himself  and  in  me\  "I  am  so  one  with  Him  that
He  makes  me  as  though  I  were  not  parted  from  Himself,
and  the  Holy  Ghost  takes  his  origin  from  me  as  from
God  since  I  am  in  God.  If  He  did  not  take  His  birth
from  me,  He  would  not  take  it  from  God,  for  God  makes
me  as  though  in  no  wise  separate  from  Him."  ^  In
another  sermon  he  says  :  "  When  I  attain  this  blessedness
of  union,  then  all  things  are  in  me  and  in  God,  and  where
I  am  there  God  is,  and  where  God  is  there  am  I."  ^  But
he  still  does  not  go  over  into  sheer  pantheism — the  soul's
identity  is  not  lost  in  God.  "  I  might  ask,"  he  says,  "  how
it  stands  with  the  soul  that  is  lost  in  God  .''  Does  the
soul  find  itself  or  not  ?  To  this  I  will  answer  as  it  appears
to  me,  that  the  soul  finds  itself  at  the  point  where  every
rational  being  understands  himself  with  himself  Although
he  sinks  and  sinks  in  the  eternity  of  the  Divine  essence,
yet  he  can  never  reach  the  ground  {i.e.  bottom).  There-
fore God  has  left  a  little  point  wherein  the  soul  turns
back  upon  itself  and  knows  itself  to  be  a  creature."  *

It  is  true,  as  various  critics  have  pointed  out,  that
Eckhart  does  not  clear  himself  sufficiently  from  the  charge
of  pantheism,  but  he  does  not  quite  fall  into  pantheism.
He  makes  personality  inherent  in  the  very  nature  of  God,
and  equally  inherent  in  the  nature  of  man — it  belongs
to  the  very  nature  of  the  soul  "  to  reflect  itself  and  to  call
itself  a  Person."^  Eckhart  says  that  when  Paul  was
caught  up  into  the  third  heaven  all  his  "  faculties  "  were
absorbed  and  abolished,  so  that  he  knew  God  with  the
essence  of  his  soul,  i.e.  with  his  inmost  nature,  or  spark  of
being — "  it  was  not  a  temporal  consciousness."  When  he
came  back  to  the  world  again  nothing  was  forgotten,  but

1  Pfeiffer,  p.  lo.  2  j^i^i   p    ^^  3  /^^-^   p    22.

■*  Ibid.  p.  387.  ^  See  Preger,  pp.  419-20.


234  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

the  entire  experience  was  so  deep  within  the  ground  of
the  soul  that  reason,  or  the  "  faculties,"  could  not  reach  it
and  draw  it  forth.  To  get  it  he  had  to  retire  back  into
himself,  but  the  experience  had  eternally  become  a  part  of
himself,  therefore  he  says  neither  death  nor  any  other
thing  can  separate  me  from  what  I  have  experienced  in
viyself}  Personality  is  real  from  all  eternity,  and  even
at  the  highest  point  of  the  soul's  "  union "  with  God,
personality  remains  unlost — "  the  soul  still  finds  itself."
This  is  not  fairly  called  pantheism.^

His  treatment  of  sin,  in  similar  fashion,  is  up  near  the
perilous  edge  of  pantheism,  but  he  still  keeps  on  the
hither  side  of  it.  There  are  passages  in  his  Sermons  in
which  distinctions  are  lost,  and  God  is  in  everj^ thing
"  from  angel  to  spider,"  and  yet  there  are  other  passages
which  imply  that  sin  is  a  positive  fact.  In  his  positive
view  sin  is  self-wnll.  It  is  the  setting  of  the  individual
will  against  the  Divine  will.  The  "  disease  of  sin,"  "  the
blindness  of  sin,"  he  says,  comes  from  "  self-love  "  ;  "  all
love  of  the  world  springs  out  of  self-love."  Sin  is  not
merely  an  affair  of  the  flesh  ;  it  is  an  attitude  of  will,  for
even  Lucifer,  who  was  pure  spirit,  fell  and  is  eternally
fallen.  Everything  turns  on  the  attitude  of  the  will.
Here  are  some  of  the  scattered  sayings  :  "If  your  will  is
right,  you  cannot  go  wrong "  ;  "  With  the  will  I  can  do
ever}^thing  "  ;  "  There  is  nothing  evil  but  the  evil  will  "  ;
"  Love  resides  in  the  will — the  more  will,  the  more  love."  ^
This  attitude  of  the  will,  which  is  the  ground  of  sin,  has
its  origin  in  the  lower  consciousness,  but  it  may  spread
and  become  the  death  of  the  soul  by  separating  the  soul
from    God.*      The    reality   of    moral    distinction    persists

^  Pfeiffer,  p.  8  (see  also  Preger,  p.  421).

2  It  must,  however,  be  said  that  Eckhart  saves  himself  from  pantheism  by
shying  away  from  the  logic  of  his  system.  There  are  many  passages  which  go
fearlessly  on  to  the  conclusion  that  everything  in  the  universe  is  a  differentiation
of  the  Godhead  and  has  no  reality  "out  of"  the  Godhead,  but  he  occasionally
tempers  his  doctrine  and  introduces  distinctions  which  are  not  involved  in  his
premises.  There  are  throughout  his  system  two  strands  which  are  never  quite
woven  together.  His  intellect  carries  him  straight  on  to  a  monistic  system  in
which  God  is  all ;  his  heart  keeps  him  in  sympathy  with  the  beliefs  of  the
Christian  Church.

2  Quoted  from  Inge,  Christian  Mysticism,  p.  161.  *  Pfeiffer,  p.  215.


XII  MEISTER   ECKHART  235

eternally.  There  is  a  "  last  judgment,"  though  it  is  not
as  people  imagine  it :  "  Every  man  pronounces  his  own
sentence,  as  he  shows  himself  here  in  his  essence  so  will
he  remain  everlastingly."  ^  Sin,  he  says,  strips  away  from
the  soul  all  its  graces,  so  that  when  a  deadly  sin  takes
place  '*  a  man  becomes  bare  of  all  grace."  I  have  already
quoted  a  passage  in  which  Eckhart  insists  that  there  is
no  freedom  possible  for  the  soul  so  long  as  sin  is  there —
"  One  never  becomes  free  until  he  is  free  from  sin,  for  as
long  as  one  is  capable  of  sinning  the  distinction  between
good  and  evil  must  be  rigorously  maintained."  ^

Like  all  mystics  of  this  type,  Eckhart  does  not  find  it
easy  to  make  the  historical  plan  of  salvation  fit  organically
into  the  mystical  process,  by  which  the  soul  comes  into
immediate  union  with  God  by  "  bringing  forth  the  Son  "
within  itself.  He,  however,  insists  on  the  reality  of  the
incarnation,  and  declares  that  the  expression  of  God  in
the  Son  was  an  eternal  necessity  of  the  Divine  Nature,
and  this  self-revelation  of  God  would  have  been  made
even  if  Adam  had  never  sinned.  This  view,  so  far,  fits
his  whole  conception  of  the  procession  of  God.  When,
however,  he  comes  to  deal  with  the  atonement  he  "  adopts  "
the  language  of  evangelical  theology,  but  does  not  try  to
square  it  with  his  mystical  process.  One  of  his  great
atonement  passages  will  be  found  in  his  sermon  on  John
vi.  44  :  ''  No  one  can  come  unto  Me  except  My  Father
draw  him."  "      He  says  Christ  speaks  to  God  and  says  :

"  Heart-dear  Father,  when  Thou  couldst  not  forgive  the  sin  of
the  world  through  the  sacrifices  that  were  offered  to  Thee  under
the  old  covenant,  then  said  I,  *  My  Father,  I,  the  only  begotten
Son  of  Thy  heart,  who  in  all  things  am  like  Thee  in  Godhead,
in  whom  Thou  hast  hid  all  the  treasures  and  riches  of  Divine
love,  I  go  to  the  cross,  in  order  that  I  may  become  a  living
sacrifice  in  Thy  Divine  sight,  that  Thou  mayst  turn  the  eyes  of
Thy  fatherly  pity,  and  see  me,  Thy  only  begotten  Son,  and
behold  my  Blood  flowing  from  my  wounds,  and  sheathe  that
fiery  sword  by  which  in  the  hand  of  the  Cherubim  Thou  hast
closed  the  way  to  Paradise,  so  that  all  who  repent  and  make

1  Pfeiffer,  p.  471.  2  j^i^   p    55^  (ggg  Jundt,  of>.  cit.  p.  96;.

8  Ibid.  pp.  216-20  (see  especially  p.  219).


236  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

atonement    for    their    sins    in    me    may  go  in  there    in  perfect
freedom.' "

Eckhart  also  speaks  of  Christ — and  this  view  fits  well
in  with  his  mysticism — as  the  representative  of  Collective
humanity — the  ideal  Man^  in  Whom  all  ^nen  have  their
unity  and  reality,  so  that  when  a  person  rises  to  the
ground  and  reality  of  his  essential  being  he  partakes  of
Christ  and  becomes  one  with  Him  and  so  one  with  God  :
"  All  creatures  that  have  flowed  out  from  God  must
become  united  into  one  Man,  who  comes  again  into  the
unity  Adam  was  in  before  he  fell.  This  is  accomplished
in  Christ.  According  to  this  truth  all  creatures  are  One
Man,  and  this  Adam  is  God  (Christ  the  Son  of  God)."  ^
However  profound  and  complicated  Eckhart's  metaphysics
may  appear,  his  practical  religion  is  as  simple  and  straight-
forward as  that  of  the  popular  saints.  One  would  expect,
as  he  toils  through  the  tangled  passages  which  tell  about
the  "  nameless  Nothing  "  of  the  Godhead,  and  which  call
for  an  Abgeschiedenheit  or  separation  of  soul  from  every-
thing sensible,  imaginable,  or  conceivable,  that  the  outcome
would  be  a  quietism  amounting  to  absolute  self-death  ;
one  would  suppose,  as  he  follows  the  great  mystic  in  his
cry  of  "  vanity  "  toward  all  things  temporal  and  mutable
until  not  a  rag  of  human  merit  is  left  in  heart,  mind,  or
will,  so  that  nothing  "  good  "  can  come  in  man  unless  God
becomes  the  centre  of  his  being,  and  wills  through  him,
in  place  .  of  his  own  will,  that  this  finite  life  would  be
rendered  wholly  abortive  in  "  a  fascinated  gazing  "  toward
the  blank  of  Reality  "  yonder."  Quite  the  contrary  is  the
fact.  Eckhart  was  a  highly  practical  man,  who  did  his
day's  work  with  fidelity  and  with  telling  effect.  He
eminently  preserved  his  balance^  and  he  kept  his  spiritual
perspective  healthy.  While  insisting  that  no  temporal
thing  may  be  put  in  the  place  of  the  soul's  own  goal,  he
does  not  neglect  to  make  proper  use  of  the  things  that
are  now  and  here.  The  world  of  "  creatures  "  is,  after  all,
a  Divine  expression  of  the  Word  of  God,  but  we  need  to
remember  that  God  "  has  given  every  gift,  which  He  has

^  Preger,  vol.  i.  p.  427.


XII  MEISTER  ECKHART  237

given  in  heaven  or  in  earth,  in  order  that  He  may  be
able  to  give  us  the  one  gift — Himself."  ^

He  attaches  little  importance  to  forms,  rites,  or  cere-
monies. There  is  only  one  way  to  a  spiritual  height — to
a  spiritual  victory — the  soul  itself  must  rise  to  it  and
achieve  it.  Nobody  has  more  strongly  insisted  that
spiritual  results  come  by  spiritual  processes — not  by
magic,  not  by  easy  requests  :  "  I  will  never  pray  to  God
to  give  Himself  to  me.  I  will  pray  Him  to  make  me
purer.  If  I  were  purer,  God  must  give  Himself  to  me  of
His  own  nature  and  sink  into  me."  ^

•*  Some  people,"  he  says,  "  are  for  seeing  God  with  their
eyes,  as  they  can  see  a  cow  (which  thou  lovest  for  the  milk,  and
for  the  cheese,  and  for  thine  own  profit).  Thus  do  all  those
who  love  God  for  the  sake  of  outward  riches  or  of  inward
comfort ;  they  do  not  love  aright,  but  seek  only  themselves  and
their  own  advantage."

The  whole  value  of  the  sacrament  depends  not  on  the
use  of  bread  and  wine  but  on  the  attitude  of  the  soul.
The  partaking  of  something  physical  can  effect  nothing.
If  a  spiritual  condition  is  to  be  attained  the  soul  must  go
beyond  the  sacrament :  "  When  I  rise  above  the  sacrarnent
I  experience  God,  and  become  ixctually  changed  into  that
which  I  experience!'  ^  Even  the  historical  Christ  is
thought  of  only  as  a  symbol  of  the  divine  humanity  to
which  our  souls  should  rise :  "  When  the  soul  brings
forth  the  Son,  it  is  happier  than  Mary."  ^

But  the  very  fact  that  events  in  time  and  space  are
symbolic,  and  point  the  soul  toward  the  reality  which
they  symbolize,  keeps  Eckhart  from  being  over-ascetic.
He  will  not  stop  short  of  God  in  His  absolute  wholeness,
but  he  will  use  "  broken  manifestations  "  of  Him  as  far  as
they  will  carry  him.  The  goal  is  union  in  the  Godhead,
but  everything  on  the  way  may  be  made  a  help  toward  the
final  attainment.  He  has  a  human  interest  in  the  people
about  him  ;  he  feels  their  sorrows  and  needs,  and  is  active
in   his    sympathies.       He    lays    down    a   noble    principle,

1  Pfeiffer,  p.  569.  2  jj,id,  p.  290.

8  Ibid.  p.  592.  4  Ibid.  p.  290.


238  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

which  he  himself  also  practised  :  *'  What  a  man  takes  in
by  contemplation  he  must  pour  out  in  love."  In  the
same  practical  fashion  he  puts  Martha  above  Mary,  i.e.
activity  above  contemplation.  "  Mary  hath  chosen  the
good  part,  that  is,  she  is  striving  to  be  as  holy  as  her
sister.  Mary  is  still  at  school  :  Martha  hath  learnt  her
lesson.  It  is  better  to  feed  the  hungry  than  to  see  even
such  visions  as  St.  Paul  saw."  ^  The  same  practical
truth  is  set  forth  in  a  fragment  of  a  sermon  in  Pfeiffer's
collection  (p.  553):

"  If  a  man  were  in  rapture  such  as  Paul  experienced,  and  if
he  knew  of  a  person  who  needed  something  of  him,  I  think  it
would  be  far  better  out  of  love  to  leave  the  rapture  and  serve  the
needy  man."

He  puts  great  value  on  the  discipline  of  sorrow,  and
finds  in  suffering  a  revelation  of  Divine  reality  :

"  I  say  that  after  God  there  was  never  anything  that  is  nobler
than  sorrow,  then  surely  the  Father  from  heaven  would  have
granted  that  nobler  gift  to  His  Son  Jesus  Christ.  But  we  find
that,  except  for  His  humanity,  there  was  nothing  of  which  Christ
had  so  much  as  sorrow.  .  .  .  Yes,  I  say,  were  there  anything
nobler  than  sorrow,  then  therewith  would  God  have  redeemed
man.  .  .  .  But  we  do  not  find  that  Christ  was  ever  an  hour
upon  earth  without  sorrow ;  therefore  sorrow  must  be  above
all  things."  2

The  true  victory  of  the  soul  is  not  won  by  withdrawal
from  the  struggles  incident  to  life,  but  by  the  cultivation
of  patience  and  endurance  in  the  struggle — an  overcoming
of  the  world  by  living  through  it :

"  That  a  man  has  a  restful  and  peaceful  life  in  God  is  good.
That  a  man  endures  a  painful  Hfe  in  patience,  that  is  better ;  but
that  a  man  has  his  rest  in  the  midst  of  a  painful  life,  that  is  best
of  all."  3

He  urges  his  friends  not  to  divide  life  into  two  com-
partments— the  sacred  and  the  secular — but  to  maintain
the  same  disposition   in   the  crowd,  amid   the  unrest  and

^  Quoted  from  Inge,  Christian  Mysticism,  p.  i6i.

'^  Pfeiffer,  p.  357  ;   Royce's  translation  in  Studies  of  Good  and  Evil,  p.  286,

•^  Pfeiffer,  p.  221.


XII  MEISTER  ECKHART  239

manifoldness  of  the  world,  which  they  have  in  church  or
in  their  cells,^  and  to  realize  that  it  is  just  as  important
to  practise  faithfully  a  small  duty  as  one  which  the
people  call  great.  Those  among  his  hearers  who  missed
the  meaning  of  his  lofty  flights  of  speculation  must  have
listened  with  their  heart  as  he  told  them  that  God  was
not  only  Father  but  Mother  too,  and  as  he  repeated  in
fourteenth  century  language  the  gospel  of  Christ  to  the
poor  :

"  Look  you,  the  most  ignorant  and  the  lowest  of  you  all  can
obtain  God's  grace,  in  ever  richer  fulness,  till  he  comes  to
perfection — he  can  obtain  it  before  he  leaves  this  church,  yea,
before   I    finish   this   sermon,  as   sure   as  God  lives   and  I    am


In  a  tumultuous  age,  revolting  from  dry  formalism  and
empty  orthodoxy,  it  was  a  great  thing  to  have  a  man  tell
his  hearers  that  the  God  Whom  they  missed  in  the  Church
they  could  find  in  their  own  souls.

The  doctrines  which  he  preached  in  German  to  the
common  people  he  also  taught  in  Latin  to  scholars  and
theologians,  and  it  seems  extraordinary  that  he  should
have  taught  so  many  years  unmolested.  It  indicates
that  there  was  a  freedom  of  thought  allowed  in  the
fourteenth  century  which  many  historians  of  the  Church
have  hardly  suspected.  There  is  no  indication  that
Eckhart's  "  soundness "  came  under  suspicion  before  the
year  1326.^  The  first  complaint  against  him  was  brought
by  the  Archbishop  of  Cologne  in  the  year  just  given.
The  complaint  was  taken  up  by  Nicholas  of  Strasbourg,
who  was  friendly  to  Eckhart.  Nicholas  was  Vicar-
General  to  the  Dominican  Order  and  *'  Visitor "  for  his
province,  having  been  entrusted  by  the  Pope  in  1323
with  the  oversight  of  the  convents  of  Germany.  Early
in  1327  he  took  up  the  complaint  against  Eckhart,
deciding  that  the  archbishop  had  no  jurisdiction  over
Dominican  preachers,  and  carrying  the  whole  matter  by

1  Pfeiffer,  p.  547.  2  /^^^^  p_  187.

8  The   "brother  Eckhart,"  Prior  of  Frankfort,  suspected  of  heresy  in  1306^
cannot  be  identified  with  our  Meister  Eckhart.


240  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

appeal  to  the  papal  chair.  Eckhart,  in  his  own  name,
took  a  similar  course,  denying  the  right  of  the  archbishop
to  interfere  with  his  teaching,  and  asking  for  a  papal
decision.  On  the  13th  of  February  of  the  same  year
he  preached  to  the  people  of  Cologne,  affirming  in  his
sermon  the  purity  and  soundness  of  his  faith,  express-
ing his  horror  of  all  heresy  and  immorality  and  offering
to  retract  everything  he  had  ever  said  that  conflicted
with  the  doctrine  of  the  Church.  We  learn  from  this
sermon  that  the  two  charges  formulated  against  him
were:  (i)  that  "his  little  finger  has  created  every-
thing," and  (2)  that  "there  is  something  uncreated  in
the  soul."  The  first  statement  in  its  literal  meaning
is  of  course  absurd  and  paradoxical,  but  Eckhart  did
make  free  use  of  such  paradoxical  language,  and  it
is  an  over-bold  and  vigorous  way  of  stating  the  unity
of  God  and  man  in  creative  activity  which  in  many
passages  he  affirms.  The  truth  of  the  second  charge
is  proved  by  scores  of  passages  in  Eckhart's  writings.
His  sermon  is  a  lame  attempt  to  explain  away  the
difficulty  by  putting  an  allegorical  meaning  on  the  words
and  by  endeavouring  to  show  how  they  square  with
popular  orthodoxy.  He  reveals  at  this  crisis  a  very
submissive,  almost  naive,  spirit.  But  I  see  no  reason
for  calling  him  cowardly,  or  for  supposing  that  he  had
no  convictions.  He  never  explicitly  realized  that  there
was  inconsistency  between  his  mysticism  and  Church
doctrine,  and  he  had  not  remotely  conceived  it  a  part
of  his  mission  to  set  himself  against  the  authority  of  the
Church.  We  may  regret  that  Eckhart  did  not  show  the
heroic  spirit  of  a  reformer  and  stand  unflinchingly  for  the
right  to  think  freely,  but  it  is  unhistorical  to  expect  it  of
him.  He  must  be  judged  in  the  light  of  his  age.  There
had  always  been  an  evangelical  and  popular  side  to  his
teaching,  and  now  in  his  defence  he  simply  goes  further
than  the  case  would  warrant  in  showing  that  his
pantheistical  utterances  were  open  to  a  harmless  in-
terpretation. I  am  inclined  to  think  that  he  is  here
naive  rather  than  disingenuous.


XII  MEISTER  ECKHART  241

Before  his  case  was  settled  at  the  papal  court  Eckhart
had  finished  the  term  of  his  life — dying  in  this  very  year
1327.  By  a  papal  Bull  of  1329,  twenty-eight  proposi-
tions, found  in  Eckhart's  writings,  were  condemned —
seventeen  were  pronounced  heretical,  and  the  rest  were
called  rash  and  suspect.  "  He  has  wished  to  know  more
than  he  should  ! "  is  the  curious  verdict  of  the  Pope.
Yes,  it  is  true  that  he  "  wished  to  know "  things  about
which  the  Church  could  give  him  no  light  ;  that  he
fearlessly  pushed  his  speculation  into  realms  which  were
uncharted  in  the  books  of  dogma.  "  We  are  transformed
totally  into  God,  even  as  in  the  sacrament  the  bread
is  converted  into  the  body  of  Christ,"  is  one  of  the
twenty-eight  "  items,"  and  one  of  the  seventeen  proposi-
tions found  "heretical."  It  is  a  fair  statement  of
Eckhart's  teaching,  and  well  sums  up  his  message — Man
through  the  Divine  Spark  within  his  soul  may  rise  into
union  with  the  Godhead  in  an  Eternal  Now.  It  has  "  an  ill
sound  "  and  is  "  very  rash,"  says  the  Pope's  Bull.  Such
teaching — if  it  were  found  that  experience  verified  it —
would  surely  make  popes  unnecessary,  and  would  render
the  elaborate  Church  machinery  of  the  fourteenth  century
as  useless  as  medieval  armour  is  to  a  citizen  of  the
modern  world.  The  Pope's  Bull  unfortunately  neglects
to  settle  for  us  the  question  whether  Eckhart's  message
of  Divine  Union  fits  the  eternal  nature  of  things  or  not,
it  only  decides  that  it  does  not  fit  dogma.


CHAPTER    XIII

THE    FRIENDS    OF    GOD

I

One  of  the  most  important  and  remarkable  expressions
of  mystical  religion  in  the  history  of  the  Christian  Church
is  that  which  flowered  out  in  Germany  in  the  fourteenth
century,  and  whose  exponents  are  known  under  the  name
of  "  Friends  of  God."     The  title  does  not  cover  a  sect,
nor  even  a  "  Society,"  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  word.      It,
rather,  names  a  fairly  definite  type  of  Christianity,  which
found  its  best  expression  in  persons  of  the  prophet-class  in
that  century,  both  men  and  women,  who  powerfully  moved
large  groups  of  Christians  by  their  preaching,  their  writings,
and  their  extraordinary  lives.     All  the  leaders  of  the  move-
ment were  profoundly  influenced  by  the  teaching  of  that
luminous  figure  of  German  mysticism,  Meister  Eckhart,  but
they  were  hardly  less  definitely  influenced   by  the  apoca-
lyptic writings  of  the  great  German  *'  prophetesses  "  of  the
two  preceding  centuries — St.  Hildegarde,  St.  Elizabeth  of
Schoenau,  and  St  Matilda  of  Magdeburg.      The  writings
of  these  famous  women  are  full  of  incidents,  phrases,  and
images   which  formed  "  suggestion   material "  for  the  ex-
periences and  ideas  of  the  Friends  of  God.      In  fact,  they
have   very   similar   conceptions    of    the    Church   and    the
world,  and  of  the  impending  catastrophes  that  are  about
to  break   upon  both  the  world   and  the  Church.      I  shall
give  illustrations  of  this  influence  later.

The   period   covered   by  the   movement  which  we  are
now  studying  was  one  of  the  most  troublous  epochs  in

242


CHAP.  XIII  THE   FRIENDS  OF  GOD  243

medieval  history.  Woes  and  disasters  came  thickly  one
after  the  other,  and  they  produced  a  "  psychological
climate,"  which  partly  accounts  for  the  morbid  features
which  characterize  the  movement,  and  which  partly  ex-
plains the  abnormal  occurrences  in  the  lives  of  many  of
the  "  Friends  of  God."  Every  sensitive  person  was  over-
wrought and  strained.  There  was  a  widespread  expecta-
tion that  apocalyptic  prophecies  were  soon  to  be  fulfilled  ;
this  visible  world  was  believed  to  be  the  sport  of  super-
natural powers,  both  good  and  bad,  and  men  and  women
everywhere  were  in  "  hair-trigger  condition  "  of  response
to  any  captivating  suggestion,  as  the  terrible  outbreak  of
flagellation  which  swept  many  of  the  Rhine  cities  plainly
indicates.  A  few  of  the  events  which  helped  to  produce
this  "  mental  climate "  may  be  mentioned  here.  From
1309  to  1377  occurred  the  so-called  "  Babylonish  Cap-
tivity "  of  the  Church,  when  the  papal  seat  was  changed
to  Avignon,  and  when  the  popes  were  more  or  less  puppets
of  France.  To  many  of  the  faithful  this  "  captivity "
was  a  supreme  woe- — the  reward  and  result  of  sin  and
apostasy.  A  still  greater  misfortune  followed  hard  after
the  period  of  "  captivity."  Upon  the  death  of  Gregory  XL,
in  1378,  there  occurred  a  double  election,  resulting  in  two
rival  popes,  and  during  the  next  forty  years  the  Church
was  torn  and  almost  wrecked  by  what  is  known  as  the
"Great  Schism,"  which  lasted  from  1378  to  141 7.

More  important  for  our  distinct  period,  and  carrying
with  it  more  serious  practical  consequences  for  the  common
people  of  the  German  cities,  was  the  "  Great  Civil  War,"
which  resulted  from  a  double  election  of  emperors.  Louis
of  Bavaria  was  chosen  Emperor  in  13  14,  by  one  party  of
electors,  and  Frederick  of  Austria  by  another  party.  The
Pope  took  sides  against  Louis,  excommunicated  him,  and
laid  an  interdict  upon  all  cities  which  supported  him.  By
the  interdict,  all  public  religious  services  were  prohibited,
and  all  consolation  of  religion  suspended,  through  the
section  of  the  country  covered  by  the  interdict.  Infants
were  unbaptized,  the  Mass  was  not  celebrated,  the  sacred
offices  for  the  dead  ceased.      In  many  cities  of  Germany


244  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

where  the  citizens  were  loyal  to  Louis,  the  priests  were
forced  to  go  on  with  their  religious  functions  in  spite  of
the  interdict,  or  to  go  into  banishment.

While  Europe  was  thus  suffering  through  the  wrath
of  man,  a  veritable  scourge,  which  in  that  age  seemed
traceable  directly  to  the  wrath  of  God,  fell  upon  the
German  cities.  It  was  a  pestilence  known  in  history  as
the  "  Black  Death."  It  first  struck  the  west  of  Europe  in
1347)  ^rid  raged  for  two  years,  returning  again  in  less
virulent  form  in  1358  and  in  1363.  In  some  places  the
mortality  was  so  great  that  it  is  estimated  that  only
one-tenth  of  the  population  survived.  There  were,  too,
many  earthquakes  through  the  Rhine  valley  about  the
middle  of  the  century,  one  of  which,  "the  great  earth-
quake," left  the  city  of  Basle  a  heap  of  ruins,  and  wrought
similar  havoc  in  many  small  towns.

The  Friends  of  God  formed  small  groups,  or  local
societies,  gathered  about  some  spiritual  leader  or  coun-
sellor. There  was  little  or  no  organization.  The  type  of
each  particular  group  was  largely  determined  by  the
personality  of  the  "  leader,"  while  the  whole  movement
was  unified  and  moulded  by  the  work  of  itinerant
"  prophets,"  and  by  the  production  of  a  very  remarkable
literature.  These  mystic  circles,  or  groups,  were  wide-
spread, and  were  formed  in  far-sundered  places,  stretching
from  Bavaria,  possibly  from  Bohemia,  to  the  low  countries,
with  the  most  important  groups  in  Strasbourg,  Cologne,"
and  Basle.^

There  was  a  voluminous  exchange  of  letters  among
the  leaders,  and  frequent  personal  visits.  The  visits  and
the  itinerant  missions  were  generally  prompted   by  some

1  Speaking  of  the  "society"  in  Cologne,  Henry  of  Nordlingen  says  in  a
sermon  :  "  I  do  not  know  in  the  whole  universe,  from  one  end  to  another,  any
place  where  the  word  of  God  has  spread  so  widely,  and  has  manifested  itself  so
richly  and  purely,  during  the  last  sixty  years,  or  where  it  is  announced  to-day
by  so  many  illuminated  doctors,  or  so  many  Friends  of  God  as  in  the  city  of
Cologne."

2  Lady  Frick,  a  close  friend  of  Henry  of  Nordlingen,  on  her  return  to  Basle
after  an  absence,  writes  that  she  is  "  filled  with  joy  to  be  again  in  the  holy  and
spiritual  society  at  Basle,"  which  she  says  is  "  large,"  and  she  feels  as  though  she
had  come  from  purgatory  to  paradise.  She  declares  that  she  would  not  change
her  home  in  Basle  for  any  other,  unless  it  were  for  one  in  Medingen,  in  Bavaria,
where  there  was  a  group  of  Friends  of  God,  with  Margaret  Ebner  as  its  head.


xiii  THE  FRIENDS   OF  GOD  245

direct  revelation.  In  fact,  the  whole  plan  and  direction
of  the  movement,  as  well  as  the  preparation  of  the  most
important  pieces  of  their  religious  literature,  are  ascribed
to  direct  revelation  granted  to  the  leaders.

Some  of  the  societies  had  retreats  in  which  the  mem-
bers lived — "  quiet  nests  "  Tauler  calls  them.  They  were
"  brotherhood  houses,"  modelled  on  the  plan  of  the  Beg-
hards.  In  many  respects  the  Friends  of  God  were  like
the  Beghards — there  is  no  sharp  line  of  differentiation
between  them,  though  the  former  are  always  radically
opposed  to  the  loose  and  antinomian  tendencies  which
affected  many  groups  of  Beghards  and  Beguines.  The
Friends  of  God  were  inclined,  rather,  to  err  in  the  opposite
direction.  Their  failing  lies  in  the  direction  of  extreme
asceticism  and  self-renunciation.  All  the  leading  Friends
of  God,  both  in  sermons  and  in  writings,  speak  vigorously
against  the  negative  freedom  and  licence  of  the  "  Brethren
of  Free  Spirit."

The  leading  figures  of  the  group  are  Rulman  Merswin
of  Strasbourg ;  his  friend  and  secretary,  Nikolaus  von
Lowen  ;  John  Tauler  ;  Henry  Suso  ;  Jan  Ruysbroek  ;
Margaret  and  Christina  Ebner ;  Henry  of  Nordlingen,
and  the  great  unknown,  who  wrote  the  little  book  called
German  Theology.  The  most  important  literature  for  the
purposes  of  this  study  are  the  writings  attributed  to
Rulman  Merswin  and  to  *'  The  Friend  of  God  of  the
Oberland  "  ;  the  sermons  of  Tauler  ;  the  writings  of  Suso
and  Ruysbroek  ;  the  German  Theology^  and  the  correspond-
ence between  Margaret  Ebner  and  her  friends.^

As  I  shall  often  refer  in  this  chapter  to  Rulman
Merswin  and  his  "  double,"  the  so-called  "  Friend  of  God
from  the  Oberland,"  it  will  be  well  to  consider  here  who
they  were.  There  is  no  more  difficult  problem  in  the
history  and  literature  of  mysticism  than  that  of  the
identity  and  personality  of  this  "  Friend  of  God  " — every-
where treated  as  a  somewhat  supernatural  "  character  " —
who   figures   so   prominently   in    the   great   collection    of

^  The   letters    are    published   in    Heumann's    Opzaczda    (Nurnberg,    1747),
pp.  331-404.


246  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

mystical     literature     ascribed     to    him    and    to    Rulman
Merswin.^

It  was  assumed  in  the  fifteenth  century  that  this
mysterious  "  Friend  of  God  from  the  Oberland "  was  a
certain  Nicholas  of  Basle,^  and  this  tradition  came  down
with  little  challenge  until  recent  times.  It  was  adopted
and  given  wide  currency  by  the  valuable  publications  of

1  The  great  religious  books,  or  treatises,  which  have  been  in  part  or  in  whole
ascribed  to  "The  Friend  of  God  from  the  Oberland"  or  to  Rulman  Merswin,
are  as  follows :  First  a  collection  of  sixteen  treatises  which  are  preserved  in.  the
"Great  German  Memorial"  (Das  grosse  deutsche  Memorial).     They  are  :

(i)    Two  Fifteen-year-old  Boys.

{ 2 )   The  Imprisoned  Kn  igh  t.

(3)  The  Story  of  Ursula  and  Adelaide,

(4)  Two  Holy  Nuns  in  Bavana.

(5)  The  Spiritual  Stairway.

(6 )  The  Spiritual  Ladder.

(7)  The  Spark  (Funklein)  in  the  Soul.

(8)  A  Lesson  for  a  Young  Brother  of  the  Order.

(9)  Story  of  a  Man  Endowed  with  Worldly  Wisdom.

(10)  A  Revelation  given  to  ' '  the  Friend  of  God  "  on  Christmas  Night.

(11)  A   Young  Man  of  the  World.

(12)  Warnings  which  "  the  Friend  of  God"  sent  to  the  People.

(13)  The  Book  of  the  Banner  of  Christ.

(14)  The  Three  Halting-places  (Durchbriiche).

(15)  The  Seven  Works  of  Mercy.

(16)  Book  on  Prevenient  Grace.

The  MS.  oi  Das  grosse  deutsche  Memorial  is  in  the  Universitats-  und  Landes-
bibliothek  at  Strasbourg.  The  Treatises  numbered  i,  2,  10,  and  12  have  been
published  in  Karl  Schmidt's  Nikolaus  von  Basel  (Wien,  1866).  Those  numbered
5  and  6  have  been  printed  in  Jundt's  Rulman  Merswin  (Paris,  1890).  In  the
collection  known  as  Pflegermemorial  the  following  Treatises  are  preserved  : —

The  Book  of  the  First  Four  Years  of  Rulman  Merswin' s  New  Life,  and  the  Book
of  the  Five  Men,  which  is  the  story  of  "the  Friend  of  God  "  and  his  companions.
There  is  a  fifteenth-century  manuscript  of  this  in  the  Bezirksarchiv  of  Strasbourg.
"  The  Book  of  the  Five  Men  "  is  published  in  Schmidt's  Nikolaus  von  Basel.

Besides  these  the  most  important  Treatises  for  the  Religious  ideas  of  the
Friends  of  God  are  the  Book  of  the  Master  of  Ploly  Scripture,  the  Book  of  the
Two  Men,  and  the  Book  of  the  Nine  Rocks.  "The  Book  of  the  Two  Men  "  is
published  in  Schmidt's  Nikolaus  von  Basel,  and  it  has  also  been  edited  and
published  by  Lauchert,  Des  Gottesfreundes  in  Oberland  [=  Rulman  Merswin],
Buch  von  den  Zwei  Mannen  (Bonn,  1896).

There  is  an  autograph  MS.  of  the  Nine  Rocks  in  the  Universitats-  und  Landes-
bibliothek  at  Strasbourg  [L.  germ  665  ;  Neun  Felsen  :  Rulmanni  Merschwin,
Fundatoris  domus  St.  Johannis  de  9  Rupibus  autographus].  This  was  edited
and  published  by  Schmidt,  Das  Buch  von  den  Neun  Felsen  (Leipzig,  1859).  Das
Meisterbuch  [Book  of  the  Master  of  Holy  Scripture]  is  in  the  collection  known  as
Das  erste  Ubriggebliebene  Lateinbuch.  It  has  been  published  by  Schmidt  under
the  title  :  Nikolaus  von  Basel,  Bericht  von  der  Bekehrung  Taulers  (Strasbourg,

1875)-

There  is  also  an  important  collection  of  Letters  [Briefiuch)  professing  to  be
Letters  to  and  from  the  "  Friend  of  God."  There  is  a  MS.  of  this  BHefbuch
in  the  Bezirksarchiv  [H  2185].  The  Letters  are  printed  in  Karl  Schmidt's
Nikolaus  von  Basel.

2  This  Nicholas  of  Basle  was  a  Beghard,  and  was  burned  at  the  stake  in
Vienna,  as  a  heretic.


XIII  THE  FRIENDS  OF  GOD  247

the  famous  Strasbourg  historian,  Karl  Schmidt.  It  is  a
view,  however,  now  everywhere  discredited  by  scholars.
Preger  believes  that  he  was  a  great  unknown  who  lived  in
or  near  the  city  of  Chur  (Coire),  in  Switzerland,  and  Jundt
held  this  view  when  he  wrote  his  valuable  book,  Les  A  mis
de  Dieu  (1879).  But  since  Denifle's  important  studies  in
the  mystical  literature  of  the  fourteenth  century,  the  belief
has  been  growing  that  the  "  Friend  of  God  of  the  Ober-
land "  is  not  an  historical  personage  at  all.^  All  his
movements  are  wrapped  in  profound  mystery.  There  is
no  historical  evidence  of  his  existence  outside  the  evidence
furnished  by  this  collection  of  literature,  ascribed  to  him
and  Merswin.  The  accounts  of  his  life  say  that  sometime
about  1343  he  was  forbidden  to  reveal  his  identity  to
any  one  whatever,  except  to  Rulman  Merswin.  In  the
correspondence,  supposedly  between  the  "  Friend  of  God  "
and  John  of  Schaftholsheim,  a  prominent  Church  official
at  Strasbourg,  the  latter,  writing  about  1363,  urges  his
unknown  correspondent  to  reveal  himself  to  him.  The
answer  comes  back  that  he  cannot  do  it :  "I  should  like
to  grant  your  request,  but  it  is  impossible.  Cease  to  ask
it,  for  the  love  of  God.  More  than  twenty  years  ago  God
forbade  me  to  reveal  myself  to  any  man  except  one."
Every  effort  is  made  to  destroy  all  traces  of  his  personal
identity,  and  there  is  an  evident  purpose,  both  in  the
correspondence  and  the  books  ascribed  to  him,  to  leave
the  impression  that  whatever  he  does  is  done  by  the  Holy
Spirit.  The  human  medium  is,  for  this  very  purpose,
made  as  mysterious  and  shadowy  as  possible.  This  entire
collection  of  writings  betrays  the  marks  of  a  single  hand.
There  is  a  striking  similarity  in  the  experiences  which
occur  both  to  Merswin  and  the  "  Friend  of  God,"  though
there  is  a  boldness  of  tone  and  a  sureness  of  direction  in
the  utterances  ascribed  to  the  latter  which  are  missing  in
the  former.  The  same  expressions  and  the  same  phrases
appear  and  reappear  in  the  writings  ascribed  to  both

Before,     however,     undertaking    to    account    for    his

^  See  especially  Denifle's  Der  Gottesfreund  im  Oberlande  und  Nikolaus  von  Basel
(1870).


248  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

mysterious  "  double,"  we  must  endeavour  from  the  literature
at  hand  to  get  some  biographical  details  concerning
Rulman  Merswin.  He  was  born  in  Strasbourg  in  1307.
As  a  young  man  he  became  a  banker,  and  amassed  a  large
fortune.  He  was  "  a  man  of  watchful  conscience  and  of
great  fear  of  God,"  and  he  belonged  to  a  very  important
family  of  the  city.  When  he  was  forty  years  of  age  he
gave  up  business,  "took  leave  of  the  world,"  and  devoted
himself  entirely  to  divine  things,  after  the  manner  of
the  Franciscan  Tertiaries,  or  the  Waldensian  brothers.
He,  however,  did  not  give  away  his  money  ;  he  kept  it
"  to  use  for  God,"  as  He  might  direct  from  time  to  time.
His  wife,  Gertrude  of  Bietenheim,  though  a  pious  woman,
had  not  yet  attained  what  the  Friends  of  God  call  "  the
light  of  grace."  With  Waldensian  rigour  he  resolved  to
live  henceforth  as  celibate.

His  first  experience  of  ecstasy  came  to  him  at  the
time  of  his  resolve  to  devote  all  his  money  to  the
service  of  God — as  the  first  step  in  his  "new  life."
Suddenly  he  felt  himself  raised  from  the  earth  and
carried  through  the  air  all  about  the  garden.  At  the  same
time  he  felt  unutterable  joy  and  spiritual  illumination  un-
known before.  He  passed  through  the  usual  "  stages  of
spiritual  experience"  that  were  expected  at  this  epoch.
He  had  terrible  inward  temptations  and  struggles  ;  he
endeavoured  to  conquer  his  evil  nature  and  his  "  hated
body"  by  extreme  ascetic  practices.  John  Tauler  became
his  confessor  in  1348,  and  he  wisely  told  him  to  stop  his
macerations.  Merswin  was  next  called  to  pass  through
an  absolutely  joyless  period  when  he  felt  himself  destined
to  burn  in  hell  for  ever ;  then,  at  length,  all  sufferings  left
him,  and  he  came  into  "the  joy  and  peace  of  the  Holy
Spirit." '

The   Story  of  the  First  Four    Years   of  a  New   Life^

^  During  the  years  of  his  "commencement,"  as  they  termed  the  period  of
preparation,  he  underwent,  according  to  the  accounts,  almost  unbelievable  trans-
formations and  psychic  experiences.  For  example,  whenever  he  saw  blood,  as,
for  instance,  when  he  was  bled  by  the  physicians,  the  thought  of  the  sacrifice  of
Christ  would  so  fill  his  mind  that  he  would  swoon  away  into  an  ecstasy.  He  was
the  frequent  recipient  of  "Divine  voices,"  and  many  important  situations  were
revealed  to  him.


XIII


THE  FRIENDS   OF  GOD  249


which  is  a  remarkable  piece  of  biographical  literature,  was,
according  to  Merswin's  friend,  Nikolaus  von  Lowen,  found
after  his  death  in  a  sealed  cupboard.  This  document
gives  an  account  of  the  first  appearance  of  the  mysterious
"  Friend  of  God."      Merswin  says  :

"  Of  all  the  wonderful  works  which  God  had  wrought  in  me  I
was  not  allowed  to  tell  a  single  word  to  anybody  until  the  time
when  it  should  please  God  to  reveal  to  a  man  in  the  Oberland  to
co??ie  to  me.  When  he  came  to  me,  God  gave  me  the  power  to
tell  him  everything.  He  became  my  intimate  friend;  I  submitted
myself  to  him  in  the  place  of  God,  and  I  told  him  all  the  secrets
of  those  four  years  as  God  inspired  me  to  do.  Then  he  said :
*  My  dear,  beloved  friend,  take  this  book ;  ^  thou  wilt  find  in  it
the  story  of  the  five  years  of  my  conversion,  and  now  give  me  in
writing  the  story  of  thy  four  years  of  conversion.' "

Merswin  stoutly  resisted  the  request  to  write  his  ex-
periences, but  finally  the  unnamed  friend  "  commanded
me  to  write,  in  the  name  of  the  obedience  which  I  had
promised  him,  and  I  was  compelled  to  submit.  He
knew  very  well  that  my  refusal  came  entirely  from  my
humility."

The  sentence  above  in  italics,  which  intimates  that
Merswin  had  a  subjective  idea  of  the  "  Friend  of  God  "
sometime  before  he  had  ever  seen  him  or  even  heard  of
him,  is  certainly  suspicious,  and  would,  on  the  face  of  it,
make  us  inclined  to  question  the  historicity  of  the  narrative.
Even  more  suspicious  is  the  account  given  of  the  most
important  event  in  Merswin's  life — the  purchase  of  Griinen-
worth,  or  the  "  Convent  of  the  Green  Isle."  This  was
purchased,  according  to  the  narrative,  by  Merswin ,  and
fitted  up  as  a  quiet  retreat — "  a  mystic  nest " — for  the
Strasbourg  circle  of  the  Friends  of  God,  a  sort  of  "  school
of  prophets  "  for  which  the  most  important  books  of  this
mystical  collection  were  written.  Merswin  himself  is
supposed  to  be  the  author  of  the  account  of  the  founding
of  the  retreat.  He  brings  in  his  mysterious  "  Friend,"
and  gives  the  entire  transaction  a  miraculous  colouring.
He    says    that    during   the   night    of    October    9,     1364,

1  The  Book  of  the  Two  Men,  containing   the  story  of  the  conversion   of  the
"  Friend  of  God."


250  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

the  "  Friend  of  God,"  in  his  Oberland  home — "  six  days'
journey  "  from  Strasbourg — dreamed  that  he  was  ordered
by  God  to  go  to  his  friend  Rulman  Merswin,  and  help
him  to  found  a  ''  nest "  in  Strasbourg  for  the  Friends  of
God.  The  same  night,  in  a  dream,  Rulman  Merswin
himself  had  a  revelation  that  he  ought  to  found  such  a
retreat  in  Strasbourg !

Both  men  were  opposed  to  the  idea  of  founding  such
a  retreat,  and  they  refused  to  follow  the  suggestion  made
in  their  dreams.  The  night  of  the  following  Christmas
they  both  simultaneously  in  their  respective  homes  fell
seriously  ill  at  midnight ;  the  illness  increased  until  they
were  at  the  point  of  death  ;  suddenly,  at  precisely  the
same  time,  they  were  told  in  indescribable  visions  to  found
the  retreat !  The  "  joint "  illness  lasted  for  nearly  two
years,  when  a  general  paralysis  of  their  limbs  rendered
them  both  helpless  !  They  were  now  told  that  this  con-
dition would  last  until  they  followed  the  will  of  God.  At
length  they  yielded,  and  immediately  they  v/ere  both
restored  to  health  !  Confirmed  by  such  miraculous  signs,
the  two  friends  now  set  to  work  to  carry  out  the  plan
which  had  been  revealed  to  them.^

The  later  accounts,  which  describe  the  last  years  of
Merswin  and  the  "  Friend  of  God,"  throw  even  more
suspicion  on  the  historicity  of  the  narratives,  and  force
us  to  question  the  existence  of  this  mysterious  "  Friend
of  God."  Shortly  before  his  death,  which  occurred  in
1382,  Merswin  and  the  "Friend  of  God,"  with  eleven
other  Friends  of  God,  met  miraculously  for  a  "  divine
diet"  to  intercede  for  Christianity.  On  Good  Friday,
1380,  as  they  were  praying,  a  letter  fell  from   the  sky  in

^  Merswin  bought  the  Isle  with  its  ruined  convent  in  the  autumn  of  1366,  and
put  it  in  complete  condition  for  a  retreat  of  peace  and  calm,  suited  to  the  mystical
life.  As  the  result  of  another  "joint  revelation,"  the  retreat  was  turned  over  to
the  Order  of  Saint  John  in  1371.  The  important  documents  for  the  story  of
Merswin's  connection  with  Griinenworth,  or  "the  Convent  of  the  Green  Isle,"
are  the  collections  known  as  Das  grosse  deutsche  Memorial,  Erstes  lateinische
Memorial  und  PJlegeriiietnorial,  sindjohatiniter  Chronik,  all  of  which  are  in  the
Universitats-  und  Landesbibliothek  ;  and  the  collection  known  as  Das  PJleger-
memorial  and  Erweitertes  Pjlegermemorial  and  Das  Brief  buck  in  the  Bezirksarchiv.
The  reader  who  wishes  to  study  the  actual  history  of  Griinenworth,  freed  from  the
colouring  of  fiction,  should  read  Karl  Rieder's  Der  GottesJreu?id  vom  Oberland
(Innsbruck,  1905).


XIII  THE   FRIENDS   OF  GOD  251

their  midst,  and  an  angel  told  them  that  God  had  granted
to  Christianity  a  reprieve  of  Judgment  for  three  years,  on
condition  that  they — these  thirteen  Friends  of  God —
would,  according  to  the  contents  of  the  Divine  letter,
become  "the  captives  of  the  Lord,"  i.e.  die  absolutely  to
self  and  the  world,  giving  their  lives  "  as  a  continual  sacri-
fice for  the  salvation  of  Christianity" — and  so  they  did  !
The  last  word  that  came  from  the  "  Friend  of  God,"  now
grown  even  more  mysterious  than  ever,  was  an  instruction
on  how  to  begin  and  end  the  day  with  prayer,  during  the
pestilence  of  1381,  and  Rulman  Merswin,  still  "  the  captive
of  the  Lord,"  died  in  1382.

Everybody  who  has  worked  over  this  collection  of
Friends  of  God  literature  has  been  impressed  with  the
difficulties  of  the  problems  involved  in  it.  It  seems  well-
nigh  certain  that  "  the  Friend  of  God  from  the  Oberland  "
was  not  a  historical  person,  but,  if  not,  who  "  created  "
him  ?

It  has  been  assumed,  especially  by  Denifle,  that  "  the
Friend  of  God  "  is  a  literary  creation  of  Rulman  Merswin.
This  entire  collection  of  mystical  treatises,  it  is  assumed,
was  written  by  Merswin,  with  the  assistance,  perhaps,  of
a  school  of  prophets,  and  it  is  all  tendency -literature^  com-
posed to  express  and  develop  the  ideals  of  the  great
religious  movement  to  which  Merswin's  life  was  devoted.

The  "  great  unknown  "  from  the  Oberland  is  the  ideal
character — the  "Christian"  of  a  fourteenth -century  Pil-
grinis  Progress — who  illustrates  how  God  does  His  work
for  the  world  and  for  the  Church  through  a  divinely-trained
and  spiritually-illuminated  layman.  On  this  hypothesis
Rulman  Merswin  as  the  creator  of  this  ideal  Christian  of
the  fourteenth  century,  as  the  author  of  this  remarkable
autobiographical  literature,  and  as  the  writer  of  the  great
Book  of  the  Nine  Rocks,  would  take  rank  as  a  genius  of
uncommon  order  and  as  one  of  the  foremost  exponents
of  mysticism  in  any  age,  though,  as  Denifle  points  out,
he  would  have  to  be  regarded  as  an  arch-deceiver  who
wilfully  misled  all  his  associates  and  befooled  all  his
readers  for  four  centuries.


252  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

In  order  to  clear  Merswin  from  the  charge  of  deceit,
Auguste  Jundt  has  proposed  a  very  bold  and  ingenious
hypothesis  to  solve  the  mystery.  He  suggests  that
Rulman  Merswin  was  a  "  double  personality,"  of  a  patho-
logical type  now  well  known  to  all  students  of  psychology.-^
In  his  primary  state  he  wrote  the  books  ascribed  to  him
and  experienced  the  events  recorded  in  his  autobiography  ;
while  in  his  secondary  state  he  became  the  person  known
as  "  the  Friend  of  God  from  the  Oberland,"  and  in  this
state  he  wrote  the  books,  treatises,  and  letters  ascribed
to  "  the  Friend  of  God."  This  view,  if  proved  sound,
would  surely  make  Rulman  Merswin  one  of  the  most
interesting  psychological  "  subjects "  in  the  entire  range
of  history.

There  is  a  third  hypothesis  which  rests  on  solider
ground  than  either  of  the  two  preceding  views.  It  is
presented  with  sound  learning  and  minute  and  accurate
scholarship  by  Karl  Rieder.^  He  holds  that  Rulman
Merswin  is  neither  a  deceiver  nor  "  a  double  personality,"
and,  with  the  iconoclasm  characteristic  of  modern  German
scholarship,  he  concludes  that  Merswin  is  not  the  author
of  any  of  these  mystical  treatises,  and  that  none  of  them
furnish  reliable  biographical  facts  bearing  on  Merswin's
life.

What  he  finds  is  that  this  entire  collection  of  literature
has  gone  through  the  hands  of  Nikolaus  of  Lowen  and
been  transformed  by  him.  Nikolaus  was  a  friend  and
trusted  secretary  of  Rulman  Merswin,  his  associate  in  the
foundation  and  development  of  the  Religious  House  of
Grlinenworth,  afterwards  the  House  of  St  John,  and  the
first  local  head  of  the  House  of  St.  John  during  the  life-
time and  after  the  death  of  Merswin.

There  came  into  the  hands  of  Nikolaus,  possibly  as
part  of  the  library  of  Grunenw5rth,  a  rich  collection  of
mystical  treatises,  the  creation  of  different  members  of  the
group  of  Friends  of  God,  but  with  no  definite  authorship

^  A.  Jundt,  Rulman  Merswin  et  V Ami  de  Dieu  (Paris,  1890).  It  is  a  very
interesting  piece  of  work,  and  the  theory  is  ably  presented.

-  Der  Gottesfreund  vom  Oberland :  eine  Erjindung  des  Strassburger  Johan-
niterbruders  Nikolaus  von  Lowen,  von  Karl  Rieder  (Innsbriick,  1905).


XIII  THE   FRIENDS   OF  GOD  253

attached  to  them  or  ascribed  to  them.-^  In  order  to  glorify
the  Religious  House  to  which  he  belonged,  and  to  give  a
weighty  influence  and  authority  to  its  founder,  Nikolaus
attached  Merswin's  name  to  some  of  these  anonymous
treatises,  and  finally  created  out  of  his  own  imagination
the  mysterious  and  somewhat  supernatural  adviser,  "  the
Friend  of  God  from  the  Oberland,"  to  whom  he  ascribed
the  origin  of  most  of  the  remaining  mystical  treatises.
As  the  plan  grew,  Nikolaus  expanded  the  anonymous
narratives  relating  extraordinary  experiences,  and  inserted
the  names  of  Merswin  and  "  the  Friend  of  God,"  and
passed  them  off  as  autobiographical,  inventing  a  concrete
setting  for  narratives  which  in  their  original  form  had
been  purely  fictitious,  and  written  to  illustrate  principles
which  were  dear  to  the  Friends  of  God.  The  arch-
deceiver,  therefore,  was  Nikolaus  von  Lowen,  and  his  was
the  genius  that  created  "  the  Friend  of  God  from  the
Oberland."

Rieder's  main  contention  that  this  mystical  literature
has  received  a  transformation  and  a  local  setting  at  the
hands  of  Nikolaus  von  Lowen,  and  that  he  has  woven  in
much  fictitious  material  to  glorify  the  House  of  St.  John,
and  its  founder,  Merswin,  seems  to  me  sound  ;  but  I  see,
however,  no  good  reason  for  the  conclusion  that  Rulman
Merswin  is  not  the  author  of  any  of  these  mystical
treatises.  It  now  becomes  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to
prove  that  he  wrote,  for  example.  The  Banner  of  Christ
and  The  Book  of  the  Nine  Rocks,  but  if  he  were  known
to  Nikolaus  and  to  others  of  the  religious  circle  to  be  the
actual  author  of  some  of  these  important  treatises,  it
makes  it  much  easier  to  understand  how  Nikolaus  could
have  conceived  his  bold  scheme  of  enlarging  the  scope
of  his  friend's  activity,  and  how  he  was  able  to  deceive  so
successfully  his  contemporaries.

We  shall,  however,  in  any  case  be  compelled  to  give
up  using  any  of  this  collection  of  mystical  literature  as
genuine    biographical    and   historical    material.      It   is    all

1  This  modesty  of  authorship  appears  to  be  a  characteristic  of  many  writers
among  the  Friends  of  God,


254  -  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

tendency -literature^  full  of  fictitious  situations,  and,  until
more  light  is  thrown  upon  it,  it  must  be  treated  as
anonymous.  It  does,  nevertheless,  furnish  us  material
for  discovering  the  prevailing  ideas  and  ideals  of  these
mystical  groups  of  the  period,  known  to  us  as  Friends
of  God,  and  I  shall  now  endeavour  to  gather  up  the  trend
and  characteristics  of  the  movement.

Their  religion  was  extremely  simple  and  practical.
They  humbly  claim  that  they  "  have  drunk  at  the  heavenly
fountain,"  and  have  had  their  "  inner  eyes  opened."  They
were  not  primarily  speculative,  like  Eckhart,  but  were
rather  concerned  with  the  concrete  matters  of  actual  life,
though  they  evidently  put  undue  emphasis  on  "  ex-
periences "  and  on  visions,  and  they  shared  the  tendency
of  the  times  to  drift  into  exuberant  apocalyptic  fancies.
But,  however  deep  and  intense  their  piety  was,  it  always
conformed  to  the  medieval  type  rather  than  to  the  spirit
of  the  Reformation  period.  Some  writers  have  tried  to
find  in  these  Friends  of  God  Protestants  before  the  Refor-
mation, but  a  careful  historical  study  gives  little  ground
for  such  a  view.  Even  the  most  spiritual  of  them  were
scrupulous  in  their  obedience  to  the  rules  of  the  Church  ;
they  were  the  children  of  their  age,  and  they  were  loyal
to  Roman  Catholic  ideals.  Even  during  the  terrible
period  of  the  interdict  there  is  little  indication  of  a  revolt,
though  some  of  the  Friends  of  God  rose  to  the  discovery
that  it  is  possible  to  have  spiritual  life  without  the
mediation  of  the  Church.

It  was  distinctly  a  laymen's  movement,  and  there  is
an  evident  purpose  in  the  literature  of  the  Friends  of  God
to  exalt  the  ordinary  lay  Christian,  and  to  show  how  the
Church  can  be  saved  and  the  ministry  purified  by  un-
ordained  persons  ;  but  these  men  do  not  show  any  spirit
of  revolt  from  the  ancient  system,  they  have  not  gained
the  Protestant  temper,  and  they  never  dreamed  of  dis-
pensing with  the  mediation  of  the  Church,  though  they
occasionally  admit  that  spiritual  life  is  possible  without
such  mediation.  The  nearest  approach  to  a  religion
purely    of  the   Spirit   is  found    in    The  Book  of  tJie  Nine


XIII  THE  FRIENDS  OF  GOD  255

Rocks ^  where  it  is  said  that  even  Jews  and  pious  pagans,
who  are  hampered  only  by  ignorance^  will  be  saved  at  the
moment  of  death  by  ways  known  only  to  the  Holy
Spirit.      Here  is  the  passage  :

"  If  a  Jew  or  Mohammedan  fears  God  from  the  depth  of  his
heart,  and  leads  a  good  and  simple  life ;  if  he  does  not  know  any
better  religion  than  the  one  in  which  he  was  born ;  if  he  is  ready
to  obey  God  in  case  He  reveals  to  him  a  better  faith  than  his
own,  why  should  not  such  a  man  be  dearer  to  God  than  wicked
and  impious  '  Christians  '  who,  though  having  received  baptism,
wilfully  disobey  the  commands  of  God  ?  When  God  finds  a  good
Jew  or  Mohammedan  of  pure  life  He  feels  a  thrill  of  love  and
infinite  pity  for  him,  no  matter  in  what  part  of  the  earth  he  lives,
and  God  will  find  some  way  of  saving  hifn  unknown  to  us  !  "  "  If
baptism  cannot  be  conferred  upon  him,  though  he  has  a  desire
for  it,  God  can  baptize  him  in  the  holy  desire  of  his  will^  and  there
are  in  the  eternal  world  many  good  pagans  who  have  been
received  in  this  way."^

One  of  the  utterances  which  sounds  most  like  a  spirit
of  revolt  came  from  Christina  Ebner,  who,  beholding  the
miseries  of  the  unshepherded  people,  cried  out :  "  The
actions  of  the  Pope  toward  the  clergy  make  groans  and
cries  rise  to  heaven."

It  is  not  possible  to  decide  whether  Tauler  obeyed  the
interdict  or  not,  but  it  is  at  least  certain  that  he  said  in
one  of  his  powerful  sermons  :  "  While  the  Holy  Church
is  able  to  take  from  us  the  external  Sacrament,  no  one
can  take  from  us  the  spiritual  joy  which  comes  from  union
with  God,  i.e.  inward  joy  from  the  free  partaking  of  the
body  and  blood  of  Christ."  ^

During  the  period  of  the  interdict  and  the  "  Black
Death,"  when  the  religious  services  were  suspended  in
Strasbourg,  a  plan  of  life,  ascribed  to  Rulman  Merswin,
was  drawn  up  by  which  a  Christian  layman  could  dispense
with  the  services  of  the  priest.  This  proved  so  valuable
that  it  was  copied  and  spread  broadcast,  not  only  through-
out the  city  of  Strasbourg,  but  far  beyond  its  limits.  This
"  Advice "  well  illustrates  the  simple,  practical,  spiritual
religion  of  the  "  Society."      It  reads  as  follows  : —

1  Book  of  the  Nine  Rocks.  2  Tauler,  Sermon  No.  LXXI.


256  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

"  All  those  in  whom  the  love  of  God,  or  the  terror  created  by
the  terrible  calamities  of  the  present,  arouses  a  desire  to  begin  a
new  and  spiritual  life,  will  find  great  profit  in  a  withdrawal  into
themselves  every  morning  when  they  rise,  to  consider  what  they
will  undertake  during  the  day.  If  they  find  in  themselves  any
evil  thought,  any  intention  contrary  to  the  Divine  wall,  let  them
renounce  it  for  the  glory  of  God.  Likewise,  in  the  evening,  on
going  to  bed,  let  them  collect  themselves  and  consider  how  they
have  spent  the  day ;  what  acts  they  have  done,  and  in  what  spirit
they  have  done  them.  If  they  find  that  they  have  done  any
good,  let  them  thank  God  and  give  Him  the  glory.  If  they  find
they  have  committed  any  sin,  let  them  attribute  the  fault  of  it  to
themselves,  and  to  nobody  else,  and  let  them  show  to  God  a  deep
repentance,  saying  to  Him  :

'  Oh  !  Lord,  be  merciful  to  me — poor,  unworthy  sinner,  and
forgive  me  all  the  sins  of  this  day,  for  I  seriously  repent,  and  I
have  a  firm  purpose  henceforth  with  Thy  help  to  avoid  sinning.' "

But,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  they  often  caught  a
glimpse  of  a  spiritual  religion  far  in  advance  of  the
prevailing  ideals  of  their  time,  they  shared  for  the  most
part  the  theology  of  their  age,  and  in  some  instances
they  were  grossly  superstitious,  like  their  unmystical
countrymen.

They  had  not  yet  outgrown  a  naive  faith  in  the
efficacy  of  "  holy  relics."  Henry  of  Nordlingen  is  one
of  the  leading  "  experts "  of  his  time  in  the  efificacious
values  of  different  relics,  and  we  frequently  hear  of  him
in  some  remote  region,  searching  for  the  holy  bone  of  a
saint  which  is  to  work  wonders  among  the  faithful.  He
carries  his  superstitious  worship  to  such  an  extreme  that
he  even  believes  that  there  is  a  supernatural  power  in
objects  which  have  touched  the  body  of  his  saintly  friend,
Margaret  Ebner,  the  Friend  of  God,  who  was  head  of
the  "  circle  "  at  Medingen  in  Bavaria.

There  is,  too,  an  excessive  love  of  supernatural
manifestations  apparent  in  all  the  literature  of  the
movement.  In  the  earlier  stages  of  what  they  called
their  "  commencement,"  the  Friends  of  God  subjected
themselves  to  terrible  bodily  tortures,  self-inflicted,  often
of  the  most  ingenious  sort,  and  they  generally  emerged
from    this    aberration    with    enfeebled    constitutions    and


XIII  THE  FRIENDS  OF  GOD  257

wrecked  nervous  systems.  Certain  typical  "  experiences  "
were  expected,  and  sooner  or  later  they  generally  occurred.
The  stress  and  strain  of  the  troublous  epoch  produced
a  mental  type  of  person  easily  affected  by  suggestion,  and
thus  the  ideas  and  experiences  of  the  leaders  spread  in
this  responsive  material.  We  find  in  the  literature  of  the
movement  accounts  of  almost  every  known  form  oi psychic
experience.  There  are  accounts  of  hallucinations  of  every
sense — sight,  touch,  smell,  taste,  and  hearing.  I  give  one
instance  from  the  Imprisoned  Knight,  This  knight  had
been  taken  prisoner,  and  was  thrust  into  a  dungeon
under  a  tower,  where,  loaded  with  chains,  he  had  passed
six  months.  Feeling  himself  about  to  die,  he  wished  to
take  communion,  but  his  request  was  harshly  denied.  At
midnight  he  saw  a  ''  radiant  light,"  and  heard  a  voice
saying  that  the  mother  of  God  had  come  to  his  aid.
"  She  has  prayed  her  Son,"  the  voice  continued,  "  to
divide  between  the  chaplain  of  the  castle  and  thee  the
wafer  which  will  be  used  to-morrow  in  the  consecration
of  the  Mass.  The  wafer  will  be  divided  into  two  parts,
but  the  Lord  will  be  entirely  present  without  division  in
both  parts."  The  next  morning  the  knight  saw^  sur-
rounded with  a  dazzling  light,  a  half  wafer  enter  his
prison !  It  went  directly  into  his  mouth,  and  at  once
revived  his  strength,  so  that  for  the  entire  day  he  took
none  of  the  food  which  was  brought  to  him.  This
miracle  was  repeated  for  six  consecutive  days,  and  after
the  first  day  the  jailer  also  saw  both  the  light  and  the
wafer.^  Reports  of  collective  hallucination  are  frequent
in  the  literature  of  the  "  Society."  Christina  Ebner,  head
of  the  circle  at  Engelthal,  in  Bavaria,  many  times  heard
the  Divine  Voice  say  that  Tauler  was  of  all  men  the
one  whom  God  most  loved.  She  also  was  told  that  there
were  two  names  written  in  heaven — those  of  John  Tauler
and  Henry  of  Nordlingen.  The  voice  said  that  God
dwelt  in  Tauler   like   melodious    music.      The    members

^  It  is  true  that  this  narration  is  fictitious,  but  the  writer  is  not  creating  mere
fiction.  He  is  writing  for  edification,  and  he  gives  what  he  beheves  ia  possible
experience  for  the  group.


258  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

of    the    group    were    telepathic   and    often   felt  what  was
happening  to  some  other  Friend  of  God  far  away.

They  all  looked  upon  the  state  of  ecstasy  as  a  supreme
divine  favour.     In  these  moments  of  "  unspeakable  ecstasy  "
they  believed  that  God  was  talking  with  them  face  to  face,
and  the  uprushes  of  intimation  which  came  at  such  times
were  counted  as  veritable  "  revelations "  from   the   Holy
Spirit.      These   revelations  were   considered    by  them   as
authoritative  as  the   Holy  Scriptures.      Henry  of   Nord-
lingen  calls  the  revelations  which  come  through  Margaret
Ebner  "  a  holy  scripture."      He  allows  the  Friends  of  God
in  Basle  to  have  communion  during  the  interdict,  and   he
explains  in   a  letter  that  he  granted  the  privilege  to  the
spiritual  circle  on   the  strength  of  a   personal   revelation
given  to  Margaret  Ebner.      In  an  ecstasy,  Margaret  was
called  into  the  presence  of  the  Saviour  Himself,  and  in
tender  love  He  invited  her  to  take   His  holy  body,  and
Henry  adds  :  "  I   dare  not  oppose  myself  to  Thee."      In
the  Book  of  the  Master  of  Holy  Scripture,  ''  the  Friend  of
God,"  speaking  as  an  oracle  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  says  to
the  Master :  "If  you  are  to  receive  the  words  I  speak  as
though  they  come  from  me,  I  shall  say  no  more  to  you."
Their    writings    everywhere    imply   or    assert    that    God
speaks  through  them  in   the   same  way  that   He  spoke
through  "  His  Friends  in  the  Old  and  New  Testament "  ;
in  both  dispensations  the  "  counsel "  of  a  Friend  of  God
is  "  the  counsel  of  God  Himself."

They  never  question  the  authority  of  the  Scriptures,
nor  undervalue  their  teaching ;  in  fact,  they  were  in  no
other  respect  so  like  the  Protestants  of  the  sixteenth
century  as  in  their  devotion  to  the  Bible — but  at  the
same  time  they  insisted  on  the  reality  of  present  in-
spiration and  continuous  revelation.  Those  who  receive
"  the  luminous  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit "  are  granted
immediate  revelations  bearing  upon  both  inner  experience
and  outer  events.  They  talk  of  two  stages  of  truth.
To  the  lower  stage  belong  the  interpretations  of  Scripture
which  the  learned  doctors  of  the  Church  give.  It  is
their  function  to  tell  what  has  been  revealed  in  past  ages.


XIII  THE   FRIENDS  OF  GOD  259

The  higher  stage  is  the  truth  of  immediate  revelation.
"  God  has  a  few  whom  He  whispers  in  the  ear  !  "  They
have  the  privilege  of  being  the  bearers  of  a  first-hand
word  from  Him.  "  They  hear,"  as  one  of  them  says,  "  in
their  own  souls  what  they  are  to  speak."  This  stage
they  call  '*  the  upper  school  of  the  Holy  Spirit."  This
distinction  between  the  "  lower  school  "  of  those  who  have
only  "  knowledge  about "  and  the  "  higher  school "  of
those  who  have  also  "  knowledge  of  experience  "  is  well
illustrated  by  a  passage  from  the  Book  of  the  Two  Men.

"  If  two  men  gave  thee  a  description  of  the  city  of  Rome,  one
by  mere  hearsay,  and  the  other  by  experience  after  he  had  been
there,  thou  wouldst  give  thy  attention  mainly  to  the  second.  So
also,  if  a  man  who  has  been  touched  inwardly  by  divine  grace
hears  the  preaching  of  a  doctor  who  still  loves  himself,  he  feels
that  the  preaching  of  such  a  doctor  does  not  come  from  pure  and
unadulterated  love  of  God.  The  soul  that  is  filled  with  divine
love  is  not  touched  by  such  a  sermon.  Such  a  preacher  is
speaking  only  by  hearsay  of  the  heavenly  Rome,  and  of  the
roads  which  lead  to  it.  He  knows  only  what  he  has  learned
from  Scripture.  But  if  the  same  man  hears  the  preaching  of  a
master  who  knows  both  from  Scripture  and  through  his  own
spiritual  experience,  a  master  who  has  renounced  all  self-love
and  self  advantage,  who  knows  the  heavenly  Rome,  not  only  by
hearsay,  but  because  he  has  travelled  the  road  to  it,  and  because
he  has  seen  the  form  of  its  buildings,  he  rejoices  to  hear  his
message,  because  it  proceeds  from  the  Divine  Love  itself."

Those  who  have  had  this  first-hand  experience,  and
belong  to  this  "  upper  school  of  the  Holy  Spirit,"  are  the
true  teachers  and  guides  of  the  rest,^  For  this  reason  the
Friends  of  God  insisted,  as  a  matter  of  first  importance,
that  all  who  were  in  the  stage  of  "  preparation  "  should
submit  themselves  entirely  to  the  counsel  and  direction
of  some  holy  man  of  the  "  Society."

By  far  the  most  famous  account  of  submission  and
direction  is  that  recorded  in  the  Book  of  the  Master.
This  book  relates  that  in  1346  there  was  "a  great  doctor,
a  master  of  Holy  Scripture,"  who  preached  in  a  certain
city,  and  multitudes  flocked  to  hear  him — "  his  preaching

^  This  phrase,  "upper  school  of  the  Holy  Spirit,"  had  already  been  used  bj
Matilda  of  Magdeburg.


26o  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

was  talked  about  for  miles  around."  "  A  certain  layman^
a  man  full  of  divine  grace,  the  beloved  Friend  of  God
from  the  Oberland,  came  by  command  of  God  "  ten  days'
journey,  and  heard  five  sermons  by  the  master.  He
perceived  that  the  "  master,"  though  "  a  man  of  good
heart,"  v^^as  "  still  in  the  dark  and  v^ithout  the  full  light
of  grace."  At  the  end  of  the  fifth  sermon  the  "  Friend  of
God  "  asked  "  the  doctor "  if  he  would  preach  a  sermon
on  "The  way  to  attain  the  highest  degree  of  spiritual
life."  The  preacher  demurred  for  a  time  on  the  ground
that  the  layman  could  not  understand  it  if  he  should
preach  it,  as  it  would  be  beyond  his  experience  and  com-
prehension. He,  however,  finally  assented  and  preached
the  sermon.  In  this  sermon  the  great  preacher  pointed
out,  in  mystical  fashion,  that  the  highest  state  of  spiritual
life  is  found  in  an  experience  beyond  "  intellectual  com-
prehension," beyond  ideas  and  images.  Quoting  from
Dionysius,  he  says  that  the  light  of  faith  takes  man  above
the  sphere  of  intellectual  conceptions.  The  perfect  man
must  rise  above  everything  sensible  and  intellectual,  must
empty  himself  of  all  content,  and  then  God  will  come  in
and  dwell  in  him.  He  must  absolutely  renounce  self,
self-will,  self-love,  and  the  pursuit  of  all  personal  advantage
either  in  this  v\^orld  or  in  the  next.

After  a  day  of  consideration  the  "  Friend  of  God  "
came  back  to  the  preacher  and  passed  severe  criticism
on  the  sermon  and  on  the  preacher  himself.  He  told
him  that  he  was  preaching  what  he  had  not  yet  ex-
perienced, and  even  went  to  the  length  of  calling  "  the
doctor "  a  Pharisee,  and  an  imitator  of  the  v^^ork  of  the
Pharisees.  The  preacher  showed  great  offence  at  this
freedom  on  the  part  of  a  mere  layman,  but  as  the  layman
went  on  to  reveal  the  height  and  depth  of  his  own  spiritual
experience,  the  master  of  Holy  Scripture  perceived  that
he  wras  in  the  presence  of  one  who  had  attained  something
which  he  himself  had  not  at  all  reached,  and  in  great
humility  he  asked  the  layman  how  he  had  gained  such  a
degree  of  spiritual  experience.  The  layman  answered
that  God   had   brought  him   into  complete  humility  and


XIII  THE  FRIENDS  OF  GOD  261

abandonment  of  self,  and  so  had  taught  him  directly  by
the  Holy  Spirit.  "  The  Holy  Spirit,"  he  says,  "  has  the
same  power  to-day  as  ever.  He  is  as  able  to  speak
through  me,  a  poor  sinner,  as  He  did  through  the  mouth
of  the  sinner  Caiaphas.  In  truth,  if  you  think  that  these
words  which  I  speak  come  through  me,  I  will  not  speak
another  word  to  you."

Under  this  criticism  and  instruction,  the  preacher^
seeing  his  own  inner  poverty  revealed,  asks  how  he  can
begin  for  himself  a  new  course  of  life  so  as  to  attain  to
the  highest  degree  of  spiritual  life,  saying  that  even  if  he
must  die  for  it  he  will  follow  "  the  counsel."  Thereupon,
the  layman  gives  him  first  of  all  the  A  B  C  of  religion
to  study,  which  was  a  series  of  twenty-three  sentences
bearing  upon  the  rudiments  of  religious  experience.  At
the  end  of  six  weeks  he  set  before  "  the  great  doctor  "  the
conditions  upon  which  he  can  advance  to  a  higher  life.
He  is  to  go  into  his  cell,  and  separate  himself  from  all
his  old  life  and  occupations.  He  is  to  say  Mass  every
day,  and  spend  the  rest  of  the  day  in  solitary  meditation,
comparing  his  life  with  that  of  the  Saviour,  and  thinking
of  what  he  has  lost  by  self-love,  until  he  shall  arrive  to
complete  humility.  He  is  told  that  he  will  be  called  a
fool,  will  lose  his  best  friends,  and  will  be  the  laughing-
stock of  all  his  companions,  but  this  will  be  to  him  a
blessing,  for  it  will  bring  him  to  the  point  of  having  con-
fidence in  none  but  God  Himself

For  two  years  "  the  doctor "  underwent  a  life  of  this
rigid  regime,  exposed  to  ridicule  and  scorn,  and  then
there  came  upon  him  a  wonderful  experience.  He  lost
all  consciousness,  and  was  carried  he  knew  not  whither.
When  at  last  he  awoke  and  came  to  himself,  he  felt  new
forces  throughout  his  whole  being,  and  immeasurable  joy
filled  him,  such  as  he  had  never  known  before.  His
mind  was  illuminated  with  a  light  from  above.

On  hearing  of  this  experience  the  layman  said  to  him  :
"  Thou  hast  been  touched  by  God  with  spiritual  know-
ledge, in  the  very  highest  part  of  thy  soul,  and  now,"
he  adds,  "  thou  wilt  have  the   Holy  Spirit  added   to  thy


262  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

knowledge  of  Scripture,  and  one  of  thy  sermons  will  do
more  good  than  a  hundred  of  thy  former  discourses  did."

Before  leaving  him  the  "  Friend  of  God  "  told  him  that
henceforth  he  must  live  in  the  Spirit,  and  not  in  the
letter  which  kills.  Instead  of  wasting  his  time  in  the
study  of  the  letter  of  holy  books  and  writings  of  great
doctors,  he  should  penetrate  to  the  spirit  and  the  wisdom
which  the  books  contain.  Many  of  the  passages,  he  says,
which  formerly  seemed  obscure  and  contradictory,  will
now  become  clear,  "  You  will  discover  that  all  Scripture
is  one,  and  now  you  may  commence  again  to  preach  and
instruct  your  fellows  ;  henceforth  your  words  will  come
from  a  pure  vessel,  and  will  be  received  with  joy  by  all
who  love  the  Lord.  I  shall  give  you  no  more  instruction.
It  is  now  for  you  to  instruct  me,  and  I  shall  stay  until
I  have  heard  many  of  your  sermons.  As  much  as  you
have  been  scorned,  so  much  you  will  now  be  esteemed
by  those  about  you.  Continue  in  humility,  and  do  not
lose  what  you  have  gained."

The  master  announced  that  in  three  days  he  would
preach  to  the  people.  A  crowd  gathered,  and  he  began
his  sermon,  but  was  overcome  with  emotion,  and  found
it  impossible  to  speak.  The  news  spread  rapidly  that
the  master  had  failed  to  meet  their  expectation,  and  more
than  ever  he  was  the  laughing-stock  of  the  people,  and
it  was  even  believed  that  he  had  lost  his  mind.  Once
again  he  gained  permission  to  attempt  a  sermon,  and  this
time  he  preached  with  great  power  on  the  text,  "  Behold
the  Bridegroom  cometh,  go  ye  out  to  meet  Him."  With
extraordinary  power  he  worked  out  the  allegory  of  the
Lord  coming  to  meet  His  bride.  Suddenly  one  of  the
listeners  cried  :  "  It  is  true,"  and  fell  to  the  ground  in  a
swoon.  When  the  sermon  was  over,  fully  forty  persons
lay  on  the  floor  incapable  of  movement.  From  this  time
to  his  death,  nine  years  later,  "  the  master  "  increased  in
power  and  reputation.  He  fearlessly  attacked  the  evils
and  corruptions  of  the  Church,  leaving  no  class  of  the
clergy  untouched  by  his  vigorous  criticism,  and  though
the  offended  monks  made  a  strenuous  effort  to  stop  him


XIII


THE  FRIENDS  OF  GOD  263


from  preaching,  the  common  people  of  the  city  implicitly
trusted  him  and  obeyed  him,  so  that  he  enjoyed  almost
unlimited  influence,  and  was  consulted  on  all  the  affairs
of  Church  and  city.

This  book  has  for  centuries  been  taken  as  actual
history,  and  "  the  master  of  Holy  Scripture  "  has  generally
been  identified  with  John  Tauler.  The  identification  with
Tauler,  however,  rests  wholly  on  tradition.  In  his  search-
ing critical  study  of  this  episode,  Denifle  first  showed
what  slender  historical  basis  there  is  for  the  Tauler  tradi-
tion.^ The  question  has  been  hotly  debated  since  the
appearance  of  Denifle's  investigation,  and  good  scholars
like  Karl  Schmidt  and  Preger  and  Jundt  continued  to
stand  by  the  historicity  of  the  Book  of  the  Master  of  Holy
Scripture,  and  to  see  in  it  an  important  chapter  in  the  life
of  the  famous  Strasbourg  preacher.^  The  historical  view
has,  however,  lost  ground,  and  is  untenable.

The  Book  of  the  Master  of  Holy  Scripture  is  in  the
main  fictitious — a  piece  of  tendency-literature,  written  to
set  forth  a  special  religious  truth.  The  central  idea
embodied  in  the  book  is  the  extraordinary  influence  of
a  holy  layman  when  he  has  been  illuminated  by  the
Divine  Spirit.  He  is  able  to  become  the  infallible  coun-
sellor to  the  greatest  preacher  in  the  country,  and  his
instruction  is  sufficient  to  bring  "the  master"  from  his
stage  of  mere  head-knowledge  to  the  stage  of  first-hand
spiritual  experience,  so  that  he  can  rise  to  a  wholly  new
level  of  power.  It  is  a  telling,  concrete  illustration  of  the
ruling  idea  of  the  Friends  of  God  that  a  divinely-instructed
layman,  who  has  attained  the  highest  stage  of  mystical
experience,  "speaks  in  the  place  of  God,"  and  has  an
apostolic  authority  which  puts  him  above  any  priest  or
doctor  who  has  only  the  authority  of  ordination  or  of
scholarship.  For  a  comprehension  of  the  views  of  the
Friends  of  God  this  book  is  most  important,  but  it  must
not  be  treated  as  furnishing  the  account  of  an  historical
event  in  the  life  of  Tauler.

^  Denifle,  Taulers  Bekehrung,  Strasbourg,  1879.

2  See  Preger,    Geschichte  der  deutschen  Mysiik  (Leipzig,    1893),   vol.   iii.    pp.
116-139.     Jnndi,  Les  Amis  de  Dieu.


264  MYSTICAL  RELIGION


II


There  is  a  powerful  apocalyptic  strain  in  all  the  litera-
ture of  the  Friends  of  God.  In  this  particular  they  show
a  close  affiliation  and  relationship  with  the  German
prophetesses,  St.  Hildegarde,  St.  Elizabeth  of  Schoenau,
and  St.  Matilda  of  Magdeburg,  who  were  granted  "visions"
of  the  corrupt  condition  of  Christianity  and  of  the  speedy
judgments  of  God.

"  The  Church  has  lost  its  state  of  purity,"  cries  St.  Hildegarde  ;
"  its  crown  is  tarnished  by  schism  and  heresy.  Its  servants,  its
priests,  who  ought  to  make  its  face  shine  like  the  morning  and
its  garment  like  the  light,  have  by  their  simony,  their  avarice,
their  dissolute  morals,  covered  its  face  with  dirt  and  soiled  and
rent  its  garments.  Their  wickedness  is  as  habitual  as  if  it  were
commanded ;  they  enjoy  sin  as  the  worm  does  earth.  Deaf  and
dumb,  they  no  longer  hear  the  Scriptures,  and  they  no  longer
teach  others.  All  classes  of  Christianity  are  corrupt.  The  Church
no  longer  has  any  staff  to  sustain  it.  All  its  commandments  are
ready  to  disappear ;  each  one  takes  his  own  will  for  rule."

St.  Elizabeth  of  Schoenau  speaks  with  the  boldness  of
a  Hebrew  prophet :

"  Cry  with  a  loud  voice  !  cry  to  all  the  nations  !  Woe,  for  the
whole  world  is  covered  with  darkness.  The  vineyard  of  the  Lord
has  perished  ;  there  is  no  one  to  cultivate  it.  The  Lord  has  sent
labourers  into  it,  but  they  have  all  proved  idle.  The  head  of  the
Church  is  sick,  and  its  members  are  dead.  Each  one  wishes  to
govern  himself,  and  to  live  according  to  his  own  caprice.  Very
rare  are  those  in  the  Church  who  follow  the  commands  of  the
Lord.  But  I  swear  by  My  right  hand  and  by  My  throne,  says
the  Eternal  One,  this  condition  shall  not  continue.  To  all  you
who  are  in  authority  on  the  earth — kings,  princes,  bishops,  abbots,
priests — I  order  you  to  purify  My  Church,  otherwise  you  will  be
smitten  with  the  sword  of  My  mouth.  Miserable  hypocrites,  you
appear  religious  and  innocent  in  the  eyes  of  men,  but  inwardly
you  are  full  of  the  spirit  of  wickedness.  Shepherds  of  My  Church,
you  are  asleep,  but  I  will  wake  you."

In  similar  strain,  Matilda  of  Magdeburg  takes  up  her
prophecy  :

"  Oh,  holy  Christianity,  glorious  crown,  how  thy  splendour  has
vanished  I     Thy  precious  stones  are  fallen,  thy  gold  is  tarnished


XIII  THE   FRIENDS  OF  GOD  265

by  impurities.  Oh,  bride  of  God,  thy  face  once  so  pure  and
chaste  is  blackened  by  the  fire  of  guilty  passions  ;  on  thy  lips  are
lies  and  hypocrisy ;  the  flowers  of  thy  virtues  are  faded  !  Oh,
holy  clergy,  shining  crown,  how  thy  glory  is  dimmed ;  thy  beauty
is  gone ;  thy  strength  is  weakened ;  thy  ruin  comes  on  !  He
who  is  ignorant  of  the  road  to  hell  has  only  to  watch  the
debauched  and  corrupted  clergy  !  The  road  they  follow  leads
straight  into  it !  Therefore  God  has  decided  to  humiliate  them,
flis  vengeance  will  break  upon  them  in  a  day  when  they  do  not
expect  it."  ^

The  fallen  condition  of  Christianity  is  constantly  on
the  lips  of  the  prophets  of  the  movement  we  are  now
studying,  and  they  paint  its  future  in  very  sombre  colours.
The  apocalyptic  element  is  not  wild  and  excessive,  but
they  all  announce  that  the  Church  is  far  out  of  the  way,
that  Christianity  is  sadly  sunk  in  the  ways  of  the
world,  and  that  Divine  judgment  is  fast  approaching.
As  the  woes  and  disturbances  of  the  period  increased,
especially  in  the  middle  decade  of  the  fourteenth  century,
the  sombre  tone  of  apocalyptic  prophecy  increased  in  the
writings  of  the  Friends  of  God.  They  have  "  revelations  "
that  the  evil  condition  is  to  go  on  from  bad  to  worse,
until  God  will  be  compelled  to  chastise  Christendom  with
pestilence,  earthquake,  famine,  divisions,  wars,  and  heresies,
and  that  many  will  lose  both  body  and  soul  in  this  time
of  testing.

In  1356  a  catastrophic  earthquake,  already  mentioned,
occurred  throughout  the  Rhine  valley,  with  its  most  dis-
astrous central  point  at  Basle  ;  the  city  was  turned  into  a
heap  of  ruins,  and  a  terrible  fear  struck  all  hearts,  the  echo
of  which  appears  in  all  the  mystical  writings  of  the  time.
The  mystical  prophets  saw  in  this  awful  catastrophe
warning  signs  of  the  approaching  end  of  the  world,  and  of
a  reconstruction  of  the  universe.^  "  God,"  they  say,  "  is
about  to  winnow  the  whole  of  Christendom,  and  those
only  who  bear  the  seal  of  God  on  their  foreheads  will  be
preserved  through  these  calamities."  *

^  These  passages  are  translated  fiom  Jundt,  Rulman  Merswin,  pp.  4-6.
'  The  "  Black  Death,"  it  will  be  remembered,  fell  upon  Germany  in  1347,  and
returned  again  in  1358  and  in  1363.

3  These  ' '  sealed  ones  "  are  evidently  the  Friends  of  God.


z66  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

Through  the  tribulations  of  the  present  age  they  see
signs  of  the  coming  of  new  heavens  and  new  earth,  and
they  declare  that  out  of  the  "  saints  of  the  earth "  God
will  select  for  blessedness  an  equal  number  with  that  of
the  fallen  angels,  so  that  the  population  of  the  new  heaven
will  be  the  same  as  the  population  of  the  primitive  celestial
city  before  there  was  a  fall !

Even  Tauler,  in  the  sermons  of  this  period,  occasionally
speaks  in  apocalyptic  imagery.  In  one  of  his  sermons
he  says :

"  It  is  written  in  the  Apocalypse  that  calamities,  hardly  less
terrible  than  the  last  judgment,  will  come  upon  the  earth.  The
time  which,  according  to  the  prophecy,  is  to  pass  before  these
calamities,  is  now  fulfilled.  We  expect  their  appearance  every
year,  every  day,  every  moment,  and  nobody  who  is  not  sealed
with  the  Divine  seal  can  come  through  them  and  endure."

The  writings  ascribed  to  Rulman  Merswin  and  to  "  the
Friend  of  God  from  the  Oberland  "  tell  how  they,  after
having  passed  through  terrible  suffering  and  temptations
in  the  various  stages  of  their  conversion,  are  promised  that
henceforth  they  will  have  "  no  other  trials  to  pass  through,
except  to  see  the  evil  state  of  Christianity — that  will  be  their
cross!'  In  the  book  entitled  Revelation  Addressed  to  the
Friend  of  God  from  the  Oberland  during  Christmas  Nighty
at  the  time  when  great  and  terrible  earthquakes  occurred}
the  writer  sees  the  end  drawing  near,  and  he  tells  how  he
experiences  in  his  own  body  the  sufferings  which  are  due
for  the  sins  of  the  Church.  He  hears  Divine  Mercy  tell
Divine  Wisdom  to  forbid  the  Friends  of  God  to  intercede
any  longer  for  the  wicked  world,  and  thereupon  he
addresses  a  last  warning.  As  has  happened  so  often
before  and  since,  the  event  miscarried,  and  the  Divine
judgment  was  postponed  !  But,  as  new  "  signs  "  appeared
(desolations  of  war  in  1375  ;  the  papal  schism  in  1378  ;
Christianity  divided  into  hostile  camps),  again  the  fatal
moment  seemed   near,  and   there  were  new  prophecies  of

1  This  book  contains  the  famous  "  Epistle  to  Christianity  "  ;  or  "The  Lament
of  a  German  lyayman  of  the  Fourteenth  Century  on  the  Decline  of  Christianity,"
printed  by  Karl  Schmidt,  in  his  Nikolaus  von  Basel.


XIII  THE   FRIENDS  OF  GOD  267

impending  doom  uttered.  The  Friends  of  God,  under
the  inspiration  of  Merswin,  again  intercede  for  the  world,
and  as  "  God  could  not  remain  deaf  to  the  prayers  of  His
Friends,"  a  "  suspension  "  of  judgment  was  granted.  This
extraordinary  spiritual  drama,  with  God,  on  the  one  hand,
holding  the  doom  of  the  world  in  His  hand,  and  the
Friends  of  God  keeping  back  the  phials  of  wrath  by  their
prayers,  goes  on  for  years,  until  there  comes  a  final
command  to  pray  no  more  for  Christianity.^

One  of  the  greatest  mystical  apocalypses  of  the  middle
ages  is  the  Book  of  the  Nine  Rocks — and  it  may,  I  think,  be
called  the  greatest  literary  creation  of  the  Friends  of  God.
It  is  the  best  illustration  there  is  of  the  ideas  current
among  these  mystical  Christians  on  the  state  of  Christianity
and  on  the  expected  "tempest  of  God,"  and  it  is  also  the
best  account  we  have  of  the  "  stages  "  of  spiritual  experi-
ence by  which  the  soul  rises  to  its  goal.  The  book  con-
tains a  series  of  "  visions "  which  the  author  of  it  saw
about  1 35  I.  He  was  commanded  to  write  them  down.
He  long  resisted  the  command,  saying  :  "  Are  there  not
books  enough  by  great  doctors,  who  can  write  much  better
than  I  can  ?  "  and  protesting  that  his  book  "  will  carry  no
conviction,  because  it  is  not  proved  by  the  Scriptures."
The  Divine  Voice  answered  :  "  Without  doubt  the  Scrip-
tures came  from  the  Holy  Spirit,  but  why  cannot  God
still  write  such  a  book  ?  Thou  art  not  the  first  person
through  whom  the  waters  of  Divine  Grace  have  come.
Is  not  the  power  of  God  the  same  as  in  Scripture  times  ?
Whoever  does  not  believe  that  God  can  work  His  wonderful
works  through  His  '  Friends '  to-day,  as  He  did  in  the
times  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament,  that  man  is  not  a
Christian^  for  he  does  not  believe  that  the  Divine  pozver
remains  the  same  throughout  the  centuries!^  "  I  will
obey,"   cries    the   author  ;    "  thou    hast    uttered    the   truth

1  There  is  a  curious  account  which  relates  how,  in  the  year  1379,  eight  Friends
of  God  from  different  countries  met  in  a  "  Divine  Diet,"  on  a  mountain  top,  to
pray  God  to  postpone  His  judgment.  On  the  eighth  day  they  were  surrounded
by  darkness,  assailed  by  demons,  and  heard  groans  coming  from  the  forest.
Suddenly  the  darkness  disappeared,  a  radiant  light  broke  forth,  and  an  angel
stood  before  them  and  announced  that  judgment  was  delayed  for  one  year,  but  they
must  not  pray  for  any  further  postponement,  for  Christianity  must  be  chastised.


268  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

through   Caiaphas  ;  speak   as  thou  wilt  through  me,  poor
sinner."  ^

The  theme  of  the  early  part  of  the  book  is  the  terrible
decadence  of  Christianity  as  compared  with  the  pristine
glory  of  the  primitive  Church.  In  a  series  of  stern  judg-
ments the  various  orders  of  Christianity  are  passed  in
review  and  condemned.  For  example,  here  is  the  "  vision  "
of  the  state  of  the  papacy  :

"  Open  thy  eyes  and  see  how  popes  live  to-day  !  All  respect
for  the  commandments  of  religion  is  extinct  in  them.  They  are
ambitious  for  worldly  goods ;  more  zealous  for  their  own  honour
than  for  that  of  God ;  they  think  only  oi places  for  their  relatives
and  friends.  Once  popes  chose  awful  deaths  before  they  would
swerve  for  an  instant  from  the  will  of  God.  Now  no  pope  for  a
long  time  has  been  sainted."

After  seeing  doleful  "  visions "  of  the  ecclesiastics  of
the  Church  from  the  top  down,  he  is  told  that  "  God  has
now  conferred  His  grace  on  other  men  [these  are,  of  course.
Friends  of  God],  whom  He  has  richly  endowed  with
spiritual  gifts.  These  men  are,  alas  !  few  in  number,  but
if  they  wholly  disappeared  from  the  world,  Christianity
would  utterly  come  to  an  end."  ^

In  the  second  part  of  the  book  is  described  the  vision
of  the  nine  rocks.  The  writer  sees  an  immense  net  which
covers  the  entire  earth,  except  one  mountain  in  which
nine  great  platforms  in  ascending  stages  are  cut  in  rock.
These  nine  platform-ledges  rise  like  the  stages  of  Dante's
Purgatory  from  the  level  plain,  where  stands  a  terrible
figure,  stretching  his  net  over  men  and  catching  them
in  it.  The  seer  opens  his  eyes  and  sees  men  running
away  from  the  net  and  beginning  to  climb  the  mountain.
Those  on  the  first  rock  receive  the  colour  of  health,  and,
by  sincere  confession,  are  delivered  from  the  mortal  sins
with  which  their  hearts  were  stained.  But,  unfortunately,
persons  keep  falling  off  this  rock  back  into  the  net  again.

On  the  second  rock  are  those  who  have  made  a  solid

^  This  resistance  against  the  command  to  put  revelations  into  writing  is  almost
universal  with  mystics.  It  appears  in  quite  similar  form  in  the  writings  of
Hildegarde,  Elizabeth  of  Schoenau,  and  Matilda  of  Magdeburg

2  They  thus  devoutly  believed  that  they  were  the  true  Church.


XIII


THE   FRIENDS  OF  GOD  269


resolution  to  give  up  their  own  will,  and  to  submit  to  an
illuminated  Friend  of  God,  who  shall  be  their  guide  and
counsellor  in  the  place  of  God.  The  third  rock  is  the
abode  of  those  who  are  practising  severe  mortifications  of
the  body,  and  are  doing  it  for  the  purpose  of  gaining  heaven.
They  are  still  in  the  state  of  a  religion  of  self-interest.
Those  on  th.e  fourth  rock  are  still  practising  self-mortification,
but  have  the  purpose  of  doing  it  solely  to  please  and  glorify
God.  Unfortunately,  they  are  still  animated  by  self-will,
and  have  themselves  chosen  mortification  without  discover-
ing the  Divine  will  for  them.  The  dwellers  on  ^t^  fifth
rock  have  entered  upon  the  sacrifice  of  their  own  will,
though  they  have  not  yet  attained  to  a  complete  and  final
death  to  self-will  and  self-pleasing.  Those  on  the  sixtJi
rock  have  completed  the  sacrifice  begun  on  the  rock  below.
They  have  burned  their  bridges,  and  have  entirely  aban-
doned themselves  to  their  Lord.  Their  only  imperfection
is  that  they  desire  the  supernatural  revelations  which  they
see  others  enjoy.  Those  who  have  reached  the  seventh
rock  have  got  beyond  this  desire  for  supernatural  revela-
tions, but  they  take  an  excessive  joy  in  such  revelations
when  they  are  granted  to  them.  Those  on  the  eighth
rock  have  nearly  conquered  the  enjoyment  of  anything
that  concerns  self  They  have  renounced  earthly  posses-
sions except  to  use  them  for  God  ;  they  have  given  up
counting  on  heaven.  They  are  ready  to  accept  what  God
gives  them,  both  in  time  and  in  eternity.  Their  only
imperfection  is  that  they  have  not  attained  the  state  where
they  can  have  perfect  peace,  even  when  God  hides  His
face  from  them  and  leaves  them  no  tokens  of  His  grace.

The  ninth  rock  is  the  top  of  the  mountain.  The
number  of  the  denizens  on  each  rock  decreases  as  the
stages  go  up,  until  finally  on  this  summit  there  are  only
three  dwellers  to  be  seen.  In  them,  all  personal  desire
is  destroyed.  They  are  crucified  to  the  world,  and  the
world  to  them.  They  enjoy  whatever  God  does.  They
have  attained  an  absolutely  disinterested  state.  They  seek
no  "  signs  "  ;  they  wish  for  no  "  manifestations,"  They
have  lost  all   fear.      They  have  arrived  at  the  full  stature


270  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

of  a  man,  afid  they  love  all  men  in  God  with  an  equal
love.  Here  on  the  top  is  granted  the  supreme  experience,
dimly  felt  sometimes  on  the  lower  levels,  the  experience  of
beJwldmg  the  Divine  Origin.  "  The  man,"  the  voice  says,
"  who  beholds  the  Divine  Origin,  loses  his  own  name  and
no  longer  bears  an  earthly  name.  He  has  now  become
God  by  grace,  as  God  is  God  by  nature  !  "

There  comes  at  last  to  the  writer  of  the  book  himself
this  supreme  vision  of  the  Divine  Origin,  and  when  the
indescribable  glory  passes  he  hears  a  voice  saying  :  "  Thou
hast  been  in  the  upper  school  where  the  Holy  Spirit
teaches  directly  within  the  man  himself.  This  august
Master  of  the  school  has  taken  thy  soul  and  filled  it
with  such  an  overflowing  love  that  it  has  flooded  even
thy  body  and  transfigured  it."  "  My  beloved  !  "  cries  the
man  in  a  transport  of  Divine  love,  "  thou  hast  become  so
dear  to  me  that  with  all  thy  power  thou  couldst  not  do
anything  that  would  be  disagreeable  to  me.  Do  toward
me  whatever  thou  wilt ;  whatever  thou  givest,  whatever
thou  takest  away,  I  shall  rejoice  in  it."

Here  we  have  drawn  for  us  by  a  leader  of  the  move-
ment the  ideal  Friend  of  God.

It  has  already  become  apparent  that  the  Friends  of
God  put  a  heavy  stress  on  i^enunciation.  They  often
pushed  it  to  the  extreme  of  annihilation  of  will  altogether.
"  The  true  Christian  who  wishes  to  follow  the  mystical
life,"  says  the  "  Friend  of  God,"  in  the  Book  of  the  Two
Men,  "  must  renounce  all  self-pleasure  and  all  self-will ;
he  must  destroy  all  will  that  aims  at  anything  for  self;
he  must  give  up  all  selfish  joys  and  all  self-imposed  suffer-
ings. He  must  be  wholly  directed  by  God,  ready  to
receive  from  Him  with  equal  submission  either  pain  or
joy,  temptation  or  ecstasy,  sickness  or  health."

There  is  an  extraordinary  case  of  a  Friend  of  God
who  got  to  the  indiflerence-point  to  such  a  degree  that
he,  "  through  the  power  of  love,  became  without  love,"
and  in  this  state  of  perfect  surrender,  he  heard  a  voice
say  to  him  :  "  Permit  Me,  My  beloved  child,  to  share
in    thee    and   with    thee   all    the    riches   of  My   divinity ;


XIII  THE  FRIENDS  OF  GOD  271

all  the  passionate  love  of  My  humanity  ;  all  the  joys  of
the  Holy  Spirit,"  and  the  "  Friend  of  God  "  replied  :  "  Yes,
Lord,  I  permit  Thee,  on  condition  that  Thou  alone  shalt
enjoy  it,  and  not  I  ! "

There  is  also  the  case  of  Elliaa  of  Crevelsheim,  called
the  "  Holy  child  of  God,"  who,  in  an  ecstasy  of  the
marvellous  love  of  God,  remains  seven  years  without
uttering  a  word,  and  at  the  end  of  this  period  God
touched  her  with  His  hand,  so  that  she  fell  into  an
ecstasy  which  lasted  five  days,  and  in  this  ecstasy  the
pire  truth  was  revealed  to  her,  and  she  was  given  the
privilege  of  entering  the  holy  interior  of  the  Father's
heart.  She  was  raised  to  an  experience  of  God  and
the  Supreme  Unity ;  she  was  bound  with  the  chains
of  love  ;  enveloped  in  light  ;  filled  with  peace  and  joy  ;
her  soul  carried  above  all  earthly  sufferings  ;  and  she
attained  a  complete  submission  to  the  will  of  Christ,
whatever  it  might  be.^

Throughout  this  literature  the  ideal  Friend  of  God
endeavours  to  hide  his  life,  to  be  anonymous,  to  efface
himself  by  becoming  "  a  captive  of  the  Lord,"  "  a  hidden
child  of  God."  There  was  in  this  tendency  much  that
was  morbid  and  misdirected.  It  was  often  a  waste  of
noble  powers,  and  often  a  mock  humility.  The  strained
introspection  of  inward  spiritual  states ;  the  constant
analysis  of  themselves  to  see  whether  they  had  "  a  dis-
interested love  of  God  "  ;  whether  they  were  "  ready  to  go
through  the  eternal  sufferings  and  pains  of  hell  for  the
love  of  God " ;  whether  they  had  reached  a  complete
annihilation  of  will — all  this  is  unhealthy  enough,  as  we
now  know.  But  we  must  judge  men  in  the  light  of
their  age,  and  when  we  do  that  we  must  pronounce  these
Friends  of  God  the  noblest  representatives  of  popular
mystical  religion  in  the  middle  ages.  The  best  of  them
attained  to  an  unconscious  holiness,  ^^  shining  within  like
angels  of  light,  without  knowing  that  they  were  shining"
"  Dost  thou  not  know,"  says  the  heavenly  voice  to  one
of  these  Friends  of  God,  "  that  thy  earthly  marrow  and

^  Jundt,  Les  Amis  de  Dieu,  p,  59.


2J2  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

blood  have  been  consumed,  and  that  thou  hast  received
a  new  blood  of  perfect  purity  ?  "  "  No,  I  know  nothing
of  it,"  answers  the  unconscious  saint.  "  That  is  precisely
it,"  replied  the  heavenly  voice  ;  "  thou  hast  forgotten  it,
and  it  is  just  this  forgetfulness  of  self  that  makes  the
willing,  glowing.  Divine  love  come  to  birth  in  thee  and
possess  thee  !  "  ^

Then,  when  we  remember  that  these  men  bore  their
sufferings  and  strove  to  annihilate  self-will,  and  even
accepted  the  hiding  of  all  self  "  as  captives  of  God,"  in
order  to  be  vicarious  offerings  on  behalf  of  the  corrupt
Christianity  of  their  time,  we  find  a  touch  of  real  sublimity
in  their  saintly  lives  which  does  much  to  atone  for  their
errors  of  judgment.

Tauler  gives  this  touching  incident  in  one  of  his
sermons :

"  One  day  the  Lord  offered  to  kiss  a  Friend  of  God  with  a
kiss  of  divine  love.  The  Friend  replied  :  '  I  do  not  want  to  have
it,  for  the  joy  of  it  would  flood  my  heart  so  that  I  should  lose
consciousness,  and  then  I  could  no  longer  serve  thee  ! ' "  ^

They  succeeded  as  well  as  any  mystics  have  done
in  avoiding  the  pitfalls  of  perfectionism.  They  taught,
no  doubt,  that  a  man  may  attain  even  here  below  to  a
life  with  God,  may  even  become  through  grace  what  God
is  by  nature,  may  achieve  perfect  peace,  may  come  into
the  very  presence  of  the  Divine  Origin.  Tauler  says  that
"  the  Divine  and  heavenly  man  enters  by  God's  grace
even  in  this  present  life  into  life  eternal.  He  already  has
one  foot  in  Heaven.  He  lives  attached  to  his  Origin,
and  God  can  no  more  abandon  him  than  He  can  abandon
Himself.  The  heavenly  life  has  begun  in  such  a  man,
and  will  go  on  for  ever."  But  they  held  that,  with  all
his  attainments,  it  always  remains  possible  for  a  man  to
fall  away  into  sin.  Until  the  end  he  may  never  intermit
his  vigils  and  watchfulness.  Tauler  says  that  the  evil
basis  of  our  human  nature  is  never  completely  annihilated
in   this   earthly   life.      To  the    very   end — on   the  highest

1  Book  of  the  Nine  Rocks.  ^  Sermon  XXXIV.  (Frankfort  edition.  1825).


XIII  THE   FRIENDS   OF  GOD  273

heights  of  spiritual  experience — these  Friends  of  God  are
examples  of  humihty  ;  they  still  speak  of  themselves  as
"  poor  sinners  " — "  poor  unworthy  creatures."  The  ''Friend
of  God  from  the  Oberland "  teaches  his  friends  these
prayers,  which  are  good  for  all  stages  and  steps  of  the
spiritual  ladder :

"  In  the  morning  say,  *  Oh  Lord,  I  wish,  for  the  love  of  Thee,
to  keep  from  all  sin  to-day.  Help  me  this  day  to  do  all  I  do  to
Thy  glory  and  according  to  Thy  dear  will,  whether  my  nature
hkes  it  or  not ' ;  and  in  the  evening  say,  '  Oh  Lord,  I  am  a  great
sinner,  a  poor  and  unworthy  creature.  Be  merciful  to  me  and
forgive  me  to-day  all  my  sins,  for  I  repent  of  them,  and  sincerely
wish  by  Thy  help  to  commit  no  more.' "

They  do  not  teach  a  fixed  and  final  state  of  perfection.
There  is  no  "  Olympian  calm  "  where  progress  ends.  To
stop  on  the  "  road  of  perfection  "  is  to  go  back,  as  one  of
their  wise  men  says.  The  "  spiritual  ladder "  in  reality
has  no  last  round  on  which  the  completed  saint  may  sit
in  moveless  felicity  !  The  Book  of  the  Five  Men  urges  its
readers  to  expect  no  gifts  of  grace  from  the  Holy  Spirit
if  they  are  living  in  the  "  holy  inactivity "  of  absolute
quietism.

There  can  be  no  question  that  these  Friends  of  God
took  themselves  very  seriously,  and  thought  themselves  to
be  the  spiritual  "  remnant "  that  was  to  save  Christianity
from  the  utter  wreck  into  which  they  believed  it  to  be
drifting — they  were  in  their  own  estimation  the  true
Church  of  God  within  the  visible  Church.  "  If  a  Friend
of  God,"  says  the  Book  of  the  Nine  Rocks,  "  were  put  at
the  head  of  Christianity,  he  could  transform  it,  because  he
would  have  the  counsel  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  If  any  city
in  the  world  would  submit  to  the  direction  of  a  holy
Friend  of  God,  it  would  be  saved  from  the  woes  and
plagues  that  are  falling  on  the  world."  John  Tauler  fully
shared  this  view,  and  in  many  of  his  sermons  he  puts  the
highest  estimate  on  their  spiritual  service.  Here  are  a
few  examples  :

"  Those  whom  God  has  drawn  into  the  unity  of  the  Godhead
are  the  persons  on  whom  the  Church  rests.     They  are  divine,

T


274  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

supernatural  men,  and  they  hold  up  the  world  and  the  pillars  of
'\t\If  they  were  not  in  Christe?idom  it  would  not  last  an  hour^''  ^

"  Without  the  help  of  the  Friends  of  God,  God  could  give  no
blessing  to  sinners,  for  His  justice  demands  satisfaction,  and  here
is  precisely  the  service  of  the  Friends  of  God — they  intercede  in
favour  of  Christendom,  and  their  prayer  is  heard."  ^

"  In  case  of  need,  these  men  (the  Friends  of  God)  could
govern  the  country,  by  the  help  of  the  Divine  gift  and  the  light
of  eternal  wisdom  with  which  their  souls  are  filled."  ^

"  Get  the  Friends  of  God  to  help  you  return  into  the  Divine
Origin,  where  the  true  light  shines.  Attach  yourself  to  those
who  are  attached  to  God — for  they  can  take  you  with  them  to
Him."  *

"  If  it  were  not  for  the  Friends  of  God — who  are  in  the  world
—we  should  indeed  be  badly  off."  ^

III

I  have  already  referred  often  to  John  Tauler,  and  have
frequently  quoted  from  his  sermons  to  illustrate  principles
and  tendencies  of  the  Friends  of  God.  I  must  now^  bring
together  the  most  important  characteristics  of  his  teaching,
for  he  vi^as  one  of  the  purest  and  noblest  leaders  of  this
religious  movement,  and,  with  all  his  imperfections,  one  of
the  best  exponents  of  spiritual  religion  in  his  century.
He  u^as  undoubtedly  regarded  by  the  Friends  of  God
themselves  as  their  greatest  man,  and  he  was  best  loved
by  the  people  because  his  sermons  helped  them  most  to
find  the  door  of  hope  and  comfort  and  joy.  Tauler  "  is
passing  through  deep  sufTering,"  writes  Henry  of  Nord-
lingen  in  1347,  "because  he  is  teaching  the  whole  truth
as  nobody  else  teaches  it,  and  furthermore  his  whole  life
conforms  to  it."  ^

There  is  very  little  to  tell  of  his  outward  life.  He
was  born  in  Strasbourg,  about  1300.  In  his  early  youth
he  entered  a  Dominican  convent,  and  after  the  proper
steps  of  training  he  was  ordained  a  priest  in  that  Order.
He  had  already  come  under  the  powerful  influence  of
Meister  Eckhart,  and  was  deeply  versed  in  the  writings  of

1  Sermon  LXI.  2  Sermon  XXXIV.

3  Sermon  LXIX.  ■*  Sermon  XLIV.

^  Sermon  XLIII  ^  Jundt,  Les  Amis  de  Dieu,  p.  53.


XIII  THE   FRIENDS   OF  GOD  275

the  great  Christian  mystics,  who  were  always  his  most
intimate  outward  guides.  In  1338-39  he  was  in  the  city
of  Basle,  where  he  was  the  central  figure  of  a  mystical
group  of  Friends  of  God.  His  friend,  Henry  of  Nord-
lingen,  writes  that  *'  God  is  daily  working  a  great  and
marvellous  work,  through  Tauler,  in  the  hearts  of  men  at
Basle."

It  is  a  much-debated  question  whether  Tauler  obeyed
the  interdict,  or  whether  he  continued  in  defiance  of  it  to
perform  religious  services  for  the  people.  It  has  been  the
delight  of  Protestant  writers  to  show  Tauler  as  a  fearless
reformer  before  the  Reformation,  defying  the  Pope,
claiming  a  direct  authority  from  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  to
represent  him  as  speaking  words  which  have  the  ring  of
Luther's  spirit  in  them.^  There  are,  however,  no  well-
authenticated  facts  to  support  this  position.  It  is  more
than  probable  that  he  obeyed  the  interdict.  These  words,
from  one  of  his  sermons,  at  least  do  not  indicate  that  he
would  be  likely  to  lead  a  revolt  from  the  authority  of  his
Church  :

"  I  received  the  privilege  of  belonging  to  my  Order  from
the  grace  of  God  and  from  the  holy  Church.  It  is  from
both  that  I  have  this  hat,  this  coat,  my  dignity  as  priest,  my  right
to  preach  and  to  hear  confession.  If  the  Pope  and  the  holy
Church,  from  whom  I  have  received  these  privileges,  wish  to  take
them  from  me,  I  ought  to  obey  them  without  reply  ;  to  put  on
another  coat  if  I  have  one ;  leave  the  convent ;  cease  to  be  a
priest,  and  stop  preaching  and  hearing  confession.  I  should  have
no  right  to  ask  the  wherefore  of  such  a  decision.  ...  If  the
holy  Church  wishes  to  deprive  us  of  the  external  sacrament,  we
must  submit.  But  7iobody  can  take  from  us  the  privilege  of  taking
the  sacrament  spiritually  {Aber  geistlich  zuo  nemende,  das  mag  uns
nieman  ge?iemmen\  although  everything  which  the  Church  has
given  us  it  can  take  from  us,  and  we  ought  to  obey  without  a
murmur."  ^

^  There  is  no  historical  evidence  to  establish  as  genuine  the  following  words,
frequently  quoted  as  though  spoken  by  Tauler  :  ' '  Those  who  hold  the  true
Christian  faith  and  sin  only  against  the  person  of  the  Pope,  are  no  heretics.
Those,  rather,  are  real  heretics  who  refuse  to  repent  and  forsake  their  sins  ;  for
let  a  man  have  been  what  he  may,  if  he  will  do  so,  he  cannot  be  cast  out  of  the
Church."

2  Tauler,  Sermon  No.  LXXI.


276  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

If  he  did  obey  the  order  of  the  Pope  as  a  faithful
churchman  of  his  time,  he  rose  far  above  a  merely  external
religion  which  could  be  given  or  taken  away  at  the  caprice
of  a  pope,  and  he  found  the  secret  of  eternal  religion  in
a  direct  spiritual  intercourse  with  the  Saviour  ;  and,  moved
with  tender  sympathy  for  the  common  people,  he  tried  to
turn  them  to  spiritual  religion.  The  importance  of  this
inwardness  and  directness  of  religion  comes  out  again  in
another  sermon,  where  he  says :  "  Great  doctors  of  Paris
read  ponderous  books  and  turn  over  many  pages.  The
Friends  of  God  read  the  living  Book  where  everything  is
life  "  ^ ;  and  he  tells  us  that  one  of  the  greatest  Friends  of
God  he  had  ever  known  was  a  simple  day  labourer,  a
cobbler,  who  had  no  magic  of  ordination  and  no  wisdom
of  scholarship.

I  have  already  discussed  the  question  of  the  historicity
of  the  narrative  which  records  the  conversion  and  discip-
line of  "  the  master  of  Holy  Scripture,"  by  "  the  Friend  of
God  from  the  Oberland."  I  am  convinced  that  this  cannot
be  used  as  material  for  the  life  of  Tauler.  This  conclusion
takes  away  a  most  dramatic  incident  from  his  biography,
and  we  are  left  with  very  little  material  indeed  with  which
to  draw  the  figure  of  the  popular  preacher  of  Strasbourg,
who  did  a  great  work  there  six  hundred  years  ago.  We
only  know  that  from  1 340,  until  his  death  in  1 361,  he
comforted  multitudes  of  souls  with  as  pure  an  evangel  as
his  century  heard,  and  he  showed  many  devout  spirits  the
inward,  secret  way  to  the  Father  of  Light  and  Love.

Tauler,  like  all  true  mystics,  insists  on  the  fact  of  an
inner  Light — the  master  light  of  all  the  soul's  seeing.  He
says  that  the  Friends  of  God  have  "  an  inward,  divine
knowledge,  a  Divine  Light  which  illuminates  them  and
raises  them  into  union  with  God."  "  God  illumines  His
true  Friends,"  again  he  says,  "and  shines  within  them
with  power,  purity,  and  truth,  so  that  such  men  become
divine  and  supernatural  persons."  ^  Again  :  "  This  Light
gives  man  all  truth  {alle  warheit) — a  wonderful  discern-
ment,   more    perfect    than    can    be   gained    in    any  other

1  Sermon  LIX.  2  Sermon  VII.


XIII  THE  FRIENDS  OF  GOD  277

manner  here  below."  "  These  divine  men  "  [the  Friends
of  God],  Tauler  says  in  another  sermon,  "  enjoy  an
enlightened  understanding."  ^  When  they  have  been  dis-
ciplined by  temptations,  they  possess  the  gift  of  discerning
spirits  ;  by  merely  looking  at  their  neighbour  they  can
tell  his  inward  state  ;  they  know  whether  he  belongs  to
God  or  not,  and  what  hinders  him  from  spiritual  progress.^
"  The  vision  of  the  eternal  Light  makes  their  souls  so
luminous  that  they  could  teach  all  men  if  the  occasion
for  it  came."  ^  ''  They  become  endowed  [by  this  Divine
Light]  with  a  perfect  conscience  in  respect  to  what  they
ought  to  do  and  what  leave  undone."*  "They  gain  [from
their  inner  illumination]  an  inward  peace  and  joy  in  the
Holy  Spirit."  ^  "  The  Divine  illumination  gives  a  man  a
marvellous  discernment,  more  perfect  than  he  is  able  to
acquire  on  earth  in  any  other  manner."  *  In  his  sermon
"  On  the  Feast  of  St.  Mary  Magdalene,"  he  says  :  "  In
one  short  hour  you  can  learn  more  from  the  inward  voice
than  you  could  learn  from  man  in  a  thousand  years."

None  of  these  passages  indicate  that  Tauler  believed
that  this  illumination  belonged  to  man  as  man — he  is  here
speaking  of  the  "  gifts  "  which  belong  to  a  special  class  of
men,  whom  he  calls  "  divine  and  supernatural  men."  ^  He
does,  however,  sometimes  speak  in  his  sermons  of  "  the  un-
created ground  of  the  soul  "  ;  "  the  apex  of  the  soul  "  ;  "  the
kingdom  of  God  in  the  innermost  recesses  of  the  spirit";
"  the  unseen  depths  of  the  spirit,  where  lies  the  image  of
God,"  as  though  there  were  something  of  God  in  the  very
structure  of  the  soul,  unlost  by  the  fall,  or  the  sin,  or  the
stupidity  of  man.  This  is  vigorously  said  in  a  striking
sentence  from  Tauler :  "As  a  sculptor  is  said  to  have
exclaimed  on  seeing  a  rude  block  of  marble,  *  What  a
godlike  beauty  thou  hidest ! '  so  God  looks  upon  man  in
whom  His  own  image  is  hidden."      But  this  "  Divine  soul

1  Sermon  XLVI.  2  Sermon  XLVIII.

8  Sermon  LXXXI.  4  Sermon  LXXXIV.

5  Sermon  LII.  8  Sermon  XV.

"^  In  his  sermon  "On  the  Conception  of  Ovir  Lady,"  he  says:  "There  is
nothing  so  near  the  inmost  heart  as  God.  He  who  will  seek  there  shall  find  Him.
Thus,  every  day  we  find  Him  in  the  Blessed  Sacrament  and  in  all  the  Fnends  of
God."


278  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

centre "  does  not  become  an  operative  power,  a  dynamic
possession^  until  "  the  outward  man  is  converted  into  this
inward,  reasonable  [intelligible]  man,  and  the  two  are
gathered  up  into  the  very  centre  of  the  man's  being — the
unseen  depths  of  his  spirit,  where  the  image  of  God
dwelleth — and  thus  he  flings  himself  into  the  Divine
Abyss  in  which  he  dwelt  eternally  before  he  was  created  ;
then  when  God  finds  the  man  thus  solidly  grounded  and
turned  towards  Him,  the  Godhead  bends  and  nakedly
descends  into  the  depths  of  the  pure,  waiting  soul,  drawing
it  up  into  the  uncreated  essence,  so  that  the  spirit  becomes
one  with  Him."  ^

He  is  much  less  speculative  than  his  master,  Eckhart.
In  the  language  of  simple  experience  he  tells  his  listeners
that  "  there  is  nothing  so  near  the  inmost  heart  of  man
as  God,"  but  he  can  also  on  occasion  use  the  language  of
speculation,  and  talk  with  his  great  mystical  teacher  of
« the  Hidden  God  " — "  the  calm  waste  of  the  Godhead  "  ;
"the  necessity  of  withdrawing  into  the  bosom  of  the
Divine  Dark."  There  are  passages  in  his  sermons  where,
by  the  road  of  negation,  he  takes  us  up  to  the  same  empty
abstraction  which  we  have  so  often  found  in  speculative
mysticism.

"  God  is,"  he  says  in  his  Third  Instruction^  "  a  pure  Being
[that  is,  a  Being  with  no  attributes],  a  waste  of  calm  seclusion —
as  Isaiah  says,  He  is  a  hidden  God — He  is  much  nearer  than
anything  is  to  itself  in  the  depth  of  the  heart,  but  He  is  hidden
from  all  our  senses.  He  is  far  above  every  outward  thing  and
every  thought,  and  is  found  only  where  thou  hidest  thyself  in  the
secret  place  of  thy  hearty  in  the  quiet  solitude  where  no  word  is
spoken,  where  is  neither  creature  nor  image  nor  fancy.  This  is
the  quiet  Desert  of  the  Godhead,  the  Divine  Darkness — dark
from  His  own  surpassing  brightness,  as  the  shining  of  the  sun  is
darkness  to  weak  eyes,  for  in  the  presence  of  its  brightness  our
eyes  are  like  the  eyes  of  the  swallow  in  the  bright  sunlight — this
Abyss  is  our  salvation  !  "

In  harmony  with  this  conception  of  a  God  above  all
attributes  and  distinctions,  he  makes  much  of  the  negative

1  Tauler's  "Sermon  for  the  Fifteenth  Sunday  after  Trinity,"  Hutton's  TIk
Inner  Way,  being  Tauler's  Serinons  for  Festivals.


XIII  THE   FRIENDS  OF  GOD  279

road  to  Him,  i.e.  the  way  of  self-dying  and  renunciation.
There  are  three  stages  of  self-dying.-^

The  first  stage  is  found  in  those  who  practise  acts  of
self-denial  through  fear  of  hell  and  for  the  hope  of  heaven.
At  this  "  half-way  stage  "  they  believe  that  what  is  painful
to  the  flesh  is  highly  prized  by  God.  The  person  at  this
stage  is  self-centred,  unloving,  harsh  in  judgment ;  what  he
does  is  from  constraint  of  fear  rather  than  from  love.

The  second  stage  of  self-death  is  found  in  the  person
who  endures  insult,  contempt,  and  such-like  depths  ;  who
learns  in  humility  and  patience  to  pass  through  spiritual
destitution,  and  to  be  bereft  even  of  the  gracious  sense  of
the  Divine  Presence.  These  "  barren  seasons "  are  for
discipline  to  bring  the  man  by  inward  poverty  to  a  dis-
satisfaction with  himself  and  to  carry  him  to  a  state  where
he  shall  cease  to  be  occupied  with  himself.  The  third
stage  is  one  of  perfect  union  of  the  human  will  with  the
Divine  will — entire  resignation  and  perfect  denial  of  self
and  self-love.  All  delight  in  having  one's  own  will  is
overmastered  and  quenched,  because  the  Holy  Spirit  has
supplanted  the  man's  will  and  love,  and  he  wills  nothing
on  his  own  account — though  he  cannot  fathom  the  Abyss
of  God,  he  feels  perfect  joy  in  the  experience  of  God.

In  another  sermon,^  Tauler  says  that  those  who  wish
to  be  Friends  of  God  tnust  rid  themselves  of  all  that
pertains  to  the  "  creature  "  ;  must  especially  free  themselves
from  all  that  is  called  "  necessary "  ;  must  avoid  being
blinded  by  "  transitory  things,"  and  look  alone  to  the
source  and  Origin.  "  Divine  Love  can  brook  no  rival,"
therefore  all  unnecessary  conversation,  all  outward  delight
in  human  beings,  all  images  external  and  internal  that
merely  please  the  natural  man,  must  be  cut  off  so  that
God  can  work  His  work  freely — even  external  works  of
love  may  blind  us  and  prevent  us  from  perceiving  the
Divine  Voice.  "  We  shall  never  find  God  anywhere  so
perfectly,  so  fruitfully,  and  so  truly  as  in  retirement  and  in
the   wilderness."      In   a  beautiful   sermon   on   the   temple

^  See  Sermon  IV.,  "  On  the  Feast  of  St.  Stephen,"  The  Inner  Way.
**  Sermon  XV. ,  "  On  the  Feast  of  St.  Mary  Magdalene. "  TJie  Inner  Way,


280  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

within  man,^  he  points  out  that  as  man  is  meant  to  be  a
temple — "  a  clean,  pure  house  of  prayer  " — he  must  first
drive  out  all  "  traders,"  i.e.  all  human  fancies  and  imagina-
tions ;  all  delight  in  the  creature  and  all  self-willing
thoughts  of  pleasure,  aims  at  self-gratification,  ideas  of
temporal  things.  These  are  the  "  traders  "  that  keep  God
out  of  His  house.

But  Tauler  does  not  stop  with  negations,  and  he  does
not  make  the  attainment  of  a  state  of  "  barren  wilderness  "
his  spiritual  terminus.  In  this  same  sermon  he  goes  on
to  say  that  after  the  inner  mind  has  become  "  free  of
traders,"  there  must  come  a  positive  devotion  of  spirit,  an
inner  consecration  of  self  toward  the  attainment  of  union
and  communion  of  the  man  with  God  ;  and  finally  there
comes  the  experience — again  a  positive  experience — that
the  soul  in  its  inmost  deeps  actually  is  a  temple  where
God  eternally  reveals  "  His  Father  Heart "  and  begets
His  Son,  "  a  temple  where  is  the  true,  pure  presence  of
God,  in  whom  all  things  live  and  move,  and  where  all
suffering  is  done  away  ! "  But  even  this  life  in  the  inner
temple  is  not  wholly  an  end  in  itself.  We  cannot  expect
a  devout  Catholic  of  the  fourteenth  century  to  enter  fully
into  the  spirit  of  service,  which  is  the  very  breath  of  our
best  modern  Christianity,  but  Tauler  often  rises  to  an
insight  which  carries  him  far  beyond  contemplation  and
joy  in  inward  states,  however  exalted.  "  Works  of  love,"
he  says,  "  are  more  acceptable  than  contemplation " ;
*'  spiritual  enjoyments  are  the  food  of  the  soul,  but  they
are  to  be  taken  only  for  nourishment  and  support  to  help
us  in  our  active  work  "  ;  "  sloth  often  makes  men  eager  to
get  free  from  work  and  set  to  contemplation,  but  no
virtue  is  to  be  trusted  until  it  has  been  put  into  practice''  ^
One  of  the  finest  passages  in  his  sermons — in  fact,  one
of  the  finest  words  that  any  mystic  has  given  us — is  the
well-known  and  often-quoted  passage,  which  has  the  true
note  of  social  service  :


^  Sermon  XXXVI.,  "Second  Sermon  at  the  Dedication  of  a  Church,"  T/u
Inner  Way.

^  Those  three  passages  are  taken  from  Inge,  Christian  Mysticis?n,  p.  i88.


XIII  THE   FRIENDS   OF  GOD  281

"  One  man  can  spin,  another  can  make  shoes,  and  all  these  are
gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  I  tell  you,  if  I  were  not  a  priest,  I
should  esteem  it  a  great  gift  that  I  was  able  to  make  shoes,  and
I  would  try  to  make  them  so  well  as  to  be  a  pattern  to  all."

The  most  important  feature  of  Tauler's  teaching — a
feature  which  allies  him  with  all  the  great  prophets  of
the  soul — is  his  constant  insistence  on  a  religion  of
experience.  There  are  long  passages  in  his  sermons
which  are  too  scholastic  to  be  of  any  permanent  value  ;
there  are  other  passages  which  are  too  much  bound  up
with  the  conceptions  of  the  medieval  Church  to  touch
our  lives  to-day  ;  there  are  still  other  passages — even
whole  sermons — which  are  commonplace  and  devoid  of
inspiration,  but  again  and  again  the  reader  finds  in  the
writings  of  this  pre -Reformation  prophet  words  which
are  laden  with  a  living  message,  good  for  all  men,  and
quick  and  powerful  for  any  century.  "  The  man  who
truly  experiences  the  pure  presence  of  God  in  his  own
soul,"  he  tells  his  "  dear  children,"  ^  "  knows  well  that
there  can  be  no  doubt  about  it " — by  "  devout  prayer  and
the  uplifting  of  the  mind  to  God  "  there  is  "  an  entrance
into  union  of  the  created  spirit  with  the  uncreated  Spirit
of  God,"  so  that  all  the  human  is  "  poured  forth  into  God
and  becomes  one  spirit  with  Him."  But  this  knowledge
is  not  something  to  be  learned  from  "the  Masters  of
Paris  "  ;  it  can  come  only  through  experience  of  "  entering
in  and  dwelling  in  the  Inner  Kingdom  of  God,  where
pure  truth  and  the  sweetness  of  God  are  found."  "  What
this  is  and  how  it  comes  to  pass  is  easier  to  experience
than  to  describe.  All  tJtat  I  have  said  of  it  is  as  poor  and
unlike  it  as  a  point  of  a  needle  is  to  the  heavens  above  us  I"

IV

The  other  member  of  this  spiritual  society  whom  I
shall  consider  in  this  chapter  is  Henry  Suso,  for  I  shall
postpone  the  treatment  of  John  Ruysbroek  to  the  next
chapter.      Suso  was  plainly  a  disciple  of  the  great  mystic,

f  Sermon  XXXVI.,  "Second  Sermon  at  the  Dedication  of  a  Church.  '


282  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chak

Eckhart  In  one  of  the  n:iost  important  spiritual  crises  of
his  life  he  went  to  Eckhart  for  comfort,  and  he  tells  us
that  the  latter  "  set  him  free  from  a  hell  which  he  had
long  been  enduring."  He  also  refers  to  Eckhart  with
deep  veneration,  and,  though  utterly  different  from  him  in
temperament  and  in  style,  he  holds  the  same  fundamental
conceptions  as  his  master.

He  has  all  the  characteristic  marks  of  the  other  well-
known  "  Friends  of  God."  He  is  subject  to  spiritual
visions  ;  he  passes  through  great  soul-crises  ;  he  practises
austerities  ;  he  experiences  ecstasies,  and  he  is  profoundly
conscious  of  the  immediate  presence  of  God.

He  was  born  about  1300,  of  a  noble  Swabian  family.
The  influences  of  his  home  were  of  a  very  mixed  sort.
His  father  was  "  full  of  the  world,"  unconcerned  about
things  of  the  Spirit,  and  through  this  unconcern  he
caused  Suso's  mother  much  suffering.  The  mother  was
a  woman  "  full  of  God,  and  one  who  would  fain  live  in  a
godly  manner."  She  was  deeply  concerned  to  bring  her
boy  into  this  "  godly  manner  of  life."  ^

While  he  was  still  a  boy  at  school  in  Cologne,  his
mother  died,  but  at  the  hour  of  death  she  appeared  to
him,  bade  him  love  God,  told  him  that  though  gone  from
the  world  she  was  not  really  dead  ;  she  then  "  kissed  him
on  the  mouth,  blessed  him,  and  vanished."  This  is  the
first  of  Suso's  recorded  psychic  experiences,  and  it  is
interesting  as  indicating  his  peculiar  constitution  and
temperament.

At  the  age  of  thirteen  he  entered  the  Dominican
monastery  at  Constance,  where  he  spent  five  years  in
study.  Through  this  period  he  frequently  experienced
"  spiritual  visions,"  though  he  had  not  yet  gone  through
a  "  conversion-experience."  At  about  the  age  of  eighteen
he  underwent  a  great  spiritual  awakening — a  time  of
marked  crisis,  and  under  what  he  calls  "  the  direct  Divine
work  upon  his  soul,"  he  experienced  his  "  commencement."
He  says  that  "  the  hidden   drawing  of  God   turned  him

1  The  data  for  Suso's  life  and  experiences  are  found  in  his  autobiography,
The  Life  of  the  Blessed  Henry  Suso,  by  himself.


XIII  THE  FRIENDS  OF  GOD  283

away  from  creatures  and  called  him  to  the  inward  hidden
life."      "  I  turned  wholly  from  things"

In  this  period,  like  the  great  mystic  of  the  Common-
wealth, George  Fox,  he  went  through  a  period  of  extreme
loneliness,  when  he  tried,  all  in  vain,  through  human
friendship  and  earthly  love,  "  to  lighten  his  spirit."  The
more  he  endeavoured  to  lighten  his  heart,  the  sadder
he  grew.  In  this  condition  of  inward  loneliness  and  of
spiritual  suffering,  he  was  the  recipient  of  many  marvellous
visions,  and  "  whether  in  the  body  or  out  of  the  body,"
he  often  had  "  the  powers  of  his  soul  filled  with  the  sweet
taste  of  heaven."

I  give  his  account  of  one  of  these  ecstatic  ex-
periences :

"  He  was  alone  after  his  midday  meal,  undergoing  a  severe
suffering.  Of  a  sudden  he  saw  and  heard  what  no  tongue  can
express.  What  he  saw  was  without  definite  form  or  shape,  and
yet  had  in  itself  the  beauty  of  all  forms  and  all  shapes.  It  was
at  once  the  climax  of  his  desires  and  the  realisation  of  his  hopes,
in  a  forgetfulness  of  everything  and  of  self  in  a  blessed  state.
He  felt  the  sweetness  of  eternal  life  in  calm  and  silence.  This
experience  lasted  an  hour  or  less,  and  when  he  came  to  himself
again  he  felt  that  he  had  come  back  from  another  world,  and  he
was  still  full  of  divine  joy,  and  felt  himself  as  light  as  if  he  were
soaring  in  the  air."

In  this  early  stage  of  his  experience,  in  order  to  help
him  turn  away  wholly  from  "creatures,"  he  decided  to
mark  out  for  himself,  in  thought,  three  circles,  within
which  he  shut  himself  up  as  in  "  a  spiritual  entrenchment."

"  The  first  circle  was  his  cell,  his  chapel,  and  the  choir.
When  he  was  within  this  circle  he  seemed  to  himself  in  complete
security.  The  second  circle  was  the  whole  monastery,  as  far  as
the  outer  gate.  The  third  and  outermost  circle  was  the  gate
itself,  and  here  it  was  necessary  for  him  to  stand  well  upon  his
guard.  When  he  went  outside  these  circles  it  seemed  to  him
that  he  was  in  the  plight  of  some  wild  animal  which  is  outside
its  hole  and  surrounded  by  the  hunt,  and  therefore  in  need  of
all  its  cunning  and  watchfulness."  ^

1  Life  of  the  Blessed  Henry  Suso,   by  himself,    translated  by  T.   F.    Knox,
London,  1865,  p.  168.


284  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

He  came  into  a  dangerously  morbid  condition,  and
began  the  practice  of  such  awful  austerities,  that  his  case
stands  almost  in  a  class  by  itself  in  mystical  literature.^

He  gives  two  reasons  for  the  practice  of  these
austerities  :

(i)  That  "he  might  conquer  the  lively  nature  of  his
youth  "  !

(2)  His  great  love  for  Jesus  Christ,  Whose  suffering  he
wished  to  imitate.

The  following  passage,  describing  his  self-tortures,  is
taken  from  his  Autobiography,  which  is  written  in  the
third  person  : —

"  He  was  in  his  youth  of  a  temperament  full  of  fire  and  life,
and  when  this  began  to  make  itself  felt,  it  was  very  grievous  to
him,  and  he  sought  in  many  devices  how  he  might  bring  his
body  into  subjection.  He  wore  for  a  long  time  a  hair  shirt  and
an  iron  chain,  until  the  blood  ran  from  him,  so  that  he  was
obliged  to  leave  them  off.  He  secretly  caused  an  under-garment
to  be  made  for  him,  and  in  the  under-garment  he  had  strips  of
leather  fixed,  into  which  a  hundred  and  fifty  brass  nails,  pointed
and  filed  sharp,  were  driven,  and  the  points  of  the  nails  were
always  turned  towards  the  flesh.  He  had  this  garment  made
very  tight,  and  so  arranged  to  go  round  him  and  fasten  in  front,
in  order  that  it  might  fit  closer  to  his  body,  and  the  pointed  nails
might  be  driven  into  his  flesh  ;  and  it  was  high  enough  to  reach
upwards  to  his  navel.     In  this  he  used  to  sleep  at  night.

Now  in  summer,  when  it  was  hot,  and  he  was  very  tired
and  ill  from  his  journeyings,  or  when  he  held  the  office  of
lecturer,  he  would  sometimes,  as  he  lay  thus  in  bonds,  and
oppressed  with  toil,  and  tormented  also  by  noxious  insects,  cry
aloud  and  give  way  to  fretful  ness,  and  twist  round  and  round  in
agony,  as  a  worm  does  when  run  through  with  a  pointed  needle.
It  often  seemed  to  him  as  if  he  were  lying  upon  an  ant-hill,  from
the  torture  caused  by  the  insects ;  for  if  he  wished  to  sleep,  01
when  he  had  fallen  asleep,  they  vied  with  one  anotlier.  Some
times  he  cried  to  Almighty  God  in  the  fulness  of  his  heart  :
Alas !  Gentle  God,  what  a  dying  is  this  !     When  a  man  is  killed

^  This  extraordinary  practice  of  asceticism  is  baffling  to  the  ordinary  healthy
person  who  revels  in  the  joy  of  Hving,  but  there  must  be  in  asceticism  a  powerful
psychological  effect  which  accounts  for  the  great  role  it  has  played  in  man's
spiritual  history.  It  was  felt  by  the  mystic,  no  doubt,  to  minister  toward  the
supreme  end  in  view,  namely  beatific  vision,  and  there  almost  certainly  came  to
those  who  practised  asceticism  states  of  intoxication,  or  swoon,  in  which  there  was
a  sense  of  the  fulness  of  life.


XIII  THE  FRIENDS  OF  GOD  285

by  murderers  or  strong  beasts  of  prey  it  is  soon  over  ;  but  I  lie
dying  here  under  the  cruel  insects,  and  yet  cannot  die.  The
nights  in  winter  were  never  so  long,  nor  was  the  summer  so  hot,
as  to  make  him  leave  off  this  exercise.  On  the  contrary,  he
devised  something  further — two  leathern  hoops  into  which  he
put  his  hands,  and  fastened  one  on  each  side  of  his  throat,  and
made  the  fastenings  so  secure  that  even  if  his  cell  had  been  on
fire  about  him,  he  could  not  have  helped  himself.  This  he  con-
tinued until  his  hands  and  arms  had  become  almost  tremulous
with  the  strain,  and  then  he  devised  something  else :  two  leather
gloves,  and  he  caused  a  brazier  to  fit  them  all  over  with  sharp-
pointed  brass  tacks,  and  he  used  to  put  them  on  at  night,  in
order  that  if  he  should  try  while  asleep  to  throw  off  the  hair
under-garment,  or  relieve  himself  from  the  gnawings  of  the  vile
insects,  the  tacks  might  then  stick  into  his  body.  And  so  it
came  to  pass.  If  ever  he  sought  to  help  himself  with  his  hands
in  his  sleep,  he  drove  the  sharp  tacks  into  his  breast,  and  tore
himself,  so  that  his  flesh  festered.  When,  after  many  weeks,  the
wounds  had  healed,  he  tore  himself  again  and  made  fresh  wounds.
He  continued  this  tormenting  exercise  for  about  sixteen
years.  At  the  end  of  this  time,  when  his  blood  was  now  chilled
and  the  fire  of  his  temperament  destroyed,  there  appeared  to
him  in  a  vision  on  Whit-Sunday,  a  messenger  from  heaven,  who
told  him  that  God  required  this  of  him  no  longer.  Whereupon
he  discontinued  it,  and  threw  all  these  things  away  into  a  running
stream."

Unfortunately,  he  had  not  yet  learned  his  lesson,  and
he  next  tells  how,  to  emulate  the  sorrows  of  his  crucified
Lord,  he  made  himself  a  cross  with  thirty  protruding  iron
needles  and  nails.  This  he  bore  on  his  back  between  his
shoulders  day  and  night.

"The  first  time  that  he  stretched  out  this  cross  upon  his
back  his  tender  frame  was  struck  with  terror  at  it,  and  he  blunted
the  sharp  nails  slightly  against  a  stone.  But  soon,  repenting  of
this  womanly  cowardice,  he  pointed  them  all  again  with  a  file,
and  placed  once  more  the  cross  upon  him.  It  made  his  back,
where  the  bones  are,  bloody  and  seared.  Whenever  he  sat
down  or  stood  up,  it  was  as  if  a  hedgehog  skin  were  on  him.  If
any  one  touched  him  unawares,  or  pushed  against  his  clothes,  it
tore  him."

Suso  next  tells  of  his  penitences  by  means  of  striking
this  cross  and  forcing  the  nails  deeper  into  the  flesh,  and


286  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap

likewise  of  his  self-scourgings  —  a  dreadful   story  —  and
then  goes  on  as  follows  : —

"  At  this  same  period,  the  Servitor  ^  procured  an  old  cast-away
door,  and  he  used  to  lie  upon  it  at  night  without  any  bedclothes
to  make  him  comfortable,  except  that  he  took  off  his  shoes  and
wrapped  a  thick  cloak  round  him.  He  thus  secured  for  himself
a  most  miserable  bed  ;  for  hard  pea-stalks  lay  in  humps  under
his  head,  the  cross  with  the  sliarp  nails  stuck  into  his  back,  his
arms  were  locked  fast  in  bonds,  the  horse-hair  under-garment
was  round  his  loins,  and  the  cloak,  too,  was  heavy  and  the  door
hard.  Thus  he  lay  in  wretchedness,  afraid  to  stir,  just  Hke  a
log,  and  he  would  send  up  many  a  sigh  to  God.

In  winter  he  suffered  very  much  from  the  frost.  If  he
stretched  out  his  feet  they  lay  bare  on  the  floor  and  froze ;  if
he  gathered  them  up  the  blood  became  all  on  fire  in  his  legs,
and  this  was  great  pain.  His  feet  were  full  of  sores,  his  legs
dropsical,  his  knees  bloody  and  seared,  his  loins  covered  with
scars  from  the  horsehair,  his  body  wasted,  his  mouth  parched
with  intense  thirst,  and  his  hands  tremulous  from  weakness.
Amid  these  torments  he  spent  his  nights  and  days;  and  he
endured  them  all  out  of  the  greatness  of  the  love  which  he  bore
in  his  heart  to  the  Divine  and  Eternal  Wisdom,  our  Lord  Jesus
Christ,  whose  agonising  sufferings  he  sought  to  imitate.  After  a
time  he  gave  up  this  penitential  exercise  of  the  door,  and  instead
of  it  he  took  up  his  abode  in  a  very  small  cell,  and  used  the
bench,  which  was  so  narrow  and  short  that  he  could  not  stretch
himself  upon  it,  as  his  bed.  In  this  hole,  or  upon  the  door,  he
lay  at  night  in  his  usual  bonds,  for  about  eight  years.  It  was
also  his  custom,  during  the  space  of  twenty-five  years,  provided
he  was  staying  in  the  convent,  never  to  go  after  compline  in
winter  into  any  warm  room,  or  to  the  convent  stove  to  warm
himself,  no  matter  how  cold  it  might  be,  unless  he  was  obliged
to  do  so  for  other  reasons.  Throughout  all  these  years  he  never
took  a  bath,  either  a  water  or  a  sweating  bath  ;  and  this  he  did
in  order  to  mortify  his  comfort -seeking  body.  He  practised
during  a  long  time  such  rigid  poverty  that  he  would  neither
receive  nor  touch  a  penny,  either  with  leave  or  without  it.  For
a  considerable  time  he  strove  to  attain  such  a  high  degree  of
purity  that  he  would  neither  scratch  nor  touch  any  part  of  his
body,  save  only  his  hands  and  feet."  At  length  "  God  made
him  sure  that  the  time  was  come  when  he  might  be  released
from  these  sufferings."  ^

1  He  calls  himself  "  the  Servitor"  of  "  Eternal  Wisdom."

2  The  Life  of  the  Blessed  Henry  Siiso,  pp.  56-80,  abridged


XIII  THE  FRIENDS   OF  GOD  287

He  was  subject,  not  only  during  this  long  period  of
austerities,  but  throughout  his  life,  to  "visions."  His
world  was  no  longer  this  world  of  sense-objects,  it  was
a  world  beyond  time  and  space — a  world  of  celestial
denizens,  angels,  saints,  the  Virgin,  with  their  scenery  and
circumstance.  He  saw  the  scenes  of  this  other  world  as
vividly,  and  with  as  much  sense  of  their  objectivity,  as
we  see  the  things  of  space  and  time.  He  was  a  person
of  extraordinary  visualizing  power,  and  could  actually  see
anything  which  he  had  heard  described.  His  "other
world  sights  "  were  plainly  formed  out  of  "  suggestion-
material,"  and  they  came  to  him  often  when  he  was
exhausted  by  the  chastisements  of  his  body,  and  when  the
control  and  guidance  of  the  will  were  weak,  so  that  they
correspond  to  the  vivid  flights  of  the  mind  in  the  border-
land state  between  sleeping  and  waking.

In  one  of  these  visions  he  was  granted  a  sight  of  "  how
God  dwells  in  the  soul."

"  He  was  told  to  look  into  himself,  and  there  he  saw  as
through  a  crystal  in  the  midst  of  his  heart  the  Eternal  Wisdom
in  lovely  form,  and  beside  Him  his  own  soul  leaning  lovingly  to
God's  side,  and  embraced  in  His  arms  and  pressed  to  His  Divine
heart,  and  lying  entranced  and  drowned  in  the  arms  of  the  God
he  loved."

One  of  his  most  striking  visions  was  the  one  granted
to  him  at  another  spiritual  crisis  in  his  life,  when  he  gave
himself  in  spiritual  espousal  to  Eternal  Wisdom  as  his
heavenly  bride.

"  It  happened  to  him  often,"  he  tells  us,  *'  as  when  a  mother
has  her  sucking  child  pressed  in  her  arms  lying  on  her  bosom,
and  the  child  lifts  itself  with  its  head  and  with  the  movement  of
its  body  towards  its  tender  mother,  and  by  its  lovely  bearing
shows  forth  its  joy  of  heart,  so  often  did  his  heart  within  his  body,
turning  towards  the  presence  of  the  Eternal  Wisdom,  overflow
with  tenderness."

Once  the  Virgin  granted  him  the  privilege  of  holding
the  Holy  Child.

"  He  contemplated  its  beautiful  little  eyes,  he  kissed  its  tender
little  mouth,  and  gazed  again  and  again  at  the  infant  members


288  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

of  the  heavenly  treasure.  Then,  lifting  up  his  eyes,  he  uttered  a
cry  of  amazement  that  He  who  bears  up  the  heavens  is  so  small,
so  beautiful  in  heaven,  and  so  childlike  on  earth  !  "

We  get  another  vivid  picture  of  his  power  of  visual
imagination  v^hen  he  tells  us  that  "the  food  which  he  did
not  like  he  dipped  in  the  wounded  heart  of  his  Beloved,"
and  then  ate  it  with  joy.  And  in  a  beautiful  poetical
passage,  which  seems  like  Walt  Whitman  baptized  with
spiritual  fervour,  he  tells  us  how  he  sees  the  whole  world
praising  God  :

"  I  set  before  the  eyes  of  my  soul  myself,  all  that  I  am,  with
body,  soul,  and  all  my  powers,  and  set  around  me  all  creatures
which  God  ever  created  in  heaven,  in  earth,  and  in  all  the
elements,  each  with  its  name,  were  it  birds  of  the  air,  beasts  of
the  forest,  fish  of  the  waters,  leaf  and  grass  of  the  earth,  and  all
the  unnumbered  sand  of  the  sea,  and  therewith  all  the  little
motes  which  shine  in  the  sunbeam,  and  all  the  little  drops  of
water,  of  dew,  and  snow,  and  rain,  which  ever  fell  or  have  fallen,
and  wished  that  each  of  them  had  a  sweet  instrument  of  music
made  ready  out  of  my  heart's  innermost  chords,  and  thus  forth-
sounding  from  first  to  last,  should  bring  to  the  beloved,  tender
God  new  and  glorious  praise."

After  years  of  self-inflicted  pain,  and  experiences  which
one  would  have  thought  would  have  shattered  his  sanity,
he  came  upon  the  discovery  that  what  he  had  been
enduring  had  been  prompted  by  his  own  reason  ;  that
thus  far  he  had  been  only  "  in  the  lower  school,"  and  that
he  was  still  far  from  "  the  highest  knowledge."

At  this  stage  he  experienced,  as  did  most  of  the  other
mystics  of  his  group,  a  time  of  deep  inward  testing.  He
passed  through  the  desolation  of  feeling  utterly  forsaken
by  God.  "  It  seemed  to  him  that  his  soul  would  never
be  saved,  but  would  be  eternally  damned,  whatever  he
might  do  or  suffer  "  ;  and  at  the  same  time  he  found  him-
self separated  from  his  closest  friends,  misunderstood  and
falsely  accused,  charged  with  heresy,  taken  for  a  charlatan,
and  called  "  a  fool  always  gaping  towards  heaven."

During  these  hard  years — altogether  nine  years —
"  with  crying  heart  and  weeping  eyes  "  he  passed  through


XIII  THE   FRIENDS  OF  GOD  289

dark  perplexities  over  questions  of  faith,  but  he  came
through  into  the  light  and  fotmd  the  God  he  sought.

As  a  relief  to  this  morbid  occupation  with  his  own
troubled  spirit,  there  is  a  touching  story  of  the  way  he
rescued  his  sister,  a  nun,  who  had  fallen  into  mortal  sin,
and  had  run  away  from  the  convent.  When  Suso  heard
of  her  sin,  straight  he  became  "  like  a  stone  for  sorrow,
and  his  heart  died,"  and  the  resolve  rose  up  in  him  to
"  spring  after  her  into  the  deep  pit  and  lift  her  out."  After
a  long,  desperate  search,  being  himself  half-dead  from  a
fall  into  the  river,  he  hit  upon  the  little  hut  where  his
sister  was  hiding.  He  fell  fainting  and  helpless  on  the
bench  at  her  side,  clasped  her  in  his  arms,  and  cried  :
"  Alas  !  my  sister,  what  have  I  endured  for  thee  !  "  and
fainted.  "  Then  his  sister  rose  and  fell  at  his  feet  with
great  bitter  tears,  and  said  mournfully  :  '  Ah,  Lord  and
Father,  what  a  sad  day  was  that  which  brought  me  into
the  world,  for  I  have  lost  God  and  have  given  to  thee
such  pain.' "  At  length  he  had  the  great  joy  of  seeing
his  sister  restored  and  "  brought  back  in  his  own  arms  to
the  kind  God."

Not  only  in  this  touching  incident,  but  in  all  his  teach-
ing, he  insists  on  the  value  of  practical  love,  and,  though
he  is  excessively  concerned  with  his  own  inward  states,
and  lays  down  the  maxim  :  "  Live  as  if  there  were  no
creature  in  the  world  but  thyself,"  he  shares  with  Eckhart,
and  his  other  fellow-mystics,  in  the  practice  of  love  in  the
ordinary  duties  of  life.

The  ultimate  reality  for  Suso,  as  for  Eckhart,  is  "  the
eternal,  uncreated  truth."  "  Here  in  this  eternal,  uncreated
truth,"  he  says,  "  all  things  have  their  Source  and  Eternal
Beginning."  "  Here  the  devout  man  has  his  beginning
and  his  end."  Whatever  flows  out  from  this  Source,  the
Godhead,  can  turn  back  again  into  its  Source,  and  so
come  to  reality  and  to  bliss,  and  even  while  he  is  living
on  the  earth  "  a  man  may  be  in  eternity."

There  is  "an  image  of  God  in  the  soul"  which  can  rise
to  the  Divine  Essence,  or  Source,  and  which,  "  unhindered
by  the  clouds  and  veils  of  created  things,  may  contemplate,

U


290  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

in  silent  darkness,  in  absolute  repose,  the  marvels  of
Divinity."  Suso  pushes  quite  too  far  his  "  silent  darkness
and  absolute  repose,"  and  though  his  religious  iiistincts  carry
him  out  into  a  life  of  loving  and  unselfish  service,  his
speculations  too  often  carry  him  into  barren  wildernesses
where  "  something  and  nothing  are  the  same."  His  account
of  "  union  with  God  "  outdoes  even  Eckhart,  and  may  be
taken  as  the  extreme  doctrine  of  ultimate  Divine  and
human  oneness.  This  highest  state  of  union,  he  teaches,
is  an  indescribable  experience  in  which  all  idea  of  images
and  forms  and  differences  has  vanished.  All  conscious-
ness of  self  and  of  all  things  has  gone,  and  the  soul  is
plunged  into  the  abyss  of  the  Godhead,  and  the  spirit  has
become  one  with  God,  as  in  the  experience  of  Paul  when
he  said  :  "  I  live,  yet  no  longer  I  ;  it  is  Christ  that  liveth
in  me."  In  this  highest  state  God  becomes  the  inner
essence,  the  life  and  activity  within,  so  that  whatever  the
person  does,  it  does  as  an  instrument.

"  Like  a  being,"  he  says,  "  which  loses  itself  in  an  indescribable
intoxication,  the  [human]  spirit  ceases  to  be  itself,  divests  itself
of  itself,  passes  into  God,  and  becomes  wholly  one  with  Him,  as
a  drop  of  water  mingled  with  a  cask  of  wine.  As  the  drop  of
water  loses  its  identity,  and  takes  on  the  taste  and  colour  of  the
wine,  so  it  is  with  those  who  are  in  full  possession  of  bliss;  human
desires  influence  them  no  longer ;  divested  of  self  they  are  ab-
sorbed in  the  Divine  Will,  mingle  with  the  Divine  Nature,  and
become  one  with  it."^

Poor  soul !  was  it  to  gain  such  annihilation  of  identity
and  personality  that  he  suffered  the  terrible  tortures  of
those  sixteen  years  ?  was  it  for  this  he  wore  the  crucifix
with  its  lacerating  nails  in  his  flesh  ?  We  must  not,  how-
ever, make  too  much  of  his  over-emphasis  of  a  line  of
teaching,  and  of  pathological  experiences,  which  had  by
this  time  become  second  nature  in  all  mystical  circles.
The  spirit  of  kindly  love,  the  passion  for  the  redemption

1  As  an  orthodox  Christian,  Suso  tries  to  save  himself  from  the  logical  outcome
of  this  complete  absorption.  He  says  that  there  is  no  temporal  moment  when
the  identification  of  the  human  with  the  Divine  is  complete.  The  personal  /  is
never  destroyed,  though,  while  the  theopathic  state  lasts,  there  is  no  personal  con-
sciousness of  it.     This  theopathic  state  is  set  forth  in  his  Book  of  the  Truth.


XIII  THE  FRIENDS  OF  GOD  291

of  sinners,  the  utter  loss  of  selfish  interest,  the  sweet  con-
sciousness of  Divine  love,  and  the  complete  obedience  of
will  to  the  heavenly  leading  which  mark  this  Friend  of
God,  must  cover  for  us  the  blindness  and  error  which
were  mainly  due  to  his  intellectual  environment  and  to
the  subtle  influences  of  suggestion.


The  literary  gem  of  this  religious  movement  is  a
little  book  which  bears  the  name  Theologica  Gcrtnanica.
It  lacks  the  robustness  of  The  Nine  Rocks ^  but  its
beauty  of  style  and  its  depth  of  inner  experience  give  it
the  right  to  be  entered  among  the  classic  books  of  mystical
literature.  Inge  goes  so  far  in  praise  of  it  as  to  say  that
"  in  some  ways  it  is  superior  to  the  famous  treatise  of
a  Kempis  on  the  Imitation  of  Christ."  It  was  put  by
Luther  in  the  highest  company  :  "  Next  to  the  Bible  and
St  Augustine,"  he  says,  "no  book  hath  ever  come  into
my  hands  from  which  I  have  learned  more  of  wdiat  God
and  Christ  and  man  and  all  things  are  ! "

Its  author  is  unknown,  for  the  very  reason  that  he
strictly  practised  what  he  taught — namely,  the  hiding  of
the  "  creature,"  that  no  glory  might  accrue  to  him  who
held  the  pen.  The  unknown  author's  great  prayer  :  "  I
would  fain  be  to  the  Eternal  Goodness  what  his  own  hand
is  to  a  man  "  ^ — is  beautifully  fulfilled  in  this  book.  The
passive  writer  "  lent  his  hand  "  to  the  Eternal  Goodness,
and  he  had  no  concern  to  sign  his  human  name  at  the
end  of  his  book.  The  preface,  which  appears  in  the
earliest  extant  MS.,  says  :  ^

"  This  little  book  hath  the  Almighty  and  Eternal  God  spoken
by  the  mouth  of  a  wise,  understanding,  faithful,  righteous  man.
His  Friend^  who  aforetime  was  of  the  Teutonic  Order,  a  priest
and  a  warden  in  the  house  of  the  Teutonic  Order  in  Frank-
fort ;  and  it  giveth  much  precious  insight  into  divine  truth,  and

1  The    quotations   will    be    made    from    Susanna    Winkworth's    translation,
London,  1874.     This  quotation  is  from  p.  30.

2  This  MS.    was  found  in   the  library  of  Wurzburg  University  in   1850.      It
dates  from  1497.      It  has  been  published  verbatim  by  Pfeiffer.


292  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

especially  teacheth  how  and  whereby  we  may  discern  the  true
and  upright  Friends  of  God  from  those  unrighteous  and  false
free-thinkers,  who  are  most  hurtful  to  the  holy  Church."

The  writer  is  plainly  influenced  by  Eckhart,  and  shows
the  "  family  characteristics  "  of  the  Friends  of  God.  He
quotes  from  Tauler,  and  he  holds  much  the  same  ideas
which  appear  and  reappear  in  Tauler's  sermons.

The  fundamental  conception  of  the  writer  is  the  view,
made  familiar  enough  in  these  studies,  that  the  finite,  the
temporal — everything  which  can  be  called  "  the  creature,"
everything  which  can  be  conceived  as  severed  from  the
wholeness  of  God — must  be  transcended  before  the  soul
can  come  upon  Divine  Reality.  The  supreme  error,  there-
fore, in  the  mind  of  this  unknown  mystic  is  having  a  will
which  aims  at  getting  some  particular  thing  for  self.  "  So
long,"  he  says,  "as  a  man  taketh  account  of  anything
which  is  this  or  that,  whether  it  be  himself  or  any  other
creature ;  or  doeth  anything ;  or  frameth  a  purpose  for
the  sake  of  his  own  likings,  or  desires,  or  opinions,  or
ends  ;  he  cometh  not  unto  the  life  of  Christ."  ^  "  So  long
as  a  man  seeketh  his  own  will  and  his  own  highest  good,
because  it  is  his  and  for  his  own  sake,  he  will  never  find
it.  For  so  long  as  he  doeth  this,  he  is  seeking  himself
and  dreameth  that  he  is  himself  the  highest  Good.  But
whoever  seeketh,  loveth,  and  pursueth  Goodness  {i.e.  the
Good  per  se),  and  for  the  sake  of  Goodness,  and  maketh
that  his  end,  for  nothing  but  the  love  of  Goodness  :  not
for  the  love  of  I,  me,  mine,  self,  and  the  like,  he  will  find
the  highest  Good,  for  he  seeketh  it  aright."  ^  The  very
mark  and  brand  of  the  "  natural  man,"  as  distinguished
from  "  the  divine  and  spiritual  man,"  is  found  here  in  the
aim  of  the  will:  "To  the  creature — the  self  according  to
Nature — it  belongeth  to  be  somewhat — to  be  this  or  that
— and  not  simply  what  is  good  without  any  wherefore ! "
But  "  he  who  is  made  a  partaker  of  the  Divine  nature
neither  willeth  nor  desireth  nor  seeketh  anything  save
Goodness  as  Goodness  for  the  sake  of  Goodness."  ^  Nay,
more,  in  this  aim  of  the  will  is  manifested  the  very  "  secret  "

1  p.  6i.  2  p^  i58^  8  p.  135,


XIII  THE   FRIENDS   OF  GOD  293

of  heaven  and  hell :  "  No  thing  burneth  in  hell  but  self-
will  [the  aim  at  some  particular  thing  for  self],  and  there-
fore it  hath  been  said,  put  off  thine  own  will  and  there
will  be  no  hell !  "  ^  "  Were  there  no  self-will  there  would
be  no  ownership,  and  in  heaven  there  is  no  ownership.  If
any  one  in  heaven  took  upon  himself  to  call  anything  his
own,  he  would  straightway  be  thrust  out  into  hell.  If
there  were  any  person  in  hell  who  should  get  quit  of  his
self-will,  and  call  nothing  his  own,  he  would  come  out  of
hell  into  heaven."  ^  Again  :  "If  there  were  no  self-will
there  would  be  no  devil  and  no  hell  ;  and  by  self-will  we
mean  willing  otherwise  than  as  the  One  and  Eternal  Will
of  God  willeth."  ^  He  tells  us  over  and  over  what  he
means  by  the  way  in  which  "  the  One  and  Eternal  Will
of  God  willeth "  :  "  With  God  there  is  no  willing,  nor
working,  nor  desiring  "  ;  "  It  is  the  property  of  God  to  be
without  this  and  that,  without  self  and  me."*  The  result
of  this  view  is  a  corresponding  emphasis  on  renunciation,
self-abandonment,  and  annihilation  of  will.  God  cannot
come  in  until  the  man  goes  out :  "  Whenever  a  man
forsaketh  and  cometh  out  of  himself,  then  God  entereth."  ^
It  is  a  view  which  is  gloriously  true  in  one  aspect,  and
pitiably  false  in  another  aspect.  In  the  negative  aspect
in  which  our  unknown  mystic  uses  it,  it  leads  to  emptiness
and  quietism.  Its  goal  is  a  person  who  wills  nothing —
which  is  a  blank  contradiction,  for  the  central  feature  of
personality  is  will-activity.  A  being  "  taking  no  account
of  anything  which  is  this  or  that,"  a  being  that  "  neither
willeth  nor  worketh  nor  desireth,"  is  not  a  person — in  fact,
is  in  the  very  lowest  scale  of  life,  not  in  the  highest.  The
root  of  the  difficulty  lies  in  the  false  conception,  common
to  all  medieval  speculation,  that  the  One,  the  Perfect,  is
a  Being  without  attributes  or  distinction.  As  our  author
puts  it :  "  To  God,  as  Godhead,  appertains  neither  will,
nor  knowledge,  nor  manifestation,  nor  anything  that  we
can  name,  or  say,  or  conceived  He  is  an  Infinite  beyond
all  that  is  finite,  an  Absolute  beyond  all  that  is  relative,
a  Perfect  beyond   all   that  is  imperfect,  an  abstract  Being

^  p.  115.  2  pp    192-93.  3  p.  180.  4  pp_  77  and  90.  s  P.  78.


294  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

beyond  all  that  is  concrete  and  particular  ;  and  therefore
to  rise  to  Him  and  become  joined  to  Him  involves  the
negating  of  everything  that  is  "  this  "  or  "  that  "  ;  in  short,
the  annihilation  of  will  to  the  extent  that  "  something  and
nothing  have  become  alike."  ^

The  time  was  not  yet  ripe,  when  our  author  lived  and
wrote,  for  the  truer,  positive  view  of  immanence,  the  view
which  finds  the  Infinite  in  the  finite,  the  Absolute  in  the
relative,  the  Perfect  in  the  imperfect,  the  Universal  in  the
particular  ;  and  so,  too,  the  time  was  not  ripe  for  the  truer
view  of  self- surrender,  the  view  that  all  genuine  self-
surrender  is  the  affirmation  of  a  higher  self,  that  all
genuine  self-sacrifice  is  consecration  to  the  realization  of
a  wider  self.  There  must  be  annihilation  of  aims  that
end  in  the  isolated  self,  "  the  I,  me,  and  mine,"  but  that
does  not  mean  annihilation  of  will,  or  the  destruction  of
desire — it  only  means  that  desire  is  to  be  heightened  by
a  vision  of  service  to  God  and  man,  and  that  our  will  is
to  become  consecrated  to  the  tasks  which  God  is  working
out  in  the  world  of  which  we  are  a  part.  But  to  the  end,
however  far  one  may  travel  on  the  path  of  holiness,  the
aim  must  be  concrete^  and  it  must  be  motived  by  a  concrete
motive,  for  a  desireless,  will-less  man  can  be  called  neither
good  nor  bad.  A  person  is  not  good  until  his  own  will
wills  the  good  deed,  because  he  sees  that  it  is  good,  and
chooses  to  put  his  life  into  it.

Some  hints  of  this  affirmative  spirituality  appear  here
and  there  in  this  little  book,  and  even  where  the  funda-
mental conception  of  it  seems  to  us  wrong,  there  is  a
constant  feeling  that  the  writer's  hea^'t  is  right.  He  did
his  thinkings  as  we  all  do,  in  the  terms  and  ideas  of  his
time,  but  he  attained  a  religious  mood,  a  spiritual  attitude,
which  has  a  timeless  aspect  about  it.  What  noble  words
these  are :

"  A  true  lover  of  God  loveth  Him  alike  in  having  or  in  not
having,  in  sweetness  or  in  bitterness,  in  good  report  or  in  evil
report.  And  therefore  he  standeth  alike  unshaken  in  all  things,
at  all  seasons."  ^

^  P.  173-  ^  P.  32.


XIII  THE   FRIENDS  OF  GOD  295

And  where  can  one  find  a  finer  note  of  positive  con-
secration to  service  than  in  those  words  already  quoted  ?
"  I  would  fain  be  to  the  Eternal  Goodness  what  his  own
hand  is  to  a  man."  His  words  on  the  union  of  the  human
and  Divine  are  well  balanced,  and  are  as  favourable  to  a
practical  life  as  to  a  life  of  quietism  :

"  God  and  man  should  be  wholly  united,  so  that  it  can  be
said  of  a  truth  that  God  and  man  are  one.  This  cometh  to  pass
on  this  wise  :  where  the  truth  always  reigneth,  so  that  true  perfect
God  and  true  perfect  man  are  at  one,  and  man  so  giveth  place  to
God,  that  God  Himself  is  there,  and  this  same  unity  worketh  con-
tinually, and  doeth  or  leaveth  undone,  without  any  I  or  me  or
mine — behold  there  is  Christ,  and  nowhere  else."

His  view  of  Christ's  suffering  over  sin  is  very  modern,
and  has  no  mark  of  the  traditional  or  dogmatic  temper.
It  shows  how  penetrating  a  spirit  he  was,  and  how  pro-
foundly he  was  influenced  by  experience.  Wherever  God
reveals  Himself  personally — or  to  use  the  author's  own
words,  "  wherever  God  is  made  man  or  dwelleth  in  a  truly
godlike  man  " — He  always  reveals  His  sorrow  over  sin.
Christ  is  the  supreme  instance  of  the  Perfect  God  flowing
forth  into  a  person  and  bringing  forth  His  Son  in  a  person.
As  a  man  rises  in  the  spiritual  scale  and  partakes  of  God
he  grows  more  sensitive  to  sin,  and  his  sorrow  over  it
increases  ;  and  this  sorrow  over  sin  comes  from  the  fact
that  God  is  in  the  man,  for  it  is  the  nature  of  God  Him-
self to  grieve  over  sin,  and  such  grief  is  always  a  sign  of
God's  presence.  This  is  the  cause  of  that  unutterable
anguish  and  grief  of  Christ,  who  is  God  made  man  in
fullest  measure.  He  has  shown  to  us  that  sin  is  so
hateful  to  God  and  grieves  Him  so  sore  that  He  would
willingly  suffer  agony  and  death,  if  even  one  man's  sins
might  be  washed  out  thereby  ;  and  wherever  God  finds
this  grief  for  sin.  He  loveth  and  esteemeth  it  more  than
aught  else.^

Like  all  the  other  members  of  this  group,  our  author

*  See  especially  chap,  xxxvii.  It  is  interesting  in  this  connection  to  note
that  the  author's  great  test  of  an  act  or  an  attitude  is  whether  such  act  or  attitude
would  be  seemly  for  God  if  He  were  made  man  (pp.  196-97).


296  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

makes   much  of  first-hand   experience,  and   much   less  of
"  knowledge-about."      He  says  :

"  Although  it  be  good  and  profitable  that  we  should  ask  and
learn  and  know  what  good  and  holy  men  have  wrought  and
suffered,  and  how  God  hath  dealt  with  them,  and  what  He  hath
done  in  and  throuijh  them,  yet  it  is  a  thousand  times  better  that
we  should  in  ourselves  learn  and pei'ceive  and  understand  who  we
are  J  how  afid  what  our  life  is,  what  God  is  and  is  doing  in  us,
what  He  will  have  from  us,  and  to  what  e?ids  He  will  or  will  not


In  another  fine  passage  he  asks  "  in  what  Blessedness
lieth,"  and  he  answers  that  it  is  not  in  anything  whatever
outside  us — "  not  in  any  works  or  wonders  that  God  hath
wrought,  or  ever  shall  work,  so  far  as  these  things  exist
or  are  done  outside."  "  TJiese  things  can  inake  me  blessed
only  iji  so  far  as  they  exist  or  are  done  and  loved,  known,
tasted,  and  felt  within  me."  ^  In  this  connection  it  is  in-
teresting to  note  that  this  Friend  of  God  in  the  fourteenth
century  used  the  term  "  Light "  almost  precisely  as  the
Friends  of  the  seventeenth  century  did.  There  is,  he
says,  a  true  Light  within  the  soul  which  gives  us  our
sense  of  sin  ;  it  leads  us  to  frame  and  build  our  lives  after
His  life.  In  a  single  golden  sentence  he  says :  "  The
true  Light  is  God's  seed,  and  it  bringeth  forth  the  fruits
of  God."  ^  There  are  two  persons  who  have  no  sense  of
sin — Christ  and  Satan,  and  the  sense  of  sin  in  a  man
decreases  as  he  moves  up  or  down  toward  either  of  these
divergent  goals.  Those  who  are  losing  their  sense  of  sin
by  following  the  Light  toward  Christ  have  always  this
sign  and  seal,  that  they  are  "  inflamed  and  consumed  with
love  "  :  "  The  Light  is  worth  nothing  without  love  "  ;  "  to
be  a  partaker  of  the  Divine  Nature,  that  is,  to  be  a  God-
like man,  means  to  be  illuminated  by  the  Divine  Light,
and  to  be  inflamed  and  consumed  with  Divine  Love."  ^

In  spite  of  his  dread  of  being  tangled  in  the  finite  and
temporal,  and   his   tendency  to  reduce  all  that  is  seen   to
1  p.  26.  2  i>p  28-29.

^  This  is  iterated  and  re-iterated  throughout  the  wriiings  of  Isaac  Pening^on
{Works,  London,  1681).

*  See  especially  chapters  xl.  and  xli.


xiti  THE   FRIENDS  OF  GOD  297

zero  in  order  to  exalt  the  unseen  and  eternal  to  infinity,
he  nevertheless  calls  the  world  that  now  is  "  an  outer  court
of  the  Eternal,"  and  he  sa}^s  that  temporal  things  "  mani-
fest and  remind  us  of  God,"  so  that  things  which  are
made — "  creatures  " — are  "  a  guide  and  a  path  unto  God
and  Eternity."  ^  And  the  supreme  thing  about  an  earthly
life  is  that  it  can  become  a  revealing  place  for  God  :

"Thanks  be  unto  the  man,  and  everlasting  reward  and  bless-
ing, who  is  fit  and  ready  to  be  a  tabernacle  of  the  Eternal  Good-
ness and  Godhead,  wherein  God  may  exert  His  power  and  will,
and  work  without  hindrance."  -

It  remains  to  point  out  that  our  author,  like  the  other
members  of  his  group,  has  "  a  spiritual  ladder "  for  the
soul's  upward  path.  His  ladder  has  three  stages,  each  of
which  has  three  sub-stages.  The  first  upward  step  of  the
soul  is  "  Purification."  The  first  degree  of  Purification  is
(a)  sorrow  for  sin  ;  the  second  (d),  full  confession  of  sin  ;
and  the  third  is  (c)  hearty  amendment  of  life.  The  second
stage  of  the  soul  is  "  Enlightenment,"  with  its  three  degrees
of  advance  :  (a)  Eschewal  of  sin,  (d)  practice  of  virtue  and
good  works,  and  (c)  endurance  of  trial  and  temptation.
The  third  stage  is  "  Union,"  which  ends  upward  in  the
perfect  life.  Its  three  degrees  are  (a)  pureness  and  single-
ness of  heart,  (d)  love,  and  (c)  contemplation  of  God.^
But  at  every  s^a^^e  on  the  spiritual  ladder,  the  soul  that  is
progressing  toward  the  Light  and  Love  and  Vision  of
God  "  must  live  by  God  as  the  body  liveth  by  the  soul"  *

1  p.  181.  2  p^  27_  3  See  chap.  xiv.  *  P.  £ii.


CHAPTER    XIV

THE    BRETHREN    OF    THE    COMMON    LIFE

The  mysticism  of  all  these  societies  and  groups  in  the
fourteenth  century,  which  we  have  so  far  studied,  was
weakened  by  its  heavy  load  of  scholastic  speculation.
There  was  at  the  heart  of  it  a  deep,  sincere  craving  for
God,  its  exponents  were  trying  to  utter  the  unstilled
hunger  of  the  soul ;  but  it  was  always  at  the  mercy  of  pre-
vailing intellectual  currents,  which  swept  it  now  into  the
dangers  of  an  unmoral,  or  even  immoral,  pantheism,  and
now  into  a  via  negativa,  ending  in  a  blind  alley  of  Quietism.
It  was  always  too  subtle  for  the  common  people,  too  far
removed  from  the  warm  pulses  of  actual  human  life.  It
was,  furthermore,  too  much  absorbed  in  the  introspection
of  inward  states,  in  the  cataloguing  of  stages  of  "  experi-
ence," to  become  a  social  gospel,  a  spiritualizing  power
for  the  age.  The  times  called  loudly  for  a  religion  of
experience,  an  intimate  life  with  God,  but  at  the  same
time  for  a  religion  more  simple,  practical,  social — in  a
word,  more  Christlike,  than  any  of  these  spiritual  move-
ments. The  New  Learning  was  already  working  its
noiseless  revolution.  Unsuspected  transformations  were
commencing  to  remould  the  mind  of  Europe,  and  with
the  new  intellectual  dawning  there  also  began  to  spread,
unconsciously  and  without  observation,  a  new  7nysticisin^
born  out  of  the  old,  but  more  practical  and  social
than  it ;  more  eager  to  minister  to  the  whole  man,  and
with  wider  interest  in  the  entire  spiritual  mission  of
Christianity.

The  visible  Church  was  sick  with  an  astonishing  com

298


CH.  XIV    BRETHREN  OF  THE  COMMON  LIFE    299

plication  of  diseases,  which  none  of  its  doctors,  "greedy
for  quick  returns  of  profit,"  could  cure.  Its  spiritual
power  had  waned  ;  its  hierarchy  was  honeycombed  with
corruption  ;  its  oracles  were  dumb ;  it  had  no  word  of
authority  for  the  sin-burdened  multitude  that  "  looked  up
and  were  not  fed."  The  great  Church  that  had  conquered
the  Empire  and  led  captive  the  barbarian  conquerors,  and
had  turned  the  tribes  of  Gaul  and  Germany  and  Britain
into  men  of  faith,  was  sinking  into  a  temporal  corporation
for  dispensing  wealth  and  patronage  and  power.  But  in
the  dark  days  at  the  end  of  the  fourteenth  century  even
its  temporal  power  and  prestige,  which  had  been  slowly
built  up  by  the  cunning  statesmanship  of  popes,  was
crumbling.  The  seventy  years  of"  Babylonish  Captivity  "
had  put  a  deep  stain  on  the  glory  of  the  official  Church,
had  weakened  its  world-authority,  had  brought  to  light  its
insincerity,  and  had  been  a  terrible  witness  to  its  corrup-
tion and  rottenness.  But  the  "  great  schism  "  that  followed
the  return  to  Rome  wrought  still  greater  havoc.  The
unity  of  Christendom  was  shattered.  There  was  no
longer  any  pretence  of  a  single  spiritual  head  to  the
official  Church.  Each  country  followed  its  own  interests
in  deciding  which  papal  head  to  acknowledge  ;  and  the
mystic  order,  the  seamless  robe,  was  rent  in  twain — and
finally  into  three  parts.

"  The  body  of  Christianity,"  writes  Gerson,  at  the  end
of  the  fourteenth  century,  "  is  covered  with  sores  from
head  to  foot.  Everything  is  rushing  from  bad  to  worse,
and  every  one  must  take  his  part  in  the  sum  of  evils."
There  was  no  hope  of  a  spiritual  regeneration  from  the
official  Church.  It  was  busy  bartering  and  trafficking  in
the  temple,  busy  with  world  politics  and  temporal  schemes.
Even  when  the  rent  in  the  mystic  order  was  patched  up
at  Constance,  the  next  concern  was  to  burn  the  man
who  was  most  keenly  diagnosing  the  moral  and  spiritual
diseases  from  which  the  Church  was  suffering.  If  the
religion  of  Christ  was  to  be  revived  in  power  and  supplant
the  caricature  of  it,  the  age  had  to  produce  prophets  of
the  invisible  Church — voices  of  the  Eternal  Christ  to  cry


300  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

in  the  ears  of  men — who  could  exhibit  in  powerful  fashion
new  and  compelling  ideals  of  spiritual  religion.

Such  prophets,  in  fact,  did  appear,  and  helped  to  turn
the  battle  from  defeat  to  victory.  The  work  of  the
mystics  of  the  thirteenth  and  fourteenth  centuries  was  not
lost.  Their  teaching  burned  in  the  hearts  of  the  high-
minded  men  and  women  who  heard  them  ;  their  books
and  sermons  were  like  torches  passed  on  by  dying  hands
to  living  successors,  and  the  dark  period  of  schism  and
spiritual  incapacity  in  the  visible  Church  was  relieved  by
the  appearance  of  many  worthy  representatives  of  that
invisible  Church  which  never  dies,  which  must  always
be  reckoned  with  by  official  hierarchies  and  traditional
systems,  and  which  is  still  the  hope  and  promise  of  that
kingdom  of  God  for  which  Christ  lived  and  died.

The  "  new  mysticism  "  of  the  late  fourteenth  and  early
fifteenth  centuries  was  more  emancipated  from  scholasticism
than  the  mystics  of  the  early  fourteenth  century  had  been.
The  influence  of  Dionysius  and  Erigena  was  weakening,
and  the  influence  of  Christ  and  of  the  primitive  ideals  was
growing.  There  was  still  an  air  of  the  recluse  about  it,
a  smell  of  the  cloister  was  upon  it,  and  the  old  tendency
to  be  over- occupied  in  the  cultivation  of  inward  states  was
not  conquered,  but  there  appeared  now  a  new  passion  for
service,  a  consecration,  not  so  much  to  the  attainment  of
the  "  Divine  Origin  "  for  the  individual  as  a  consecration
to  the  task  of  building  the  spiritual  Zion,  the  invisible
Church  for  humanity.  The  great  mystics  of  this  period
at  the  turning  of  the  century  were  concerned  to  revitalise
Christianity,  and  to  restore  the  Church  to  its  apostolic
power,  not  by  miracle  and  cataclysm,  but  by  a  positive
imitatio7i  of  CJnist,  by  the  cultivation  of  brotherhood,  by
the  religious  education  of  little  children,  and  by  most
strenuous  efforts  to  heal  the  diseases  of  the  Church  and
to  bring  its  official  guides  to  the  Light  of  Christ.  These
champions  of  inward  religion  were  confined  to  no  locality
and  to  no  one  nation.  Nearly  every  Christian  country
had  its  leader,  or  leaders,  of  this  new  mysticism,  which  was
forcing  the  attention   of  the  most  serious   minds   at   the


XIV     BRETHREN   OF  THE   COMMON   LIFE      301

very  time  when  the  New  Learning  was  beginning  to
attract  the  interest  of  little  groups  of  men  in  widely-
sundered  centres.  France  had  her  Gerson  ;  Italy  her
Catharine  of  Siena  ;  Sweden  her  Bridget ;  England  her
Walter  Hilton  and  Lady  Julian  ;  Holland  was  the  home
of  a  great  mystical  brotherhood  —  the  successor  of  the
Friends  of  God — "  the  New  Devotion  "  or  "  Brethren  of
the  Common  Life,"  out  of  which  came  the  most  influential
piece  of  mystical  literature  the  world  has  seen — The
Imitation  of  Christ.


Catharine's  life  covers  the  years  from  1347  to  1380.^
She  was  a  charming,  joyous  child,  but  given  to  visions,
and  filled  with  longing  to  imitate  the  desert  hermits,  even
at  the  age  of  six.  Already  at  this  childish  age  she  had
her  first  ecstasy,  and  became  so  absorbed  with  the  vision
of  Christ  that  her  little  brother  had  to  pull  her  by  the
hand  to  bring  her  back  to  earth,  and  she  took  the  vow  of
virginity  when  she  was  seven  !  At  fourteen  she  put  on
the  black  and  white  garb  of  St.  Dominic,  and  became  a
Dominican  tertiary.  When  her  father  endeavoured  to
compel  her  to  marry,  and  deprived  her  of  solitary  con-
templation to  force  her  into  the  worldly  life,  "  the  Holy
Ghost  taught  her  how  to  make  for  herself  a  solitude  in
her  heart,  where  amid  all  her  occupations  she  could  be  as
though  alone  with  God,  to  whose  Presence  she  kept  herself
no  less  attentive  than  if  she  had  no  exterior  employment
to  distract  her."

In  1370  she  underwent  a  mystical  death  and  returned
to  life  under  the  Divine  command  to  go  abroad  to  save
souls  and  to  minister  to  the  needy  world.  She  experi-
enced, she  tells  us,  "  the  sweetness  of  serving  God,  not  for
her  own  joy  ;  and  of  serving  her  neighbour,  not  for  her
own  will  or  profit,  but  from  pure  love."  ^  And  this  love
of  hers,  burning  with   intense  desire,   was  kindled   in  her

1  She  was  the  youngest  of  the  twenty-five  children  of  Jacopo  Benincasa,  of
Siena.

2  See  Letters  of  St.  Catharine  of  Siena,  by  Vida  D.  Scudder,  1905,  p.  63.


302  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

heart  by  a  clear  perception  of  the  love  of  God  as  the
supreme  reality  of  the  universe,  which  breaks  out  in  that
great  sentence  of  hers :  "  For  nails  would  not  have  held
the  God-man  fast  to  the  cross  had  not  love  held  Him
there."  ^

The  corruptions  of  the  Church  and  the  evils  of  the
times  oppressed  her  with  a  weight  heavy  almost  as  death,
and  brought  her  under  a  severe  mental  strain  and  an
intense  passion  for  Christ.  In  an  extraordinary  ecstasy
she  experienced  an  espousal  to  Christ,  and  she  felt  herself
to  be  ever  after  the  espoused  bride  of  the  King  of  Heaven,
pledged  *'  to  do  manfully  and  without  hesitation  "  vv'hatever
she  might  be  called  to  do.  Even  more  extraordinary  was
a  later  ecstasy,  in  which,  like  St.  Francis,  she  experienced
the  imprint  of  the  five  wounds  of  Christ-^the  stigmata.
She  felt  a  torrent  of  blood  and  fire  poured  out  upon  her-
self, and  was  conscious  of  a  mystical  cleansing  wrought
by  this  torrent,  so  that  she  was  "changed  into  another
person."  In  the  ardour  of  this  experience  she  prayed  for
a  sign,  and  suddenly  felt  her  outstretched  palm  pierced
through  by  an  invisible  nail.  The  final  imprint  of  the
stigmata  came  somewhat  later.  Her  own  description  of
this  experience  is  as  follows  : —

"  I  saw  the  crucified  Lord  coming  down  to  me  in  a  great
light.  .  .  .  Then  from  the  marks  of  His  most  sacred  wounds  I
saw  five  blood -red  rays  coming  down  upon  me,  which  were
directed  towards  the  hands  and  feet  and  heart  of  my  body.
Wherefore,  perceiving  the  mystery,  I  straightway  exclaimed,
'  Ah  !  Lord,  my  God,  I  beseech  Thee,  let  not  the  marks  appear
outwardly  on  the  body.'  Then,  while  I  was  speaking,  before  the
rays  reached  me,  they  changed  their  blood-red  colour  to  splendour,
and  in  the  semblance  of  pure  light  they  came  to  the  five  places
of  my  body,  that  is,  to  the  hands,  the  feet,  and  the  heart.  So
great  is  the  pain  that  I  endure  sensibly  in  all  those  five  places,
but  especially  within  my  heart,  that  unless  the  Lord  works  a  new
miracle,  it  seems  not  possible  to  me  that  the  life  of  my  body  can
stay  with  such  agony."  ^

By  a  later  experience  the  "  new  miracle  "  was  granted,

^  Letters  of  St.  CathaHne  of  Siena,  p.  8.
2  Gardner's  6V.  Caihari7ie  of  Siena,  p.  134.


XIV     BRETHREN   OF  THE  COMMON  LIFE      303

so  that  the  wounds   not  only  ceased   to  afflict  the  body,
but  even  fortified  it.^

The  next  year,  after  these  experiences  (1376),  she
threw  herself  into  the  task  of  restoring  the  spiritual  power
of  the  Church.  She  had  poor  material  at  hand  with
which  to  build  a  kingdom  of  God  in  those  years,  but  one
feels  a  sense  of  awe  as  he  sees  this  woman,  girt  about
with  no  forces  but  the  invisible  might  of  God,  going  to
work  to  bring  the  head  of  the  Church  back  to  Rome  and
to  his  ancient  dignity.  She  finds  abject  superstition  in
the  court  of  Avignon  ;  vacillation  and  cowardice  in  the
heart  of  her  Pope,  but  she  rises  to  a  full  sense  of  her
spiritual  mission,  and  speaks  with-  the  authority  of  one
inwardly  conscious  of  a  Divine  commission.

"  When  I  told  you  that  you  should  toil  for  Holy  Church,"  she
wrote  to  the  Papal  Legate,  "  I  was  not  thinking  only  of  the
labours  you  should  assume  about  temporal  things,  but  chiefly
that  you  and  the  Holy  Father  ought  to  toil  and  do  what  you  can
to  get  rid  of  the  wolfish  shepherds  who  care  for  nothing  but
eating  and  fine  palaces  and  big  horses.  Oh  me,  that  which
Christ  won  upon  the  wood  of  the  Cross  is  spent  with  harlots !  I
beg  that  if  you  were  to  die  for  it,  you  tell  the  Holy  Father  to  put
an  end  to  such  iniquities.  And  when  the  time  comes  to  make
priests  or  cardinals,  let  them  not  be  chosen  through  flatteries  or
moneys  or  simony ;  but  beg  him,  as  far  as  you  can,  that  he  notice
well  if  virtue  and  a  good  and  holy  fame  are  found  in  the  men."  2

That  has  the  ring  of  the  prophet,  but  it  is  only  the
prelude.  The  same  year  she  writes  to  the  Pope  himself,
Gregory  XI.  With  the  licence  of  a  little  child,  she  calls
him  "  sweetest  '  Babbo  '  mine  !  "  but  she  tells  him  the  plain
facts  that  the  "  blind  shepherd-physicians  "  are  leading  the
Church  straight  into  the  ditch  ;  and  rising  to  the  very
limit  of  daring,  she  says  :

"  I  hope  by  the  goodness  of  God,  venerable  father  mine,  that
you  will  quench  this  perverse  and  perilous  self-love  in  yourself,
and  will  not  love  yourself  for  yourself,  nor  your  neighbour  for
yourself,  nor  God;  but  will  love  Him  because  He  is  highest  and

1  There  are  few  pieces  of  autobiographical  description  which  better  show  the
power  of  auto-suggestion  than  this.  2  Letters,  p.  115.


304  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

Eternal  Goodness,  and  worthy  of  being  loved ;  and  yourself  and
your  neighbour  you  will  love  to  the  honour  and  the  glory  of  the
Sweet  Name  of  Jesus.  I  will,  then,  that  you  be  so  true  and
good  a  shepherd  that  if  you  had  a  hundred  thousand  lives  you
would  be  ready  to  give  them  all  for  the  honour  of  God  and  the
salvation  of  men.  .  .  .  Let  no  more  note  be  given  to  friends  or
relatives  or  to  one's  temporal  needs,  but  only  to  virtue  and  the
exaltation  of  things  spiritual.  For  temporal  things  are  failing  you
from  no  other  cause  than  from  your  neglect  of  the  spirituaV^  .  .  .
*'  I  wish  and  pray  that  the  moment  of  time  that  remains  [for  you]
be  dealt  with  manfully,  following  Christ,  whose  vicar  you  are,  like
a  strong  man."  ^

Again,  v^riting  to  Gregory  as  his  "  unworthy  daughter
Catharine,  servant  and  slave  of  the  servants  of  Jesus
Christ,  in  His  precious  blood,"  she  urges  that

"  Holy  Church  should  return  to  her  first  condition^  poor,  humble,
and  meek,  as  she  was  in  that  holy  time  when  men  took  note  of
nothing  but  the  honour  of  God  and  the  salvation  of  souls,  caring
for  spiritual  things,  not  for  temporal.  For  ever  since  the  Church
has  aimed  more  at  temporal  than  at  spiritual  things  it  has  gone
from  bad  to  worse."  ^

There  is  something  sublime  in  a  message  such  as  the
following  from  the  daughter  of  a  dyer  of  Siena  to  the
sovereign  Pontiff  of  the  world  : —

"  The  sick  man  is  blind,  for  he  knows  not  his  own  need ;  and
the  pastor,  who  is  the  physician,  is  blind,  for  he  considers  nothing
save  his  own  pleasure  and  advantage,  and,  in  order  not  to  lose
that,  does  not  employ  the  knife  of  justice  or  the  fire  of  most
ardent  charity.  Such  a  one  is  truly  an  hireling  shepherd  .  .  .  and
does  not  follow  sweet  Jesus,  the  true  Shepherd,  who  has  given
His  life  for  the  sheep.  Oh,  Babbo  mine,  sweet  Christ  on  earth,
follow  that  sweet  Gregory  [Gregory  the  Great],  for  it  will  be  as
possible  for  you  to  quench  self  love  as  it  was  for  him. "  ^

Finally,  she  went  in  person  to  Avignon,  and,  as  the
messenger  of  Christ,  persuaded  the  wavering  Pope  to
return  to  Rome,  triumphed  over  all  obstacles,  and  induced
him   to  "  fulfil  what   he   had   promised   God."  ^      Another

^  Letters,  p.  131.  ^  Ibid.  pp.  1 19-21.  ^  Gardner,  p.  154.

^  Thereisan  account,  undoubtedly  fictitious,  mXh&Bookof the  Five  Men,  attributed

to  ' '  The  Friend  of  God  from  the  Oberland,"  of  how  he  received  an  order  from  God


XIV     BRETHREN  OF  THE  COMMON   LIFE      305

trait  in  this  great  woman,  no  less  wonderful  than  her
statesmanlike  grasp  and  her  penetrating  insight  into
public  affairs,  was  her  power  of  seeing  the  hidden  possi-
bilities within  the  persons  who  came  in  contact  with  her,
a  certain  creative  power  which  all  the  greatest  mystics
show.  She  tells  in  one  of  her  letters  how  one  in  close
unity  with  God  can  help  bring  a  friend,  a  fellow-man  to
his  full  possibility :

"  Nay,  there  grows  within  one  a  love  made  of  great  and  true
compassion,  and  with  desire  he  brings  his  friend  to  the  birth,
with  tears  and  sighs  and  continual  prayers  in  the  sweet  presence
of  God.  .  .  .  There  is  no  spirit  of  criticism  in  it  nor  displeasure
because  it  loves  the  friend  not  for  himself,  but  for  God."  ^

Her  later  life  was  devoted  in  the  same  fearless  strain  to
the  discouraging  task  of  rousing  spiritual  passion  in  the
hearts  of  officials  who  were  immersed  in  material  concerns.
Her  noble  life  admirably  illustrates  her  lofty  confession  :
"  /  would  rather  exert  myself  for  Christ  crucified,  feeling
pain,  gloom,  and  inward  co?ifiict,  than  not  exert  myself  and
feel  reposed  ^  She  knew  in  her  own  experience  of  having
entered  "  that  sea  of  peace  where  thou  shalt  never  have
any  fear  of  being  separated  from  God."  ^  She  gave  her
testimony  to  the  fact  that  the  soul  "  bears  ever  within  it
the  place  where  God  lives  by  grace — the  house  of  our
soul  wherein  holy  desire  prays  constantly,"  ^  and,  in  words
of  lofty  spiritual  import,  she  wrote  :  "  I  desire  to  see  you
seek  God  in  truth,  without  anything  betzueen" ^

II

It  was  a  saint  and  mystic,  Catharine,  who  was  the  chief
instrument  in  bringing  the  "  Babylonish  Captivity  "  of  the
Church  to  an  end  ;  so,  too,  it  was  a  mystic  and  politician,

to  go  to  the  Pope,  Gregory  XI. ,  upon  his  return  to  Rome,  to  warn  him  of  the
woes  which  were  coming,  and  to  call  upon  him  in  the  name  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to
reform  the  Church.  At  first  the  Pope  was  angry  at  the  freedom  with  which  he,
a  layman,  spoke  of  the  shis  of  the  Pope  and  of  Christendom,  but  as  he  saw
the  proofs  of  the  layman's  divine  mission,  the  Pope  promised  to  obey  him  in
everything.  St.  Bridget  of  Sweden  had  already,  in  1366,  under  a  Divine  intima-
tion, paid  a  visit  to  Avignon,  to  urge  Pope  Urban  V.  to  return  to  Rome.

1  Letters,  p.  250.  '^  Ibid.  p.  160.  3  /^/^_  p    ^5^

*  Ibid.  p.  151.  5  /^^-^   p    89.


3o6  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap

Jean  le  Charlier  de  Gerson  (i  363-1429),  who  was  the
chief  instrument  in  ending  the  "  great  schism."  He  won
for  himself  the  title  "Most  Christian  Doctor,"  he  held
the  foremost  scholastic  position  in  Europe,  Chancellor  of
the  University  of  Paris,  and  he  was  the  controlling  power
in  the  great  Council  of  Constance.  It  was  the  deepest
purpose  of  his  life  to  build  up  again  the  invisible  Church
within  the  visible,  but  he  was  a  politician,  a  reconciler — a
man  who  was  ready  to  put  unity  above  truth,  and  the
result  was  that  in  doing  much  good  he  also  did  some  evil,
and  that  while  toiling  with  valiant  spirit  to  realize  the
kingdom  of  Christ,  he  also  furnished  some  material  for
the  kingdom  of  Anti-Christ.  With  a  boldness  and  frank-
ness which  reminds  one  of  Catharine  speaking  to  her
"sweet  Babbo,"  Gerson  in  a  powerful  sermon  in  1405
told  the  King  of  France  the  pitiable  condition  of  his
people,  robbed  by  princes  and  plundered  by  soldiers,  and
called  him  to  his  duty  to  relieve  the  sufferings  of  these
people,  and  to  give  them  their  rights  as  men.  A  still
greater  service  he  rendered  to  the  people  by  teaching  in
person  the  children  of  the  poor,  declaring  that  they  were
the  children  of  God,  inheritors  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,
and  that  it  was  as  great  an  honour  to  teach  them  as  to
teach  princes.  In  behalf  of  these  little  children  he  power-
fully attacked  the  superstitions  which  were  fed  to  them  in
place  of  truth,  and  to  train  their  innocent  spirits  he  wrote
an  ^  ^  C  for  Little  People^  telling  them  about  the  Divine
Father  and  His  holy  will.  Higher  than  his  title  of  "  Most
Christian  Doctor  "  was  the  other  title  he  gained,  "  Doctor
of  the  people  and  Doctor  of  little  children."  ^

His  mysticism  is  worked  out  in  a  series  of  very  dry
books,  which  show  much  more  subtilty  than  originality
and  more  learning  than  personal  experience.  He  was
the  stern  foe  of  any  mysticism  which  leaned  toward
pantheism  or  which  ended  in  a  Divine  Dark,  but  he  was
not  very  successful  at  the  task  of  blazing  the  way  to  a
positive  mysticism  which  could  ground  the  active  life  in
an  inner  consciousness  of  God.     His  psychological  studies

^  See  De  Montmorency,  Thomas  i  Kempis,  p.  22.


XIV     BRETHREN   OF  THE  COMMON   LIFE      307

of  mystical  processes  are  formal  and  scholastic  rather  than
genuine  analyses  of  experience  itself,  and  have  little  value
to-day.  The  main  point  of  interest  is  his  conclusion,  in
his  Mystica  Theologia}  that  the  soul  has  an  intuitive  faculty
above  the  reasoning  faculty — a  synderesis  or  power  of
mind,  for  receiving  truth  immediately  from  God  ;  that  all
genuine  mystical  exercises  are  exercises  of  love  rather  than
of  thought ;  that  it  is  in  contemplation  of  Divine  Love
that  the  soul  experiences  its  love-union  with  God,  and  so
finds  its  own  true  activities,  and  that  only  a  few  souls  attain
the  mystical  experience,  since  it  is  a  rare  grace  or  achieve-
ment, and  most  men  stop  at  lower  levels.

It  was,  however,  significant  that  the  foremost  scholar
of  the  time  was  looking  for  God  within  the  soul  rather
than  above  the  dome  of  the  sky  or  in  the  bread  and  wine
of  the  altar,  and  it  meant  much  for  such  a  man  to  point
out  that  God  and  man  discover  their  oneness  through  love.
His  good  and  his  evil  work  at  the  Council  of  Constance
cannot  be  told  here.  He  cured  the  schism  by  formulating
the  great  principle  that  Councils  are  above  popes,  and  can
unmake  and  make  them.  He  stood  by  the  mystical
movement  in  Holland,  and  saved  "  the  Brothers  of  the
Common  Life  "  from  their  ecclesiastical  enemies  ;  but  he,
though  in  intention  a  member  of  the  Invisible  Church,
helped  to  destroy  its  noblest  living  stone  by  consenting
to  and  even  urging  the  death  of  John  Hus.

Forced  into  exile  at  the  very  height  of  his  glory,
because  he  dared  in  the  Council  to  stand  for  righteousness
in  a  cause  which  called  upon  him  the  hate  of  the  Duke  of
Burgundy,  he  ended  his  public  service  as  he  began  it —
teaching  little  children.  The  world  may  forget  the  mystic
commentary  on  the  Song  of  Songs  which  he  wrote  in  his
years  of  exile  at  Lyons,  but  it  cannot  well  forget  the
beautiful  picture  of  this  great  scholar,  unifier  of  the
Church,  and  mystic,  surrounded  by  a  band  of  poor
children  listening  to  his  words  of  life,  and  crowding
around,  as  he  lay  dying,  to  pray  for  "  our  dear  father,
Jean  Gerson."

^  Doctrina  Johannis  Gersoni  de  Theologia  Mystica,  Paris,  1838.


3o8  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

Ill

But  this  chapter  must  be  mainly  devoted  to  the  quiet
work  for  the  realization  of  the  invisible  Church  performed
in  the  mystical  groups  of  "  the  Brethren  of  the  Common
Life " — a  movement  often  called  by  its  own  members
the  "  New  Devotion,"  which  gives  us  the  ripest  fruit  of
mysticism  before  the  Reformation.  The  actual  founder
and  spiritual  guide  of  the  movement  was  Gerard  Groote,
at  the  same  time  the  bearer  of  a  new  evangelism,  a  new
education,  and  a  new  mysticism.  But  Gerard  owed  so
much  to  his  spiritual  father,  John  Ruysbroek,  the  Flemish
mystic,  that  I  shall  introduce  him  here  as  a  vital  part  of
"the  New  Devotion."  Ruysbroek  is  the  link  that  joins
the  two  movements — the  Friends  of  God  and  the  Brothers
of  the  Common  Life — together,  and  the  spirit  of  both
groups  is  found  in  him.  He  was  the  intimate  friend,  on
the  one  hand,  of  Tauler  and  Suso,  and,  on  the  other,  of
Gerard  and  his  companions.

He  was  born,  probably  of  German  parents,  in  the  year
1293,  in  the  little  village  of  Ruysbroek,  on  the  Senne,
between  Brussels  and  Hal,  and  now  his  "  village  name  "  is
the  only  name  for  him  we  know.  He  was  not,  like  his
friends  Tauler  and  Groote,  a  scholar.  "  He  had,"  says
Denis  the  Carthusian,  "  no  teacher  but  the  Holy  Ghost.
He  was  ignorant  and  illiterate.  Peter  and  John  were  the
same.  His  authority  I  believe  to  be  that  of  a  man  to  whom
the  Holy  Ghost  has  revealed  secrets."  With  consider-
able exaggeration  his  great  admirer,  Maeterlink,  comments
thus  on  his  ignorance  and  astonishing  wisdom  :

"This  monk  possessed  one  of  the  wisest,  most  exact,  and
most  subtle  philosophic  brains  which  have  ever  existed  (!).  He
lived  in  his  hut  at  Gronendal  (Green  Valley),  in  the  midst  of  the
forest  of  Soignes.  He  knew  no  Greek,  and  perhaps  no  Latin.
He  was  alone  and  poor ;  and  yet  in  the  depths  of  this  obscure
forest  of  Brabant  his  mind,  ignorant  and  simple  as  it  was,  receives
all  unconsciously  dazzling  sunbeams  from  all  the  lonely,  mysteri-
ous peaks  of  human  thought.  He  knows,  though  he  is  unaware
of  it,  the  Platonism  of  Greece,  the  Snfism  of  Persia,  the  Brah-
manism  of  India,  and  the  Buddhism  of  Tibet ;  and  his  marvellous


XIV     BRETHREN  OF  THE  COMMON   LIFE      309

ignorance  rediscovers  the  wisdom  of  buried  centuries,  and  foresees
the  knowledge  of  centuries  yet  unborn."  ^

He  at  least  knew  Latin  enough  to  receive  priest's
orders,  which  he  took  in  his  twenty -fourth  year,  and
became  vicar  of  the  Church  of  St.  Gudule,  in  Brussels.
He  performed  the  duties  of  his  priesthood  with  zeal  and
fidelity  until  his  sixtieth  year,  when  he  retired  with  a  little
band  of  companions  to  the  monastery  of  Gronendal,  where
in  the  solitude  of  the  forest  he  devoted  himself  to  medita-
tion and  to  the  composition  of  his  mystical  books.  He
devoutly  believed  that  he  was  the  recipient  of  immediate
revelation,  and  he  told  Gerard  Groote  that  he  was  firmly
convinced  that  he  had  not  written  a  word  except  under
the  impulse  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  He  wrote  in  the  tongue
of  his  own  people,  but  he  travelled  so  far  up  "  within  the
polar  circle  of  the  mind  "  that  it  is  desperately  hard  to
follow  him,  and,  as  Maeterlink  says,  his  words  and  phrases
are  but  "  poor  double  horn-panes,"  through  which  the
light  of  his  mind  comes  to  us.  His  reputation  for  saintli-
ness  spread  widely  abroad,  and  drew  many  visitors  to  his
retreat — some  seriously  seeking  the  wise  man's  counsel,
and  some  coming  to  satisfy  their  curiosity.  Among  the
many  legends  which  his  fame  and  holiness  inspired  there
is  one  which  ought  to  be  true,  whether  it  actually  is  or
not.  Some  priests  from  Paris  presented  themselves  to
him  one  day,  desiring  to  consult  him  on  the  state  of  their
souls,  but  his  only  answer  was,  "  You  are  as  holy  as  you
desire  to  be."  They  were  naturally  nettled  and  annoyed
at  such  an  answer,  for  they  missed  its  profound  meaning.
"  My  very  dear  children,"  continued  the  spiritual  counsellor,
'*  I  said  that  your  holiness  was  that  which  you  desired  it
to  be  ;  in  other  words,  it  is  in  proportion  to  your  good-
will. Enter  into  yourselves,  examine  your  goodwill,  and
you  will  have  the  measure  of  your  state."  ^

One  touches  in  those  words  the  very  secret  of  mysticism,
that  in  the  inward  life  itself,  not  in  outside  props,  lies  the

1  Maeterlink,   Ruysbroek  and  the  Mystics,   translated  by  Jane   T.   Stoddart.
London,  1894,  p.  12.

2  Bailie,  Reflections  from  the  Mirror  of  a  Mystic,  London,  1905,  p.  13.


310  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

man's  salvation  and  power.  The  legend  writers  miss  just
this  secret  when,  to  glorify  him,  they  tell  how  once
Ruysbroek  was  lost  in  the  forest,  and  the  brethren  sought
in  all  directions  for  him.  At  length  one  of  his  most
intimate  friends  saw  a  distant  tree  wrapped  in  light,  and,
when  he  drew  near,  he  found  it  enveloped  in  flames,  while
under  it  sat  the  master  in  an  ecstasy  of  meditation  !  He
died  at  a  ripe  old  age  in  1 381.

It  is  a  primary  principle  of  his  teaching  that  "  the
soul  finds  God  in  its  own  depths  "  :  "  God  suffices  for  all,
and  every  spirit,  according  to  the  measure  of  its  love,  has
a  manner  more  or  less  profound  of  seeking  God  in  its  own
depths."  ^  The  deepest  root  and  very  essence  of  the  soul
in  every  man  is  tJie  eternal  image  of  God  there — there
without  any  agency  of  our  own,  there  before  our  personal
creation,  and  there  for  ever.  In  the  mirror  of  the  Son
God  sees,  and  we  too  may  see,  the  types  or  patterns  of  all
reality  ;  and  the  way  to  find  ourselves  and  God  and  all
that  Is,  is  to  stretch  forth  our  arms  toward  the  Divine
pattern  which  is  ours :  "  Flying  from  brightness  to  bright-
ness, the  spirit  aspires  with  outstretched  arms  to  reach
this  immortal  pattern  according  to  which  it  was  created."

The  "  spiritual  ladder,"  by  which  the  created  spirit
climbs  up  "  that  mountain  without  summit,"  has,  according
to  Ruysbroek,  three  steps  or  stages.  The  first  stage  is  the
active  life.  This  is  a  stage  of  religion  which  consists  of
outward  acts,  such  as  abstinence  from  things  harmful,
deeds  of  penance,  acts  of  self-denial,  the  performance  of
virtuous  deeds — in  short,  the  living  of  a  morally  good  life,
in  accordance  with  the  laws  and  commandments  of  God.
To  look  upon  outwardly,  this  life  appears  to  conform  to
its  pattern  ;  the  thing,  however,  which  spoils  it,  and  puts
the  trail  of  imperfection  on  all  its  deeds,  is  its  intention.
It  is  a  stage  of  self-love  and  self-concern.  The  soul  does
what  it  does  for  reward  and  gain.  It  is  moved  by  fear  of
hell  or  desire  for  the  joys  of  heaven.  It  is  a  religion  of
legalism,  and  those  who  are  in  this  stage  can  be  called  by
no  higher  name  than  "  Servants  of  God."

*  Bailie,  op.  cit.  pp.  22  and  23.


XIV     BRETHREN  OF  THE  COMMON  LIFE      311

The  second  stage  is  the  Inward  Life.  Deeds  of  good-
ness and  outward  acts  are  not  left  behind  as  the  soul
comes  up  to  this  higher  level.  The  ascent  is  rather
marked  by  change  of  intention.  What  is  done  now  is
done  from  sheer  love.  The  heart,  by  love,  has  come  into
a  oneness  of  purpose  with  God,  so  that  its  deeds  are  no
longer  from  calculation  and  outward  constraint  ;  they  are
the  natural  fruit  of  the  transformed  soul,  which  burns  with
pure  love  and  devotion.  The  soul  surpasses  in  aspira-
tion all  that  it  does  or  can  do.  In  a  beautiful  passage
Ruysbroek  says  :

"The  pure  soul  feels  a  constant  fire  of  love,  which  desires
above  all  things  to  be  one  with  God,  and  the  more  the  soul  obeys
the  attraction  of  God  the  more  it  feels  it,  and  the  more  it  feels  it
the  more  it  desires  to  be  one  with  God."  ^

Again  he  says :

"  We  follow  the  splendour  of  God  on  toward  the  source  from
which  it  flows,  and  there  we  feel  that  our  spirits  are  stripped  of
all  things  and  bathed  beyond  all  thought  of  rising  in  the  pure
and  infinite  ocean  of  love.  This  immersion  in  love  becomes  the
habit  of  our  being,  and  so  takes  place  while  we  sleep  and  while
we  wake,  whether  we  know  it  or  whether  we  know  it  not.  .  .  .
It  is  simply  an  eternal  going  forth  out  of  ourselves  into  a  trans-
formed state."  2

And  in  his  Ladder  of  Love  he  reiterates  the  rapturous
cry:

"  Love  the  love  which  loves  you  everlastingly — for  the  more
you  love  the  more  you  desire  to  love,"  and  "  when  we  spirits  hold
fast  by  love,  He  by  His  Spirit  remakes  us,  then  joy  is  ours.  The
Spirit  of  God  breathes  us  out  toward  love  and  good  works,  and
it  breathes  us  into  rest  and  joy ;  and  that  is  eternal  life,  just  as
in  our  mortal  life  we  breathe  out  the  air  which  is  in  us  and
breathe  in  fresh  air."

Perhaps  we  can  get  a  sense  of  the  selflessness  and
spontaneity  of  this  stage  of  the  inward  life  best  of  all
from  the  personal  testimony  of  Ruysbroek  :  "  Lord,  I  am
Thine,  and   I   should   be  Thine   as   gladly  in    hell   as   in

^  From  The  Book  of  the  Sparkling  Stone.  In  the  following  passages  from
Ruysbroek,  I  have  used  Jane  T.  Stoddart's  translation.  ^  Ibid.


31^  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

heaven,  if  in  that  way  I  could  advance  Thy  glory ! "  and
this  attainment  he  tells  us  is  wrought  "  when  Christ  the
Eternal  Sun  rises  in  our  hearts  and  sends  His  light  and
fire  into  our  wills,  and  draws  the  heart  from  the  multitude
of  *  things,'  and  creates  unity  and  close  fellowship,  and
makes  the  heart  grow  and  become  green  through  inward
love,  and  bear  flowers  of  loving  devotion."  ^  Those  who
come  upon  this  level  of  the  spiritual  life  are  called  no
longer  Servants,  but  "  Friends  of  God."

But  there  is  still  a  third  stage — the  contemplative  life —
to  which  only  a  few  attain,  and  which  is  an  experience
for  pinnacle  moments  rather  than  a  plateau  where  the
soul  normally  tabernacles.  "  Those,"  he  says,  "  who  have
raised  themselves  into  the  absolute  purity  of  their  spirit
by  love  stand  in  God's  presence  with  open  and  unveiled
faces,"  and  then,  "by  the  Light  and  Splendour  which
radiate  from  God  they  behold  the  very  substance  of  God
above  reason  and  beyond  distinction."  In  other  words,
it  is  a  kind  of  knowledge,  or  rather  of  seeing^  in  which
there  are  no  modes  or  distinctions.  There  is  no  power
of  description,  because  what  is  seen  is  above  all  thisy
or  that.     In  Ruysbroek's  own  words  :

"  It  is  as  when  you  stand  in  the  dazzling  radiance  of  the  sun,
and  turning  away  your  eyes  from  all  colour,  from  attending  to
distinguishing  all  the  various  '  things '  which  the  sun  illuminates,
you  simply  follow  with  your  eyes  the  brightness  of  the  rays,  and
so  are  led  up  into  the  sun's  very  essence."  ^

In  this  sublime  experience — of  seeing  God — the
human  spirit  becomes  what  it  sees,  is  one  with  the  very
light  by  which  it  beholds  the  object  of  its  vision.  In  the
beautiful  words  of  our  mystic :  "  What  we  are,  that  we
behold  ;  and  what  we  behold,  that  we  are ;  for  in  this
pure  vision  we  are  one  life  and  one  spirit  with  God."  ^  In
this  experience,  when  the  soul  is  burning  and  consumed
in  the  fire  of  love,  "  God  possesses  us  and  we  Him  in
unity,  and  we  enjoy  God  and  rest  in  blessedness."     Those

••  From  The  Book  of  the  Adornment  of  Spiritiml  Marriage.
2  From  The  Book  on  True  Contemplation.
'^  From  The  Book  of  the  Sparkling  Stone.


XIV     BRETHREN   OF  THE  COMMON   LIFE      313

who  come  to  this  round  of  the  ladder  are  more  than
Friends  of  God,  they  are  Sons  of  God.

But  it  must  be  noted  that  Ruysbroek  never  taught  the
fusion  of  the  self  in  God.  On  the  highest  height  of  the
ascent  the  soul  never  loses  its  identity — the  creature  is
to  the  end  creature,  and  God  is  God.  The  union  is  one
of  likeness  in  love  and  in  spirit,  not  oneness  of  being.
When  we  live  wholly  in  God,  then  for  the  first  time  we
live  wholly  in  ourselves.  "  In  this,"  he  says,  "  consists  the
nobility  of  our  nature,  now  and  everlastingly,  that  it  is
impossible  for  us  to  become  God  and  lose  our  created
essence,"  but  "  overwhelmed  in  love  we  are  one  with
God."^

One  who  read  only  the  passages  on  the  contemplative
life  would  doubtless  conclude  that  the  "  ecstatic  doctor "
of  Gronendal,  like  many  others  of  the  mystic  order,  was
too  far  removed  from  actual  human  life,  was  straining
after  a  spiritual  vacuum,  or  at  least  that  his  words  are
"  double  horn-panes "  to  our  intelligence,  but  I  believe
that,  taken  in  the  whole  of  his  life  and  message,  he  is  one
of  the  rarest  souls  in  the  goodly  fellowship  of  mystical
teachers.  One  comes  away  from  a  study  of  him  feeling
a  sort  of  reverent  awe  at  being  so  long  in  the  company  of
a  man  who  had  "  entirely  enveloped  and  saturated  the
kingdom  of  his  soul "  in  love.  He  was  certainly  a  pillar
in  the  Invisible  Church  of  God,  and  by  the  contagion  of
his  life  he  built  many  other  souls  into  the  same  kingdom
to  which  he  belonged.  In  words  that  burn  across  the  five
centuries  that  intervene  he  pictures  the  rottenness  and
corruption  of  the  visible  Church — "  priests  and  doctors
live  such  a  life  that  they  are  incapable  of  receiving  divine
wisdom."  Prelates  and  even  popes  "  seek  their  own  honour,
and  live  for  the  world  " — but  his  own  peculiar  service  was
his  life-long  exhibition  of  the  presence  of  God  in  the  holy
temple  of  a  human  soul.  Nor  was  he  a  mere  recluse
withdrawing  from  actual  life  to  indulge  in  the  luxury  of
beatific  vision.  He  says,  with  fine  balance — and  his  life
was  behind  the  words — that  "  the  act  of  life  must  drive

^  Book  of  the  Sparkling  Stone.


314  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap

man  outwardly  to  practise  virtue  ;  the  act  of  death  must
drive  him  into  God,  in  the  depth  of  his  own  being.  These
are  the  two  movements  of  the  perfect  life,  united  as  matter
and  form,  as  soul  and  body."-^  He  has  little  patience
with  those  who  sit  idly,  "  with  introverted  eyes,"  waiting
for  a  formless  vision.  The  thing  which  most  impressed
Gerard  Groote  at  the  time  of  his  visit  to  Ruysbroek  was
the  practical  side  of  his  life.  It  seemed  to  him  that  the
religious  life  of  the  little  society  at  Gronendal,  of  which
Ruysbroek  was  the  central  figure,  realized  the  idea  of  a
true  brotherhood  upon  the  highest  Christian  principles.
A  genuine  family  spirit  reigned  among  the  brethren
which  put  them  all  on  the  same  social  level.  Ruysbroek
himself,  though  prior,  performed  the  lowliest  tasks,  while
the  humblest  servants,  down  to  John  the  cook,  were
treated  as  friends,  and  were  taken  into  counsel  on  spiritual
affairs  of  high  moment^

IV

I  shall  turn  now  to  his  most  famous  disciple — using
the  word  disciple  in  a  somewhat  loose  sense — Gerard
Groote,  called  by  one  of  the  brothers,*  "  the  first  father  of
our  Reformation,"  and  "  founder  of  all  our  modern  devo-
tion." Gerard  was  born  at  Deventer,  the  chief  city  of
Overyssel,  about  sixty  miles  from  Amsterdam,  in  1340.
He  was  the  son  of  wealthy  and  distinguished  parents,
who  planned  a  great  career  for  him.  He  was  sent  to  the
University  of  Paris  at  the  age  of  fifteen,  and  in  three  years
received  the  degree  of  Master.  His  keen,  well-equipped
mind  and  his  prominent  family  connections  promised  him
a  brilliant  future,  though,  as  Thomas  ^  Kempis,  his  loving

1  Bailie,  op.  cit.  p.  32.

2  The  account  of  the  visit  is  given  in  Thomas  k  Kempis's  Vita  Gerardi.
Neale,  in  his  Jansenist  Church  in  Holland ,  p.  68,  says:  "What  his  influence
(that  is  Ruysbroek's)  must  have  been  is  gathered  from  the  tone  taken  at  once
by  all  his  scholars — that  intense  love  to  God,  that  overwhelming  devotion  to  the
Passion,  which  characterized  the  mystic  school  of  Holland  from  Ruysbroek
himself  to  De  Neercassel."

2  This  was  John  Buschius,  a  contemporary  of  Thomas  k  Kempis.  He  wrote
the  Chrojiicles  of  Windesheim,  which  with  Thomas  k  Kempis's  Vita  Gerardi  are
the  main  sources  of  information  on  the  early  history  of  ' '  The  Brethren  of  the
Common  Life"  [Chronicon  Canonicorum  Regularium  Ordinis  S,  Augustini,
Capituli  Windesemensis,  Antwerp,  1621).


XIV     BRETHREN  OF  THE  COMMON   LIFE      315

biographer,  says  :  "  He  was  not  yet  seeking  the  glory  of
Christ,  but  in  the  broad  ways  of  the  world  was  following
the  shadow  of  a  great  name."  He  obtained  a  professor-
ship in  Cologne,  was  the  recipient  of  important  ecclesi-
astical positions,  lived  in  the  public  eye,  and  had  the
admiration  of  a  distinguished  circle  in  the  University  and
in  the  Church.  He  was  apparently  satisfied  with  a  comfort-
able place  in  the  visible  Church,  where  all  his  worldly
tastes  were  met,  and  where  he  "  dabbled  in  magic  and
astrology."  But,  unexpectedly  to  himself,  by  a  series  of
events,  he  was  slowly  prepared  for  a  place  in  the  invisible
Church.

The  first  incident  which  turned  his  mind  inward
occurred  while  he  was  watching  a  public  game  in
Cologne.  A  stranger,  with  a  devout  face,  an  unnamed
"  Friend  of  God,"  clothed  in  very  simple  garb,  sad  at
seeing  Gerard  wasting  his  rare  powers  of  mind  and  spirit,
came  softly  to  his  side  and  said  :  "  Why  standest  thou
here  ? — thou  oughtst  to  become  another  man"  ^  The
stranger  remains  unknown  to  us,  but  he  belonged  also
to  God's  invisible  Church,  and  was  building  better  than
he  knew,  when  he  followed  his  inner  impulse  on  that  day
at  the  game.  At  the  moment  the  effect  of  the  word
dropped  into  Gerard's  mind  seemed  slight,  but  it  went  on
working.  Some  time  after  he  fell  dangerously  ill,  and
was  brought  face  to  face  with  the  deeper  issues  of  life
and  death.  This  illness  marked  a  distinct  turning-point,
but  his  definite  devotion  to  spiritual  religion  was,  humanly
speaking,  brought  about  through  the  personal  influence  of
his  old  Paris  friend,  his  teacher  in  the  University  days,
Henry  de  Kalkar,  a  devout  Carthusian,  who  had  become
prior  of  a  monastery  not  far  away  from  Deventer,  and
who  came  to  visit  Gerard  for  the  definite  purpose  of
calling  his  young  friend  to  a  new  life.  Human  instru-
mentality was  used  to  help  him  find  the  path,  but  Gerard
himself  always  attributed  the  great  change  in  his  life  to
the  direct  work  of  the  Divine  Spirit.  Thomas  a  Kempis
reports  Gerard's  cry  of  joy  :

*  This  phrase  is  twice  used  by  Thomas  k  Kempis.


3i6  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

"  Oh  the  power  and  grace  of  the  ineffable  Spirit,  who  can  so
easily  change  the  heart  of  a  man  whom  he  inwardly  visits  and
illumines  !  This  is  the  mighty  power  of  God  alone.  He  has
turned  the  lion  into  a  lamb,  predestinating  him  who  was  before
in  the  world  to  be  incorporated  into  Himself."

After  a  period  of  retirement  and  preparation,  he  set
out  to  preach  the  Gospel  as  a  lay-evangelist.  The  "  pre-
paration "  which  he  underwent  was  mainly  preparation  of
heart  ;  communion  with  the  spirits  past  and  present  who
could  interpret  the  devout  life  to  him,  among  whom  the
influence  of  Ruysbroek  was  greatest.  "  I  never  loved  or
honoured  any  mortal  man  so  warmly,"  he  wrote  to  the
brothers  at  Gronendal.  His  university  studies  had  carried
him  into  the  practice  of  magic,  and  had  overtrained  him
in  subtilties  which  led  to  nothing  ;  and  with  his  entrance
upon  the  new  devotion  he  revolted  from  the  higher
learning  of  his  time,  and  became  henceforth  the  advocate
of  a  more  simple  but,  at  the  same  time,  more  practical
culture,  a  culture  which  aimed  primarily  at  the  develop-
ment of  a  good  life  ;  while  his  observation  of  the  priest-
hood of  his  day  inclined  him  to  prefer  the  life  and  service
of  a  layman,  and  to  the  end  of  his  days  he  refused  to  be
ordained.^

In  1379,  with  a  spirit  aflame  and  with  an  anointing
from  on  high,  Gerard  went  forth,  like  George  Fox  in  the
English  Commonwealth,  like  Wesley  in  the  spiritual
drought  of  the  eighteenth  century,  to  preach  to  the
people  and  to  call  them  to  a  religion  of  following  Christ.^
He  was  granted  a  permit  by  the  Bishop  of  Utrecht  to
preach  anywhere  within  that  diocese.  He  was  dressed  in
the  utmost  simplicity,  and  in  every  way  he  showed  his
nearness  to  the  people  and  his  sympathy  with  them.
His  gospel,  like  his  garb,  was  very  simple.  Scholastic
subtilties  seemed  to  him  stones  instead  of  bread.      Ruys-

1  His  refusal  to  be  ordained  came  partly  at  least  from  the  fact  that  his  ideal
of  a  genuine  priest  seemed  unattainable  in  the  world  as  it  then  was.

2  "He  was  seen,  as  of  old  Peter  de  Bruys  and  Henry  of  Lausanne,  as  after-
ward St.  Norbert,  and  as  in  still  more  recent  times  Geortje  Fox,  William  Penn,
and  others,  in  mean  attire,  travelling  through  towns  and  villages,  and  everywhere
exhorting  the  people  to  rei)entance  and  amendment  of  life,  with  overpowering
eloquence"  (Ullmann,  Reformers  before  the  Reformation,  vol.  ii,  p.  64).


XIV     BRETHREN  OF  THE  COMMON   LIFE      317

broek  had  taught  him  to  rise  above  appeal  to  rewards
and  punishments.  He  broke  completely  with  the  tradi-
tions of  the  time,  and  his  message  formed  the  strongest
contrast  to  the  puerilities  of  the  mendicant  monks.  The
central  note  in  his  preaching  was  the  love  of  God,  the
Divine  search,  the  great  salvation,  the  possibilities  of  life
with  God.  He  possessed  a  powerful  eloquence,  though
the  secret  even  of  his  eloquence  was  simplicity,  directness.
It  was  intensity  of  spirit,  absolute  conviction  ;  as  Thomas
a  Kempis  well  noted,  it  was  the  powerful  appeal  of  per-
sonal experience.  He  preached  out  of  his  own  life — what
he  kneiv.  Another  secret  of  his  power  was  the  novelty
of  preaching  in  the  popular  dialect.  The  Latin  droned  in
church  had  no  more  dynamic  effect  than  a  "  dead  wire  " ;
Gerard's  words  were  quick  and  powerful,  with  a  live  faith
and  a  burning  passion  for  souls.

Then,  too,  it  was  an  element  of  the  first  importance
that  he  took  no  pay.  Every  vestige  of  selfishness  was
removed.  Here  was  a  preacher  who  came  to  the  people
for  the  sole  reason  that  he  loved  them,  who  had  none  of  the
marks  of  a  "  professional "  about  him,  and  whose  life  rang
true  to  every  test.-^  He  was  like  the  later  Reformers  and
the  Evangelists  of  the  Protestant  era  in  that  he  turned
back  to  the  Scriptures  for  his  material,  and  to  the  Gospels
for  his  model.  He  thoroughly  understood  men,  and  one
of  the  old  chroniclers  has  taken  pains  to  tell  us  that
Gerard  had  a  way  of  taking  in  his  audience  with  a  quick
survey  of  eye,  in  which  he  read  their  mood  and  their
needs,  and  which  enabled  him  "  to  speak  to  their  con-
dition." His  message  was  decidedly  a  new  Evangelism,
and  it  worked  powerfully.  The  people  flocked  to  hear
as  they  had  not  done  since  the  days  of  the  great  preacher
of  Assisi.  Whole  towns  left  their  occupations  and  came
to  listen  to  Gerard's  message.  Every  class  and  rank  of
society  yielded  to  his  spell,  even  meals  were  neglected  !
Where  the  local  church  was  too  small  for  the  multitude
the   meetings   were    held    in    the    open,  frequently  in   the

^  Thomas  i  Kempis  has  preserved  an  epitaph  on  Gerard,  which  runs  thiis  ;
"  He  did  what  he  said,  and  what  he  taught  that  he  also  Hved."


3i8  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

churchyard,  and  the  sermon  sometimes  lasted  two  or
three  hours.  But  more  important  than  enthusiasm  and
neglect  of  meals  was  the  moral  and  spiritual  amendment
of  life  wrought  by  the  preaching.  It  set  men  and  women
to  living  on  a  new  moral  level.  They  gave  up  vanities
and  vulgar  pursuits,  and  began  to  live  in  more  Christlike
fashion.  Men  who  had  been  living  in  sin  and  wickedness
turned  straight  about  in  spirit  and  in  practice.  Gerard
had  a  way  of  diagnosing  the  diseases  of  the  visible
Church — he  drew  the  picture  of  apostolic  holiness  and
zeal,  and  over  against  it  he  set  the  actual  conditions
which  all  the  hearers  saw  day  by  day,  and  he  asked  his
listeners  to  "  look  on  this  picture  and  then  on  that,  the
counterfeit  presentment."  Many  of  the  clergy  were
brought  to  shame  and  conviction  by  his  preaching,  and
dedicated  themselves  to  a  holy  life  and  a  pure  service.
With  good  right  his  admiring  biographer  cries  out :
"  Blessed  be  God  who  raised  up  such  a  preacher  among
us  and  gave  us  such  preaching,  that  through  it  the  light
of  the  heavenly  life  might  shine  upon  us  in  this  uncertain
world  ! "

But  it  is  serious  business  in  any  age  to  let  "  the  light
of  the  heavenly  life  shine  upon  this  uncertain  world."
There  are  always  Golgothas  for  genuine  light-bringers,
and  Gerard  soon  found  that  the  representatives  of  the
visible  order,  living  at  their  ease  under  the  old  system,
would  not  tolerate  a  new  revealer  of  the  living  Christ.

There  was  little  hope  of  easy  paths  for  a  man  in  the
fourteenth  century  who  dared  to  say  these  words  :

"  The  decadence  of  the  Church  is  visible  in  CA'ciy thing.
The  ruin  of  the  whole  body  of  the  Church  has  been  a  long
time  threatened.  What  do  I  say  ?  It  is  already  falling  in  ruins.
We  suffer  especially  in  the  head — the  Pope  ;  for  following  the
doctrine  of  the  physicians,  the  disorder  of  the  head  is  the
symptom  of  a  grave  malady,  and  the  effect  of  a  fever  which
ravages  the  whole  organism.  We  are  like  inexperienced  physi-
cians ;  we  see  the  actual  symptoms  of  the  evil  without  taking
note  of  older  symptoms,  which  are  not  less  important.  I  hold
it  as  certain  that  the  candlesticks  of  the  Church  are  to  be
removed  because  of  the  cupidity  and  luxury  of  the  ecclesiastics.


XIV     BRETHREN   OF  THE  COMMON   LIFE      319

This  schism  will  not  be  cured  without  leaving  a  large  scar,  and
I,  who  desire  the  return  of  the  Church  to  unity,  I  could  wish
that  the  two  rival  Popes  were  in  heaven  to  sing  the  Gloria  in
excelsis^  and  that  a  veritable  Eliakim  would  descend  upon  the
earth  to  establish  peace,  if  only  he  be  not  of  this  race  of
vipers."^

The  contrast  between  the  spiritual  ideal  and  the  actual
Church  had  been  made  too  plain  to  go  unchallenged,  and
Gerard  found  one  day  that  his  permit  to  preach  was
revoked.  He  quietly  yielded  to  authority,  declined  to
make  a  scandal,  or  to  turn  upon  those  who  sought  his
hurt.  "  Let  love  be  inflamed  within  us,"  he  wrote,  and
"  let  us  be  patterns."

This  brought  to  an  end  his  career  as  an  evangelist,
but  it  only  opened  the  door  for  another  type  of  service
hardly  less  important — the  formation  of  a  new  brother-
hood. His  five  years  of  preaching  had  awakened  in
many  young  men  a  pure  desire  for  a  spiritual  life.  There
were  groups  of  these  aspirants  in  all  the  centres  where
he  had  laboured.  They  were  eager  for  some  movement
which  would  give  them  scope  for  their  new  zeal.  Gerard
himself  had  always  loved  young  men,  had  gathered  them
about  him,  and  had  done  much  to  promote  their  educa-
tion. He  had  a  passion  for  good  books — as  his  bio-
grapher puts  it :  "  He  was  more  than  avaricious  for  good
books," — and  it  occurred  to  him  to  gather  bands  of  these
young  men  together  and  give  them  copying  work  to  do
to  earn  money  for  their  education.  This  plan  accom-
plished a  number  of  ends  :  it  enabled  him  to  multiply
his  beloved  manuscripts,  to  forward  his  educational  aims,
to  influence  his  young  friends  toward  a  holy  life,  and,  in-
cidentally, to  use  his  means  for  the  glory  of  God.  It
was  his  dear  friend  Florentius  Radewin  (or  Radewyn),
the  statesman  of  the  movement,  who  first  suggested  the
idea  of  a  community -life — that  all  those  engaged  in
copying  and  beautifying  manuscripts  should  put  their
earnings    into    a    common    purse    and    share   equally   in

^  This  is  a  letter  written  to  Guillaume  de  Salvavarilla,  Archdeacon  of  Li^ge.
1  have  translated  it  from  Bonet-Maury's  Gerard  Groot  un  pricursf.ur  de  l&
Riforme,  Paris,  1878,  pp.  38-39.


320  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chav.

common.  The  idea  impressed  Gerard,  and  he  worked
it  out,  largely  on  the  model  of  the  primitive  Church  as
recorded  in  Acts.  The  first  community  was  formed
at  Deventer,  with  Florentius  at  its  head,  and  the  move-
ment spread  rapidly  through  the  towns  of  Holland  and
Germany.  Brother- houses  —  in  some  instances,  sister-
houses  —  were  provided.  The  members  took  no  per-
manent vows,  they  mingled  freely  in  the  world  for
purposes  of  service,  and  lived  from  their  manual  labour
without  any  resort  to  begging.  They  wore  a  simple  grey
garb,  and  followed  a  very  simple  manner  of  life — it  was
an  effort  to  make  daily  life  spiritual.  Their  emphasis
was  on  practice  rather  than  on  contemplation.  The  most
visible  social  service  which  came  from  the  movement
was  the  impetus  it  gave  to  practical  education,  in  which
direction  Gerard  was  the  prime  mover.  Through  his
brotherhoods  he  provided  not  only  copies  of  the  Scrip-
tures and  other  holy  books  for  the  people,  but  what  was
still  more  important,  he  provided  for  the  instruction  of
the  common  people,  especially  the  children.  His  brothers
gave  free  teaching  in  their  communities  to  the  poorer
people,  teaching  them  to  read  and  write,  and  creating  in
their  minds  an  appreciation  of  the  real  meaning  of  their
religion.  His  aim  in  education,  as  in  everything  else,
was  practical.  He  wanted  his  young  friends  to  be  not
more  learned,  but  imbued  with  better  learning.  He  had
come  to  feel  that  the  higher  learning  of  his  time  was
unprofitable,  that  it  was  more  or  less  in  league  with
astrology  and  magic,  and  over  fond  of  the  subtilties  of
logic  and  useless  disputation.  His  plans  for  the  new
education  bore  entirely  on  moral  and  spiritual  improve-
ment. His  one  concern  was  the  formation  of  good  lives.
He  discounted  degrees  and  all  the  show-aspects  of  educa-
tion. He  did  nothing  to  encourage  training  for  lucrative
professions.-^       His  aim  may  be  summed   up  in   his   own

1  His  attitude  toward  theological  degrees  anticipates  George  Fox.  He
says  :  "  Thou  shalt  never  study  to  take  a  degree  in  Theology,  for  it  is  not  right
to  make  gain  thereby,  while  knowledge  and  fame  can  as  well  be  got  without  a
degree.  The  degree  appeals  to  the  flesh,  and  is  the  aim  of  those  who  are  wise
according  to  the  flesh."  And  finally,  to  get  a  degree  one  must  attend  "many
vain  lectures  "  !


XIV     BRETHREN  OF  THE  COMMON   LIFE      321

words  :  "  Let  the  root  of  thy  studies  and  the  mirror  of
thy  life  be  first  of  all  the  Gospel."  It  was,  one  sees,  a
narrow  plan  of  guarded  education  with  a  single  aim,  to
cultivate  devotion  and  to  fashion  holy  lives  among  the
people.  It  must  be  judged  by  its  fruits,  which  were
groups  of  devout  and  saintly  men  and  women  scattered
through  Holland  and  Germany,  raising  the  spiritual  level
of  religion  among  the  people  ;  and  in  the  second  genera-
tion the  production  of  a  book  which  has  influenced
Christendom  next  to  the  Bible  itself — The  Imitation  of
Christ}

His  mysticism  is  of  a  mild  and  practical  sort.  It
was  simply  a  religion  of  inward,  personal  experience,
and  a  positive  experiment  at  re-living  Christ.  Thomas  a
Kempis  has  preserved  for  us  Gerard's  testimony  that  "  the
Holy  Spirit  inwardly  visits,  illumines,  and  changes  the
heart  of  a  man,"  and  that  finally  "  He  incorporates
the  man  into  Himself"  He  dwelt,  in  his  preaching,  on
the  spiritual  truth  that  the  kingdom  of  God  is  within
man,  and  is  righteousness,  peace,  and  joy  in  God.  He
insisted  throughout  on  grounding  religion  in  experience,
and  on  making  it  an  affair  of  life.  He  said  to  some
anxious  youths,  who  were  smitten  with  the  plague  :  "  If
you  have  a  goodwill  to  serve  God^  you  may  die  in  peace."  ^
We  have  only  scraps  of  sayings  from  him,^  but  enough  is
preserved  to  show  that  he  is  the  true  spiritual  father
of  the  author  of  the  Imitation.  The  same  note  is  struck
in  these  sayings  that  reverberates  throughout  the  great
treatises  of  the  disciple  :  Conquer  thyself  ;  turn  thy  heart
from  creatures  ;  point  thy  mind  continually  to  God,  do
not  for  anything  suffer  thy  mind  to  be  discomposed  ;
practise  obedience  ;  accept  things  that  are  difficult  and
irksome  ;  exercise  thyself  always  in  humility  ;  continually
observe  the  principle  of  moderation,  and   above  all  and

^  Neale  says  that  this  movement  was  the  commencement  of  Holland's  reputa-
tion for  learning.  "The  universities  of  Leyden,  Utrecht,  and  Groningen,  all
owe  their  name  and  fame  to  the  impulse  given  by  the  scholar-monk  of  Deventer  "
(Neale,  Jansenist  Church  of  Holland,  p.  79).

'■^  The  brothers  were  often  called  ' '  Brothers  of  Goodwill."
2  These  are  preserved  in  a  sort  of  appendix  chapter  to  Thomas  a  Kempis's
Vita  Gerardi,  from  which  I  have  taken  them.

Y


322  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

first  of  all,  let  Christ  be  the  root  of  thy  studies  and  the
mirror  of  thy  life.  There  are  three  or  four  of  these
sayings  which  will  do  for  permanent  spiritual  principles  :
for  instance — "  The  farther  a  man  knows  himself  to  be
from  perfection,  so  much  the  nearer  he  is  to  it "  ;  "  The
greatest  temptation  is  not  to  be  tempted  at  all  "  ;
"  Never  breathe  a  word  to  show  yourself  off  as  very
religious  or  very  learned  "  ;  "  Nothing  is  a  better  test  of  a
man  than  hearing  himself  praised."

The  spirit  of  love,  which  was  a  dominating  feature
of  his  life,  found  beautiful  fulfilment  in  his  death.  He
had  for  some  time  been  meditating  a  further  step  in
the  New  Devotion — the  foundation  of  a  higher  grade,
or  order,  of  Brotherhood,  made  up  of  the  brothers  who
wished  to  go  on  and  take  vows  and  devote  themselves
wholly  and  irrevocably  to  the  service  of  God.  But
Gerard's  fortune  had  been  already  exhausted  in  his
works  of  love,  and  no  money  was  at  hand  to  build  the
house  needed  for  the  new  movement.  While  he  was
waiting  for  means  to  accomplish  his  plan,  a  fearful
visitation  of  the  plague  came  upon  Deventer.  One  of
his  friends  was  stricken  with  it,  and  Gerard  at  once
went  to  him  to  render  what  help  he  could.  He  was
unable  to  save  his  friend,  but  as  the  latter  was  dying
he  left  a  large  sum  of  money  for  the  realization  of
Gerard's  hope.  He  was,  however,  not  to  see  its  fulfil-
ment, for  in  his  ministrations  of  love  he  contracted  the
dread  disease,  and  died  of  it.  His  most  intimate  disciple,
Florentius  Radewin,  had  already  imbibed  his  spirit,  and
was  in  all  respects  his  spiritual  successor.  As  he  was
dying,  Gerard  said  to  his  band  of  scholars  :  "  Here  is
Florentius,  the  beloved  disciple,  in  whom  of  a  truth  the
Holy  Ghost  rests :  he  shall  be  your  father  and  ruler.
Hold  him  in  my  place."  Under  the  direction  of
Florentius  the  spiritual  brotherhood  developed,  the  life
of  devotion   and   simplicity  was   cultivated/  and  the  new

1  Florentius  sometimes  pushed  the  "simple-life"  idea  to  extremes.  In  his
desire  for  simple  clothes  he  is  said  to  have  asked  a  tailor  if  he  could  make  him  an
t>/<f  coat  I  It  was  his  great  disciple,  a  Kempis,  who  wrote,  "Blessed  is  the
simplicity  which  leaves  the  difficult  ways  of  dispute."


XIV     BRETHREN  OF  THE  COMMON   LIFE      323

order,  the  Canons  Regular,  as  they  were  called,  was  founded
— their  first  monastery  being  that  of  Windesheim,  and
their  most  famous  one  that  of  Mount  St.  Agnes,  made
immortal  by  the  life  and  work  of  its  foremost  brother,
Thomas  a  Kempis.-^


There  is,  fortunately,  no  need  now  for  an  elaborate
discussion  of  the  real  authorship  of  the  Imitation  of
Christ,  nor  for  the  re-telling  of  the  life  of  the  man  who
wrote  it.  One  does  not  often  have  the  satisfaction  of
reading  a  piece  of  work  more  adequate  for  its  purpose
than  De  Montmorency's  TJioinas  a  Kempis :  His  Age
and  Book  (London,  1906),  and  everybody  who  cares
for  light  on  this  great  spiritual  movement  in  Holland  is
under  obligation  to  the  Rev.  S.  Kettlewell  for  his  two
volumes  on  Thomas  a  Kempis  (London,  1882).  There
are  three  names  intimately  associated  with  the  Imitation
as  possible  authors  of  it  :  Thomas  a  Kempis,  Chancellor
Gerson,  and  Walter  Hilton.  It  cannot  be  said  that  the
claims  for  Thomas  a  Kempis  are  absolutely  proved  as
against  the  claims  for  Walter  Hilton,  but  the  circum-
stantial evidence  is  so  overwhelming  that  the  "  case "
for  the  Canon  of  Mount  St.  Agnes  is  as  good  as
settled.

I  shall  only  attempt  in  this  chapter  to  indicate  the
type  of  religion  exhibited  in  this  extraordinary  book  ;
how  it  took  men  away  from  creeds  and  systems  to  the
eternal  idea  of  Christianity ;  how  it  ministered  to  an
inward,  first-hand  spiritual  life  —  in  a  word,  how  this
quiet,  unassuming,  self- forgetting  brother  in  his  cloister
at  Mount  St.  Agnes  builded,  all  unconsciously  perhaps,
at  the  invisible  Church  of  the  ages.

Thomas'  real  name  was  Haemerlein.  He  was  born
in  1379  or  1380,  in  the  village  of  Kempen  (about  forty
miles  from  Cologne),  hence  his  name  a  Kempis.      In  1392

1  Charles  Bigg  says  that  ' '  within  thirty-six  years  the  mother-house  of  Windes-
heim had  given  birth  to  forty-five  daughter  convents,  of  which  eight  were  for
women  and  thirty-seven  for  men  "  (Bigg,  Imitation  of  Christ,  Introduction,
p.  xxii. ).


324  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

he  went  to  Dcventer,  in  Holland,  to  get  his  education  in
the  schools  of  the  Brethren  of  the  Common  Life,  where
his  older  brother  John  was  already  settled.  Florentius
was  his  teacher,  his  adviser  and  his  friend — "  My  good
father  and  sweet  master,"  he  calls  him.  He  has  left  a
most  charming  picture  of  this  "  sweet  master."

"  As  often  as  I  saw  my  superior,  Florentius,"  he  writes,  "  stand-
ing in  the  choir,  the  mere  presence  of  so  holy  a  man  inspired  me
with  such  awe  that  I  dared  not  speak  when  he  looked  up  from
his  book.  On  one  occasion  it  happened  that  I  was  standing
near  him  in  the  choir,  and  he  turned  to  the  book  we  had  and
sang  with  us.  And,  standing  close  behind  me,  he  supported
himself  by  placing  both  his  hands  on  my  shoulders  ;  and  I  stood
quite  still,  scarcely  daring  to  move,  so  astonished  was  I  at  the
honour  he  had  done  me."

Thomas  entered  the  Community  at  Mount  St.  Agnes
in  1400,  and  spent  there  seventy  years,  dying^ in  147 1.'
De  Montmorency  gives  this  description  of  the  life  in
this  Community :

"  It  knew  nothing  of  ambition,  nothing  of  controversy,  nothing
even  of  the  great  spiritual  movements  of  which  it  was  the  heart
It  was  the  silent,  motionless  centre  of  a  whirling  and  incompre-
hensible world.  .  .  .  The  poor  little  monastery  was  composed
of  a  tiny  group  of  men  who  thought  only  of  Christ  and  strove
to  imitate  Him ;  whose  sins  were  minute  fallings  away  from  their
ideal  of  the  Man  of  Nazareth — sins  wept  over  and  watched  ;
whose  hope  lay  on  the  other  side  of  the  grave  that  offered  them
no  terror;  whose  faith  came  so  near  to  the  faith  of  the  first
Christians  that  the  days  of  Christ  seemed  to  have  returned.
Mount  St.  Agnes  was  the  Little  Gidding  of  the  fifteenth  century.
It  represented  the  noblest  form  of  Christianity  that  that  or
perhaps  any  age  could  produce.  The  rule  of  the  Community
inculcated  the  fundamental  law  of  love  towards  God  and  man ;
the  lessons  of  humility  as  taught  by  Christ ;  the  preparation  of
body  and  soul  for  orderly  prayer,  by  proper  and  simple  attention
to  both  body  and  mind.  Nothing  in  excess  was  the  ideal  of  the
Community.  The  body  was  to  be  ?nade  absolutely  efficient  for  the
purposes  of  the  soul,  and  the  duty  of  man  to  his  neighbour  was  to
shadow  forth  the  duty  of  man  to  his  God.  Perfect  simplicity  in
dress  and  manners,  food  and  drink,  work  and  play,  was  the  ideal
for  the  body  ;  perfect  charity  to  all  men,  to  the  young,  to  the  sick,


XIV     BRETHREN   OF  THE  COMMON  LIFE      325

to  the  sinful,  was  the  ideal  for  the  mind ;  and  the  love  of  God
which  passeth  all  understanding  was  the  ideal  for  the  soul."  ^

Here  in  this  atmosphere  of  spiritual  strivings  and  holy-
aspirations,  probably  sometime  between  1400  and  1425,
Thomas  a  Kempis  w^rote  his  book — a  book  which,  next
to  Dante's  "  miracle  of  song,"  is  the  most  perfect  flov^^er
of  medieval  Christianity,  and  which  comes  nearest  of
any  voice  that  was  raised  to  being  "  an  answer  to  the
sighing  of  Christian  Europe  for  a  light  from  heaven."

"  This  small,  old-fashioned  book,  for  which  you  need  pay  only
sixpence  at  a  bookstall,  woi-ks  miracles  to  this  day,  turning  bitter
w^aters  into  sweetness  ;  while  expensive  sermons  and  treatises,
newly  issued,  leave  all  things  as  they  were  before.  It  was  written
down  by  a  hand  that  waited  for  the  heart's  prompting;  it  is
the  chronicle  of  a  solitary,  hidden  anguish,  struggle,  trust,  and
triumph — not  written  on  velvet  cushions  to  teach  endurance  to
those  who  are  treading  with  bleeding  feet  on  the  stones.  And
so  it  remains  to  all  time  a  lasting  record  of  human  needs  and
human  consolations ;  the  voice  of  a  brother  who,  ages  ago,  felt,
suffered  and  renounced  .  .  .  with  a  fashion  of  speech  different
from  ours,  but  under  the  same  silent,  far-off  heavens,  the  same
strivings,  the  same  failures,  the  same  weariness."  2

No  other  piece  of  literature  presents  greater  psychological
puzzles.  Nobody  has  ever  said  worse  things  about  this
world  of  ours  than  the  author  of  the  Imitation  ;  nobody
has  painted  a  darker  picture  of  man,  the  poor  worm  of
the  dust  ;  nobody  has  struck  a  deeper  note  of  pessimism.
We  are  living  in  a  mutability  where  nothing  is  of
worth — all  is  but  "  vain  vision,"  "  deceitful  shadows."
We  are  "exiles  from  our  native  home,"  "strangers  and
pilgrims  with  no  real  concern  for  the  business,  the  cares,
or  the  pleasures  of  this  wretched  world."  The  trail  of
vanity  and  evil  is  over  everything,  and  "  death,  that  awful
event,"  is  dogging  the  steps  of  us  all  !

And  yet  this  book  has  "  worked  miracles "  in  every
generation  since  it  was  written  :  it  has  been  like  fresh
water  to  shipwrecked  men  ;  it  has  helped  thousands  to
turn   defeat  to  victory   and  despair  into  optimism.       No

1  op,  cit.  pp.  89-90.  2  j^jiii  Q^  fjj^g  Floss,  Book  IV.  chap.  iii.


326  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

other  book  except  the  Bible  has  been  a  more  permanent
source  of  joy  and  comfort  and  hope.  It  is  a  standing
paradox,  a  baffling  contradiction.  The  politics  and
world-ambitions  of  fourteenth  century  popes  are  things
of  little  interest  to  us  now,  but  this  poor  monk's  vision
of  eternal  reality,  his  message  of  the  inward  way  to  the
kingdom  of  the  Spirit,  his  discovery  of  the  invisible
realm  whose  excelling  glory  makes  the  soul  forget  its
temporal  miseries,  have  persistently  attracted  the  attention
of  men,  and  will  continue  to  attract  it  as  long  as  the
heart  pants  for  the  living  God.

There  is,  let  us  admit  at  once,  a  negative  side  to
the  Imitation^  as  to  much  other  mystical  literature,
which  is  false  in  emphasis  and,  more  than  that,  false
to  the  facts  of  experience  and  reality.  This  picture  of
the  worthlessness  of  the  finite,  the  vanity  of  all  that  is,
is  untrue  and  impossible.  Taken  consistently,  it  cuts
the  nerve  of  spiritual  effort,  and  destroys  all  faith  in  the
significance  of  earthly  life  with  its  myriad  moral  issues.
It  turns  the  gaze  away  from  the  very  stuff  out  of  which
moral  and  spiritual  fibre  is  to  be  woven.  It  is  an  attempt
to  climb  up  by  first  destroying  the  ladder  which  has  been
given  to  us.  "  A  man  ought  to  rise  above  all  creatures
(finite  things),  and  perfectly  forsake  himself  and  stand  in
ecstasy  of  mind  and  see  that  Thou  God  art  in  no  respect
like  creatures  "  (Book  III.  chap.  xxxi.).  "  Few  attain  to  the
blessed  privilege  of  contemplating  the  infinite,  because  few
totally  abandon  that  which  is  finite  "  (Book  III.  chap.  xxii.).
"  Abandon  all,  and  thou  shalt  possess  all ;  relinquish  all
desire,  and  thou  shalt  find  rest"  (Book  III.  chap.  xxiv.).
"  Learn  for  the  love  of  the  Creator  to  subdue  earth-born  love
for  any  creature,  since  God  suffers  no  rival  to  His  love,"  ^
**  The  more  nature  is  subdued,  the  more  Grace  is  infused."
This  two-world  scheme,  this  stubborn  dualism,  which  sets
the  eternal  wholly  over  against  the  temporal,  and  negates
all  that  experience  gives  us,  in  order  to  glorify  the  unseen
and  unexperienced,  mars  the  book  for  us  and  tempts  us
in  our  haste  to  say  with  Thackeray  :

1  The  substance  of  Book  II T.  chap,  xxxii.  rather  than  a  literal  quotation.


XIV     BRETHREN   OF  THE  COMMON   LIFE      327

"The  scheme  of  that  book  {The  Imitation)  carried  out  would
make  the  world  the  most  wretched,  useless,  dreary,  doting  place
of  sojourn.  There  would  be  no  manhood,  no  love,  no  tender
ties  of  mother  and  child,  no  use  of  intellect,  no  trade  or  science
— a  set  of  selfish  beings,  crawling  about,  avoiding  one  another,
and  howling  a  perpetual  Miserere  !  "  ^

But  this  is  certainly  a  hasty  and  superficial  conclusion.
Thomas  a  Kempis  has  "  crystallized  into  perfect  literary
form  the  Godward  yearnings  of  humanity  through
fourteen  centuries  of  time,"  ^  and  his  message  is  bound
to  bear  the  marks  of  the  intellectual  climate  in  which  it
grew.  If  one  wants  doctrines  of  evolution  he  will  not  go
to  Dante  for  them,  and  if  he  is  seeking  for  a  monistic
view  that  does  full  justice  to  the  concrete  facts  of
experience  he  will  not  go  to  a  Kempis  for  it.  But  if  he
wants  the  voice  that  utters  the  passion  of  the  mightiest
spirits  of  the  medieval  world  ;  if  he  wants  to  see  how  a
great  spiritual  soul,  conscious  of  a  divine  mission,  builds  a
permanent  refuge  against  the  defeats  of  the  present ;
if  he  wants  a  seer  who  can  project  into  this  finite  world
the  reality  of  worlds  not  yet  realized,  then  let  him  go
to  Dante  and  a  Kempis.  We  must  not  be  too  much
disturbed  over  the  temporal  aspects,  which  get  out-
dated with  the  flow  of  time,  to  see  and  appreciate  the
eternal  message  of  this  sincere  and  genuine  book.  Let  us
try  to  find  the  positive  and  permanent  notes  which  have
given  this  medieval  book  its  power  over  men  and  women
of  all  religious  types  and  of  all  intellectual  stages.

The  eternal  thing  in  the  book  is  its  calm  and
compelling  revelation  of  the  reality  of  the  spiritual
kingdom,  and  its  complete  sufficiency  for  the  soul.  All
is  well  the  moment  the  soul  changes  its  centre  of  gravity
from  the  world  of  vain  and  fleeting  things  to  the  world
of  unchanging  reality  where  God  is  all.  Its  real  remedy
for  misery  is  not  the  stoic  one  of  lopping  off  desires,  but
of  getting  a  new  set  of  desires.  It  would  raise  the  value
of  life  not  by  decreasing  the  denominator,  but  by  increasing
the  numerator.      The  passion   of    love,    which   shifts    the

1  Letters  of  W.  M.  Thackeray,  p.  96.  ^  De  Montmorency,  p.  172-


328  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

values  of  life,  is  the  key  to  peace  and  to  the  victory  that
overcometh  the  world.

"The  saints  of  God,"  this  is  the  message  which  Thomas  a
Kempis  gathers  out  of  the  past,  "  ravished  above  self  and  drawn
out  of  love  of  self,  plunged  wholly  into  love  of  Me  (Christ) :  in
whom  also  they  rest  in  fruition.  Nothing  can  turn  them  back
or  hold  them  down,  for  being  full  of  eternal  truth,  they  burn  with
the  fire  of  unqiietichahle  love  "  (Book  III.  chap.  Iviii.).  "  The  saints
of  God,  and  all  the  devoted  friends  and  followers  of  Christ,  regarded
not  the  things  that  gratified  the  appetites  of  the  flesh,  nor  those
that  were  the  object  of  popular  esteem  and  pursuit;  but
their  hope  and  desire  panted  for  the  purity  and  glory  of
the  celestial  kingdom  :  their  whole  soul  was  continually  elevated
to  the  eternal  and  invisible  "  (Book  I.  chap.  xxii.).  "  Love  panteth
after  its  original  and  native  freedom.  .  .  .  Nothing  is  sweeter  than
love,  nothing  stronger,  nothing  loftier,  nothing  broader,  nothing
pleasanter,  nothing  fuller  or  better  in  heaven  or  in  earth;  for
love  is  born  of  God,  and  cannot  rest  save  in  God  from  whom  it
is  derived.  He  who  loveth  flyeth,  runneth,  and  is  glad  ;  he  is  free
and  not  hindered  ;  he  giveth  all  for  All  and  possesseth  all  in  All,
because  he  hath  the  One  from  whom  all  good  proceeds.  He
looketh  not  for  gifts,  but  turneth  to  the  Giver  above  all  gifts.
Love  knoweth  no  Hmits,  feeleth  no  burden,  considereth  no
labour.  .  .  .  Expand  my  heart  with  love  that  I  may  be  dissolved
in  its  holy  fire.  .  .  .  Let  me  love  Thee  more  than  myself,  let
me  love  myself  only  for  Thy  sake,  and  in  Thee  love  all  others
...  for  that  which  seeketh  itself  falls  immediately  from  love "
(Book  III.  chap.  iv.).

When    the  soul  has  thus  found  its    centre,  nothing   can

disturb  it ;  when  it  has  "  plunged  wholly  into  love,"  it  has

pulled  the  sting  from  every  earthly  woe.       It  can  calmly
say  :

"  If  Thou  pourest  Thy  light  upon  me,  and  turnest  my  night
into  day,  blessed  be  Thy  name  ;  and  if  Thou  leavest  me  in
darkness,  blessed  be  Thy  name.  I  will  take  alike  from  Thee
sweet  and  bitter,  joy  and  sorrow,  good  and  evil :  for  all  that
befalleth  me  I  will  thank  the  love  that  prompts  the  gift "
(Book  III.  chap.  xii.).

The    real    problem    for    Thomas    is    not   how   to    find    a
different  and   more  comfortable  world,  it  is  how  to  get  a

different  self-.


XIV     BRETHREN   OF  THE  COMxMON   LIFE      329

"  Acquisition  and  increase  of  goods  cannot  help  thee  to  peace.
Neither  can  change  of  place  avail.  Thou  mayest  change  thy
situation,  but  thou  canst  not  get  away  from  the  real  evil,  which
is  thy  own  selfish  wilV  (Book  III.  chap.  xx.).  "Thy  peace  can
depend  on  nothing  that  makes  no  alteration  in  thy  real  character  "
(Book  III.  chap.  xxi.).  "  He  that  purely  and  simply  intends  and
desires  only  the  re-union  of  his  soul  with  God,  will  not  easily  be
moved  by  what  he  see  or  hears"  (Book  II.  chap.  v.).  "T/"  thy
heart  were  light,  then  every  creature  would  be  a  mirror  of  life
and  a  book  of  holy  doctrine  to  thee"

This  is  the  very  core  of  Thomas'  message.  Poverty
in  itself  is  no  sovereign  remedy.  Mere  abandonment  of
earthly  goods  vv^ill  not  bring  us  to  any  goal.  Self-
mortification,  even  self-crucifixion,  alone  does  not  carry
the  soul  anywhere.  The  soul  must  be  kindled  and
burn  with  a  holy  passion  of  love  which  carries  it  above
all  dependence  on  and  attachment  to  the  fleeting,
failing  things  of  the  world,  and  be  "  inwardly  united "
to  the  Divine  Fountain  from  whom  all  good  flows —
then,  in  this  union  with  God,  everything  becomes  a
mirror  of  life.  But  this  "  condition "  of  heart  is  not
natural  \  it  does  not  form  itself  in  us  while  we  sleep
and  play.  The  Church  cannot  bestow  it.  It  cannot  be
bought  as  an  "indulgence"  can  be.  It  is  the  business
of  life  to  conquer  and  win  it :

"  If  thou  desirest  to  obtain  victory,  make  ready  for  the  battle.
The  crown  of  patience  cannot  be  received  where  there  has  been
no  suffering.  If  thou  wishest  to  be  crowned,  thou  must  fight
manfully  and  suffer  patiently :  without  labour  none  can  obtain
rest,  and  without  contending  there  can  be  no  conquest "  (Book
III.  chap.  xiii.).

Nobody  has  exalted  Grace  more  than  has  a  Kempis
— Grace  as  a  "  supernatural  and  special  gift  of  God
operating  on  the  soul " ;  nobody  has  put  a  firmer
emphasis  on  the  work  of  the  Cross  for  human  redemption,
but  he  has  seen,  as  all  true  mystics  see,  that  in  the
last  resort  salvation,  deliverance,  victory,  depend  on
the  act  of  the  soul.  "He  who  will  have  a  hearty  sense
of  what  Christ  suffered  on  the  Cross  must  suffer  tJie
like  himself'  is  his  great  word  to  men  :


330  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap

"Turn  thyself  upwards,  turn  thyself  downwards,  turn  thyself
outwards,  turn  thyself  inwards  ;  everywhere  thou  shalt  find  the
Cross  ;  and  everywhere  thou  must  needs  keep  patience,  if  thou
wilt  have  inward  peace  and  earn  an  everlasting  crown  "  (Book
II.  chap.  xii.).

Thomas  says  less  than  the  earlier  mystics  of  the
Divine  in  man,  because  his  gaze  is  turned  more  than
theirs  was  to  Christ  and  His  revelation  of  God,  but
the  direct,  inward  revelation  in  the  soul  is  by  no
means  ignored.  "  The  outward  word,"  he  says,  in  a
passage  which  might  have  come  from  Fox's  Jouimal^
"  the  outward  word,  even  of  Moses  and  the  prophets,
is  only  letter  \  it  cannot  impart  the  Spirit.  Speak
Thou,  God,  Eternal  Truth,  speak  to  my  soul"  (Book  III.
chap,  ii.),  and  he  goes  on  to  say  that  the  same  Spirit  that
taught  prophets  and  holy  men  of  old  now  teaches  us.

"Some,"  again  he  says,  "place  their  religion  in  books,  some
in  images,  some  in  the  pomp  and  splendour  of  external  worship,
but  some  with  illuminated  understandings  hear  what  the  Holy
Spirit  speaketh  in  their  hearts  "  (Book  III.  chap.  iii.).  "  The  Holy
Scriptures  must  be  read  with  the  same  Spirit  by  which  they
were  written  "  (Book  I.  chap.  v.).

Like  all  men  of  his  type,  he  insists  on  life  as  more
important  than  doctrine  :

"  Of  what  benefit  are  thy  most  subtle  disquisitions  on  the
blessed  Trinity,  if  thou  art  destitute  of  humility  ?  It  is  not  pro-
found speculations,  but  a  holy  life  that  makes  a  man  right  and  good
and  dear  to  God.  /  had  rather  feel  compunction  than  be  able  to
give  the  most  accurate  defi?iition  of  it.  ...  It  is  vanity  to  wish
that  life  may  be  long  and  to  have  no  concern  whether  it  be
good  "  (Book  I.  chap.  i.).

In  another  fine  passage,  that  sounds  like  the  text  on
which  Kipling's  Tomlinson  was  written,  he  says  :

"  In  the  day  of  universal  judgment,  it  will  not  be  asked  what
we  have  read,  but  what  we  have  done ;  not  how  eloquently  we
have  spoken,  but  how  holily  we  have  lived  ! "  (Book  I.  chap.  iii).

Some  have  tried  to  show  that  the  religion  of  the
Imitation  is  a  religion    of   slavish    copying   of  a  model.


XIV     BRETHREN   OF  THE  COMMON   LIFE      331

But  that  view  is  superficial,  for  it  never  stops  with  a
copy  of  the  outward  life  of  Christ.  It  calls  rather  for
a  deep  inward,  mystical  appreciation  of  the  Spirit  of
Christ  and  life  in  that  Spirit — "  only  he  who  endeavours  to
get  the  Spirit  of  Christ  can  imitate  Christ "  (Book  I.  chap.  i.).
It  has,  too,  been  condemned  as  Quietism,  but  Thomas
is  not  a  Quietist  An  act  of  helpfulness  to  a  brother
is  better  than  the  performance  of  a  "  religious  exercise,"
and  he  calls  his  readers  to  have  their  "  loins  girt  like
valiant  men."

"  Never  be  idle  or  vacant,"  he  says,  "  be  always  reading  or
writing,  or  praying,  or  meditating,  or  employed  in  some  useful
labour  for  the  common  good"  (Book  I.  chap.  xix.).

It  has  also  been  condemned  as  a  religion  of  refined
selfishness — "  A  spiritual  hedonism."  "  The  hnitation
of  Christ  begins  in  self  and  terminates  in  self,"  wrote
Dean  Milman.^  It  is  true  that  the  book  is  full  of  that
passion  for  a  holier  self  which  is  a  spring  of  all  pure
religion,  and  which  cannot  be  washed  out  without
destroying  religion  itself,  but  it  is  not  true  that  the
aim  of  the  Imitation  is  selfish.  The  constant  prayer  of
its  author  is  to  "  conquer  self  utterly,"  to  "  retain  not
the  least  leaven  of  self-love."  He  had  not  discovered,
it  was  not  possible  for  his  age  to  discover,  the  true
scope  of  the  social,  altruistic  spirit,  but  he  has  the
attitude  of  uncalculating  love,  and  he  announces  that
"  lie  does  much  that  loves  much ;  and  he  does  well
that  serves  the  commiinity  rather  than  his  own  wiir'
(Book  I.  chap.  v.).  And  he  has  found  and  left  for  us  a  great
spiritual  law  in  the  principle  :  "  If  thou  wilt  be  carried,
carry  another  thyself"  (Book  11.  chap.  iii).

The  Imitation  of  Christ  is  by  no  means  the  last
word  of  Christianity.  It  is  not  a  full  account  of  the
Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  not  a  type  of  Christianity
that  stirs  profoundly  the  mass  of  men  in  these  strenuous,
virile  times,  but  the  heart  of  it  is  sound  and  genuine.
It  is  not  concerned  to  find  some  easy  way  to  a  heaven

^  History  of  Latin  Christianity,  Book  XIV.  chap.  iii.


332  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap,  xiv

beyond  the  stars.  It  tells  how  the  soul  comes  to  its
own  kingdom — a  kingdom  which  is  one  with  Eternal
Reality — and  thus  joins  the  invisible  Church — and  every
age  needs  this  message.^

^  One  of  the  greatest  "disciples"  of  Thomas  was  John  Wesel  Gansfoort
(1419-1489).  He  was  educated  in  the  School  of  the  Brothers  of  the  Common
Life  at  Zwolle.  He  travelled  widely,  and  studied  in  the  Universities  of  Cologne,
Heidelberg,  and  Louvain,  and  made  himself  one  of  the  most  famous  scholars  of
his  time.  '•  Through  truth  alone,"  he  said,  "lies  the  way  to  life."  He  also,  like
his  master,  wrote  books  of  meditation,  and  taught  his  contemporaries  the  art  of
contemplation,  but  his  greatest  service  was  his  work  toward  a  genuine  spiritual
reformation  of  the  Church.  He  put  the  authority  of  the  Scriptures  above  that  of
the  Church :  he  powerfully  attacked  confession,  excommunication,  transub-
stantiation  and  absolution.  Luther  himself  said  :  "  If  I  had  read  Wesel  sooner,
m)'  adversaries  would  have  presumed  to  say  that  I  had  borrowed  my  whole
doctrine  from  him  ;  our  minds  are  so  consonant  with  each  other."


CHAPTER    XV

THE    PRE-REFORMATION    IN    ENGLAND
Wyclif  and  the  Lollards

While  the  forces  of  the  invisible  Church  were  thus  silently
gathering  intensity  and  volume  on  the  continent,  and  the
religion  of  the  Spirit  was  working  like  hidden  leaven  in
the  mass  of  the  visible  Church,  a  still  mightier  spiritual
movement  was  spreading  in  England — in  a  very  real  sense
the  dawn — "the  morning  star" — of  a  new  spiritual  day.
Wyclif  is  England's  greatest  religious  prophet — in  fact
he  ranks  among  the  foremost  prophets  of  the  Christian
Church.

But  Wyclif  is  by  no  means  a  lone  figure,  a  solitary
path-breaker,  the  sudden  initiator  of  a  fresh  movement.
He  is  rather  a  part — to  be  sure  magna  pars — of  a  great
national  movement  which  was  well  under  way  when  he
appeared,  and  of  which  he  was  the  mightiest  voice.

One  of  his  great  forerunners  was  Robert  Grossetete,
Bishop  of  Lincoln  and  Chancellor  of  Oxford  (born  about
II 7 5,  died  1253).  He  was  the  foremost  English  scholar
of  his  time.-^  It  was  under  his  direction  and  oversight
that  the  first  translation  of  Aristotle's  Ethics  from  the
Greek  was  made  ;  he  wrote  Commentaries  on  Aristotle's
Logic  and  Physics  ;  and  he  was  one  of  the  founders  of
the  new  scholasticism  under  the  sway  of  Aristotle.  Great
scholar  as  he  was,  and  bishop  of  inflexible  authority,  his
spirit  was  gentle  and  childlike.      He  was   a   man   of  the

1  Roger  Bacon  calls  Grossetete  and  Adam  Marsh  "the  greatest  clerks  (scholars)
m  the  world,  perfect  in  divine  and  human  wisdom  !  "

333


334  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

mystical  type,  and  by  his  translation  of  the  writings  of
Dionysius  the  Areopagite,  he  started  the  wave  of  interest
in  mystical  religion  which  became  a  distinct  feature  of  the
religious  literature  of  the  fourteenth  century  in  England.^
He  taught  that  the  soul  has  an  eye  as  well  as  the  body,
and  this  eye  is  Love  :  "  Love,"  he  says,  "  absorbs  all  the
acts  of  the  soul.  One  day  we  shall  know  God  face  to
face,  as  even  now  some  choice  spirits  know  Him,  by
Love."  He,  like  Wyclif,  made  the  Scriptures  the  founda-
tion of  all  true  learning,  and  he  infused  into  the  students
of  his  generation  a  new  spirit  of  devotion  to  the  Bible.
The  supreme  passion  of  his  soul  was  the  spiritual  shep-
herding of  the  flock.^

Oxford  was,  in  the  fourteenth  century,  the  centre  of  an
intellectual  and  spiritual  movement  in  England,  as  extra-
ordinary as  any  that  has  ever  come  from  that  famous  seat
of  learning.  Duns  Scotus,  the  century  before  (died  1308),
had  been  the  leader  of  a  new  scholasticism — the  last  stage
and  culmination  of  scholasticism.  William  of  Occam,  the
flower  of  Oxford,  in  the  early  part  of  the  fourteenth  cen-
tury (died  1346),  had  taken  the  step  which  destroyed
scholasticism,  sundered  science  and  theology,  and  prepared
the  way  for  the  method  of  experience  and  induction.  In
its  next  period  Oxford  was  to  furnish  the  leaders  of
English  mysticism,  the  creators  of  English  literature,  and
the  spiritual  reformers  of  the  English  Church.

The  first  of  the  English  mystics  of  the  period  was
Richard  RoUe — generally  called  Richard  Rolle  of  Ham-
pole — who  was  born   in   YorksUire,  near  Pickering,  about

^  His  edition  of  Dionysius  the  Areopagite  was  printed  in  Strasbourg  in
1502.

2  It  has  generally  been  supposed  that  the  great  bishop  was  a  protestant  before
his  time,  and  that  he  wrote  in  burning  words  of  remonstrance  to  the  Pope  :  ' '  He
who  commits  the  care  of  a  flock  to  a  man  in  order  that  he  may  get  the  milk  and
the  wool,  is  a  persecutor  of  Christ  in  His  members."  "  The  cure  of  souls  consists
not  in  the  dispensation  of  sacraments,  in  the  singing  of  hours,  and  the  reading  of
masses,  but  in  the  true  teaching  of  the  word  of  life,  in  rebi/king  and  correcting
vice,  in  deeds  of  charity,  and  in  the  insti'uction  of  the  people  in  the  holy  exercises  of
active  life,"  and  that  in  old  age,  when  he  was  brought  face  to  face  with  the  reck-
less power  of  the  corrupt  Church,  he  rose  to  the  height  of  an  ancient  prophet,
and  called  upon  the  head  of  the  Church  to  ' '  fulfil  its  office  for  the  eternal
salvation  of  the  sheep  of  Christ."  But  these  famous  letters  are  almost  certainly
spurious  (see  Charles  Jourdain's  Excursions  histoHques  et  philosophiques  a  travet'.
ie  moyen  age  (Paris,   1888),  pp.  149-71 1


XV    THE  PRE-REFORMATION  IN  ENGLAND    335

1300."^  He  went  to  Oxford  with  a  passion  for  learning,
but  whether  by  a  revolt  from  the  dry  and  subtle  scholas-
ticism of  the  time,  or  through  the  influence  of  his  studies
of  the  continental  mystics,  he  suddenly  abandoned  his
University  career,  withdrew  wholly  from  the  world,  and
devoted  himself  to  the  mystic  ideal  of  contemplative  life.
Everybody  thought  him  mad,  and  he  evidently  underwent
in  the  early  period  of  his  "  new  life "  profound  psychic
changes,^  but  after  passing  through  the  three  mystic  stages
oi  purification^  illumination  and  contemplation^  he  came  into
an  experience  of  pure  and  holy  love  which  brought  him
great  inward  calm,  more  stable  nervous  conditions,  and
finally  gave  him  a  rare  creative  power.  He  sometimes  felt
the  promptings  of  an  inward  voice,  which  drove  him  from
his  solitary  contemplation,  and  turned  him  into  a  powerful
preacher  of  the  life  of  love.  Unordained,  and  with  no
commission  but  that  of  the  voice  of  God  in  his  soul,  he
stood  up  in  church  on  one  occasion  and  spoke  with  such
resistless  power  that  the  entire  congregation  broke  into
tears.  His  life,  however  marred  by  its  excessive  emphasis
on  withdrawal  from  the  world  and  on  the  joys  of  indulgence
in  contemplation,  was  a  striking  exhibition  of  a  new  type
of  religion.  He  was  absolutely  free  from  the  ecclesiastical
system  of  his  age.  He  made  no  use  of  the  machinery  of
the  Church.  He  owned  no  head  but  Christ,  he  had  no
creed  but  love^  he  was  in  his  own  right  a  king  and  priest
unto  God,  and  he  flung  his  passionate  soul  into  lyrics  of
great  fervour  and  beauty.  He  was  one  of  the  first,  after
the  Norman  Conquest,  to  use  his  mother-tongue  in  the
service  of  religion.  He  turned  the  psalms  into  English,
and  was  thus  the  beginner  of  the  great  work  which  Wyclif
helped  to  complete.  His  writings,  edited  by  C.  Horstman,
fill  two  ponderous  volumes,  and  they  must  have  played  a
great  part  in  the  spread  of  a  freer  religion  of  the  heart.
"  He  is,"  says   Horstman,   "  the  head   and   parent  of  the

1  He  died  at  Hampole  in  1349.

2  "  He  was  sitting  one  day  in  a  church,  rapt  in  meditation,  when  he  feh  in  his
breast  a  strange  and  pleasant  heat,  as  of  a  real  sensible  fire,  so  that  he  kept  feeling
of  his  breast  to  see  if  the  heat  was  caused  by  some  exterior  cause.  He  often  heard
heavenly  music  "  (see  Horstman,  Richard  Rolle  of  Harnpole,  vol.  ii.  p.  vii.).


336  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

great    mystic    and     religious    writers    of    the    fourteenth
century."  ^

Sometime  during  this  century  there  appeared  the  first
EngHsh  translation  or  paraphrase  of  the  Mystical  Theology
of  "  Dionysius,"  under  the  title  Dionise  Hid  Divinite,  that
is,  "  The  Hid  Divinity  of  Dionysius."  ^  There  appears  to
have  been  a  school  of  mystics  gathered  about  the  writer
of  the  "  Hid  Divinity,"  and  once  again  the  anonymous
Greek  of  the  fifth  century  had  a  large  spiritual  progeny.
There  still  exist  in  manuscript  a  number  of  mystical
treatises  which  came  from  this  group.^  The  important
treatises  are  (besides  Dionise  Hid  Divinity^  The  Cloud
of  Unknowing,  A  Pistle  of  Private  Cowncelle,  A  Pistle  of
Praier,  A  Tretyse  of  Discrecion  in  Knowyng  of  Spirites,
and  A  Pistle  of  Discrecion  in  Styrryngs.  The  great
mystical  strain  which  runs  through  these  early  English
writings  is  that  God  is  beyond  the  reach  of  "  bodily  wits,
as  hearing,  seeing,  smelling,  tasting,  and  touching,"  and
also  beyond  the  reach  of  "  ghostly  wits,"  i.e.  the  powers
of  the  understanding,  and  to  be  found  only  when  the  soul
has  "  learned  to  know  beyond  '  knowing/  "  and  has  entered
"the  cloud  of  unknowmg"  that  is,  has  attained  to  an
experience  in  which  "self"  and  "other"  are  undiffer-
entiated. No  mystic  of  this  type  has  come  nearer  giving
an  adequate  account  of  the  "  experience "  than  has  the
writer  of  The  Cloud  of  Unknowing.  He  says  :  "  It  is  a
swift,  piercing  act,  an  act  of  directioft,  a  naked  intent  of  the
will  fastening  itself  upon  God.  For  the  substance  of  all
perfection  is  naught  else  but  a  good  will"  and  "  this  work
of  perfection  is  the  shortest  work  of  all  that  man  can
imagine  ;  it  is  neither  longer  nor  shorter  than  is  an  atom."
But  the  mystical  experience  is  more  than  will,  as  it  is  also

^   op.  cit.  vol.  ii.  Introduction,  p.  xxxv.

-  My  attention  was  first  called  to  this  "  Hid  Divinity  "  in  an  article  with  the
title,  "The  Cloud  of  Unknowing,"  by  David  M.  M'Intyre,  in  the  Expositor  io\
October  1907.  He  incorrectly  says,  in  the  above  article,  that  a  Cistercian  monk,
named  Ambrose,  in  Fountains  Abbey,  translated  the  Mystical  Theology  of
Dionysius  into  Latin  in  1346.  The  MS.  to  which  he  refers  was  made  by  a
monk  named  Ambrose,  but  in  1436,  and  in  the  Monastery  of  Bonne  Fontaine
on  the  continent  (see  MSS.  Line.  Col.  Ox.  49).

3  The  two  collections  I  have  examined  are  MSS.  Univ.  Col.  Ox.  14,  and
MSS.  Harl.  674  (in  British  Museum).


XV   THE  PRE-REFORMATION  IN  ENGLAND    337

more  than  knowing.  "  It  is  a  sharp  dart  of  longing  love
directed  to  God,  and  in  this  great  joy  of  loving  Him
there  is  taken  away  from  the  man  all  knowing  or  feeling
of  his  own."

The  writer  is  evidently  endeavouring  to  suggest  an
experience  which  includes  and  embraces  all  the  powers
of  the  inward  being,  functioning  in  an  undifferentiated
activity,  like  that  of  primitive  experience  in  the  child,
though  informed  and  heightened  by  all  the  gains  of  a
lifetime  and  by  all  the  suggestions  of  the  social  environ-
ment.     He  calls  this  "  the  cloud  of  unknowing."

"  It  is  needful  for  thee  to  bury  in  a  cloud  of  forgetting  all
creatures  [all  differentiated  objects]  that  ever  God  made,  that
thou  mayest  direct  thine  intent  to  God  Himself"  "  Therefore
lift  up  thine  heart  unto  God  with  a  meek  striving  of  love,  and  be
thou  loth  to  think  on  aught  but  Himself;  so  that  naught  work  in
thy  wit  nor  in  thy  will,  but  only  Himself  When  thou  dost  next
begin  in  this  work  thou  wilt  find  but  a  darkness — a  cloud  of
unknowing — between  thee  and  thy  Lord,  so  that  thou  art  able
neither  to  see  Him  clearly  by  light  of  understanding  in  thy  reason,
nor  feel  Him  in  sweetness  of  love  in  thine  affection.  Yet  if  ever
thou  shalt  see  Him  or  feel  Him — in  the  measure  in  which  it  is
possible  in  this  life  to  do — it  behoveth  thee  always  to  abide  in
this  cloud  and  darkness.  When  thou  enterest  this  cloud,  per-
ad venture  thou  feelest  far  from  God,  but  thou  art  nearer  Him
than  formerly ;  He  hath  set  a  darkness  between  thee  and  all
creatures  that  ever  He  made.  If  any  thought,  therefore,  should
come  between  thee  and  thy  God,  then  (even  though  it  seem  to
thee  most  holy)  tread  it  down  with  a  stirring  of  love,  and  say,  '  It
is  God  whom  I  covet,  whom  I  seek.'  Take  thee  a  sharp,  strong
word  of  prayer ;  with  this  word  thou  shalt  beat  down  all  thoughts
under  thee.  Even  to  think  of  God's  kindness  or  worthiness
would  hinder  thee  in  this  work.  For  though  it  be  good  to  muse
on  the  perfections  of  God,  and  to  praise  Him  therefor,  it  is  far
better  to  think  on  the  native  substance  of  Him,  and  to  love
and  praise  Him  for  Himself  But  now  thou  askest  me,  '  How
should  I  think  on  Himself,  and  what  is  He?'  Unto  this  I
cannot  answer  thee.  I  wot  now  that  thou  has  brought  me  into
the  same  cloud  of  unknowing  that  I  would  thou  wert  in  thyself
But  this  will  I  say :  '  By  love  He  may  be  gotten  and  holden,  but
by  thought  never.' "

In   the  Pistle  of  Private    Cowncelh  the   writer   insists

z


338  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

still  further  on  "  the  naked  intent  stretched  toward  God,"
and  on  a  life  "  fully  meekened  in  noughting  itself."
*'  Thou  shalt  make  spoil  and  utterly  unclothe  thyself  of
all  manner  of  feeling  of  thyself;  so  shalt  thou  be  clothed
with  the  gracious  feeling  of  God  Himself.  .  .  .  Yet  this
is  not  to  unbe — that  were  madness,  but  it  is  to  forego  the
witting  and  the  feeling  of  thy  own  being."

These  treatises,  produced  under  the  influence  of  the
Dionysian  writings,  had  a  wide  circulation,  and,  in  the
words  of  an  old  writer,^  "  walked  up  and  down  (England)
at  deer  rates."

Walter  Hilton  is  the  best  known  of  the  popular  writers
of  mystical  literature  in  England  in  the  fourteenth  century.
He  was,  as  was  Rolle,  an  Oxford  scholar  and  a  contem-
porary of  Wyclif — the  probable  date  of  his  death  being
1395.  He  was  a  man  of  rare  and  saintly  life,  "travailing
busily  with  all  the  powers  of  his  soul  to  fulfil  the  truth  of
good  life."  A  very  strong  case  has  been  made  out  for
settling  upon  him  the  authorship  of  the  Imitation  of  Christy
and,  though  it  is  practically  certain  that  he  did  not  write
it,  it  is  high  praise  to  say,  what  critics  generally  admit,
that  he  might  have  written  it}  What  he  did  write  is  the
profoundly  mystical  book  called  The  Ladder  of  Perfection^
in  which  he  tells  his  age  how  the  soul  can  learn,  not
through  priests  and  ecclesiastical  systems,  but  in  direct
intercourse  with  God,  to  "  see  and  know  spiritual  things."
He  is  not  concerned,  like  his  greater  contemporary
Wyclif,  with  the  task  of  making  a  new  England.  His
problem  is  to  tell  man  how  to  "  enter  into  himself,
and  know  his  own  soul  and  the  powers  of  it,"  "  to  see
by  inward  sight  the  nobility  and  dignity  that  belong
to  the  soul."  ^

"  The  Divine  treasure,"  he  says,   "  lies  hidden  in  thy

^  Quoted  by  D.  M.  M'Intyre,  from  whose  article  the  passages  quoted  above
are  taken.

2  Hilton  wrote  both  in  English  and  in  Latin.  It  is  still  an  unsettled  question
whether  he  wrote  his  books  originally  in  English  or  Latin,  though  De  Mont-
morency thinks  that  the  evidence  is  in  favour  of  English.  It  is  well  known  that
he  translated  Latin  writings  into  English,  among  others  Bonaventura's  Stimulus
A  moris.

^  The  Scale  of  Perfection  (London,  1870),  p.  49.


XV    THE  PRE-REFORMATION  IN  ENGLAND    339

own  soul."  "  The  piece  of  money — the  groat — is  lost  in
thy  own  house."  ^

"  Behind  this  dark  and  formless  shape  of  evil  is  Jesus
hid."  "  Consider  thy  soul  as  a  life,  immortal  and  invisible,
which  has  in  itself  the  power  to  know  the  sovereign  truth,
and  love  the  sovereign  goodness,  which  is  God.  Seek
thyself  in  no  other  place."

But  he  is  no  merely  passive  mystic,  satisfied  with  con-
templation, and  for  ever  engaged  in  hunting  for  the  "  lost
groat "  within  the  dark  of  his  own  soul.  He  calls  the
Christian  to  a  life  of  "  busy  rest "  and  energetic  love,
which  loves  every  man,  "  be  he  ever  so  sinful,"  for  in
comparison  with  love,  he  says,  "  there  is  no  great  excel-
lence in  watching  and  fasting  till  thy  head  aches,  nor  in
running  to  Rome  or  Jerusalem  with  bare  feet !  "

Less  mystical,  less  of  an  adept  in  the  inward  way
Godward,  but  much  more  practical  and  influential  with
the  common  people  of  England,  was  William  Langiand,
the  writer  of  Piers  Plowman  —  probably,  though  not
certainly,  an  Oxford  man,  like  his  contemporaries  in
literature.  He  was  no  hermit  like  RoUe,  no  recluse
monk  like  Hilton,  but  he  glowed  with  no  less  religious
passion  than  they,  though  his  ideal  was  a  moral  and
spiritual  society  rather  than  the  achievement  of  untroubled
contemplation  of  God.  He  is  the  voice  of  the  common
people  crying,  in  vivid  alliterative  verse,  against  the  hollow
shows  and  mockeries  and  hypocrisies  of  outward  religion,
and  for  a  genuine  religion  of  heart  and  life.

"It  is  not  so  much,"  says  Milman,^  "in  his  keen,  cutting
satire  on  all  matters  of  the  Church,  as  in  his  solemn  installation
of  reason  and  conscience  as  the  guides  of  the  self-directed  soul,
that  he  is  breaking  the  yoke  of  sacerdotal  domination  :  in  his
constant  appeal  to  the  plainest,  simplest  Scriptural  truths,  as  in
themselves  the  whole  of  religion,  he  is  a  stern  reformer.  True
religion    was    not    to    be    found,    it   was    not    known   by   Pope,

1  George  Fox  says  the  same  thing  in  his  Journal :  ' '  The  woman  that  lost  the
piece  of  silver  was  seeking  it  without.  But  when  the  candle  was  lighted,  and  the
house  swept,  she  found  it  in  her  own  house."  Francis  Howgil  has  a  still  closer
parallel.  He  says  :  ' '  Return  home  to  within  ;  sweep  your  house  all ;  the  groat
is  within  !  "  [A  Lamentation  to  the  Scattered  Tribes,  1656).

2  Latin  Christianity,  Book  XIV.  chap,  vii


340  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

Cardinals,  Bishops,  Clergy,  Monks,  Friars.  It  was  to  be  sought
by  man  himself,  by  the  individual  man,  by  the  poorest  man,
under  the  sole  guidance  of  Reason,  Conscience,  and  the  Grace
of  God,  vouchsafed  directly,  not  through  any  intermediate
human  being,  or  even  sacrament,  to  the  self-directing  soul."

This  voice  from  the  Malvern  Hills,  the  voice  of  the
people,  speaking  in  their  own  tongue,  was  a  cry  of  heart
for  the  religion  of  Christ — a  yearning  for  a  religion  of
new  life  and  new  motives  —  an  "  ill  life  is  an  ill  life,
whether  in  pope  or  peasant."  Everywhere  in  this  great
poem  of  the  people,  the  thing  that  counts  is  right-doing,  a
life  that  squares  with  faith  and  conscience  :  "  If  you  had
a  bag  full  of  pardons  and  provincial  letters,  though  you
be  in  the  fraternity  among  the  four  orders,  and  have
indulgences  double-fold,  I  would  not  give  a  magpie's  tail
for  your  pardon  unless  Do-well  help  you!'

He,  too,  though  no  mystic  in  the  strict  sense,  has  his
spiritual  ladder  or  scale  of  the  religious  life.  This  comes
out  in  his  three  visions  of  "  Do-well,"  "  Do-bet,"  and
"  Do-best."  "  Do-well "  religion  is  founded  on  moral
uprightness  and  the  fear  of  God.  It  is  a  good,  plain,
straightforward  type  of  religion,  observant  of  doctrine,
playing  fair  with  conscience,  and  deeply  concerned  over
the  everlasting  issues  of  life.  "  Do-bet "  religion  is
religion  according  to  the  "  law  of  Christ " — the  religion
of  love  like  that  of  the  Good  Samaritan,  a  religion  whose
ideal  is  realised  in  Christ,  Who  redeemed  us  by  love.
"  Do-best "  religion  is  the  highest  type  of  all — it  is  the
Christ-spirit  realized  in  a  living  Church,  whose  members
are  inwardly  free,  fed  by  Grace,  united  to  Christ  and
embodying  Him  in  the  daily  work  of  life — for  at  the  last
Piers  Plowman  is  seen  as  Christ,  typifying  human  nature
joined  to  Divine  Grace,  and  doing  God's  will  in  the  midst
of  the  busy  world.  It  was  a  beautiful  insight  of  the  poet
that  made  the  figure  of  his  Piers  Plowman  melt  away  into
the  Divine-human  Christ,  and  the  vision  of  a  world  with
conscience  as  king  and  under  the  sway  of  love  is  good  for
any  age  of  humanity.

But   the   greatest   spiritual    force   of   this   period    was


XV   THE  PRE-REFORMATION  IN  ENGLAND    341

embodied  in  the  patriot  and  reformer  John  Wyclif,  who
was  born  about  1320,  of  North  of  England  parentage,  in
the  Richmond  district  of  Yorkshire.^  His  life  and  work
are  closely  bound  up  with  Oxford,  which  was  his  chief
place  of  residence  and  of  intellectual  activity  from  about
1335,  when  he  entered  the  University,  to  within  three
years  of  his  death,  which  occurred  at  Lutterworth  in  i  384.^

He  was  most  probably  a  fellow,  and,  for  a  short  period,
master  of  Balliol  College.  In  i  361  he  was  presented  by
that  College  to  the  living  of  Fillingham,  in  Lincolnshire,
though  he  continued  to  reside  mainly  at  Oxford.  In
1368,  in  order  to  be  nearer  Oxford,  he  exchanged  this
living  for  the  less  valuable  rectory  at  Ludgershall,  about
twelve  miles  from  Oxford,  and  probably  devoted  himself
mainly  to  University  work.  About  1372  he  received  the
degree  of  Doctor  of  Theology,  and  entered  upon  the  work
of  a  University  teacher.^  From  this  time  to  the  end  of
his  life  he  was  in  the  forefront  of  the  great  spiritual
battles  of  England.  We  must  try  to  see  what  those
battles  were.

The  early  part  of  the  reign  of  Edward  III.  (i  327-1377)
had  given  England  "  a  dazzling  harvest  of  glory,"  and  had
established  an  Anglo-Saxon  supremacy  in  the  western
world.  The  later  years  of  the  same  reign  saw  the  military
glory  fade  away,  saw  this  "  Anglo-Saxon  supremacy "
broken,  saw  England  sapped  by  continual  war,  dreadfully
misgoverned  through  corrupt  favourites,  the  country  swept
by  famine  and  pestilence,  and  brought  face  to  face  with
social  and  economic  conditions  which  no  statesman  of  the
time  understood,^   with    its    medieval    Church    sick    unto

^  According  to  Leland,  who  wrote  in  the  time  of  Henry  VIII.,  Wyclif  was
born  at   "  Ipreswel,"  now  Hipswell,  about  a  mile  from  Richmond,  in  Yorkshire.

2  All  the  details  of  Wyclif  s  early  life  are  in  doubt.  No  other  great  English-
man, except  Shakespeare,  has  his  biographical  records  more  completely  obscured
by  time.  There  was,  too,  an  Oxford  contemporary  by  the  same  name — a  certain
John  Wyclyve  of  Mayfield — whose  history  has  been  tangled  up  with  that  of  the
great  reformer.  We  do  not  possess  a  single  authentic  letter  written  either  from
or  to  Wyclif.

2  Many  scholars  give  an  earlier  date  for  the  attainment  of  the  degree.  Poole
thinks  that  he  became  Doctor  between  1361  and  1366.  At  any  rate  he  was
Doctor  in  1374,  when  he  was  appointed  a  member  of  the  royal  commission  to
confer  with  the  papal  representatives  at  Bruges  on  the  question  of  "  provisions."

*  These  social  and  economic  troubles  came  to  a  head  in  138 1  in  the  form  of  a


342  MYSTICAL  RELIGIOxN  chap.

death  with  a  multitude  of  ills,  and  with  the  new  religion,
that  was  to  save  the  nation,  hardly  yet  born.  The  con-
dition of  the  Church  in  this  age  especially  concerns  us,  for
the  questions  of  life  and  death  with  Wyclif  were  questions
of  religion.

In  this  period  there  was  only  one  form  of  "  religion  "
in  England — that  of  the  Church,  and  to  be  an  Englishman
was  to  be  a  Christian  of  the  orthodox  type.  This  Church,
though  in  the  broad  sense  a  unity,  was  in  reality  divided
into  two  parts — the  Religious  Orders,  such  as  monks  and
friars,  and  the  Church  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  bishops.
The  friars  in  the  early  days  of  their  history  had  been  the
leaders  of  a  great  spiritual  revival.  They  had  carried
religion  into  the  homes  of  the  people,  they  had  spread
abroad  a  fresh  religious  enthusiasm,  and  they  had  made
a  powerful  protest  against  worldliness  in  the  Church  and
laxity  in  the  monastery.  But  in  the  intervening  years
they  had  greatly  degenerated.  Once  they  had  been  as
saving  salt  in  a  very  corrupt  Church,  but  in  Wyclifs  time
they  had  lost  their  savour,  and  were  themselves  one  of
the  most  corrupt  elements  within  the  corrupt  Church.
Langland  has  impaled  them  with  his  satire ;  Chaucer,
though  untroubled  with  religious  convictions,  and  telling
what  he  saw  without  passion,  yet  with  much  humour,  has
shown  them  to  us  in  their  spiritual  nakedness.  The
worst  feature  of  the  friar's  work  in  the  profession  of  "  cure
of  souls "  was  his  cheap  and  easy  method  of  granting
absolution.  Repentance,  confession,  and  penance  were
the  three  acts  by  which  sins  were  purged,  but  it  had
become  a  fixed  custom  to  commute  penance  into  a  fine.
The  friars,  once  "  God's  poor  men,"  were  now  eager  to
gather  in  money  for  their  Orders  by  this  easy  method  of
granting  absolution.  A  window  for  a  church  or  convent
would  cover  the  crime  of  a  great  man  ;  a  pair  of  old  shoes
or  a  dinner  would  obtain  heaven's  pardon  for  the  peasant.^

peasant  uprising  of  great  seriousness,  headed  by  agitators  like  John  Ball  and  Wat
Tyler.  The  young  king,  Richard  11. ,  saved  the  day  by  temporizing  promises,  but
not  until  the  mob  had  slain  Archbishop  Sudbury  and  other  men  whom  they  held
responsible  for  the  evils  of  the  time.

1  It  has  been  estimated  that  there  were  4000  friars  in  England  at  this  time,
and  that  they  drew  from  the  people  not  less  than  ;^40,ooo  annually.     Wyclif  says


XV   THE  PRE-REFORMATION  IN  ENGLAND    343

Then,  too,  both  men  and  women  much  preferred  to  confess
to  a  wandering  and  irresponsible  friar,  who  was  here
to-day  and  gone  to-morrow,  than  to  the  parish  priest,  who
would  be  a  constant  presence  and  a  permanent  witness  of
their  lives.  The  friars  were  furthermore  a  menace  to  the
peace  and  purity  of  households,  for  they  ingratiated  them-
selves with  women,  made  themselves  their  authoritative
guides  and  masters,  and  naturally  aroused  the  jealousy  of
husbands.^

Trevelyan  lays  great  emphasis  on  the  influence  of  the
friars  with  women,  and  says  :

"The  friars  were  as  much  in  the  confidence  of  great  ladies
as  of  common  people's  wives.  Those  among  the  laymen  who
were  not  in  the  hands  of  these  insinuating  visitors  hated  them
with  the  hatred  of  righteous  jealousy."  ^

Lechler  quotes  the  following  passage  from  Richard
Fitzralph's  sermon  on  the  mendicant  Orders,  giving  the
following  reason  why  people  preferred  to  confess  to  the
friars  : —

"  With  regard  to  confession,  the  archbishop  shows  most  con-
vincingly  that  it  is  much  more  suitable  and,  on  moral  grounds,
much  more  advisable  that  confession  should  be  made  to  one's
own  parish  priest  (sacerdos  ordinariiis)  than  to  a  begging  monk ;
for  the  former  stands  much  nearer  than  the  latter  to  any  member
of  his  own  parish  coming  to  confess,  and  has  personal  knowledge
both  of  the  man  and  his  previous  sins ;  and  naturally  such  a
man  has  more  feeling  of  shame  before  one  whom  he  sees  every
day,  than  before  a  stranger  whom  perhaps  he  sees  face  to  face
only  once  a  year."  ^

The  monks,  too,  had  once  embodied  the  purest  type
of  religion  of  the  times.  They  had  in  their  spiritual
prime  made  religion  the  sole  business  of  their  lives,  and
they  had  called  men,  by  a  startlingly  bold  example  of
complete  surrender,  to  leave  all  and  follow  Christ.  But,
like  Jeshurun,  they  waxed  fat  and  kicked.  They  had
been    extremely   skilful    in    securing    endowments.      Men

that  the  friars  took  more  from  England  than  Christ  and  all  His  Apostles  took
from  Judea  !

1  Trevelyan,  Age  of  Wyclif,  pp.  146-48.  2  j^gg  ^f  Wyclif,  p.  148.

'  Lechler,  John  Wycli^e,  trans,  by  Lorimer,  p.  58.


344  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

who  had  been  weak  and  profligate  while  living  were
readily  induced  when  dying  to  leave  their  fortunes  to
persons  who  were  believed  to  have  the  keys  of  the  next
world  at  their  disposal.  They  found  out  how  to  work
this  morbid  fancy  to  its  full,  and  through  this  and  other
means  they  became  rich  and  increased  in  goods.-^  And
at  the  same  time  they  became  fat  and  lazy.  They,  too,
had  the  bad  habit  of  absolving  sin  for  gain  and  endow-
ment, and  though  with  a  long  list  of  good  services  to  their
credit,  they  were,  on  the  whole,  a  burden  to  the  people
and  a  disgrace  to  the  Church  of  Christ.

The  national  Church,  with  its  array  of  clergy  and
*'  clerks,"  was  under  the  jurisdiction  of  bishops,  with  a
Primate  at  Canterbury.  The  bishops  were,  as  a  rule,
selected  by  the  King.  The  Statute  of  Provisors,  passed  in
135 1,  forbade  any  person  to  receive  appointment  by
papal  provision^  but,  as  no  one  could  actually  become
bishop  without  the  confirmation  of  the  Pope,  the  King
found  it  necessary  to  act  in  alliance  with  the  Pope,  and
in  practice  the  Pope  supported  the  royal  candidates  for
bishoprics,  while  the  King  allowed  the  Pope  to  appoint
his  foreign  cardinals  to  other  places  in  the  English  Church.^
The  bishops  of  the  time  were  all  native  Englishmen.
Most  of  them  had  worked  their  way  up  from  the  poorer
classes,  and  they  were,  as  a  rule,  able  men.  The  main
trouble  with  them  as  officials  of  the  Church  was  their
worldliness.  They  had  become  the  leading  administrators
and  politicians  of  the  kingdom.  Trevelyan  says  that  out
of  the  twenty-five  bishops  between  1376  and  1380,
thirteen  at  one  time  or  another  held  high  secular  offices
under  the  Crown.  The  principal  offices  in  the  nation
were  held  by  bishops,  and  what  we  now  call  the  *'  civil
service "    of   the    country    was    monopolized    by    clerics.*

^  Fully  one-third  of  the  land  in  England  was  in  the  hands  of  ecclesiastical
Orders  or  ecclesiastical  persons  in  the  reign  of  Edward  III.,  and  all  this  enormous
Church  property  was  very  inadequately  taxed  as  regarded  the  property  of  the
secular  clergy,  while  the  wealth  of  the  friars  was  not  taxed  at  all.  The  Pope's
revenue  from  England  at  this  period  was  five  times  that  of  the  King.

2  Trevelyan,  p.  io8.

3  There  was  a  great  "reform  wave"  in  1371,  which  swept  many  of  the
clerical  officers  from  their  positions  and  put  laymen  in  their  places.


XV   THE  PRE-REFORMATION  IN  ENGLAND    345

The  natural  result  was  that  political  ambitions,  absorption
in  the  affairs  of  the  world,  chances  at  great  riches,  took
the  attention  of  the  leaders  of  the  Church  away  from  the
business  for  which  they  existed.

This  entire  army  of  clerics,  by  a  privilege  known  as
"  benefit  of  the  clergy,"  were  exempt  in  cases  of  felony
from  the  criminal  law  of  the  land.  "  Criminous  clerks  "
were  taken  from  the  King's  courts  and  tried  before
"  spiritual  tribunals,"  from  which  they  generally  made  an
easy  escape.  These  "spiritual  courts"  had  a  monopoly
of  the  probate  of  wills,  and  were  used  as  a  ready  means
of  extortion.  Before  these  courts  came  the  cases  for
collection  of  tithes,  and  the  administration  of  fines  im-
posed as  commutation  for  penance  for  sins.  It  was  an
opportunity  for  "  graft "  and  corruption  on  a  gigantic
scale.-^  The  spiritual  courts  pressed  hard  on  the  poor,
and  they  were  bitterly  hated  by  the  people.  Where  the
Church  in  its  spiritual  capacity  touched  the  life  of  the
people  most  closely,  namely  in  its  shepherding  of  the
flock,  it  was  weakest  and  least  efficient.  A  system  of
absenteeism  had  grown  up  which  proved  a  fine  source  of
revenue  but  starved  the  flock.  The  cardinals  and  arch-
deacons who  controlled  many  of  the  best  benefices  were
foreigners  appointed  by  the  Pope,  and  they  used  their
"  charges  "  for  revenue  purposes  only.  Several  benefices
were  often  conferred  upon  one  person,  who  then,  under
this  plural  system,  farmed  out  "  the  cure  of  souls "  to
underlings.  The  parish  priests,  who  at  the  end  of  the  long
chain  finally  came  into  immediate  touch  with  the  people,
were  generally  poor,  uneducated,  and  inefficient.  The
parsonage  and  tithes  under  the  system  of  "  appropriation  "
belonged  either  to  the  bishopric,  to  a  monastery,  or  to
some  high  benefice,  and  only  a  very  small  stipend  came
to  the  hands  of  the  local  priest  or  vicar  who  did  the
work.  This  was  the  worst  possible  division  of  the  spoil.
Those  who  were  to  live  among  the  people,  and  raise  them
to  higher  spiritual  levels,  were    too   poorly  paid   to   live

1  Those  who  were  rich  sometimes  gave  a  lump  sum  annually  to  the  more
corrupt  courts  to  prevent  inquiry.


346  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

decent  lives,  and  generally  men  unfitted  for  these  high
tasks  drifted  into  them,  while  their  superiors  treated  the
"  cure  of  souls  '^  as  a  comfortable  source  of  income,  and
lived  at  their  ease  in  cities.  The  actual  instruction  which
the  parish  priests  gave  their  flocks  was  in  most  places  but
slight.  Preaching  was  not  unknown,  but  it  was  very
infrequent,  and  even  when  there  was  preaching  it  was
puerile  in  its  range  and  power.  The  parish  priests
taught  the  people  the  Creed,  the  Ten  Commandments
the  Ave  Maria,  the  Paternoster,  and  they  inculcated
the  superficial  moral  system  which  had  grown  up  in  the
Church :  the  six  works  of  mercy,  the  seven  virtues,  and  a
knowledge  of  the  seven  deadly  sins,  but  they  hardly
touched  the  moral  quick  in  their  flocks.  There  is  over-
whelming evidence  of  widespread  immorality  in  all  classes
of  society,  both  among  clergy  and  laity.

The  population  of  rural  England  was  several  times
greater  than  that  of  all  the  towns  together.  The  people
were  ignorant,  poor,  and  preyed  upon  by  their  overlords
and  by  the  Church,  and  they  endured  their  lot  only
because  they  had  no  imagination  of  any  other  possible
lot  to  be  attained.

At  the  top  of  this  dual  spiritual  system,  with  its  Orders
of  monks  and  friars ;  its  cardinals,  bishops,  priests  and
clerks,  was  the  Pope.  The  Pope,  to  the  medieval  mind,
was  an  inconceivably  august  being,  the  Vicar  of  Christ,
the  successor  of  Peter,  the  bearer  of  the  keys,  with  power
to  loose  and  bind  for  eternity,  and,  what  was  of  still  more
practical  importance,  by  his  power  to  excommunicate,  able
to  bring  the  mightiest  monarchs  on  their  knees  before
him.  He  had,  however,  never  possessed  the  same  un-
disputed power  in  England  as  in  most  continental
countries.  The  pretensions  of  the  papacy  reached  their
climax  in  England  under  Innocent  III.,  when  King  John
gave  his  crown  to  the  Pope  and  received  it  as  a  fief
to  the  See  of  Rome,  and  promised  in  perpetuity  the
annual  sum  of  one  thousand  marks  ;  but  the  very  next
year  the  Barons,  who  wrung  the  Magna  Charta  from  the
King,  in  the  same  spirit  of  great  patriotism,  defied    the


XV    THE  PRE-REFORMATION  IN  ENGLAxND    347

Pope  and  his  excommunications,  announcing  in  significant
words  the  national  principle  :  "  The  ordering  of  secular
matters  appertaineth  not  to  the  Pope."

In  1365  Pope  Urban  V.  called  upon  Edward  III.
to  pay  the  tribute  promised  by  John,  with  all  the  unpaid
arrears  during  the  previous  years  of  his  reign,  threatening
in  case  of  refusal  to  summon  the  King  before  him  as
feudal  lord.  Edward  was  king  over  a  different  England
from  that  of  John's  day,  and  he  laid  the  question  of
tribute  to  the  Pope  before  Parliament.  Both  Houses  were
unanimous  in  refusing  the  papal  demand,  announcing
that  John's  act  was  null  and  void,  as  no  king,  without
consent  of  Parliament,  had  any  right  to  subject  the  realm
of  England  to  foreign  authority.  And  yet  in  spite  of
this  national  spirit  the  Pope's  power  in  England  was  very
great.  The  vast  army  of  monks  and  friars  was,  as  I
have  said,  under  his  immediate  control.  Through  his
appointments  of  Cardinals  and  other  high  beneficiaries
he  always  had  great  places  at  his  disposal  throughout
the  kingdom.-^  England's  continental  possessions  forced
the  Crown  into  European  politics,  and  made  it  necessary
for  the  nation  to  keep  on  good  terms  with  the  papal
court,  not  to  speak  of  the  terrors  of  a  possible  interdict
which  filled  all  good  Catholics  with  awe.

As  I  have  been  trying  to  show  in  previous  chapters,
the  great  mystics  had  long  felt  that  the  Church  was  in
the  wilderness.  This  vast  machinery,  this  secular  power,
was  weakness,  not  strength.  They  felt  that  things  were
out  of  joint,  and  that  the  art  of  ministering  balm  to
burdened  souls  was  being  lost — but  they  were  not  states-
men. They  could  only  withdraw  from  "the  heavy  and
weary  weight  of  all  the  unintelligible  world "  in  which
they  were,  and  build  from  within  the  spiritual  ladder  for
the  individual  soul  to  mount  to  freedom,  peace,  and  God.

'  The  Statute  of  Provisors  was  passed  in  1351,  making  it  illegal  to  obtain
any  benefice  from  the  Pope,  but  the  statute  was  not  enforced  ;  and  the  Statute  of
Premunire  was  passed  in  1353,  forbidding  appeals  to  the  papal  court  on  questions
of  property,  and  affirming  the  right  of  the  nation  to  prohibit  the  execution  of  papal
bulls  within  the  realm.  This  anti-papal  legislation  was  partly  due  to  the  fact
that  the  Avignon  popes  were  in  league  with  the  French,  with  whom  England
was  at  war.


348  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

Their  service  is  immeasurable,  for  they  patiently  felt  out,
"  with  toil  of  knees  and  heart  and  hands,"  the  inward  way
to  God,  and  taught  the  finer  souls  of  their  age  how  to
dispense  with  the  cumbersome  machinery  of  the  medieval
system.  But  the  times  were  ripe  for  a  prophet-statesman,
who,  with  a  great  spiritual  vision,  would  throw  himself
into  the  task  of  breaking  the  yoke  of  bondage,  and  of
guiding  the  people,  the  nation,  to  freedom,  peace,  and  God.
Wyclif  was  this  prophet-statesman,  and  few  men  have
ever  undertaken  a  harder  task,  or  done  it  in  a  more  un-
compromising and  heroic  spirit.-^

His  first  recorded  appearance  as  a  champion  of  the
secular  power  against  papal  encroachment  was  in  the
form  of  a  tract,  written  in  answer  to  the  challenge  of
an  anonymous  monk.^  The  monk  is  a  champion  of  the
indefeasible  right  of  the  hierarchy.  He  contends  that
the  clergy  should  never  be  brought  before  a  civil  tribunal,
that  the  temporal  power  has  no  right  to  withdraw  property
from  the  Church  or  from  churchmen,  and  that  the  Crown
of  England  is  a  fief  of  the  papal  see,  and  should  pay
annual  tribute  to  the  Pope.  Wyclif,  writing  "  as  a  lowly
and  obedient  son  of  the  Roman  Church,"  has  yet  no
consciousness  of  the  great  fire  his  spark  is  to  grow  into,
nor  does  he  see  to  what  lengths  his  logic  is  eventually  to
carry  him.  He  answers  his  opponent  by  giving  him  a
summary  of  seven  speeches  given  in  the  House  of  Lords
during  the  great  debate  concerning  the  tribute,  and  in  the
summary  of  the  sixth  speech  he  gives  the  germ  of  his
dominion  theory.  He  says  that  Christ  is  the  Lord-
Paramount,  the  Feudal  Chief- Proprietor,  of  all  the  goods
of  the  universe.  All  who  hold  goods  or  rights  hold  them
from  Him — the  Pope  as  well  as  other  mortals.  In  case
the  Pope  falls  into  mortal  sin,  as  he  may  do  like  other

^  "  Had  it  not  been  for  the  perverseness  of  our  prelates,  against  the  divine
and  admirable  Wicklef,  to  suppress  him  as  a  schismatic  and  innovator,  perhaps
neither  the  Bohemian  Huss  and  Jerome,  no,  nor  the  name  of  Luther  or  of
Calvin,  had  ever  been  known.  The  glory  of  reforming  all  our  neighbours  had
been  completely  ours  "  (Milton,  Areopagitica).

2  The  title  of  this  tract  is  Determinatio  de  Dominio,  and  is  Wyclif  s  earliest
view  of  dominion.  The  tract  was  probably  written  in  1366,  though  some
authorities  put  it  in  the  early  seventies.


XV   THE  PRE-REFORMATION  IN  ENGLAND    349

men,  he  then  loses  all  right  to  dominion  of  any  kind,  and
has  no  claim  to  the  possession  of  England,  which  is  held
by  the  English  themselves  directly  in  fief  from  Christ.

Shortly  after  this  discussion  Wyclif  brought  out  his
great  treatise  on  the  Dominion  of  God  {De  Dominio
Divino\  and  probably  about  five  years  later  he  finished
his  third  treatise  on  Dominion,  Civil  Dominion  {De
Civili  Doniinid).  These  works  are  prolix  and  abound
in  the  far-fetched  logic  of  the  schoolman,  in  form  quite
remote  from  our  way  of  thinking  to-day,  but  in  his
ponderous  manner  he  arrives  at  conclusions  which  are
profoundly  significant :  all  dominion,  lordship,  and
possession  belong  to  God,  Who  is  Lord-in-Chief  of  the
universe.  All  right  of  dominion  which  any  man  holds,
whether  civil  or  spiritual  ("  natural  "  is  Wyclif  s  word  for
spiritual),  is  conferred  upon  him  by  God,  and  is  held
directly,  immediately  from  God  ;  and  this  right  of  dominion
continues  only  so  long  as  the  man  who  holds  it  continues
in  grace,  and  renders  the  service  which  God  expects  from
him.  No  one  living  in  sin,  or  failing  in  service,  has  any
legitimate  right  either  to  rule  or  to  possess — he  incurs
forfeiture  of  domi^tion.  In  real  fact  all  possessions  belong
to  the  good,  though  it  is  expedient  in  this  present  state  of
society  to  submit  to  the  temporary  dominion  of  the  bad —
God  seems  for  a  time  to  endure  the  rule  of  the  devil.

We  are  not  here  concerned  with  the  social  and
economic  bearing  of  Wyclif's  theory  of  dominion,  though
it  should  be  said  in  passing  that  his  communism,  of  the  Good
was  only  an  interpretation  of  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,
and  was  far  removed  from  the  aims  of  the  leaders  of  the
peasant  uprising.  But  the  fundamental  principle  of  the
theory  is  what  concerns  us,  namely,  that  7nan,  as  man,
depends  directly  upon  God  and  upon  none  else.  The  Pope,
the  King,  the  priest  have  no  rights  except  as  a  gift  from
God,  and  on  the  condition  of  goodness  and  service  ;  and
the  "  common  man  "  has  the  same  direct  relation  to  God
that  the  ofificial  has.  Apostolic  succession  rests  on  the  real
worth  of  the  man,  not  on  position  or  outward  ordination;  "for
crown  and  cloth  make  no  priest,  nor  the  emperor's  bishop


3 so  -  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

with  his  words,  but  power  that  CJirist  giveth^  and  thus  by  life
are  priests  known!'  ^  The  real  Churchy  therefore,  is  not
the  ecclesiastical  system  with  inalienable  magic  rites  ;  it
is  the  society  of  good  persons  holding  their  spiritual  gifts
from  God,  and  rendering  the  service  that  belongs  to  a
divine  society.  Thus,  through  his  dominion  theory,
Wyclif  arrived  in  the  fourteenth  century  at  the  supremacy
of  the  individual  soul,  as  Luther  did  in  the  sixteenth
through  his  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith.^  By  the
time  his  dominion  doctrine  was  fully  developed,  Wyclif
was  well  under  way  toward  a  complete  transforma-
tion of  medieval  Christianity.  He  appears  for  a
time  in  the  doubtful  company  of  John  of  Gaunt,  in  an
attack  on  clerical  influence  in  State  affairs,  and  in  a
movement  to  dispossess  or  curtail  the  property-holdings
of  the  Church.  The  two  men  were  seeking  totally
different  ultimate  ends,  and  Wyclif  was  moving  in
directions  in  which  the  arch-politician  could  not  travel
with  him,  and  their  ways  were  soon  to  separate.  He  had,
early  in  his  intellectual  life,  become  convinced  of  the
supreme  authority  of  Scripture  over  all  traditions  of  men
and  over  all  Church  authority,  and,  guided  by  its  teachings,
and  pushed  on  by  virile  moral  and  religious  instincts,  he
soon  began  to  move  against  the  central  idea  of  medieval
piety,  and  to  attack  the  fundamental  doctrines  of  the
"system."  The  evils  which  Chaucer  ridicules  with  such
fine  satire  became  intolerable  to  Wyclif's  finer  moral
sense,  and  he  smote  them  with  all  the  intense  power  of
his  feelings  and  his  logic.  From  his  chair  at  Oxford  he
levelled  his  glowing  arguments  against  the  type  of
religion  represented  by  the  useless  monks  and  friars
and  the  unspiritual  clergy.^  He  declared  that  work  and
service  and  a  life  of  goodness  are  dearer  to  God  than
the  conventional  prayer  and  praise  which  fill  such  a
place    in   the   prevailing  system   of    piety.      The  Gospel,

^  Matthew,  English  Works  of  Wyclif,  p.  467.

-  This  whole  subject  of  Dominion  is  very  well  treated  in  a  chapter  on
"  W^yclifs  Doctrine  of  Lordship,"  in  R.  L.  Poole's  Illustrations  of  the  History
of  Mediaeval  Thought.

3  Wyclif's  hostility  to  the  friars  belongs  only  to  this  later  period  of  his  life.


XV   THE  PRE-REFORMATION  IN  ENGLAND    351

he  holds,  gives  no  ground  for  two  types  of  religion
— the  religion  of  the  "Orders"  on  the  one  hand,  and
of  "  common  Christians  "  on  the  other.  Whatever
belongs  intrinsically  to  religion  is  for  all  men  alike.
There  is  but  one  "  sect "  provided  for  in  the  Gospel,
and'  that  is  the  "sect  of  Christ."  The  distinguishing
mark  of  membership  in  that  "  sect "  is  the  practice  of  the
Christ-like  life.

The  only  salvation  for  the  Church  is  a  return  to
the  primitive  ideal — a  return  to  the  original  religion  of
Christ :  ^  "  Well  I  know,"  he  says,  "  that  the  Church
has  been  many  a  day  in  growing,  and  some  call  it  not
Christ's  Church,  but  the  church  of  wicked  spirits.  And
man  may  not  better  know  Anti-Christ's  clerk  than  by
this,  that  he  loveth  this  church  and  hateth  the  Church
of  Christ."  ^  He  had  already  in  his  early  theory  of
dominion  reached  the  logical  conclusion  that  Christ  is
the  Head  of  all  dominion,  but  by  the  late  seventies
he  had  risen,  under  the  influence  of  the  Scriptures,  to
a  more  spiritual  view  of  that  sole  Headship.  In  his
treatise  on  The  Four  Nezv  Sects,  he  says :  "  If  thou
say  that  Christ's  Church  must  have  a  Head,  sooth  it
is ;  for  Christ  is  Head,  and  must  be  here  with  His
Church  until  the  day  of  doom."*  With  the  insight
that  Christ  is  Head,  and  that  the  individual  person
has  direct  relations  with  Him  without  interventions,  it
is  not  strange  that  Wyclif  moves  on  to  the  conclusion
that  there  is  no  sharp  line  between  clergy  and  laity —
that  there  is  in  Christ's  Church  a  priesthood  of
believers,  though  he  never  uses  the  phrase.^  Though
he  does  not  actually  formulate  a  doctrine  of  inner
Light  as  a  universal  guide,  he  does  recognise  a  Light
which  belongs  to  man  as  man — a  fiatural  Light  he  calls
it,  though  Wyclif  uses  "  natural "  to  mean  i^iherently
bound  up  with  man's  relation  to  God.  This  Light,  he
holds,  has  been  weakened  by  the   Fall,  but  it  is  not  lost,

^  See  Lechler,  p.  323  ;  and  Trevelyan,  pp.  179-80.

2  English  Works  of  Wyclif,  p.  467.

^  Select  English  Works  of  Wyclif,  iii.  p.  243.

*  See  Lechler,  pp.  305-308.


352  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

nor  is  it  opposed  to  the  special  light  of  Grace.  It  is
simply  imperfect,  and  needs  the  assistance  of  revealed
knowledge.-^

The  directness  of  Divine  teaching  to  the  individual
soul  is  emphasized  in  one  of  his  late  tracts.^  This
tract  was  written  to  exalt  the  Bible  as  the  ultimate
authority  in  matters  of  religion,  and  to  show  that  the
Church  which  has  set  up  its  traditions  and  its  authority
in  the  place  of  Scripture  is  Anti-Christ,  but  there  are
passages  in  this  tract  which  acknowledge  an  inivard
teaching  also  :  "  God,"  he  says  "  is  our  best  Master,  and
ready  to  teach  true  men  all  things  profitable  and  needful
for  their  souls."  Again,  in  the  same  tract :  "  Christian
men  take  their  faith  of  God  by  His  gracious  gift,  when
He  giveth  to  them  knowledge  and  understanding  of
truths  needful  to  save  men's  souls  by  Grace,  to  assent  in
their  hearts  to  such  truths.  And  this  men  call  faith  ;  and
of  this  faith  Christian  men  are  more  certain  than  any
man  is  of  mere  outward  things  by  bodily  wit."

The  Trialogus,  in  which  he  brings  together  his
religious  and  philosophical  views  in  systematic  form,
is  apparently  developed  from  his  University  lectures  ^ ;
and  from  it  we  can  see  what  he  was  teaching  his
students  in  these  eventful  years.  One  can  here  see
the  bold  mind  of  the  master  moving  on  irresistibly
toward  a  religion  of  the  Spirit,  which  will  in  time
burst  the  bondage  and  restraint  of  the  ancient  system.
He  scores  prelates  who  know  how  to  extort  money  for
sins,  but  know  not  how  to  cleanse  a  man  from  them  ;
who  "  babble "  of  the  distinction  between  mortal  and
venial  sins  in  order  to  make  merchandise  of  pardons  ;
and  who  "  chatter  of  Grace  as  though  it  were  something
to  be  bought  and  sold  like  an  ox  or  an  ass."  Then,
with  the  swing  of  his  intense  moral  nature,  he  smites  this
heresy  in  morals,  with  the  announcement  that  morality
is  grounded  in  the  very  nature  of  things,  is  immutable
and  eternal — is  deeper  than  and  anterior  to  even  the  will

^  This  is  treated  in  the  Trialogus,  I.  chap,  vi,

2  How  Anti-Christ  and  his  Clerks  travail  to  destroy  Holy  Writ,  etc.

^  Vaughan's  John  de  Wycliffe — a  Monograph,  pp.   142-43.


XV  THE  PRE-REFORMATION  IN  ENGLAND    353

of  God,  for  God  wills  the  right  because  it  is  right,  there-
fore indulgences  and  pardons  are  but  stupid  and
unavailing  jugglery.  On  the  same  ground  he  struck  at
saint-worship,  and  the  superstition  that  God  could  be  won
over  by  a  multitude  of  intercessors.  "  The  apostles,
without  any  saint's  day,  loved  Jesus  Christ  more  than  we
do,"  is  his  significant  comment,  as  usual  putting  the
conditions  of  the  heart  above  the  mummery  of  the  lips.
His  test  of  any  rite  or  service  in  the  Church  is  the  way
in  which  it  ministers  to  real  devotion  of  the  heart,  well
expressed  in  the  saying  :  "  As  oft  as  the  song  delighteth
me  more  than  what  is  songen,  so  oft  I  acknowledge  that
I  trespass  grievously."

About  1380  he  moved  on  to  attack  the  very  citadel
of  medieval  Christianity — the  doctrine  of  Transubstan-
tiation  itself  In  words  as  unambiguous  as  the  multi-
plication table,  he  says  :  "  I  maintain  that  among  all  the
heresies  which  have  ever  appeared  in  the  Church,  there
was  never  one  which  was  more  cunningly  smuggled  in  by
hypocrites  than  this,  or  which  in  more  ways  deceives  the
people  ;  for  it  plunders  them,  leads  them  astray  into
idolatry,  and  denies  the  teaching  of  Scripture."  ^

He  indicates  that  he  was  led  on  metaphysical
grounds  to  disbelieve  that  the  bread  and  wine  became
actual  body  and  blood  of  Christ,  and  with  his  scholastic
bent  of  mind  this  is  quite  natural ;  but  he  had  already
arrived,  along  distinctly  religious  lines,  to  a  type  of
Christianity  for  which  the  miracle  of  the  Mass,  even  if
it  were  real,  was  useless  and  meaningless.  He  came  to
realize  that  the  miraculous  eucharist  was  the  foundation
stone  of  a  false  priesthood,  and  it  was  easy  and  natural
for  him  to  conclude  that  it  had  been  invented  for  material
purposes,  and  that  its  celebration  was  idolatry.  But
whatever  Wyclif  thought  about  it,  the  Church  of  his
day  considered  Transubstantiation  essential  to  its  very
existence,  and  in  attacking  this  doctrine,  and  in  pointing
out  another  road  to  salvation,  he  was  calling  down  upon
himself  all   the  bottles  of  wrath  which  the  visible  Church

1   Trialogus,  IV.  chap.  ii.

2  A


354  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

had  in  its  keeping.  He  was  now  burning  every  bridge
behind  him  and  venturing  his  life  and  all  on  his  soul's
insight.  He  was  challenging  the  very  supremacy  of  the
Church,  in  behalf  of  man's  direct  approach  to  God.

Wyclif  had  already  come  into  collision  with  the
hierarchy.  In  1377  he  was  summoned  before  the
Convocation  of  Canterbury  at  St.  Paul's,  but  he  had
behind  him  the  support  of  John  of  Gaunt  and  Lord
Henry  Percy  and  the  people  of  London.  The  same
year  the  Pope,  Gregory  XL,  issued  five  Bulls  against
Wyclif,  reciting  his  errors  in  nineteen  articles  of  accusa-
tion. More  than  a  year,  however,  passed  before  he
was  finally  summoned  by  the  Archbishop  at  Lambeth  to
answer  the  charges.  Here  again  he  had  the  people  with
him  and  the  powerful  influence  of  the  royal  family,  so
that  once  more  his  enemies  stumbled  and  fell.  Mean-
time the  "  great  schism  "  arose,  for  a  time  paralysing  the
papal  arm,  and  at  the  same  time  developing  into  sudden
maturity  Wyclif 's  anti-papal  views.  But  now,  in  1381,
when  Wyclif  revealed  the  startling  extent  to  which  he
was  ready  to  change  the  religious  beliefs  of  the  nation,
the  situation  was  quite  altered.  The  peasant  rising  had
produced  a  great  conservative  reaction.  An  effort  was
made  to  hold  Wyclif  responsible  for  the  extreme
socialistic  views  of  the  leaders.-^  Then,  by  the  murder
of  Archbishop  Sudbury,  Bishop  Courtenay,  Wyclifs  great
enemy,  the  stern  foe  of  heresy,  had  become  Primate.
The  Court  and  the  nobles,  who  in  the  period  of  the
political  attack  on  Church  privileges  had  been  on
Wyclifs  side,  were  shocked  at  his  doctrinal  heresies,  and
John  of  Gaunt  hastened  to  counsel  him  against  the
dangerous  course  he  was  taking.  But  Wyclif  was  a
prophet,  and  not  a  politician,  and  the  compromiser's
words  had  no  effect  upon  him.  Early  in  1382  a
Council  at  Blackfriars'  Convent,  in  London,  condemned
a  long  list  of  Wyclifite  heresies,  and  for  the  first  time
dealt   with   the   Lollard    preachers.       While   the   Council

1  John  Ball,  in  his  "confession,"  declared  that  he  had  learned  his  popular
doctrines  from  Wyclif,  but  this  testimony  is  discredited  by  facts.  John  Ball  was
excommunicated  for  his  views  as  early  as  1366.


XV   THE  PRE-REFORMATION  IN  ENGLAND    355

was  coming  to  its  decisions,  a  terrible  earthquake  shook
the  building  and  struck  panic  into  the  hearts  of  all
present  except  the  redoubtable  Archbishop  Courtenay.
Wyclif's  friends  seized  on  the  omen  and  made  much
of  it,  but  Courtenay  moved  on  to  strike  a  powerful  blow
at  the  centre  of  VVyclifs  powder.  He  determined  to  drive
him  from  Oxford.  It  was  no  light  task,  for  Wyclif  was
the  greatest  figure  in  the  University,  and  Oxford  was
very  jealous  of  its  liberty  of  thought  and  freedom  of
speech ;  but  the  union  of  the  ecclesiastical  and  royal
forces,  with  the  far-reaching  influence  of  the  friars,  formed
too  powerful  a  combination  to  be  resisted,  and  in  the
summer  of  1382  Oxford  was  closed  for  ever  to  Wyclif.
With  this  loss  of  intellectual  freedom,  the  University  lost
also  its  intellectual  power  and  influence.

Wyclif  himself  was,  however,  wholly  unmoved  by
the  blow  which  fell  upon  him.  He  flung  himself  without
a  sigh  into  the  greater  work  which  was  already  opening
before  him — a  work  more  important  even  than  teaching
Oxford  scholars.  He  had  for  some  time  seen  the
necessity  of  teaching  the  truths  of  spiritual  religion  to  the
people  of  England,  and  to  this  task  he  now  devoted  all  his
powers.  He  withdrew  from  the  storm  centre,  and  settled
down  in  the  quiet  parish  of  Lutterworth,  which  had  been
his  living  since  1374,  and  with  almost  incredible  activity
set  himself  to  the  crowning  work  of  his  life — the
translation  of  the  Bible,  the  development  of  a  popular
evangelism,  and  the  writing  of  evangelical  sermons  and
tracts  for  the  people.^

It  has  been  generally  assumed  that  Wyclif  was
summoned  to  Rome  in  1384,  the  year  of  his  death,  and
that  in  a  bold  letter  he  declined,  saying  :  "  If  I  might  with
God's  will  travel  to  the  Pope,  I  would,  but  necessity  saith
the  contrary,  and  teacheth  me  to  obey  God  rather  than
men."  There  is  no  reliable  evidence  that  he  was  actually
summoned  ;  and  Wyclifs  famous  letter,  which  throughout
names  the  Pope  in  the  third  person,  was  probably  written

^  It  is  quite  probable  that  Wyclif  had  largely  withdrawn  from  his  University
work  of  his  own  accord,  at  least  a  year  before  the  King's  mandate  was  executed,
and  was  mainly  devoting  himself  to  his  work  for  the  English  people.


356  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

by  him  somewhat  in  the  form  of  a  popular  tract,  on
hearing  a  rumour  that  he  was  likely  to  be  summoned
before  the  Pope.  The  letter,  in  any  case,  lets  us  see  the
great  reformer's  latest  views  of  the  Pope  :  "  He  is  the
highest  vicar  of  Christ,  who  followeth  Christ  more  than
other  men  in  virtuous  living,  for  thus  the  Gospel  teacheth.
...  I  believe  that  no  man  should  follow  the  Pope,  no,
nor  any  saint  that  is  now  in  heaven,  except  inasmuch  as
he  shall  follow  Christ."

At  the  time  of  his  death,  in  1384,  WycHf  had  come
up  to  a  very  simple  and  untrammelled  type  of  Christianity.
It  consisted  of  following  Christ  according  to  the  Gospel^  of
living  by  "the  law  of  God,"  i.e.  the  Scriptural  revelation
of  truth.  It  put  no  superstitious  emphasis  on  sacra-
ments, holding  that  the  benefit  from  them  was  wholly
subjective  and  dependent  on  the  spiritual  attitude  of
the  recipient ;  and  none  on  Church  systems — "  any  man
following  Christ  is  as  much  Christ's  vicar  as  any  other
man.

Wyclif  put  a  value  on  the  Bible  wholly  novel  to  medieval
Christianity.  It  was  for  him,  as  it  was  not  for  other
Christians  of  his  time,  the  supreme  and  sufficient  rule  of
life,  and  to  him  belongs  the  honour  of  having  translated  it
into  English  speech.  This  honour  was  unchallenged
until  recent  times,  but  through  the  publication  of  a
critical  essay  by  Dr.  Gasquet,  in  the  July  number  of  the
Dublin  Review^  1895,  maintaining  that  the  so-called
Wyclif  Bible  is  neither  Wyclif's  nor  even  Wyclifite,  the
whole  question  was  thrown  open.^  Dr.  Gasquet  has,
however,  not  made  out  his  case.      Great  Wyclif  scholars

1  The  simplicity  of  Vl^yclif  s  final  view  of  Christianity  is  well  seen  in  the  Opus
Evangelicum,  edited  by  Loserth,  London,  1895.  He  put  little  value  on  music
and  on  church  architecture,  and  preferred  the  simple  appeal  of  truth  to  the  soul.
Vaughan,  in  his  summary  of  Wyclif s  opinions  {Afonograph,  chap.  xii. ),  says:
"Concerning  the  sacraments,  he  retained  the  ordinance  of  baptism,  but  without
receiving  the  doctrine  of  the  Church  in  respect  to  it  as  being  necessary  in  all
cases  to  salvation.  In  like  manner  he  retained  the  ordinance  of  the  Lord's
Supper,  but  without  the  doctrine  of  Transubstantiation,  ,  .  .  according  to  his
general  language  the  value  of  a  sacrament  must  depend  wholly  on  the  mind  of
the  recipient,  not  at  all  on  the  external  act  performed  by  the  priest  ;  and  contrary
to  the  received,  doctrine,  he  could  not  allow  that  infant  salvation  was  dependent
on  infant  baptism."

2  See  also  Dr.  Gasquet's  Old  English  Bibk,


XV   THE  PRE-REFORMATION  IN  ENGLAND    357

like  F.  D.  Matthew  ^  and  Vaughan,^  have  gathered  such
an  array  of  indirect  and  circumstantial  evidence  in  favour
of  the  Wyclif  claim,  that  it  still  holds  its  ground.  It
seems  probable  that  between  1381  and  1384,  Wyclif
with  a  band  of  efficient  helpers,  of  whom  Nicholas  of
Hereford  was  the  foremost,  turned  the  Vulgate  into
English,  Wyclif  doing  the  New  Testament  and  Hereford
doing  the  Old,  and  that  this  first  translation  was  revised
and  improved  under  the  direction  of  Wyclif's  friend  and
assistant  in  the  Lutterworth  parish,  John  Purvey,  whose
edition  was  probably  issued  four  or  five  years  after
Wyclif's  death.  There  is  one  famous  testimony  to  the
fact  that  it  was  Wyclif  who  gave  the  Bible  to  the  people,
and  that  his  work  was  regarded  in  high  places  as  a
mischievous  innovation  :

"Christ,"  says  Knighton  in  his  Chronicles,^  "delivered  His
Gospel  to  the  clergy  and  doctors  of  the  Church,  that  they  might
administer  to  the  laity  and  to  weaker  persons,  according  to  the
states  of  the  times,  and  the  wants  of  men.  But  this  master,  John
Wyclif,  translated  it  out  of  Latin  into  English,  and  thus  laid  it
out  more  open  to  the  laity  and  to  women  who  could  read,  than
it  had  formerly  been  to  the  most  learned  of  the  clergy,  even  to
those  of  them  who  had  the  best  understanding.  In  this  way
the  Gospel-pearl  is  cast  abroad  and  trodden  under  foot  of  swine,
and  that  which  was  before  precious  both  to  clergy  and  laity  is
rendered,  as  it  were,  the  common  jest  of  both.  The  jewel  of
the  Church  is  turned  into  the  sport  of  the  people,  and  what  had
hitherto  been  the  choice  gift  of  the  clergy  and  of  divines,  is
made  for  ever  common  to  the  laity."

The  other  great  practical  service  of  Wyclif's  later  life
was  his  preparation  and  organization  of  a  band  of  popular
preachers — "  evangelical  men  "  he  called  them — and  this
step,  like  that  of  the  translation,  is  extremely  important,
for  through  it  Wyclif  continued  to  influence  the  people  of
England  long  after  his  voice  was  hushed,  and  his  ashes
were  thrown  in  disgrace  into  the  tributary  to  the  Avon  ;
and   thus  his   positive  impact  on  the  nation  never  ceased

^  English  Historical  Review,  January  1895.

2  In  his  John  de  Wycliffe,  pp.  331-59.

'  Chronicon  HenHci  Knighton,  edited  by  J,  R.  Lumby,  vol.  ii.  pp.  it;i-52.


358  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

until  his  views  triumphed  in  the  Reformation  and  in  the
rise  of  the  Commonwealth  sects.

Unfortunately,  we  know  extremely  little  of  the  precise
part  which  WycHf  took  in  the  organization  of  this  popular
itinerant  ministry,  known  in  history  as  the  Lollard
movement.  The  word  "  Lollard  "  was  first  applied,  so
far  as  we  have  record,  to  these  itinerant  ministers  by  an
Oxford  opponent  of  Wyclif,  Henry  Crump,  in  1382.
But  the  word  Lollard,  as  a  religious  nickname,  had  been
in  use  on  the  continent  for  more  than  a  hundred  and  fifty
years.  Much  labour  has  been  bestowed  on  the  effort  to
trace  the  origin  of  the  word,  and  a  good  deal  of  ingenuity
has  been  shown.  The  most  probable  supposition  is  that
it  comes  from  Lollen^  to  mumble  or  babble.  It  was
usually  given  to  members  of  the  semi-monastic  orders
who  worked  among  the  people,  and  it  was  a  kind  of  fling
at  persons  who,  though  heretical,  made  pretensions  to
unusual  piety,  humility,  and  poverty.  It  was  often
applied  to  Beghards.^

It  is  evident  that  these  ititierant  preachers  must
already  have  become  numerous  in  England  by  the  year
1382,  for  they  not  only  received  a  name  of  reproach  at
Oxford,  but  they  also  were  made  a  distinct  object  of
attack,  under  the  name  of  "  unlicensed  priests,"  at  the
"  Earthquake  Council  "  of  that  year.^  It  is  certain  that
the  movement  to  establish  itinerant  preaching  was  already
well  under  way  before  this  date.  It  seems  likely,  from
contemporary  testimony,  that  Wyclif,  in  the  later  years  of
his    Oxford    life,   had    been    preparing   and   sending  out

1  The  name  Lollard  appears  for  the  first  time  in  the  Chronicles  of  Joannes
Hocsemius  in  1309  (see  Du  Cange,  Glossarimn,  vol.  v.  p.  138).  It  was  at  first
used  to  designate  associations  of  laymen  who  devoted  themselves  to  the  care  of
the  sick  and  insane  and  to  the  burial  of  the  dead,  and  it  has  been  suggested  that
the  name  was  derived  from  their  low,  soft  singing  of  funeral  chants  (see  Lea's
History  of  the  Inquisition,  vol.  ii.  p.  351).  They  were  also  called  Alexians  from
their  patron  St.  Alexis,  and  Cellites,  from  the  fact  that  they  lived  in  cells.  As
lay  Orders  developed  and  spread  this  name  took  on  a  wider  signification  and
became  a  general  term,  as  did  Beghai-d,  to  cover  the  members  of  lay  Orders,  and
was  used  in  official  circles  as  a  word  of  opprobrium.

^  ' '  Certain  unauthorised  itinerant  preachers  are  setting  forth  erroneous,  yea,
heretical,  assertions  in  public  sermons,  not  only  in  churches,  but  also  in  public
squares  and  other  profane  places"  (Mandate  of  Archbishop  to  the  Bishop  of
London,  May  1382).


XV   THE  PRE-REFORMATION  IN  ENGLAND    359

travelling  preachers,  and  he  seems  to  have  been  the  central
figure  of  a  group  of  men,  mostly  young,  who  were  devoted
to  the  proclamation  of  evangelical  religion  in  England.^
At  first  the  itinerant  ministers  were  "  priests "  and  men
of  good  learning  who  had  come  under  Wyclif  s  influence
at  Oxford,  but  after  the  eventful  years  of  1381-82  he
seems  to  have  made  no  distinction  between  priests  and
laymen,  and  he  no  longer  calls  the  itinerants  "  poor
priests,"  but  rather  "  apostolic  men "  or  "  evangelical
men,"  and  he  positively  insists  in  these  latter  years  of
his  life  that  the  Divine  call  and  commission  are  entirely
sufficient  for  ministering ;  that  zvhen  God  has  installed
a  minister  J  the  imposition  of  Bishop's  hands  is  of  no
consequence}

As  time  went  on  the  Lollard  missionaries  were  less
and  less  from  the  priestly  and  educated  classes.  There
was  nothing  to  gain  and  everything  to  lose  for  these
unauthorized  preachers.  Their  course  was  along  the  line
of  greatest  resistance,  and  not  many  rich,  not  many
learned,  not  many  with  great  names  were  ready  for  such
a  hazardous  calling.  Of  the  early  group  we  know  the
names  of  John  Ashton,  Nicholas  Hereford,  John  Purvey,
William  Swynderby,  John  Parker,  and  Walter  Brute.
Some  of  them  lacked  staying  power,  and  were  drawn
back  into  the  Church  again  as  the  stress  of  persecution
increased  and  the  dangers  of  independency  loomed  before
them.  In  fact,  the  early  Lollards  were  not  very  good
martyrs,  but  we  must  remember  that  the  spirit  of  martyr-
dom has  to  be  cultivated  ;  it  is  not  a  natural  tendency,
and  the  need  for  it  in  England  was  new.  There  came  in
time  a  race  of  Lollards  whose  faith  rose  to  the  sticking-
point,  and  whose  spirit  was  equal  to  the  fiery  test  to  which
it  was  put.^

1  See  testimony  of  William  Thorpe,  in  Acts  and  Monuments  of  John  Foxe.

2  See  Lechler,  p.  196.

^  It  must,  however,  be  admitted  that  the  whole  history  of  Lollardry  is  seriously
marred  with  "recantation."  Foxe  has  preserved  a  very  harrowing  record  of  a
"great  abjuration,"  near  the  end  of  the  fifteenth  century  in  the  parish  of
Amersham,  where  there  was  a  Lollard  "  conventicle  "  of  sixty  members  and  three
preachers.  William  Tylesworth,  one  of  the  preachers,  was  seized  and  carried  to
the  stake  for  burning.      The  members  of  his  flock  abjured  their  faith,  and  were


36o  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

A  decided  group-spirit  prevailed  among  these  preachers.
They  wore  a  common  garb — long  russet-coloured  gowns
with  deep  pockets  ;  they  had  a  similarity  of  manner  and
style  in  preaching  ;  they  dwelt  with  peculiar  fondness  on
"  God's  law,"  i.e.  Scripture,  as  the  basis  of  their  argument ;
they  were  uniformly  opposed  to  image-worship,  and  they
were  hostile  to  the  Mass;  they  abhorred,  like  the  Waldenses
whom  they  resemble  in  many  ways,  the  common  oaths  of
the  day.^  They  used  simple,  direct  language,  with  much
illustration ;  they  avoided  dogma  and  insisted  on  a
practical,  ethical  religion.  They  had  a  vigorous  way  of
dealing  with  the  evils  and  vices  of  "  official "  Christians,
and  they  indulged  in  biting  satire  on  the  followers  of
"  Anti-Christ."  They,  however,  were  the  bearers  of  a
positive  message — a  gospel,  with  many  real  apostolic  notes
in  it.  They  have  been  compared  to  Wesley's  itinerant
preachers,  but  a  nearer  parallel  is  found  in  the  itinerant
lay  ministry  of  Gerard  Groote,  whose  preaching  in  Holland
in  this  same  century  was  extremely  like  that  of  Wyclif's
"  evangelical  men."

They  were  from  the  first  popular,  and  had  the  common
people  with  them.  They  also  found  favour  at  the  first
with  the  knights  and  wealthy  citizens,  who  welcomed  and
supported  the  poor  preachers  on  their  rounds  ;  and  in  the
early  stages  of  the  movement  the  House  of  Commons  was
plainly  in  sympathy  with  their  efforts.  By  the  end  of
Richard's  reign  Lollardry  had  become  a  powerful  influence
in  London,  in  Leicestershire  and  Nottinghamshire,  in
Sussex,  Berks,  and  Wilts,  in  Herefordshire  and  Gloucester-
shire.^ The  people  in  all  these  sections  of  England  were
growing  familiar  with  attacks  on  the  entire  medieval
'system,  were  becoming  used  to  lay-preaching  and  the
language  of  Scripture,  and  their  ears  had  grown  accustomed

ordered  to  "bear  the  fagots  for  his  burning,"  which  they  did,  and  his  own
daughter,  herself  a  Lollard,  was  compelled  to  set  fire  to  the  wood  !  It  is  a
picture  of  awful  barbarity,  and  unrelieved  by  any  touch  of  heroism  on  the  part  of
the  flock.  All  three  of  the  preachers,  however,  died  for  their  faith  (Foxe,  folio
edition,  vol.  i.  pp.  Zyj  seq.).

^  "William  Thorpe,  who  bore  a  good  testimony  to  the  Lollard  faith  before
Archbishop  Arundel,  in  1407,  declared  that  "  he  preached  that  it  was  not  lawfu!
to  swear  by  creatures  and  so  not  by  a  booke"  (Foxe's  Acts  and  Momiments).

2  Trevelyan,  p.  331


XV   THE  PRE-REFORMATION  IN  ENGLAND    361

to  the   distinction   between   "  Christ's   Sect "   and   "  Anti-
Christ's  Church."

Foxe  has  preserved  a  remarkable  document  from  the
early  period  of  Lollardry,  which  vividly  shows  the  character
of  the  movement.  It  is  written  in  the  spirit,  though  not
in  the  style,  of  Piers  Plowmaiz^  and  is  called  the  Plowman's
Prayer  and  Complaint}  The  writer,  a  sort  of  fifteenth-
century  Quaker,  is  full  of  passion  for  the  spiritual  rights
of  man,  is  opposed  to  calling  a  "  house "  a  church,  and
prefers  good  deeds  to  singing  psalms.

"  Lord  God,"  he  cries  out,  "  men  raaketh  stonen  houses,  full
of  glasen  windows  and  clepeth  thilke  thine  houses  and  churches.
And  they  setten  in  these  houses  mawmets  (idols)  of  stocks  and
stones,  and  before  them  they  knelen  and  maken  their  prayers,
and  all  this  they  say  is  thy  worship  and  a  great  herying  (worship)
to  thee.  But  Lord  God,  what  herying  is  it  to  build  thee  a  church
of  dead  stones  and  robben  thy  quick  churches  (living  men)  of
their  bodilich  lives  ?  Lord,  I  see  thy  image  gone  in  cold  and  in
hete,  in  clothes  all  tobroken,  without  shone  and  hosen,  anhungered
and  athurst.  .  .  .  Lord^  we  lewd  {unlearned)  men  have  a  beliej
that  thy  goodness  is  endless^  and  if  we  keepen  thy  hests  then  ben  we
thy  true  servants.  Men  singen  thy  words  and  that  singing  they
clepen  thy  service,  but  Lord,  I  trow  that  the  best  singer  herieth
(worshippeth)  thee  not  most."

In  1 40 1,  the  second  year  of  Henry  IV.'s  reign,  the
famous  statute  "  for  burning  heretics "  was  passed  by
Parliament,  and  William  Sawtrey  (or  Sautre  or  Chatrys)
was  its  first  victim.  He  had  once  recanted,  as  the  fashion
then  was,  but  in  140 1  he  kept  the  faith,  and  was  burned
for  teaching  that  "  after  consecration  by  the  priest,  the
bread  remaineth  true  material  bread."  The  next  victim,
in  14 10,  was  John  Badby,  a  tailor,  of  Evesham — a  lay-
preacher — who  declared  that  "  Christ  sitting  at  supper
could  not  give  His  disciples  His  living  {i.e.  literal)  body  to
eat."  He  stood  by  his  faith,  and  went  to  the  stake.  The
Prince  of  Wales,  afterwards  Henry  V.,  was  present  at
Smithfield  when  Badby  was  burned,  and  vainly  offered
him  life  on  the  condition  of  his  recanting.

*  Foxe,  vol.  i.  pp.  453  seq.


362  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

"  It  was  a  remarkable  and  significant  scene.  The  hope  and
pride  of  England  had  come  in  person  to  implore  a  tailor  to  accept
life,  but  he  had  come  in  vain.  At  last  the  pile  was  lit.  The
man's  agonies  and  contortions  were  taken  for  signals  of  submis-
sion. Henry  ordered  the  faggots  to  be  pulled  away,  and  renewed
his  offers  and  entreaties,  but  again  to  no  effect.  The  flames  were
lit  a  second  time,  and  the  body  disappeared  in  them  for  ever."  ^

The  next  great  event  in  the  history  of  Lollardry  is  the
hunting  down  of  Sir  John  Oldcastle,  Lord  Cobham.  He
had  been  a  friend  of  the  young  King,  Henry  V.,  had
rendered  on  the  Welsh  border  great  service  to  the  throne,
but  he  had  become  thoroughly  imbued  with  the  new  form
of  religion,  and  was  the  powerful  protector  of  Lollard
preachers.  He  was  brought  before  "  the  spiritual  court "
by  the  intervention  of  the  King,  and  here  he  made  a  clear
confession  of  faith  in  the  Lollard  tenets.  He  was  con-
demned as  a  heretic,  and  given  over  to  the  secular  arm
to  be  burned.  He  made,  however,  his  escape  from  the
Tower,  and  his  Lollard  friends  resolved  to  save  him.  An
insurrection  was  in  all  probability  planned.  At  any  rate
it  was  suspected,  and  the  Lollard  meeting-place  in  London
was  surrounded  by  the  King's  troops,  and  many  Lollards
were  seized  and  hung  on  the  spot.  Sir  John  Oldcastle
escaped,  and  evaded  capture  for  three  years.  At  length
he  was  caught,  and  executed  with  all  the  barbarity  known
to  the  period.  He  died  like  a  hero  and  a  saint,  asking
God  to  forgive  his  enemies,  saying  that  to  God  only  would
he  confess  his  sins  and  pray  for  forgiveness.  As  the
crackling  flames  drowned  his  words  of  praise  the  people
wept  and  prayed  with  him,  and  counted  him  a  martyr  to
the  truth.

From  this  time  on  Lollardry  had  scant  patronage  from
the  knights  and  gentry.  It  became  the  religion  of  the
middle  or  lower  classes,  and  its  professors  were  shown  no
mercy.  There  were,  however,  in  spite  of  the  danger,
many  large  congregations  gathered  by  itinerant  preachers

1  Trevelyan,  p.  335.  There  is  a  book  in  the  muniment  room  of  Colchester
Castle  which  contains  the  account  of  the  burning,  "in  the  flame  of  fire,"  as  a
"  manifest  example  to  other  Christians,"  of  a  tailor  named  William  Chivelyng,
who  was  a  Lollard  leader  in  the  city  of  Colchester.      He  was  burned  in  1428.


XV   THE  PRE-REFORMATION  IN  ENGLAND    363

down  to  the  middle  of  the  fifteenth  century.  One
preacher,  going  to  the  stake,  told  his  judges  that  he  had
converted  not  less  than  seven  hundred  persons  during  his
life.  They  had  their  own  schools,  met  to  hear  the  Bible
read,  discarded  the  superstitious  practices  of  the  clergy,
and  appear  to  have  been  called  by  their  opponents  '*  the
lay-party."  ^

During  the  second  half  of  the  fifteenth  century  this
unofficial  lay-religion  seemed  to  be  a  losing  cause,  and
likely  to  be  stamped  out.  It  was,  however,  moving  on
like  a  subterranean  stream,  and  filtering  down  into  the
life  of  the  people,  and  in  the  reign  of  Henry  VII.  there
came,  after  a  long  incubation,  a  deep  revival  of  Lollardry.^
There  were,  as  formerly,  groups  or  congregations  of  them,
with  blacksmiths  and  tailors  for  preachers,  who  believed
themselves  "  the  only  true  priests."  Their  schools  had
been  broken  up,  their  founder's  writings  destroyed,^  their
Bibles  burnt,  and  yet  they  flourished  and  grew.  Foxe
gives  us  a  fine  picture  of  their  zeal  :

"  Although  public  authority  failed  then  to  maintain  the  open
preaching  of  the  Gospel,  yet  the  secret  multitude  of  professors
was  not  much  unequal ;  certes  the  fervent  zeal  of  those  Christian
days  seemed  much  superior  to  these  our  days  and  times,  as
manifestly  may  appear  by  their  sitting  up  all  night  in  reading  and
hearing ;  also  by  their  expenses  and  charges  in  buying  of  books
in  English,  of  which  some  gave  five  marks  (about  £,^,0  of  present
value),  some  more,  some  less,  for  a  book.  Some  gave  a  load  of
hay  for  a  few  chapters  of  St.  James  or  of  St.  Paul  in  English."  *

This  zeal  for  the  truth,  this  eagerness  to  barter  hay  for
Scripture,  continued  on  down  into  the  reign  of  Henry  VIII.
There  were  '*  known  men,"  as  the  Lollards  came  to  be
called,  i.e.  "  Known  of  God,"  at  work  in  a  silent  way  in
scores  of  English  parishes  on  the  day  that  Luther  rode
into  Worms,  and  there  was  an  unbroken  succession  of
truth-bearers  between  the  great  "  Evangelical  doctor "  of

1  See  Bishop  Pecock's  The  Repressor  of  Overmuch  Blaming  of  the  Clergy.

2  Trevelyan,  p.  347,

^  They  seem  to  have  preserved  only  Wyclif  s  Tract,  called  the  Wicket,  written
against  Transubstantiation.

*  Quoted  from  Summers,  Our  Lollard  Ancestors,  p.  96.


364  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

Oxford  and  the  Protestants  of  the  Reformation  period.*
Lollardry  was  never  extinguished  ;  it  merged  into  the  great
spiritual  revival  which  remade  the  modern  world.  "  Once
the  party  of  the  Wyclifites  was  overcome  by  the  power  of
the  Kings,"  wrote  Erasmus  to  Pope  Adrian  VI.,  "  but  it
was  only  overcome,  not  extinguished."  The  Bishop  of
London  was  right  in  the  opinion  which  he  expressed  to
Erasmus,  that  the  doctrines  of  Luther  were  no  novelty  in
England.

There  came  to  light  in  1530  a  number  of  pieces  of
anti-Church  literature  which  gathered  up  in  a  popular  way
the  message  of  the  Lollard  preachers.  These  tracts  in  the
reports  of  the  Ecclesiastical  Commission  bear  the  titles :
"  The  Wicked  Mammon,"  "  The  Obedience  of  a  Cristen
Man,"  "  The  Revelation  of  Anti-Crist,"  and  most  important
of  all,  the  "  Sum  of  Scriptures."  This  latter  tract  bears
strong  marks  of  Anabaptist  influence,  though  it  may  be
only  the  inward  development  of  Lollardry.  The  following
passages  give  the  character  of  the  message  embodied  in
these  tracts  : —

"  There  is  noo  warke  better  than  another  to  please  God — to
wash  dishes  and  to  preche  is  all  oon  as  towching  the  dede  to
please  God."

"  Cereymonyes  of  the  Churche  hath  brought  the  worlde  from
God."  2

1  Foxe  {Acts  and  Monuments,  ii.  p.  29)  gives  us  a  graphic  picture  of  Lollard
activity  in  England,  the  very  year  Luther  was  nailing  his  theses  on  the  door  of
the  Wittenberg  church  :  "  In  the  deposition  of  one  Thomas  Risby,  weaver,  of
Stratford  Langthorne,  against  the  martyr  Thomas  Man,  it  appeareth  by  the
Register,  that  he  had  been  in  divers  places  and  countries  in  England,  and  had
instructed  very  many,  as  at  Amersham,  at  London,  at  Billerica,  at  Chelmsford,
at  Stratford  Langthorne,  at  Uxbridge,  at  Burnham,  at  Henley-upon-Thames,  in
SufFolke  and  Northfolke,  at  Newbery  and  divers  places  more :  where  he  himself
testifieth,  that  as  he  went  westward,  he  found  a  great  company  of  well-disposed
persons,  being  of  the  same  judgment  touching  the  Sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper
that  he  was  of,  and  especially  at  Newbery,  where  was  (as  he  confessed)  a  glorious
and  sweet  society  of  faithful  favourers,  who  had  continued  the  space  of  fifteen
years  together,  till  at  last,  by  a  certain  lewd  person,  whom  they  trusted  and  made
of  their  counsel,  they  were  bewrayed  ;  and  then  many  of  them,  to  the  number  of
six  or  seven  score,  abjured,  and  three  or  four  of  them  were  burnt.  From  thence
he  came  then  (as  he  confessed)  to  the  Forest  of  Windsor,  where  he,  heaiing  of
the  brethren  that  were  at  Amersham,  removed  thither,  where  he  found  a  godly
and  a  great  company,  which  had  continued  in  that  doctrine  and  teaching  twenty-
three  years."

^  The  book  of  "  The  Wicked  Mammon,"  Wilkins'  Concilia  Magnae  Brilavnia^
et  Hibernlae,  vol.  iii.  p.  728.


XV   THE  PRE-REFORMATION  IN  ENGLAND    365

"  Every  man  is  a  priest,  and  we  nede  noon  other  priest  to  be
a  meane  [mediator]."  ^

"  The  Temple  of  God  is  not  stones  and  wood,  neither  in  the
time  of  Pawle  was  there  any  house  that  was  called  the  temple  of
God."  -^

"  We  think  that  when  we  beleve  that  God  is  God  and  cati
[know]  owr  crede,  that  we  have  the  faithe  that  a  cristen  man  is
bound  to  have,  but  so  doth  the  divill  beheve."^

"  Every  man  doth  as  much  as  he  believeth."  ^

There  is  a  very  strong  social  note  in  the  Sum  of
Scriptures,  and  it  carries  on  the  best  social  spirit  of  the
Lollards  :

"  He  that  is  rich  and  liveth  of  his  rents,  may  not  use  or  spend
his  goodes  as  he  wille,  but  thy  goodes  belong  as  well  unto  the
poor  as  to  thee."  ^

"  A  man  shall  be  reproved  for  noo  other  thinge  at  the  day  of
judgment  but  for  forgetting  the  poor."^

"  Men  of  warre  are  not  allowed  by  the  Gospel,  the  Gospel
knoweth  peace  and  not  warre."  '^

Simultaneously  with  the  growth  of  Reformation  prin-
ciples in  England,  advocates  of  Anabaptism  began  to
appear,  and  this  "heresy,"  feared  everywhere  by  those
who  claimed  the  right  to  be  vicars  to  the  absent  Christ,
began  to  spread.^  It  is  an  interesting  fact  that  it  found
its  strongholds  in  the  very  districts  where  Lollardry  had
most  flourished  and  where  the  people  were  familiar  with
anti-clerical  sentiment.  "  God  made  not  priests,"  the
Lollards  had  taught,  "  for  in  Christ's  time  there  were  no
priests  " — "  what  need  to  go  to  the  feet  {i,e.  to  priest  or
to  saints),  when  we  may  go  to  the  Head  ?  "  The  soil  in
which  such  teaching  was  sown  was  just  the  soil  for  Ana-
baptism  to  grow  in,  and  we  shall  see  in  a  later  chapter
how  close  the  historical  bond  was.

Lollards    and    Quakers,   too,   had    much    in    common.

^  The  book  of  "  Obedience  of  a  Cristen  Man,"  Cone.  Mag.  Brit.  p.  728.
2  "The  Revelation  of  Anti-Crist,"  Cone.  Mag.  Brit.  p.  730.
2  "Sum  of  Scriptures,"  Cone.  Mag.  Brit.  p.  731.

^   "  Sum  of  Scriptures. "  "  Cone.  Mag.  Brit.  p.  732.

^  Ibid.  p.  732.  7  Ibid.  p.  732.

^  The  earliest  record  of  Anabaptists  in  England  is  in  1534.      Mentioned  in
Cone.  Mag.  Brit.  pp.  776-79.


366  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

The  very  founders  of  Quakerism  were  "  of  the  stock  of
martyrs  " — martyrs  directly  or  indirectly  for  their  faith  in
Lollard  views.  But  the  real  connection  is  still  closer  than
that.  George  Fox  and  his  followers,  consciously  or  uncon-
sciously, were  the  genuine  apostolic  successors  of  Wyclif's
"  Evangelical  men."  They  proclaimed  anew  to  their  age
truths  which  England  had  already  heard  ;  that  "  God
made  not  priests "  ;  that  man^  and  not  "  stonen  houses
with  glasen  windows,"  is  the  true  divine  temple  ;  that  the
simplest  person  may  go  directly  to  the  Head  of  the
Church.  The  Lollard  had  already  borne  a  valiant  testi-
mony to  simple  garb  and  plain  speech  ;  he  had  given  his
body  to  be  burned  in  his  protest  against  idolatrous  sacra-
ments ;  he  had  refused  to  "  swear  on  a  book,"  and  he  had
called  men  away  from  "  Anti-Christ "  to  simple  member-
ship in  the  "  Sect  of  Christ."

"The  English  mind,"  writes  Trevelyan,  "moves  slowly,  cau-
tiously and  often  silently.  The  movement  in  regard  to  forms  of
religion  began  with  Wyclif,  if  it  began  no  earlier,  and  reached  its
full  height  perhaps  not  a  hundred  years  ago.  England  was  not
converted  from  Germany ;  she  changed  her  own  opinion,  and
had  begun  that  process  long  before  Wittenberg  or  Geneva  became
famous  in  theological  controversy.  If  we  take  a  general  view  of
our  religious  history,  we  must  hold  that  English  Protestantism
had  a  gradual  and  mainly  regular  growth."

"  Apart  from  questions  of  doctrine  and  ritual,  the  importance
of  Lollardry  was  great  in  formulating  the  rebellion  of  the  laity.
That  rebellion  was  directed  against  the  attempt  of  the  Church  to
keep  men  in  subordination  to  the  priest,  after  the  time  when  higher
developments  had  become  possible.  Lollardry  offered  a  new
religious  basis  to  all.  In  the  reign  of  Richard  the  Second,  many
laymen  had  thought  the  existing  power,  property,  and  privileges
of  the  Church  to  be  an  evil,  but  a  sacred  evil.  The  Lollards
asserted  that  ecclesiastical  evils  were  not  necessarily  sacred.
The  triumph  of  that  view  was  the  downfall  of  the  governing
Church."  1

Who  can  measure  the  reach  of  the  spiritual  influence
of  a  great  man's  life  and  teaching !  Wyclif  dies  ;  his
dust  is  thrown   into  the   river,  and   a  college  is  built  at

*  Trevelyan,  pp.  351-52.


XV   THE  PRE-REFORMATION  IN  ENGLAND    367

Oxford  to  counteract  his  teaching.  Statutes  are  passed
to  annihilate  his  followers,  and  all  the  might  of  the  visible
Church  gathers  itself  to  extinguish  the  flame  which  he
had  kindled.  We  have  seen  that  it  never  was  extin-
guished in  England.  But  the  kindling  power  of  this
Wyclif  flame  gets  its  most  remarkable  revelation  in
Bohemia.  The  story  has  all  the  surprises  of  a  romance.
Bohemian  students  came  in  large  numbers  to  Oxford  in
Wyclif  s  time  and  later,  and  they  imbibed  the  ideas  of  the
great  Oxford  teacher,  and  patiently  copied  his  manuscripts
and  took  them  back  to  their  native  land.  Richard's  Queen,
Anne  of  Bohemia,  became  affected  with  Wyclif's  views,
and  through  her  and  her  court  circle  the  influence  passed
over  to  her  home  country.  The  main  work,  however,  was
accomplished  through  the  scholars  and  the  manuscripts.
John  Hus,  in  his  own  University  of  Prague,  made  copies
of  Wyclif's  philosophical  writings,  and  his  friend  Jerome,
about  the  same  time,  came  back  from  Oxford  with  the
theological  writings.  It  was  like  a  spark  in  tinder,  and
in  a  brief  time  Wyclifite  ideas  had  permeated  Bohemia.
Hus,  from  the  pulpit  of  the  Bethlehem  Chapel,  became
a  powerful  preacher  of  righteousness,  and  a  fearless
opponent  of  the  evils  and  corruptions  of  the  Church,  with
almost  the  whole  nation  for  his  audience.  Once  more
the  visible  Church  girded  itself  to  put  out  the  fire  which
had  leaped  from  England  to  Bohemia.  The  Council
which  decreed  that  Wyclif's  bones  should  be  burned  at
Lutterworth,  also  decreed  that  Hus  should  die  at  the
stake  in  Constance.  "  The  chief  aim  of  my  preaching,"
said  the  martyr,  as  the  faggots  were  heaped  about  him,
"  has  been  to  teach  men  repentance  and  the  forgiveness
of  sins  according  to  the  truth  of  the  Gospel  of  Jesus
Christ,  therefore  I  am  prepared  to  die  with  a  joyful
soul."

The  spiritual  flame  was  not  extinguished  by  the
decrees  of  Constance ;  it  spread  more  rapidly  than  ever,
and  when  Luther  was  ready  to  speak,  he  found  Europe
ready  to  hear  him  ;  and  from  the  continent,  the  truth,
which  Wyclif  had  done  so  much  to  spread,  came  back


368  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap,  xv

to  swell  the  native  flame  which  had  never  ceased  to  burn.
"It  is  no  pernicious  novelty!'  declared  the  Bishop  of
London,  when  the  Lutheran  teachings  began  to  disturb
his  peace ;  "  it  is  only  new  arms  being  added  to  the
great  band  of  Wyclifite  heretics  !  "


CHAPTER    XVI

THE   ANABAPTISTS


Judged  by  the  reception  it  met  at  the  hands  of  those  in
power,  both  in  Church  and  State,  equally  in  Roman
Catholic  and  in  Protestant  countries,  the  Anabaptist
movement  was  one  of  the  most  tragic  in  the  history  of
Christianity  ;  but,  judged  by  the  principles  which  were
put  into  play  by  the  men  who  bore  this  reproachful  nick-
name, it  must  be  pronounced  one  of  the  most  momentous
and  significant  undertakings  in  man's  eventful  religious
struggle  after  the  truth.  It  gathered  up  the  gains  of
earlier  movements,  and  it  is  the  spiritual  soil  out  of  which
all  nonconformist  sects  have  sprung,  and  it  is  the  first
plain  announcement  in  modern  history  of  a  programme
for  a  new  type  of  Christian  society  which  the  modern
world,  especially  in  America  and  England,  has  been  slowly
realizing — an  absolutely  free  and  independent  religious
society,  and  a  State  in  which  every  man  counts  as  a
man,  and  has  his  share  in  shaping  both  Church  and  State.
This  distinct  movement  toward  a  radically  new  type
of  religious  society — later  named  Anabaptism  ^ — was
launched  at  least  as  early  as  was  the  movement  to  reform
the  old  Church.  In  fact,  it  is  practically  certain  that
"  the  Spiritual  groups,"  which  I  have  been  studying  in
these    chapters,    had    an    unbroken    existence ;    that   the

^  The  term  is  an  opprobrious  nickname  given  by  the  enemies  of  the  movement.
It  means  re-baptism,  but,  as  we  shall  see,  questions  of  baptism  were  by  no  means
the  vital  questions  in  the  movement.

369  Z  B


370  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

bands  of  "  Brethren  "  who  quietly  gathered  in  homes  and
in  out-of-the-way  meeting-places  to  foster  personal  religion
and  to  express  their  disapproval  of  the  "system,"  had  a
continuous  descent  down  to  the  times  of  the  Reformation,
and  that  they  were  gathered  up  by  the  glowing  leaders  of
the  sixteenth  century  into  this  great,  though  somewhat
chaotic,  movement,  which  ran  parallel  with  the  more
rigidly  organized  Reformation.

I  say  "  practically  certain,"  because  there  is  very  little
documentary  evidence  at  hand  to  prove  the  direct  connec-
tion between  Anabaptism  and  the  earlier  mystical  and
evangelical  societies.^

What  we  actually  know  is  that  there  suddenly  appeared,
just  at  the  dawn  of  the  Reformation,  in  almost  every
Christian  country,  little  groups  of  men  and  women,  who
were  determined  to  reconstruct  Christianity  after  the  New
Testament  model,  who  were  bent  on  reviving  primitive
Christianity.  These  groups  had  the  same  characteristic
marks  that  have  become  familiar  to  us  in  these  studies,
with  the  addition  of  other  peculiarities  due  largely  to  the
social  conditions  under  which  they  lived.  They  put,  too,
a  peculiar  and  novel  emphasis  on  certain  aspects  of  truth,
largely  as  a  result  of  their  greater  knowledge  of  Scripture,
and  they  felt,  more  intensely  than  any  of  the  groups  of
"  Brethren  "  before  them,  the  social  passion — the  aspiration
for  a  society  in  which  men  might  be  free  from  every  kind
of  tyranny.  But  they  present  every  appearance  of  having
evolved  from  the  social  and  religious  groups  which  we
know  existed  throughout  Europe  before  them,  and  that,
too,  in  the  very  centres  where  Anabaptism  later  flourished
at  its  best.

It  was  perfectly  natural  that  this  freer,  intenser,  more
radical  type  of  Christianity  should  break  forth  simultane-
ously with  the  Reformation.  The  same  tendencies  which
pushed  Luther  and  Zwingli  to  take  their  bold  stand  for
a    reform    in    the    Church,    pushed    these    other    groups

^  Dr.  Ludwig  Keller,  in  liis  Altevangelischen  Gemeinden  (Berlin,  1887)  and
his  Die  Reformation  u?id  die  alteren  Reformparteien{L.?^^i\g,  1885),  has  gathered
much  material  which  points  in  the  direction  of  direct  influence,  but  it  is  not
generally  admitted  that  he  has  made  good  his  case.


b


XVI  THE  ANABAPTISTS  371

of  Christians  into  unwonted  activity.  They  had  alike
measurably  shaken  themselves  free  from  the  spell  of  tradi-
tion, and  had  been  appalled  at  the  spiritual  bankruptcy  of
the  Church.  They  had  alike  rediscovered  Christianity  in
the  Bible  ;  and  the  new  vision  worked  within  them  like
new  wine.  Those  who  had  this  vision,  and  with  it  had  the
power  of  restraint,  and  the  gifts  of  statesmanship  to  see
what  would  work  and  what  would  not  work  in  the  world
as  it  actually  was  then,  became  the  leaders  of  the  Protestant
Reformation,  and  have  their  renown  in  the  pages  of  history.
Those  who  had  this  vision  and  who  were  resolved  to  make
the  world  fit  the  vision,  with  no  shade  of  levelling  down  and
with  no  hairsbreadth  of  a  compromise,  became  the  leaders
of  Anabaptism,  risked  everything  for  the  cause  they
believed  in,  flung  out  ideals  w^hich  have  been  guiding  stars
for  us  ever  since,  went  to  death  in  terrible  fashions,  and
fell  on  almost  total  obscurity.  It  is  a  story  well  worth
telling,  and  quite  worth  reading.

Whatever  may  have  been  the  influence  of  the  previous
mystical  and  evangelical  societies  in  producing  this  new
religious  outbreak,  there  can  be  no  question  that  the
circulation  of  the  Bible  among  the  people  was  the  deepest
spring  and  occasion  of  it.  The  priests  were  right  when
they  announced  that  it  was  dangerous  for  "  common  men  "
to  have  the  Bible.  It  was  even  more  dangerous  than  they
knew,  and  everybody  now  realizes  that  putting  the  Bible
into  the  hands  of  peasants  and  craftsmen  wrought  one  of
the  greatest  spiritual  revolutions  in  the  history  of  the  race,
and  marked  the  doom  of  an  exclusive  priesthood.  The
finer  spirits  had,  in  the  earlier  centuries,  been  able  to  feel
out  an  inner  way  to  God,  and  they  knew  in  their  own
souls  of  a  Divine  fellowship,  independent  of  priest  or
sacrament,  but  their  message  was  vague  and  unformed,
and  did  not  grip  the  rank  and  file  with  reality.  In  the
early  part  of  the  sixteenth  century  the  actual  message  of
the  New  Testament  was  beginning  to  filter  down  into  the
lives  of  the  people  themselves.  There  were  many  labour-
ing men  who  had  read  the  very  words  of  Christ ;  there
were  many  simple  homes  in  which  a  copy  of  the  wonderful


372  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

Book  was  owned  and  possessed.  Men  and  women  with
slender  culture  and  with  no  wealth  but  their  hands  of  toil,
were  reading  and  pondering,  and  as  they  read  and  pondered
they  saw  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth.  With  his  open
Bible,  the  "  common  man  "  became  his  own  priest,  and  in
a  measure  his  own  prophet.  He  suddenly  found  himself
in  strange  new  relations  to  God,  and  possessed  of  a  picture
of  the  Church  wholly  different  from  the  actual  Church
which  he  knew.  He  awoke  to  the  fact  that  he  had  been
pitiably  deceived  by  the  priests,  and  led  off  into  the
wilderness  instead  of  into  the  promised  land.  Under
the  powerful  inspiration  of  the  Bible,  with  its  vivid
prophecies  and  its  luminous  ideals  of  a  pure  and  spot-
less Church  as  the  Bride  of  Christ,  there  broke  forth  a
great  surging  of  spirit  toward  emancipation  and  toward
the  realization  of  the  splendid  vision  which  the  Bible
had  opened.

The  powerful  challenge  of  Luther  and  Zwingli  to  the
old  system,  and  their  championship  of  evangelical  Christi-
anity, stirred  all  Europe  and  kindled  new  courage  in  the
hearts  of  those  who  were  waiting  and  praying  for  the
morning  to  break.  The  early  utterances  of  Luther  voiced
the  passionate  yearning  of  multitudes  of  patient  men  and
women  who  had  been  thinking  deeply,  but  who  were
themselves  unable  to  make  their  voices  heard  in  high
places,  and  his  hammer  strokes  woke  many  more  to
sudden  activity.  Simultaneously,  but  by  independent
steps,  Zwingli  was  moving  toward  a  sweeping  Reform,  and
was  carrying  with  him  the  enlightened  men  of  the  Swiss
Cantons  and  of  Southern  Germany.  Already,  by  1520,
under  his  influence,  the  Council  of  Zurich  issued  an  order
directing  all  pastors  and  preachers  in  the  Canton  to  declare
the  pure  word  of  God.  And  by  the  time  Luther  was  at
work  in  the  Wartburg,  on  his  translation  of  the  New
Testament,  Zwingli  had  declared  the  principle  that  the
Church  must  reject  in  doctrine  and  practice  everything  not
positively  enjoined  by  Scripture}

1  Luther's  own  principle  is  much  more  conservative,  namely,  that  the  Church
should  retain  whatever  is  not  contrary  to  Scripture :  "Whatever  is  not  against
Scripture  is  for  Scripture,  and  Scripture  for  it."


XVI  THE  ANABAPTISTS  373

But  it  soon  became  manifest  that  Luther  and  Zwingli
had  a  very  different  aim  in  view  from  that  which  inspired
the  men  who  had  hoped  at  first  that  a  "  root  and  branch  "
transformation  was  beginning.  It  quickly  developed  that
bo^h  Luther  and  Zwingli,  however  they  might  differ  in
their  personal  views,  were  depending  on  the  help  of
the  secular  arm,  and  were  going  no  farther  with  their
reforms  than  they  could  carry  their  respective  States  with
them.  They  had  no  conception  of  a  Church  independent
of  secular  princes  and  powers,  and  they  were  ready  to
sacrifice  ideals  and  compromise  principles  to  carry  with
them  the  persons  whom  they  supposed  essential  to  the
formation  of  a  winning,  successful  Church.

There  appeared  as  early  as  1523  a  wing  of  the  reform-
ing force,  composed  of  persons  who  saw  then,  as  in  the
light  of  history  we  see  to-day,  the  glaring  inconsistencies
of  these  great  reformers.  In  principle^  Luther  and
Zwingli  announced  the  sovereignty  and  priesthood  of
the  individual.  They  proclaimed  the  ideal  of  a  Church
on  the  New  Testament  model.  In  practice  they  put
personal  faith  in  jeopardy,  under  an  authority  almost  as
rigid  and  almost  as  unspiritual  as  in  the  system  they  were
overthrowing,  and  they  constantly  levelled  their  ideal  of  a
Church  down  to  the  standard  which  custom  and  tradition
had  made  familiar.  It  is  a  nice  question,  which  we  are
not  debating  here,  whether  the  moderate  reformers  who
compromised  and  "  succeeded,"  or  the  radicals  who  died
for  their  ideals,  and  "  failed,"  were  right.  We  are  only
concerned  now  with  the  fact  that  there  quickly  did  develop
a  radical  wing,  resolved  on  constructing  a  Church  of  the
apostolic  type,  and  that  Luther  and  Zwingli  were  among
their  most  persistent  opponents.

The  first  leaders  of  the  radical  wing  of  the  reform
movement  were  young  Swiss  scholars  who  were  intimate
with  Zwingli  and  had  worked  zealously  with  him  in
the  earliest  stages  of  the  Evangelical  revival.  The  best-
known  names  in  this  Swiss  group  are  Conrad  Grebel
from  one  of  the  leading  families  of  Zurich,  educated  in
the    Universities    of  Vienna    and    Paris  ;   Felix   Mantz,  a


374  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

first-rate  Hebrew  scholar  ;  George  Blaurock,  a  converted
monk  of  Chur,  a  man  who  from  his  eloquence  was
popularly  called  the  "  mighty  Jorg "  and  "  the  second
Paul "  ;  Simon  Stumpf,  the  first  priest  to  be  publicly
married  in  Switzerland  ;  and  Ludwig  Hetzer,  also  a
Hebrew  scholar,  and  who  with  the  German  Anabaptist,
Hans  Denck,  made  the  first  Protestant  translation  of  the
Old  Testament  Prophets.^

The  real  issue,  which  finally  led  to  a  sharp  cleavage
between  the  Swiss  reformers,  was  on  the  question  of  the
type  of  Church  to  take  the  place  of  the  old  Church.  As
Philip  Schaff  well  puts  it,  "  the  Zwinglian  reformers  aimed
to  reform  the  old  Church  by  the  Bible  ;  the  Anabaptists
attempted  to  build  a  new  Church  from  the  Bible."  ^  The
radical  wing  demanded  "  a  pure  Church,  separated  from
the  Godless,"  "  a  congregation  of  believers  conceived  by
the  word  of  God  and  born  of  faith."  It  should  have  in  it
as  members  only  those  who  had  an  experience  of  religion^
"  the  saved,"  and  it  should  have  as  practices  only  what
was  plainly  enjoined  by  Scripture.  They  believed  that
the  old  Church  had  been  swamped  by  its  alliance  with
the  world,  that  instead  of  overcoming  the  world  it  had
been  overcome  by  it,  and  that  the  time  had  now  come  to
set  religion  free  from  all  entangling  alliances,  and  to  form
a  Church  which  should  be  composed  of  members  who  were
ready  to  make  it  their  sole  business  to  realize  the  kingdom
of  God.  To  them  the  centuries  intervening  between  their
time  and  the  apostles  formed  a  period  of  "  apostasy,"  and
they  proposed  leaping  over  the  chasm  and  restoring  the
apostolic  Church.  They  further  maintained  that  both
within  and  without  the  Church  a  man's  conscience  must
be  absolutely  free  to  follow  the  best  light  he  had.  "  Do
not  lay  a  burden  on  my  conscience,"  said  Hans  Miiller,  an
Anabaptist,  when  brought  before  the  Zurich  magistrates,
"  for  faith  is  a  gift  given  freely  by  God,  and  is  not  common
property.      The    mystery   of   God    lies    hidden,    like  the

^  The  movement  begun  by  these  young  Swiss  leaders  found  its  noblest  expres-
sion in  two  young  German  scholars,  Balthasar  Hiibmaier  and  Hans  Denck,
whose  teachings  will  be  given  later  on.

2  Article  on  Swiss  Anabaptists  in  Baptist  Quarterly  Review,  vol.  xl.  p.  266.


XVI  THE  ANABAPTISTS  375

treasure  in  the  field,  which  no  one  can  find  but  he  to
whom  the  Spirit  shows  it.  So  I  beg  you,  ye  servants  of
God,  let  my  faith  stand  free."  -^

The  advocates  of  the  "  pure,  separate  Church "  first
came  into  collision  with  the  moderate  reformers  on  the
question  of  the  basis  of  authority.  It  was  in  October  1523
at  the  "  Second  Zurich  Discussion."  The  "  Discussion  "
was  on  the  celebration  of  the  Mass  and  the  use  of  images.
Both  groups  of  reformers  agreed  that  there  was  no  ground
or  place  for  either  Mass  or  images  in  a  Church  of  the
apostolic  type,  but  Zwingli  and  the  moderates  urged  that
the  decision  as  to  further  practice  should  be  left  with  the
civic  Council  of  Zurich.  The  radical  party  protested
against  such  a  course.  "  You  have  no  authority,"  one  of
them  cried  out,  "  to  leave  the  decision  with  them.  The
decision  is  given  already.  The  Spirit  of  God  decides.
Should  the  men  of  the  Council  give  a  decision  contrary  to
the  word  of  God,  imploring  Christ  for  His  Spirit,  I  will
teach  and  act  against  it."  ^

This  declaration  perfectly  fits  the  fundamental  con-
tention of  the  Anabaptists.  The  decision  in  spiritual
matters  does  not  belong  to  civic  councils  ;  it  belongs  alone
to  the  group  of  Spiritual  persons  who  compose  the  Church,
and  who  have  the  leading  of  the  Spirit.  From  the  time
of  this  "  Discussion,"  those  who  united  in  this  view  of  the
Church  began  to  meet  in  the  houses  of  the  "  brethren  "  to
study  the  Bible  together  and  to  mature  their  views.  They
were  men,  as  even  their  fiercest  opponents  admit,  of  marked
purity  of  life,  of  deep  sincerity  and  simplicity,  and  they
were  ready  to  follow  the  light  as  soon  as  it  broke  upon
them.^

As  they  pored  over  the  Scriptures  they  failed  to  find
that   the    New   Testament    gave    any  ground    for  infant

1  Egli,  Die  Ziiricher  Wiedertdufer,  p.  98.  Quoted  in  Lindsay's  History  of  the
Reformation,  vol.  ii.  p.  441.

2  Burrage,  Anab.  in  Switzerland  (Phila.  1882),  p.  69.

3  BuUinger  in  his  Rise  of  the  Anabaptists,  though  unfriendly  to  their  views,
says:  "  They  denounced  luxury,  intemperance  in  eating  and  drinking,  and  all
vices,  and  led  a  serious  spiritual  life."  Kessler  of  St.  Gall  says  :  "Alas  !  what
shall  I  say  of  these  people  ?  They  move  my  sincere  pity,  for  many  of  them  are
zealous  for  God  though  without  knowledge."  The  testimony,  even  from  their
enemies,  shows  them  consistent  followers  of  Christ.


376  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

baptism,  and  they  put  their  finger  on  this  custom  as  one
of  the  most  objectionable  inventions  of  the  "  apostasy."
As  in  the  Galatian  controversy  Paul  focused  the  whole
complex  issue  over  the  two  kinds  of  Christianity  on
circumcision ;  so  with  a  profound  insight  these  young
Swiss  leaders  saw  that  the  whole  question  of  the  kind  of
Church  they  were  to  make  was  bound  up  with  the  question
of  infant  baptism.  Infant  baptism  implied  at  once,  they
believed,  that  there  was  some  saving  power  in  baptismal
water.  The  baptized  child  was  in  some  mysterious  way
put  on  a  different  spiritual  level  by  the  application  of  it.
The  child  himself  being  wholly  unconscious,  had  contri-
buted nothing,  had  put  forth  no  faith,  and  yet  before
baptism  it  was  assumed  that  the  child  was  lost ;  after
baptism  it  was  assumed  that  the  child  was  in  the  class  of
the  saved.  If  so,  then  he  was  saved  entirely  by  something
done  for  him  by  a  priest,  without  the  exercise  of  any  faith
on  his  own  part.  This  was  the  very  essence  of  sacer-
dotalism, and,  as  they  concluded  from  their  Scripture
study,  bald  superstition.  It  gave  the  priest  the  fulcrum
for  all  his  power,  and  it  opened  the  door  for  bringing  the
world  into  the  Church,  since  the  mere  act  of  receiving
baptism  made  one  a  member  of  the  Church,  quite  apart
from  the  exercise  of  personal  faith,  or  a  spiritual  attitude
of  soul.

It  was  on  this  issue  that  the  line  of  cleavage  was
drawn.  The  radicals  cared  little  for  baptism.  They
conceived  in  it  no  saving  power.  It  was  neither  the  use
nor  the  non-use  of  it  that  primarily  mattered  or  availed.
Their  contention  went  much  deeper,  and  dealt  with  really
vital  matters.  They  were  determined  to  lay  the  axe  at
the  root  of  every  superstition,  and  to  destroy  utterly
sacerdotalism  and  priestcraft.  Then,  plainly,  this  was  the
place  to  strike.

But  more  than  that  was  involved.  They  were  deter-
mined to  maintain  the  principle  that  no  spiritual  change
can  be  wrought  in  the  soul  except  by  voluntary  choice.
Against  the  view  that  God  chooses  some  to  be  "  saints "
and   some  to  be  "damned,"  they  set  the  view  that  each


xvi


THE  ANABAPTISTS  377


man  dj^  his  own  choice  is  made  spiritual  and  saintly,  or
unspiritual  and  damned.  The  Church,  they  held,  should
be  the  congregation  of  those  who  chose  to  be  Christ's
followers,  and  who  were  conscious  of  a  living  relation  with
their  Lord.  Then,  of  course,  it  followed  that  no  baptism
could  be  tolerated  unless  it  were  taken  as  an  act  of  faith
and  as  an  act  of  personal  obedience  to  the  command  of
Christ.

"  Water,"  said  one  of  their  leaders,-^  "  is  not  baptism,
else  the  whole  Danube  were  baptism  and  the  fishermen
and  boatmen  would  be  daily  baptized."

For  a  time  Zwingli  himself  wavered  on  the  question
of  infant  baptism,  and  was  on  the  point  of  declaring
against  it  as  unscriptural,  and  Oecolampadius,  too,  felt  a
similar  halt  in  his  mind  in  reference  to  it.  But  the  deeper
issues  involved  finally  carried  them  against  this  insight.
The  ideal  of  a  Church  composed  only  of  believers,  a
fellowship  of  the  faithful,  seemed  to  them  impracticable
for  earth,  and  they  swung  over  to  the  old  plan  of  a  Church
of  wheat  and  tares,  and  Zwingli  became  the  most  stubborn
defender  of  infant  baptism  ^

The  progress  of  events  steadily  pushed  the  two  groups
of  reformers,  with  their  different  ideals  of  the  Church,
farther  apart  and  into  sharper  differentiation.  The  radicals
— "  spirituals,"  or  simply  "  brethren,"  or  "  Christians,"  they
called  themselves  —  continued  to  meet  in  little  groups.
Their  "  apostles  "  were  full  of  enthusiasm,  restless,  resist-
less, heroic,  and  the  movement  spread  with  an  astonishing
rapidity.  Little  societies  of  "  believers  "  sprang  up  almost
spontaneously  in  Berne,  Basle,  Appenzel,  St.  Gall,  and  in
other  places.  The  movement,  even  in  Switzerland  where
it  was  thoroughly  sane^  had  a  powerful  social  aspect  as
well  as  a  religious  aspect.  Its  leaders  had  an  intense
humanitarian  spirit,  a  passionate  love  for  the  "  common
man,"  and  they  "  spoke  to  the  condition  "  of  the  oppressed
and  the  heavy-laden.      Even  their  enemies  admitted  that

^  Balthasar  Hiibmaier.

2  He  defended  it  on  the  analogy  of  circumcision  enjoined  in  the  Old  Testa-
ment ;  on  the  ground  of  Christ's  treatment  of  httle  children  ;  and  on  the  strength
of  Acts  xvi.  15  and  33  ;   i  Cor.  i.  16  ;  and  i  Cor.  vii.  14.


378  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

by  the  test  of  life  they  rang  true.      Bullinger,  In  his  History
of  the  Reformation^  says  :

"  They  had  an  appearance  of  spiritual  life  ;  they  were  excellent
in  character,  they  sighed  much,  they  uttered  no  falsehoods,  they
were  austere,  they  spake  nobly  and  with  excellence,  so  that
they  thereby  acquired  admiration  and  authority  or  respect  with
simple  pious  people.  For  the  people  said  :  '  Let  others  say  what
they  will  of  the  Dippers^  we  see  in  them  nothing  but  what  is
excellent,  and  hear  from  them  nothing  else  but  that  we  should
not  swear  and  do  no  one  wrong,  that  every  one  ought  to  do  what
is  right,  that  everyone  must  live  godly  and  holy  lives ;  we  see  no
wickedness  in  them.'  Thus  they  deceived  many  people  in  this
land."  1

Finally,  in  1525,  they  took  the  step  which  gave  them
their  name,  and  which  separated  them  completely  from
the  moderate  reformers.  At  one  of  their  "  brother-
meetings  "  in  Zurich,  while  all  were  bowed  in  prayer  that
God  would  grant  them  power  to  fulfil  all  His  will,
Blaurock  stood  up  and  asked  Grebel  to  baptize  him  on
his  personal  confession  of  faith.  He  then  fell  on  his
knees,  and  Grebel  baptized  him,  and  he  (Blaurock)  there-
upon baptized  all  who  were  present.  Similar  scenes
followed  in  the  houses  where  the  "  brethren  "  met  in  the
various  Swiss  cities.  Baptism  was  thus  adopted  as  a  sign
and  seal  of  their  faith  and  their  membership  in  the  Church
of  Christ,  and  in  adopting  it  as  an  act  of  faith  they  pro-
claimed the  nullity  of  infant  baptism.  Their  enemies
called  them  henceforth  Anabaptists,  i.e.  re-baptists.  They
protested  against  the  name  as  inapplicable,  for  they  held
that  their  first  "  baptism  "  was  no  baptism  at  all,  but  only
mere  water  poured  over  a  child  incapable  of  faith,  and
that  therefore  the  baptism  of  a  believing  adult  was  not  re-
baptism.  Their  protest,  however,  was  in  vain,  and  almost
immediately  the  pitiless  storm  of  persecution,  which  was
pushed  almost  to  annihilation,  broke  upon  them.

To  grasp  the  profounder  meaning  of  the  movement,  we
must  now  turn  to  its  two  greatest  exponents,  Hiibmaier
and  Denck.

*  Quoted    from    A   Mariyrology   of  the  Churches  of  Chnst   commonly  called
Baptists  (London,  1850,  vol.  i.  p.  7).


XVI  THE  ANABAPTISTS  379

II

Balthasar  Hubmaier  was  born  in  Friedburg,  about  five
miles  from  Augsburg,  probably  in  1480.  He  received  his
education  in  the  University  of  Freiburg  and  Ingolstadt,
under  the  famous  Dr.  Eck,  Luther's  antagonist,  receiving
in  succession  the  Master's  degree  and  the  degree  of  Doctor
of  Theology.  His  great  gifts  as  a  preacher  gave  him  wide
fame,  and  he  was  induced  to  leave  Ingolstadt,  where  he
had  become  vice-rector  of  the  University,  to  become  chief
preacher  in  the  city  of  Regensburg  (Ratisbon).  This  was
in  1 5  16,  and  he  remained  in  this  city  five  years.  During
this  period  he  seemed  thoroughly  entrenched  in  the
theology  and  practices  of  the  old  Church.  There  was  no
sign  of  the  great  radical  leader,  slumbering  and  potential,
in  the  zealously  devoted  Catholic  preacher.

In  I  52 1 — the  year  of  the  Diet  of  Worms — he  became
pastor  of  the  church  at  Waldshut,  on  the  Rhine,  in
Austrian  territory,  but  near  the  Swiss  border.  Here  he
took  up  the  study  of  Paul's  Epistles,  and  went  seriously
to  work  to  discover  what  the  primitive  conception  of
Christianity  was.  Through  his  study  he  came  into  a
personal  experience  of  salvation  through  Christ.  He
wrote  to  his  Regensburg  friends  in  1524:  "Within  two
years  has  Christ  come  for  the  first  time  into  my  heart  to
thrive."  He  entered  into  sympathetic  relations  with  the
Swiss  reformers,  and  conferred  with  the  great  leaders  of
the  new  learning,  Erasmus,  Oecolampadius,  and  Vadian.
By  the  autumn  of  1523  he  was  thoroughly  settled  in  the
new  faith,  and  had  carried  his  congregation  at  Waldshut
with  him,  and  in  the  famous  Zurich  "  Discussion,"  already
referred  to,  he  took  his  place  on  the  side  of  the  radical
reformers.  He  was  baptized  — "  re-baptized,"  as  his
opponents  would  have  it — in  1525,  by  William  Roublin,
and  shortly  after  he  (Hubmaier)  baptized  from  a  milk-
pail  three  hundred  of  the  people  of  Waldshut.  Only
three  years  later — loth  of  March  1528 — he  was  burned
at  the  stake  in  Vienna  as  a  martyr  to  his  faith^  but  during
the  five  years  of  his  evangelical  ministry  he  led  a  large


380  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

number  of  serious  men  and  women  into  the  type  of
apostolic  religion  which  he  professed.^

He  was  a  powerful  preacher,  and  as  a  lucid  and
vigorous  writer  unmatched  among  the  reformers  except
by  Luther,  and,  though  he  temporarily  wavered  on  the
rack,  on  the  whole  he  was  one  of  the  noblest  spirits  of  the
German  Reformation.  There  are  few  finer  testimonies
than  Hiibmaier's  to  an  absolute  confidence  in  the  power
of  the  Truth.  Again  and  again  he  closes  his  addresses
and  his  treatises  with  the  words,  "  Truth  is  immortal."  In
a  letter  asking  for  a  Discussion  with  Zwingli  on  the  subject
of  baptism,  he  says  :  "  If  I  err,  I  will  gladly  retract.  If
Master  Ulrich  (Zwingli)  errs,  he  should  not  be  ashamed
to  forsake  his  error,  for  the  truth  will  ultimately  conquer
him,"  In  the  Zurich  "  Discussion  "  he  had  already  said  :
"  I  can  err,  for  I  am  a  man,  but  I  cannot  be  a  heretic,  for
/  am  willing  to  be  taught  better  by  anybody."

He  made  a  fundamental  point,  as  was  true  of  all  the
Anabaptists,  of  the  necessity  of  personal  faith  and  indi-
vidual experience.  "  You  tell  me,"  he  wrote  in  his
Dialogue  with  Oecolampadius,  "  of  the  faith  of  another,  it
may  be  of  father  or  mother  ;  of  the  faith  of  a  godfather,
or  of  the  faith  of  the  Church  ;  but  all  of  this  is  without
foundation  in  Scripture,  for  the  just  must  live  by  his  own
faithr  This  necessity  of  personal  first-hand  faith  was
his  test  of  value  for  every  religious  observance,  and  it  was
on  this  ground  that  he  threw  over  the  Mass,  which  in  his
Regensburg  days  had  been  a  central  feature  of  his  religion.
"  As  I  cannot  believe  for  another^'  he  said  in  his  address
before  the  Zurich  Council,  "so  it  is  not  permitted  for  me
to  celebrate  the  Mass  for  another."  It  is  because  of  this
fundamental  insight  that  he  was  so  determined  to  abolish
infant  baptism.  To  baptize  a  child,  he  says,  is  to  per-
form a  "  ceremony  " — it  is  not  an  intelligent  act  of  faith.^
One  may  as  well  expect,  he  says,  to  "  save  "  a  Turk  or  a
Jew  by  pouring  a  little  baptismal  water  over  him.      And

^  During  the  closing  year  of  his  ministry,  which  was  in  the  city  of  Nikolsburg,
in  Moravia,  it  is  estimated  that  no  less  than  6000  were  added  to  the  ranks  of  the
Anabaptists  in  that  region  (see  Vedder's  Balthasar  Hiibmaier,  p.  152).

"^  See  his  treatise  on  Chnstian  Baptism  of  Believers,


XVI  THE  ANABAPTISTS  381

in  answer  to  the  claim  that  the  child  is  baptized  as  a
future  believer,  he  says  :  "  To  baptize  a  child  as  a  future
believer  is  like  hanging  out  a  hoop  as  a  sign  of  future
wine !  "  ^

Hiibmaier  was  more  distinctly  evangelical  than  Denck,
who  was  the  great  mystic  of  the  group,  and  yet  there  was
a  decidedly  mystical  strain  in  Hiibmaier,  as  there  was,
furthermore,  in  the  entire  Anabaptist  movement.  All  the
sane  leaders  of  the  movement  held  that  true  religion  is  an
act  and  attitude  of  the  person's  own  spirit,  and  that  nothing
whatever  is  wrought  by  magic,  by  sacerdotalism,  by  rite,
or  by  ceremony.^  Salvation  is  a  change  of  nature  within
the  soul,  and  this  change  is  wrought  alone  by  a  personal
transaction  between  the  soul  and  God.  To  such  an
experience  Hiibmaier  has  given  a  powerful  testimony  :  "  /
believe  and  trust  that  the  Holy  Ghost  has  come  in  me  and
the  power  of  the  most  high  God  has,  as  with  Mary  (the
Virgin),  overshadowed  my  soul,  to  conceive  in  me  the  new
man  ;  so  that  in  the  living,  indestructible  Word  and  in  the
Spirit  I  might  be  born  again,  and  see  the  kingdom  of
God.  For  Thou,  Son  of  the  living  God,  didst  become
man  in  order  that  through  Thee  we  might  become  children
of  God."  ^

It  is  true  that  he  founded  his  entire  message  on  the
teaching  of  Scripture,  and  he  patiently  spelled  out  the
word  for  his  age  from  the  Word  of  the  ages.  And  yet  he
emphatically  insisted  as  well  on  the  importance  of  a  direct,
inward  work.  "  God  draws  men,"  he  wrote  in  his  Table
of  Doctrine^  "in  two  ways,  inwardly  and  outwardly.  The
outward  drawing  takes  place  by  the  public  proclamation
of  His  holy  Gospel,  which  Christ  commanded  to  be
preached  to  every  creature,  and  is  now  made  known
everywhere.  The  inward  drawing  is  wrought  by  God,
who  enlightens  the  soul  within,  so  that  it  understands  the
undeniable  truth,  and   is  so  thoroughly  convinced   by  the

1  See  his  treatise  on  Christian  Baptism  of  Believers.

2  Hiibmaier  says  in  his  Form  of  Baptizing  that  there  is  nothing  sacramental  in
baptism.  These  are  his  words  :  ' '  Water  baptism  is  an  external  and  public
testimony  of  the  inward  baptism  of  the  Spirit."

3  Hubmaier's  Twelve  Articles  of  Faith  [Veddor,  p.   131),


382  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

Spirit   and   the    preached    word,  as   to   confess    from  the
conscience  that  these  must  be  so  and  not  otherwise."  ^

When  he  was  face  to  face  with  the  trial  by  fire  he  bore
a  personal  testimony  to  this  inward  leading :  "  Whatever  I
have  either  written  or  taught  hitherto  was  not  for  my  own
advantage,  but  simply  from  the  conviction  that  the  Spirit
of  God  was  leading  me  to  do  it"  ^  Hiibmaier  holds  that
the  true  Church  is  a  spiritual  organism,  made  up  of  those
who  have  been  born  from  above  and  joined  to  Christ,  so
that  they  live  in  the  Spirit  as  sons  of  God.  The  authority
of  this  Church  is  in  itself.  It  cannot  depend  on  temporal
rulers,  or  on  any  secular  power,  for  its  support.  It  deals
only  with  the  affairs  of  the  soul.  '*  The  Church,"  he  says
in  his  Table  of  Christian  Doctrine,  "  includes  all  men  who
are  congregated  and  united  in  one  God,  in  one  Lord,  in
one  faith  and  one  baptism,  and  confess  the  faith  with  the
mouth  wherever  they  may  be  on  earth.  That  is  the
universal  Christian  Church,  the  body  and  communion  of
saints,  that  meets  only  in  the  Spirit  of  God."  And  in  his
Twelve  Articles  of  Faith  he  says  :  "  I  believe  and  confess
a  holy  Catholic  Church,  which  is  the  communion  of  saints
and  a  brotherhood  of  pious  and  believing  men."

Hiibmaier's  treatment  of  singing  as  a  religious  exercise
throws  much  light  on  his  conception  of  a  Church  and  its
positively  spiritual  function.  It  is  well  known  that  the
Anabaptists  made  much  of  congregational  singing,  and
that  they  produced  some  of  the  finest  of  the  early  Pro-
testant hymns,  but  Hiibmaier  expresses  the  feeling,  which
prevailed  pretty  generally  among  them,  that  whatever  was
made  a  part  of  worship  must  be  done  intelligently  and
with  spiritual  intention.      He  says  in  his  Short  Apology :

"With  singing  and  reading  in  the  Churches  I  am  well  con-
tented (but  not  as  they  have  been  hitherto  conducted),  when  it  is
with  the  Spirit  and  from  the  heart,  and  with  the  understanding
of  the  words  and  edification  of  the  Church  as  Paul  teaches
us.  But,  otherwise,  God  rejects  it  and  will  have  none  of  our
Baal  cries. ^^

Hiibmaier     was     one    of    the    noblest    spirits    of   his

*  Vedder,  p.  199.  ^  From  an  interview  in  prison  in  Vienna  (Vedder,  p.  227),


XVI  THE  ANABAPTISTS  383

time,  but  he  was  the  herald  of  a  message  for  which
the  world  was  not  yet  ripe,  and  he  met  at  every  turn
the  pitiless  hate  and  persecution  of  a  world  that  was
resolved  to  seal  his  lips.  He  learned  in  a  hard  school
the  profound  truth  which  he  spoke :  "  Faith  which
flows  from  the  Gospel  fountain  lives  only  in  contests  ;
and  the  rougher  they  become,  so  much  the  greater
becomes  faith."

in

Hans  Denck  has  been  rightly  called  "an  apostle  of
Anabaptism,"  ^  and  as  a  scholar,  leader  and  spiritual
prophet  he  is  Hubmaier's  equal.  His  contemporaries,
however  hostile  to  his  doctrines,  recognised  his  great
gifts,  Bucer  called  him  "  the  pope  of  the  Anabaptists  "  ;
Haller,  "  the  Anabaptist  Apollo "  ;  and  Vadian  wrote  in
1523:  "In  Denck,  that  most  gifted  youth,  all  excel-
lencies were  present"  Sebastian  Franck  says  that  he
was  "  the  President  and  Bishop  of  the  Anabaptists/'

He  is  a  "  priest "  quite  after  the  order  of  Melchizedec,
for  he  has  no  traceable  lineage.  His  place  of  nativity  ^
and  the  date  of  his  birth  are  unknown.  He  studied  in
the  University  of  Basle,  where  he  heard  the  lectures
of  Oecolampadius,  though  he  never  became  his  disciple.
His  main  intellectual  interest  was  in  the  prophets  and
mystics,  in  whom  he  was  deeply  read.  He  was  not  a
revolutionary  leader,  but  gentle  in  spirit  and  with  a
single  passionate  aim,  to  build  up  a  spiritual  fellowship
of  good  persons.

He  became  headmaster  in  St.  Sebald's  School,  in
Nuremberg,  in  1523,  but  he  soon  came  into  collision
with  the  Lutheran  theologians  there,  and  was  forced
to  leave  the  city.  Instead  of  shaking  off  the  dust  of
his  feet  against  them  he  wrote  a  Tract  called  A
Protestation  and  Confession,  in  which  he  shows  himself
to  be  a  mystic  and  a  seeker  after  a  live  faith.  "  I
would   fain   possess,"  he  wrote,  "that  faith  which  works

1  Keller,  Ha7is  Denck,  ein  Apostel  der  Wiederiau/er  {heipzig,  1882).
2  Probably  in  Bavaria.


384  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

salvation  and  leads  to  life,  but  I  do  not  find  it  in  me.
Nay,  if  I  said  to-day  that  I  had  that  faith,  to-morrow
I  should  accuse  myself  of  lying ;  for  an  inner  Voice,  a
Spark  of  Truth  which  I  partly  feel  in  me,  tells  me  that
I  have  not  yet  in  me  that  faith  which  works  life."

Denck's  Nuremberg  Confession  is  still  in  the  archives
of  that  city,  and  has  been  put  into  modern  shape  by
Dr.  Keller.^  His  leading  question  in  the  Confession
is  "  Who  gives  me  faith  ?  Is  it  inborn,  or  is  it  won  ?
Is  it  communicated  by  parents,  or  is  it  an  elemental
condition  of  the  soul  ? "  His  answer  is  that  it  is  a
native  condition  of  the  soul.  It  is  a  tendency  grounded
in  the  very  structure  of  the  soul,  which  pushes  man
after  a  better,  purer  life,  and  which  makes  him  resist
the  lower  natural  tendencies.  This  situation  involves
battle,  struggle  {Seelenkainpf)  as  long  as  one  lives  in
the  body,  but  the  victory  is  well  in  sight  when  one
"  sets  his  will  towards  God's  will  through  Christ."  He
says  that  the  higher  convictions  which  make  man
truly  religious  cannot  have  their  origin  from  the  Bible,
as  they  are  presupposed  in  any  acceptation  of  the
Bible  as  a  Word  of  God.  Therefore  the  true  and
primary  faith  must  rest  on  "  facts  of  experience,
directly  given " ;  on  what  he  rightly  calls  "  an  inner
witness  which  God,  by  His  grace,  plants  in  the  soul."
The  supreme  test  of  the  Word  of  God  in  the  Bible  is
its  power  of  speaking  to  this  "  inner  witness."  "  It
[the  Bible]  is  an  echo  of  what  is  being  uttered  deep  in
my  own  bosom,"  "  it  is  the  light  and  guide  on  the  way
of  Faith,  and  without  it  the  best  of  us  would  stumble
and  go  astray,  but  it  is  not  the  primary  Word  of  God."
This  "  inner "  Word,  which  perfectly  fits  the  "  outer,"
is,  he  says,  "  a  spark  of  the  Divine  Spirit."  Without
this  within  him,  a  man  would  neither  seek  nor  find
God,  for  "he  who  seeks  Him,  in  truth  already  has
Him,  and  without  this  inner  Spirit  to  guide  and  direct
him,  one  cannot  find  Him,  even  in  the  Bible."  ^

^  Ein  Apostel  der  Wiedertdufer,  pp.  49-62.

^  Compare  this  view  with  Luther's  doctrine  of  total  depravity — the  absence  of
all  impulse  toward  Good  :   "1  find  nothing  pure  or  holy  in  me,  nor  in  any  man,


XVI  THE  ANABAPTISTS  385

During  the  next  six  months  after  his  Cojifessio?z,
the  awful  six  months  of  the  peasant  revolt,  Denck's
movements  cannot  be  traced,  but  he  finally  comes  to
light  again  in  June  1525,  at  St.  Gall,  in  Switzerland,
where  he  wrote  a  Tract  with  the  luminous  title  :  "  He
who  really  loves  the  truth  can  herein  examine  himself,
so  that  none  exalt  his  faith  by  reason  of  personal
experiences,  but  knows  from  whom  he  should  ask  and
receive  wisdom ! "  He  soon  received  a  call  to  teach
in  Augsburg,  where  he  found  a  group  ready  for  his
spiritual  message.  It  was  apparently  under  the
influence  of  Hiibmaier,  who  visited  Augsburg  on  his
way  to  Nikolsburg,  that  Denck  became  convinced  of
the  distinct  views  on  baptism  held  by  the  Anabaptists,
though  he  had  already  arrived  independently  at  the
spiritual  conception  of  Christianity.  In  fact,  he  went
further  than  any  of  the  other  leaders  in  his  teaching
of  a  Light  within.  He  flatly  denied  the  depravity  of
man  as  we  have  seen,  and  asserted  that  there  is
something  divine  in  every  man — an  upward  im.pulse  or
conscience  which  he  believed  to  be  "  a  spark  of  the
Divine  Spirit."  Consistently  with  this  view  he  held  to
the  freedom  of  the  will,  man's  personal  power  to  obey  or
disobey  this  Divine  Light  in  the  Soul.  Christ,  he  taught,
was  the  Eternal  Word  or  Spirit,  incarnate  ;  this  same
Word,  or  Spirit,  is  in  some  measure  in  all  true  believers,
and  the  Church  is  the  company  or  fellowship  of  these
spiritual  souls,  united  to  their  Divine  Head  :  "  All  who
are  inspired  with  the  Spirit  of  love  are  one  with
Christ  in  God."  He  had  an  intense  love  for  the
Bible,  and  in  conjunction  with  Ludwig  Hetzer  he
made  a  translation  of  the  Prophets,  but  he  would
not  consent  to  make  the  Scriptures  the  sole  source
and  foundation  of  faith.  God  was,  he  said,  before  the
Scriptures,  and  they  are  only  instruments  to  bring  men
to  Him.


but  all  our  works  are  (if  I  may  be  allowed  the  expression)  mere  lice  in  an  old
filthy  hide,  from  which  nothing  good  can  come,  because  neither  hide  nor  hair
is  any  good  any  more."

2  C


386  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

"The  Holy  Scriptures,"  he  wrote,  "I  esteem  above  human
treasures,  but  not  so  highly  as  the  Word  of  God,  which  is  living,
powerful,  and  eternal,  and  pure  from  the  elements  of  this  world,
since  it  is  God  Himself,  Spirit  and  not  letter,  written  without
pen  and  paper,  so  that  it  can  never  be  blotted  out.  Therefore,
blessedness  is  not  bound  up  in  Scripture,  however  useful  and
good  it  may  always  be  in  that  direction.  It  is  not  possible  for
Scripture  to  make  better  a  bad  heart ;  but  a  good  heart  is  bettered
by  all  things.  A  man  who  is  chosen  by  God  may  attain  to
blessedness  without  preaching,  without  Scripture."

During  his  stay  in  Augsburg,  he  threw  himself  with
great  earnestness  into  the  task  of  forming  a  "  Spiritual
fellowship "  in  the  city,  "  an  apostolic  brotherhood  " —
"  an  embassy  of  God,"  he  called  it — and  he  was  so
successful  that  more  than  a  thousand  persons  were  in
a  short  time  brought  into  the  fellowship.  But  under
the  fire  of  opposition  he  withdrew  from  Augsburg  and
went  to  Strasbourg  where  another  "  fellowship "  was
being  formed.  Here  the  opposition  was  led  by  the
great  reformer,  Bucer,  who  had  Denck  driven  into
exile.

Homeless,  penniless,  the  object  of  fierce  attack,
hunted  like  a  dangerous  wild  beast,  he  wandered  about
on  foot  from  town  to  town,  telling  his  message  to
those  who  were  ready  for  it,  and  organizing  the
scattered  Anabaptists  into  local  brotherhoods.  He
seems  also  to  have  drawn  together  the  leaders  of  the
movement  throughout  Germany  into  a  sort  of  "  general
meeting,"  over  which  he  presided  in  Augsburg  in  1527.
Broken  in  health,  and  "  dying  daily,"  he  found  his
way  to  Basle,  where  he  hoped  to  spread  the  truth,
but  his  worn-out  body  soon  gave  way  entirely  and  he
finished  his  course  in  faith.

He  was  one  of  the  first  in  the  modern  world  to
proclaim  consistently  the  plain,  simple  Gospel  of  the
infinite  love  and  fatherhood  of  God.  He  had  no
sympathy  with  far-fetched  schemes  of  theology.  He
threw  himself  unreservedly  on  the  goodness  of  God.
"  The  voice  of  my  heart,"  he  wrote,  "  the  voice  of  my
heart,  of   which   I   assuredly  know    that    it    renders    the


XVI  THE  ANABAPTISTS  387

truth,  says  to  me  that  God  is  righteous  mid  merciful^
and  this  Voice  speaks  in  every  good  heart  distinctly,
and  intelHgibly,  and  it  speaks  the  more  distinctly  and
clearly  the  better  one  is."

There  were  great  diversities  of  view  among  the  Ana-
baptists, and  it  is  not  safe  to  make  any  universal  state-
ments about  their  views  or  practices,  but  nearly  all  these
early  leaders  of  Anabaptism  were  radical  in  their
opposition  to  the  keeping  of  fasts,  to  the  payment  of
tithes}  the  taking  of  oaths,  and  a  very  large  number  of
them  opposed  the  performance  of  any  military  service.
As  early  as  1524  Grebel  and  his  friends  wrote:

"  The  Gospel  and  its  followers  shall  not  be  guarded  by  the
sword.  .  .  .  Truly  believing  Christians  are  sheep  in  the  midst
of  wolves,  sheep  ready  for  the  slaughter ;  they  must  be  baptized
in  fear  and  in  need,  in  tribulation  and  death,  that  they  may
be  tried  to  the  last,  and  enter  the  fatherland  of  eternal  peace,
not  with  carnal,  but  with  spiritual  weapons.  They  use  neither
the  sword  of  the  world  nor  war,  for  to  kill  is  forbidden."  ^

They  had  discovered  the  fatherhood  of  God,  and
they  had  a  firm  belief  in  human  brotherhood.^  They
opposed  the  fiction  that  from  all  eternity  some  were
God's  men  and  some  were  Satan's  men,  and  they
hoped  to  bring  about  a  transformation  of  society,  so
that  all  men  might  actually  live  as  children  of  God
and  as  brothers.  Sebastian  Franck,  the  Chronicler,
though  himself  not  one  of  them,  says  that  "  they
taught  nothing  but  love,  faith,  and  crucifixion  of  the
flesh,  manifesting  patience  and  humility  under  many
sufferings,  breaking  bread  with  one  another  in  sign  of
love  and  unity,  helping  one  another  with  true  helpful-
ness,   lending,    borrowing,    giving,    learning    to    have    all

^  Some  of  the  early  Anabaptists  strongly  objected  to  a  salaried  ministry.
Denck's  disciple,  Eitelhans  Langenmantel,  attacked  the  reformed  clergy  on  the
ground  of  its  "hireling"  feature.  He  condemned  the  grasping  avarice  of
ministers  who  "will  do  nothing  for  the  poor  except  for  money,"  and  he
denounced  the  administration  of  ordinances  for  money  (see  Newman,
History  of  Anti-Pedobaptism,  p.  169).

2  Letter  to  Thomas  Miinzer.

2  One  of  the  errors  charged  against  an  early  English  Anabaptist  was  his
affirmation  :  "  I  am  bound  to  love  the  Turke  from  the  bethome  (bottom)  of  my
heart  ! '


388  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

things  in  common,  calling  each  other  '  brother.' "  ^
There  was  a  wing  of  the  Anabaptists  which  pushed
this  idea  of  brotherhood  to  its  limit  in  complete
communism.  *'  The  highest  command  of  God,"  said
Eitelhans  Langenmantel,  of  Augsburg,  "  is  love.  '  Love
the  Lord  thy  God,  with  all  thy  heart,  and  thy  neighbour
as  thyself.'  In  the  Community  no  one  ought  to  say
'  mine,  mine,'  it  is  also  the  brother's.  A  community
where  one  is  rich  and  another  poor  belongs  not  to
Christ."  In  similar  vein  Ulrich  Stradler,  of  Auspitz,
taught :  "  All  those  who  truly  believe  and  have  wholly
given  themselves  up  to  Christ  have  all  God's  gifts  and
possessions  in  common.  In  the  house  of  the  Lord
there  is  no  mine,  thine,  nor  his."  ^  But  the  apostles  of
this  great  spiritual  movement — the  men  whose  views
I  have  been  studying — were  simply  bent  on  following
Christ  in  the  spirit  of  love,  and  on  transforming
society  by  practising  the  Gospel  of  the  kingdom.
Hiibmaier  wrote  before  he  left  Zurich  :         •

"  I  am  accused  as  if  I  would  have  made  all  things  in  common,
which  yet  I  have  not  done,  but  I  have  called  this  a  Christian
community  of  goods,  namely :  that  when  one  have,  and  see  his
neighbour  suffer,  he  should  give  him  alms,  in  order  that  the
hungry,  thirsty,  naked,  and  imprisoned  may  be  helped ;  and  that
the  more  a  man  practise  such  works  of  mercy,  the  nearer  would
he  be  to  the  Spirit  of  Christianity."  ^

But  it  was  bound  to  happen,  at  that  stage  of  history
and  of  education,  that  such  large  principles  of  free  and
spiritual  religion  as  those  which  this  movement  expressed
could  not  be  presented  without  producing  extremes  and
divisions.  There  was  throughout  the  primitive  period  of
Anabaptism  a  fanatical  wing  which  greatly  hampered  the
sane  leaders,  and  which  gave  a  strong  pretext  to  the
authorities  for  their  merciless  attack  on   the  whole   move-

1  Chronica,  p.  164.  Quoted  in  Lindsay's  History  of  the  Reformation,  vol.
ii.  p.  437.

2  The  most  successful  of  all  the  Communistic  leaders  was  Jacob  Huter,  to
whom  belongs  the  chief  credit  for  the  organization  of  the  Moravian  Communities,
which  have  survived  through  baptisms  of  blood  and  fire,  and  through  many
migrations,  to  the  present  time.

^    Vedder,  p.  139.


XVI  THE  ANABAPTISTS  389

ment.  There  are  always  in  any  given  group  of  men  a
certain  number  of  psychopathic  persons  in  whom  sugges-
tions  will  work  with  abnormal  coerciveness.  If  new  ideas
are  "  in  the  air  "  these  persons  will  be  powerfully  infected
with  them,  obsessed  with  them.  If  their  unstable  nervous
systems  are  organized  and  constructed  under  the  control
of  the  new  insight,  these  persons  will  be  the  prophets  and
heroes  of  the  movement ;  if  they  are  unstrung  and  over-
wrought by  the  contagion  they  then  become  the  fanatics
and  wreckage  of  the  movement.  Anabaptism  had  its  full
quota  of  psychopaths  of  both  types.  It  had  powerful
prophets,  and  it  also  had  its  flotsam  and  jetsam.

IV

It  has  been  customary  among  historians  to  reckon  the
"Zwickau  Prophets"  among  Anabaptists,  though  strictly
speaking  they  do  not  belong  to  this  class.  They  were,
however,  considered  a  part  of  the  movement  by  their
contemporaries,  and  they  well  illustrate  the  new  ideas  that
were  abroad,  and  that  worked  like  leaven  in  the  ranks  of
the  Anabaptists.  "  Zwickau  Prophets  "  is  a  name  given
to  a  little  group  of  ultra-evangelical  reformers  who  came
into  prominence  in  Zwickau  while  Luther  was  in  the
Wartburg  (1521-1522).  Their  leader  was  Thomas
Miinzer  (born  about  1490),  a  Master  of  Arts,  a  profound
student  of  the  mystics,  and  a  fervent  sympathizer  with
the  people,  burdened  with  wrongs  and  sufferings.  While
he  was  pastor  at  Zwickau  he  was  greatly  influenced  by
Nicholas  Storch,  an  itinerant  weaver,  who  in  his  travels
had  come  under  the  influence  of  the  "  Bohemian  Brethren."
He  had  picked  up  a  ready  knowledge  of  Scripture,  and
had  become  strongly  imbued  with  millenarian  doctrine,
a  doctrine  which  prevailed  in  a  branch  of  the  "  Bohemian
Brethren."  He  was  decidedly  psychopathic,  given  to
"  visions "  and  conscious  of  immediate  "  inspiration."
Like  Munzer,  he  had  a  passion  for  the  emancipation  of
the  people.  They  both  came  to  the  conclusion  that
infant  baptism  was  useless  and   not  founded  on  Scripture,


390  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

and  they  considered  baptism  with  the  Spirit  the  only
important  baptism  ;  but  they  did  not  confirm  this  view
by  their  practice,  for  in  "  the  model  Church,"  which  he  set
up  after  he  was  driven  from  Zwickau,  Munzer  still  pro-
vided for  the  baptism  of  children.

While  Luther  was  in  the  Wartburg,  Storch  and  some
of  his  disciples  resolved  to  visit  Wittenberg  and  win  the
University  to  their  cause.  It  was  a  bold  stroke,  and  in
it  they  succeeded  to  the  extent  of  gaining  the  rector  of
the  University,  Carlstadt,  and  of  deeply  impressing  even
Melanchthon.  Luther  hurried  home  and  broke  the  spell
of  the  "  prophets  "  in  Wittenberg.  Meantime  Munzer  was
carried  farther  and  farther  into  millenarian  and  revolu-
tionary views.  His  preaching  became  denunciatory  and
menacing,^  and  finally  he  conceived  himself  as  a  new
Gideon,  commissioned  with  "  the  sword  of  the  Lord  "  to
lead  the  people  to  victory  over  all  princes  and  into  com-
plete freedom.  He  infused  a  fanatical  spirit  into  the
peasant  revolt,  and  he  did  much  to  wreck  the  cause  he
championed.  Against  the  warnings  of  the  Swiss  Ana-
baptists, he  took  the  sword,  and  he  perished  by  it.  But
he  left  a  heavy  legacy  behind,  for  he  and  his  group  of
disciples  had  spread  widely  abroad  the  extreme  super-
naturalism  of  this  Zwickau  movement,  the  eager  expecta-
tion of  an  imminent  millennium,  and  a  passion  for  the
sword  to  hasten  religio-social  ideals.

Soon  after  the  death  of  Munzer,  Hans  Hut,  an  illiterate
but  powerful  preacher,  who  firmly  believed  himself  a
divinely  inspired  prophet,  played  a  remarkable  role.  His
millenarian  views,  which  he  drew  from  the  apocalyptic
sections  of  the  Bible,  spread  like  contagion  wherever  he
went,  under  his  infectious  preaching.

Melchior  Hoffman  was  another  leader  of  the  "  apoca-
lyptic type."  He  had  pored  over  the  Scriptures,  especially
the  apocalyptic  chapters,  until  he  became  convinced  that  he
had  the  key  to  all  mysteries.  He  interpreted  Bible  texts
by  far-fetched  allegory,  and  formulated  a  marvellous   mil-

^   "If  princes  act  not  only  against  the  (iospel,  but  also  against  the  natural
rights  of  the  people,  they  should  be  strangled  like  dogs,"  is  one  of  his  ' '  sayings. "


i


XVI  THE  ANABAPTISTS  391

lenarian  dream.  He  was  opposed  to  a  salaried  ministry,
and  supported  himself  at  his  trade.  H^e  opposed  all
distinction  between  clergy  and  laity,  except  a  difference
in  gifts.  He  was  opposed  to  all  oaths,  and  he  held  that
it  was  inconsistent  for  a  Christian  to  fill  the  office  of
magistrate.

His  "  Church "  was  as  unecclesiastical  as  that  of  the
primitive  Quakers.      He  says  :

"  God's  community  knows  no  head  but  Christ.  Teachers  and
ministers  are  not  lords.  The  pastors  have  no  authority  except  to
preach  God's  word  and  punish  sins.  A  Bishop  {i.e.  overseer)
must  be  elected  out  of  the  community.  ...  A  true  preacher
would  willingly  see  the  whole  community  prophesy."

He  believed  himself  divinely  inspired.  He  had  a
"  revelation  "  that  the  New  Jerusalem  was  to  come  in  the
City  of  Strasbourg,  and  though  thrown  into  prison  there
he  continued  to  set  date  after  date  for  the  "  coming."
Before  his  imprisonment  he  had  been  the  "  apostle "  of
Anabaptism  in  the  Netherlands,  where  there  was  a  great
"  convincement."  His  "  message  "  reached  the  people,  and
he  kindled  the  highest  hopes  in  the  popular  mind  wher-
ever he  went.  This  "  message,"  though  without  the
powerful  magnetic  personality  which  was  behind  it,  is
preserved  in  his  Tract  on  "  The  Ordinances  of  God,"  an
extract  from  which  is  herewith  given  :

"  Christ,  King  in  heaven  and  on  earth,  sends  His  friends  and
servants  to  teach  all  nations  that  He  has  sacrificed  Himself  for
the  whole  world,  and  taken  away  its  sins.  It  is  the  work  of  a
true  apostle,  not  only  to  proclaim  this  Gospel  of  the  Crucified,
but  also  to  bring  to  all  people  the  joyful  kiss  from  the  mouth  of
the  Bridegroom,  who  has  been  made  by  His  Father  king  over  all
creatures  in  heaven  and  earth,  and  to  deliver  the  message  that
all  those  who  serve  Him  and  will  acknowledge  Him  as  Lord  can
come  to  Him  freely  and  surely,  and  that  He  will  keep  them  with
Him  eternally.  And  the  messengers  of  the  Lord  are  furthermore
commanded  to  unite  to  Christ  through  baptism  all  who  have
thus  given  Him  their  hearts.  To  the  Bride  (the  holy  com-
munity formed  of  those  who  have  thus  given  themselves  in
baptism)  the  Bridegroom  gives  Himself  in  bread  and  wine,  as  an
earthly  bridegroom  gives  himself  with  a  ring;    and   the  Bride


392  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

receiving  the  bread  and  wine,  through  faith  becomes  with  the
Bridegroom  one  body  and  one  flesh,  one  spirit  and  one  mind."

Unfortunately  the  Dutch  leaders,  Jan  Matthys  and
Jan  Bockelson  (often  called  John  of  Leyden),  adopted
the  less  spiritual  side  of  Hoffman's  teaching,  and  pushed
his  millenarian  ideas  to  their  extreme  limit.  They  con-
cluded that  the  time  had  come  for  the  "  believers  "  to  take
the  sword  and  hasten  "  the  coming  of  the  Kingdom,"  and
they  swept  along  with  them  a  band  of  followers  who
credited  them  with  infallible  divine  guidance.  The  result
was  the  maelstrom  of  fanaticism  in  the  "  Miinster  King-
dom "  which  shocked  the  civilized  world.-^


Even  before  the  fanaticism  of  the  "  Miinster  Kingdom  "
had  broken  out,  or  the  excesses  of  millenarianism  had
become  apparent,  the  imperial  authority  and  the  officials
of  the  Church  had  resolved  on  the  extirpation  of  Ana-
baptism  at  whatever  cost.  It  can  be  safely  said  that  no
other  movement  for  spiritual  freedom  in  the  history  of  the
Church  has  such  an  enormous  martyrology.^  Almost  all
the  Swiss  leaders  suffered  martyrdom  while  the  movement
was  in  its  infancy.  As  early  as  1528  the  Suabian  League
sent  out  four  hundred,  and  later  eight  hundred,  and  then
a  thousand  armed  troopers  to  scour  the  districts  under
their  rule,  and  the  leaders  of  the  company  were  given
authority,  at  once  and  without  trial  or  laWy  to  put  to  death
Anabaptists  wherever  caught,  and  to  hunt  them  down  like
wild  beasts.  Keller  says  that  not  less  than  2000  were
put  to  death  in  a  few  years,^  and  Sebastian  Franck  records
that  2000  Anabaptists  had  been  executed  by  1530.      At

1  The  story  of  this  "  Miinster  Kingdom"  is  well  and  fairly  told  for  English
readers  in  Belford  Bax's  Rise  and  Fall  of  Anabaptism,  also  in  Heath's  Anabap-
tism,  chap.  vii.

2  The  Martyrology  of  the  Anabaptists  was  compiled  by  a  Mennonite  teacher
named  Tieleman  Jans  van  Braght,  and  published  in  Dutch  in  1660.  It  gives  the
memorial  and  d)ing  witness  of  the  leading  martyrs  ' '  who  suffered  and  were  put
to  death  for  the  testimony  of  Jesus  their  Saviour."  It  was  translated  into  English
by  Benjamin  Millard,  edited  by  Edward  Bean  Underhill,  and  published  in  two
volumes  by  the  Hanserd-Knollys  Society,  in  1850,  London.

^  Keller,  Ein  Apostel  der  Wiedertaufer,  p.  12.


XVI  THE  ANABAPTISTS  393

the  imperial  Diet  of  Speier,  in  1529,  an  edict  was  passed
for  the  absolute  eradication  of  Anabaptism.  It  decreed
that  "  re-baptizers  and  re-baptized,  all  and  each,  male  and
female,  of  intelligent  age,  be  judged  and  brought  from
natural  life  to  death,  without  antecedent  inquisition  of  the
spiritual  judges."  This  edict  was  ruthlessly  carried  out
in  almost  every  part  of  the  empire.  The  records  show
that  in  Gorz  and  the  Tyrol  alone  the  number  of  execu-
tions in  the  year  i  5  3  i  number  one  thousand,  in  Enisheim
six  hundred,  while  seventy-three  suffered  martyrdom  in
Linz  in  six  weeks.-^  An  eye-witness  of  the  persecution  in
the  Tyrol,  Conrad  Braun,  an  assessor  to  the  Imperial
Chamber,  wrote  :

"  I  have  seen  with  my  own  eyes  that  nothing  has  been  able  to
bring  back  the  Anabaptists  from  their  errors  or  to  make  them
recant.  The  hardest  imprisonment,  hunger,  fire,  water,  the
sword,  all  sorts  of  frightful  executions,  have  not  been  able  to
shake  them.  I  have  seen  young  people,  men  and  women,  go  to
the  stake  singing,  filled  with  joy ;  and  I  can  say  that  in  the
course  of  my  whole  life  nothing  has  moved  me  more."

The  slaughter  in  the  Netherlands  was  almost  beyond
belief.  Buckle  estimates  that  by  1546  thirty  thousand
persons  had  been  put  to  death  in  Holland  and  Friesland
alone  for  their  faith  in  Anabaptism.^

It  was  the  sight  of  the  pitiless  murder  and  martyrdom
of  three  hundred  Anabaptists  in  West  Friesland,  near  his
own  home,  and  one  of  whom  was  his  own  brother,  which
finally  brought  Menno  Simons  to  the  definite  step  of
allying  himself  with  the  movement.  He  became  the
leader  and  organizer  of  a  new  stage  of  Anabaptism,  and
the  prophet  of  the  type  out  of  which  the  modern  Baptist

1  See  Lindsay's  History  of  Reformation,  vol.  ii.  p.  449;  Cornelius,  Geschichte
des  milnsterischen  Aufruhrs  (Leipzig,  1855),  vol.  iL  p.  58.

2  Buckle,  History  of  Civilization,  vol.  i.  p.  189.

Driven  to  frenzy  and  desperation  under  terrific  persecution,  the  Anabaptists
sometimes  show^ed  fanatic  traits,  as  has  happened  in  all  eras  of  persecution.  Who
can  read  except  with  pity  the  account  which  relates  how  some  Anabaptists  in
Amsterdam  stripped  off  their  clothes  and  ran  through  the  street  crying  :  ' '  Woe  1
woe!  woe!  The  wrath  of  God!  The  wrath  of  God!"?  Brought  before  the
magistrates  they  refused  to  dress.  "We  are,"  they  said,  "the  naked  truth."
They  were  hurried  to  the  scaffold  in  barbaric  fashion.  Blok,  in  his  History  of  the
People  of  the  Netherlands  (New  York  and  London,  1899),  thinks  that  Ruckle's
estimate  is  too  large.     Vol.  ii.  p.  317,


394  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

sects  sprang — a  type  of  Christianity  which  profoundly
affected  the  rehgious  life  of  Holland,  the  inner  life  of  the
religious  societies  of  the  English  Commonwealth  and  the
spiritual  destinies  of  America.  Menno  Simons  was  born
in  Whitmarsum,  in  West  Friesland,  about  1496,  and
while  still  a  young  man  was  settled  as  priest  in  the  near-
by village  of  Pingjum.  He  was  well-educated  for  his
time,  but  had  no  first-hand  knowledge  of  the  Bible,  and
performed  his  priestly  duties  in  a  perfunctory  fashion,
living  a  worldly  life  with  apparent  unconcern.

One  day,  without  any  conscious  reflection  on  the
subject,  he  found  himself  arrested  in  the  consecration  of
the  Mass  with  the  over-mastering  suggestion  that  what
he  held  in  his  hands  was  mere  bread  and  wine,  not
Christ's  flesh  and  blood.  He  thought  at  first  that  it
must  be  a  suggestion  of  the  devil,  but  the  impression
would  not  leave  him.  He  took  counsel  with  other  priests,
and  began  to  read  his  Bible  and  the  new  writings  of
Luther  which  were  just  appearing.  A  wonderful  change
came  over  his  spirit.  He  discovered,  to  his  surprise,  that
many  of  the  practices  of  the  Church  had  no  foundation  in
Scripture,  and  that  especially  was  this  true  of  the  practice
of  baptizing  infants.  The  edicts  for  the  suppression  of
the  Anabaptists  brought  their  views  forcibly  to  his
attention.  In  1533  he  was  deeply  stirred  by  the
martyrdom  of  an  Anabaptist  near  by,  and  two  years
later  occurred  the  moving  event  already  referred  to.
This  spectacle,  instead  of  arousing  fear,  fired  his  own
faith  to  the  point  of  conviction.  In  his  own  account  of
it,  he  says  :

"  I  thought  within  myself,  wretched  man  that  I  am,  what  do
I,  remaining  in  this  position  and  not  confirming  by  my  life  the
word  of  the  Lord  and  the  knowledge  that  I  have  received  ?  If  1
do  not  lead  the  ignorant,  misguided  sheep,  who  are  so  anxious
to  do  what  is  right,  as  much  as  in  me  lies,  to  the  true  fold  ot
Christ,  how  then  will  the  blood  shed  in  error  rise  up  against  me
in  the  judgment  of  Almighty  God  ?  My  heart  trembled  in  my
body  at  this  contemplation  of  myself.  I  implored  God  for  grace
and  the  pardon  of  my  transgressions,  and  besought  the  Almighty
that  He  would  create  in  me  a  pure  heart,  that  He  would  endow


XVI  THE  ANABAPTISTS


395


me  with  frankness  and  manly  power  in  order  that  I  might  preach
His  unfalsified  word."

Forthwith  the  die  was  cast,  and  he  threw  himself  with
the  fervour  of  an  apostle  into  his  mission,  which  seemed
to  him  a  heavenly  calling.  He  resolved  from  the  outset
to  have  done  with  dreams  and  fancies  ;  to  turn  away  for
ever  from  the  follies  and  fanaticisms  of  the  "  false
prophets  "  of  Anabaptism,  and  to  organize  the  scattered
forces  of  the  great  movement  into  a  solid  society,  on  the
fundamental  spiritual  truths  revealed  in  Scripture.  He
opposed  all  oaths,  all  war,  and  every  form  of  capital
punishment.  He  utterly  refused  to  have  anything  to  do
with  a  salaried  ministry  ;  he  insisted  on  a  personal  faith,
a  birth  from  above,  and  a  new  life  in  Christ  as  necessary
conditions  of  membership  in  a  Christian  Church,^  and  he
made  a  complete  separation  of  State  and  Church.

^  "  Let  no  one  trust,"  he  wrote,  "  in  the  fact  that  he  is  a  baptized  Christian,
nor  upon  the  long  usage  of  the  times,  nor  upon  papal  decrees,  nor  upon
imperial  edicts,  nor  upon  the  wit  of  learned  men,  nor  upon  human  counsels
and  \sisdom,  for  he  must  be  born  from  above  and  transposed  from  evil  nature
to  good  nature,  from  which  a  new  life  follows."


CHAPTER    XVII

ANABAPTISM    IN    ENGLAND


There  are  two  well-marked  stages  in  the  development
of  Anabaptism  in  England.  The  first  stage,  speaking
roughly,  covers  the  sixteenth  century.  During  this
period  frequent  refugees  from  Holland  and  Germany
introduced,  into  different  localities  of  Great  Britain,  the
doctrines  of  the  continental  Anabaptists,  and  there  was
simultaneously  a  steady  maturing  of  the  ideas  and
teachings  which  the  scattered  groups  of  Lollards  had
kept  alive.  The  early  movement  was,  however,  never
allowed  to  have  free  development,  nor  did  it  achieve
distinct  national  characteristics  or  produce  a  prophetic
leader  who  was  able  to  organize  it  into  a  national  move-
ment. Throughout  the  entire  century  it  was  regarded
with  disgust  and  horror  by  all  sections  of  the  Church,
and  it  was  subjected  to  a  persistent  campaign  of
"  extermination."

The  founder  of  the  new  Anabaptism — the  Ana-
baptism  of  the  second  stage,  more  properly  named  the
"  General  Baptist  "  movement — was  himself  an  English-
man, a  Cambridge  scholar,  a  noble  spirit  with  a  gre^t
religious  vision,  and  this  movement  was  from  its  origin
thoroughly  English,  with  an  early  promise  of  national
significance.

It  is  extremely  difficult  to  fix  the  date  of  the  first
appearance  of  Anabaptism  in  England,  because,  as  I  have
said,  it  had  very  many  traits  in  common  with  the  Lollards,

396


CHAP.  XVII     ANABAPTISM   IN   ENGLAND  397

who  were  secretly  nursing  a  spiritual  religion.  We  get
glimpses  in  the  early  years  of  the  sixteenth  century  of
little  groups  of  "  brethren "  in  England  who  had  views
very  similar  to  those  of  the  continental  Anabaptists.
Proceedings  were  instituted  in  the  court  of  Bishop
Wareham,  in  1511,  against  persons  who  were  teaching
that  the  sacraments  of  baptism  and  of  confirmation  are
not  necessary  or  profitable  to  man's  soul.-^  They  were
probably  Lollards  who  had  come,  independently,  to  the
position  which  characterized  the  Anabaptists.  Wareham
succeeded  in  terrifying  them  into  a  renunciation  of
their  "  errors,"  and  compelled  them  to  "  wear  the  badge
of  a  fagot  in  flames  on  their  clothing  during  the  rest
of  their  lives   or  till  they  were  dispensed  with  for  it."  "^

A  commission  appointed  by  Henry  VIII.,  in  1530,
consisting  of  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  the  Bishop
of  Durham,  and  others,  found  "  divers  heretical  erroneous
opinions,"  among  others  "  the  unlawfulness  of  all  war."
The  commission  declared  that  it  had  found  a  group
of  people  who  taught  that  Jesus  Christ  "hath  not
ordeyned  in  His  spirituall  kingdom — which  is  all  trewe
Cristen  people — any  sworde,  for  He  Himself  is  the
King  and  Governour  without  sworde  and  without  any
outward  law.  Cristen  men  among  themselves  have
nought  to  do  with  the  sworde,  nor  with  the  lawe,  for
that  is  to  them  neither  needful  nor  profitable.  The
secular  sworde  belongeth  not  to  Crist's  kingdom,  for  in  it
is  noon  but  good  and  justice.  Crist  saith  that  noo  Cristen
shall  resist  Evil,  nor  sue  any  man  at  the  law."  ^  This  has
the  hall-mark  of  Anabaptism,  but  it  is  quite  possible  for
such  views  to  have  developed  from  Lollardry  without  any
foreign  influence  from  the  continent.

The  name  "  Anabaptism "  does  not,  so  far  as  I
am  aware,  appear  in  English  documents  before  1534.
Two     proclamations     were    issued    in     1534,     in     which

1  Evans'  Early  English  Baptists,   vol.   i,   p.    41  ;   Crosby's  English  Baptists,
vol.  i.  p.  30.

2  Burnet's  History  of  the  Reformation,  vol.  i.  p.  27.

3  Quoted  from  Barclay's  Inner  Life  of  the  Religious  Societies  of  the  Coinmon.
wealth  (London,  1879),  P-  14-


398  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap

Anabaptists  were  denounced  by  name,  were  spoken  of  as
being  both  of  foreign  and  native  origin,  and  they  were
accused  of  "  lurking  secretly  in  divers  corners  and  places,"
and  of  increasing  "  naughty  printed  books."  ^  But  they
were  almost  certainly  "  lurking  secretly  in  divers  corners  "
before  that  date.  In  an  address  issued  by  Bishop
Wareham,  in  1530,  a  statement  is  made  which  indicates
that  persecuted  Anabaptists  from  the  continent  had
already  begun  to  seek  refuge  in  Great  Britain.  It  says
that  "  many  books  in  the  English  tongue,  containing
many  detestable  errors  and  damnable  opinions,  are  printed
in  countries  beyond  the  seas,  to  be  brought  into  divers
towns  and  sundry  of  this  realm  in  England,  and  sown
abroad  in  the  same,  to  the  great  decay  of  our  faith,  and
the  perilous  corruption  of  the  people  unless  speedy
remedy  were  provided."  ^

One  of  these  books,  full  of  "detestable  errors  and
damnable  opinions,"  was  the  Sum  of  Scriptures,  which
contained  this  "  opinion  "  :  "  The  water  in  the  font  has
no  more  virtue  in  it  than  the  water  of  the  river ;  the
baptism  lies  not  in  hallowed  water,  or  in  any  outward
thing,  but  in  the  faith  only.  The  water  of  baptism  is
nothing  but  a  sign  that  we  must  be  under  the  standard
of  the  cross."  ^  This  "  opinion "  contains  the  very
essence  of  Anabaptism,  and  was  most  probably  written
by  a  person  who  had  been  influenced  by  the  continental
movement.^

The  terrible  persecution  of  the  Anabaptists  in  the
Netherlands  drove  many  of  them  across  to  England  to
try  their  fate  under  Henry  VIII.  The  result  was  that
the  prevailing  strain  of  teaching  in  Early  English
Anabaptism  was  of  the  "  Hoffmanite  "  or  "  Melchiorite  "
type — due  to  the  influence  of  Melchior  Hoffman,  the
"  apostle  "  to  the  Netherlands.  There  are  many  evidences
of    the    presence    in    the    kingdom    of   these   Anabaptist

1  Wilkins'  Concilia  Magnae  Britaiiniae  et  Hiberniae,  vol.  iii.  p.  776.

2  Evans'  Early  English  Baptists,  vol.  i.  p.  42.

2  The  ' '  Sum  of  Scriptures  "  is  printed  in  Wilkins'  Concilia  Magnae  Britanniae
et  Hiberniae,  vol.  iii.  pp.  730-33  (see  chap.  xv. ).

*  It  is,  of  course,  possible  that  such  opinions  are  only  a  native  development
of  English  Lollardry.


XVII  ANABAPTISM   IN  ENGLAND  399

refugees,  especially  of  the  artisan  class.  The  proclamation
of  1534,  already  referred  to,  says  that  "divers  and
sundry  strangers  of  the  sects  and  false  opinions  of  the
Anabaptists  ...  are  lately  come  into  this  realme,  where
they  lurke  secretely  in  divers  corners  and  places,  minding
craftily  and  subtilly  to  provoke  and  stir  the  King's  loveing
subjects  to  their  errors  and  opinions."  They  are  ordered
to  leave  the  country  within  eight  days.

Again,  in  1535,  more  "strangers"  fell  into  the  hands
— one  cannot  say  the  "  tender  mercies  " — of  the  Church
authorities.  A  contemporary  chronicler  ^  gives  the
following  account  of  the  occurrence  :

"The  25th  day  of  May,  were — in  St.  Paul's  Church,  London
— examined,  nineteen  men  and  six  women,  born  in  Holland,
whose  opinions  were — first,  that  in  Christ  is  not  two  natures,  God
and  man ;  secondly,  that  Christ  took  neither  flesh  nor  blood  of
the  Virgin  Mary  ;  ^  thirdly,  that  children  born  of  infidels  may  be
saved  ;  fourthly,  that  baptism  of  children  is  of  none  effect;  fifthly,
that  the  sacrament  of  Christ's  body  is  but  bread  only ;  sixthly,
that  he  who  after  baptism  sinneth  wittingly,  sinneth  deadly,  and
cannot  be  saved.  Fourteen  of  them  were  condemned ;  a  man
and  woman  were  burnt  in  Smithfield ;  the  other  twelve  of  them
were  sent  to  other  towns  there  to  be  burnt."

The  chronicler  further  says  that  the  above  "  damnable
errors "  were  drawn  from  "  the  indiscreet  use  of  the
Scriptures."

Latimer,  in  one  of  his  sermons,  shows  the  indomitable
spirit  of  these  martyrs  :

"  I  should  have  told  you  here  of  a  certain  sect  of  heretics.
They  will  have  no  magistrates  nor  judges  on  the  earth.  Here  I
have  to  tell  you  what  I  heard  of  late,  by  the  relations  of  a
credible  person  and  a  worshipful  man,  of  a  town  in  this  realm
of  England  that  hath  about  500  of  heretics  of  this  erroneous
opinion  in  it."  "The  Anabaptists  that  were  burnt  there,  in
divers  towns  of  England,  as  I  have  heard  of  credible  men  (I
saw  them  not  myself),  met  their  death  even  intrepid^  as  you  will
say  ;  without  any  fear  in  the  world.  Well,  let  them  go.  There
was,   in  the  old  times,  another  kind  of  poisoned  heretics,  that

^  Stow's  Chronicles  of  England,   p.  1004.

2  These  opinions  marked  ' '  first  "  and  ' '  secondly  "  are  evidently  ' '  Hoffmanite  "
opinions.


400  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

were  called  Donatists ;  and  those  heretics  went  to  their  execu-
tion as  they  should  have  gone  to  some  jolly  recreation  or
banquet."  ^

Barclay,  in  his  study  of  the  Inner  Life  of  the  Religious
Societies  of  the  Commonwealth,  which  contains  a  large
amount  of  valuable  though  badly  digested  material,  gives
an  interesting  account  of  a  great  gathering  of  Ana-
baptists on  the  continent  in  1536,  to  which  the  English
societies  sent  a  deputation.  He  says  (quoting  Dr.
Nippold's  Life  of  D.  foris'^  as  his  authority)  :

"In  that  year  (1536)  certain  Baptist  societies  in  England
sent  a  deputation  to  a  great  gathering  of  the  Anabaptists  near
Buckholt,  in  WestphaUa,  which  was  held  after  the  fall  of  Miinster,
to  compose  their  differences  upon  the  subject  of  the  bearing  of
arms,  in  order  to  further  the  interests  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ,
and  respecting  some  other  matters.  The  violent  party  were
represented  by  Battenburg,  who  approved  the  views  of  the
Miinster  faction,  and  it  is  well  to  note  that  this  man  regarded
the  tenet  of  adult  baptism  as  quite  unimportant  compared  with
the  extirpation  by  the  sword  of  the  enemies  of  the  '  Kingdom  of
God,'  and  had  abolished  it  {i.e.  water  baptism)  among  his
followers  previously  to  this  meeting.  The  party  in  direct
antagonism  were  represented  by  Ubbo  Phillips  (although  he
was  not  present),  who  opposed  all  war  and  revenge  as  anti-
Christian,  and  maintained  the  purely  spiritual  character  of
Christ's  kingdom.  The  third  party  represented  was  that  of
Melchior  Hoffman.  David  Joris,  the  originator  of  a  fourth
party,  acted  the  part  of  mediator,  and  subtilely  maintained  that
even  if  the  Battenburgers  were  right,  the  titne  was  not
co?ne  to  set  up  the  'Kingdom  of  the  Elect,'  and  that  for  the
present,  therefore,  the  power  must  be  left  in  the  hands  of  the
hostile  and  unbelieving  magistracy.     This  meeting  at  Buckholt

1  Latimer's  Sermons  {Parker  Soc.  Pub.),  vol.  v.  p.  151.  Froude  has  com-
memorated these  unnamed  heroes  in  a  passage  full  of  beautiful  sympathy  :  "The
details  are  gone — their  names  are  gone.  Poor  Hollanders  they  were,  and  that  is
all.  Scarcely  the  fact  seemed  worth  the  mention,  so  shortly  is  it  told  in  a  pass-
ing paragraph.  For  them  no  Europe  was  agitated,  no  courts  were  ordered  into
mourning,  no  papal  hearts  trembled  with  indignation.  At  their  death  the  world
looked  on  complacent,  indifferent,  or  exulting.  Yet  here,  too,  out  of  twenty-
five  poor  men  and  women  were  found  fourteen  who  by  no  terror  of  stake  or
torture  could  be  tempted  to  say  they  believed  what  they  did  not  believe.  History
for  them  has  no  word  of  praise  ;  yet  they,  too,  were  not  giving  their  blood  in
vain.  Their  lives  might  have  been  as  useless  as  the  lives  of  most  of  us.  In
their  deaths  they  assisted  to  pay  the  purchase  money  for  England's  freedom"
{History  of  England,  vol.  ii.  p.  365).

2  In  Zeitschrift  fur  die  historische  Theologieiox  1863,  pp.  52-55.


XVII  ANABAPTISM  IN  ENGLAND  401

was  the  commencement  not  only  of  the  disentanglement  of  the
Baptist  Churches  from  political  aims,  but  of  the  active  propaga-
tion of  the  great  idea  concerning  the  entire  distinction  between
the  province  of  the  Church  and  that  of  the  State.  This  view
was  later  developed  by  Menno,  who  was  a  follower  of  Ubbo
Phillips.

A  certain  Englishman  of  the  name  of  '  Henry '  was  very
active  in  promoting  this  meeting,  and  himself  paid  the  travelling
expenses  of  the  deputies.  (Krohn's  supposition  that  this
'  Henry '  was  Henrick  Niclaes  is  quite  beside  the  mark,  as  may
be  seen  by  comparing  the  dates.)  England  was  represented  by
John  Mathias,  of  Middleburg  (who  was  afterwards  burnt  at
London  for  his  adhesion  to  the  tenets  of  Melchior  Hoffman).
It  is  interesting  to  notice  that  the  representatives  of  England
were  very  indignant  at  the  loose  views  of  the  Miinster  party.
The  result  of  this  conference  was  that  the  power  of  the  unruly
Anabaptists  was  completely  destroyed."  ^

"The  Pilgrimage  of  Grace,"  in  1536,  which  was  an
attempt  on  the  part  of  Roman  Catholics  to  overthrow
the  Reformation,  included  Anabaptism  among  the  "  new
doctrines  "  that  were  to  be  extirpated.  The  list  of
heresies  which  the  "pilgrims"  laid  before  Henry  VIII.
ended  with  the  words  :  "  Heresies  of  Anabaptists,  clearly
within  this  realm,  are  to  be  annihilated  and  destroyed,"  ^
and  the  Articles  of  Religion,  drawn  up  by  the  Con-
vocation which  met  in  June  1536,  show  that  Anabaptist
opinions  were  on  the  increase  in  England.^  The  same
year,  in  July,  the  Lower  House  laid  before  the  Prelates
in  Convocation  a  portentous  collection  of  sixty-seven
erroneous  doctrines  which  were  then  being  publicly  pro-
fessed and  preached  in  the  country.  In  the  list  are
found  many  tenets  which  are  distinctly  in  line  with
Anabaptism.      For  example  :  ^

"  Item  5. — That  all  ceremonies  accustomed  in  the  Church,
which  are  not  clearly  expressed  in  Scripture,  must  be  taken  away,
because  they  are  men's  inventions."

"  Item  8. — That  it  is  preached  and  taught  that  the  Church

1  Barclay,  p.  76  note.

2  Froude,  History  of  England,  vol.  ii.  pp.  156-57.

3  Crosby,  History  of  English  Baptists,  vol  i.  p.  33.

^  These  "  items  "  are  taken  from  Fuller's  Church  History  of  Britain  (London
Edition,  1868),  vol.  iii.  pp.  81-86.

2  D


402  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

that  is  commonly  taken  for  the  Church  is  the  old  synagogue ;
and  that  the  Church  is  the  congregatio?t  of  good  men  only.'"

"  Item  12.  —  That  all  religions  and  professions  {i.e.  all
established  religions),  whatsoever  they  be,  are  clean  contrary
to  Chris fs  religion."

"Item  17. — That  it  is  as  lawful  to  christen  a  child  in  a  tub
of  water  at  home,  or  in  a  ditch  by  the  way,  as  in  a  font-stone  in
the  church."

"  Item  34. — That  it  is  ?iot  necessary  or  profitable  to  have  any
church  or  chapel  to  pray  in  or  to  do  any  Divine  service  in."  ^

"Item  35. — That  the  church  was  made  for  no  other  purpose,
but  either  to  keep  the  people  from  wind  and  rain,  or  else  that
the  people  upon  Sundays  and  holy-days  should  resort  thither  to
have  the  word  of  God  declared  unto  them."

"Item  41. — That  it  is  as  much  available  to  pray  unto  saints
as  to  hurl  a  stone  against  the  wind  ;  and  that  the  saints  have  no
more  power  to  help  a  man  than  a  man's  wife  hath  to  help  her
husband."

"Item  52. — That  the  singing  or  saying  of  Mass,  matins,  or
even-song,  is  but  a  roaring,  howling,  whistling,  mumming,  tom-
ring,  and  juggling;  and  that  playing  at  the  organ  is  a  foolish
vanity."

"  Item  56. — That  by  preaching  the  people  have  been  brought
in  opinion  and  belief  that  nothing  is  to  be  believed  except  it  can
be  proved  expressly  by  Scripture."

"Item  61. — That  water  running  in  the  channel  or  common
river  is  of  as  great  virtue  as  the  holy  water."

The  King  was  from  the  first  resolved  to  "repress
and  utterly  extinguish  these  persons,"  who,  "whilst  their
hands  were  busied  about  their  manufactures,  had  their
heads  also  beating  about  points  of  divinity  "  ;  and  from
the  year  1538,  "  by  the  exercise  of  the  royal  prerogative
in  the  imposition  of  dogmas  of  faith  on  the  consciences
of  his  subjects,"  ^  he  set  the  machinery  in  operation  to
exterminate  both  the  Anabaptists  themselves  and  their
books.  The  hated  "  sect,"  however,  steadily  increased,
and  Strype  says  that  their  "opinions  were  believed  by
many  honest,  well-meaning  people."

1  It  is  not  possible  to  decide  in  the  case  of  some  of  these  views  whether  they
have  a  Lollard  or  an  Anabaptist  origin.  Strype  records  (in  Eccl.  Mem.  under
Henry  VI  11.  vol.  i.  p.  2S8)  how  a  converted  friar  taught  that  "  Christ  would
dwell  in  no  church  that  was  made  of  lime  and  stones,  but  only  in  heaven  above
and  in  men's  hearts  on  earth."

2  Tracts  on  Liberty  of  Conscience,  Intro,  by  Dr.  Underhill,  p.  xIvL


XVII  ANABAPTISM   IN   ENGLAND  403

Burnet,  in  his  History  of  the  Reformation}  makes  it
plain  that  the  "  extermination  "  poHcy  was  not  succeed-
ing. He  says:  "At  this  time  (1549)  there  were  many
Anabaptists  in  several  parts  of  England.  They  were
generally  Germans  whom  the  Revolution  forced  to  change
their  seats."      Burnet  further  says  that

"  the  Reformers  made  the  Scriptures  the  only  rule  for  Christians,
and  thereupon  many  argued  that  the  mysteries  of  the  Trinity
and  Christ's  Incarnation  and  sufferings,  the  fall  of  man  and  the
aids  of  Grace,  were  indeed  philosophical  subtilties  and  only  pre-
tended to  be  deduced  from  Scripture,  as  almost  all  opinions  of
religion  were,  and  therefore  they  rejected  them.  Among  these,
Baptism  of  Infants  was  one.  They  believed  that  our  Saviour,
commanding  the  Apostles  to  baptize,  did  join  teaching  with  it,
and  they  said  that  the  great  decay  of  Christians  followed  from
this  way  of  making  children  Christians  before  they  understood
what  they  did."

The  county  of  Kent  was  especially  infected  with
Anabaptist  teaching,  and  an  ecclesiastical  commission,
consisting  of  Cranmer  and  six  other  prelates  and  divines
with  various  distinguished  laymen,  was  appointed  in  1549,
*'  for  the  examination  of  the  Anabaptists  and  Arians  that
now  began  to  spring  up  apace  and  show  themselves  more
openly."  ^  The  first  martyr  under  this  commission  was
the  famous  Joan  Boucher,  a  member  of  a  small  congrega-
tion of  Anabaptists  in  the  town  of  Eythorne.^  Strype
says  ^  that  these  sectaries  in  Kent  and  Essex  were

"the  first  that  tcvzAq  separation  from  the  reformed  Church  of
England^  having  gathered  congregations  of  their  own.  The
congregation  in  Essex  was  mentioned  to  be  at  Booking,  that
in  Kent  at  Feversham,  as  I  have  from  an  old  register.  From
whence  I  also  collect  that  they  held  the  opinions  of  the
Anabaptists  and  Pelagians  (free-wiilers) ;  that  there  zvere  con-
tributions made  among  them  for  the  better  maintaining  of  their
congregations ;  that  the  members  of  the  congregation  in  Kent
went  over  to  the  congregatio7t  in  Essex^   to  instruct  and  to  join

'  Vol.  ii.  p.  202.

2  Strype's  Life  of  Sir  Thomas  Smith,  p.  37.

8  Strype  calls  her  an  Arian,  and  she  probably  did  hold  "  heretical"  views  on
the  nature  of  the  Incarnation.

*  Sxxyp&s  Memorials  of  Eeformers  [Oxioxd),  vol.  i.  p.  369.


404  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

them ;    and  that    they   had    their   meetings    in   Kent   in   divers
places  besides  Feversham."

Strype  has  gathered  some  of  the  tenets  of  these
sectaries  as  follows  :  "  That  the  doctrine  of  predestination
is  meeter  for  devils  than  for  Christian  men "  ;  **  that
children  are  not  born  in  original  sin "  ;  "  that  there  is
no  man  so  chosen  but  that  he  may  damn  himself,  neither
any  man  so  reprobate  but  that  he  may  keep  God's  com-
mands and  be  saved."  He  further  records  a  great  dis-
pute which  arose  among  them,  "  whether  it  was  necessary
to  stand  or  kneel,  bareheaded  or  covered,  at  prayers."
Their  wise  conclusion  was  "  that  the  ceremony  is  not
material  {i.e,  counts  for  nothing)^  but  that  the  heart  before
God  is  required,  and  nothing  else^  ^

The  Cranmer  commission,  which  was  renewed  in
1551,  burnt  George  van  Pare,  evidently  a  Dutch  Ana-
baptist, and  forced  from  another  Dutchman  a  recanta-
tion of  the  opinion  that  "  there  is  no  priest  but  God
only  ;  that  no  priest  has  power  to  take  away  sin  ;  that
no  bishop  can  make  one  ground  holier  than  another  ;
that  no  man  ought  to  keep  any  day  holy  but  the
Sunday."  ^

The  sufferings  of  the  "  Reformers  "  during  the  reign
of  Mary  have  bulked  so  large  that  historians  have  given
little  thought  and  attention  to  "  the  root  and  branch
Reformers,"  the  Anabaptists,  whom  these  very  "  martyrs  "
of  "  Bloody  Mary's "  reign  had  harried  and  done  to
death.  All  through  Mary's  reign  the  "  extermination  of
Anabaptists  continued,  always  needing,  however,  a  re-
petition of  "  extermination  "  immediately  after.  It  is
with  sadness  that  one  reads  of  Ridley's  condemnation  of
these  noble  "  heretics "  just  before  he  himself  was  called
to  the  stake  in  Oxford  —  to  "  light  such  a  candle  in
England  as  by  the  grace  of  God  was  never  to  go  out."
He  condemns  them  because  they  regard  the  sacraments
as  "  only  badges  and  tokens  of  Christian  men's  profes-
sion "  ;  because  they  "  make   no   difference    between   the

^  See  Strype's  Life  of  Parker,  vol.  i.  pp.  54-55  ;  vol.  iii.  p.  413  ;  and  Mem.
of  Cranmer,  vol.  i.  p.  337.  '^  Evans,  op.  cit.  vol.  i.  p.  81.


XVII  ANABAPTISM   IN  ENGLAxXD  405

Lord's  table  and  their  own "  ;  because  "  they  refuse  to
attend  the  ministry,  or  submit  to  any  Christian  rite  from
any  clergyman,  however  regular  his  succession,  who  was
not  known  as  a  man  of  God  by  his  holy  life  and  the
fruits  of  piety  r  ^

During  Elizabeth's  reign  not  only  the  existence  but
the  wide  diffusion  of  Anabaptist  principles  is  acknow-
ledged on  all  hands.  Marsden  says,^  speaking  of  this
period  :

"  But  the  Anabaptists  were  the  most  numerous^  and  for  some  time
the  most  formidable,  opponents  of  the  Church.  They  are  said
to  have  existed  in  England  from  the  early  days  of  the  Lollards ;
but  their  chief  strength  was  now  derived  and  their  numbers
reinforced  from  Germany."

Contemporary  writers  bear  witness  to  the  prevalence
of  the  sect.

Bishop  Jewel,  in  his  correspondence  with  the  Swiss
divines,  complained  :  "  We  found  at  the  beginning  of
the  reign  of  Elizabeth  large  and  inauspicious  crops  of
Arians,  Anabaptists,  and  other  pests,"  and  Bishop  Cox
wrote  to  Gaulter  :  "  You  must  not  be  grieved,  my  Gaulter,
that  sectaries  are  showing  themselves  to  be  mischievous
and  wicked  interpreters  of  your  most  just  opinion.  For
it  can  not  be  otherwise  but  that  tares  must  grow  in  the
Lord's  field,  and  that  in  no  small  quantity.  Of  this  kind
are  the  Anabaptists,  Donatists,  Arians,  Papists,  and  all
the  good-for-nothing  tribe  of  sectaries."  Bishop  Aylmer
was  especially  embittered,  saying  :  ^  "  The  Anabaptists,
with  infinite  other  swarms  of  Satanists,  do  you  think  that
every  pulpit  may  be  able  to  answer  them  ?  I  pray  God
there  may  be  many  who  can.  .  .  .  And  in  these  latter
daies  the  old  festered  sores  newly  broke  out,  as  the
Anabaptists,  the  free-willers,  with  infinite  other  swarms
of  God's  enemies."  And  Dr.  Parker,  in  his  letter,
declining  the  Archbishopric  of  Canterbury,  says  :  *  "  They

^  Underbill,  Liberty  of  Conscience,  p.  cxxv.
2  Marsden's  History  of  the  Early  Puritans,  p.  145.

^  Bishop  Aylmer' s  An  Harborowe  for  Faithful  and  True  Subjects,  eta
(1559).  P-  A.  3.

^  Burnet's  History  of  Reformation,  vol.  ii.  p.  359.


4o6  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

say  that  the  realm  is  full  ot  Anabaptists,  Arians,
libertines,  free-will  men,  etc."

Many  natives  of  the  Low  Countries,  exiled  by  religious
persecutions  at  home,  had  settled  in  Norfolk  and  Suffolk
by  1560,  and  in  the  fourth  year  of  Elizabeth's  reign  a
proclamation  was  issued  by  the  Oueen,^  commanding  "  the
Anabaptists  and  such  like  heretics,  which  had  flocked  to
the  coast  toivns  of  England  from  the  parts  beyond  the  seas,
under  colour  of  shunning  persecution,  and  had  spread  the
poison  of  their  sects  in  England,  to  depart  the  realm
within  twenty  days,  whether  they  were  natural-born  people
of  the  land  or  foreign,  upon  pain  of  imprisonment  and  loss
of  goods."  Many  were  forced  to  wander  in  other  lands,
and  probably  fell  victims  to  the  persecuting  power.  Collier
says  :  "  Several  secured  themselves  with  their  Protestancy,
and  joined  the  French  and  Dutch  congregations,  both  in
London  and  the  coast  towns."  ^

A  sect  came  to  light  in  the  diocese  of  Ely  in  1573,
which  gave  the  "  ecclesiastical  commission  "  great  trouble,
and  which  seems  like  a  small  Society  of  Friends  three-
quarters  of  a  century  before  their  time.  "  They  maintain
and  defend,"  the  report  of  the  commission  declares,  "  that
it  is  not  lawful  by  the  word  of  God  to  take  any  kind  of
oath,  for  any  cause,  before  any  person  "  ;  "  that  it  is  not
lawful  for  any  magistrate  to  put  a  malefactor  to  death  "  ;
"  that  every  man  may,  without  lawful  callings,  leap  into
the  Church  of  God,  and,  as  his  furious  brain  moveth  him,
preach  and  interpret !  Whose  voice  all  men  are  bound  to
hear,  as  well  as  the  ministers  of  God  "  ;  and  finally,  "  they
meet  in  privy  conventicles,  with  the  doors  shut  upon  them :
intromitting  no  man  but  him  that  will  join  with  them  in
their  mysteries,  as  they  call  them.  Their  preacher  is  some
one  of  their  company  ;  a  private  man  called  and  moved,  as
is  above  said."  ^

There  is  overwhelming  evidence    from    contemporary

^  Camden's  Annales  of  Elizabeth  (edition  of  1625),  p.  64,
^  Strype,  in  his  Annals,  gives  a  long  account  of  these  commotions,  which  he
professes   to  draw  from   Dutch   MSS.      Evans  (vol.   i.   p.    151)  says:   "These
(MSS. )  we  believe  still  exist,  and  as  yet  unpublished.     Their  publication  is  much
to  be  desired."  '  Strype's  Life  of  Parker,  vol.  ii.  pp.  287-88.


XVII  ANABAPTISM   LN   ENGLAND  407

writers  to  prove  that  Anabaptism  never  was  "  extermin-
ated "  in  England.  Such  confessions  as  :  "  Now  began
the  Anabaptists  wonderfully  to  increase  in  the  land  "  ;  -^
and  "There  are  several  Anabaptistical  conventicles  in
London  (1589)  and  other  places,  and  some  of  this  sort
have  been  bred  at  our  universities,"  ^  show  that  "  the
infection  of  England,"  as  it  was  called,  went  on  unchecked
by  "  ecclesiastical  commissions  "  and  "  martyr  fires."


II

The  second  stage  of  English  Anabaptism  begins  with
John  Smyth,  the  "  Se-Baptist,"  or  self-baptizer.^  There
is  an  amazing  confusion  of  John  Smyths  (or  Smiths)  in
this  period  of  history.  Our  John  Smyth  received  his
Master's  degree  at  Cambridge  in  1593,  was  probably
ordained  a  minister  of  the  Church  of  England  in  1594,
and  certainly  became  lecturer  and  preacher  of  the  city  of
Lincoln  in  1600,  a  position  which  came  to  an  end  two
years  later.  He  soon  after  wrote  two  books.  The  Bi'ight
Morning  Star  and  A  Pattern  of  True  Prayer^  and  by  1 606
he  was  a  member  of  the  "  Separatist  Church  "  of  Gains-
borough, a  part  of  the  famous  congregation  which  assembled
at  Scrooby  Manor  House  in  1602,  and  "  formed  themselves
by  covenant  into  a  Church  of  the  congregational  order,"
and  soon  "  afterwards  he  was  chosen  their  pastor."  Under
the  pitiless  fire  of  persecution,  a  large  band  of  this
Gainsborough  congregation  resolved  to  migrate  to  Holland
with  their  leading  spirits,  John  Smyth,  Thomas  Helwys
(or  Helwisse),  and   John   Murton   (or  Morton),  to  secure

^  Fuller's  Church  History  of  Britain.

2  Dr.  Some's  Treatise  Against  Barrow.  Dr.  Some  gives  interesting  light  on
the  views  of  the  Anabaptists  of  the  period.  "They  held,"  he  says,  "that
ministers  of  the  Gospel  ought  to  be  maintained  by  voluntary  contributions  of  the
people";  "  that  the  civil  power  has  no  right  to  make  or  impose  ecclesiastical
laws";  "that  the  people  ought  to  have  the  right  of  choosing  their  own
ministers"  ;  "that  no  man  ought  to  arrogate  to  himself  the  title  of  Doctor  of
Divinity"  ;  and  "that  though  the  Lord's  Prayer  be  a  rule  and  foundation  of
prayer,  yet  it  is  not  to  be  used  as  a  form  ;  and  that  no  forms  of  prayer  ought  to
be  imposed  on  the  Church."

3  The  movement  inaugurated  by  John  Smyth  is  the  beginning  of  what  is
historically  known  as  the  "  Society  of  General  Baptists,"  and  the  term  Anabaptism
gradually  fell  out  of  use.


4o8  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

freedom  of  faith,  and  thither  they  sailed,  in  all  probability,
toward  the  end  of  1607.

Smyth  was  one  of  the  most  able  of  the  Separatists,
and,  as  Bishop  Creighton  says,  none  of  them  had  "  a  finer
mind  or  a  more  beautiful  soul."  He  was  broad  and  open-
minded,  and  just  the  type  of  man  to  carry  the  separation
idea  to  its  logical  issue,  which  he  did  by  enunciating  the
principle  of  complete  and  perfect  freedom,  as  opposed  to
a  partial  toleration  by  the  State  of  certain  "  tolerable
opinions."

It  must  be  admitted,  however,  that  with  all  his  "open-
mindedness  "  Smyth  was,  by  a  fundamental  trait  of  nature,
prone  to  put  over  -  emphasis  on  unimportant  scruples.
This  trait,  in  spite  of  his  genuine  honesty  and  sincerity,
made  him  a  disturbing  element  in  the  new  Church,  and
the  leader  of  separatist  tendencies  within  "  the  separation."
For  example,  in  the  interest  of  "  spiritual  worship,"  he
insisted  that  it  was  a  sin  to  use  the  English  Bible
in  the  worship  of  God,  and  he  thought  that  the
preachers  should  bring  the  originals,  the  Hebrew  and
Greek,  and  out  of  them  translate  by  voice.  "  A  written
translation,"  he  claimed,  "  was  as  much  a  human
writing  as  a  homily  or  written  prayer."  ^  Under  the
influence  of  the  Mennonite  teaching  about  him  in
Holland  he  came  to  see  that  "infants  ought  not  to
be  baptized,  (i)  because  there  is  neither  precept  nor
example  for  it  in  the  New  Testament,  and  (2)  because
Christ  commanded  to  make  disciples  by  teaching  them  and
then  baptizing  them."  ^  This  conclusion  carried  with  it
the  necessity  of  re-baptism  (for  Smith  did  not  adopt  the
Quaker  position  that  baptism  with  water  is  no  necessary
part  of  the  Christian  dispensation),  and  the  question  there-
fore arose,  as  it  had  arisen  with  the  primitive  Swiss
Anabaptists,  who  was  qualified  to  give  the  leader  the  new
baptism  ?  The  decision  reached  was  novel  and  unique.
It  was  decided  that  Smyth  should  baptize  himself,  which
he  did.      He  then  baptized  Thomas  Helwys  and  the  rest

*  Ainsworth's  "  Reply"  to  Smyth's  Differences  of  the  Churches  of  the  Separa-
tion, p.  108.  -  Smyth's  Character  of  the  Beast.


XVII  ANABAPTISM   IN   ENGLAND  409

of  the  company,-^  defending  his  action  on  the  ground  that
he  had  "as  good  warrant  for  baptizing  himself"  as  his
critics  had  for  "  beginning  a  new  Church,"  namely,  "  the
true  Church  of  the  separation."

He,  however,  later  looked  on  his  act  as  an  error  and
blunder,  since,  on  further  consideration,  he  came  to  the
conclusion  that  the  Mennonites  were  already  "  a  true
Church  with  a  true  baptism,"  and  that  he  should  have
joined  himself  to  that  Church.  On  this  ground  he,  with
thirty-one  others,  asked  for  membership  in  the  Mennonite
congregation  of  Amsterdam  ;  ^  but  before  the  decision  to
receive  them  was  reached  Smyth  had  already  joined  the
great  company  of  those  "  who  have  washed  their  robes
and  made  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb."

Before  leaving  Smyth,  to  follow  the  development  of
the  larger  movement  which  grew  out  of  this  initiation
of  the  English  Baptist  Society,  I  must  gather  up  the
important  religious  principles  which  were  more  or  less
clearly  enunciated  by  him.

The  following  passage  from  his  Long  Confession  is
remarkable  for  the  boldness  of  its  insistence  on  "  freedom,"
its  absolute  rejection  of  "  original  sin,"  and  for  its  declara-
tion that  the  "atonement"  means  the  reconciliation  of  men
to  God: —

"  God  created  man  with  freedom  of  will,  which  was  a  natural
power  or  faculty  in  the  soul.  Adam,  after  his  fall,  did  not  lose
any  natural  faculty,  but  still  retained  freedom  of  will.  Original
sin  is  therefore  an  idle  term.  Infants  are  conceived  and  born  in
innocency  without  sin,  and  so  dying  are  undoubtedly  saved,  and
this  is  to  be  understood  of  all  infants  under  heaven.  All  actual
sinners  bear  the  image  of  Adam  in  his  innocency,  fall,  and  resti-
tution to  grace.  As  no  man  begetteth  his  child  to  the  gallows,
nor  no  potter  maketh  a  pot  to  break  it,  so  God  doth  not  pre-

1  The  form  of  baptism  used  by  Smyth  is  unimportant,  but  it  is  generally
thought  to  have  been  affusion,  as  was  the  custom  of  the  Mennonites  of  the  time,
and  not  immersion  (see  Newman's  History  of  Baptists,  p.  41).

2  The  application  for  admission  to  the  Mennonite  Church  runs  as  follows  :
"The  names  of  the  English  who  confess  this  their  error  and  repent  it,  viz.
that  they  undertook  to  baptize  themselves  contrary  to  the  order  appointed  by
Christ,  and  who  now  desire  on  this  account  to  be  brought  back  to  the  true
Church  of  Christ  as  quickly  as  may  be  suffered."  (Evans,  vol.  i.  p,  209,  and
Appendix  D. )


410  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

destinate  any  man  to  destruction.  The  sacrifice  of  Christ's  body
doth  not  reconcile  God  unto  us,  Who  did  never  hate  us  nor  was
our  enemy,  but  reconcileth  us  unto  God.  The  efficacy  of  Christ's
death  is  derived  only  to  them  who  do  mortify  their  sins,  being
grafted  with  Him  in  the  similitude  of  His  death ;  and  every
regenerate  person  hath  in  himself  the  three  witnesses  of  the
Father,  the  Word,  and  the  Holy  Spirit.  Repentance  and  faith
are  wrought  in  the  hearts  of  men  by  the  preaching  of  the  Word ;
but  the  new  creature  which  is  begotten  of  God  needeth  not  the
outward  Scriptures,  creatures,  or  ordinances  of  the  Church ;  yet
he  can  do  nothing  against  the  law  and  Scriptures,  but  rather  all
his  doings  shall  serve  to  the  confirming  and  establishing  of  the
law.  All  penitent  and  faithful  Christians  are  brethren  in  the
communion  of  the  outward  Church,  wheresoever  they  live,  by
what  name  soever  they  are  known ;  and  we  salute  them  all  with
a  holy  kiss,  being  heartily  grieved  that  we  which  follow  after  one
faith  and  one  Spirit,  one  Lord,  one  God,  one  baptism,  should  be
rent  into  so  many  sects  and  schisms ;  and  that  only  for  matters
of  less  moment.  The  outward  baptism  of  water  is  to  be  admin-
istered only  upon  penitent  and  faithful  persons,  not  upon  innocent
infants  and  wicked  persons.  The  sacraments  have  the  same  use
that  the  Word  hath  :  they  are  a  visible  Word,  and  teach  the  eye
of  them  that  understand  as  the  Word  teacheth  them  that  have
ears  to  hear.  The  outward  Church  visible  consists  of  penitent
persons  only,  and  is  a  mystical  figure  of  the  true,  spiritual,
invisible  Church.  The  separation  of  the  impenitent  from  the
outward  Church  is  a  figure  of  their  eternal  rejection,  but  is
reserved  for  those  who  forsake  repentance  and  deny  the  power  of
godliness.  There  is  no  succession  in  the  outward  Church,  but
all  succession  is  from  heaven,  and  is  of  the  new  creature  only.
The  magistrate  is  not  by  virtue  of  his  office  to  meddle  with
religion  or  matters  of  conscience,  to  force  or  compel  men  to  this
or  that  form  of  religion  or  doctrine,  but  to  leave  (the)  Christian
religion  free  to  every  man's  conscience,  and  to  handle  only  civil
transgressions,  injuries,  and  wrongs  of  man  against  man,  in
murder,  adultery,  theft,  etc.,  for  Christ  only  is  the  King  and  Law-
giver of  the  Church  and  conscience."  ^

Some  of  the  positions  taken  by  Smyth  in  his  book
called  The  Differences  of  the  Church  of  the  Separation  are
of  great  interest  for  the  light  they  throw  on  the  teachings
of  the  General  Baptists  and  the  practices  of  the  Society  of

1  John  Smyth's  Last  Book,  which  contains  his  "Confession  of  Faith"  in  one
hundred  propositions,  was  found  in  The  York  Minster  Library.  It  has  been
printed  in  full  in  Barclay's  Inner  Life,  as  Appendix  to  chap,  vl


xvn  ANABAPTISM    IN   ENGLAND  411

Friends.       The    three    following    principles    have    special
bearing  : —

"First — We  hold  that  the  New  Testament,  properly  so-called,
is  spiritual,  proceeding  originally  from  the  heart,  and  that  reading
out  of  a  book  (though  a  lawful  ecclesiastical  action)  is  no  part  of
spiritual  worship.  Second — We  hold  that,  seeing  prophesying  is
a  part  of  spiritual  worship,  therefore  in  the  time  of  prophesying
it  is  unlawful  to  have  the  book  as  a  help  before  the  eye.  Third —
We  hold  that  seeing  singing  a  psalm  is  a  part  of  spiritual  worship,
it  is  unlawful  to  have  the  book  before  the  eye  in  time  of  singing
a  psalm."  ^

In  his  Short  Confession  Smyth  announced  principles
which  are  entirely  in  line  with  the  doctrines  later  pro-
mulgated by  Friends.  Two  or  three  specimens  of  these
principles  will  suffice  : —

"  They  that  are  redeemed  of  the  Lord  do  change  their  fleshly
weapons,  namely  their  swords,  into  shares,  and  their  spears  into
scythes,  do  lift  up  no  sword,  neither  have  nor  consent  to  battle."
"Yea,  rather  they  are  called  of  Him  (whom  they  are  commanded
to  obey  by  a  voice  heard  from  heaven)  to  the  following  of  His
unarmed  and  unweaponed  life  and  His  cross-bearing  footsteps."
"  It  is  not  permitted  that  the  faithful  of  the  New  Testament
should  swear  at  all."

John  Smyth  died  in  the  autumn  of  1612,^  and  shortly
before  his  death  his  old  associate,  Thomas  Helwys,  whom
he  had  baptized,  and  who  had  refused  to  follow  him  into
the  Mennonite  Church,  returned  to  England,  accompanied
by  Murton  and  a  great  part  of  their  fellow-members,  and
established    a    Baptist    Church    in    London,   on    Newgate

^  The  full  title  of  this  book,  which  was  answered  by  Ainsworth,  is  The
Differences  of  the  Church  of  the  Separation  :  containing  a  description  of  the
Leitourgie  and  Ministrie  of  the  Visible  Church,  annexed  as  a  Correction  and
supplement  to  a  little  treatise  lately  published,  bearing  title  ''Principles  and
Inferences  respecting  the  Visible  Church."  By  John  Sm\'th,  1608.  Copy  in  the
Bodleian.

-  A  footnote  to  p.  95  of  Barclay's  Inner  Life  says  :  ' '  Smyth's  burial  is
registered  in  the  register  of  the  New  Church  of  Amsterdam,  on  the  ist  of
September  16 12,  where  he  was  buried,  and  at  the  time  cf  his  decease  he  lodged
in  the  hinder  part  of  the  '  great  bakehouse '  then  belonging  to  John  Munter,
where  religious  meetings  were  held  by  the  English  who  joined  the  \Iennonites.  I
am  indebted  for  this  to  Dr.  Scheffer,  who  has,  by  searching  these  registers,
established  a  date  of  great  importance  in  the  histor}-  of  the  English  Separatist
Church  in  Holland.  The  date  of  the  death  of  Smyth  has  been  variously  stated-
and  no  authority  has  hitherto  been  given  for  the  date."


412  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

Street — the  first  General  Baptist  Church  on  English  soil.^
Helwys  was  actuated  by  the  highest  motives  in  his  perilous
undertaking,  and  in  his  courage  and  devotion  to  truth
deserves  to  rank  with  the  "  Pilgrims,"  who  eight  years
later  began  their  experiment  at  Plymouth.  He  braved
persecution  in  his  homeland  because  he  felt,  as  he  says,
that  "  thousands  of  ignorant  souls  in  our  own  country
were  perishing  for  lack  of  instruction."  He  was  fiercely
attacked  by  some  of  those  still  in  "  exile  "  for  his  "  return,"
and  he  was  charged  with  an  exhibition  of  "  natural
courage  "  and  "  vain-glory."  His  Short  Declaration  is  a
sufficient  defence  of  his  course.^  There  are,  unfortunately,
no  extant  "  records  "  of  this  famous  church,  but  there  is  no
question  that  the  ideas  embodied  in  this  little  "  society  "
in  Newgate  Street  spread  rapidly,  for  by  1626  there  were
five  Baptist  churches  besides  the  original  church,  namely,
in  London,  Lincoln,  Sarum,  Coventry,  and  Tiverton,  in
correspondence  with  the  Mennonite  Church  of  Amsterdam.^
There  was,  too,  a  society  of  Baptists  in  Yarmouth  in  the
year  1624.'*  There  was  also,  as  early  as  1625,  a  Baptist
society  at  Stony  Stratford,  which  met  for  some  time  as  a
congregation  without  any  settled  minister.^

Taylor  says  :  ^  "  There  is  some  reason  to  believe  that
in  1626  there  was  a  General  Baptist  Church  at  Amer-
sham,  in  Buckinghamshire.  In  the  first  page  of  an  old
church  book  belonging  to  that  ancient  church,  there  is  an
imperfect  entry  in  this  form  :  '  Brother  David,  26  April,
1626,'"  which  affords  a  strong  presumption  that  there
was  a  church  in  that  town  at  that  early  period.      And  we

1  They  were  called  "General  Baptists"  because  they  were  Arminian  in  faith,
*,  e.  they  held  to  the  general  salvability  of  mankind.

2  Helwys'  writings  are  as  follows  :  (i)  An  Advertisement  to  the  New  Fryelers
[Freewillers)  in  the  Low  Countries,  dated  1611  ;  (2)  A  Declaration  of  Faith  of
the  English  People  at  Amsterdam  (1611)  ;  {3)  A  Proof  that  God's  Decree  is  Not
the  Cause  of  any  Man's  Sin  or  Condemnation  (1611) ;  (4)  Declaration  of  the
Mystery  of  Iniquity  (1612)  ;  {5)  A  Short  Declaration  (1614)  ;  (6)  Persecution  for
Religion,  Judged  and  Condetnned  {161  s).  This  last  work  may  be  from  the  pen
of  Helwys'  associate,  John  Murton.  It  is,  in  any  case,  one  of  the  most  explicit
expositions  that  had  yet  appeared  of  the  doctrine  that  the  soul  of  man  should  bz
absolutely  free  in  matters  of  faith.

^  Barclay,  Inner  Life,  p.  95.

*  See  Stoughton's  Church  of  the  Commonwealth,  vol.  ii.  pp.  232-34.
^  Evans,  vol.  ii.  p.  54.

*  Taylor's  History  of  Baptists  (1818),  vol.  i.  pp.  96-97.


XVII  ANABAPTISM   IN   ENGLAND  413

have  Dr.  Featley's  authority  for  stating  that  two  yeai^s
prior  to  this  {i.e.  to  1626)  they  had  many  converts  in
Soiithwark}

Thomas  Helwys  seems  to  have  died  in  1616,  and
upon  his  death  John  Murton  apparently  became  the  leader
of  the  movement.^  By  the  year  1626  the  society  had
grown  to  150,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  it  had  had  two
years  earlier  a  secession  of  eighteen  members  under  the
leadership  of  Elias  Tookey.  The  most  notable  spiritual
contribution  of  this  little  group  of  returned  "  exiles  "  was
their  splendid  promulgation  of  liberty  of  conscience.

"  It  was,"  says  Masson,^  "  from  their  little  dingy  meeting-
house, somewhere  in  Old  London,  that  there  flashed  out  first  in
England  the  absolute  doctrine  of  Religious  Liberty.  Religious
Peace  ;  or  a  Plea  for  Liberty  of  Conscie?ice,  is  the  title  of  a  little
tract  first  printed  in  16 14,  and  presented  to  King  James  and  the
English  Parliament  by  '  Leonard  Busher,  citizen  of  London.'
This  Leonard  Busher,  there  is  reason  to  believe,^  was  a  member
of  Helwys'  congregation ;  and  we  learn  from  the  tract  itself  that
he  was  a  poor  man,  labouring  for  his  subsistence,  and  had  had  his
share  of  persecution.  He  had  probably  been  one  of  Smyth's
Amsterdam  flock  who  had  returned  with  Helwys.  The  tract  is
certainly  the  earliest  known  English  publication  in  which  full
liberty  of  conscience  is  openly  advocated.  It  cannot  be  read
now  without  a  throb.  The  style  is  simple  and  rather  helpless ;
but  one  comes  on  some  touching  passages.  Thus  :  '  May  it
please  your  Majesty  and  Parliament  to  understand  that  by  fire
and  sword  to  constrain  princes  and  peoples  to  receive  that  one
true  religion  of  the  Gospel  is  wholly  against  the  mind  and
merciful  law  of  Christ'  '  Persecution  is  a  work  well  pleasing  to
all  false  prophets  and  bishops,  but  it  is  contrary  to  the  mind  of

1  Daniel  Featley's  Dippers  Dipt,  dedication,  London,  1645.

2  A  passage  in  Truths  Victory  (London,  1645)  says:  "Some  thirty  years
ago  Mr.  Morton  (Murton)  was  a  teacher  of  a  church  of  Anabaptists  in  Newgate.
Then  his  confessions  comprehended  all  the  errors  of  the  Arminians,  which  now
of  late  many  that  go  under  your  name  in  and  about  London  dissent  from."

2  Masson's  Milton,  vol.  iii.  pp.  98-129.

^  This  cannot  be  definitely  proved.  See  Underhill's  Introduction  to  the  reprint
in  Tracts  for  Liberty  of  Conscience.  He  was  a  citizen  of  London,  and  had  been
an  exile  from  his  native  land  at  some  part  of  his  life,  when  he  probably  became
acquainted  with  the  Brownists  and  Mr.  Robinson,  to  whom  he  refers.  From
them  he  differed  on  several  important  subjects,  especially  on  Infant  Baptism  and
Liberty  of  Conscience.

Leonard  Busher's  Tract  was  first  printed  in  16 14.  It  is  in  the  Bodleian
Library.


414  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

Christ,  Who  came  not  to  judge  and  destroy  men's  lives,  but  to
save  them.  And,  though  some  men  and  women  believe  not  at
the  first  hour,  yet  may  they  at  the  eleventh  hour,  if  they  be  not
persecuted  to  death  before.  And  no  king  or  bishop  can  or  is
able  to  command  faith.  That  is  the  gift  of  God,  Who  worketh
in  us  both  the  will  and  the  deed  of  His  own  good  pleasure.  Set
him  not  a  day,  therefore,  in  which,  if  His  creature  hear  not  and
believe  not,  you  will  imprison  and  burn  him.  ...  As  kings
and  bishops  cannot  command  the  wind,  so  they  cannot  command
faith ;  and,  as  the  wind  bloweth  where  it  listeth,  so  is  every  man
that  is  born  of  the  spirit.  You  may  force  men  to  church  against
their  consciences,  but  they  will  believe  as  they  did  before  when
they  come  there.'  '  Kings  and  magistrates  are  to  rule  temporal
affairs  by  the  swords  of  their  temporal  kingdoms,  and  bishops  and
ministers  are  to  rule  spiritual  affairs  by  the  word  and  Spirit  of
God,  the  sword  of  Christ's  temporal  kingdom,  and  not  to  inter-
meddle one  with  another's  authority,  office,  and  function.' "

Masson  finely  says  that  "the  task  of  vindicating  for
England  the  idea  of  Liberty  of  Conscience  "  fell  to  "  tvi^o
of  the  most  extreme  and  despised  sects  of  the  Puritans."

"The  despised  Independents,"  he  continues,  *'and  the  still
more  despised  Baptists,  or  thorough  Separatists  of  the  school  of
Smyth  and  Helwisse,  were  groping  for  the  pearl  between  them ;
and,  what  is  strangest  at  first  sight,  it  was  the  more  intensely
Separatist  of  these  two  sects  that  was  groping  with  most  success.
How  is  this  to  be  explained  ?  Partly,  it  may  have  been,  that  the
Baptists  were  the  sect  that  had  been  most  persecuted — that  they
were  the  ultimate  sect,  in  the  English  world,  in  respect  of  the
necessary  qualification  of  pain  and  suffering,  accumulated  in  their
own  experience."^

The  little  band  of  English  Anabaptists,  sometimes
called  the  "  Smyth  remainder,"  left  behind  in  Holland
on  the  return  of  Helvi^ys  and  his  Church,  became
thoroughly  incorporated  into  the  Mennonite  Church.
There  was  for  some  years  an  intimate  relationship
between  the  English  societies  and  the  Mennonite
Church  of  Amsterdam,  and  it  is  evident  from  existing
correspondence  that  the  persecuted  societies,  struggling
for  their  life,  turned  for  recognition  and  support  to
their   spiritual    kindred    on   the   continent.       There   were,

1  Masson's  Milton,  vol.  iii.  p.  104.


XVII  ANABAPTISM   IN  ENGLAND  415

however,  some  differences  between  the  two  groups  which
made  complete  union  impossible.

"  The  English  did  not  see  their  way  to  reject  oaths,  magistracy,
and  warfare  entirely,  and  asked  for  toleration  of  slight  differences
of  opinion  in  these  matters.  The  Mennonites  limited  the
administration  of  the  ordinances  to  such  as  had  received
ordination ;  the  English  sought  to  explain  their  practice  as
substantially  in  accord  with  that  of  the  Mennonites,  but  they  would
extend  the  privilege  of  administering  the  ordinances,  in  the  absence  of
a7i  ordained  minister,  to  teachers  a?td  evaiigelists  recognized  as  such
by  the  Chu?'ch.  The  efforts  at  union  would  seem  to  have  been  un-
successful. The  Mennonites  were  too  inflexible  in  their  positions
to  make  compromises."  ^

III

These  Baptist  societies,  of  the  Smyth  and  Helwys
type,  were,  as  we  have  seen,  Arminian  in  their  faith  ;
that  is  to  say,  they  rejected  utterly  the  dogmas  of
original  sin  and  predestination  to  wrath  and  salvation,
and  for  that  reason  they  are  called  General  Baptists.
We  now  come  to  the  formation  of  another  type  of
Baptist  society,  which  was  destined  to  have  a  great
future :  that  was  the  Calvinistic,  or  "  Particular,"
Baptist  Society.  The  first  society  of  this  type  was
organized  in  Southwark,  London,  in  161 6,  under  the
leadership  of  Henry  Jacob.  Such  a  movement  in  the
very  nature  of  things  was  almost  certain  to  appear
sooner  or  later.  Some  person  who  accepted  the  Cal-
vinistic theology  was  bound  to  ask  on  what  Scriptural
ground  infants  were  baptized,  and  finding  no  satisfying
ground  was  likely  to  start  a  "  new  Church."  At  any
rate  somebody  did  ask  the  question,  and  somebody
did  take  the  novel  step,  and  that  person  was  Henry
Jacob.  He  was,  like  the  other  Separatist  leaders  of
the  period,  a  scholar,  and  a  man  with  the  genuine
qualities  of  leadership.  He  was  an  Oxford  graduate,
and  at  first  was  disinclined  to  "  separation,"  believing
that  the  National  Church  offered  suiTficient  scope  for
all  genuine  spiritual  development.  Time  and  events
and   the  personal  influence   of  the   Separatist  leaders  in

^  Newman,  Baptists,  p.  47,


4i6  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

Holland  carried  him  over  to  the  opposite  view.  He
was  for  a  time  at  Middleburg,  in  Zealand,  where  he
collected  a  band  of  English  exiles  into  a  congregation,
to  which  he  ministered,  and  his  experience  in  this
congregation,  together  with  the  influence  of  John
Robinson,  with  whom  he  conferred  at  Leyden,  led  him
to  adopt  the  "  congregational  idea."  ^  And,  in  1 6 1 6,  as
stated,  he  decided  to  follow  the  bold  course  of  Helwys,
and  organize  a  "  congregation  "  in  his  home  country.
This  Southwark  congregation,  often  called  the  "Jacob
Church,"  is  the  mother  congregation  of  the  Particular
Baptists.  Its  founder  went  to  Virginia  in  1622,  in  the
hope  of  founding  a  congregation  under  freer  conditions
than  then  prevailed  in  England.  He,  however,  died
before  his  contemplated  ''  Jacobopolis "  materialized.
His  successor  in  the  mother  congregation  was  John
Lathrop,  who,  in  his  turn,  surrendered  the  hard  task
of  holding  out  against  the  organized  forces  of  perse-
cution, and  sought  relief  in  the  New  England  colony.
There  are  other  great  names  associated  either  with  this
mother  Church  or  with  the  daughter  Churches  which
sprang  from  it :  Samuel  How,  the  "  learned  cobbler "  ;
Praise -God  Barebones,  the  "leather-seller,"  who  gave
the  name  to  Cromwell's  nominated  Parliament ;  Henry
Jessey,  the  "  oracle  "  of  his  party  ;  Hanserd  Knollys,  who
"  built  on  grace,  not  works "  ;  and  William  Kiffin,  "  the
strict  communionist."

This  Church  was  sadly  prone  to  "  separations."
The  first  division  came  during  Lathrop's  pastorate,  when
a  number  withdrew  "  because  the  congregation  kept  not
to  their  first  principles  of  separation,"  and  because  those
withdrawing  were  "  convinced  that  baptism  was  not  to  be
administered  to  infants,  but  only  to  such  as  professed
faith  in  Christ."  The  inference  is  that  the  Church  was
too  "  broad,"  or  open  in  its  admission  of  members,  to  suit
the  seceders.  One  of  the  most  interesting  of  the
complicated  separations  was  due  to  the  adoption  of
"  immersion."       Richard    Blunt    had    an    "  opening "    that

^  Barclay  thinks  he  was  influenced  by  Helwys  (see  op.  cit.  p.  98).


XVII  ANABAPTISM   IN   ENGLAND  417

baptism  ought  to  be  "  by  dipping  the  body  into  the
water,"  "  though  none  had  so  practised  it  in  England  to
professed  beHevers."  If  Blunt  had  been  a  natural-born
innovator  like  John  Smyth,  he  would  probably  have
immersed  himself  and,  as  a  "  se-immersionist,"  started  a
new  line.  But  he  rather  inclined  to  follow  precedents
and  to  value  channels  of  "  succession."  It  was  discovered
that  there  was  on  the  continent  a  body  of  immersionists
called  the  "  Collegianten,"  who  were  a  branch  of  the
Mennonites.  To  them  Blunt  went  for  what  he  had  come
to  believe  was  "true  baptism,"  and  on  his  return  in  1642
he  immersed  his  fellow -believers,  and  "  the  new  way  of
baptizing,"  as  Praise-God  Barebones  puts  it,  "  began  to
be  practised — the  particular  of  which  opinion  and  practice
is  to  dip!'  The  "  new  baptism "  was  attacked  and
ridiculed  as  "  a  new  leaven  "  ;  as  "  a  new  crotchet,  that  all
who  have  not  been  dipt  under  water  have  not  been  truly
baptized,"  and  books  against  it  abounded,^  but  the  practice
spread  and  came  to  be  the  approved  method  among  the
Baptist  societies — "  the  fit  symbol  of  Christ's  death,  burial,
and  resurrection."

By  1644  the  sect  of  Particular  Baptists  had  become  a
powerful  influence,  and,  as  Masson  puts  it,  had  "  attained
considerable  dimensions."  There  were  seven  congrega-
tions in  London,  and  forty-seven  in  the  rest  of  England,
with  many  vigorous  adherents  in  the  Parliamentary  Army.
They  carefully  defined  their  position  in  1644,  in  a  Con-
fession of  Faith  of  fifty-two  articles,  which  impressed  their
contemporaries  with  the  orthodoxy  of  their  theology.  Even
Featley  calls  it  "a  little  ratsbane  in  a  great  quantity  of
sugar."  The  permanent  ground  of  objection,  however,  to
all  branches  of  the  Baptists,  on  the  part  both  of  the
Established  Church  and  the  Presbyterian  Church,  was  the
congregational  form  of  organization,  the  complete  separa-
tion of  Church  and  State,  the  wide  toleration  of  faith  and
practice,  and  the  enormous  expansion  of  the  rights,  privi-
leges  and   functions   of  the  laity.       They   were,  therefore,

^  See  Featley "s  Dippers  Dipt,  or  The  Anabaptists  Duck' d  and  Plunged  over
Head  and  Ears,  London,  1647  ;  and  Pagitt's  Heresiography,  London  (first
edition),  1645,

2  E


4i8  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

throughout  the  formative  period  of  their  history,  subject
to  persecution,  and,  when  that  ceased,  to  slander  and
abuse.  Edwards,^  with  his  drag-net  spread  all  over
England,  gathered  up  a  few  stories  of  the  extravagant
practices  of  the  Baptists  in  their  conventicles  and  at
"  river-dippings,"  but  there  is  no  good  evidence  to  show
that  the  movement  was  not  sane  and  morally  sober.  The
famous  Confession  of  Faith  contained  the  injunction  that
at  times  of  immersion  "convenient  garments  be  upon
both  the  administrator  and  subject,  with  all  modesty,"
and  the  fragments  of  truth  in  reported  scandals  are
nothing  more  than  "  the  occasions  of  offence "  which
attend  any  widespread  movement.

They  were  frequently  ridiculed  for  having  illiterate
preachers  of  mean  origin.  The  charge  was  partly  true  ;
there  were  among  them  preachers  who  had  been  tailors,
leather-sellers,  soap-boilers,  brewers,  weavers,  and  tinkers,
but  the  important  point  is  that  these  preachers  carried
conviction  and  wrought  righteousness  and  constructed
spiritual  churches  to  the  glory  of  God.  They  did,  in
their  generation,  what  herdsmen  and  vine-dressers  did  in
the  early  days  of  Hebrew  prophecy,  what  tax-collectors
and  fishermen  did  in  the  primitive  days  of  the  Church  ;
and  it  was  vastly  to  the  credit  of  these  primitive  Baptists
that  they  rediscovered  how  to  bring  the  gifts  of  laymen
and  unschooled  members  into  play  for  spiritual  ends.
Masson,  in  an  interesting  passage,^  gathers  up  some  of
the  important  tenets  and  practices  of  the  Baptists  which
were  in  the  line  of  the  expansion  of  the  laity  :  "  They  put
all  Church  power  in  the  hand  of  the  people  "  ;  "  They  give
the  power  of  preaching  and  celebrating  the  sacraments  to
any  of  their  gifted  members,  out  of  all  office"  ;  "All  churches
must  be  demolished  :  they  are  glad  of  so  large  and  public
a  preaching  place  as  they  can  purchase,  but  of  a  steeple-
house  they  must  not  hear " ;  "  All  tithes  and  all  set
stipends  are  unlawful  ;  their  preachers  must  work  with
their   own    hands ;   and    may   not   go   in    black   clothes."

1  Edwards'  Ga?jgrae?ia,  or  Catalogue  and  Discovery  of  Errors,  Heresies,  and
Blasphemies,  London,  1646.  "^  Life  of  Milton,  vol.  iii.  p.  149.


XVII  ANABAPTISM   IN   ENGLAND  419

According  to  Baillie,^  also,  the  Baptists  outwent  even  the
Brownists  ^  in  the  power  which  they  gave  to  women  in
Church  matters.  There  were  many  women  preachers
among  them,  of  whom  a  Mrs.  Attaway,  "  the  mistress  of
all  the  she-preachers  in  Coleman  Street,  was  the  chief."

Baillie  (p.  30)  says  further,  that  the  continental  Baptists
allowed  every  one  of  their  members,  including  women,  to
preach  in  public,  and  also  to  question  the  preacher  on
doctrine  before  the  Church,  and  that  in  England  it  was
the  same.

We  get  more  light  on  the  famous  "  she-preacher  of
Coleman  Street "  from  Edwards.  In  his  gossipy  way  he
gives  testimony  to  the  common  custom  of  allowing  women
to  preach  among  the  Baptists,  and  incidentally  he  describes
Mrs.  Attaway :

"Among  all  the  confussions  and  disorder  in  the  Church,"  he
writes,^  "  matters  both  of  opinions  and  practices,  and  particularly
of  all  sorts  of  mechanicks,  taking  upon  them  to  preach
and  baptize  as  smiths,  taylors,  shoemakers,  pedlars,  weavers,
etc.,  there  are  also  some  women  preachers  in  our  times,  who  keep
constant  lectures,  preaching  weekly  to  many  men  and  women.
In  Lincolnshire,  in  Holland  and  those  parts  \i.e.  the  parts  about
Holland  in  Lincolnshire],  there  is  a  woman  preacher  who
preaches  (it's  certain),  and  'tis  reported  also  she  baptizeth,  but
that's  not  so  certain.  In  the  Isle  of  Ely  (that  land  of  errors  and
sectaries)  is  a  woman  preacher  also ;  in  Hartfordshire  also  there
are  some  woman  preachers  who  take  upon  them  to  expound  the
scriptures  in  houses,  and  preach  upon  texts  as  on  Rom.  viii.  2.
But  in  London  there  are  women  who  for  some  time  together
have  preached  weekly  on  every  Tuesday,  about  four  of  the  clock,
unto  whose  preaching  many  have  resorted.  I  shall  particularly
give  the  reader  an  account  of  the  preaching  of  two  women  (one
a  lace-maker  that  sells  lace  in  Cheapside,  and  dwells  in  Bell
Alley  in  Colejnan  Street,  and  the  other  a  major's  wife  living  in
the  Old  Bailey),  who  about  a  month  ago,  the  second  Tuesday  in
December  (as  I  take  it),  did  preach  in  Bell  Alley  in  Coleman
Street,  the  manner  whereof  is  as  follows  (as  I  had  it  from  a  godly
minister  of  this  city  who  was  there  present,  an  eye  and  ear  witness

1  Baillie,  Anabaftism  the  True  Foundation  of  Independency ,  Brownism,
Familism,  Antinomy,  etc.,  London,  1646.

2  The  Brownists  were  primitive  Congregationalists.

2  Gangraena  (edition  of  1646,  second  division,  p.  29).


420  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

of  it) :  Three  women  came  forth  out  of  an  inward  room  or
chamber  into  the  room  where  they  used  to  exercise  and  where
some  company  waited  for  to  hear  them.  These  women  came
with  Bibles  in  their  hands,  and  went  to  a  table ;  the  lace-woman
took  her  place  at  the  upper  end  of  the  table ;  the  gentlewoman,
the  major's  wife,  sate  on  one  side  by  her ;  the  third  woman  stood
on  the  other  side  of  the  table.  The  lace-woman  at  the  upper
end  of  the  table  turned  herself  first  to  this  gentlewoman  (who  was
in  her  hoods,  necklace  of  pearls,  watch  by  her  side,  and  other
suitable  apparel),  and  intreated  her  to  begin."

(Then  follows  a  long  account  of  their  parleys  and
excuses,  each  trying  to  have  the  other  speak.)     Finally

"  the  lace-woman  began  with  making  a  speech  to  this  purpose,  that
now  those  days  were  come  and  were  fulfilled  which  was  spoken
of  in  Scriptures,  that  God  would  pour  out  of  His  Spirit  upon  the
handmaidens,  and  they  should  prophesy,  and  after  this  speech
she  made  a  prayer  for  almost  half  an  hour,  and  after  her  prayer
took  that  text,  If  ye  love  Me,  keep  My  Commandments  \  when  she
had  read  the  text  she  laboured  to  analyze  the  chapter  as  well  as
she  could,  and  then  spake  upon  the  text,  drawing  her  doctrines,
opening  them  and  making  two  uses,  for  the  space  of  some  three-
quarters  of  an  hour ;  when  she  had  done  she  spake  to  the  com-
pany and  said  if  any  had  anything  to  object  against  any  of  the
matter  delivered  they  might  speak,  for  that  was  their  custome  to
give  liberty  in  that  kinde^

The  gossipy  account  runs  on  and  on  until  finally  the
minister  who  furnished  the  information  had  to  leave  the
meeting  "  for  fear  the  candles  might  go  out."  Edwards
has  heard  that  on  another  occasion  a  thousand  persons
came  to  hear  these  women  preach  !  He  says,  too,  that  at
a  later  meeting

"  One  Mrs.  Attaway  " — "the  woman  who  before  preached  in
Bell  Alley  (as  he  has  described  above),  delivered  many  and
dangerous  doctrines:  As  (i)  that  it  could  not  stand  with  the
goodness  of  God  to  damn  His  own  creatures  eternally.  (2)  That
God  the  F'ather  did  reign  under  the  law ;  God  the  Son  under  the
Gospel ;  and  now  God  the  Father  and  God  the  Son  are  making
over  the  kingdom  to  God  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  He  shall  be
poured  out  on  all  flesh.  (3)  That  there  shall  be  a  general
restauration,  wherein  all  men  shall  be  reconciled  and  saved ;  and
(4)  that  Christ  died  for  all."


XVII  ANABAPTISM   IN  ENGLAND  421

It  plainly  appears  from  this  account  of  Mrs.  Attaway's
"  dangerous  errors  "  that  this  was  a  congregation  of  General
Baptists,  though  the  preaching  of  women  seems  not  to
have  been  confined  to  this  branch  of  the  movement.
Edwards  knows  of  "she-preachers  in  Kent,  Norfolk,  and
the  rest  of  the  shires."  Barclay  quotes  a  vivid  passage
from  The  Schismatics  Sifted  (London,  1646),  which  is  in
line  with  Edwards'  testimony  :

"  Is  it  a  miracle  or  wonder  to  see  saucie  boys,  bold  botching
taylors,  and  other  most  audacious,  illiterate  mechanicks  to  run  out
of  their  shops  into  a  pulpit  ?  To  see  bold^  impudent  huswifes  to
take  upon  them  to  prate  an  hour  or  more ;  but  when,  I  say,  is
the  extraordinary  Spirit  poured  upon  them  ?  "  ^

William  Prynne  adds  his  testimony  that  women  not
only  have  "  decisive  votes "  in  their  congregations,  but
"  liberty  of  preaching  and  prophesying."      He  further  asks  :

"  Whether  Independents  admitting  women  not  only  to  vote  as
members,  but  sometimes  to  preach,  expound,  speak  publicly  as
p7-edicants  in  their  conventicles,  be  not  directly  contrary  to  the
Apostles'  doctrine  and  practice,  and  a  mere  politick  invention  to
engage  that  sex  to  their  party  ?  "  ^

Barclay  has  found  in  an  "  uncalendered  State  paper "
an  account  of  "  an  audacious  virago "  who  preached  for
two  hours  in  the  Strand,  and  who  "  claps  her  Bible  and
thumbs  the  pulpit  cushion  "  with  much  confidence.^  Some
one  who  was  nourishing  in  his  soul  a  rhymester's  gift
undertook  to  answer  a  letter  written  against  Edwards,
and  has  given  a  description  in  "  poetry "  of  a  woman
preacher  :

"  And  that  her  zeal,  piety,  and  knowledge
Surpassed  the  gravest  student  in  college,
Who  strive  their  human  learning  to  advance  ;
She  with  her  Bible  and  concordance
Could  preach  nine  times  a  week,  morning  and  night.
Such  revelation  had  she  from  New  Light !  "  *

Henry  Denne,  who  wrote  a  tract  on  The  Drag-net  of
the   Kingdom    of  Heaven,   or    Christ   Drawing  All   Men

1  Barclay,  Inner  Life,  p.  157.  ^    Quoted  by  Barclay,  p.  157.  ^  Ibid,

^  From  Tub-Preachers  Overturned' {London,  1647).    Quoted  in  Barclay,  p.  156.


422  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

(London,  1646),  was  one  of  the  great  exponents  of  lay-
religion  and  of  the  doctrine  of  the  indwelling  of  the  Divine
Light  in  all  men.  He  was  a  Cambridge  graduate,  and  an
ordained  minister  of  the  Church,  but  in  1643  he  joined
himself  to  the  Baptist  congregation  in  Coleman  Street,
and  he  is  "  embalmed  "  in  the  pages  of  the  Gangraena  as
"  an  antinomian  and  desperate  Arminian,"  who  was  "  re-
baptized  by  a  mechanick."  He  preached  against  tithes,
which  the  "  people  "  liked  to  hear.  "  He  hath,"  mourns
Edwards,  "  a  kind  of  strain  in  his  preaching  which  affects
and  takes  the  people  imich ;  as,  for  instance,  he  will  say :
*  Oh  Lord  Christ,  if  Thou  wert  now  on  earth  and  didst
reveal  the  Gospel  to  men,  they  would  call  Thee  Anabaptist,
Antinomian,  Independent,  who  now  call  us  so.'"  Edwards
reports  that  "  Mr.  Denne  preaches  and  prays,  and  after  he
hath  done  he  calls  to  know  if  any  be  not  satisfied,  and
then  they  stand  up  that  will,  and  object,  and  he  answers
them."  This  seems  to  have  been  the  settled  custom  in
the  Independent  congregations.  It  is  further  reported
that  "others  of  the  brethren  that  will,  meer  mechanicks^
one,  two,  or  more  sometimes,  do  exercise  {i.e.  preach)  after
him."  "  This  Mr.  Denne  delivered  his  opinions  in  such
a  manner  as  if  he  had  been  an  apostle  from  heaven."
Edwards'  whole  account,  in  spite  of  himself,  lets  daylight
enough  through  for  us  to  see  that  here  was  a  truly  great
soul.  "  Mr.  Disbrough,"  he  declares,  "  says  of  him  that  he
is  the  ablest  man  in  England  for  prayer,  expounding,  and
preaching."  ^  "  His  usual  theme  that  he  is  upon  is  Chrisfs
dying  for  all^  for  Judas  as  well  as  Peter.  He  often
preaches  this  doctrine.  This  is  the  everlasting  Gospel,
that  Jesus  Christ  has  died  for  all  me^t^  Turks,  Pagans ;
and  men  are  only  damned  for  not  believing  in  Christ,  and
for  nothing  else."  ^  A  passage  from  Denne's  Drag-net  ^
will  show  that  two  years  before  George  Fox  began  his
preaching  of  the  "  Light  within  "  there  was  an  advocate  of
the  same  doctrine  among  the  Baptists :

^  "  Mr.  Disbrough"  was  James  Disbrough,  an  elder  in  the  famous  FenstantoD
Church,  and  a  brother  of  Cromwell's  major-general.

2  Edwards,  p.  23.  ^  p^  ^j.


XVII  ANABAPTISM   IN   ENGLAND  423

"  Now  God  is  light,  and  God  is  spirit.  If  then  Christ  lighteth
every  man,  God  lighteth  every  man.  The  Spirit  lighteth  every
man  that  cometh  into  the  world.  What  is  it  for  man  to  be
lighted,  but  for  the  light  of  the  glory  of  God,  shining  forth  in  the
face  of  Jesus  Christ,  to  shine  in  darkness  ?  For  every  man  to  be
lighted  is  {as  I  conceive)  for  the  manifestation  of  the  glory  of  God
to  be  showed  forth  in  some  measure  to  them.

Lay-preaching  greatJy  increased  during  the  Civil  War,
and  in  spite  of  the  Parliamentary  Ordinance  against  it  the
practice  was  common  in  many  parts  of  England  during
the  Commonwealth.  A  prominent  soldier  of  the  period
says  :

"  Many  thousand  souls  besides  me  can  testify  that  Christ  hath
been  preached,  and  that  effectually  and  to  the  comfort  of  many
hearts,  and  I  bid  defiance  to  the  devil  and  all  his  black-mouthed
instruments  (ordained  ministers  in  black  coats)  to  produce  that
even  those  who  they  call  Sectaries  in  the  preaching  of  the  Lord
Jesus  did  by  that  open  a  gap  to  profaneness."  ^

The  Baptists  not  only  opened  the  way  for  lay-preach-
ing, and  even  women's  preaching,  but  they  vigorously
opposed  tithes,  state-supported  ministry,  and  anything
that  led  to  "  hireling  ministry.*'  Many  of  their  preachers
gave  their  time  and  service  freely  to  their  congregation.
Even  as  late  as  1679  the  practice  of  having  "a  set  main-
tenance for  preaching"  is  denounced.^  Taylor  thus
describes  the  views  of  the  General  Baptists  :

"The  ministers  of  Christ,  they  say,  who  have  freely  received
from  God,  ought  freely  to  minister  to  others,  and  such  as  have
spiritual  things  ministered  unto  them  ought  freely  to  communicate
necessary  things  to  the  ministers  upon  account  of  their  charge ;
but  tythes  or  any  forced  maintenance  we  utterly  deny  to  be  the
maintenance  of  Gospel  ministers."  ^

They  strongly  protested  against  creating  a  worldly
clergy  for  worldly  ends.  They  were  almost  as  positive
as  the  Quakers  were  later  in  their  assertions  that  human
learning   could    not    make    a   minister.      Samuel   How,   a

1  Preaching  without  Ordination,  etc. ,  by  Edward  Chillenden,  Lieutenant  of
Horse.     Quoted  Dy  Barclay,  p.  171.

2  Berkhamstead  Church  Book  (1679).  Quoted  by  Taylor  in  his  General
Baptists.  ^  Ibid.  vol.  i.  p.  420.


424  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

minister  of  the  Particular  Baptists,  says  :  "  Human  learn-
ing would  never  make  a  man  a  minister  of  the  Gospel,  or
enable  him  to  understand  the  mind  of  God  in  His  Word."  ^
Barclay  has  collected  much  evidence  to  show  that
the  Baptists  originated  the  practice  of  standijig  up  in
church  after  the  preacher  had  finished  his  sermon,  and
that  this  practice  was  current  when  George  Fox  began
his  ministry.^

"  Our  brethren  in  London "  {i.e.  the  Independents),  says
Baillie,^  "  are  for  this  exercise  "  {i.e.  the  exercise  of  prophesying),
"but  especially  to  hold  a  door  open  for  them  to  preach  in
parish  churches  where  they  neither  are,  nor  ever  intend  to  be,
pastors  ;  only  they  preach  as  gifted  men  and  prophets,  for  the
conversion  of  those  who  are  to  be  made  members  of  their
congregations."

Richard  Baxter  says  there  were  "  few  of  the
Anabaptists  that  have  not  been  the  opposers  and  troublers
of  the  faithful  ministers  of  the  land "  {i.e.  of  the
Presbyterians).

"On  the  27th  day  of  the  ninth  month,  Henry  Denne  (the
celebrated  General  Baptist  preacher)  declared  the  proceedings
at  Hawson,  There  was  mention  of  a  promise  that  I  should  go
to  Hawson  the  next  first-day,  and  accordingly,  on  the  1 9th  day  of
this  present  month,  I  went  thither,  and  on  the  next  day,  it  being
the  first  day  of  the  week,  the  priest  and  chiefest  men  of  the
town  sent  to  me  to  come  and  preach  in  the  public  place  {i.e.  the
church).  Whereupon  I  went,  intending  to  have  spoken  there
unto  the  people,  but  as  soon  as  I  began  to  speak  the  rude
multitude  gathered  together  and  would  not  suffer  me  to  speak.
.  .  .  Whereupon  I  departed  from  them,  and  I  spake  in  a
private  house."*

Edwards  mentions  that  Lamb  (of  Bell  Alley  Church
of  the  General  Baptists)  "  preaches  sometimes  (when  he
can  get  into  pulpits)  in  our  churches."  On  5  th  November,
1644,  he  preached  at  Grace  Church  in  London,  "where
he  had  mighty  great  audience,  and  preached  universal
grace."  ^      Hanserd   KnoUys  preached  "  in  the  churchyard

^  JHow's  Sufficiency  of  the  WorhVs  Teaching  without  Hitman  Learning  (1640).
-  Inner  Life,  pp.  288-90.  ^   '^■a\\\\€s  Dissuasive,  p.  175.

*  Fenstanton  Church  Records,  p.  8t.  ^  Edwards,  Part  IT.  p.  35,


k


xvn  ANABAPTISM   IN   ENGLAND  425

when  he  could  not  in  the  church,  and  getting  up  into
the  pulpits  when  the  sermon  or  lecture  had  been
ended,  against  the  will  of  the  minister,  so  that  there
were  several  riots  and  tumults  by  his  means.  He  was
complained  against  for  this  to  a  committee  of  Parlia-
ment, but  he  got  off  from  that  committee."  ^  On
another  occasion  Mr.  Kiffin  handed  a  letter  to  Edwards
in  the  pulpit  asking  leave,  "  to  declare  against  what
you  say  when  your  sermon  is  ended."  ^

On  the  14th  July  1648,  Edward  Barber,  a  cele-
brated General  Baptist,  spoke  at  the  "  parish  meeting-
house of  Bentfinck,"  London.  Several  of  the  inhabit-
ants of  the  parish  had  invited  Mr.  Barber  to  come,
promising  that  he  should  have  liberty  to  add  to  what
the  minister  (Mr.  Calamy)  should  deliver,  or  contradict
if  erroneous.  "  I  desired  him,"  says  Mr.  Barber,  "  and
the  rest  of  the  audience  to  add  some  few  words.  ...
Upon  which  he  (Calamy)  desired  me  to  *  forbear  till  he
had  concluded,  and  I  might  speak.'"  Mr.  Barber  then
complains  that  he  dealt  with  him  as  Calamy  had
before  dealt  with  Mr.  Kiffin,  Mr.  Knowles,  and  Mr.  Cox,
and  charged  him  with  "  coming  to  make  a  disturbance
in  the  '  Church  of  God.' "  Mr.  Barber  was  then  sadly
handled  by  the  audience,  who  cried,  "  Kill  him,  kill
him  !  pull  him  limb  from  limb ! "  and  "  a  woman
scratched  his  face."  A  constable,  however,  interfered
in  his  favour,  or  he  "  might  have  been  robbed  or
murdered."  Some  of  the  audience,  however,  spoke
kindly  to  him,  and  wished  him  to  "  go  to  Mr.  Calamy's
house "  and  be  satisfied,  but  Mr.  Barber  says  that
after  this  treatment  he  was  satisfied  that  they  were  all
anti-Christian  ministers.^

The  General    Baptists,  with    their    faith    in   universal

^  Edwards,  Part  II.  p.  39.  2  /^/^_  p   ^^^

2  "  A  Declaration  and  Vindication  of  the  carriage  of  Mr.  Edward  Barber
at  the  parish  meeting-house  of  Bentfinck,  London,  Friday,  February  14,  1648.
After  the  morning  exercise  of  Mr.  Calamy  was  ended,  wherein  the  pride  of  the
ministers  and  Babylonish  carriage  of  the  hearers  is  laid  open,  etc.  ...  as  also
the  false  aspersions  cast  upon  hipi,  he  doing  nothing  but  what  was  according  to
the  primitive  institution,  and  is,  and  ought  to  be,  in  the  best  reformed  churches
according  to  the  Protestation  and  Covenant  "  (Barclay,  p.  290).


426  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

redemption  through  Christ,  felt  that  the  Gospel  should
be  preached  to  every  person  under  heaven,  and  that
the  work  of  "  discipling  all  nations  "  should  be  seriously
taken  up.  In  fact,  they  had  a  vision  of  an  apostolic
mission.      Says  a  quaint  Baptist  writer :

"  It  is  most  certain  that  there  were  several  things  proper  and
peculiar  to  the  first  and  chief  Apostles,  not  to  be  pretended  at  all
by  their  successors,  yet  it  is  also  true  that  many  things  pertaining
to  their  office  as  itinerant  ministers  are  of  perpetual  duration  in
the  Church  with  respect  to  that  holy  function,  and  consequently
to  descend  to  those  who  were  to  succeed  them  as  travelling
ministers,  to  plant  churches,  and  to  settle  them  in  order  who  are
as  sheep  without  a  shepherd."^

They  plainly  had  bands  of  travelling  ministers,  some-
times called  "  apostles,"  sometimes  "  messengers  of  the
churches,"  who  "  travelled  up  and  down  the  world
planting  new  churches,  edifying  old  churches,  and
seeing  that  good  order  and  government  was  carefully
and  constantly  kept  up."  The  discipline,  or  Church
power,  in  the  Baptists'  congregations  was  in  the  hands
of  the  members  themselves.  Periodical  meetings  were
held  and  officers  were  chosen  "  to  look  after  the  poor
and  the  suffering,"  "to  have  care  over  the  members
in  their  respective  districts,"  "  to  oversee  their  con-
versation and  carriage,"  "to  report  on  attendance  of
the  members  at  meetings  for  worship  and  business."^
They  insisted,  however,  that  Christ  Himself  is  Head
and  Governor  of  the  Church,  and  they  made  it  a
principle  of  the  first  importance  that  in  order  to  "  restore
the  primitive  way "  there  must  be  "  men  professing
and  practising  the  order  and  form  of  Christ's  doctrine
who  shall  beautify  the  same  with  a  holy  and  wise  con-
versation in  all  godliness  and  honesty."  ^

1  Grantham's  Christianismus  Primitivus,  Book  II.  p.  119,

2  Taylor's  General  Baptists,  p.  435.  If  they  absent  themselves  without
sufficient  cause,  "  they  shall  be  looked  upon  as  offending,  and  be  proceeded  with
accordingly"  {Records  of  the  Fenstanto?t  Church,  p.  126,  ^.vA  passirn,  pp.  433-35).
"As  soon  as  any  General  Baptist  Churches  had  been  gathered,  they  united  to
support  a  periodical  meeting — such  meeting  was  called  an  association,  and  was
usually  held  quarterly,  half-yearly,  or  annually"  [ibid.  437).  The  Travelling
Ministers  or  Elders  were  most  frequently  chosen  representatives.

'  Grantham,  op.  cit.  p.  69.


xvii  ANABAPTISM   IN   ENGLAND  427

They  were  the  ring-ing  champions  of  a  free  conscience,
a  free  ministry,  a  spiritual  Church  and  a  pure  daily
life.  They  were  the  beginners  of  a  new  order,  which
did  much  to  prevent  old  customs  from  "  corrupting
the  world."  Their  part  in  the  great  political  transactions
which  were  going  on,  as  George  Fox  was  starting  out
on  his  momentous  journeys  to  enlarge  the  spiritual
horizon  of  England,  are  beyond  the  scope  of  my
work.  I  shall  merely  give  one  important  passage  from
Skeats.^

"  They  protested  against  any  compulsory  religion^  stating  that
'  the  ways  of  God's  worship  are  not  all  entrusted  to  us  by  any
human  power.'  The  Presbyterians,  on  the  other  hand,  insisted
on  the  establishment  of  their  own  religion  only,  upon  'a
covenanted  uniformity,'  and  upon  the  extirpation  of  the  sects.
A  third  party  was  represented  by  the  King,  who,  after  two  years'
treaty,  consented  to  most  of  the  views  of  the  Presbyterians.  It
was  at  this  period  that  the  Army,  seeing  that  everything  for
which  they  had  fought,  including  liberty  of  conscience^  was  about
to  be  wrested  from  them,  sent  in  a  remonstrance  to  the  legis-
lature. It  was  not  attended  to ;  Fairfax  at  once  marched  on
London,  and  on  December  6,  1648,  Pride  "purged"  the
House  of  Commons.  From  this  time  Cromwell  and  the
Independents  held  the  reins  of  government."  ^

^  History  of  the  Free  Churches  of  England,  p.  56.

2  Skeats  points  out  that  it  is  remarkable  that  so  few  modern  writers  should
have  drawn  attention  to  the  intimate  connection  of  the  question  of  reHgious  Uberty
with  the  events  which  led  to  Pride's  "purge,"  the  execution  of  Charles,  and  the
establishment  of  the  Commonwealth.  Rushworth,  and  Neal  following  him,  have
clearly  pointed  it  out.


CHAPTER    XVIII

THE    FAMILY    OF    LOVE

Among  the  obscure  sects  which  came  into  existence
during  the  opening  period  of  the  Reformation,  none  was
more  novel  and  unique,  and  none  has  been  more  viHfied
than  the  "  Family  of  Love,"  or  "  House  of  Love,"  or
"  Familists."  It  was  synchronous  in  origin  with  the  rise
of  Anabaptism  on  the  Continent,  and,  like  Anabaptism,
too,  it  had  a  great  second  flowering  period  in  England
during  the  early  part  of  the  seventeenth  century,  and  on
through  the  Commonwealth.  It  was,  however,  in  origin
entirely  independent  of  the  Anabaptist  movement,  and
though  its  founder  undoubtedly  read  the  writings  of
Luther,  the  movement  was  in  the  main  an  isolated  out-
burst, a  sporadic  upheaval,  having  its  own  course  apart
from  the  central  stream  which  was  breaking  up  the
hardened  crust  of  tradition  and  custom.  It  brought  into
public  notice  and  gave  wide  vogue  to  many  doctrines  and
practices  generally  supposed  to  have  originated  with  the
Quakers,  and  it  was  at  its  best  the  exponent  of  a  very
lofty  type  of  mystical  religion.  Its  founder  was  a  very
extraordinary  character,  and  his  voluminous  writings  con-
tain spiritual  insights  and  religious  teachings  which  deserve
to  be  rescued  from  the  oblivion  into  which  they  have
largely  fallen.

This  founder  was  Henry  Nicholas  (or  Niklaes,  or
Niclaes),  who  was  born  of  extremely  devout  and  pious
parents  in  Miinster  in  Westphalia  either  in  i  501  or  i  502.^

^  The  data  for  the  story  of  Nicholas  are  three  unpublished  manuscripts  pre-
served  in   the   Maatschappy   Library  in    Leyden.      They  are   (i)    Chrofiika  des

428


J


CHAP.  XVIII         THE   FAMILY   OF  LOVE  429

The  boy  was  dowered  with  a  constitution  which  made
him  susceptible  even  as  a  child  to  intimations  and  openings,
and  which  turned  him  with  an  instinct  like  that  of  the
homing  pigeon  toward  Divine  things.  He  was,  like
George  Fox,  a  boy  apart  from  the  throng,  solitary  and
brooding,  full  of  vivid  imaginations  and  unsatisfied  with
the  ordinary,  traditional  explanations  which  were  given  to
the  boyish  minds  of  the  period.  The  whole  atmosphere
of  the  home  was  intensely  religious.  His  father,  a  zealous
Catholic,  prayed  to  God  every  day  "  to  be  gracious  to
him,  to  give  him  a  holy  nature,  and  to  give  him  holy
offspring."  ^  As  little  Heinrich  was  weak  and  delicate
his  mother  gave  him  the  first  stages  of  his  education,  and
thus  he  was  in  a  peculiar  degree  penetrated  and  permeated
with  the  religious  spirit  of  the  family.  A  special  effort
was  made  to  cultivate  in  him  reverence  and  love  for  the
ceremonies  of  the  Church.  The  child  was  taken  to  daily
Mass,  and  his  father  took  pains  to  talk  with  him  freely
about  the  holy  things  of  his  religion.

Under  this  nurture  the  highly  susceptible  boy  advanced
to  a  wisdom  and  insight  unusual  in  persons  of  such  tender
years,  so  that  by  his  eighth  year  his  questions  became  too
deep  and  puzzling  for  the  simple  pious  father.  The
chronicler  has  preserved  an  incident  from  this  period
which  seems  to  him  to  show  that  the  Lord  Himself  opened
the  mouth  of  the  child  and  touched  his  lips  and  tongue.
He,  so  the  account  runs,  naively  asked  his  father  one  day
what  he  thanked  God  for.  The  father  replied  that  he
thanked  God  for  forgiveness  of  sins  through  Jesus  Christ
and  for  the  true  life  of  godliness  established  by  Him.
The  child  startled  his  father  with  the  blunt  remark  that
he  could  not  see  that  sin  in  man  had  been  bettered  by
Jesus  Christ's  coming,  or  that  he  was  brought  into  actual
godliness.  The  boy  was  told  that  he  must  not  doubt  or
question   the   grace  of  God,  but  simply  accept  what  was

Hiisgesinnes  der  Lieften,  (2)  Acta  H.N.,  and  (3)  Ordo  Sacerdotis.  Owing  to  an
ambiguity  in  the  Chronika  it  is  impossible  to  decide  whether  he  was  born  in  1501
or  1502,  and  also  whether  the  birthday  was  the  9th  or  loth  of  January.

^  I  have  made  large  use  of  Nippold's  excellent  chapter  on  "  Heinrich  Niclaes
und  das  Haus  der  Liebe  "  in  Zeitschrift  fiir  die  historische  Theologie,  Gotha,  1862.
Nippold  has  drawn  his  material  from  the  three  MSS.  mentioned  above.


430  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

taught   about  it      Not   easily  hushed   he   still   urged   the
point  that  he  did  not  at  all  doubt  that  through  the  death
of  Christ  the  door  to  the  kingdom  of  God  was  opened  for
all,  but  that   for   him   faith  was   meaningless  without   an
imitation  of  Christ's  passion,  and  that  he  could  think  of  no
restoration  to  the  perfect  state  of  godliness  until  sin  itself
was  destroyed.     So  far  he  could  not  see  that  this  had  taken
place  among  men,  therefore  God   must  intend   to  destroy
sin  and  establish  perfect  righteousness  in  some  other  way
than  men  generally  thought.      This  seems  like  an  advanced
position  for  an  eight-year-old  lad,  but  some  such  brooding
is  by  no  means  unnatural   or  impossible  in   such  a  child.
He  was  next  brought  to  a  Franciscan  monk  confessor  for
counsel,  and  to  dispel  "  the  strange  whimsies  in  his  head."
He  was  told  that  he  was  much  too  young  and  too  small
to  search   into   the   deep,    profound    mysteries   of  divine
things,  or  to  expect  to  fathom  them.    "  Very  true,"  answered
the   boy,  "  and   that   is   why  I   have  asked,  and   have  not
tried  to  search  them  out  in  my  own   power."      And   then
with  simple  earnestness  he  laid  his  spiritual  burden  on  the
confessor.      His    trouble   was    that   the  very  thing  which
Christ  died  to  do  was  not  yet  done.       He  died,  everybody
told  him,  to  redeem  mankind,  to  bring  men  back  into  the
condition   of  righteousness  which  Adam  was  in  before  he
fell  ;  but  men  all  about  were  still  living  in  sin  and  very
far  from   that  first  condition !     There  was  a  discrepancy
somewhere  ;  something  was   lacking.      Sin    was    not   de-
stroyed, and  men  were  not  perfect  like  the  Christ  who  had
died  for  them.     The  helpless  confessor  had  no  illumination
for  the  strange  boy,  and  a  second  monk  was  called  to  no
better  purpose.      In  the  end  the  boy  was  severely  scolded,
and  told  that  he  had  committed  the  greatest  sin  possible
in  his  questionings  about  the  hidden  things  of  God,  and
that  perhaps   he   could   never   be   forgiven   at  all,   which
threw  him   into   a   great   fright.      To  quiet   him  he  was
finally  promised  absolution  if  he  would  repent.      He  came
home  far  from  satisfied  with  the  "  instruction   of  the  two
love-brothers,"  and  he  "  went  up  and   down   with  a  sad
heart."     He  now  kept  his  musings  to  himself     He  shrank


XVIII  THE  FAMILY  OF  LOVE  431

from  companions  and  playmates,  and  dwelt  much  on  his
spiritual  problems.  In  his  ninth  year  a  marvellous  vision
came  to  him — the  beginning  of  a  series  of  visions.  It
came  at  daybreak  when  he  was  1  in  a  half-sleeping,  half-
waking  state — a  borderland  condition — and  when  he  was
deeply  troubled  over  the  sinful  condition  of  men.  A
great  light  suddenly  surrounded  him,  the  light  of  the
splendour  and  glory  of  the  Lord,  in  shape  like  a  mountain
rising  from  his  bed  up  into  heaven,  wrapping  him  wholly
about  and  illuminating  him  in  mind  and  spirit  through
and  through,  until  he  was  absolutely  one  being  with  the
shining  mountain.  He  felt  himself  penetrated  with  the
divine  Spirit  and  to  use  his  later  phrase,  raised  to  "  a
begodded  man."  In  this  unity  of  being  he  discovered,
says  the  chronicler,^  the  true  fulfilment  of  redemption  in
Jesus  Christ.  When  the  vision  departed  he  awoke  in  a
weak  and  nervously  exhausted  state,  and  soon  fell  into  a
trance  condition  in  which  he  saw  a  multitude  of  saints  of
God,  to  whom  he  imparted  this  glorious  life  for  which
men  were  created,  and  into  which  Christ  had  redeemed
them,  and  this  vision  was  taken  as  his  call  to  be  a  prophet
of  the  new  revelation.^  He  early  became  a  constant  and
careful  reader  of  the  Scriptures,  and  his  later  works  show
an  extraordinary  familiarity  with  them.  Before  he  under-
took his  studies  of  the  Bible  he  already  had  read  the
writings  of  Luther,  but  disapproved  of  them,  first  because
of  their  attack  on  the  priesthood  of  the  Roman  Catholic
Church  (to  which  he  was  still  loyal),  and  secondly  because
Luther  did  not,  to  his  mind,  teach  the  ground  of  true
righteousness  and  the  fulfilment  of  real  godliness  in  Jesus
Christ,  and  did  not  insist  on  a  Church  composed  of  trans-
formed persons.^  He  was  married  at  twenty  to  a  "  virtuous
lady,  of  a  plain  and  simple  family,"  who  made  him  an
excellent  wife,  and  he  took  up  a  mercantile  business  in
which,  strangely  enough,  he  was  very  successful.      He  was

^  The  discovery  is,  however,  certainly  the  outcome  of  later  reflection,  and  the
whole  account  shows  expansion  in  the  light  of  later  experience.

2  Compare  this  vision  of  the  "multitude  of  saints"  with  George  Fox's  vision
in  Wensleydale  :  "  The  Lord  opened  unto  me,  and  let  me  see  a  great  people  in
white  raiment  coming  to  the  Lord  "  [Journal,  London  edition,  1901,  vol.  i.  p.  no).

3  Nippold,  p.  349.      In  this  particular  he  was  like  the  Anabaptists.


432  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

early  suspected  of  holding  "  unsound  views,"  and  partly  on
account  of  these  prevailing  suspicions  he  moved  with  his
family  to  Amsterdam  (about  1530),  where  he  allied
himself  with  persons  "  who  had  fallen  away  from  the
Catholic  Church,  though  they  were  persons  who  earnestly
sought  after  righteousness."  It  was,  however,  not  till  his
thirty-ninth  year  that  he  received  the  revelation  which  at
length  made  him  the  founder  of  a  new  sect.  He  had
during  his  nine  years  in  Amsterdam  prayed  unweariedly
that  God  would  "  reveal  His  perfect  truth  on  the  earth."
Suddenly  one  day  "  God  appeared  to  him,  enwrapt  him,
became  one  being  with  him,  and  communicated  to  him
the  hidden  things  of  His  Divine  nature  and  of  the  spiritual
nature  of  man.  The  Holy  Spirit  of  Love  was  poured  out
upon  him,  and  he  felt  himself  chosen  to  be  the  revealer  of
the  Word."  With  the  revelation  there  came  the  command
to  write  and  publish  what  had  been  revealed  to  him.

A  further  vision  of  similar  character  came  to  him  later
(in  Emden,  whither  he  had  removed  his  home).  He  had
an  enwrapping  experience  which  so  expanded  his  heart
and  mind  that  he  comprehended  the  perfection  of  God
and  the  heavenly  host,  and  the  things  as  well  of  the
earthly  kingdom,  and  he  was  definitely  called  to  be  the
prophet  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  love.^  From  now  on  he
gathered  adherents  about  him,  and  organized  a  society
called  the  "  House,  or  Family,  of  Love."  ^  It  spread
slowly  but  steadily  in  the  towns  of  Friesland,  Holland,
Brabant,  Flanders,  and  later  in  England  and  France.  He
and  his  supporters  were  everywhere  harried,  and  though
he  himself  appears  somewhat  unheroic  under  the  onset  of
persecution,  his  practice  of  allowing  all  abuse,  slander,  and
enmity  to  go  unnoticed  was  highly  dignified,  and  was
wholly  unique  at  that  date  of  the  world.  In  the  "  House
of  Love,"  he  insisted,  there  is  to  be  no  violence,  no  bluster.


^  Nippold,  p.  354.

^  From  now  on  he  always  used  the  initials  H.  N. ,  which  may,  and  very  likely
do,  stand  for  Homo  Novus  (New  Man),  as  well  as  for  his  old  name  Henry  Nicholas.

3  "  Brawling  and  discord  do  I  not  hold  for  any  Christian  fight,  seeing  men  do
thereby  forsake  love.  Therefore  such  a  fight  doth  nothing  further  the  life"
(Introduction  to  Glass  of  Righteousness,  chap.  xi.  p.  21).


XVIII  THE   FAMILY  OF  LOVE  433

The  organization  of  the  "  House  of  Love  "  was  formed
more  on  the  basis  of  the  Roman  CathoHc  hierarchy  than
on  any  Protestant  model.  It  had  a  highest  bishop,  twenty-
four  elders,  and  three  lower  orders  of  priests,  but,  notwith-
standing his  cumbersome  hierarchy,  it  was  the  supreme
purpose  of  Nicholas,  through  his  writings,  to  raise  the
entire  membership  of  the  "  House  of  Love  "  to  "  full-grown
men  in  Christ,"  so  that  each  member  should  attain  to  the
experience  of  "  a  begodded  person."  ^  These  "  writings  "
were  very  numerous  and  voluminous,  though  they  are  now
extremely  rare.^  They  were  originally  in  a  Low  German
dialect  (called  by  the  English  translator  Basse  Almayne\
and  they  were  all,  or  nearly  all,  translated  into  English.
The  works  of  chief  importance  were  The  Glass  of  Righteous-
ness f  An  Intj'oduction  to  the  Glass  of  Righteousness^  The
First  Exhortation  of  H.  N.  to  his  CJiildren,  The  Evangeliu^n
Regni  (Gospel  of  the  Kingdom),  Epistles,  Cantica,  and
Terra  Pads :  or  Spiritual  Land  of  Peace,  which  is  a
spiritual  pilgrimage  quite  like  Pilgrim's  Progress  in  germ.'^
The  central  idea  in  all  Henry  Nicholas's  writings  is  his
insistence  on  real  righteousness  and  actual  holiness  as
contrasted  with  the  fiction  of  a  merely  imputed  righteous-
ness and  a  forensic  holiness,  or  holiness  based  on  a  trans-
action outside  the  person  himself      He  maintains  that  the

^  He  says  in  Introduction  to  Glass  of  Righteousjiess,  chap.  xxv. ,  that  ' '  Every
father  of  a  family  under  the  Love  hath  the  Hberty  in  his  family  to  use  services
and  ceremonies  as  he  perceiveth  out  of  the  Testimonies  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  Love,
that  they  are  profitable  or  necessary  for  his  household,  to  the  lite  of  Peace,  and
the  true  righteousness  which  God  esteemeth.  If  any  have  any  heavenly  revelation,
or  use  any  service  of  the  Priestly  Ordinance,  let  him  do  it  to  concord  and  not  to
strife,  dissension,  or  schism."  He  made  much  of  the  Elders,  and  frequently
urged  the  members  to  obey  them  and  take  counsel  of  them.  It  is  not  improbable
that  the  Elders  in  the  Family  of  Love  had  an  influence  on  the  formation  of  the
Quaker  Eldership.  He  writes  :  ' '  Give  care  to  the  Elders  of  the  Holy  Under-
standing, follow  not  the  will  or  counsel  of  your  own  mind,  but  under  the  service
of  Love  follow  the  counsel  of  wisdom  and  keep  with  the  Elders  in  the  Family  of
Love,  to  the  concord  and  multiplying  in  good  of  the  peaceable  Kingdom  in  all
Love.  Be  not  wavery.  but  if  ye  stumble  or  fall,  yet  rise  again,  stay  not  upon
yourselves  lest  ye  come  not  at  any  time  to  the  light  of  life  or  day  of  Love.
Subject  yourselves  to  teaching  and  the  service  of  Love,  that  ye  come  to  the
Freedom  of  the  Children  of  God  "  {Introduction  to  Glass  of  Righteousness).

2  Charlotte  Fell-Smith  in  her  excellent  article  in  the  Nat.  Diet,  of  Biog.  gives
a  list  of  twenty-three  genuine  works  and  five  doubtful  works  commonly  ascribed
to  him.

•^  The  only  English  translation  of  this  work,  so  far  as  known,  is  the  manuscript
fragment  in  the  Bodleian  Library.

*  It  was  printed  in  English  in  1649.

Z  F


434  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

only  righteousness  that  amounts  to  anything  is  one  which
appears  in  the  person  himself — one  which  bears  witness  to
a  new  life  in  the  person.  And  this  righteousness,  this
new  life,  comes  from  a  spiritual  incorporation  of  the  person
into  God's  life,  so  that  the  person,  once  a  mere  man,
becomes  "  godded,"  or  made  comformable  to  Christ,  who
was  an  absolutely  begodded  man.^  "  God,"  he  says,  "  is  a
living  God,  a  perfect,  clear  Light  and  Love  itself.  This
God  mamieth  Himself  \i.e,  reveals  Himself  humanwise],
and  we  may  become  likewise,  through  His  godly  Light,
godded  and  made  a  conformable  willing  spirit  with  Him."  ^
It  is  through  Jesus  Christ  that  we  are  reneived  in  our
human  spirit  and  brought  into  "  a  goodwilling  life,"  and
when  we  become  "  incorporated  into  Christ  as  fellow-
members  with  Him,"  then  and  only  then  does  He  become
our  Saviour.  This  experience  involves  a  following  after
Christ,  even  to  His  death  on  the  Cross,  in  perfect  obedience
to  His  Holy  Spirit  of  Love,  to  the  actual  vanquishing  op
sin,  death,  and  hell,  to  the  burying  of  all  iniquity,  to  the
destroying  of  our  old  nature  and  ungodly  being.  "  Those
that  do  not  even  so  become  baptized  in  His  name,  and  do
not  bear  in  their  inwardness  the  death  of  sin  through  the
death  on  the  Cross  of  Christ,  are  no  Christians."  ^

In  a  passage  of  the  Spiritual  Tabernacle  (chap.  v.  15)^
he  expresses  himself  precisely  as  George  Fox  so  often
does  on  the  inwardness  of  the  Christ-revelation  ;

'*  Behold  this  high  Priest  is  spirit  and  life,  the  true  King  and
faithful  Lord,  a  peaceable  Prince,  and  not  this  or  that  ivithout  us,
but  He  is  in  us  all  which  believe  on  Him  according  to  the  truths

^  He  appears  to  have  held  the  orthodox  view  of  Christ's  divinity,  though  his
conception  is  often  expressed  in  words  which  sound  extremely  modern.  For
example,  he  says  in  one  of  his  epistles  that  "  the  true  Christ  was  the  like-being  of
God,  only  begotten  Son  of  God  from  eternity,  born  of  the  seed  of  David  according
to  the  flesh,  delivered  to  death  on  the  Cross,  but  risen  again  from  the  dead  for  a
perpetual  conquering  of  sin  and  death,  and  making  himself  manifest  unto  the
friends  that  love  him."  Quoted  freely  from  Prof.  Allen  C.  Thomas's  excellent
monograph  on  "The  Family  of  Love,"  in  Haverford  College  Studies,  fifth  mo.
1893,  p.  31.

'^  First  Exhortation  (London,  1656),  pp.  27-31.

*  Ibid.  pp.  35-37.  He  means  by  the  atonement  a  vital  and  dynamic  re-
demption by  which  we  are  brought  into  union  with  Christ,  who  ''mamieth
Himself  with  us  to  an  implanting  of  us  in  Him  with  the  like  death  of  His  Cross,
to  crucify  and  slay  even  so,  through  His  suffering  and  death,  the  sinful  flesh
witli  its  lusts  and  desires"  [First  ExhortalioTi,  p.  156).


XVIII  THE   FAMILY  OF  LOVE  435

This  same  idea  is  expounded  again  and  again  in  the
writings.  It  is  set  forth  with  a  fair  degree  of  clearness
in  another  section  of  the  First  Exhortation^  which  I
have  freely  rendered  :

"  The  true  Light  is  the  everlasting  life  itself  and  has  its  origin
and  forthcoming  out  of  the  lovely  Being  and  true  Mind  of  the
eternal  and  living  God.  This  Light  shows  itself  (in  the  world)
through  illuminated,  i.e.  godded  men,  for  through  such  persons
the  Most  High  is  man?ied  {i.e.  humanly  shown).  The  true  Light,
therefore,  consists  not  in  knowing  this  or  that,  but  in  receiving
and  partaking  of  the  true  Being  of  the  Eternal  Life,  by  the
renewing  of  the  mind  and  spirit  and  by  an  incorporation  of  the
inward  man  into  this  true  Life  and  Light,  so  that  the  person
henceforth  lives  and  walks  in  the  Light  in  all  Love."  ^

Nothing  short  of  this  experience,  he  holds,  can  make
a  man  a  Christian,  and  apart  from  such  an  experience,
"  ceremonies  "  and  "  God-services  "  are  "  mere  vain  husks."
"  Ye  shall  find,"  he  writes  to  his  "  dear  children,"  "  in  experi-
ence that  God  with  His  Christ  and  Holy  Spirit  and  with
the  heavenly  fellowship  of  all  the  holy  ones  will  inhabit  in
you  and  live  and  walk  in  you,  for  He  hath  chosen  none
other  house  or  temple  for  His  habitation  but  you."  ^  With
this  exalted  conception  of  the  religious  life  as  an  inward
experience  of  Christ  incorporated  in  the  soul,  was  joined
also  an  equally  lofty  conception  of  the  moral  life  in  daily
walk  and  conversation.  Henry  Nicholas  and  his  Family
of  Love  have  been  frequently  charged  with  libertinism
and  antinomian  leanings.  There  is  no  ground  in  his
writings  for  the  charge,  and  there  is  no  evidence  that  the
society  countenanced  loose  and  immoral  living.^  Henry
Nicholas's  writings  abound  in  wholesome  counsel,  and  his
moral  injunctions  have  everywhere  the  ring  of  sincerity.

1  First  Exhortation,  pp.  107-9.  ^  Ibid.  p.  151.

2  It  is  quite  probable  that  loose  livers  took  advantage  of  the  movement  in  its
beginning,  and,  under  the  guise  of  a  spiritual  Family  of  Love,  formed  a  Family
of  Love  with  low  motives  and  so  gave  the  Society  a  bad  reputation.  No  such
charges  can  be  estabhshed  against  the  founder  himself  or  against  the  genuine
members  of  the  House  of  Love.  Nicholas,  while  admitting  that  marriage  is  a
proper  ordinance,  counsels  those  who  are  married  to  destroy  the  lusts  of  the  flesh
in  themselves,  and  he  tirges  that  there  shall  be  no  sexual  intercourse  even  in  the
married  state  except  such  as  is  consistent  with  pure  love  (see  Henry  Nicholas
upon  the  Beatitudes  under  "  Beatitude  on  Cleanness  of  Heart  ").


436  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

In  fact  the  entire  burden  of  his  "  prophecy  "  is  the  necessity
of  exhibiting  a  renewed  and  transformed  life  in  which  the
righteousness  of  God  is  realized.

"  If  now,"  he  says,  "  any  man  be  a  Christian,  let  him  then
have  also  a  Christian  nature  and  stand  under  the  obedience  of
the  love  of  Jesus  Christ."  ^

And  he  continues :

"  If  he  have  no  Christian  nature  and  standeth  not  subject
under  the  Love  of  Jesus  Christ,  then  can  he  not  assuredly  be
illuminated,  neither  can  he  be  any  Christian  in  the  sight  of  God."

On  the  subject  of  Antinomianism,  he  is  as  clear  as  a
bell:

"  No  one  is  ever  released  from  law.  Those  who  think  the
law  is  abolished  have  not  the  Love  of  Christ  formed  in  them.
The  law  is  not  abolished,  it  is  fulfilled  in  Love.  He  that  loveth
doeth  the  will.  No  one  ever  transcends  righteousness,  for  the
entire  work  of  God  toward  salvation  has  been  making  for  the
fruits  of  righteousness."  ^

There  is  a  fine  personal  testimony  in  the  Introduc-
tion^ in  which  Nicholas  impresses  his  "  dear  friends  "  with
the  importance  of  positive  righteousness  for  the  reception
of  spiritual  experience :

"I  (Henry  Nicholas)  held  my  own  human  nature  straight
unto  all  virtue  and  righteous  dealings  to  do  the  Lord's  will  in  all
my  doings.  I  passed  under  the  obedience  of  love  with  my
human  nature  to  the  intent  to  obtain  the  virtuous  disposition  of
love  and  to  be  incorporated  to  the  same  with  soul  and  body,  and
with  all  the  senses  and  thoughts  of  my  human  nature,  and  so  the
Lord  received  me  into  the  Grace  of  His  love  and  gave  me  inherit-
ance with  Christ  and  His  saints  in  His  heavenly  riches,  and
revealed  His  last  will  unto  me."  ^

Like  the  Anabaptists  and  the  Quakers,  he  called  his
foHowers  away  from  oaths   and  war  and   capital   punish-

1  Introduction  to  Glass  of  Righteousness,  p.  7.

2  \n  epitome  of  chap.  ii.  sees.  1-5,  Introduction  to  Glass  of  Righteousness.
In  a  fine  passage  of  the  First  Exhortation,  he  defines  ' '  the  true  freedom "
as  the  "  Unbinding"  of  the  man  from  himself  and  his  wicked  nature,  "  through
the  ministration  of  the  gracious  word,"  and  as  the  formation  in  him  of  a  new  and
h^^avenly  hfe  conformed  to  "the  lovely  being  of  the  true  Life  and  Love,"
pp.  120-21.  ^  Introduction,  chap.  xii.  sec.  57.


XVIII  THE  FAMILY  OF  LOVE  437

ment      Here   is    a   clear   announcement   of  his   position
from  the  "  Introduction  "  :

"  In  the  House  of  Love  men  do  not  curse  nor  swear ;  they  do
not  destroy  nor  kill  any.  They  use  no  outward  swords  or  spears.
They  seek  to  destroy  no  flesh  of  men ;  but  it  is  a  fight  of  the
cross  and  patience  to  the  subduing  of  sin ^  ^

Their  attitude,  again,  toward  the  Scriptures  and  toward
outward  ordinances  and  ceremonies  (Henry  Nicholas's
phrase  is  "  God-services ")  is  almost  exactly  that  of  the
Friends.  The  following  passage  from  the  Introduction
sounds  as  though  it  were  taken  from  Fox's  Journal  or
Barclay's  Apology^  though  they  were  written  a  hundred
years  later :

"  The  written  word  of  the  letter  is  not  the  Word  itself  that
cleanseth  and  sanctifieth  the  man,  or  which  procreateth  the  life.
But  it  is  a  shadow  or  figuring  out  of  the  holy  and  true  word,  a  ser-
viceable instrument  whereby  we  are  made  well-affected  inwardly
in  our  souls  to  the  true  word  of  vivification,  to  the  end  that
through  belief  and  love  we  might  in  the  spirit  of  our  minds  be
made  of  like-being  with  the  nature  and  being  of  the  Good  Life ;
even  as  the  words  of  Scripture  witness."  ^

In  his  First  Exhortation^  he  says  that  "this  Word
of  Life  (which  now  inspires  us  with  the  holy  Spirit  of
Love)  hath  in  all  ages,  by  figures,  shadows,  parables,  words,
written  letters,  been  working  men  up  to  good  will,"  but  he
constantly  speaks  of  the  danger  of  being  led  astray  by
those  who  are  only  "  Scripture-learned."  So,  too,  all  rites
and  ceremonies  are  only  shadows  and  figures  for  a  low
stage  of  religious  progress.

"Alas,"  he  writes,  "how  great  contention  and  disputation
hath  there  been  among  many  touching  baptism.  The  one  would
have  the  baptism  thus,  the  other  so.  But  while  it  was  right  with
them,  yet  hath  no  man  been  able,  before  this  day  of  love  which
is  the  true  light  and  glory  of  God  himself,  to  understand  nor  dis-
cern the  baptism  of  John  (the  outward)  nor  the  baptism  of  Christ
(the  inward)."  *

1  Chap.  xi.  p.  20.  ^  Chap.  vii.  sec.  29.  '  Pp.  13,  14.

^  Evangelhim  Regni,  xix.  12  ;  quoted  in  Thomas's  Monograph,  p.  32.


438  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

This  teaching  gets  a  clearer  interpretation  in  the
First  Exhortatmt  where  he  says  that  those  upright
{i.e.  spiritual)  believers  that  follow  after  Christ  in  death
and  life  become  baptized  and  washed  through  Christ  in
the  pure  living  water  of  the  holy  Ghost.^  In  another
passage  of  sweeping  import  he  sets  forth  his  principle,  in
words  that  are  probably  inspired  by  the  Galatian  Epistle  :

"  Not  in  anything  whatsoever  that  is  visible  or  feelable,  nor  in
any  factious  God-services  or  ceremonies  which  are  observed
with  men's  hands  in  contention  and  which  do  not  require  any  life
of  righteousness^  consisteth  either  salvation  or  condemnation
before  God,  nor  can  they  bring  any  vantage  or  damage  at  all
unto  souls."  2

It  was  his  overmastering  concern  that  the  life  should
be  put  above  forms  and  "  God-services,"  and  it  may  not
be  amiss  to  quote  one  more  passage  out  of  an  abundance
of  similar  utterances  :

"  Let  no  man  bind  his  heart  unto  any  outward  thing,  for  here
is  the  sum  of  perfect  Righteousness.  It  is  a  humble  heart  that
departeth  from  all  earthly  and  corruptible  things  and  with  a  lowly
and  meek  spirit  is  incorporated  with  God  in  pure  love,  according
to  the  Spirit,  living  in  the  form  of  Jesus  Christ,  in  an  unspotted
conscience."  ^

Nicholas,  like  George  Fox,  made  much  of  quiet  waiting
in  silence.

"Grow  up  in  stillness  and  singleness  of  heart,"  he  says,
"  praying  for  a  right  sight  in  the  truth,  for  that  shall  make  you
free.  He  urges  his  Family  to  break  spiritual  bread  together  in
stillness^  abiding  steadfast  in  prayer,  till  all  covering  wherewith

*  P.  20,  see  also  pp.  41-43.

2  Introduction  to  Glass  of  Righteoiisness,  chap.  xvi.  sec.  35.  There  is  an
interesting  passage  in  the  Evangelium  Regni,  chap,  xxxiii. ,  which  shows  that  he
believed  that  no  religious  service  is  of  value  unless  the  person  who  performs  it  is
illuminated :  ' '  Therefore  consider  now  that  no  man  by  his  knowledge  of  the
Scripture  can  rightlie  erect,  teach,  or  set  forth  the  Christian  ceremonies.  But
they  shall  be  administered  and  taught  in  their  right  form  by  them  that  are  chosen
or  raised  up  thereunto  by  God,  which  follow  after  Christ  in  his  death,  become
renewed  with  him  in  a  new  life,  in  whom  the  living  God  with  His  Christ  hath  even
so  then  obtained  his  dwelling  and  shape.  From  whose  bodies  likewise  the  Words
of  God  and  Christ  do  then  flow  forth  as  living  waters,  which  also  concordably
agree  with  the  testimony  of  the  Holie  Ghost."

2  Introduction  to  Glass  of  Righteousness,  chap.  xii.  p.  25.


XVIII  THE  FAMILY  OF  LOVE  439

their  hearts,  after  the  flesh,  are  covered  is  done  away,  that  is
to  say  until  the  spiritual,  heavenly,  and  uncovered  being  of  Christ
appears  and  comes  to  their  spirit."^

He  undoubtedly  looked  upon  himself  as  a  prophet  of
at  least  equal  standing  and  inspiration  with  any  in  the
Scriptures,  and  he  always  assumes  that  his  new  sect,
founded  on  his  own  revelations,  is  the  only  true  church.^
"  The  House  of  Love  "  is  God's  latest  stage  of  revelation —
"  the  more  perfect  way,"  for  which  the  world  had  waited
long.'  It  was,  they  believed,  "the  New  Day  of  Life,"
"  the  fulfilment  of  God's  Covenant  of  Grace  " — the  begin-
ning of  the  Religion  of  the  Spirit.  "  Now  in  the  last
time"  writes  Henry  Nicholas,^  "  through  the  appearing  of
Christ,  God  hath  raised  up  His  community  of  holy  ones,"
which  is  "  the  only  true  seed  and  witness  of  Jesus  Christ  in
the  world,"  or,  as  he  says  again,  "  the  stool  of  Grace  to
an  everlasting  remission  of  sins " ;  though  the  benefit
is  promised  only  to  such  as  "submit  your  hearts  until
that  Love  which  is  the  being  of  Christ  have  a  shape
in  you."  *

It  has  often  been  assumed  that  both  Henry  Nicholas
and  his  followers  pushed  their  claims  of  holiness  and
perfection  to  a  wild  and  dangerous  extreme.  It  is  pro-
bably true  that  they  held  a  "  perfection "  that  inclined
them,  or  at  least  some  of  them,  to  believe  in  their  own
infallibility,  and  that  ministered  to  an  over-security  in
their  attainments.  The  doctrine  was,  however,  safe-
guarded by  an  unvarying  insistence  on  purity  of  life,  and
by  an  emphasis  on  the  truth  that  the  final  goal  of  perfec-
tion is  "  the  measure  of  the  stature  of  the  fulness  of
Christ,"  or  as   Henry  Nicholas  puts  it,  growing  up  from

^  Introduction,  chap,  xviii.

2  "  So  at  the  last  God  remembered  the  desolate,  heard  the  sighing  and  prayer
of  the  poor,  and  to  the  end  that  his  truth  and  will  might  be  made  manifest,  he
wrought  a  wonderful  work  on  earth  and  raised  up  Henry  Nicholas,  the  least
among  the  holy  ones,  who  lay  altogether  dead  and  without  breath  and  life,  from
the  dead  and  made  me  alive  through  Christ,  anointed  me  with  his  godlie  Being,
manned  Himself  with  me  and  godded  me  with  Him  to  a  living  tabernacle  or
House  for  his  dwelling  and  to  a  seat  of  his  Christ,  to  the  end  that  his  wonderful
works  might  now  in  the  last  time  be  known,  the  light  of  His  glorie  revealed  with
full  clearness  and  instruction"  [Evangelium  Regni,  chap,  xxxiv. ).

2  First  Exhortation,  pp.  23,  24.  ■*  Ibid.  pp.  75-78.


440  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

"  the  youngnesse  of  the  spiritual  life  unto  the  oldnesse  of
the  Man  Christ."  He  counsels  his  followers  not  to
assume  that  they  "  have  already  attained,"  but  "  to  look
steadily  for  the  Increase  of  God,  abiding  steadfast  in  the
service  of  Love,  until  the  lapsing  away  of  the  mortal
body."  They  are  to  prepare  like  good  soldiers  "  for  hard
battle,  expecting  to  face  bitter  enemies  and  to  suffer  hurt,
but  are  to  go  on  in  courage,  not  satisfied  with  any  victory
short  of  actual  deliverance  from  sin  and  the  manifestation
of  the  fruits  of  God  in  the  daily  life."  ^  And  he  further
insists  that  the  "  perfection "  which  he  teaches  is  not  a
perfect  obedience  according  to  the  flesh,  but  a  perfect
obedience  to  the  true  Light  of  Life,  revealed  in  the  soul,
as  the  following  passage  testifies  :

"  Also  how  grossly  have  certain  overreached  themselves  who  have
taught  the  perfection  according  to  the  flesh,  and  applied  the  free-
dom of  the  children  of  God  to  elementish  man,  with  a  certain
use  of  fleshlie  dealings.  Let  every  one  look  well  to  it  that  he  run
not  forth  according  to  the  good  thinking  of  his  own  spirit,  nor
believe  any  manner  of  knowledge  which  riseth  up  in  his  own
heart — he  that  forsaketh  himself  in  the  obedience  of  the  requiring
of  the  gracious  word  of  the  Lord  and  his  service  of  Love  cometh
to  the  true  Light  of  Life."  2

The  sect,  or  "  society,"  first  comes  to  light  in  England
about  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  century.  Archbishop
Cranmer  had  his  attention  called  to  "  a  sect  newly  sprung
up  in  Kent,"  which  Strype  thinks  may  have  been  the
"  Family  of  Love.^  We  get  our  first  definite  information
of  the  spread  of  the  movement  in  John  Rogers'  book,
which  fairly  screams  against  these  simple  religious
people.'*  He  says  that  he  has  been  told  by  the  members
that  there  are  about  1000  of  the  Family  of  Love  in
England  at  that  time  (1579).  Rogers  gives  a  very
interesting  "  confession,"  which  he  says  was  given  by
two  members  of  the   Family  before   Sir  William   Moore,

1  An  epitome  of  chap.  xiii.  sees.  22-36,  Introduction  to  Glass  of  Righteousness.
^  Ibid,  chap.  xxv.

3  Strype's  Crafifner,  ii.  p.  410  (Oxford,    1848).      Quoted  by  Thomas,  p.  16.
(This  sect  was  very  Hkely  a  group  of  Anabaptists. )

^  John  Rogers,  The  Displaying  of  an  Horrible  Sect  ('London,  1579).


XVIII  THE   FAMILY  OF  LOVE  441

a  Justice  of  Surrey,  May   28,  1561.      The  "confession'
is  in  substance  as  follows  :

"  They  are  all  unlearned,  save  some  who  can  read  English
and  are  made  bishops,  elders,  and  deacons,  who  call  them  to  one
of  the  disciples'  houses,  thirty  in  number  assemble  to  hear  the
Scriptures  expounded.  They  have  goods  in  common,  new
members  are  received  with  a  kiss,  all  have  meat,  drink,  and
lodging  found  by  the  owner  of  the  house  where  they  meet.
They  knock,  saying,  '  Here  is  a  Brother  or  Sister  in  Christ.'
The  congregation  does  not  speak  until  admitted  so  to  do.
They  go  to  church,  but  object  to  the  Litany  that  says  '  Lord
have  mercy  upon  us  miserable  sinners,'  as  if  they  could  never  be
amended.  They  may  not  say  '  God  speed,  God  morrow,  or  God
even.'  They  did  prohibit  bearing  of  weapons,  but  at  length
allowed  the  bearing  of  staves.  When  a  question  is  demanded
of  any,  they  stay  a  great  while  ere  they  answer,  and  commonly
their  word  shall  be  '  Surely '  or  '  So.'  When  their  wives  are
in  childbirth  they  must  use  the  help  of  none  other  but  one  of
their  own  sect.  If  any  die,  the  wife  or  husband  that  overliveth
must  marry  again  with  one  of  their  congregation  or  else  the
offence  is  great.  ^  The  marriage  is  made  by  the  brethren,  who
sometimes  bring  them  together  who  hve  over  a  hundred  miles
asunder,  as  Thomas  Chaundler  of  Woneherst,  Surrey,  who  sent
for  a  wife  from  the  Isle  of  Ely  by  two  of  the  congregation.
These  had  never  met  before,  and  in  a  year  they,  upon  a  disliking,
did  divorce  themselves  asunder  before  certain  of  the  congrega-
tion. No  man  is  to  be  baptized  before  the  age  of  thirty.
Until  then  he  is  an  infant.  Heaven  and  hell  are  present  in
this  world  among  us.  They  are  bound  to  give  alms  only  to
their  own  sect,  bound  to  relieve  him  that  decayeth.  All  men
not  of  their  congregation  or  revolted  from  them  are  as  dead.
Bishops  and  ministers  should  not  remain  still  in  one  place  but
should  wander  from  country  to  country.  They  hold  there  was  a
world  before  Adam's  time.  No  man  should  be  put  to  death  for
his  opinions,  and  they  therefore  condemn  Cranmer  and  Ridley
for  burning  Joane  of  Kent.  They  expound  Scripture  according
to  their  own  minds,  comparing  one  place  with  another.

They  bragge  verie  muche  of  their  owne  sincere  lives,  justify-
ing themselves,  saying,  '  marke  how  purelie  we  live.'  If  they
have  anything  to  do  touching  their  temporal  things  they  must  do
it  by  advice,  viz.  ask  Counsell  of  the  Lord  through  one  of  their

1  I  take  it  this  is  if  he  marry  again  at  all,  not  that  there  is  compulsion  to  do  so.
Obviously  the  Family  had  not  in  1561  been  long  enough  existing  in  England  for
the  children  of  Familists  to  arrive  at  marriageable  age.


442  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

bishops  or  elders.  They  give  their  alms  by  putting  under  a  hat
upon  a  table  what  they  are  disposed  to  give,  and  the  money  is
secretly  distributed  by  the  Bishops  ^  or  Elders."

Rogers  says  that  he  has  seen  and  tried  to  read  a
number  of  Henry  Nicholas'  books,  but  that  he  finds  them
"  subtle  and  dark " ;  they  "  speak  in  riddle  and  dark
speech,"  v^^hich  means  that  Rogers  did  not  penetrate  the
meaning  of  their  deep  mystical  teaching.  He  admits
that  these  Familists  "  shovi^  an  outvi^ard  face  of  holy  con-
versation, like  the  Pelagians  who  believe  in  vi^orks ! "
This  good  life,  however,  he  thinks,  is  only  a  pretence,
"  a  visard  and  cloake  to  hide  their  grosse  and  absurd
doctrine,  and  a  bait  for  the  simple."  He  brings  up  the
old  theological  mallet :  "  They  press  the  need  of  a  good
life,  but  what  is  this  without  a  right  fayth !  Turks  and
Jews  are  diligent  in  observances."  He  charges  Nicholas
with  getting  his  ideas  from  David  Joris  (or  David
George,  as  it  is  sometimes  written).  "  H.  N.  was  a
schoUer  of  David  George "  ;  "  David  George  layde  the
egg  and  H.  N.  brought  forth  the  chicken."^  He
tells  how  these  pestilential  doctrines  are  being  spread
broad-cast  by  a  certain  ignorant  Dutch  joiner  named
Christopher  Vitells.  This  Vitells  "  trudges  from  country
to  country  ;  has  not  been  with  his  wife  in  London  for
two  years,  'tis  said  ;  creeps  in  corners  and  dare  not  show
his  head,  is  a  man  utterly  unlearned,  more  fit  to  be  a
scholar  in  Christ's  school  than  an  illuminated  elder  and
teacher."  His  preaching,  however,  to  the  sorrow  of  the
said  Rogers,  "  appeals  to  novices "  ;  "  many  have  been
snared  by  him,  and  not  a  few  ministers  have  been
entangled  by  the  drowsie  dreams  of  this  doting  Dutch-
man," told  by  "  a  rude  and  unlearned  joyner."  ^      In  spite

1  The  Family  never  itself  uses  the  word  bishop.

2  This  opinion  is  very  common,  but  without  much  foundation.  Joris  was
born  in  Ghent  or  Bruges  in  1500.  He  had  extraordinary  experiences  of  the
nature  of  "revelations,"  and  he  held  that  God  made,  through  him,  the  third  of  His
great  revelations  to  the  world.  The  first  was  through  David  the  Psalmist,  the
second  was  through  the  Son  of  David,  the  holy  one  of  the  Gospels,  and  he
claimed  to  be  the  third  David  through  whom  God  was  giving  the  revelation  of
the  Spirit  to  supersede  the  other  two.  His  visions  are  told  in  a  book  published
in  1536  with  the  sensational  title,  "  Hark,  Hark,  Great  Marvel  !    Great  Marvel  !  !  "

*  This  "rude  and  unlearned  joyner,"  however,  was  sufficiently  learned  to
translate  Henry  Nicholas'  difficult  books  into  his  adopted  tongue  !


XVIII  THE   FAMILY  OF  LOVE  443

of  himself  Roger's  picture  of  the  "  Horrible  Sect "  reveals
many  fine  traits  in  the  members  of  the  Family  of  Love,
and  evidently  Vitells  was  a  great  success  as  an  "  Elder  "
in  the  Family !  ^  The  next  witness  to  the  existence
of  the  sect  in  England  is  J.  Knewstub,  who  rushed
into  print  against  H.  N.  and  his  "Family"  in  1579,
under  the  title  "A  Confutation  of  Monstrous  and  Hor-
rible Heresies  taught  by  H.  N.,  and  embraced  by  a
number  who  call  themselves  the  Family  of  Love."  ^
He  does  not  accuse  Nicholas  or  the  Familists  of  im-
morality, though  he  thinks  that  Nicholas'  writings  en-
courage undue  liberty,  and  in  his  dedicatory  epistle  to
his  work  he  says  that  "  the  errors  of  the  sect  bee  so
foule  and  so  filthy,  as  would  force  the  very  penne  in
passing  to  stay  and  stop  her  nose ! "  When  these
"  Errours "  are  marshalled  they  do  not  look  so  "  foule
and  filthy "  to  us  as  they  did  to  Knewstub  in  the  six-
teenth century.  He  charges  that  "  H.  N.  turns  religion
up-side-down.  He  buildeth  heaven  here  upon  earth  ;
he  maketh  God  man  and  man  God "  [what  Henry
Nicholas  really  said  was  that  God  could  reveal  Himself
humanly,  and  man  could  be  raised  to  a  divine  nature,
which  Paul  also  said].  He  shows  that  Henry  Nicholas
taught  that  "our  bodies  are  not  ours  to  do  therewith  our
own  will,  but  the  Lord's  to  use  as  instruments  of  His
service  to  all  righteousness,"  and  he  tries,  though  un-
successfully, to  give  this  teaching  a  libertine  construc-
tion. A  number  of  interesting  tenets  of  the  sect  are
brought  forward  as  "  monstrous  heresies."  For  example,
he  points  out  with  horror  that  Henry  Nicholas  says  that
"  God  hath  raised  him  from  the  dead  and  anointed  him
with  the  holy  Ghost,  and  chosen  him  to  be  a  minister  of
the   Word    under   the   obedience    of    Love."      Again    he

*  We  learn  from  ' '  A  Confutation  of  Certain  Articles  delivered  unto  the
Family  of  Love,"  by  William  Wilkinson,  M,A.  (Cambridge,  1579),  that  the
chief  Elders  of  the  Familists  were  "weavers,  basket-makers,  musicians,  bottle-
makers,  and  such  like."  He  declares  that  they  "  swarm  and  dayly  increase  in  the
Isle  of  Ely."

2  John  Knewstub  (1544-1624)  was  a  Cambridge  Master  of  Arts  and  a  famous
divine  with  strong  Puritan  leaning.  He  translated  sections  of  Henry  Nicholas'
Evangelhim  Regni  with  denunciatory  comments.


444  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

argues  that  "  H.  N.  makes  Christ  no  one  man,  but  a
state  and  condition  in  men^  by  the  reception  of  which
state  and  condition  men  grow  into  perfection  and  so  sin
no  more.  This  state  he  calleth  the  true  Light,  or  Being,
or  Perfection."  ^  He  quotes  the  following  passage  to
illustrate  the  point :

"  The  true  Light  is  the  anointing  of  the  Holy  Ghost  called  in
Hebrew  '  Messias,'  in  Greek  '  Christus.'  The  Jews  say  the
Messias  or  anointed  is  the  Sabbath  day.  These  figures  change
out  of  the  letter  into  the  true  revealing  of  the  holie  Spirit  of
Christ.  Divers  have  cried  'Christ,  Christ,'  and  'We  are  Chris-
tians,' and  attributed  to  themselves  much  Freedom  ere  ever  the
time  of  the  appearing  of  Christ  or  the  anointing  of  the  Holy
Ghost  was  come  to  pass  in  them.'*  ^

Knewstub  has  also  heard  that  the  members  of  the
Family  of  Love  do  not  believe  that  the  tree  in  the
Garden  of  Eden  was  a  material  tree,  or  that  the  fruit
which  Adam  ate  was  material  fruit,  but  that  the  trans-
gression of  Adam  was  in  the  will^  and  that  true  seed  to
Abraham  can  now  be  conceived  by  the  Holy  Ghost.

Thomas  Rogers,  another  contemporary  opponent,  gives
us  some  of  the  prominent  traits  of  the  "  Familists."  ^  He
says  that  they  "  deny  original  sin."  They  teach  that  the
regenerated  {i.e.  the  godded  persons)  do  not  sin,  that  the
water  of  baptism  is  only  "  eleinentish  water "  {i.e.  is  just
water).  They  condemn  all  war  ;  prohibit  the  bearing  of
arms  ;  hold  that  no  man  should  be  put  to  death  for  his
religion.  They  "  deny  all  calling  but  the  immediate  call
of  God."  They  term  professional  ministers  "  scripture-
learned,"  "  letter-doctors,"  "  teaching-masters."  They  call
it  presumptuous  to  preach  unless  the  preacher  receives  a
revelation,  for  the  Word  of  God  can  neither  be  "  learned  "
nor  "  taught."     They  call   churches  "  common    houses  "  ;

1  Poor  Knewstub  does  not  remotely  comprehend  the  mystical  view  which  he
is  combating.  Hooker  in  the  Preface  to  his  Ecclesiastical  Polity  implies  that
the  Familists  "  have  it  in  their  heads  that  Christ  doth  not  signify  any  one  person,
but  a  quality  whereof  many  are  partakers."  Neither  of  these  writers  has
penetrated  Henry  Nicholas'  spiritual  meaning.

2  Evangelium  Regni,  chap.  xiii.

^  In  his  Catholic  Doctrine  of  the  Church  of  England,  London,  1585  (first
edition  said  to  be  1579).      Published  by  the  Parker  Society,  1854.


XVIII  THE   FAMILY  OF  LOVE  445

they  hold  conventicles  ;  they  contemn  the  Lord's  Day
(on  the  contrary,  they  held  that  all  days  are  the  Lord's
days).  They  say  that  the  promises  of  blessedness  are  for
this  life,  and  they  declare  that  hell  is  in  the  heart  and
conscience.

Another  opponent,  Edmond  Jessop,  considerably  later,
attacked  the  Family  of  Love,  as  "  the  most  blasphemous
and  erroneous  sect  this  day  in  the  world."  -^  Jessop
charges  that  they  teach  that  "the  same  perfection  of
holiness  which  was  in  Adam  before  he  fell  is  to  be
attained  here  in  this  life,  and  affirm  that  the  members
of  their  Family  are  as  perfect  and  innocent  as  he."  They
say  that  "  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  spoken  of  by
St.  Paul  in  i  Cor.  15,  is  fulfilled  in  them,  and  they  deny
all  resurrection  of  the  body  after  this  life."  ^

Henry  Ainsworth,  the  famous  "  Separatist,"  published  in
Amsterdam  in  1608,  "An  Epistle  to  two  daughters  of
Warwick  from  H.  N."®  This  epistle  Ainsworth  answers
section  by  section  in  a  preface,  quoting  also  from  at
least  nine  of  Henry  Nicholas'  books.  He  says  that
"  Satan  has  never  had  a  fitter  religion  for  atheists  and
carnal  hypocrites  than  that  which  Henry  Nicholas  out  of
his  corrupt  and  fleshly  hert  hath  set  abroach  " ;  that  "  he
hath  written  more  blasphemously  than  ever  did  Mahomet
in  Elkoran,"  and  that  "  he  labors  to  be  obscure  in  his
words  that  he  may  have  for  his  last  refuge  the  claim  that
men  understand  him  not ! "  He  charges  that  Henry
Nicholas'  teaching  "maketh  persons  pure  and  without
al  syn,  in  their  own  foolish  imaginations,  yea,  it  deifieth
them  with  God."  He  then  proceeds  to  "  manifest  the
impieties  of  his  dark,  delphick  speeches  and  glozing
allegories."  Here  are  some  of  Henry  Nicholas'  "  im-
pieties": That  ceremonies  are  "  mere  outward  means  set
forth  by  God  and  His  ministers  to  direct  people  to  the
inward  life  of  Christ  in  the  Spirit  " ;  that  "  he  that   letteth

1  "A  Discovery  of  the  Errors  of  the  English  Anabaptists,"  London,  1623.

2  Compare  George  Fox's  statement  :    "I  was  in  the  condition  Adam  was  in
before  he  fell "  [Journal^  London,  1901,  vol.  i.  p.  28).

^  Aji  Epistle  sent  unto   Two  Daughters  of  Warwick  with  Refutation  of  the
Errors  that  are  therein,  by  H.  A.,  Amsterdam,  1608.


446  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

himself  think  that  he  is  a  Christian  before  the  Spirit  of
Christ  is  born  in  him  is  a  thief  and  a  murderer "  ;  that
"  the  confession  of  Christ  must  stand  in  greater  force
than  to  be  confessed  with  the  mouth  in  a  ceremonial
service  which  is  a  baptizing  with  water  or  some  other
elcmentish  confession,"  and  that  "  baptism  with  water  and
the  taking  of  the  sacrament  are  elementish  and  unfruitful
unless  the  Spirit  of  Christ  is  served  {i.e.  promoted)  by  the
Christian  service  let  it  be  fashioned  ever  so  much  on  the
Scriptures."

John  Etherington  was  a  prominent  Familist  teacher  in
London  in  1623,  as  we  learn  from  a  fierce  sermon  against
him,   preached    in    St.    Paul's    by    Stephen    Denison    on
Sunday,    February    ii,    1627.       Poor    Etherington    was
compelled   to   stand    through    the   entire  service  —  three
hours   long — with  a  paper  on  his  breast  declaring  that
"  he  had  scandalized  the  whole  church  of  Christ  by  say-
ing that  it  was  no  true  church."-^     The  sermon  divides
"  Famisticall  wolves  "  into  four  "  packs,"  the  two  most  im-
portant of  which  are  (i)  Those  who  hold  that  the  law  of
God   may  be   perfectly  fulfilled  in   this  world,  and  that
men  may  be  inspired  with  light  and  illumination  as  far  as
ever  Paul  or  any  of  the  prophets  were.     (2)  Those  w^ho
hold  that  the  Spirit  is  above  Scripture,  that  all  days  are
Sabbaths,  that  when  God   dwells   in  a   soul  He  fills  the
soul  so  that  there  is  no  more  lusting,  and  who  boast  that
they  have  cast  off  saying  prayers  and  repeating  sermons
and   such-like  long  ago.      Etherington  was  a  box-maker
by  trade,  but  he  found   time  to  do  an    extensive  "  mis-
sionary "  work  along  with  his  trade.      Denison   says  that
he    drew    many  men    and    women    from    the   Church   of
England  into  the   "  Family  of  Love."      He  charges  him
with  "tampering  with   many  tender  consciences"  in   his
(Denison's)  parish,  and  with  circulating  his  "  linsey-woolsie
books."  ^      He  says  that  Etherington  holds  that  "  no  bap-
tism has  any  virtue  except  a  baptism  in  a  thousand  tears."

1  The  "  White  Wolf,"  a  Sermon,  London,  1627.

2  Etherington  wrote  a  book  in  i6io  in  which  he  said  that  outward  ordination
does  not  make  a  true  minister.  He  wrote  from  prison  in  1627  a  "Defense
against  Stephen  Denison,"  \vhich  was  published  in  1641.


XVIII  THE   FAMILY  OF  LOVE  447

The  most  lamentable  attack  on  the  Familists  is  that
made  by  Samuel  Rutherford,  for  in  this  attack  he  lays
aside  his  saintliness  and  sweetness,  and  writes  in  a  spirit
of  bigotry  and  intolerance,  and  in  ignorance  of  the  real
teaching  of  the  persons  whom  he  assails.  From  him,
however,  we  learn  that  many  Familists  were  in  jail  at  the
time,  that  they  regarded  outward  worship  and  ordinances
as  traditions,  and  that  they  were  spread  through  twelve
counties  of  England.  He  quotes  from  their  petition  to
King  James,  saying  that  they  are  "  few  in  number  and
poor  in  worldly  wealth,"  and  ejaculates,  Would  God  they
were  few  in  number,  yet  they  are  pestering  twelve  counties
of  England/  John  Evelyn  has  an  interesting  reference
to  the  sect,  under  date  of  June  16,  1687.  He  says  that
James  H.  received  an  Address  from  some  of  the  Family
of  Love,  and  "  His  Majesty  asked  them  what  their  party
might  consist  of ;  they  told  him  their  custom  was  to
reade  the  Scripture  and  then  to  preach,  but  did  not  give
any  further  account,  onely  sayd  that  for  the  rest  they
were  a  sort  of  refined  Quakers,  but  their  number  was
very  small,  not  consisting,  as  they  sayd,  of  above  three
score  in  all,  and  those  chiefly  belonging  to  the  Isle  of
Ely."  There  can  be  no  question,  for  any  one  who  care-
fully studies  the  facts,  that  there  is  much  truth  in  their
claim,  as  reported  by  Evelyn,  that  they  were  "  a  sort  of
Quakers."  They  had,  for  more  than  a  hundred  years,
maintained  in  England  a  steady  testimony  to  the  spiritual
nature  of  religion,  to  the  fact  of  a  Divine  Light  and  Life
in  the  soul,  and  to  the  unimportance  of  outward  forms
and  ordinances  in  comparison  with  the  inward  experience
of  God's  Presence.  They  had  insisted  on  spiritualizing
this  life  rather  than  on  dogmatizing  about  the  next  life,
and  they  had  been  practising,  as  far  as  they  could,  in  the
society  in  which  they  lived,  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount
Their  organization  was  cumbersome,  their  religious  books
were  over-mystical  and  hard  to  penetrate,  and  their  teach-
ing on  "  perfection  "  was  open  to  a  dangerous  application.

'   Rutherford's  Survey  of  Spiritual  AntichHst  (London,    1648),   which  con-
tains a  Petition  of  the  Familists  to  King  James  in  1604.


448  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap,  xvi.i

These  weaknesses  of  system  and  method  hampered  them
and  kept  them  from  becoming  a  powerful  people.  By
the  middle  of  the  century  the  Quakers,  with  clearer
insight  and  with  far  wiser  leadership,  were  presenting  all
that  was  valuable  in  the  Family  of  Love,  with  a  much
wider  spirit  of  common  human  brotherhood  and  with
a  still  more  positive  insistence  on  the  necessity  of  carry-
ing religion  into  daily  life.  Many  Familists  must  have
joined  with  Friends,  though  there  is  little  proof  of  the
fact  that  they  did.  Some  of  them  took  the  attitude  of
and  position  of  the  "  Seekers,"  whom  I  shall  study  in  the
next  chapter,  and  some  drifted  into  the  looser  movement
which  goes  under  the  name  of  "  Ranters."  ^  A  remnant
of  the  Family  lingered  on  into  the  opening  of  the
eighteenth  century.^  It  is  now  a  "dead  sect,"  but  the
great  contention  of  its  founder,  that  salvation  is  no  true
salvation  unless  it  delivers  from  sin  and  produces  a  new
man,  is  a  very  live  doctrine  in  the  world  to-day.

1  William  Penn  makes  no  clear  distinction  between  these  three  groups  (see
preface  to  Fox's  Journal,  p.  xxv. ).

2  Collier  in  his  Eccl.  Hist,  of  Great  Britain,  published  1708-1714,  says
that  Henry  Nicholas'  opinions  "exist  to  this  day  in  new  modifications,"
Neal,  writing  in  1720,  speaks  of  Familists  as  "something  akin  to  the  Quakers
among  ourselves "  (see  Hist,  of  the  Puritans,  vol.  i.  p.  227  ;  quoted  from
Thomas'  Monograph,  p.  26).


CHAPTER  XIX

THE    SEEKERS    AND    THE    RANTERS

Almost  all  contemporary  accounts  refer  with  more  or
less  horror  to  the  swarm  of  sects  which  appeared  in
England  during  the  Civil  War  and  the  period  of  the
Commonwealth.  It  was  a  period  of  social  and  political
ferment ;  a  time  of  religious  upheaval,  when  the  crust  of
habit  and  ancient  traditions  was  broken  through  by  a  wave
of  strong  religious  emotion.  The  nation  passed  through  a
distinct  crisis  of  incubation,  a  creative  epoch  in  its  life
attended  by  an  extraordinary  release  of  energy.  Milton
in  a  classic  passage  has  given  a  description  of  England  in
this  creative  epoch  :

"I  see  a  noble  and  puissant  nation  rousing  herself  like  a
strong  man  after  a  sleep  and  shaking  her  invincible  locks.
Methinks  I  see  her,  as  an  eagle  mewing  her  mighty  youth,
and  kindling  her  undazzled  eyes  at  the  full  mid-day  beam,  purging
and  unsealing  her  long-abused  sight  at  the  fountain  itself  of
heavenly  radiance,  while  the  whole  noise  of  timorous  and  flocking
birds,  with  those  also  that  love  the  twilight,  flutter  about  amazed  at
what  she  means,  and  in  their  envious  gabble  would  prognosticate
a  year  of  sects  and  schisms."  ^

Whether  Milton  was  conscious  of  the  fact  or  not,  it  is
impossible  for  a  nation  to  "  unseal  her  long-abused  sight
at  the  fountain  itself  of  heavenly  radiance,"  without  the
noise  and  flutter  of  sects  and  schisms.  A  nation  that
throws  off  its  settled  habits  and  faces  the  issues  of  life
with  freshness  and  freedom  must  expect  ferment  and
turmoil ;       and     therewith     novelties     and     peculiarities.

^   The  Areopagitica,  first  edition.  1644.

449  2  G


450  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

England  had  passed  through  the  great  Reformation
period  without  much  social  or  religious  ferment.  Her
Reformation  was  an  extremely  mild  one.  There  was  no
seething,  surging  ground  swell  of  popular  emotion.  There
was  no  great  religious  prophet  to  re-voice  in  fresh  ways
the  elemental  hunger  of  the  soul  of  man.  Abuses  were
corrected,  a  few  superstitions  were  cast  aside,  a  national
head  of  the  Church  was  substituted  for  the  papal  head,
a  new  prayer-book  was  produced  and  the  form  of  worship
simplified,  but  there  was  no  severance  of  continuity  with
the  old  Church.  Everybody  was  compelled  to  "  conform."
There  was  no  toleration,  no  provision  for  independent
thought  The  Anabaptists  and  Familists  and  other
separatists  took  their  lives  in  their  hands  and  were  always
in  jeopardy.  The  nation  was  not  yet  ready  to  risk  the
danger  of  "kindling  her  eyes  at  the  full  mid-day  beam."
The  civil  war  was  the  first  opportunity  for  the  long-
delayed  religious  revival  to  break  forth  in  England,  and
break  forth  it  did  with  a  vigour  and  commotion  seldom
witnessed  before  or  since.  "  Old  Ephraim  "  Pagitt  is  not
a  very  reliable  authority,  but  he  was  an  eye-witness  of  the
commotion,  which  he  saw  "  with  great  grief  of  heart."
**  Our  people,"  he  writes,  "  are  becoming  of  the  Tribe  of
Gad,  running  after  seducers  as  if  they  were  mad."  His
appeal  to  the  Lord  Mayor  of  London  in  1645  is  a  vivid
picture  of  the  infection  of  new  faiths  and  religious
novelties  :

"  The  plague  is  of  all  diseases  most  infectious  :  I  have  lived
among  you  almost  a  jubile,  and  have  seen  your  great  care  and
provision  to  keep  the  city  from  infection.  The  plague  of  heresy
is  greater,  and  you  are  now  in  more  danger  than  when  you
buried  five  thousand  a  week.  You  have  power  to  keep  these
heretics  and  sectaries  from  conventickling  and  sholing  together
to  infect  one  another."^

Edwards'  Gangrcena  is  a  still  more  hysterical  account
of  the  swarm  of  sects,  or  as  he  puts  it  himself,  "  of  the
many  errors,  heresies,  blasphemies,  and  pernicious  practices
of  the  sectaries  of  this  time,  vented  and  acted  in  England

^  Pagitt's  Heresiography  (London,  1645),  Dedication  to  the  Lord  Mayor.


XIX     THE   SEEKERS  AND  THE   RANTERS     451

in  these  four  last  years."  -^  Marsden's  account  is  not
that  of  an  eye-witness,  but  it  faithfully  reproduces  the
general  impression  of  contemporary  writers  :

"Absurd  excesses  of  opinion  now  appeared,  as  exotics  in  a
hotbed.  The  distractions  of  the  times  suspended  the  restraints
of  Church  discipline  ;  opinions  monstrous  and  prodigious  started
up  every  day,  and  were  broached  with  impunity  in  public  and
in  private,  and  multitudes  were  led  astray.  The  number  of
new  sects,  religious  and  political,  with  which  England  swarmed
appears  almost  incredible.  The  sober  Puritans  were  confounded.
The  state  of  England  reminded  them  of  the  fabulous  description
of  the  sands  of  Libya,  where  scorching  suns  produce  new  monsters
every  year."  ^

These  contemporary  impressions  must,  however,  not
distort  our  judgment.  We  are  accustomed  to  complete
religious  freedom.  We  do  not  expect  the  heavens  to  fall
because  men  differ  in  their  views.  We  have  learned
that  churches  can  live  and  flourish  without  conformity.
These  impressions  come  from  persons  who  are  unused  to
religious  freedom  and  who  have  not  learned  that  health
and  growth  demand  the  removing  of  swaddling  clothes.
We  must,  therefore,  discount  their  tales  of  woe.  Their
stories  of  excesses  and  "  blasphemies  "  and  "  lewdnesses  "
are  highly  coloured  by  their  own  imaginations.  The
epoch  of  the  Commonwealth  was  a  time  of  great  ferment,
but  on  the  whole  it  was  marked  by  a  maturing  of  the
national  consciousness  and  a  heightening  of  religious  life
and  thought  Most  of  the  "  sects,  heresies,  and  schisms  "
described  by  Edwards  and  Pagitt  were  not  distinct
"  sects "  in  our  modern  sense  of  the  word.  They  were
rather  special  phases  of  the  general  religious  movement,
prevailing  types  of  thought  and  local  peculiarities,  due  to
a  sudden  expansion  of  freedom.  Some  of  them  developed
into  great  and  influential  denominations  ;  others  were
only  sporadic  and  temporary  tendencies,  destined  to  be
absorbed  in  larger  movements  which  ministered  more
genuinely  to  the  entire  religious  needs  and  nature  of  man.

^  Edwards'  Gangrcena  (London,  1646),  Title-page.
*  Marsden's  Later  Puritans  (London,  second  edition),  p.  224.


45  2  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

The  most  significant  of  these  latter  sporadic  and
temporary  tendencies  were  those  of  the  Seekers  and
Ranters.  They  were  not,  strictly  speaking,  sects  ;  they
were  more  or  less  contagious  movements  or  tendencies  of
thought,  which  affected  groups  of  people  in  various  parts
of  England  without  producing  any  unifying,  cementing
organization.  No  "  founder  "  can  be  discovered  for  either
movement  ;  no  **  origin  "  of  them  can  be  traced.  They
were  tendencies  more  or  less  felt  and  shared  by  all
classes  of  the  people  of  England  who  were  not  satisfied
with  the  national  Church  or  with  the  equally  rigid  system
of  Presbyterianism.  "  Seekers  "  were  to  be  found  among
the  Anabaptists,  the  Familists,  the  Brownists,  and  also
among  those  who  nominally  remained  inside  the  fold  of
the  Church.     William  Penn  speaks  of  people  who

"left  all  visible  churches  and  societies  and  wandered  up  and
down  as  sheep  without  a  shepherd,  and  as  doves  without  their
mates ;  seeking  their  beloved,  but  could  not  find  Him  (as  their
souls  desired  to  know  Him),  whom  their  souls  loved  above
their  chiefest  joy.  These  persons  were  called  Seekers  by  some
and  the  Family  of  Love  by  others."  ^

Barclay^  thinks  that  this  confusion  of  sects  shows
William  Penn's  ignorance  of  the  facts.  I  do  not  think
so.  It  rather  shows  that  there  were  "  Seekers  "  among
the  Familists  as  there  almost  certainly  were  among  all
the  other  religious  societies  of  the  time.^  Such  persons
always  appear  in  epochs  of  religious  unsettlement,  persons
who  are  "  like  doves  without  their  mates,"  *  and  who  seek
in  earnestness  for  the  Beloved  of  their  souls.  As  soon
as  faith  in  the  authority  of  the  Church  grows  faint,
and  the  sufficiency  of  established  forms  and  rituals  is
seriously  questioned,  the  primal  right  of  the  soul  to
find  God  Himself  is  sure  to  be  asserted.  "  Seekers,"
under  different  names,  we  have  found  at  every  period  of
this    history.      Sebastian    Franck    in    his   Chronicles   has

1  Penn's  Preface  to  George  Fox's  Journal.

2  Inner  Life  of  the  Societies  of  the  Commonwealth,  p.  177.

*  Baptist  writers  of  the  period  admit  that  there  were  many  Baptist  "  Seekers."

*  This  expression  "  like  doves  without  their  mates  "  appears  occasionally  in
the  Seeker  literature  of  the  period.


I


XIX     THE  SEEKERS   AND  THE   RANTERS     453

preserved  an  interesting  record  of  "  Seekers  "  in  the
tumultuous  times  when  Luther  was  shaking  the  ancient
system,  and  when  Anabaptism  was  first  spreading  its  new
ideas  through  the  world.

"  Some,"  he  writes,  "  desire  to  allow  Baptism  and  other
ceremonies  to  remain  in  abeyance  till  God  gives  another  command
— sends  out  true  labourers  into  His  harvest — some  have,  with
great  desire,  a  longing  for  this,  and  desire  nothing  else.  Some
others  agree  with  these,  who  think  the  ceremonies  since  the
death  of  the  apostles  are  equally  defiled,  laid  waste,  and  fallen —
that  God  no  longer  heeds  them,  and  also  does  not  desire  that
they  should  be  longer  kept,  on  which  account  they  will  never
again  be  set  up,  but  now  are  to  proceed  entirely  in  Spirit  and  in
Truth,  and  never  in  an  outward  manner,  so  that  it  is  as  unbecoming
that  we  should  come  to  the  Wine,  as  that  we  should  go  back
to  the  pointer  when  we  have  found  the  road,  or  that  we  should
look  behind  ourselves  to  the  statue.  These  people  will  not
acknowledge  the  Baptists  for  brethren,  but  exclude  them,  and  are
against  them  with  mouth  and  pen."  ^

This  description  by  Sebastian  Franck  is  an  accurate
account  of  the  position  of  the  English  Seekers  in  the
seventeenth  century.

Ubbo  Philipps,  fellow-labourer  with  Menno  Simons,
the  founder  of  the  Mennonites,  says  that  there  were
persons  in  his  day  who  "  served  God  in  quiet  simplicity
after  the  manner  of  the  Patriarchs  and  who  sought  God
from  the  heart,  served  and  clave  to  Him,  without  preachers,
teachers,  or  an  outward  gathering."  ^

There  was  a  wing  of  the  Mennonite  Church  in  Zealand
in  which  these  Seeker  tendencies  were  nourished,  even
down  into  the  seventeenth  century.  There  continued  to
be  little  groups  of  serious  people  among  them,  who
"  sought  God  from  the  heart "  and  who  *'  served  Him  in
quiet  simplicity."  It  is  quite  likely  that  influences  from
these  little  hidden  societies  reached  England  through  the
Anabaptists,  and  that  the  Seeker-attitude  in  England
thus  had  a  continental  origin,  though  the  tendency
might   easily  have    developed    from   the   native    religious

^  Sebastian  Franck's  Chronica,  1536,  p.  cc.  Part  III.  (quoted  from  Barclay,
p.  410).  2  Barclay,  p.  174.


454  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

movements  which  were  quietly  at  work  beneath  the
surface.

The  only  actual  link  which  can  at  present  be  traced
between  the  English  Seekers  and  these  continental  groups
is  Bartholomew  Legate,  the  last  heretic  burned  at
Smithfield — a  very  slender  bridge,  it  must  be  confessed.
Legate  was  a  dealer  in  cloth,  and  his  business  took  him  to
Zealand  where  he  became  a  preacher  among  the  Seeker
Mennonites.  He  became  convinced  that  God  was  soon
to  make  a  new  revelation  through  "  myraculous  apostles,"
and  a  "  myraculous  ministry "  ;  and  that  until  this  new
revelation  appeared,  there  was  no  "  true  church,"  no  "  true
baptism,"  and  no  "  visible  Christian."

It  was  his  belief  that

"  the  Church  has  been  latent  and  invisible  for  many  years,
and  there  can  be  no  more  a  visible  Church  till  some  notable
man  be  stirred  up  of  God  to  raise  it  again  out  of  the  dust."

He  held  that  the  learning  of  the  University  is  un-
necessary for  ministry,  that  Latin,  Greek,  and  Hebrew  are
"  the  languages  of  the  beast "  and  not  of  the  Spirit.  He
argued  that  true  ministry  must  be  initiated  by  men  with
miraculous  gifts,  saying :

"  The  men  that  began  the  frame  of  the  Church  of  Israel  were
Moses  and  Aaron.  The  men  that  began  the  New  Testament
Church  were  the  Apostles.  All  these  were  furnished  with  the
gift  of  miracles,  for  the  persuading  of  their  hearers  :  for  without
miracles  they  could  not  be  believed  to  come  from  God  for
establishing  a  new  Church-polity.  Now,  father  (addressing  an
Anabaptist),  who  were  the  first  layers  of  your  Church  foundations  ?
They  must  bring  miracles  with  them  or  who  (but  madmen)  will
take  them  for  new  Founders  ?  "  ^

The  right  attitude  was,  therefore,  that  of  a  waiter,
expecter,  or  seeker.  Legate  adopted  the  opinion  that
Christ  was  "  a  meere  man,  onely  borne  free  from  sinne "
and  possessed  "  of  the  Spirit  beyond  measure  "  and  termed
God,  in  Scripture,  not  from  "  His  essence  but  from  His
office."  2

1  Legate's  views  are  given  in  dialogue  form  in  Henoch  Clapham's  Error  on
the  Right  Hand  (London,  i6o8).     These  passages  are  taken  from  pp.  30-31.
"^  Henoch  Clapham's  Error  on  the  Right  Hand,  p.  44.


XIX     THE  SEEKERS  AND  THE  RANTERS     455

It  was  his  "Arian  heresy  "  which  aroused  the  choler  of
King  James  so  that  on  one  occasion,  "  he  spurned  at  him
with  his  foot,"  and  it  was  for  such  views  that  he  was
burned  at  Smithneld  in  the  presence  of  a  vast  "  conflux
of  people,"  March  18,  1612}

We  find,  in  the  teachings  of  this  Legate,  the  main  idea
of  the  English  Seekers,  namely,  that  there  now  exists  no
true  Church,  no  valid  sacraments,  no  person  with  apostolic
unction,  and  that  the  sincere  soul  can  only  wazt  for  a
fuller  revelation  and  a  more  efficacious  ministry.

The  first  use  of  the  word  "  Seeker "  to  designate  a
religious  "sect"  in  England,  appears  in  Truth's
Champion,  first  published  in  16 17,  and  which  bears  the
initials  "  J.  M.,"  supposed  to  be  John  Morton  (or  Murton),
one  of  the  founders  of  the  General  Baptists.      He  writes  :

"  Oh,  ye  Seekers,  I  would  ye  sought  aright  and  not  beyond
the  Scriptures  calling  them  carnal;  and  ye  speak  also  against
Christ,  and  set  Him  at  light,  and  are  not  ashamed  to  say  that
there  is  none  saved  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  that  it  is  of  no
value  at  all,  and  that  they  look  upon  the  Scriptures  as  nothing
.  .  .  by  preaching  up  a  libertine  doctrine  to  the  people,  and
that  they  need  not  hear  preaching  nor  read  the  Scriptures,  nor
live  in  obedience  thereto."

This  characterization  of  the  Seekers  must  not  be  taken
too  seriously.  It  bears  the  marks  of  misinterpretation
and  unconscious  colouring.  The  early  Seekers  merely
insisted  that  the  letter  of  Scripture  is  carnal  and  in-
sufficient ;  that  Christ  after  the  flesh  and  that  literal  blood
of  Christ  do  not  save  ;  that  wordy-preaching,  with  spiritual
experience  absent,  is  empty  and  worthless.  A  truer
witness  of  their  views  is  John  Saltmarsh.  He  himself
had  reached  a  stage  beyond  the  Seeker-attitude,  as  we
shall  see  in  the  next  chapter,  but  he  thoroughly  under-
stood them  and  is  a  sympathetic  reporter  of  their  position.^

"  The  Seekers  find  that  the  Christians  of  Apostolic  times  were
visibly   and    spiritually  endowed   with  power  from  on  high  and

1  See  Article  by  Alexander  Gordon  in  Nat.  Diet,  of  Biog.

2  The    following  passage  is  condensed   from  Saltmarsh's  Sparkles  of  Glory,
London,  1648,  pp.  214-21,


456  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap

with  Gifts  of  the  Spirit,  and  so  were  able  to  make  clear  and
evident  demonstration  of  God  in  the  Churches,  and  all  who
administered  in  any  office  were  visibly  gifted.  All  was  ad-
ministered in  the  anointing  or  unction  of  the  Spirit  clearly,
certainly,  infallibly.  They  ministered  as  the  oracles  of  God.
But  now  in  this  ti77ie  of  apostacy  of  the  churches,  they  (the
Seekers)  find  no  such  gifts,  and  so  they  dare  not  meddle  with  any
outward  administrations,  dare  not  preach,  baptize,  or  teach :
they  find  in  the  churches  nothing  but  the  outward  ceremony  of
all  administrations,  as  of  bare  water  in  baptism,  bare  imposition
of  hands  in  ordination,  etc.  Therefore,  they  "wait"  for
power  from  on  high,  finding  no  practice  of  worship  according
to  the  first  pattern.  They  wait  in  prayer,  pretending  to  no
certain  determination  of  things,  nor  to  any  infallible  interpreta-
tion of  Scripture.  They  wait  for  a  restoration  of  all  things  and
a  setting  up  of  "  Gospel  Officers,"  "  Gospel  Churches,"  "  Gospel
Ordinances,"  according  to  the  pattern  in  the  New  Testament.
They  wait  for  an  apostle  or  some  one  with  a  visible  glory  and
power,  able  in  the  spirit  to  give  visible  demonstration  of  being
sent."i

They  urged,  too,  that  miracles  should  attend  true
ministry,  as  in  apostolic  times,  and  that  until  such
demonstration  and  power  appeared,  the  perfunctory
performance  of  outward  rites,  and  the  utterance  of  mere
words  were  vain  and  hollow.  There  was  nothing  to  do
but  "  wait."

William  Penn  says  that

"  they  sometimes  met  together  not  formally  to  pray  or  preach  at
appointed  times  and  places  in  their  own  wills,  as  in  times  past
they  were  accustomed  to  do ;  but  they  waited  together  in  silence,
and  as  anything  arose  in  one  of  their  minds  that  they  thought
favored  with  a  Divine  Spring,  so  they  sometimes  spoke."  ^

Ephraim  Pagitt  gives  us  a  glimpse  of  them,  with  his
"  double  horn-pane  "  lantern.      He  says  :

"  Many  have  wrangled  so  long  about  the  Church  that  at  last
they  have  quite  lost  it,  and  go  under  the  name  of  Expecters  or
Seekers^  and  do  deny  that  there  is  any  Church,  or  any  true
minister,  or  any  ordinances ;  some  of  them  affirm  the  Church  to

^  Saltmarsh  gives  a  similar  account  of  the  Seekers  in  his  other  writings  (see
especially  his  New  Quej-e  and  his  Smoake  in  the  Te7nple,  London,  1646).
"^  Preface  to  George  Fox's  Journal.


XIX     THE  SEEKERS   AND   THE   RANTERS     457

be  in  the  wilderness,  and  they  are  seeking  for  it  there  ;  others
say  that  it  is  in  the  smoke  of  the  Temple,  and  that  they  are
groping  for  it  there — where  I  leave  them,  praying  to  God  to
open  their  eyes."  ^

Edwards  was  too  chaotic  to  devote  a  distinct  section  of
his  book  to  a  distinct  "error,"  "heresy,"  or  "blasphemy,"
but  there  are  a  number  of  "  errors  "  in  his  long  catalogue
which  seem  to  be  meant  for  "  Seekers."  The  following
passages  appear  to  apply  to  the  subject  in  hand  :

"  That  to  read  the  Scripture  to  a  mixed  congregation  is
dangerous  (Error  i  o).  That  we  did  look  for  great  matters  from
One  crucified  at  Jerusalem  1600  years  ago;  but  that  does  no
good,  it  must  be  a  Christ  formed  in  us — the  Deity  united  to  our
humanity  (Error  29).  That  men  ought  to  preach  and  exercise
their  gifts  without  study  and  premeditation  and  not  to  think  of
what  they  are  to  say  until  they  speak,  because  it  shall  be  given
them  in  that  hour  and  the  Spirit  shall  teach  them  (Error  127).
That  there  is  no  need  of  human  learning  or  reading  of  authors
for  preachers,  but  all  books  and  learning  must  go  down.  It
comes  from  want  of  the  Spirit  that  men  write  such  great  volumes
(Error  128).  That  only  persons  who  have  an  infallible  Spirit,
as  the  Apostles,  should  pray  (Error  135).  That  Christians  are  not
bound  to  pray  constantly  every  day  at  set  times,  as  morning  and
evening,  but  only  such  time  that  the  Spirit  moves  them  to  it,
and  if  they  find  not  themselves  to  be  moved  in  many  days
and  weeks  together,  they  ought  not  to  pray  (Error  137).  That
parents  are  not  to  catechize  their  little  children,  nor  to  set  them
to  read  Scripture  or  to  teach  them  to  pray,  but  to  let  them  alone
for  God  to  teach  them  (Error  157).  "^

Edwards  sheds  a  little  more  dim  light  by  three
personal  references  to  individual  "  Seekers."  He  says
that

"  Lawrence  Clerkson  (Clarkson)  turned  from  Anabaptist  and
Dipper  to  be  a  Seeker  and  to  deny  the  Scriptures  to  be  the  rule
of  a  Christian.  He  denied  that  in  doctrine  or  practice  half  of
God's  glory  was  revealed  as  yet."^

"There  is  one  Mr.  Erbury  .  .  .  w^ho  has  fallen  to  many
grosse  errors  and  is  now  a  Seeker  and  I  know  not  what.  .  .  .
He  said  that  within  a  while  God  would  raise  up  apostolical  men,
who    should   be   extraordinary  to  preach   the   Gospel.  .   .   .   He

1  Heresiograpky,  p.  128.  ^  Gangrcsna,  pp.  15-31.

2  Ibid,  p.  20,  sec.  2,  Part  I.


458  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

spake  against  gathering  in  churches  and  said  that  men  ought  to
wait  for  the  coming  of  the  Spirit,  as  the  Apostles  did.  In  a
private  meeting,  the  main  scope  of  his  exercise  was  to  speak
against  the  certainty  and  sufficiency  of  the  Scriptures."^

"  There  is  one  Clement  Wrighter  (Writer)  in  London  .  .  .
an  arch-heretic  and  fearful  apostate,  an  old  wolf  and  subtile  man.
.  .  .  He  fell  to  be  a  Seeker  and  is  now  an  anti-Scripturalist,
a  questionist  and  sceptic,  and  I  fear  an  atheist.  This  Wrighter
is  one  of  the  chief  heads  of  those  that  deny  the  Scriptures  to  be
the  Word  of  God.  .  .  .  He  said  that  the  Scriptures  are  not  the
Word  of  God,  neither  in  translation,  nor  yet  in  the  original
tongues,  so  as  to  be  an  infallible  foundation  of  faith.  He  further
said  that  there  is  no  Gospel,  no  ministry,  nor  no  faith,  nor  can
be,  unless  any  can  show  as  immediate  a  call  to  the  ministry  as
the  Apostles  had,  and  can  do  the  same  miracles  they  did."  ^

One  more  hostile  witness  to  the  views  of  the  Seekers
must  be  heard  from,  namely,  Richard  Baxter.      He  says  :

"  The  second  sect  which  then  rose  up  was  that  called  Seekers.
These  taught  that  our  Scripture  was  uncertain ;  that  present
miracles  are  necessary  to  faith;  that  our  ministry  is  null  and
without  authority ;  and  our  worship  and  ordinances  unnecessary
or  vain  ;  the  true  Church,  Ministry,  Scriptures  and  Ordinances
being  lost ;  for  which  they  are  now  seeking^  ^

John  Jackson,  who  was  himself  a  Seeker,  says  that
those  who  write  against  Seekers  "  comprehend  under  the
term  all  those  which  differ  from  themselves  touching  the
present  exercise  of  visible  administration."  *

"  Seekers,  properly  so  called,"  he  says,  "  are  such  as,  not
seeing  a  sufficient  ground  for  the  practice  of  ordinances  are  said
to  seek  them."

"Persons  called  by  the  name  of  Seekers,"  he  continues,
"  having  compared  the  present  ministry  with  the  Word  of  God
and  not  finding  it  to  conform  thereto  dare  not  join  issue  in  the
present  practice  of  it."^

^  Gangrcsna,  p.  24,  sec.  2,  Part  I.  This  was  William  Erbury{or  Erberie),  whose
collected  writings  were  published  in  1658,  A  Collection  of  Writ i?igs for  the  Benefit
of  Posterity.  His  wife  Dorcas  became  a  Quaker  and  walked  before  James  Nayler
in  the  famous  Bristol  procession.  There  is  no  evidence  that  this  '*  Mr.  Erbury  "
became  a  Quaker.

2  Ibid.  p.  27,  sec.  2,  Part  I.

'  Richard  Baxter's  Narrative  of  his  Life  and  Times  (London,  1696),  Part  I.
p.  76.

^  A  Sober  Word  to  a  Serious  People  (London,  1651),  Preface.

^  Ibid.  pp.  2-4.


XIX     THE   SEEKERS   AND  THE  RANTERS     459

John  Jackson  holds  that  if  a  person  do  entitle  himself
a  minister  of  Christ  he  must  either  have  an  immediate  call
from  Christ,  "  a  powerful  enabling  "  from  the  Bridegroom
Himself,  or  a  call  by  the  Friends  of  the  Bridegroom,
i.e.  the  Apostles ;  but  there  are  now,  he  thinks,  no  ministers
of  either  sort.-^

The  real  pith  of  the  Seeker  movement  is  thus  clear.
It  was  at  heart  a  mystical  movement ;  a  genuine  spiritual
quest  for  something  deeper  than  the  empty  show  of
religion,  a  search  for  what  some  of  them  happily  call  "  an
upper  room  Christianity."  They  were  resolved  that  they
would  not  call  stones  bread,  and  that  they  would  not  take
the  husks  of  religion  for  the  real  thing.  They  were  for
the  most  part  unlearned,  simple,  labouring  folk.  They
knew  little  of  the  history  of  the  spiritual  travail  of  the
race,  and  they  evidently  undervalued  external  helps  and
outward  revelations.  They  dwelt  too  much  on  negations,
and  found  themselves  unable  to  minister  to  striving,
hungering  souls,  for  they  could  not  find  the  true  bread
and  water  of  life.  But  they  preferred  to  wait  for  God
Himself  to  show  His  face  rather  than  to  bow  down
before  the  images  which  men  had  set  up  for  them  to
worship.

There  was  something  in  the  movement  which  impressed
Cromwell — a  soberness,  an  honesty  of  spirit,  a  possibility
of  finding  some  real  satisfaction  for  the  soul.  He  writes
in  1646  to  his  daughter  Bridget,  and  in  the  letter
tells  of  the  spiritual  state  of  his  favourite  daughter.  Lady
Claypole  :

"Your  sister  Claypole  is,  I  trust  in  mercy,  exercised  with
some  perplexed  thoughts.  She  sees  her  own  vanity  and  carnal
mind ;  bewailing  it,  she  seeks  after  (as  I  hope  also)  what  will
satisfy.  And  thus  to  be  a  Seeker  is  to  be  of  the  best  sect  next
to  a  finder,  and  such  shall  every  faithful,  humble  seeker  be  at
the  end.  Happy  seeker,  happy  finder !  Who  ever  tasted  that
graciousness  of  His,  and  could  go  less  in  desire  —  less  than
pressing  after  full  enjoyment  ?  "  ^

^   A  Sober  Word  to  a  Serious  People,  pp.  i6,  17.
2  Carlyle's  Oliver  Cromwell,  vol.  i.  p.  254  (New  York,  1897).


46o  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

Even  more  striking  is  Cromwell's  testimony  of  sym-
pathy with  the  Seeker  attitude,  as  expressed  in  one  of  his
speeches  to  the  army  council  in   1647  :

"  Truly,  as  Lieutenant-Colonel  Goffe  said,  God  hath  in  several
ages  used  several  dispensations,  and  yet  sonie  dispensations  more
eminently  in  one  age  than  another.  /  a^n  one  of  those  whose
heart  God  hath  drawn  out  to  wait  for  some  extraordinary  dispensa-
tions^ according  to  those  promises  He  hath  set  forth  of  things
to  be  accomphshed  in  the  latter  time,  and  I  cannot  but  think
that  God  is  beginning  of  them."  ^

Gerrard  Winstanley,  in  one  of  his  early  pamphlets
{The  Breaking  of  the  Day  of  God^  1648),  bears  witness  to
the  existence  of  waiting,  seeking  people  whom  he  addresses
as  the  "  Despised  Sons  and  Daughters  of  Zion,  scattered
up  and  down  the  Kingdom  of  England."  He  even  calls
them  "  Children  of  the  Light,"  and  promises  that  the  day
of  relief  is  near.

"  If  they  (the  people  of  the  world)  did  truly  know  the  power
of  God  that  dwells  in  you,  they  would  not  despise  you.  ...  It
is  your  Father's  will  that  it  shall  be  so.  The  world  must  lie
under  darkness  for  a  time.  That  is  God's  dispensation  to  them.
And  you  that  are  children  of  the  Light  must  lie  under  the
reproach  and  oppression  of  the  world ;  that  is  God's  dispensation
to  you.  But  it  shall  be  for  but  a  little  time.  What  I  have  here
to  say  is  to  bring  you  glad  tidings  that  your  redemption  draws
near."  ^

This  pamphlet  concludes  with  the  words :

"  Wait  patiently  upon  the  Lord ;  let  every  man  that  loves  God
endeavour  by  the  spirit  of  wisdom,  meekness,  and  love  to  dry  up
Euphrates,  even  this  spirit  of  bitterness,  that  like  a  great  river
hath  overflowed  the  earth  of  mankind."  ^

"Think  it  not  strange,"  he  writes  in  another  Tract,  "to  see

1  Clarke  Papers,  edited  by  C.  H.  Firth  for  the  Camden  Society,  vol.  i.  pp.  378,
379.  Lord  Rosebery  has  this  to  say  of  Cromwell  :  ' '  He  was  a  practical  mystic,
the  most  formidable  and  terrible  of  all  combinations.  A  man  who  combines
inspiration  apparently  derived — in  my  judgment  really  derived — from  close  com-
munion with  the  supernatural  and  the  celestial,  a  man  who  has  that  inspiration
and  adds  to  it  the  energy  of  a  mighty  man  of  action,  such  a  man  as  that  lives  in
communion  on  a  Sinai  of  his  own,  and  when  he  pleases  to  come  down  to  this
world  below  seems  armed  with  no  less  than  the  tenors  and  decrees  of  the
Almighty  Himself."

2  Breaking  of  the  Day  0/  God  [l^ondon,  1648),  Dedication,  p.  3.
^  Ibid.  p.  126.


XIX     THE  SEEKERS  AND   THE  RANTERS     461

many  of  the  Saints  of  God  at  a  stand  in  the  wilderness,  and  at  a
loss,  and  so  waiting  upon  God  to  discover  Himself  to  them."  ^

John  Jackson,  whom  even  Baxter  admits  was  '*  one  of
the  sound  sort  of  Seekers,"  ^  gives  a  clear  and  illuminating
account  of  the  views  and  practices  of  the  sane  and
moderate  Seekers,  which  makes  them  much  less  negative
than  the  unsympathetic  or  hostile  accounts  given  above.
He  says  :

"Firstly,  they  seek  the  mind  of  God  in  the  Scriptures.
Secondly,  they  judge  that  prayer  and  alms  are  to  be  attended  to,
and  for  this  purpose  they  come  together  into  some  place  on  the
First-days  as  their  hearts  are  drawn  forth  and  opportunity  offers.
They  then  seek,  firstly,  that  they  may  be  instruments  in  the  hand
of  the  Lord  to  stir  up  the  grace  of  God  in  one  another,  by  mutual
conference  and  communication  of  experience ;  and  secondly,  to
wait  for  a  further  revelation.  Thirdly,  to  hold  out  their  testimony
against  the  false,  and  for  the  pure  ordinance  of  ministry  and
worship.  They  behave  themselves  as  persons  who  have  neither
the  power  nor  the  gift  to  go  before  one  another  by  way  of
eminency  or  authority,  but  as  sheep  unfolded,  and  as  soldiers
unrallied,  waiting  for  a  time  of  gathering.  They  acknowledge  no
other  visible  teacher  but  the  Word  and  works  of  God,  on  whom
they  wait,  for  the  grace  which  is  to  be  brought  at  the  revelation
of  Jesus  Christ."  3

The  documents  printed  in  The  First  Publishers  of
Truth  ^  have  brought  to  light  the  existence  of  a  large
community  of  simple  Christian  people,  who  were  plainly
separatists,  in  and  about  Preston  Patrick,  Westmorland,
in  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century.  They  are
called  in  these  documents  "  a  seeking  and  religiously
inclined  people."  These  people,  however,  had  ministers
settled  among  them  who  "  usually  preached,"  though  there
was  evidently  opportunity  given  for  others  to  speak  besides
the  regular  ministers,  and  they  appear  not  to  have  had
scruples  against  paying  at  least  a  support  to  those  who
ministered   among   them,   as   the   letters    from    a    kindred

1  The  Mystery  of  God  {'Loudon,  1648),  p.  39.

2  Baxter's  Key  for  Catholics,  p.  332.

2  John  Jackson's  A  Sober  Word,  p.  3.

^  "Being  Early  Records  of  the  Introduction  of  Quakerism  into  England  and
Wales,"  edited  by  Norman  Penney,  London,  1907.


462  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

separatist  community  in  Swaledale  to  those  in  Preston
Patrick  clearly  indicate.^  It  is  now  a  settled  historical
fact,  as  William  Charles  Braithwaite  has  pointed  out  in  his
article  on  "  Westmorland  and  the  Swaledale  Seekers,"  ^
that  a  separatist  religious  movement  of  a  novel  sort  had
spread  over  a  wide  area  in  Westmorland  and  the  West
Riding  of  Yorkshire.  It  was  evidently  a  mild  and  serious
form  of  Seekerism.  The  leaders  of  the  movement  appear
to  have  been  Thomas  Taylor,  Francis  Howgil,  and  John
Audland.

Thomas  Taylor  (who  afterwards  became  a  Quaker)  is
thus  described  in  The  First  Publishers  of  Truth :

"  He  was  bred  up  a  scholar  at  the  University  and  became  a
public  minister  or  preacher,  but,  being  a  sincere  and  conscientious
man  denied  to  receive  his  maintenance  by  that  antichristian  and
popish  way  of  tithes,  so  became  a  minister  to  a  people  that  were
separated  from  the  common  way  of  worship,  then  at  Preston
Chapel  in  Westmorland,  and  took  for  his  maintenance  only  what
his  hearers  were  willing  freely  to  give  him^  and  was  for  his  sincerity
and  godly  living  greatly  beloved  and  esteemed  by  his  congrega-
tion which  were  many,  until  such  time  as  there  were  endeavours
used  by  the  Presbyterians  and  Independents  and  others  for
uniting  into  one  body  or  church  communion.  And  the  persons
appointed  for  that  work  did  so  far  prevail  upon  the  said  Thomas
Taylor  to  go  back  and  sprinkle  several  of  his  children,  that  he
and  his  hearers  had  seen  beyond  and  the  emptiness  thereof  as  an
invention  of  man  and  not  the  one  baptism  of  our  Lord  Jesus
Christ — which  condescension  {i.e.  return  to  the  emptiness)  his
hearers  could  not  bear.  So  he  removed  into  Swaledale  in  York-
shire, and  became  a  teacher  there  to  a  separatist  congregation."  ^

These  Westmorland  Seekers,  with  their  ministers,
came  over  to   Fox,  and   became  the  powerful  nucleus  of

1  See  Swaledale  Papers.  The  originals  are  in  Devonshire  House,  London.
The  letters  referred  to  above  are  printed  in  an  article  by  William  Charles
Bra.iihwa.\ie  in /ozirnal  0/ Friends'  Historical  Society ,  Jan.  1908,  pp.  5-9.

2  J  our  71  al  of  Friends'  Historical  Society,  Jan.  1908,  pp.  3-10.

3  First  Publishers  of  Truth,  p.  253.  Thomas  Taylor's  brother  Christopher
gives  the  following  "Testimony"  of  him:  "  My  deceased  brother  Tho.  Taylor
was  a  man  who,  in  his  tender  years,  had  a  sense  of  sin  upon  him  and  saw  a
necessity  of  coming  and  attaining  to  a  state  of  righteousness  and  faithfulness  to
God  that  he  might  please  Him  ;  as  for  several  years  he  v^^as  exercised  under  the
spirit  of  bondage  and  great  fears,  lest  he  should  miss  of  eternal  salvation,  and  so
came  to  be  a  true  seeker  and  inquirer  after  best  things,  and  the  Lord  was  good  to
him  in  a  preparatory  work,  as  I  may  say,  before  he  came  to  know  the  sabbath  of
eternal  rest  in  Christ  Jesus"  (Introduction  to  Works  of  T.  Taylor).


XIX     THE  SEEKERS  AND   THE  RANTERS     463

Quakerism  in  Westmorland  and  western  Yorkshire.  Their
"  convincement "  to  Quakerism  proved  the  turning  of  the
tide  of  that  cause,  and  opened  the  way  for  its  great  spread
through  England.

The  following  interesting  passage  from  The  First
Publishers  of  Truth  throws  considerable  light  on  this  com-
munity of  Seekers,  and  it  tells  in  very  simple  style  the
story  of  the  great  "convincement":

"And  it  having  then  been  a  common  practice  amongst  the
said  seeking  and  religiously  inclined  people  ^  to  raise  {i.e.  to
hold)  a  General  Meeting  at  Preston  Patrick  Chapel  once  a  month
upon  the  Fourth  day  of  the  week,-  to  which  resorted  the  most
zealous  and  religious  people  in  several  places  adjacent,  as  from
Sedberg  side  in  the  county  of  York;  Yelland  (Yealand)  and
Kellet  in  the  county  of  Lancaster ;  Kendal,  Grayridge  (Grayrigg),
Underbarrow,  Hutton,  and  in  and  about  the  said  Preston  Patrick,
where  F.  H.  (Francis  Howgil),  J.  A.  (John  Audland),  and  several
others  did  usually  preach  to  the  congregation  there  met.  The
said  meeting  (monthly  General  meeting)  being  there  appointed
that  same  day,  thither  G.  F.  (George  Fox)  went,  accompanied
with  J.  A.  and  J.  C.  (John  Camm).  J.  A.  would  have  had  G.  F.
to  have  gone  into  the  place  or  pen  where  usually  he  and  the
preacher  did  sit,  but  he  refused  and  took  a  back  seat  near  the
door,  and  J.  C.  sat  down  by  him,  where  he  sat  quietly  waiting
upon  God  about  half  an  hour,  in  which  time  of  silence  F.  H.
(Francis  Howgil,  their  preacher)  seemed  uneasy,^  and  pulled
out  his  Bible,  and  opened  it,  and  stood  up  several  times,  sitting
down  again  and  closing  his  book,  a  dread  and  fear  being  upon
him  that  he  durst  not  begin  to  preach.  After  the  said  silence
and  waiting,  G.  F.  (George  Fox)  stood  up  in  the  mighty  power
of  God,  and  in  the  demonstration  thereof  was  his  mouth  opened
to  preach  Christ  Jesus,  the  Light  of  Life  and  the  way  of  God
and  Saviour  of  all  that  believe  and  obey  Him;  which  was
delivered  in  that  power  and  authority  that  most  of  the  auditory,
which  were  several  hundreds^  were  effectually  reached  to  the  heart
and  convinced  of  the  truth  that  very  day,  for  it  was  the  day  of
God's  power."  ^

1  They  are  called  on  an  earlier  page  ' '  A  seeking  and  religious  people  there
separated  from  the  common  way  of  National  worship  "  (p.  242).

2  This  has  very  interesting  bearing  upon  the  origin  of  the  "  Monthly  Meetings  "
of  the  Quakers.

3  Which  would  seem   to  imply  that   he  was  not  accustomed  to  such    long
periods  of  waiting.

^  First  Publishers  of  Truth,  p.  244.


464  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

There  was  another  large  band  of  Seekers  in  Bristol
who  finally  came  over  bodily  to  the  Friends,  under  the
powerful  preaching  of  John  Audland  and  John  Camm,
who,  as  we  have  seen,  had  been  among  the  leaders  of  the
Seeker  community  in  Westmorland.  Charles  Marshall,
who  was  among  the  first  of  the  band  to  be  convinced  of
the  truth  of  the  Quaker  teaching,  has  given  a  good  account
of  this  Seeker  Society  of  Bristol.-^

"  Now,  as  I  advanced  in  years,  I  grew  more  and  more  dis-
satisfied with  lifeless,  empty  professions  and  professors,  feeling
the  burden  of  the  nature  of  sin,  which  lay  on  my  spirit ;  in  the
sense  whereof,  I  became  like  the  solitary  desert,  and  mourned
like  a  dove  without  a  mate.  And  seeing  I  could  not  find  the
living  among  the  dead  professions,  I  spent  much  time  in  retire-
ments alone,  in  the  fields  and  woods,  and  by  springs  of  water,
which  I  delighted  to  lie  by,  and  drink  of."

"And  in  those  times,  viz.  about  the  year  1654,  there  were
many  (in  these  parts)  who  were  seeking  after  the  Lord ;  and  there
were  a  few  of  us  who  kept  one  day  in  the  week  in  fasting  and
prayer ;  so  that  when  this  day  came,  we  met  together  eady  in
the  morning,  and  did  not  taste  anything.  We  sat  down  some-
times in  silence ;  and  as  any  found  a  concern  on  their  spirits,
and  inclination  in  their  hearts,  they  kneeled  down  and  sought
the  Lord;  so  that  sometimes,  before  the  day  ended,  there
might  be  twenty  of  us  pray,  men  and  women ;  on  some  of  these
occasions  children  spake  a  few  words  in  prayer ;  and  we  were
sometimes  greatly  bowed  and  broken  before  the  Lord,  in  humility
and  tenderness."  2

i  Life  and  Works  of  Charles  Marshall,  pp.  2,  4.

2  The  following  interesting  Letters  from  John  Audland  and  John  Camm  to
Edward  Burrough  and  Francis  Howgil,  written  in  1654,  give  much  light  on  these
Bristol  Seekers  :

"  JNO.  Audland  and  Jno.  Camm  to  Edw.  Burrough  and  Fras.  Howgil.

"  Bristol,  r^th  7  mo.  {Sept.) — tnust  be  1654.
' '  Dear  hearts  we  are  now  in  Bristol — here  is  a  pretty  many  convinced  of  the
truth  and  the  truth  works  and  spreads — my  soul  is  much  refreshed  for  they  are
much  come  down  into  themselves  since  we  were  here  and  they  are  sensible  of
their  conditions — they  are  the  most  noble  of  any  that  we  have  met  withal.  ,  .  .
The  work  of  the  Lord  is  great  hereaway,  the  people  hungers  after  life,  they  groan
to  be  delivered,  they  meet  every  day — if  we  go  into  the  fields  they  follow  us,  from
us  they  cannot  be  separated,  if  we  sit  silent  a  long  time,  they  all  wait  in  silence.
The  Lord  will  do  a  great  work  amongst  them  and  raise  up  a  pure  people  to  place
his  name  in — J.  A.,  J.  C.  (Written  by  J.  A.  within  a  day  or  two  of  J.  A.  and
J.  C.  reaching  Bristol  and  referring  specially  to  their  reception  by  the  Seekers)." —
Devonshire  House  MSS.,  A.  R.  Barclay  MSS.,  No.  158.


XIX     THE  SEEKERS  AND  THE  RANTERS     465

There  were  other  similar  groups  of  Seekers  in  almost  all
sections  of  England,  and  in  many  places  they  formed  the
nucleus  of  the  Quaker  Society.  The  following  references
will  be  sufficient  to  indicate  how  very  wide-spread  the
movement  was  :  William  Caton,  writing  to  Margaret  Fell
(London,  19th  January  1657)  says,  "a  door  was  opened
me  in  a  corner  of  Sussex,  where  there  were  several  seekers
(so  called),  the  most  part  of  two  meetings  were  con-
vinced." ^      In  his  Journal,  William  Caton  says  :  ^

"  After  that  I  had  exceedingly  good  service  in  Sussex,  especi-
ally among  a  people  that  were  called  Seekers,  who  were  mostly
convinced  not  far  from  Lewes."

In  the  account  of  Ann  Camm,  in  Pze^j/  Promoted^  refer-
ence is  made  to  the  Kendal  Seekers  (prior  to  1652)  :

"At    Kendal   there  was    a   Seeking  people   who    met    often

"  Letter  No.  157.     J.  C.  to  E.  B.  and  F.  H.

"  Bristol,  zith  7  mo.  {i,th  day  of  week).
"...  Here  is  the  largest  fields  that  ever  I  saw,  all  is  full  of  clusters  of  grapes—
This  day  the  people  in  the  city  who  are  our  friends  {i.e.  the  Seeker  community  at
Bristol)  met  together  to  seek  the  Lord  as  they  call  it,  .  .  .  we  bore  them  long
till  the  power  of  the  Lord  took  hold  upon  us  both  and  I  was  forced  to  cry  out
amongst  them  my  life  suffered  and  if  I  did  not  speak  I  should  be  an  example
amongst  them  and  in  much  tenderness  I  spake  unto  them  and  silence  was  amongst
them  all  and  much  tenderness  and  brokenness  and  it  is  a  glorious  day — now
they  are  come  to  see  the  serpent  which  hath  beguiled  them  and  robbed  them
of  their  simplicity  ;  they  have  many  of  them  cast  off  their  beautiful  garments
which  was  without — For  we  are  with  them  from  six  in  the  morning,  they  will
come  to  us  before  we  get  up,  and  unto  eleven  or  sometimes  one  at  night  they
will  never  be  from  us,  go  into  the  fields  they  will  follow  us,  or  go  into  any  house
the  house  will  be  filled  full,  so  that  we  cannot  tell  how  we  should  get  from  them.
The  Lord  hath  subjected  them  all  under  us  and  they  are  as  fearful  to  offend  us
as  a  child  is  to  offend  its  loving  father."

"  Letter  under  same  number.     J.  A.  to  E.  B.  and  F.  H.

^\Saine  date.)

"  We  came  7th  day  of  month — That  night  it  was  noised  in  the  city  and  all  was
filled  where  we  were — ^We  have  every  day  a  meeting,  yea  I  may  say  every  day  is  but
a  meeting  and  we  cannot  help  it,  for  let  us  go  where  we  wiU  all  is  full  where  we
are,  night  and  day,  and  as  the  work  is  great  the  power  is  greatest  in  us  that
ever  we  knew  in  us— We  had  a  great  meeting  upon  the  First  day  morning,  the
house  and  all  was  filled  and  the  street,  so  the  voice  went  forth  for  a  field  and
one  there  which  was  free  had  a  meadow  (Earlsmead,  see  Chas.  Marshall's
account)  and  we  went  to  it  like  an  army.  My  dear  brother  J.  C.  spoke,  he  is
exceedingly  grown  since  I  saw  you — I  stood  up  and  all  my  limbs  smote  together
and  I  was  like  a  drunken  man  because  of  the  Lord  and  because  of  the  word  of
his  holiness  and  I  was  made  to  cry  like  a  woman  in  travail  and  to  proclaim
war,  etc."

1  Swarthinore  MSS.  -^-^  (in  Devonshire  House,  London).

'^  Life  of  Caton  in  Select  Series  of  Biographies,  edited  by  John  Barclay,  1839,
p.  58.

2  H


466  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

together,  sometimes  sitting  in  silence,  other  times  in  religious
conferences,  and  often  in  fervent  prayer."  ^

John  Lawson,  writing  to  Margaret  Fell  in  1653,  says:

"There  are  also  a  people  about  Malpas  in  Cheshire  who  was
formerly  separated  from  the  priests  and  since  we  came  among
them  they  are  separated,  one  part  of  them  meet  together  and
speak  their  own  words  as  they  did,  another  part  of  them  separate
from  them  and  meet  together  to  wait  upon  the  Lord  without
words."  2

They  were  also  called  "  thirsty  souls  who  hunger."

"About  the  year  1652,  It  pleased  the  Lord  to  visit  this
County  of  Chester  By  that  faithfuU  Servant  of  his  Richard
Hubberthorne,  who  for  his  Testimony  was  put  into  prison  att
Chester,  where  severall  Came  to  See  him  &  Some  were  Con-
vinced, amongst  whom  was  Thomas  Yarwood,  who  had  been
a  great  professor  &  A  preacher  amongst  them ;  who  sometime
after  his  Convincment  had  his  Mouth  opened  to  Preach  Truth,
and  was  Moved  of  the  Lord  to  visit  a  people  who  Sometimes  met
att  the  house  of  one  Rich  Yarwood,  in  Moberly  in  the  said
County  (whose  Custom  was  when  met  Together  neither  To  preach
nor  pray  vocally  butt  to  Read  the  Scriptures  &  Discourse  of
Religion,  Expecting  a  farther  Manifestation) ;  "  ^  .   .   .

(Wigton)  "About  ye  Year  1653,  A  few  People  were  Gathered
together  from  ye  publique  worship  of  ye  Nation,  and  oftentimes
sat  together  in  Silence."  *  .  .  .

"The  first  yt  Came  into  Boulton  to  declare  the  glad  tideings
of  the  Everlasting  Gospell  to  A  people  thatt  was  then  seeking
after  ye  Lord,  was  Geo:  ffox  and  Robert  Widders."  ^

The  Seeker  movement  took  two  quite  opposite  direc-
tions. It  attracted  men  of  large  spiritual  powers  and
insight,  who  quickly  transcended  it  and  became  "  happy
Finders  "  on  the  one  hand.  On  the  other  hand,  "  it  ran
out "  into  what  William  Penn  calls  "  a  monstrous  birth,"
and  ended  downward  in  Ranterism.

Some  of  them,  as  John  Jackson  says,  after  long  waiting
on  God,  waxed  weary  and  said  :  "  Come,  let  us  go  back  to

1  Ann  Camm,  before  her  marriage  to  Thomas  Camm,  was  the  wife  of  John
Audland  {Piety  Promoted,  vol.  i.  p.  318).

2  Swarthmore  MSS.  -gV  (in  Devonshire  House).

3  First  Publishers  of  Truth,  p.  18.

4  Ibid.  p.  52.  5  Ibid.  p.  56.


XIX     THE   SEEKERS  AND   THE   RANTERS     467

Egypt  for  bread,  it  is  better  to  take  it  at  the  mouth  of
ravens  {i,e.  the  Presbyterian  black-gowned  clergy)  than
starve."  ^  But  there  were  many  Seekers  who  did  not  go
back  to  Egypt  for  bread  ;  they  went  on  into  a  spiritual
Canaan  where  they  found  milk  and  honey,  oil  and  wine,
for  their  souls.^  John  Saltmarsh,  William  Dell,  Gerrard
Winstanley,  and,  foremost  of  all,  George  Yoyi^  found  the
clear  Light  and  present  Spirit  the  Seekers  were  groping
for.  We  shall  leave  their  discovery  for  the  present  and
briefly  consider  the  dregs  of  the  Seeker  movement — the
Ranters.

The  Ranters  got  a  bad  name  from  everybody  who
came  in  contact  with  them,^  and  there  is  no  question  that
it  was  a  "  degenerate  "  movement,  though  many  of  the  so-
called  Ranters  were  honest,  sincere  persons,  trying  in  their
crude  fashion  to  utter  the  profound  truth  of  Divine  in-
dwelling. The  central  idea  of  Ranterism  was  the  doctrine
that  God  is  essentially  in  every  creature.  There  is,  they
taught,  one  and  only  one  Spirit  in  the  universe.  This
Spirit  is  revealed  in  measure  in  all  that  is — "  in  the  tiny
ivy  leaf,"  and  "  in  the  most  glorious  angel."  This  Spirit
flows  out  into  finite  channels  and  then  flows  back  again
into  the  mother  sea,  the  ground  and  spring  of  all  things.^

Richard  Baxter  says  that  "  they  (the  Ranters)  made
it  their  business  to  set  up  the  Light  of  Nature,  under  the
name  of  Christ  in   Men,  and   to  dishonour  and   cry  down

^  John  Jackson's  Sober  Word  to  a  Serious  People,  Preface.

2  John  Jackson  says  that  ' '  those  w  ho  have  got  above  and  beyond  the  practice
of  all  ordinances  are  very  improperly  called  Seekers  ;  for  these  are  so  far  from
seeking,  that  they  are  rather  possessors,  enjoyers,  and  attainers  than  h^eekers
properly  so-called  "  {A  Sober  Word,  p.  2).

2  "Old  Ephraim  Pagitt"  allows  himself  free  rein  in  his  account  of  the
Ranters:  "The  Ranter  is  an  unclean  beast,  much  of  the  make  of  our  Quaker,
sic)  of  the  same  puddle,  and  may  keep  pace  with  him  ;  their  infidelities,  villanies
and  debochments  are  the  same,  only  the  Ranter  is  more  open,  and  less  sowre  ;
professes  what  he  is,  and  as  he  has  neither  religion  nor  honesty,  so  he  pretends  to
none.  .  .  .  He  denyes  that  there  are  either  God  or  devil,  Heaven  or  Hell.  .  .  .
It  is  a  maxim  with  them  that  there  is  nothing  sin  but  what  a  man  thinks  to  be  so.
They  are  above  ordinances,  hence  it  is  that  nothing  is  to  be  forbidden  them,
nothing  can  be  unlawful,"  and  much  more  in  the  same  strain  (Pagitt's  Heresio-
graphy,  p.  143).

*  Masson  x\ghi\y  sa-ys  {Life  of  Miltofi,  vol.  v.  p.  18),  "There  were  probably
varieties  of  Ranters  theologically.  Pantheism  or  the  essential  identity  of  God
with  the  universe,  and  His  indweUings  in  every  creature,  angelic,  human,  brute,  or
morganic,  seems  to  have  been  the  belief  of  most  Ranters  that  could  manage  to
rise  to  a  metaphysics."


468  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

the  Church,  the  Scripture,  the  present  Ministry  and  our
Worship  and  Ordinances,  and  called  men  to  hearken  to
Christ  within  them."  ^

George  Whitehead,  the  Quaker,  has  left  us  an  "  Im-
partial Account "  of  the  James  Nayler  episode,  and  in  it
he  has  given  an  interesting  report  of  one  Robert  Rich
who  supported  James  Nayler  under  his  examination  before
Parliament,  and  stood  with  him  in  the  pillory.  Rich  was
a  Ranter,^  and  later  declared  to  George  Whitehead  that
he  was  "  one  of  the  dogs  that  licked  Lazarus's  sores  "  !

He  had  a  habit  of  coming  to  the  meetings  of  the
Friends  in  London  and  of  "  walking  up  and  down  therein
in  a  stately  manner  (having  a  very  long  white  beard),  in
his  black  velvet  coat,  with  a  loose-hanging  one  over  it."
"  When  he  heard  something  declared  that  pleased  him,  he
would  cry, '  Amen,  amen,  amen.'  "  Whitehead  had  "  some
discourse  with  the  said  Robert  Rich  about  the  seed  of
God  (the  Eternal  Word)  in  Man  and  the  Soul  of  Man  ;
and  he  could  not  distinguish  them,  putting  no  Difference
between  the  Soul,  or  Spirit,  of  Man,  and  that  which  saves
it ;  to  wit,  the  Ingrafted  Immortal  Word,  which  is  able
to  save  the  Soul.  So  that  he  seemed  to  leave  no  room
for  the  Immortality  of  the  Soul  of  Man,  but  only  of  the
Immortal  Seed  or  Word  of  God  ;  but  discoursing  with
him  a  little  closely  upon  the  point,  he  put  me  off  with  an
evasive  Slight,  saying,  '  Thou  art  wise  in  the  Letter,  but  I
am  in  that  which  is  above  thy  Wisdom  ;  to  wit,  in  the
Mystery,  etc' "  ^

Many  Ranters  apparently  rejected  faith  in  Immortality,
as  well  as  belief  in  a  personal  God.  Masson  quotes  the
following  passage  from  the  "  Carol  of  the  Ranters,"  pre-
served in  the  Thomason  Pamphlets  :

"  They  prate  of  God  !     Believe  it,  fellow-creatures,
There's  no  such  bug-bear :  all  was  made  by  Nature.
We  know  all  came  of  nothing,  and  shall  pass
hito  the  same  condition  once  it  was

^  Baxter's  Life,  vol.  i.  p.  76.

-  Rich  "  publickly  licked  James  Nayler's  wounds."

•*   "  An  Epistle  to  the  Serious  Reader  containing  an  Impartial  Account,  etc."
Preface  to  James  Nayler's  Works  (London,  1716),  p.  xvii.


XIX     THE   SEEKERS  AND  THE  RANTERS     469

By  Nature's  power,  and  that  they  grossly  lie
That  say  there's  hope  of  immortality,
Let  them  but  tell  us  what  a  soul  is  ;  then
We  shall  adhere  to  these  mad  brainsick  men."

"  The  allness  of  God "  was  no  new  doctrine ;  it  had
fascinated  the  mystics  of  the  thirteenth  and  fourteenth
centuries.  Ranterism  was  to  all  intents  and  purposes  a
revival  of  the  doctrines  of  the  "  Free  Spirit,"  which  have
been  studied  in  an  earlier  chapter.  There  was  in  Eng-
land, in  the  Commonwealth  era,  a  real  contagion  of  the
idea  of  God  as  indwelling.  Some  of  the  stronger  minds
who  were  possessed  with  the  idea  were  able  to  hold  it  in
balance  with  other  ideas  equally  true  ;  but  some  unstable,
ill-balanced  men  and  women  were  swept  quite  off  the
poise  of  sanity  by  it,^  and  large  groups  of  the  common
people  (this  was  essentially  a  movement  of  the  common
people)  were  carried  into  a  cheap,  half-digested  "  spiritual-
ism," which  bristled  with  dangers  ;  as,  in  their  ignorance
of  history  and  sound  psychology,  they  were  almost  bound
to  be,  at  that  stage  of  thought.

They  fell  into  a  vague  pantheism  which  blurred  the
distinctions  between  good  and  evil,  and  which  landed
them  in  a  moral  (or  immoral)  topsy-turvey.  The  Seeker
movement  had  under-valued  objective  religion,  historical
revelation,  and  outward  helps.  The  natural  result  was
that  those  who  pushed  the  ideas  of  the  Seekers  to  their
extreme  limit,  and  throwing  overboard  all  outward  systems,
acknowledged  nothing  Divine  except  the  Spirit  in  them-
selves, had  no  fixed  authority  anywhere,  no  criterion  of
morals,  no  test  of  spiritual  guidance,  no  ground  and  basis
for  goodness.  Being  "  taught  by  the  Spirit,"  they  claimed
that  all  other  teachings  were  of  no  use.  They  called  the
Scriptures  "  a  tale,  a  history,  a  dead  letter,  a  fleshly  story,
a  cause  of  divisions  and  contradictions."  They  looked
upon  Christ  as  a  "figure"  or  "type"  of  the  true  dis-
pensation of  the  Spirit,  upon  which  they  claimed  to  have
entered.

1  There  was  an  element  of  fierce  fanaticism  in  the  movement,  and  among  the
Ranters  there  were  some  real  lunatics.


470  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

Samuel  Fisher,  the  Friend,  writing  in  1653,  gives  an
extremely  calm  and  valuable  account  of  the  Ranters.^
He  says  :

''They  considered  that  in  the  present  dispensation,  which  is
that  of  the  Spirit,  since  Christ  had  come  again  spiritually,  they
had  no  longer  any  need  of  lower  helps,  outward  administrations,
carnal  ordinances,  visible  representations  of  Christ,  and  mere
bodily  exercises,  as  baptism  and  fellowship  together  in  breaking
of  bread.  The  Church  once  saw  Christ  in  these  things,  but  they
had  become  men,  and  put  away  childish  things  ;  and  as  for
gathering  congregations,  people  assembling  in  the  Church  bodies
to  preach,  break  bread,  to  build  up  one  another  in  the  faith,
search  the  Scriptures,  etc. — all  these  shadowy  dispensations  had
their  day ;  but  now  Christ,  the  Morning  Star,  had  shined,  all  we
had  to  do  was  to  take  heed  to  His  appearing  in  our  hearts,  and
the  shadows  would  flee  away.  They  promised  to  their  converts,
that  when  they  left  off  reading  the  Scriptures,  and  those  childish
things,  they  would  then  have  the  liberty  of  the  Spirit,  and  would
enjoy  an  Angelical  or  Seraphical  life."  "  Till  Christ  come,"
means,  he  says,  for  the  Ranter,  "  His  coming  into  men  by  his
Spirit,  or  in  such  full  measures  and  manifestations  of  his  Spirit
into  men's  hearts,  that  they  may  be  able  to  live  up  with  him  in
spirit,  so  as  no  more  to  need  such  lower  helps  from  outward
administrations,  such  carnal  ordinances,  such  visible  repre-
sentations of  Christ  to  the  bodily  eyes,  such  legal  rites  and  mere
bodily  exercises  as  baptism  and  fellowship  together  in  breaking  of
bread  are.

"  These  things  were  used  indeed,  and  ordained,  as  milk  for
babes  in  that  meer  nonage  and  infancy  of  the  Church,  when
Christ  was  known  as  a  child  as  it  were,  but  now  we  are  to  know
Christ  as  a  man  grown  in  us,  risen  up  in  us,  and  to  have  fellow-
ship with  him  more  immediately  and  intimately  in  Spirit,  and  not  in
such  external  and  meer  fleshly  formes ;  we  are  to  live  higher  than
on  such  low,  weak,  empty  elements  and  beggarly  rudiments  as
these,  which  were  used  and  imposed  for  a  time  to  resemble  Christ
to  us  from  without,  but  must  be  left  when  once  Christ,  the
substance,  that  was  set  forth  by  those  Shadows,  is  come  into  us.
.  .  .  That  which  is  perfect  is  now  come,  and  therefore  what  is
imperfect,  and  in  part  only,  as  ordinances  are,  must  be  done
away,  and  as  for  gathering  of  congregations,  peoples  assembHng
together  in  the  Church  bodies  to  preach,  pray,  break  bread,  to

1  '  •  This  is  put  into  the  mouth  of  a  Ranter  in  Samuel  Fisher's  rambling  dialogue
style  in  the  chapter  on  Anti-Ranterism  in  the  volume  entitled  Baby  Baptism  meer
Babism  (London,  1653),  pp.  511-12.


XIX     THE  SEEKERS   AND   THE  RANTERS     471

build  up  one  another  in  the  faith,  search  the  Scripture,  etc.,  'twas
a  way  of  God  for  men's  edification  till  Christ  the  morning  star
shined,  to  which  men  did  well  to  take  heed,  as  unto  a  light  that
shined  in  a  dark  place,  but  now  the  day  dawned  and  the  day
starre  arises  in  men's  hearts,  yea  the  day  breaks  and  the  shadowes
flee  away  ;  and  Christ  comes  as  a  swift  Roe  and  young  hart
upon  the  mountains  of  Bether ;  for  that  now  we  are  to  exercise
ourselves  rather  into  Godhness  for  all  bodily  exercises  as  baptism,
breaking  bread,  and  Church  order,  etc.,  profit  little  :  besides  'twas
said  there  should  be  a  falling  away  from  all  those  forms  of
worship,  and  the  way  of  ordinances,  which  was  in  the  primitive
times  (2  Thess.  ii.  3),  and  a  treading  down  of  the  Holy  City  and
Temple  (Rev.  xi.  i,  2)  as  to  the  form  it  then  stood  in,  both
which  have  fell  out  also  accordingly,  so  that  there  hath  been  a
taking  of  all  that  dispensation  of  ordinances  in  their  primitive
purity  totally  out  of  the  way,  therefore  now  we  are  to  meddle  no
more  with  them  at  all ;  at  least  unless  we  had  some  extraordinary
Prophets,  as  the  Jews  had  after  the  treading  down  of  their  temple
and  worship,  to  satisfie  and  shew  us  that  its  the  mind  of  the
Lord  we  should  set  up  that  old  fabrick  and  form  again."

The  Friends,  in  the  early  period  of  the  Quaker  move-
ment, came  into  contact  and  frequently  into  rivalry  with
the  Ranters.  There  are  very  many  accounts  of  them  in
the  Quaker  Journals,  Pamphlets,  and  Letters,  and  these
accounts  for  tlie  most  part  show  a  horror  of  Ranterism
and  a  hostility  to  its  exponents.  But  these  accounts  are
almost  without  exception  vague  and  general,  with  few  actual
sins  specified,  though  with  frequent  reference  to  their
"  swinishness."

Richard  Hickock,  a  Friend,  writing  in  1659,^  evidently
to  some  who  had  once  been  Friends  and  had  afterwards
become  Ranters,  tells  them  "  lovingly "  that  they  have
"become  like  the  sow  that  was  washed  and  is  again
wallowing  in  the  mire."  He  calls  upon  them  to  "  bring
down  their  imaginations,  which  are  kept  above  the  Light
of  Christ."

He  makes  a  great  point  of  their  swearings  but  he
makes  fully  as  much  a  point  of  their  using  "  you  "  for  a
single    person.       He    charges    them    with    holding    that

^  Richard  Hickock,    ' '  A  Testimony  Against  the  People  called   Ranters  and
their  Pleads"  (London,  1659).


472  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap

"  nothing  is  sin,  if  a  man  himself  do  not  count  it  sin  and
so  make  it  sin  unto  himself,"  and  he  reproaches  them
with  the  assertion  that  when  they  have  done  wickedly
they  "  lay  it  upon  the  Lord  as  though  He  were  mover
and  leader  thereto  "  :  and  "  when  you  have  done  wickedly
you  say  you  have  taken  up  the  cross  therein."

The  Journal  of  George  Fox  contains  many  references
to  the  Ranters,  and  he  mentions  by  name,  and  gives  some
characterisation  of  two  men  who  were  leaders  of  their
rather  chaotic  ranks,  Joseph  Salmon  and  Jacob  Bottomley
(or  Bauthumley).  He  found  Joseph  Salmon  in  company
with  a  band  of  Ranters  in  the  gaol  at  Coventry.  "  They
said  they  were  God,"  Fox  tells  us,  "  but  I  asked  them
whether  it  would  rain  to-morrow  and  they  could  not  tell.
I  told  them  God  could  tell ! "  He  informs  us  that
Joseph  Salmon  afterwards  wrote  a  book  of  recantation,
upon  which  they  were  all  set  at  liberty.^  In  Swannington,
Leicestershire,  Fox  had  a  "  contest "  with  "  the  great
Ranter,"  as  he  calls  him,  Jacob  Bauthumley,  "  but  the
Lord's  power  stopt  him  and  came  over  them  all."  A
little  later  in  the  same  locality  Fox  sent  for  the
Ranters  "  to  come  forth  and  try  their  God."  "  Abundance
of  them  came,"  he  writes,  "  and  were  very  rude,  and  sung
and  whistled  and  danced  ;  but  the  Lord's  power  so
confounded  them,  that  many  of  them  came  to  be
*  convinced  '  (that  is  became  Friends)."  ^

In  London,  in  1654,  Fox  says  "there  came  to  me
one  Cobb  to  see  me  and  a  great  company  of  Ranters
with  him.  They  began  to  call  for  drink  and  tobacco,
and  one  of  them  cried,  *  All  is  ours ' ;  another  said,  *  All

^  Fox's  Journal  (edition  of  1902),  vol.  i.  p.  47.  This  Joseph  Salmon  seems
to  be  the  author  of  the  pamphlet,  "  A  Rout,  a  Rout  or  Some  Part  of  the  Armies
Quarters  Beaten  up  by  the  Day  of  the  Lord  "  (London,  1649).

2  Journal,  vol,  i.  p.  199,  This  Jacob  Bauthumley  is  the  author  of  an
extremely  pantheistical  book  with  the  sensational  title,  The  Light  and  Dark  Sides
of  God  (London,  1660).  A  short  extract  will  show  the  trend  of  its  teaching:
"  O  God,  what  shall  I  say  thou  art,  when  thou  canst  not  be  named?  What
shall  I  speak  of  thee,  when  speaking  of  thee,  I  speak  nothing  but  contradiction  ?
For  I  say  I  see  thee,  it  is  nothing  but  thy  seeing  of  thyself ;  for  there  is  nothing
in  me  capable  of  seeing  but  thyself.  If  I  say  I  know  thee  there  is  no  other  but
the  knowledge  of  thyself,  for  I  am  rather  known  of  thee  than  know  thee.  If
I  say  I  love  thee  it  is  nothing  so,  for  there  is  nothing  in  me  can  love  thee  but
thyself,  and  therefore  thou  dost  but  love  thyself.  My  seeking  thee  is  no  other
but  thy  seeking  of  thyself"  (pp.  1-2).


XIX     THE  SEEKERS  AND  THE  RANTERS     473

is  well.'  "  "  How  is  all  well,"  Fox  replied,  "  while  thou  art
so  peevish  and  envious  and  crabbed  ?  "  Fox  preserves
an  interesting  testimony  from  a  prominent  Justice  of  the
Peace  to  the  wide-spread  prevalence  of  Ranterism.  He
reports  that  Justice  Hotham  said,  "  If  God  had  not  raised
up  this  principle  of  life  and  light  which  I  [George  Fox]
preached,  the  nation  had  been  over-run  with  Ranterism
and  all  the  justices  in  the  nation  could  not  have  stopped
it  with  all  their  laws."  ^

There  is  a  very  interesting  paper  in  the  Swarthmore
Collection — a  paper  giving  an  account  of  Quaker  sufferings
at  Leicester  (dated  incorrectly  1653  ;  it  should  be  1655)
in  which  George  Fox  adds  the  following  incident.  While
in  Prison

"there  came  in  many  of  the  light  spirits,  professors,  dippers,
separatists,  ranters,  and  such  like,  whom  I  was  made  to  judge,  and
speak  to  their  condition  and  declare  against  their  ungodly
practices,  though  I  never  saw  them  before  :  for  the  Lord  gave
(me)  to  discern  their  spirits;  and  the  witness  was  raised,  and
they  could  not  deny  but  that  I  had  spoken  truly  to  their  several
conditions,  insomuch  that  some  of  the  unclean  spirits  said  '  I
was  a  witch ' ;  others  demanded  by  what  power  I  knew  these
things  seeing  I  knew  none  of  them.  I  said  it  pleased  God  to
reveal  his  Son  in  me,  which  knew  all  things  ;  and  they  said.  Was  I
the  Son  of  God  ?  I  said,  '  I  was  no  more,  but  the  Father  and  the
Son  was  all  in  me  and  we  are  one,'  so  when  there  was  silence
I  was  made  to  speak  to  the  light  in  them,  and  when  there  was
silence  Jacob  Bottomley  and  many  others  did  witness  that  what
I  had  spoken  was  the  eternal  truth,  and  I  warned  them  to  obey
that  which  witnessed  in  me,  or  else  it  would  eternally  condemn
them."

Thomas  Curtis,  writing  to  George  Fox  from  Reading  in
1659,  refers  to  a  Baptist  meeting,  which  had  evidently
turned  into  a  meeting  of  Ranters,  where  "  every  man  had
his  tobacco  pipe  in  his  mouth  ! "  and  he  continues,  "  when
we  had  ended  speaking,  like  swine  whose  nose  must  still
be  in  the  '  troffe,'  they  with  so  much  eagerness  followed
the  tobacco  pipe  again  as  if  they  had  been  famished."^
The  Antinomian   Ranters  in  colonial   New  England  also

1  Journal,  vol.  i.  p.  95.  2  Swarthmore  MSS.  ^.


474  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

apparently  used  tobacco  to  heighten  their  spiritual  vision.
Captain  Underhill  of  Dover,  New  Hampshire,  told
Governor  Winthrop  of  Massachusetts  that  "the  Spirit
had  sent  into  him  the  witness  of  Free  Grace  while  he
was  in  the  moderate  enjoyment  of  the  creature  called
tobacco !  "

The  Ranters  felt  no  longer  under  obligation  to  "  eye
or  mind  a  Christ  who  died  at  Jerusalem,  but  rather
to  eye  and  mind  the  Christ  in  themselves^  They  said
"  they  had  no  occasion  to  read  the  Scriptures  or  hear
sermons,  because  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost  were  all
in  them."  They  would  not  call  anything  the  Word
of  God  unless  it  was  revealed  in  them  as  well  as
in  the  Scriptures.  They  believed  a  truth  not  because
"  such  and  such  writ  it,"  but  because  "  God  saith  so
in  me."

They  admitted  that  Paul  had  the  Spirit,  when  he
wrote,  but  they  said :  "  Have  not  /  the  Spirit,  and
why  may  not  I  write  Scriptures  as  well  as  Paul,  and
what  I  write  be  as  binding  and  infallible  as  that  which
Paul  writ  ?  "  ^

"  They  were  above  such  weak  and  beggarly  things  as
ordinances,  which  are  for  weak  Christians  who  are  under
the  teaching  of  the  letter."  ^

Jacob  Bauthumley,  in  his  Light  and  Dark  Sides  of  God^
says  :

"  It  is  not  so  safe  to  go  to  the  Bible  to  see  what  others
have  spoken  and  writ  of  the  mind  of  God  as  to  see  what
God  speaks  within  me  and  to  follow  the  doctrine  and  leading
of  it  in  me."  ^


1  See  Barclay,  p.  417-18.

2  It  must  be  remembered  that  these  "  views"  are  largely  taken  from  persons
who  put  the  worst  construction  on  the  Ranter's  teaching,  though  the  author  of
the  Smoke  of  the  Bottomless  Pit  (London,  1650-51)  from  which  these  teachings  are
gleaned,  professes  to  be  an  honest  witness.  His  name  was  Holland  Porter,  and
he  says  that  he  is  "  an  eye  and  ear  witness."  In  a  postscript  he  frirther  says  :
"  Reader,  I  have  not  followed  that  orderly  method  I  might  have  done,  but  have
written  the  judgments  of  these  men  in  a  confused  manner  ;  but  I  do  profess  in
the  presence  of  the  Lord  who  is  the  searcher  of  all  hearts,  I  have  done  them  no
wrong  in  the  matter  of  their  judgment  except  it  be  in  forbearing  to  repeat  their
bloody  cursing  and  swearing — for  this  offence  I  hope  that  those  who  fear  the
Lord  will  excuse  me,  farewell."  ^  P.  ^^.


XIX     THE  SEEKERS  AND  THE  RANTERS     475

It  is  one  thing  to  hold,  in  the  interests  of  spiritual
religion  as  the  Seekers  did,  that  "  the  letter "  and  "  the
history "  and  "  the  outward  "  are  only  helps,  and  not  the
ultimate  substance  of  religion  itself,  and  it  is  quite  another
thing  to  fall  over  the  edge  of  the  chasm  and  assert  that,
having  the  substance — the  Spirit — secondary  helps  are  of
no  account !  The  individual  is  thus  left  as  sole  authority,
an  infallible  oracle  and  prophet  of  the  Divine  Spirit,
irresponsible  and  untrammelled.  This  fatal  step  the
Ranters  took.  They  made  their  "  oneness  with  God "
absolute,  and  confused  the  possibility  of  Divine  Guidance
with  the  assertio7i  of  personal  infallibility}

The  most  extraordinary  personal  account  of  Ranterism
from  the  inside,  which  I  have  found,  is  that  of  Joseph
Salmon.  ^

His  experience  and  his  descriptions  give  a  good  idea
of  the  mental  condition  of  the  Ranters,  and  I  know  no
document  more  valuable  for  a  diagnosis  of  the  Ranter-
attitude.  He  relates  how,  as  he  was  coming  to  maturity,
he  "  received  some  quickenings  of  a  Divine  principle  in
him."  After  going  through  many  stages  of  religious
experience,  he  heard  "  a  voice  that  came  from  the  throne
of  the  heavenly  Almightinesse  (which  said),  *  Arise  and
depart,  for  this  is  not  your  rest.'  "

Here  follows  his  own  account  of  his  "  great  experi-
ence "  ;  (the  reader  should  notice  the  sidenotes,  which  are
part  of  the  text)  :

"  I  was  made  as  truly  sensible  of  this  inwardly,  as  the  eye  is
sensible  of  the  light,  or  the  ear  of  the  outward  sound.  I  was
suddenly  struck  dead  to  all  my  wonted  enjoyment.  Stript  I  was
of  my  glory,  and  my  crown  taken  from  my  head,  and  I  could  see
nothing  but  vanity  (and  that  legibly  written)  upon  all  my  former
travails.  I  then  had  a  clear  discovery  in  my  spirit,  how  far  all
my  former  enjoyments  came  short  of  that  true  rest  which  my

^  * '  One  Ranter  made  answer  that  he  was  not  the  God,  but  he  was  God,
because  God  was  in  him  and  in  every  creature  in  the  world  "  (see  Smoke  of
Bottomless  Pit"  ;  quoted  by  Barclay,  p.  419).

2  His  tract  bears  the  title  :  "  Heights  in  Depths,  and  Depths  in  Heights  ;  or
Truth  no  less  Secretly  than  Sweetly,  Sparkling  out  of  its  Glory,"  etc.,  by  Joseph
Salmon,  London,  1651.  British  Museum,  270-E-1361,  Barclay  prints  extracts
from  it  in  appendix  to  chapter  xvii.  op.  cit.     He  gives  his  name  as  John  Salmon.


476  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

soul  had  all  along  aimed  at.     Here  I  stood  for  a  season  weeping

A  few  grave    with  Mary  at  the  sepulchre  :  fain  I  would  have  found

clothes,  or     Christ  where  I  left  him,  but  alas,  he  was  risen.     I

such  bke  stuff,  found  nothing  in  form  but  a  few  signals  of  mortality  ;

as  for  Jesus,  he  was  risen  and  departed.     Thus  have  I  followed

Christ  from  his   babeship  or  infancy  to  his  grave  of  mortality,

-.       running  through  the  life  form,  in  a  bare  knowledge

as  have  been    of  Christ  after  the  flesh,  till  I  expired  with  him  into

baptized  into  his  death,  and  was  sealed  up  in  the  grave  of  most

his  death.      ^^^^  ^^^  somnolent  retires  for  a  season.     Loath,  full

loath  was   I,  thus  to  shake  hands  with  form,    and  to  leave  the

.      ,     ,.      terrestrial    image    of  Jesus    Christ ;    yet    so    it  was

cipies,  who    designed    that    hee    must  goe    to    his   Father,   and

were  ignorant  (although  I  were   ignorant  of  it)   prepare  a  higher

°^r^\^  ^^°^-^^  mansion  in  himself  for  me.     When  my  three  dayes

of  the  Spirit.      ,  .       .  •      i     t    t  /-     ,

(or  set  time)  was  expired,  I  begann  to  feele  some
quickening  comfort  within  me  ;  the  gravestone  was  rolled  away
and  I  set  at  libertie  from  these  deep  and  dark  retires  ;  out  I  came
with  a  most  serene  and  cheerful!  countenance,  and  (as  one  inspired
with  a  supernatural!  life)  sprang  up  farr  above  my  earthly  center,  into
a  most  heavenly  and  divine  enjoyment.  Wrapt  up  in  the  embraces
of  such  pure  love  and  peace,  as  that  I  knew  not  oft-times  whether
I  were  in  or  out  of  this  fading  forme.  Here  I  saw  heaven  opened
upon  me,  and  the  new  Jerusalem  (in  its  divine  brightness  and
corruscant  beauty)  greeting  my  soule  by  its  humble  and  gentle
discensions.  Now  I  certainly  enjoyed  that  substance,  which  all
this  while  I  had  groped  after  in  the  shadow,  My  water  was
turned  into  wine ;  form  into  power,  and  all  my  former  enjoyments
being  nothing  in  appearance  to  that  glory  which  now  rested  on
my  spirit.  Time  would  faile  to  tell  what  joy  unspeakable,  peace
inconceivable,  what  soul-ravishing  delights,  and  most  divinely
infatuating  pleasures  my  soul  was  here  possest  with.  I  could
cast  my  eye  no  where  but  that  presence  of  love  presented  itselfe
to  me  whose  beatificall  vision  at  times  dazzled  me  into  a  sweet
astonishment.  In  a  word,  I  can  give  you  no  perfect  account  of
that  glory  which  then  covered  me ;  the  lisps  and  slipps  of  my
tongue  will  but  render  that  imperfect,  whose  pure  perfection
surmounts  the  reach  of  the  most  strenuous  and  high-flown
expression.  I  appeared  to  myselfe  as  one  confounded  into  the
abyss  of  eternitie,  nonentitized  into  the  being  of  beings,  my  soul
spilt  and  emptied  into  the  fountaine  and  ocean  of  divine  fulness,

expired  into  the  aspires  of  pure  life.  In  briefe,  the
carnal  self.     Lord  SO  much  appeared,  that  I  was  little  or  nothing

seen,  but  walked  at  an  orderly  distance  from  myself,
treading    and    tripping    over    the    pleasant    mountains    of    the


XIX     THE   SEEKERS  AND  THE  RANTERS     477

heavenly  land,  where  I  walked  with  the  Lord  and  was  not.  I
shall  be  esteemed  a  foole  by  the  wise  world,  through  an  over
much  boasting,  otherwise  I  could  tell  you  how  I  have  been
exalted  into  the  bosome  of  the  eternall  Almightiness,
where  I  have  seene  and  heard  things  unlawful  (I  say  "^ess  of^ma?y '
unlawful)  to  be  uttered  amongst  men ;  but  I  shall  at
present  spare  myself  the  labour,  and  prevent  the  world's  incon-
siderate censure.  The  proud  and  imperious  nature  of  flesh  would
willingly  claim  a  share  in  this  glorious  work  for  which  cause
happened  a  suddain,  certain,  terrible,  dreadfuU  revolution,  a
most  strange  vicissitude.  God  sent  a  thorn  immediately,  hid
himself  from  me  by  a  sudden  departure,  and  gives  j^ote  well  what
a  speedy  commission  to  a  messenger  of  Satan  to  I  say,  that  was
assault  me.     The  Lord  being  thus  withdrawn,  and   reserved  pure

•     -1  /•       1       1  11         r  1  •  V      in  the  life  of

havmg  carried  away  (m  the  bundle  of  his  treasures)    Christ,  while
the  heart  and  life  of  that  new  seed   in   me,  there  the  flesh  acted
now  remained  nought  behind  but  the  man  of  sinne,       '^^  P^'"^'
who   (for  his   pride)   being  wounded  with   the   thorn   of  divine
vengeance,  began  by  degrees  to  act  its  part."

Richard  Baxter  writes  with  some  hysteria  in  his  attack
and  it  would  not  carry  much  weight  if  not  otherwise  well
supported.      After  describing  their  views,  he  adds  :

"  But  withal  they  conjoyned  a  cursed  Doctrine  of  Libertinism,
which  brought  them  to  all  abominable  filthiness  of  Life.  They
taught  that  God  regardeth  not  the  actions  of  the  outward  man,
but  of  the  inner  heart,  and  that  to  the  Pure  all  things  are  Pure
(even  things  forbidden)  and  so  as  allowed  by  God  they  spake
most  hideous  words  of  Blasphemy,  and  many  of  them  committed
whoredoms  commonly.

"  There  was  never  sect  arose  in  the  world  that  was  a  lowder  warn-
ing to  Professors  of  Religion  to  be  humble,  fearful,  cautelous,  and
watchful.  Never  could  the  World  behold  more  loudly  whither
the  spiritual  Pride  of  ungrounded  Novices  in  Religion  tendeth ;
and  whither  Professors  of  Strictness  in  Religion  may  be  carried
in  the  stream  of  sects  and  factions.  I  have  seen  myself  Letters
written  from  Abington,  where  among  soldiers  and  People  this
contagion  did  then  prevail,  full  of  horrid  oaths  and  curses  and
blasphemy,  not  fit  to  be  repeated  by  the  Tongue  or  Pen  of  Man ;
and  this  all  uttered  as  the  effect  of  knowledge  and  a  part  of  their
Rehgion  in  a  Fanatick  Strain  and  fathered  on  the  Spirit  of  God.
But  the  horrid  villanies  of  this  sect  did  speedily  extinguish  it."  ^

Gilbert    Roulston,    who    professes    to    have    been    for

•^  Baxter's  Life,  i.  pp.  76-77.


4  78  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

seven  years  a  "  wicked  Ranter/'  and  who  claims  to  have
been  converted  by  "the  terrible  voice  of  the  Lord,"
speaking  within  his  heart  and  saying  :  "  Leave  off  thy
wicked  ways  and  return  from  whence  thou  camest,"  has
left  a  very  dark  picture  of  Ranterism  in  his  Ranter's  Bible}
This  gives  seven  types  of  Ranter  doctrine,  and  charges
some  of  the  Ranters  with  immoral  conduct.  But  it
shows  itself  on  its  own  face  to  be  thoroughly  unreliable,
and  its  account  of  the  Ranters'  doctrine  and  doings  is  of
little  value,  though  it  adds  to  the  impression  that  there
was  a  vast  amount  of  moral  and  religious  unsoundness
afloat.

The  records  of  Parliament,  too,  give  evidence  of  wide-
spread moral  disease  and  religious  fanaticism.  The
measures  which  were  passed  in  1649  ^^d  1650  were,  it
is  true,  formulated  under  strong  Presbyterian  influences,
and  may  be  thought  to  be  part  of  a  "  blue  law  "  system,
but  they  cannot  be  explained  away  on  that  ground,
for  we  find  Cromwell  himself  cashiering  Captain  Covell
in  October  1650,  for  asserting  that  "  sin  was  no  sin,"
and  some  months  later  he  expresses  his  vehement
detestation  of  "  opinions  destructive  of  the  power  of
godliness."  ^

August  9,  1650,  an  ordinance  was  passed  "for
punishing  blasphemous  and  execrable  opinions."  The
ordinance  reads  :

"  That  any  persons  not  distempered  in  their  brains,  who  shall
maintain  any  meer  creature  to  be  God;  or  to  be  Infinite,
Almighty,  or  in  Honor,  Excellency,  Majesty,  and  Power  to  be
equal  and  the  same  with  the  true  God  or  that  the  true  God  or  the
Eternal  Majesty  dwells  in  the  creature,  or  that  shall  deny  the
holiness  of  God,  or  shall  maintain  that  all  acts  of  wickedness  and
unrighteousness  are  not  forbidden  in  holy  scripture  ;  or  that  God
approves  them.  Any  one  who  shall  maintain  that  acts  of  drunken-
ness, adultery,  swearing,  etc.,  are  not  in  themselves  shameful,
wicked,  sinful,  and  impious  ;  or  that  there  is  not  any  real  difference
between  moral  good  and  evil,  etc.,  all  such  persons  shall  suffer  six
months'  imprisonment  for  the  first  offence ;  and  for  the  second  shall

^  Ranter's  Bible  (London,  1650).
^  Gardiner's  History  of  the  Common,  and  Protect.,  vol.  i,  p.  396.


xrx     THE  SEEKERS   AND  THE  RANTERS     479

be  banished ;  and  if  they  return  without  licence  shall  be  treated
as  felons."  ^

The  preamble  to  this  ordinance  says  that

"  though  several  laws  have  been  made  for  promoting  reformation
in  doctrines  and  manners,  yet  there  are  divers  men  and  women
who  have  lately  discovered  monstrous  opinions,  even  such  as
tend  to  the  dissolution  of  human  society."^

It  is  not  likely  that  any  "  mere  creature "  who  was
possessed  of  sanity,  i.e.  "  not  distempered  in  his  brains,"
did  maintain  himself  to  be  God,  but  there  were  many  cases
of  the  use  of  extravagant  Messianic  language  which  was
greatly  in  vogue  in  these  times.  There  were  undoubtedl}^
those  who  called  themselves,  or  allowed  themselves  to
be  called.  Son  of  God,  and  there  was  at  least  one  woman
who  claimed  to  be  the  "  Lamb's  wife,"  ^  but  those  who
made  these  professions  and  claims  were  plainly  distraught,
or,  to  use  the  language  of  the  time,  not  "  in  the  use  of
their  intellectuals."  In  fact,  the  outbreak  in  Bristol,  when
James  Nayler  rode  into  the  city  accompanied  by  a  group
of  "  disciples  "  crying  "  Hosannah  to  the  Son  of  David,"
was  only  a  single  instance  of  the  culmination  of  this
Ranter  tendency,  and  of  the  danger  of  the  use  of  Messianic
language  at  a  time  when  there  were  so  many  unbalanced
persons  about.

It  is  at  any  rate  perfectly  clear,  even  when  full
allowance  is   made   for   sectarian    misunderstanding    and

1  Scobell's  Collections  of  Acts  and  Ordinances,  Part  II.  p.  124.

2  Similar  action  was  taken  in  the  American  Colonies.  The  United  Colonies,
which  included  all  the  New  England  Colonies  except  Rhode  Island,  entered  the
following  statute  upon  their  booi-cs  :

"That  Anabaptism,  Famihsm,  Antinomianism,  and  generally  all  errors  of
like  nature,  which  oppose  and  undermine  and  slight  either  the  Scriptures,  the
Sabbath,  or  other  ordinances  of  God  and  bring  in  and  cry  up  unwarrantable
revelation,  inventions  of  men,  or  any  carnal  liberty,  under  a  deceitful  colour  of
liberty  of  conscience,  may  be  seasonably  and  duly  suppressed  ;  though  they  wish
as  much  forbearance  and  respect  may  be  had,  of  tender  consciences  seeking
light  as  may  stand  with  the  purity  of  religion,  and  the  peace  of  the  churches."
(Plymouth,  Col.  Rec.  ix.  81,  82).  We  learn  from  King's  pamphlets,  "The
Ranters,"  British  Museum,  E486,  10,  that  "  one  named  W.  Smith  was  hung  for
denying  the  Deity  and  several  illegal  practices  against  the  Parliament."

3  See  case  of  William  Franklin  and  Mary  Gadbury  in  Psezido  Chrisius,  or  a
true  and  faithful  relation  of  the  grand  impostures  .  .  .  lately  spread  abroad  and
acted  in  the  County  of  Southamptom.  By  Humphry  Ellis,  London,  1650.  This
is  a  most  extraordinary  book,  and  deserves  a  careful  study.


48o  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

exaggeration,  that  the  Ranter  movement  was  a  serious
outbreak  of  mental  and  moral  disorder.  The  movement
furnishes  much  information  on  the  wide-spread  existence,
in  the  period,  of  unstable  mental  conditions,  and  it  brings
forcibly  to  light  the  dangers  involved  in  extreme  mystical
doctrines,  that  is,  doctrines  by  which  the  individual  is
assumed  to  be  an  infallible  embodiment  of  God,  to  be
superior  to  all  previous  revelation,  and  to  be  able  to
arrive  at  final  truth  without  the  help  of  the  Church
or  the  social  environment.

It  is  very  significant  that  Gerrard  Winstanley,  whose
sympathies  with  the  common  people  were  intense,  who
cannot  conceivably  be  charged  with  any  antipathy  to
sectaries^  and  who  was,  too,  himself  a  mystic,^  looked
upon  the  Ranters  as  a  dangerous  folk.  He  calls  the
"  Rantering  power  "  "  a  devouring  beast,"  which  will  tear
in  pieces  the  kingdom  of  peace  in  and  among  mankind.
But,  in  his  usual  strain  of  brotherly  love,  he  strongly
counsels  against  suppressing  the  "  ranting  power  by  the
punishing  hand!'  "It  is  the  work  of  the  Righteous  and
Rational  Spirit  within,  not  the  hand  without  (the  hand  of
secular  power)  that  must  suppress  it.  For  the  spirit
within  must  shame  them  (the  Ranters)  and  turn  them
and  pull  them  out  of  darkness."  ^

Strangely  enough,  just  this  method  suggested  by
Winstanley,  was  the  method  which  worked,  and  which
ultimately  saved  England  from  the  unwholesome  con-
tagion of  Ranterism.  George  Fox  began  his  travels
over  England  in  1649,  proclaiming  everywhere  to  the
people  his  message  of  the  Divine  Light  and  Spirit,  reveal-
ing the  will  of  God  and  the  power  of  Christ  within  man.
His  message  was  as  clear  as  a  bell  on  all  moral  issues,
his  life  was  clean  and  pure  and  spiritually  virile,  and  he
called  men  everywhere  to  a  ftew  life  in  Christ.  In  the
early  days  of  his  ministry,  he  frequently  encountered
Ranters.      In   many  instances  he  was   able  to  impress  the

^  For  Winstanley's  religious  views,  see  next  cliapter.

-  "  A  vindication  of  those  .  .  .  called  Diggers  ;  or  some  reasons  given  by
them  against  the  immoderate  use  of  creatures,  or  the  excessive  community  ol
women,  Ranting,  rather  than  Renting."


XIX     THE   SEEKERS  AND   THE  RANTERS     481

Ranters  themselves  with  the  larger  truth  which  they  were
groping  after  ;  and  out  of  Ranter  communities  he  built
up  strong  meetings.  In  other  instances  he  failed  to  win
the  Ranters,  but  revealed  to  the  people  in  their  neighbour-
hoods the  difference  between  the  Spirit  of  Light  and
Love,  which  he  announced,  and  the  Ranter  spirit,  so  that
the  influence  of  the  Ranters  was  checked  and  a  strong
counter-influence  set  in  motion.-^

Justice  Hotham  of  Cranswick,  "  a  tender  man,  one
that  had  some  experience  of  God's  workings  in  his  heart,"
said,  as  has  been  already  noted,  that,  "  if  God  had  not
raised  up  the  Principle  of  Light  and  Life,"  which  Fox
preached,  "  the  nation  would  have  been  overrun  with
Ranterism,  and  all  the  justices  in  the  nation  could  not
have  stopped  it  with  their  laws."  "  But,"  says  Justice
Hotham,  "  this  Principle  of  Truth  overthrows  their  prin-
ciple and  the  root  and  ground  of  it."  ^

William  Penn  reports  a  similar  testimony  from  Dr.
Gell,  whom  he  calls,  "  a  person  of  worldly  quality."  This
Dr.  Gell  said  that  "  had  not  the  Quakers  come,  the  Ranters
had  overrun  the  nation."  ^

Baxter  says,  undoubtedly  with  some  truth,  "  the  horrid
villanies  of  the  sect  did  extinguish  it,"  but  there  is  no
question  that  the  positive  message  of  the  Divine  in  man
did  much  to  win  the  middle  class  English  people  away
from  the  misguided  views  and  practices  of  the  Ranters  to
a  sounder  and  more  constructive  spiritual  religion.

^  Trevelyan  [^England  Under  the  Stuarts,  p,  312)  rightly  says  that  Fox  "had
an  overwhelming,  perhaps  an  hypnotic,  power  and  presence,  like  one  of  the
ancient  prophets."

2  Fox's  Journal,  vol.  i.  p.  92.

*  Judas  and  the  Jews,  Penn's  Works  (London,  1726),  vol.  ii.  p.  208.


2  I


CHAPTER    XX

INDIVIDUAL    MYSTICS    IN    THE    PERIOD    OF    THE
ENGLISH    COMMONWEALTH

All  the  great  spiritual  concerns  of  the  race  have  their
periods  of  flood  and  ebb,  influenced  by  currents  too
subtle  and  too  deep  for  scientific  analysis  or  calculation,
and  religion,  the  most  commanding  of  these  spiritual
concerns  of  humanity,  is  no  exception  to  the  rule.  It,
too,  has  had  its  flood  and  ebb  periods,  its  flowering  times
and  its  barren  stretches.

One  of  these  flood-currents,  a  ground-swell  of  religious
earnestness,  came  to  its  height  in  the  period  of  the
English  Commonwealth.  There  was  much  in  the  move-
ment that  was  chaotic  and  abortive,  but  there  was  also
much  that  was  creative  and  constructive.  I  have  already
studied  some  of  the  most  significant  religious  groups
which  flourished  during  that  important  epoch.  I  shall
now  consider  some  of  the  men  of  the  period  who  have  a
good  claim  to  be  called  religious  prophets,  because  they
voiced  this  primary  spiritual  concern  of  the  race  in  fresh
and  vital  ways.

George  Fox  (born  1624,  died  169 1)  is  unquestionably
the  foremost  of  these  "  prophets,"  and  he  has  the  dis-
tinction of  being  the  founder  of  a  religious  sect  which  has
for  two  centuries  and  a  half  continued  the  mystical  type
of  Christianity  which  he  initiated.  The  rise  of  this  move-
ment and  the  history  of  its  progress  will  be  told  as  a
continuation  of  this  present  volume,  so  that,  for  the
moment,    I     pass    by    George     Fox,    with    his    message

482


CHAP.  XX  INDIVIDUAL  MYSTICS  483

of  Divine  Light  and  his  practical  attempt  to  revive
"  primitive  Christianity."

The  next  name  to  concern  us  is  that  of  John  Salt-
marsh,  a  Yorkshire  mystic,  whose  message  is  quite
worth  our  attention.  His  birth  date  is  unknown  ;  his
death  occurred  in  1647}  He  received  a  degree  of  M.A.
from  Cambridge  (Magdalene  College)  sometime  before
1640,^  and,  also  before  that  date,  he  became  a  rector  of
Heslerton,  in  Yorkshire,  a  preferment  which  he  resigned
in  1643  on  account  of  his  scruples  against  taking  tithes.
His  period  of  literary  activity  as  a  religious  reformer
came  mainly  in  the  last  two  years  of  his  life  (1645-47),
while  he  was  occupying  the  rectory  of  Brasted,  in  Kent.

"  He  was,"  says  Fuller,^  "  a  man  of  a  fine  and  active
fancy,  no  contemptible  poet,  and  a  good  preacher,  as  by
some  of  his  profitable  printed  sermons  doth  appear."

This  is  very  fair  of  Fuller,  for  Saltmarsh  "  wrote  a
book "  against  the  former's  sermon  on  "  Reformation,"
and  a  spirited  controversy  followed.

In  1646  he  became  an  army  chaplain,  and,  to  the
grief  of  Richard  Baxter,'^  he  had  a  large  place  with  the
soldiers.

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  Saltmarsh  was  subject
to  ecstatic,  or  trance,  experiences.  I  quote  the  following
from  Alexander  Gordon's  account  of  him  in  the  National
Dictionary  of  Biography  : —

"On  Saturday,  December  4,  1647,  rousing  himself  from  what
he  deemed  a  trance,  he  left  his  abode  at  Coystreet,  near  Great
Ilford,  Essex,  and  hastened  to  London.  Thence,  after  twice
missing  his  way,  he  rode  on  horseback  (December  6)  to  head-
quarters (of  the  army)  at  Winsor.  Retaining  his  hat  in  Fairfaxes
prese?tce,  he  'prophesied'  that  'the  army  had  departed  from
God.' "

Fuller  further  says  that  "  he  died  in  or  about  Winsor  (as
he  was  riding  to  and    fro  in   the   Parliament  army)  of  a

1  Baxter  wTongly  says  1650.     It  is  thus  only  by  using  the  term  "  Common-
wealth" loosely  that  Saltmarsh  comes  in  that  "period."

2  The  college  records  do  not  begin  until  1640.

2    Worthies  of  Erigland,  London  edition,  1840,  vol.  iii.  p.  435.
*  See  Life  of  Baxter,  Part  I.  p.  56.


484  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap

burning  fever,  venting  on  his  death-bed  strange  expres-
sions, apprehended  (by  some  of  the  party)  as  extatical,
yea,  prophetical,  raptures,  while  others  accounted  them
to  the  acuteness  of  his  disease  which  had  seized  his
intellectuals."  ^

Saltmarsh  shows  in  all  his  controversies  a  beautiful
spirit  of  charity  and  humility.  He  is  profoundly  con-
vinced that  he  has  seen  a  great  Light,  or,  as  he  puts  it :
"  The  Light  and  Glory  of  Christ  has  dawned  upon  me."
"  I  have  seen  the  morning  star  of  righteousness,  the
brightness  of  the  glory,  in  my  heart  ;  that  heart  of  mine
that  once  lived  in  the  region  and  shadow  of  death."  ^  But
he  well  knows  that  there  is  some  of  his  own  human  colour
mixed  with  the  pure  Radiance.  "  You  may  single  out,"
he  writes  in  his  dedication  to  Lord  Viscount  Say  and
Seale,  "  something  of  the  Lord's  from  what  is  mine,
and  discern  some  beams  of  God  amongst  many  things
of  the  man  (the  human).  I  know  the  candle  of  the  Lord
cannot  shine  anywhere  with  m.ore  snuff  than  in  me.
However,  since  the  Lord  hath  lighted  it,  I  dare  not  but
let  it  shine  (or  rather  glimmer)  before  men."  ^

He  apologizes  for  the  lack  of  finish  in  his  writings  :
"  I  have  no  libraries  beside  me  to  put  into  my  margins,"
and  "  I  have  more  of  myself  in  what  I  do  than  I  ought,"
but  he  nevertheless  insists  that  he  is  writing  "  not  in  the
authority  of  man,  but  of  God,"  and  he  modestly  says  that
"  if  any  of  the  Glory  of  Christ  breaks  out  while  he  holds
up  the  Glass  (the  Mirror)  let  Him  have  the  glory  who
hath  chosen  the  weak  things  of  the  world."  ^

He  quietly  says  to  "  Master  Edwards "  of  the  Gan-
grcBna,  into  whose  dragnet  of  Heresy  Saltmarsh  was
drawn,  "  you  set  your  name  to  more  than  you  know  ! "
And  with  a  touch  of  that  spirit  which  disarms  contro-
versy, he  closes  his  brief  reply  to  Edwards  with  this
challenge :  "  I  can  freely  challenge  you,  and  thousands
more  such  as  you,  to  say,  write,  do,  work,  or  print  any-

1  Fuller,  vol.  iii.  p.  435.

"^  Some  Drops  of  the  Viall,  London,  1646,  p,  149.

*  The  Smoake  in  the  Temple,  London,  1646.     Dedication.

*  Quoted  freely  from  A   Vindication,  London,  1645.


XX  INDIVIDUAL  MYSTICS  485

thing ;  and  I  hope  I  shall  in  the  strength  of  Christ,  in
whom  I  am  able  to  do  all  things,  give  you  blessings  fo?
cursings y  and  prayers  for  persecutions^

His  style  of  writing  is  uncouth.  Many  of  his  tracts
are  so  hurried  that  the  sentences  are  utterly  confused,
and  he  does  not  often  attain  to  lucid,  powerful  com-
position. As  a  writer  he  is  by  no  means  the  equal  even
of  George  Fox,  while  he  falls  far  below  the  level  of  his
contemporary  mystics,  William  Dell  and  Gerrard  Win-
stanley.  His  most  famous  book.  Sparkles  of  Glory}  is
pervaded  throughout  by  a  pure  and  lofty  spiritual  tone,
and  is  far  superior  in  style  to  his  more  hasty  tracts.  I
shall  largely  draw  upon  this  for  the  material  to  present
his  mystical  message.  His  primary  idea  is  the  progressive
revelation  of  God  through  men,  God  has,  he  says,  at
each  stage  of  humanity  submitted  to  the  limitations
of  the  period,  and  made  such  revelation  of  Himself  as
man  could  then  grasp.  He  appeared  first  under  the
external  law,  revealing  Himself  by  visions  and  dreams,
through  a  system  of  priests,  sacrifices,  and  ceremonies.
He  next  revealed  Himself  in  an  Immanuel — a  heightened
and  much  more  glorious  revelation  than  the  one  pre-
ceding. But  even  this  revelation  was  in  limitations.
Those  who  experienced  it  were  dependent  on  the  fleshly
presence,  and  on  miracles,  and  they  still  needed  a  form
of  prayer — they  attained  to  "  few  discoveries  of  Him  in
Spirit."  Finally,  God  gave  a  "  most  naked  unveiling  of
Himself  in  Spirit "  to  the  sons  of  God,  who  are  begin-
ning to  appear,  and  who  henceforth  will  be  His  only
Temple.

As  there  are  three  stages  of  revelation,  so,  too,  there
are  three  stages  of  ministry.  First,  there  was  the
ministry  of  priesthood,  conducted  under  law,  and  limited
to  one  tribe.  Next,  came  a  far  higher  ministry  through
Divine  gifts  and  "  direct  unction,"  committed,  however,
to  only  a  few.  This  soon  degenerated  into  a  ministr>^  of
anti-Christ,   a   ministry   acquired    by   art   and    study — an

•^  sparkles  of  Glory;  or.  Some  Bea^ns  of  the  Morning  Star,  London,  1647.
Reprinted  in  1811  and  1847.


486  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

artificial  rather  than  a  genuinely  spiritual  ministry.  The
third  stage  of  ministry,  now  dawning,  is  to  be  that  of
Christ  Himself,  who  shall  be  in  all  His  saints  and  people,
sJiining  in  them  as  an  inward  Light  and  Glory^  for  the
immediate  revelation  of  truth — no  longer  confined  to  one
tribe,  but  in  all  his  people,  no  longer  a  ministry  through
gifts,  but  rather  with  the  actual  presence  of  Christ  in  the
believer.

The  true  Church  is  thus  the  body  of  Christ,  which  is
baptized  into  one  Spirit  through  incorporation  into  Christ.
The  true  spiritual  government  of  the  Church  is  Christ
reigning  in  the  saints  by  His  Spirit,  ordering  them  in
thought,  word,  and  deed.  The  true  ordination  is  the
hand  of  Jesus  Christ  laid  upon  such  Christians  as  preach
or  prophesy.  The  true  test  of  prophecy  is  found  when
the  spirit  of  the  prophet  is  subject  to  the  prophets,  that  is,
when  the  gift  by  which  any  one  speaks  is  witnessed  to
in  the  hearts  and  spirits  of  the  other  believers.-^

All  rites  and  ordinances  are  but  passing  figures^  and
are  done  away  in  the  final  spiritual  dispensation.  Baptism
in  water  was  a  legal  washing  suited  to  the  stage  of  John's
ministry.  The  Baptism  of  Christ  is  a  spiritual  ministra-
tion by  which  true  Christians  are  brought  into  vital
fellowship  and  oneness  with  Him,  becoming  thereby  new
men,  new  creatures.  By  His  Baptism  Christ  administers
His  own  nature  upon  His  followers.  By  it  He  brings
them  into  His  own  sufferings  and  death,  and  by  it  they
are  made  One  Spirit  with  Him.  Every  other  Baptism  is
a  figure  or  shadow  of  this  real  Baptism?

All  the  world-stages  of  religion  are  still  to  be  found  in
the  visible  Church.  There  are  some  who  are  still  under
the  law  and  under  priesthood  and  under  ordinances,  some
who  are  still  bound  and  limited  by  systems  that  were
only  suited  to  the  swaddling  period  of  the  race  ;  but
there  are  others  who  have  been  born  of  the  Seed  and
Word  of  God,  and  who  are  living  in  the  freedom  of  the
Spirit  of  Christ.  These  two  types  of  Christians  are  to
be    found   everywhere  ;  "  they  are  grinding  at  the  same

^  See  especially  pp.  32-60.  2  g^g  especially  pp.  21-32.


XX  INDIVIDUAL  MYSTICS  487

mill,  but  one  shall  be  taken^  and  the  other  left !  "  God
has  His  times  of  winding  up  a  dispensation  and  of
laying  it  by  to  make  way  for  a  more  spiritual  ministra-
tion, a  way  of  more  Spirit,  Light,  and  Glory,  until
humanity  shall  finally  be  made  into  one  Temple  of  the
Spirit.

To  this  lofty  teaching  in  Sparkles  of  Glory  may  be
added  a  few  points  from  his  other  works.  He  says
that  the  way  to  see  Truth  is  by  living  in  the  power  of
Truths  by  first  obtaining  fesus  Christ  to  live  in  us,  and  so
to  incarnate  Him  over  again" ^  He  maintains  that  true
spiritual  ministry  is  higher  than  the  miraculous  signs  of
apostolic  times,  because  (i)  Truth  needs  nothing  added  to
its  own  spiritual  shine  and  brightness  to  convince  the
soul  ;  (2)  every  Truth  is  a  beam  of  Christ  Himself  and
has  light  in  itself ;  (3)  the  Spirit  within  us  is  far  superior
to  anything  outward,  however  glorious,  and  (4)  the  trans-
forming power  of  the  living  Word  is,  in  itself,  such  "  a
constant  and  standing  miracle,"  that  we  need  no  "  ministry
with  miracle."  ^

He  insists  that  in  the  spiritual  dispensation  which
God  is  bringing  in,  war  is  done  away,

"  To  be  a  man  of  war  means,"  he  says,  "  to  live  no  longer  than
the  life  of  the  world  which  is  perishing  ;  but  to  be  a  man  of  the
Holy  Spirit,  a  man  born  of  God,  a  man  that  wars  not  after  the
flesh,  a  man  of  the  Kingdom  of  God,  as  well  as  of  England  .  .  .
that  means  to  live  beyond  time  and  age  and  men  and  the  world  ]
to  be  gathered  into  the  life  which  is  Eternal."^

No  passage  in  his  writings  is  more  interesting  than
the  following  one  on  qualifications  for  ministry,  for  it
contains  a  statement  which  has  an  exact  parallel  in
George  Fox's  fotir?tal :

"  For  surely  it  is  not  a  University,  a  Cambridge  or  Oxford,  a
Pulpit  and    black   Gowne   or   Cloake,    that   makes    one  a   true

1  The  Smoake  in  the  Temple.     Introduction.

2  See  Smoake  in  the  Temple,  pp.  14-15.

8  Quoted    loosely  from   Dedication    to    Some   Drops  of  the    Viall  (see   also
Sparkles  of  Glory ,  pp.  112-iq).


488  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

minister  of  Jesus  Christ  ...  for  the  mystery  of  Iniquity  hath
deceived  the  world  with  a  false  and  artificial  unction  for  that  true
one  of  the  Spirit '^'^

William  Dell  has  often  been  taken  for  a  Quaker.
His  works  are  frequently  catalogued  in  lists  of  Quaker
books,  and  they  have  been  published  by  Quaker  pub-
lishers and  widely  circulated  among  Friends.  In  his
own  lifetime  he  was  charged  with  being  a  Seeker,  an
Antinomian,  and  a  leader  of  "  the  bold  and  insolent
fanatical  ministers  "  who  "  poisoned  the  army,"  and  who
"  offered  their  unhallowed  services  to  the  blessed  martyr  "
(King  Charles)  when  he  was  brought  to  the  scaffold.
He  was,  however,  never  a  Quaker.  There  was  probably
no  man  living  in  England  in  the  early  days  of  Fox's
ministry  who  would  have  become  a  more  powerful  leader
in  the  Quaker  movement  if  he  had  been  brought  into  it.
He  had  already,  independently,  won  the  insight  into  the
truth  which  formed  the  central  idea  of  Quakerism,  and
he  possessed  unusual  gifts  of  interpretation.  But  the
path  of  Dell  and  Fox  never  crossed,  more's  the  pity !
He  does  not,  either,  belong  among  the  Seekers.  He  was
not  an  Antinomian,  and  he  is  far  removed  from  fanati-
cism.^ In  his  early  period  he  was  a  loyal  Churchman,
and  filled  the  position  of  secretary  to  Archbishop  Laud.
The  date  of  his  birth  is  unknown.  He  received  his  B.A.
degree  at  Cambridge  (Emmanuel  College)  in  1627-28,
and  his  M.A.  in  163 1.

It  is  not  known  under  what  influences  he  underwent
the  great  changes  in  his  religious  views,  which  appear
between  his  years  of  service  to  Laud  and  his  connection
with  the  Parliamentary  Army,  where  he  is  found  as  a
"preacher"    in    1645.       "  Saltmarsh    and    Dell,"    writes

^  The  Divine  Right  of  Presbytery  [Liondon,  1646).  Some  Drops  of  the  Viall,
p.  112.     See  for  Fox's  "  Opening  "  yo«r«c/,  vol.  i.  p.  7,

2  ,He  plainly,  however,  shows  his  sympathy  with  the  small  dissenting  sects.
In  his  sermon  on  "  Right  Reformation,"  preached  before  the  House  of  Commons
in  1646,  he  urges  Parliament  "  to  suffer  the  assembhngs  of  the  saints,  both  publicly
and  privately,  as  occasion  serves,  seeing  this  can  be  no  prejudice  to  the  state,
but  a  gi-eat  advantage.  .  .  .  Those  who  are  anointed  with  the  Spirit  of  God
are  the  flesh  of  Christ  and  the  prophets  of  God,  and  therefore  you  touch  them
and  harm  them  at  your  own  peril "  [Select  Works,  pp.  140  41).


XX  INDIVIDUAL  MYSTICS  489

Richard    Baxter,  "  were  the    two   great   preachers   at   the
Head-Quarters."  ^     Baxter  further  says  :

"  Mr.  Dell,  the  chaplain  of  the  army,  I  think,  neither  under-
stood himself  nor  was  understood  by  others  any  further  than  to
be  one  who  took  Reason,  Sound  Doctrine,  Order  and  Concord,
to  be  intolerable  maladies  of  Church  and  State,  because  they
were  the  greatest  strangers  to  his  mind  ! "  '^

He  preached  his  sermon  on  "  The  Building  and  the
Glory  of  the  truly  Spiritual  Church  "  before  Fairfax  and
the  army  officers  in  1646,  and  his  sermon  on  "The
Reformation  of  the  Church  of  the  New  Testament  in
Gospel  Light "  ^  was  preached  before  the  House  of
Commons  November  25  of  the  same  year.  On  petition
of  the  Fellows  of  Caius  College,  Cambridge,  he  was
appointed  by  Parliament  as  Master  of  the  College  in  1 649,
a  position  which  he  appears  to  have  occupied  until  1656.
He  died  in  1664,  having  two  years  before  been  ejected
from  his  living  at  Yelden,  in  Bedfordshire.  Calamy  calls
him  "  a  very  peculiar  and  unsettled  man,"  who  preached
against  infant  baptism  and  yet  baptized  his  own  children  ;
who  preached  against  universities  while  he  himself  held
the  Mastership  of  a  College  ;  and  who  preached  against
tithes  while  he  was  himself  receiving  £200  a  year  from
his  living  in  Yelden.'*

These  seeming  inconsistencies  are  not  very  serious
when  one  realizes  that  William  Dell  was  slowly  moving
from  the  settled  positions  of  a  lifetime,  and  was  following
the  Light  as  fast  and  as  far  as  he  saw  it.  The  only  real
inconsistency  in  the  list  was  the  acceptance  of  a  living
after  he  had  seen  that  tithes  were  no  part  of  the  Christian
religion,  and  if  he  did  this,  it  is  a  blemish  on  him.  His
sermons  were  collected  and  published  in  1773,  under  the
title  :  "  Select  Works  of  William  Dell,  Master  of  Gonvil
and  Caius  College  in  Cambridge,  London  (Printed  for
John    Kendall    in    Colchester)."       The    sermons    in    this

1  Baxter,  Part  I.  p.  56.

2  Ibid.   p.   64.     One  would   surely  not  get   that  view   from    reading    Dell's
printed  sermons.

*  Called  hereafter  "  Right  Reformation."

*  Calamy' s  Nonconformist' s  Memorial,  i.  p.  201.


490  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

volume  were  preached  between  the  years  1645  and
1653.  I  shall  use  them  as  the  data  for  my  account  of
his  religious  message.

The  ruling  conception  in  all  his  teaching  is  the  direct
and  immediate  inspiration  of  the  Spirit  of  God  in  man,
the  revelation  of  spiritual  truth  by  an  inward  Light.  He
contrasts  religion  of  form  or  religion  of  externals  with
religion  in  the  poiver  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  former  he
finds  to  be  very  fashionable  and  easy,  as  it  leads  its
professors  to  think  themselves  "  safe  and  happy,"  as  being
"  near  the  suburbs  of  the  Kingdom  of  God  and  close
neighbours  to  the  saints  "  ;  but,  in  the  stress  and  strain  of
life,  on  the  perilous  edge  of  spiritual  battle  and  moral
duty,  it  leaves  them  "  unanointed  "  and  "  as  faint  and
languid  as  a  snail."  Religion  of  the  Spirit,  on  the  other
hand,  is  the  product  of  "  the  operation  of  God  Himself  in
man,"  who  thus  "  begets  the  man  unto  God,"  "  unites  him
in  one  spirit  unto  Christ,"  "informs  him  with  a  spirit  of
truth,"  and  "  anoints  him  for  ministry  and  service."  The
results  of  this  "operation"  are:  (i)  "It  makes  the  man
strong  and  mighty  for  every  duty  "  ;  (2)  "  It  makes  the
man  inflexible  in  the  ways  of  God,  able  to  go  straight
toward  the  mark,  not  to  be  bended  by  fears,  favours,  frowns,
nor  flatteries";  ^  (3)  "  It  makes  a  man  invincible  by  the  evils
and  powers  of  the  creature,  for,  with  the  power  of  God  in
him,  he  can  no  more  be  overcome  than  God  Himself  can
be  overcome."  ^

Like  all  exponents  of  mystical  religion,  he  insists  on
experience.  He  demands  a  religion  which  "  changes  the
very  nature  of  men  " — a  religion  which  "  finds  men  birds
of  prey  and  makes  them  doves  ;  it  finds  them  flesh,  it
makes  them  spirit ;  it  finds  them  sin,  it  makes  them
righteousness."  ^

"  It  lays  hold  upon  the  heart,  the  soul,  the  inner  man,  and
changes,  alters,  renews,  and  reforms  that,  and  when  the  heart  is

1  It  is  difficult  to  believe  that  the  man  who  wrote  this  would  have  accepted
tithes  if  he  saw  that  it  was  contrary  to  "  the  ways  of  God  to  take  them."

2  This  is,  in  the  main,  a  summary  of  the  Epistle  Dedicatory,  with  one  or  two
quotations  added  from  Christ's  Spirit  a  Christian's  Strength.

3  Select  Works,  p.  117.


XX  INDIVIDUAL  MYSTICS  491

reformed,  all  is  reformed.  .  .  .  When  God  undertakes  to  reform
the  Church  He  begins  with  the  heart,  and  intending  to  reform
the  heart  He  puts  His  Word  there ;  and  that  living  Word  put
into  the  heart  reforms  it  indeed."^

This  is  a  primary  position  of  all  his  teaching,  that  an
inward  change  must  occur,  and  that  this  inward  change
is  wrought  by  the  Divine  Word,  Light,  Life,  or  Spirit.

"  Christ,"  he  says,  "  dwelling  in  our  hearts  by  faith,  discovers,
reproves,  condemns,  and  destroys  sin :  because  Christ,  the
judgment  of  God  in  the  soul,  must  needs,  in  the  end;  prevail
against  every  sin  of  man."  ^

Again,  in  the  same  sermon,^  he  says  :

"  The  living  and  Eternal  Word  dwells  in  our  hearts,  and  this
Word  dwelling  in  us  by  faith  changes  us  into  its  own  likeness,  as
fire  changeth  iron  into  its  own  likeness,  and  takes  us  up  into  all
its  virtues.  .  .  .  This  is  not  a  word  without  us,  as  the  word  of
the  law  is,  but  the  Word  within  us.  If  thou  live  under  the  Word
many  years,  and  it  come  not  into  thy  heart,  it  will  never  change
thee."*

In  a  fine  sentence  he  says :  "  The  heart  cannot  be
forced  by  outward  power,  but  by  the  inward  efficacy  of
truth."  ^  "  One  single  man,"  he  elsewhere  sa/s,  "  one
single  mean  man  with  the  Word  may  very  justly  con-
tradict the  whole  world  without  it ;  truth  is  not  to  be
judged  by  multitudes  but  by  the  Word."  ^  He  cuts
away,  root  and  branch,  the  legal,  external,  carnal  forms
of  Christianity.  They  are,  to  his  mind,  dead  and  done
with.  Man  has,  in  the  past,  he  says,  understood  the
Church  carnally ;  the  law  of  it  carnally ;  the  liberties
of  it  carnally  ;  the  power,  authority,  government,  glory,
officers,  and  so  following  carnally ;  but  all  outward
religion  is  now  abolished.^  The  time  has  come  to  "  lay
by  all  those  opinions  we  have  sucked  in  from  our  very
cradles,  and  which  are  now  become  even  a  natural  religion
to  us,"  and  "  to  come  immediately  to  the  pure  and  un-
erring Word  of  God,  and  to  the  voice  of  Jesus  Christ
Himself  by  His  Spirit."

1    Works,  p.  115.  "^  Ibid,  p.  113.  '   The  Right  Reformation.

*    Works,  p.  128.  ^  Ibid.  p.  135.  ^  Ibid.  p.  392.

'  See  pp.  iio-ii.


492  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

Illuminated  by  this  "  unerring  Word  of  God  "  and  by
the  Spirit  of  Christ  in  his  heart,  he  discovers  that  nothing
has  any  efficacious  religious  function  unless  it  can  help
give  "  a  new  birth,  and  to  make  a  man  new,  that  is,  a
spiritual,  holy,  heavenly  creature "  —  but,  he  continues,
"  external  baptism,"  "  material  water,"  cannot  do  this.

"  After  all  the  washing  of  the  body  with  water,  the  soul  still
remains  as  full  of  filth,  sin,  and  corruption  as  ever."  "The
baptism  of  Christ  is  alone  efficacious,  because  it  is  a  baptism  of
soul — it  reaches  the  man's  spirit  with  the  Divine  Spirit  and
attains  to  the  soul,  the  conscience,  the  inner  man,  to  purge  and
purify  them."  ^

He  is,  however,  no  revolutionist ;  he  has  no  desire  to
reform  and  change  the  Church  by  lopping  off  the  age-
grown  customs.  He  would  simply  ask  the  State  and  all
external  powers  to  take  their  hands  off  and  let  the  Divine
Spirit,  the  Word  of  God,  have  unhindered  way  in  men's
hearts.  He  says,  with  fine  wisdom  :  **  Ceremonies  are  best
laid  down,  and  old  customs  best  laid  aside,  by  the  efficacy
of  the  Spirit."

"  The  truth  must  eat  out  the  ceremony,  and  the  substance  the
sign  ;  the  more  the  baptism  of  Christ  comes  in,  the  more  the
baptism  with  water  will  go  out ;  the  ministry  of  the  Son  shall
swallow  up  the  ministry  of  the  servant,  as  the  sunlight  doth  the
moonlight.  The  baptism  of  fire  shall  devour"  (he  elsewhere
says,  "lick  up")  "  the  baptism  of  water,  and  Christ's  spirit-
baptism,  by  degrees,  shall  put  an  end  to  water-baptism."  ^

In  almost  the  same  language  as  used  by  Fox  and
Saltmarsh,  William  Dell  declares  that  the  University
does  not  equip  for  spiritual  ministry.  "  It  is  one  of  the
grossest  errors  that  ever  reigned  under  anti-Christ's  King-
dom to  affirm  that  Universities  are  the  fountains  of  the
ministers  of  the  gospel !  "  *  They  are  "  false  teachers  "
who  suppose  that  "  titles  and  degrees  in  the  University,
and  pretended  knowledge  in  divinity,"  make  men  able  to
reveal  and  teach  Christ  as  the  true  life  of  the  Spirit.
"  Sprinkling  sermons  with  Hebrew,  Greek,  and  Latin "
may   be   "  a   perfume   acceptable   to    the   nostrils   of  the

1    Works,  p.  389.  2  /^/^_  p    298.  *  Ibid,  p,  356.


XX  INDIVIDUAL  MYSTICS  493

world,"  but  *'  the  only  sufficient  unction   for  the  ministry
of  the  Word  is  the  unction  of  the  Spirit  of  God."  ^

There  is  no  single  passage  in  Dell's  writings  that
better  sums  up  his  whole  conception  of  religion  than  the
one  in  which  he  declares  that  God  is  still  writing  His  New
Testament,  writing  it  not  in  a  book,  but  in  the  souls  and
spirits  of  men.  It  is  a  sentence  which  puts  this  truth  as
well  as  it  has  ever  been  put  :

"  In  the  same  Kingdom  of  Christ  all  things  are  inward  and
spiritual ;  and  the  true  religion  of  Christ  is  written  in  the  soul
and  spirit  of  man  by  the  Spirit  of  God ;  and  the  believer  is  the
only  book  in  which  God  Himself  writes  His  New  Testament."  ^

Gerrard  Winstanley,  though  not  a  University  man
like  Saltmarsh  and  Dell,  possessed  greater  fundamental
capacity  and  original  powers  than  either  of  them.  He
was  the  most  like  Fox  in  type  of  mind  and  bent  of
nature  of  any  of  the  great  Quaker's  contemporaries.  He
was  fifteen  years  older  than  Fox,  having  been  born  in
1 609  ;  a  native  of  Wigan  in  Lancashire.  As  with  most
of  the  religious  leaders  of  his  epoch,  his  mind  was  mainly
formed  and  nourished  on  the  English  Bible.  Its  teaching
forms  the  very  core  of  his  thinking,  and  his  style  is  plainly
moulded  by  it,  though,  like  Fox  and  Saltmarsh,  he  often
falls  into  confused  English,  with  long  unlucid  stretches.

It  is  not  possible  to  trace  the  influences  which  shaped
his  mystical  doctrine.  He  himself  always  attributes  his
doctrine  to  the  direct  "  opening "  of  the  Divine  Spirit.
In  the  New  Law  of  Rigkteous?iess^  written  in  January
1648,  he  says:  "As  I  was  in  a  trance,  not  long  since,
divers  matters  were  present  to  my  sightl'  and  he  heard
definite  words  "  spoken  "  to  him.      He  continues  :

"After  I  was  raised  up  {i,e.  after  the  trance  passed  away)  I
was  made  to  remember  very  fresh  what  I  had  seen  and  heard,
and  did  declare  all  things  to  them  that  were  with  me,  and  I  was
filled  with  abundance  of  quiet  peace  and  secret  joy."

In  his  pamphlet  entitled  A    Watchword  to  the  City  of

^  See  entire  sermon  on  "  The  Stumbling  Stone."
2  From  the  sermon  on  "  The  Trial  of  Spirits  "  (  Works,  p.  438).


494


MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.


London  and  the  Army,  written  in  August  1649,  he  reports
another  ecstatical  opening  :

"  Not  a  full  year  since,"  he  writes,  "  being  quiet  at  my  work,
my  heart  was  filled  with  sweet  thoughts,  and  many  things  were
revealed  to  me  which  I  never  read  in  books,  nor  heard  from  the
mouth  of  any  flesh."  ^

The  fact  is,  the  environment  in  which  Winstanley  lived
was  full  of  mystical  ideas.  They  had  filtered  in  from
many  sources,  and  permeated  the  common  life  of  England
in  the  middle  decades  of  the  seventeenth  century.  I
believe  that  the  teachings  of  the  Family  of  Love  had  as
much  to  do  with  producing  the  general  mystical  atmo-
sphere as  any  one  influence  had.  I  am  inclined  also  to
think  that  the  writings  of  the  great  Teutonic  mystic,
Jacob  Boehme,  had  much  to  do  with  it.  His  writings
were  put  into  English  in  successive  volumes  between  the
years  1644  and  1692,  and  they  were  widely  read  and
even  produced  a  distinct  "  Behmenite  sect."  I  cannot
agree  with  L.  H.  Berens  that  the  founders  of  the  Society
of  Friends  "  adopted  almost  in  their  entirety  "  the  views
and  doctrines  of  Winstanley.^  I  very  much  doubt
whether  Winstanley  in  any  degree  influenced  Fox.
There  is  to  my  mind  no  sign  of  it.  It  seems  to
me  rather  that  Saltmarsh,  Dell,  Winstanley,  and  Fox
were    all    the    product    of   peculiar    social    and    spiritual

^  It  should,  however,  be  said  that  these  particular  "openings"  refer  to  his
interesting  views  on  the  common  ownership  and  use  of  land.  For  example,  he
says  :  ' '  Amongst  these  revelations  this  was  one,  That  the  earth  shall  be  made  a
connnon  Treasury  of  Livelihood  to  whole  7nankind  without  respect  of  persons."  His
main  sociological  tenet  is  that  ' '  all  mankind  ought  to  have  a  quiet  subsistence
and  freedom  to  live  upon  earth  ;  and  that  there  be  no  bondman  nor  beggar  in  all
his  holy  mountain"  [i.e.  anywhere).  Lewis  H.  Berens,  in  his  book  on  The
Digger  Movement  in  the  Days  of  the  Commonwealth  (London,  1906),  has  given  an
able  exposition  of  Winstanley's  Economic  Experiments.  1  am  greatly  indebted  to
this  book,  and  I  have  in  many  instances  made  quotations  from  L.  H.  Berens'
extracts  from  the  writings  of  Winstanley,  and  I  refer  my  readers  to  this  book  for
an  adequate  account  of  this  extremely  interesting  reformer,  whose  writings  have
long  lain  in  "  innocuous  desuetude."

■•^  A  contemporary  of  George  Fox  held  that  Winstanley  was  the  real  founder
of  the  Quakers  :  ' '  The  very  draughts  and  even  body  of  Quakerism  are  to  be  found
in  the  several  works  of  Gerrard  Winstanley,  a  zealous  Leveller,  wherein  he  tells  us
of  the  arising  of  new  times  and  dispensations,  and  challengeth  Revelation  very
much  for  what  he  writ." — Thomas  Coomber  (Dean  of  Durham),  Christianity  no
Enthusiasm  ;  or,  the  Several  Kinds  of  Inspiration  and  Revelation  Pretended  by  the
Quakers,  1678.


XX


INDIVIDUAL  MYSTICS  495


conditions,  and  that  they  came  independently  of  each
other  to  quite  similar  views  and  experiences.  They  were
all,  with  the  possible  exception  of  William  Dell,  the
subjects  of  extraordinary  psychic  experiences,  and  they
were  peculiarly  responsive  to  the  suggestions  which  were
furnished  by  the  small  mystical  sects  of  the  time  and  the
current  mystical  literature.  Both  Fox  and  Winstanley
bear  the  marks  of  direct  influence  from  Boehme.  They
both  share  with  Boehme  a  belief  in  the  infinite  power  of
Light  which  is  battling  with  the  Dark  Principle,  a  faith
that  in  spite  of  the  temporal  "  spoiling  "  of  God's  creation
through  the  spirit  and  power  of  darkness,  "  the  work  of
God  shall  finally  be  restored  from  its  lost,  dead,  weedy,
and  enslaved  condition,"  ^  and  they  both  hold  with  him
the  doctrine  that  man  is  an  epitome  of  creation,  a  micro-
cosm, or  universe  in  small,  possessed  within  by  the  same
Spirit  or  Divine  Reason  that  reveals  Himself  in  large
in  the  macrocosm  or  world  system,^  and  they  both  show
a  marked  tendency  to  allegorize  and  "  spiritualize "
the  Scriptures  in  much  the  same  fashion  as  Boehme
does.^

Winstanley's  central  religious  idea  is  the  Divine  Light
within  man's  soul.  He  has  passed  completely  and
for  ever  away  from  the  childish  and  pagan  notion,  or
imagination,  as  he  would  call  it,  of  a  God  who  is  far  off
in  some  distant  sphere  above  the  sky,  to  a  Divine  Being
who  is  the  inward  power  "  by  whom  every  one  lives  and
moves  and  has  his  being."  "  Man,"  he  says,  "  looks  abroad
for  a  God  and  doth  imagine  or  fancy  a  God  in  some
particular  place  of  glory  beyond  the  skies.  But  the
Kingdom  of  Heaven  is  within  you,  dwelling  and  ruling  in
your  flesh."  The  Spirit  within  (which  he  also  calls  that
mighty  man  Christ  Jesus)  is  to  arise,  not  at  a  distance
from  man,  but  He  will  rise  up  in  me7i  and  manifest  Himself

1  Winstanley's  Mystery  of  God  concerning  the  Whole  Creation  (London,  1648).

'^  See,  for  instance,  the  famous  passage  describing  Fox's  experience  in  1648,
Journal,  pp.  28-29,  ^.nd  many  other  passages  in  the  early  pages  of  the  Journal.
Winstanley  says  that  ' '  Man  is  but  a  candle  lighted  by  that  living  power  of  Light
that  is  in  all  things."

^  The  careful  reader  will,  however,  note  that  the  contrasts  between  Winstanley
and  Fox  are  fully  as  marked  as  are  the  similarities.


496  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap.

to  be  the  Light  and  Life  of  every  man  and  woman  that  is
saved  by  Him.^  "  The  Spirit  of  reason  is  not  without  a
man,  but  within  every  man  ;  hence  he  need  not  run  after
others  to  tell  him  or  to  teach  him,  for  this  Spirit  is  his
Maker,  He  dwells  in  him,  and  if  the  flesh  were  subject
thereto,  he  would  daily  find  teaching  therefrom."  ^  He
tells  his  little  group  of  "  Friends  " — sometimes  calling
them  "  Children  of  the  Light " — that  they  do  not  look
for  a  God  now,

"  as  formerly  you  did,  to  be  in  a  place  of  glory  beyond  the  sun,
moon,  and  stars,  nor  imagine  a  Divine  Being  you  know  not
where  ;  but  you  see  Him  ruling  within  you  ;  and  not  only  in  you,
but  you  see  and  know  Him  to  be  the  Spirit  or  Power  that  dwells
in  every  man  and  woman,  yea,  in  every  creature,  according  to  his
orb,  within  the  globe  of  the  Creation.  .  .  .  You  rise  higher  and
higher  into  life  and  peace  as  this  manifestation  of  the  Father
increases  and  spreads  within  you."^

He  speaks  of  his  old  unillumined  days  as  a  period  of
darkness  and  tradition  :

"  I  worshipped  a  God,  but  I  neither  knew  who  He  was  nor
where  He  was,  so  that  I  lived  in  the  dark.  ...  I  looked  for  a
God  without  me,  but  now  the  true  worshipper  knows  who  God
is  and  how  He  is  to  be  worshipped  as  the  Spirit  and  Power  of
Light  shining  within  the  man  himself."  ^

He,  however,  does  not  set  up  some  vague,  un-
differentiated, abstract  "  principle"  to  take  the  place  of  the
God  above  the  stars  ;  he  makes  Christ  the  type  and  goal
of  the  manifestation  of  God  in  the  flesh,  and  he  calls  his
"  Friends  "  to  an  experience  of  this  Christ  rising  up  within
themselves  :

"Friends,  do  not  mistake  the  resurrection  of  Christ.  You
expect  that  He  shall  come  in  one  single  person  as  He  did  when
He  came  to  suffer  and  die,  and  thereby  to  answer  the  types  of
Moses'  Law.  Let  me  tell  you  that  if  you  look  for  Him  under
the  notion  of  one  single  man  after  the  flesh,  to  be  your  Saviour,

1  The  Saints'  Paradise.  The  passages  above  are  quoted  from  The  Digger
Movement,  p.  47.

"^  The  Digger  Movement,  p.  45.

^   The  Saifits'  Paradise.

*  Given  in  substance,  but  not  an  exact  quotation,  from  The  Saints'  Paradise.


XX  INDIVIDUAL  MYSTICS  497

you  shall  never,  never  taste  Salvation  by  him.  ...  If  you
expect  or  look  for  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ,  you  must  know
that  the  spirit  within  the  flesh  is  the  Jesus  Christ,  and  you  must
see,  feel,  and  know  from  Himself  His  own  resurrection  within  you,
if  you  expect  life  and  peace  by  Him.  For  He  is  the  Life  of  the
World,  that  is,  of  every  particular  son  and  daughter  of  the
Father  ...  for  every  one  hath  the  Light  of  the  Father  within
himself,  which  is  the  mighty  man  Christ  Jesus.  And  He  is  now
rising  and  spreading  Himself  in  these  His  sons  and  daughters,
and  so  rising  from  one  to  many  persons  till  He  enlightens
the  whole  creation  (mankind)  in  every  branch  of  it,  and  covers
this  earth  with  knowledge  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea.  .  .  .
And  this  is  to  be  saved  by  Jesus  Christ ;  for  that  mighty  Man  of
spirit  hath  taken  up  His  habitation  within  your  body ;  and  your
body  is  His  body,  and  now  His  spirit  is  your  spirit,  and  so  you
are  become  one  with  Him  and  with  the  Father.  This  is  the
faith  of  Christ,  when  your  flesh  is  subject  to  the  Spirit  of
Righteousness,  as  the  flesh  of  Christ  was  subject.  And  this  is
to  believe  in  Christ,  when  the  actings  and  breathings  of  your  soul
are  within  the  centre  of  the  same  spirit  in  which  the  man  Jesus
Christ  lived,  acted,  and  breathed."

He  does  not  undervalue  the  Scriptures,  though  he  does
put  them,  as  also  Fox  did,  in  subordination  to  the  Spirit
from  whom  they  came  forth,  and  like  all  mystics  he
regards  a  head  knowledge  of  the  Scriptures  as  a  "  moon-
light stage  "  of  illumination.      He  says  :

"  It  is  very  possible  that  a  man  may  attain  to  a  literal
knowledge  of  the  Scriptures,  of  the  Prophets  and  Apostles,  and
may  speak  largely  of  the  history  thereof,  and  yet  both  they  that
speak  and  they  that  hear  may  be  not  only  unacquainted
with,  but  enemies  to,  that  Spirit  of  truth  by  which  Prophets  and
Apostles  writ.  ...  It  is  not  the  x\postles'  writings,  but  the
Spirit  that  dwelt  in  them,  that  did  inspire  their  hearts,  which
gives  life  and  peace  to  all."  ^

It  is  the  spirit  within  that  must  "  prove  these  Scriptures
to  be  true."  ^  He  says  that  "  the  Church  now  stands  in  its
worship  partly  in  the  light  and  partly  in  the  dark.  It  is
in  the  light  in  so  far  as  men  have  the  anointing  of  Jesus
Christ  in  them,  ruling,  teaching,  acting,  and  dwelling  in

^  The  Digger  Mavement,  p.  58.
*  From  Truth  Lifting  its  Head  Above  Scandals  (London,  1648).

2  K


498  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap,

them,  for  the  same  anointing  unites  Christ  and  the  saints,
and  makes  them  one  mystical  body."  -^

He  looks  upon  outward  ordinances  precisely  as  Salt-
marsh,  Dell,  and  Fox  did,  as  forms  and  customs  which
are  to  pass  away  as  soon  as  men  enter  the  stage  of
spiritual  religion.      He  says  :

"  I  have  gone  through  the  ordinance  of  dipping,  which  the
letter  of  the  Scripture  doth  warrant,  yet  I  do  not  press  any  one
thereunto,  but  bid  every  one  to  wait  upon  the  Father,  till  He
teach  and  persuade  and  then  their  submitting  will  be  sound.
For  I  see  now^  that  it  is  not  the  material  matter,  but  the  water  of
life — that  is  the  Spirit  in  which  souls  are  to  be  dipped^  and  so
drawn  forth  into  the  one  Spirit ;  and  all  those  outward  customs
and  forms  are  to  cease  and  be  done  away."  ^

Winstanley  shows  more  of  the  "  Seeker "  tendency
than  does  any  of  the  other  mystics  studied  in  this  chapter,
though  he  possesses  a  far  more  virile  and  positive  spirit
than  that  which  for  the  most  part  prevailed  among  the
groups  of  "  Seekers,"  as  we  know  them.  He  puts  a  very
strong  emphasis  on  silence  and  on  "waiting."  As  we
have  just  seen,  he  would  have  no  one  to  submit  to  an
ordinance,  even  though  it  were  warranted  by  the  letter  of
Scripture,  until  he  had  "  waited  "  and  been  persuaded  by
an  inward  teaching  that "  the  submitting  would  be  sound."
He  held  the  view,  too,  that  no  one  should  pray  "  until
the  Power  within  thee  gives  words  to  thy  mouth  to  utter,
then  speak,  for  thou  canst  not  but  speak."  ^  As  soon  as
the  true  light  shines  into  men's  hearts  the  abundance  of
"  talk  "  ceases,  and  "  long  discourses  called  preaching  "  also
cease,  and  "  men  do  not  care  to  speak  till  they  know  by
experience  within  themselves  what  to  speak,  but  they  wait
with  a  quiet  silence  upon  the  Lord,  till  He  break  forth
within  their  hearts  and  give  them  words  and  power  to
speak."

"  Every  one  shall  be  taken  off  from  seeking  knowledge  from
without,  and  with  an  humble,  quiet  heart  shall  wait  upon  the  Lord
till  He  manifest  Himself"*     "You  shall  no  longer  feed  upon

^   The  Mystery  of  God,  pp.  39-40.

*   The  Digger  Movement,  p.  65.  ^  Ibid.  p.  65.

*  Ibid.  pp.  65  and  66.


XX  INDIVIDUAL  MYSTICS  499

the  oil  that  was  in  other  men's  lamps,  for  now  it  is  required  that
every  one  have  oil  in  his  own  lamp,  even  the  pure  testimony  of
truth  w^ithin  himself."  ^

One  of  his  finest  passages  on  silence  and  inward  power
comes  in  the  New  Law  of  Righteousness :

"  There  is  nothing  more  sweet  and  satisfactory  to  a  man  than
this,  to  know  and  feel  that  spiritual  power  of  righteousness  to  rule
in  Him  which  he  calls  God.  .  .  .  Wait  upon  the  Lord  for  teach-
ing. You  will  never  have  rest  in  your  soul  till  He  speaks  in  you.
Run  after  men  for  teaching,  follow  your  forms  with  strictness,
you  will  still  be  at  a  loss,  and  be  more  and  more  wrapt  up  in
confusion  and  sorrow  of  heart.  But,  when  once  your  heart  is
made  subject  to  Christ,  the  Law  of  Righteousness,  looking  up  to
Him  for  instruction,  waiting  with  a  meek  and  quiet  spirit  till  He
appear  in  you ;  then  you  shall  have  peace ;  then  you  shall  know
the  truth,  and  the  truth  shall  make  you  free."

But  it  needs  to  be  said  that  Winstanley  was  no  passive
Quietist,  withdrawn  from  storm  and  stress  of  practical  life.
He  is  most  like  Fox  in  his  strenuous  determination  to
turn  his  visions  into  deed.      He  says  :

"  My  mind  was  not  at  rest  because  nothing  was  acted  (i.e.
done) ;  and  thoughts  ran  in  me  that  words  and  writings  were  all
nothing  and  must  die  ;  for  action  is  the  life  of  all^  and  if  thou  dost
not  act  thou  dost  nofhing.^^  ^

His  great  "  openings  "  all  have  reference  to  action  and
deed.  His  business  in  the  world,  as  it  was  "  revealed  "
to  him,  was  to  break  yokes  and  set  men  free.  Whatever
one  may  think  of  his  economic  and  social  theories,  one
cannot  fail  to  feel  a  thrill  of  sympathy  with  a  man  who
flings  himself,  as  Winstanley  did,  into  the  task  of  so
changing  the  social  conditions  that  "  all  m.ankind  might
have  a  quiet  subsistence  and  freedom  to  live  upon  earth."
This  personal  testimony  of  his  which  follows  shows  that
the  Divine  Spirit  in  whom  he  believed  had  also  wrought
within  his  heart :  "  My  spirit  is  made  patient  and  is
guarded  with  peace  and  joy,  I   hate  none,  I   love  all,  I

*  Sub-title  to  Truth  Li/ting  its  Head  Above  Scandals.

2  A   Watchword  to  the  City  of  Lo?idon.     Quoted  from  The  Digger  Movement,
p.  113.


500  MYSTICAL  RELIGION  chap,  xx

delight  to  see  every  one  live  comfortably,  I  would  have
none  live  in  poverty,  straits,  and  sorrow,"  ^  and  this
personal  testimony  confirms  his  saying  that  "  whatever
doth  govern  in  you,  that  is  your  God."

There  were  many  other  fine  souls,  in  this  era,  who
struck  out  at  least  fragments  of  a  true  spiritual  message,
and  who  helped  to  hand  on  the  torch  which  earlier  saints
and  martyrs  had  kindled.  I  have  selected  these  men  as
samples  of  the  mystical  teachers  of  the  time.  They  are
of  a  totally  different  type  from  the  mystics  who  follow
the  negative  path  in  a  passionate  search  for  the  Divine
Dark.  They  are  primarily  of  the  practical  temper  that
belongs  to  the  English  character,  and  they  introduce  us
to  the  new  social  spirit  which  is  the  very  "  hall  mark "
of  the  Quaker  Fellowship,  which  will  be  studied  in  the
succeeding  volume.

^   The  Digger  Movement,  p.  104.


INDEX


Absolute,    The,  in  teaching  of  Plato,
63,  66

ol  Aristotle,  67

Plotinus,  72

Proclus,  78

Dionysius,  105,  iii

John  the  Scot,  124,  126

Eckhart,  224-227

Tauler,  278

Suso,  289,  290

"German  Theology,"  293-294

Ranters,  469
Absolute,  The,  weakness  of  the  doctrine

of,  211-213,  215
Academy,  Athenian  closed,  77,  78,  102
Agape,  8,  21
Ainsworth,  Henry,  445
Alain  de  I'lsle,  141
Albert  the  Great,  184,  192,  203,  217

teacher  in  Cologne,  218

mysticism  of,  219
Albigenses,  136,  148.  183
Alexander  of  Aphrodisias,  68,  185
Alexians,  358

Amaurians,  views  of,  179-180,  186-190,
191

discovered  and  persecuted,  180- 181,
190

highly  trained  men,  181

charges  of  immorality,  189-190,  195

influence  on  Strasbourg  sects,  190

and  Waldenses,  191

and  Sect  of  the  New  Spirit,  192
Amaury  (Amalrich),  179

condemned,  182

influenced  by  Erigena,  182,  186

pantheism  of,  186

influence  on  common  people,  202
Anabaptism,  origin  of  name,  369,  378

disuse  of  name,  407

connection  with  earlier  Societies,  369

and  the  Reformation,  370,  371-378

Social  aspect,    370,   377,   387,   388,
389-392

in  England,  396-407

second  stage  in  England,  407


Anabaptism,  and  the  Family  of  Love,

428,  431
in  New  England,  479
Anabaptists,  attempt  to  revive  primitive
Christianity,  370,  374
views  on  Baptism,  375,  378,  380,  403
theory  of  a  church,  374,   375,  377,

382,  385
theory  of  faith,  374,  384
theory  of  basis  of  authority,  375
views,  387,  399,  436
persecution  of,   378,   392-393,   399,

400
and  Zwickau  prophets,  389
gathering  of,  400
seek  refuge  in  England,    398,   399,

406
English,  440,  450,  452
and  Lollards,   364,   365,   396,  397,

402,  405
first  mentioned,  397
of  Hoffmanite  type,  398
represented  in  continental  gathering,

400,  401
in  Holland,  407,  411,  412,  414,  416
1       heresies  of,  399,  401-402,  404,  407
I       persecution  of,  402,  403,  404

separate    from    Reformed    Chiurch,

403
spread  of,  405,  406,  407
Angelo  Clareno,  176
Anonymous  of  Passau,  on  Waldenses,
146
on  Sect  of  the  New  Spirit,  192,  193
Apollonius  of  Tyana,  ^t,  124
Apostolic  Constitutions,  35
Aquinas,  Thomas,  217

influenced    by    Dionysian    writings,

100
on  David  of  Dinant,  184
in  Cologne,  219
Arabians,  interpreters  of  Aristotle,  185
Arians,  403,  405,  406
Aristotle,  mysticism  of,  67-69

the  doctrine  of  active  reason,  67,  68,
185


501


502


MYSTICAL  RELIGION


Aristotle,  the  Absolute  in,  67
mysticism  of  negative  type,  69
books  condemned,  182,  185
influence  on  David  of  Dinant,  184-

186
writings  restored  through  Arabians,

185

becomes  buttress  of  Church,  186

and  new  scholasticism,  333
Arminians,  412,  413,  415
Asceticism,  xxviii,  51,  284

of  Cathari,  135

of  Brethren  of  Free  Spirit,  213
Ashton,  John,  359
Athanasius,  83,  84
Attaway,  Mrs.,  419,  420
Audland,   John,    462,    463,   464,   465,

466
Augustine,  80,  84,  98,  217,  291

father  of  Catholic  mysticism,  87

mysticism  of,  88-97

constructs  authoritative  Church,  87

Harnack  on,  87

Doctrine  of  the  Will,  91

influence  of  Platonic  philosophy  on,

95
Doctrine  of  Grace,  96
a  Manichaean,  134
on  freedom,  215

"Babylonish  Captivity,"  243,  299
St.  Catherine  and,  303,  304,  305
Bacon,  Roger,  333
Badby,  John,  361
Ball,  John,  342,  354
Baptism,  356,  398

in  second  century,  32,  33
magical  view  of,  86,  88
John  the  Scot  on,  122
opposed  by  Cathari,  135
opposed  by  Anabaptists,  398
in  Family  of  Love,  437,  444,  446
sign  of  faith,  378
forms  of,  409,  416,  417
infant,  opposed  by  Cathari,  135

Wyclif,  356

Anabaptists,  375-378,  380,  403

Zwickau  prophets,  389

Menno  Simons,  394

Mennonites,  408

Particular  Baptists,  415,  416

William  Dell,  489
infant,  defended  by  Zwingli,  377
adult,  unnecessary,   400,  408,   453,

456,  492,  498
of  Holy  Spirit,  102,   135,  390,  438,

486,  492,  498
Baptists,  General  Society  of,  393,  396,

407,  410,  455
first  Church  in  England,  411,  412


Baptists,  origin  of  name,  412,  415

and  liberty  of  conscience,  414,  427

views  of,  415,  420,  426

and  Mennonites,  415

organization     congregational,     417,
421,  426

missionary  spirit,  426

Seekers  among,  452
Baptists,  Particular,  organized,  415,  416

adopt  immersion,  417

Confession  of  Faith,  417,  418

organization  congregational,  417,  426
Barber,  Edward,  425
Barebones,  Praise-God,  416,  417
Basle,  Earthquake  of,  244,  265
Bauthumley,  Jacob,  472,  473,  474
Baxter,  Richard,  424,   458,  461,  467,

477.  481,  483.  489
Beghards,  176

origin  of  name,  198

organized,  199

degeneration  of,  201

become  heretics,  202,  222

change  to  Brethren  of  Free  Spirit,  203

Edict  against,   204,   205,   206    207,
209-210

views  of,  205-209

may  join  Tertiaries,  207

tendency  to  Pantheism,  210

doctrine  of  Absolute,  211 -21 3

two  tendencies,  212

spiritual  freedom,  21 1-2 16

Eckhart  and,  222,  223

and  Friends  of  God,  245

called  Lollards,  358
Beguinage,  198

classes  of,  200-201

suppression  decreed,  206
Beguines,  176  {see  Beghards)

fotmded  by  Lambert,  197

origin  of  name,  198
Bernard,  St.,  on  vices  of  clergy,  132
Bible  {see  also  Scripture),  139,  140

English,  not  to  be  used  in  worship,
408

reading  of,  not  part  of  worship,  411
Bishops,  first  mentioned,  26,  27,  29

plurality  of,  31

single,  31-33

in  place  of  God,  32

supreme,  35

simony  of,  131

English,  344
Black  Death,  244,  255,  265
Blaurock,  George,  374

baptized  by  Grebel,  378
Blunt,  Richard,  416,  417
Bockelson,  Jan.,  392
Boehme,  Jacob,  xxvi,  xxxviii,  494,  495
Bohemian  Brethren,  389


INDEX


503


Bonaventura,  33S

Life  of  St.   Francis,  153

on  decline  of  Franciscan  Order,  169
"Book  of  the  Master  of  Holy  Scrip-
ture," 259-263
Boucher,  Joan,  403,  441
Brethren  of  Common  Life,   301,   307,
308,  324

fotmded  by  Groote,  319-321

copy   manuscripts    and   provide   in-
struction, 320

Canons  Regular,  323
Brethren  of  the  Free  Spirit  supersede
sect  of  New  Spirit,  192

develop  from  BequinesandBeghards,
203

views,  203-209,  210-216

pantheism,  210

immorality  of,  214

spiritual  freedom,  211-216,  223

and  Friends  of  God,  245
Bridget  of  Sweden,  301,  305
Brownists,  413,  419,  452
Brute,  Walter,  359
Bucer,  383,  386
Burrough,  Edward,  464,  465

Caesar  of  Heisterbach,  180,  185,  187

Calvin,  149,  348

Camm,  Ann,  465,  466

Camm,  John,  463,  464,  465

Canons  Regular,  323

Capital    punishment,    135,    142,    211,

395,  406.  436,  444
Carlstadt,  390
Cathari,  134-137,  140,  197
Catherine  of  Siena,  41,  301

Life,  301-305

Stigmata,  302

and    "Babylonish   Captivity,"   303-

304.  305
Caton,  Wilham,  465
Celibacy  of  Clergy,  130
Cellites,  358
Chaucer,  168,  342,  350
Christianity,  weakness  of,  xiv

a  legal  system,  51,  148

and  war,  51

and  public  office,  52,  391

of  cloister,  no

in  Ireland,  11 4-1 18

two  types,  486,  490,  491
Church,  early,  a  fellowship,  7,  20,  22

Holy  Spirit  in,  8,  21

House  Church,  22

officials  in,  21,  22,  23,  25-27.

Gifts,  8,  15,  21,  23

organization   becomes  fixed,   27-31,

36.  37
reaction  against  organization,  38,  42


Church,  in  Montanism,  45
authoritative,  80
Roman      Catholic,      organized      by

Augustine,  87,  88
only  channel  of  Grace,  88,  97,  132,

133
world  supremacy  of,  130
existence  depends  on  magic  power,

148
attacked  by  Beghards,  206
attacked  by  Wyclif,  353,  354
power  crumbling,  299
not    a   house,    45,    135,    361,    365,

366
not  ecclesiastical  system,  350
congregation  of  believers,  42,   135,

374.  375.    377.    382,    395.   402,
410,  431

English,  342-347

and  state,  separation  of,   369,   373,

375.  395.  401.  417.  423
separation  of,  in  England,  344-349,

366
Clara,  Saint,  159-161

Head  of  Order  of  Clarisses,  159
Clement  of  Alexandria,  83,  84

reference  to,  in  Dionysian  writings,
100
Clement  of  Rome,  Epistle  of,  29
Clementines,  205
Clergy,  authoritative,  34

magic  power  of,  130- 131

and  laity,  130,  391

vices   of,    131-133,    264,    265,   268,
299.  303.  304.  313.  318

English,  345-346,  350
Clerkson,  Lawrence,  457
''Cloud   of   Unknowing,    The,"   336,

337
Collegianten,  417
Columba,  116
Columban,  St.,  116
Communism  in  primitive  Church,  8

of  Waldenses,  144,  145

partial  among  Beguines,  200

Brethren  of  Common  Life,  319

of  Wyclif,  349,  354

of  Lollards,  365

of  Anabaptists,  388

of  Family  of  Love,  441
Congregational    methods,     407,    417J

421,  426
Council  of  Trent,  87

Constantinople,  98

Tyre,  98

Chiersey,  119

Valence,  120

Langres,  120

Lateran,  139,  140,  185

Verona,  140


504


MYSTICAL  RELIGION


Council  of  Paris,  182,  184,  185

Vienne,  201,  205,  206

Mayence,  201

Treves,  204

Constance,  299,  306-307,  367

"Earthquake,"  354,  358

Zurich,  372,  375,  380
Cranmer,  149,  403,  404,  440,  441


Dante,  107,  325,  327
David      of     Dinant,     influenced      by
Aristotle  and  Erigena,  184-186
pantheistic  views  of,  184,  189
Dell.  William,  467,  485,  494,  498
Life,  488,  489
Teachings,  490-493
Denck,  Hans,  381

translates  Prophets,  374,  385
Life,  383-386

mysticism  of,  384,  385,  386
teaches  fatherhood  of  God,  386
Denison,  Stephen,  446
Denne,  Henry,  421-423,  424
Devotion,   New,    301,    308,    322     {see

Brethren  of  the  Common  Life)
Didache,  24,  29
Diet  of  Worms,  379
Dionise  Hid  Divinite,  336
Dionysius,    The    Ai-eopagite,    writings
first  produced,  98
history  of  writings,  98-102
relation  to  St.   Denis  of   Paris,  99,

100
pupil  of  "  Hierotheus,"  101
mysticism  of,  104-112
influence  on  poetry,  107
influence  on  future  mysticism,   no,
III,  202,  211,  217,  221,  224,  260,
300
translated  by  John  the  Scot,  123
translated  by  Grosset^te,  334
translated  into  English,  336-338
Disbrough,  James,  422
Doctrine,  false,  33
of  Love  (Plato),  65
of  Will  (Augustine),  91
of  Grace,  96
of    Predestination,     1 18-120,     376,

387,  404,  409,  415
of  Transubstantiation,  120,  353
of  Free  Spirit,  192-195,  203-209
of  Divine    "  Spark,"  229,  231-233,

241
of  Inner  Light,  276-278,   296,  351-
352,    381,    384,    385.    423,    435,
446,  447,  480-484,  486,  490-492.

495-497
of  Perfection,   273,   439,   440,    444,

445


Doctrine  of  Depravity,  384,  385,  404,

409.  415
of  Divine  Indwelling,  467,  469
Dominicans,  197,  209,  220,  221,  239,

274,  282,  301
Donatists,  400,  405
Duns  Scotus,  204

leader  of  new  scholasticism,  334

Ebner,  Margaret  and  Christina,  244,
245,  255,  256,  257,  258

Eckhart,  mysticism  of,  xxvi,  224-239
views  of  freedom,  212,  223,  224
views  of  Brethren  of  Free  Spirit,  214
Life  of,  218-224,  239-241
charges  of  heresy,  217,  239-241
not  a  pantheist,  225,  233-235,  240
doctrine  of   Divine    "Spark,"   229,

231-233,  241
and  Kant,  229

and  friends  of  God,  242,  274,  293
and  Suso,  282,  289

Education  of  Children,  306,  307
of  common  people,  320

Elders  in  Family  of  Love,  433,  443
among  Quakers,  433

Elizabeth    of    Schoenau,    Saint,    242,
264,  268

Ellina  of  Crevelsheim,  271

Epiphanius,  47

Erasmus,  168,  364,  379

Erbury,  William,  457,  458

Erigena,    John   Scotus   [see   John    the
Scot)

"Eternal    Gospel,"    The,    171,    173,

174.  175
Etherington,  John,  446
Eusebius,  55

Faith,  352

The,  27

a  body  of  doctrine,  33,  34,  35,  36,
37.  80,  365

a  condition  of  soul,  xx,  384

to  be  free,  374

to  be  personal,  380,  395

Hans  Denck  on,  384
Familists  {see  Family  of  Love)
Family  of  Love,  428,  450,  452,  494

organized,  432,  433

in  England,  440-448

not  libertine,  435,  436,  443

latest  stage  of  revelation,  435

claims  of  Perfection,  439,  440,  444.

445.  447
views,  441,  444

charges  against,  442,  443-447,  479
and  Quakers,  428,  447,  448
Fatherhood   of  God,    151,    157,  317,

386,  387


INDEX


505


Fell,  Margaret,  465,  466
Firmilian,  46
Fisher,  Samuel,  470
Fox,  George,  283,  316,  320,  330,  339,
422,    424,    427,    429,    431,    434,
437.    438.    462,    463,    466,    467,
485,  487,  493,  497,  498,  499
on  Ranters,  472,  480,  481
founder  of  Quakers,  482
reaches   views   independently,    494,

495
Francis  of  Assisi,  138,  317

asks  special  Indulgence,  132

character  of,  150-153,  176,  177

history,  153-167

Lives  of,  153

psychic  nature,  154-155,  165

starts  Order  of  Poor  Little  Brothers,
158

starts  second  Order,  Clarisses,  159

starts  third  Order,  Tertiaries,  161-162

organization  of  first  Order  into  Order
of  Friars,  163,  164

Stigmata,  164-165

traditional  biography,  170

view  of  later  Spirituals  of,  175,  176

influence  on  literature  and  art,  153,
177
Franciscans  {see  Friars)

Spiritual,  170-176
Franck,  Sebastian,  383,  387,  392,  452
Fraticelli,  176

Free  Spirit,  doctrine  of,  192-195,  203-
209,  210

two  tendencies,  212

weakness  is  its  negative  feature,  211

Eckhart  and,  214,  217,  223

Ranters  revive,  469
Freedom,   spiritual,    of  Sect   of    Free
Spirit,  193-195

of  Beghards,  209,  211-216

Augustine  on,  215

Eckhart  on,  212,  223,  224

John  Smyth  on,  408

true  spiritual,  216,  412,  451

of  will,  385,  409
Friars,  Franciscan,  197

organized,  163,  164

corruption  of,  168-169

corruption  of  English,  342,  343,  350
"  Friend  of  God  from  Oberland,"  245-
254,  260,  273,  304

writings  of,  246,  266,  270
Friends  of  God,  210,  222,  242-245

Leaders,  245

writings  of,  246

Merswin  and  ' '  Friend  of  God  from
Oberland,"  245-254

Characteristics,  254-259

a  lay  movement,  254,  263


Friends  of  God  hold  Divine  Diet,  267
Book  0/  Nine  Rocks,  267-270
ideals  of,  270-274
German  Theology,  291-297

Friends,  Society  of  (j^^  Quakers),  xxxviii,
296,  406,  410,  411,  437,  494

Gangraena,  Edwards',  418,   419,  422,

424,  450,  457,  484
Gansfoort,  John  Wesel,  332
Gerard  of  San  Donnino,  171,  174-175
Gerson,  188,  299,  301,  323

and  "  Great  Schism,"  306

mysticism,  306-307

teacher  of  children,  306,  307
Gidding,  Little,  324
Gifts,  8,  15,  21,  36

of  prophecy,  23

give  place  to  priesthood,  37

succeed  priesthood,  485
Gilbert    of    Gamblours,    on    vices    o(

Clergy,  132
Gnosticism,  29,  33,  72,  134

in  Greek  Fathers,  84
Grace,  doctrine  of,  96

Church  only  channel  of,  88,  97,  132,

133

gift  of  God,  329

imiversal,  415,  422,  424,  425
Grebel,  Conrad,  373,  387

baptizes  Blaurock,  378
Gregory  XL,  303-304,  305,  354
Gregory  of  Nyssa,  84-87,  98
Groote,  Gerard,  308,  309,  314

life,  314-323

preaches  new  Evangelism,  317-319,
360

founds   Brethren  of  Common  Life,
319-321

mysticism,  321-322

influence  on  Dutch  universities,  321
Grossetete,  Robert,  333-334
Griinenworth,  249,  250,  252
Gui,  Bernard,  on  Waldenses,  145
Guillaume  le  Breton,  179,  189
Guyon,  Madame,  xxvi

Haemerlein,     Thomas,     323     [see     k

Kempis)
Helwys,  Thomas,  407,  411-413,  414,

416
Henry  de  Kalkar,  315
Henry  of  Lausanne,  316
Henry  of  Nordlingen,   244,   245,  256,

257,  258,  274
Heresy,   battle   against,   33,   34,    119,
133.  140
marks  of,  143
of  John  the  Scot,  120
of  Catharism,  134-137


5o6


MYSTICAL  RELIGION


Heresy  of  Waldenses,  139-149

of  Amaurians,  190

of  Beghards,  202-206

of  Brethren  of  Free  Spirit,  203-206

of  Eckhart,  217,  239-241

of  Wyclif,  354-356

of  Lollards,  361-365

of  Anabaptists,  365,  401,  402,  404,
407

set    forth    in    Edwards'    Gangraena,
418,  419,  422,  424,  450,  457,  484
Heretics,  Statute  for  burning.  361

how  to  recognize,  143
Hetzer,   Ludwig,   translates  Prophets,

374.  385
Hickock,  Richard,  471
Hierotheus,  loi

mystical  ladder  of,  102,  106
Hildegarde,  Saint,  169,  242,  264,  268
Hilton,  Walter,  301,  323,  338-339

writes  Ladder  of  Perfection,  338
Hoffman,  Melchior,  390-392,  398
Hotham,  Justice,  473,  481
House  of  Love  {see  Family  of  Love)
How,  Samuel,  416,  422
Howgil,  Francis,   339,   462,  463,  464,

465
Hiibmaier,  Balthasar,  374,  385,  388

Life,  379

teaching,  380-383
Hus,  John,  149,  307,  348,  367
Hut,  Hans,  390

Ignatius,  Epistles  of,  29,  31

reference  to,  in  Dionysian  writings,
100
Imitation  of  Christ ,  291,  30X,  321

authorship,  323,  338

negative  aspect,  325-327

positive  note,  327-330

not  quietism,  331

not  selfishness,  331
Independents,  414,  422,  424,  427,  462
Individual,  supremacy  of,  349-350
Indulgences,  sale  of,  132

opposed  by  Waldenses,  142
Wyclif,  353
Infant   baptism,   opposed   by  Cathari,

135
Wyclif,  356

Anabaptists,  375-378,  380,  403
Zwickau  prophets,  389
Menno  Simons,  395
Mennonites,  408
Particular  Baptists,  415,  416
William  Dell,  489
defended  by  Zwingli,  377
Irenaeus,  35

mysticism  in,  81,  84
Hamack's  summary  of,  81


Irish  Christianity,  114-118

Irish  missionaries,  116

preserve  classic  learning,  n6-ii8
foremost  is  John  the  Scot,  118

Jackson,  John,  458,  459,  466
on  Seekers,  461,  467

Jacob,  Henry,  415

Jerome,  348,  367

Jessey,  Henry,  416

Jessop,  Edmond,  445

Joachim  of  Floris,  171
writings  of,  172
"Three  Ages,"  172-173
disciples,  173
spurious  writings,  174
compared  with  Amaury,  187

John,  St.,  mysticism  of,  16-19,  9^

John  de  Brunn,  a  Beghard,  214

John   of   Parma,    Minister  General  of
Franciscans,  170,  171,  175

John  the  Scot,  history  of,  113-114,  118,
178,  183
translates    Dionysian    vmtings,    99,

III,  123
Tract  on  Predestination,  11 8- 120
views  of  Sacraments,  121-122
of  Progressive  Revelation,  122
writes  On  Division  of  Nature,  124-

128
books  among  Albigenses,  183
books  condemned,  182
mysticism  of,  124-129
influence  on  Amaury,  182-184
influence  on  Brethren  of  Free  Spirit,

202,  211
later  influence,   178-179,    217,   221^
224,  300

Joris,  David,  400,  442

Julian,  the  Apostate,  'jj

Julian,  Lady,  301

Justinian,  77,  79,  102

Kant,  229

k  Kempis,    Thomas,   291,    314,    317,
321,  322

Life,  323-325
Kiffin,  William,  416,  425
Kingdom  of  God,  a  mystical   fellow-
ship, 6

in  man,  321,  495
Knewstub,  John,  443,  444
KnoUys,  Hanserd,  416,  424

Ladder,  mystical,  of  Plotinus,  74-76
Stephen  Bar  Sudaili  or ' '  Hierotheus, "

102
of  Dionysius,  105,  107
vci  Book  of  Nine  Rocks,  267-270,  273
in  Tauler,  279


INDEX


507


Ladder,  in  German  Theology,  297
in  "  Ruysbroek,"  310-313
in  Piers  Plowman,  340
of  Perfection,  The,  338
Lambert,  founder  of  Beguines,  197
Langenmantel,  Eitelhans,  387,  388
Langland,  William,  168,  339-340,  342
Lathrop,  John,  416
Lawson,  John,  466
Lay  preaching,  in  second  century,  35
of  W'aldenses,  139,  140,  141,  147
Beguines  and  Beghards,  204
Friends  of  God,  263
Gerard  Groote,  316,  360
Lollards,  357-360
Anabaptists,  406
Baptists,  418,  422,  423
in  Family  of  Love,  446
Legate,  Bartholomew,  454,  455
Liberty  of  conscience,   374,  410,  413,

414,  427
Light,  inner,  Eckhart's  "Spark,"  229,
231-233,  241
Tauler  on,  276-278
in  German  Theology,  296
in  Wyclif,  351-352
in  Hiibmaier,  381
in  Denck,  384,  385
in  Henry  Denne,  423
in  Henry  Nicholas,  435
in  Family  of  Love,  446,  447
in  George  Fox,  480,  481,  482,  483
in  John  Saltmarsh,  484,  486
in  William  Dell,  490-492
in  Gerrard  Winstanley,  495-497
Lollards,  354,  357-366
origin  of  name,  358
lay  preachers,  359,  360
attacks  on,  358,  361,  362
opposed  to  oaths,  360

to  Mass,  360,  361,  366
revival  of,  363,  364
message  of,  364
and  Anabaptists,  364,  365,  396,  397,

402,  405
and  Quakers,  365,  366
Lombardy,  poor  of,  145
Lord's    Supper    [see    also    Mass    and
Sacraments),  17,  21
in  second  century,  32,  36,  37
administered  by  women,  46,  145

by  laymen,  145
magic  view  of,  86
doctrine  of  transubstantiation,    120,

332,  353.  356
Lollards  and,  360,  361,  364,  366
Love,  St.  Paul  on,  15
Plato's  doctrine  of,  65
secret   of  St.    Francis'   power,   152,
167,  177


Love,  Divine,  291,  296,  307,  311

practising  God's,  313,  328

preaching  God's,  317

eye  of  soul,  334

creed  of  Rolle,  335
Lull,  Raimund,  138
Luther,  142,  149,  275,  291,  332,  348,
350.  363.  364.  367.  370,  372,  373.
380,  389,  390,  394,  428.  431,  452

on  total  depravity,  384
Lyons,  poor  men  of,  139,  145

heretical  sect  in,  191


Magistrates,  Tertullian  on,  52
Melchior  Hoffman  on,  391
not  to  meddle  with  religion,  410,  414
Man,  Thomas,  364
Manichaeism,  134,  136

and  mysticism,  137
Mantz,  Felix,  373
Marriage,  Montanists  on,  52
of  a  priest,  374
in  Family  of  Love,  435
Marsh,  Adam,  333
Marshall,  Charles,  464,  465
Martin  of  Pologne,  182
Mass  [see  Lord's  Supper,  Sacraments,
etc.),  130,  243,  360,  375,  380,  394
Matilda  of  Magdeburg,  St.,  242,  259,

264,  268
Matthys,  Jan,  392
Maximilla,  41,  54
Melanchthon,  390
Mennonites,  408,  409,  412,  417,  453

and  General  Baptists,  414,  415
Menno  Simons  [see  Simons)
Merswin,  Rulman,  245-254
writings,  246,  251,  253,  266
life,  248-251
Millennium,  53,  389,  390,  392
Miracles,  Seekers  on,  454,  456,  458

John  Saltmarsh  on,  485,  487
Montanism,  35
origin  of,  38
object,  39
value  of,  42

dispensation  of  Paraclete,  42,  44,  45
foundation  principle  is  development,

45,  122
type  of  prophecy,  40,  41,  47,  50
weaknesses,  50
a  "  new  law,"  51

regulation  of  marriages  and  fasts,  5a
zeal  for  martyrdom,  53
expectation  of  millennium,  53
persecutions,  54
outcome,  55

stages  of  revelation,  43,  45,  46,  51,
122


5o8


MYSTICAL  RELIGION


Montanus,  history  of,  38

character,  39

sayings,  40

claims  of,  49
Mount  St.  Agnes,  323

Hfe  in,  324
Miinster  Kingdom,  392,  400
Miinzer,  Thomas,  389,  390
Murton,  John,  407,  411,  412,  413,  455
Mysticism,  definitions,  xv,  xvi,  xvii,  xviii

in  all  religions,  xv,  xvi,  xxv

normal  aspect,  xviii-xxv

abnormal  aspect,  xxv-xxviii,  xxxii

value  of,  xxx-xxxiv

temporal  Element,  xxxiv-xxxv

two  types,  XXXV,  67,  500

negative  type,  69,  95,  108,  109,  211,
212,  219,  278-280

in  fourteenth  century,  217,  242,  298,

334
"new,"  298,  300,  308
and  Manichaeism,  137
and  the  "Church,"  347-348
of  Gospels,  4,  5,  6,  57
of  Paul,  9-13
of  John,  16-19
of  Socrates,  58
of  Plato,  59-66
of  Aristotle,  67-69
in  Stoic  philosophy,  69
of  Plotinus,  72-76
of  Proclus,  78
of  Church  Fathers,  80-84
of  Gregory  of  Nyssa,  84-87
of  Augustine,  88-97
of  Dionysius,  104-112
of  John  the  Scot,  124-129
of  St.  Francis,  151,  177
of  Joachim,  173

of  Amaurians,  179-180,  186-190
of  Sect  of  Free  Spirit,  193
of  Brethren  of  Free  Spirit,  206
of  Albertus  Magnus,  219
of  Eckhart,  224-239
of  Friends  of  God,  268-274
ofTauler,  276-281
ofSuso,  281-291
of  German  Theology,  292-297
of  Gerson,  306-307
of  Ruysbroek,  309-313
of  Groote,  321,  322
of  Imitation,  325,  332
of  Richard  Rolle,  335,  336
of  English  translations  of  Dionysius,

336-338
of  Walter  Hilton,  338,  339
of  Hiibmaier,  381
of  Denck,  384,  385
of  Henry  Nicholas,  431,  432,  444
of  Seekers,  459


Mysticism  of  George  Fox,  482
of  John  Saltmarsh,  484-487
of  William  Dell,  490-49
of  Winstanley,  493-497
of  Quakers,  500

Nayler,  James,  458,  468,  479
Neoplatonism,  influence  on  mysticism,
70

Plotinus,  master  mind  of,  70

later  development,  jy

close  of  Academy,  78,  102

influence  on  Greek  Fathers,  83,  98

on  Augustine,  95
Nicholas   of   Basle,    Beghard   martyr,

210,  246
Nicholas  (Niclaes),  Henry,  401

Life,  428-432

organizes  Family  of  Love,  432,  433

writings,  433

views,  433-440.  443.  444
Nicholas  of  Hereford,  357,  359
Nikolaus  von  Lowen,    245,  249,  252-

253
Nine  Rocks,  Book  of,   208,   246,   251,

253,  255,  267-270,  291
Norbert,  Saint,  316

Oaths,  opposed  by  Tertullian,  52
opposed  by  Cathari,  135
by  Waldenses,  142
by  Beghards,  211
by  Lollards,  360,  366
by  Anabaptists,  387
by  Melchior  Hoffman,  390
by  Menno  Simons,  395
by  John  Smyth,  411
by  Henry  Nicholas,  436,  437
not    entirely    rejected    by    General
Baptists,  415
Occam,  William  of,  334
Oecolampadius,  377,  379,  383
Officials  in  early  Church,   21,   22,  23,

25-27
Oldcastle,  Sir  John,  362
Order  of  St.  Francis,  158,  163,  164
of  Poor  Clares,  159
Tertiaries,  161-162
corruption  of  Franciscan,  168,  169
schism  in  Franciscan,  170
failure  of  Franciscan,  177
decline  of  regular,  204
of  Beghards  and  Beguines,  200-202,
of  Beghards  and  Beguines  abolished

206
Dominican,  197,  209,  221,  239,  301
of  Saint  John,  250
Organization,  in  early  Church,  27
reason  for,  28
becomes  Ecclesiastical  system,  36


INDEX


509


Organization,  reaction  against,  42
of  Franciscan  Order,  163,  164

Origen,  71,  83,  84

Ortlieb,  202

founder  of  sect  of  New  Spirit,  192,

195
an  Amaurian,  192
Oxford,  178,  333,  334,  335,  338,  339,

341.  355.  358.  359.  367
Oxyrhynchus  Papyri,  6

Pagitt,  Ephraim,  450,  456,  467

Paris,  Matthew,  169,  199

Parker,  John,  359

Passion  of  Saint  Perpetua,  43,  44,  48,

49.  53

Patrick,  St.,  115

Paul,  St. ,  development  of,  2
mysticism  of,  9-13,  96
central  idea,  13-15,  21,  22,  iii

Paulicians,  134,  136

Peasant     revolt     in     Germany,     385,

390
in  England,  342,  349,  354
Pelagians,  403,  442
Penington,  Isaac,  296
Penn,    William,    316,    448,   452,   456,

466,  481
Peter  de  Bruys,  316
Peter  of  Vaux-Sernai,  142,  145
Phillips,  Ubbo,  400,  453
Piers  Plowman,  339-340,  361
Pilgrimage  of  Grace,  The,  401
Pistle  of  Private  Cowncelle,  336,  337,

338
Plato,  98

father  of  speculative  mysticism,  58
summary  of  his  mysticism,  59-66
doctrine  of  Love,  65
Plotinus,  98,  224

mysticism  of,  67,  72-76
life  of,  70
Pope,  The,  and  Tauler,  275

power  in  England,  344,  346-347
and  Wyclif,  348,  355,  356  .
Porter,  Holland,  474
Prayer,  mystical  element  in,  xix

to  be  only  at  moving  of  Spirit,  457,
498
Preaching,    lay,    35,    139,    140,    141,
147,  204,  316,  357-360,  363,  406,
418,  422,  423,  446
in  popular  dialect,  317
without    pay,    147,    317,   387,   391,

395,  418,  423
with  pay,  461
without  premeditation,  457
without     university     training,     423,

444,  454,  457,  487,  492
by  women,  141,  419-421,  423


Predestination,  John  the  Scot  on,  ii8-
120

Anabaptists,  376-377,  387,  404

John  Smyth  on,  409
Presbvterians,    424,    427,     452,     462,

478
Presbyters,  26
Pride's  ' '  purge, "  427
Priesthood,  of  believers,  42,  46,  351

supplants  prophecy,  29,  30

in  Roman   Church,   120,   122,    130-
133.  148

Lollards'  views  on,  365,  366

doomed,  371

first  stage  of  ministry,  485
Primitive  Christianity,  types  of,  i

a  mystical  religion,  4,  57

becomes   ecclesiastical    system,    27,
36

persists  in  some  localities,  38

attempts  to  revive,  i

by  Waldenses,  133

by  St.  Francis,  150

in  thirteenth  century,  196

by  Anabaptists,  370,  374

by  George  Fox,  483

Wychf  on,  351

studied  by  Hiibmaier,  379
Priscilla,  Montanist  prophetess,  41

oracle  of,  52,  54
Proclus,  jj

mysticism  of,  78

triads  of,  106
Prophecy,  in  early  Church,  23-25,  28,
47

supplanted  by  priesthood,  29,  30

in  second  century,  35

in  Montanism,  40,  42,  47,  50

of  Amaurians,  186
Psalms,  translated  into  English,  335

singing  of,  361
Pseudo  Christus,  479
Purvey,  John,  357,  359
Pythagoras,  58,  77

Quakers  {see  P'riends),  391,  428,  436
views  on  baptism,  408
views  on  preaching,  423
Eldership  of,  433
Monthly  Meetings  of,  463
Seekers  become,  462-466
and  Lollards,  365,  366
and  Family  of  Love,  428,  447,  448
and    Ranters,   471,    472,   473,   480,

481
founded  by  George  Fox,  482
positive  mystics,  500

Radewin,    Florentius,   319,    320,   322,
324


510


MYSTICAL  RELIGION


Ranters,  448

degenerate  movement,  467,  480

not  a  sect,  452

Pantheism  of,  467,  469,  472

revive  doctrine  of  Free  Spirit,  469

and  Quakers,  471-473,  480,  481

use  of  tobacco,  473,  474

Libertinism  of,  477,  478

ordinance  ag^iinst,  478,  479

influence  checked,  481
Reformation,  The,  130,  149,  275,  308,
314.  370

in  England,  364,  450
Religion,  two  tendencies  in,  xiii,  xiv

mysticism  in  every,  xv,  xvi,  xxv

mystics  builders  of,  xxxii

a  way  of  life,  152

two  types  of,  351
Revelation,  dispensation  of,  37

stages  of,  in  Montanism,  43,  45,  46,

51

in  John  the  Scot,  122

in  Joachim  of  Floris,    172,   173,

174
in  Eternal  Gospel,  175
in  Amaurians,  180,  187,  188
in  Family  of  Love,  439
in  David  Joris,  442
in  John  Saltmarsh,  485
Rich,  Robert,  468
Ridley,  149,  441

on  Anabaptists,  404
Robinson,  John,  413,  416
Rogers,  John,  440,  442
Rogers,  Thomas,  444
Rolle,  Richard,  334-336,  338,  339

translated  Psalms  into  English,  335
Roulston,  Gilbert,  477
Rutherford,  Samuel,  447
Ruysbroek,  Jan,  245,  317

on  Brethren  of  Free  Spirit,  213,  214
Life,  308-310,  313-314
mysticism  of,  309-313
spiritual  ladder,  310-313

Sacraments,  deification  by,  86,  121
magical  view  of,    28,    36,    37,    86,

130-131
channel  of  Grace,  88
Doctrine  of  Transubstantiation,  120
John  the  Scot  on,  120-122
Cathari  on  Baptism,  135
Waldenses  on,  144,  145
Amaurians  hold  them  unnecessary,

187,  188
sect  in  Lyons  on,  191
Beghards  on,  206,  208,  211
Eckhart  on,  237,  241
Wyclif  on,  353,  356
Lollards,  360,  361,  366


Sacraments,  none  valid  for  Seekers,  455
none  valid  for  Ranters,  470
administered   by   lay   persons,  415,
418

Salimbene,  Brother,  168

Salmon,  Joseph,  472
experience,  475-477

Saltmarsh,  John,   467,  488,  493,  494,
498
on  Seekers,  455,  456
life,  483
mystical  views,  484-487

Sawtrey,  William,  361

"Schism,  Great,"  243,  266,  299,  306-

307.  319.  354
Scriptures   {see  also   Bible),    formation

of  canon,  38
translated  by  Waldo,  139

by  Wyclif,  355-357

by  Luther,  372
views  of  Beghards  on,  208

of  Friends  of  God  on,  258,   259,
267

of  Henry  Nicholas  on,  437

of  Seekers,  455,  457,  458

of  Ranters,  470,  471,  474
copied  and  taught,  320
foundation  of  true  learning,   334
in    hands  of  common  people,   371,

372
not    sole  foundation  of  Faith,   258,

385.  386
reading  of,  dangerous,  457
authority   above   the   Church,    332,

350,  352,  356,  372.  403
authority  below  the  Spirit,  497
Sect   of  the  New  Spirit,   founded   by

Ortlieb,  192
views,  192-195
charges  of  immorality,  194
superseded  by  Brethren  of  the  Free

Spirit,  192
"Seed,"  in  John's  Gospel,  17
Stoic  doctrine  of,  70
of  God  in  man,  468
Seekers,  448,  488,  498
not  strictly  a  sect,  452
on  continent,  453,  454
in  England,  454-466
undervalue  objective  religion,  469
views,  455,  456,  457,  458,  461,  469
mysticism  of,  459
Cromwell  on,  459,  460
become  Quakers,  462-466
become  Ranters,  466
in  Westmorland,  461-463
in  Bristol,  464
Severians,  98

"Shepherd  of  Hermas,"  28,  29
Simons,  Menno,  393-395,  401,  453


INDEX


II


Simony,  131

Singing,  not  worship,  361

part  of  worship,  411

Hiibmaier  on,  382
Smyth,  John,  414,  417

Life,  407-409,  411

teachings,  409-411
Socrates,  a  mystic,  58
Spirit,  Holy,  in  early  Church,  8,  21

dispensation  of,  42,  44,  45,  46,  123,
172,  174,  179,  187,  205,  420,
469,  470,  487

baptism  of,  102,  135,  390,  438,
486,  492,  498

the  soul  of  man,  191

meetings  at  moving  of,  210

upper  school  of,  259,  270

in  heart,  330

religion  of,  352
Spiritual  Franciscans,  170,  171-175

or  Zealots,  176

Angelo  Clareno  on,  176
Spirituals  (Montanists),  43,  52
Stephen  Bar  Sudaili,  10 1

mystical  ladder  of,  102
Stephen,    Sir   James,    on    Albigenses,

148
Stewart,  J.  A.,  on  Plato's  mysticism,

66
Stigmata,  xxvi,  xxviii

of  St.  Francis,  164

Catherine  of  Siena,  302
Stoic   philosophy,    influence  on  mysti-
cism, 69

doctrine  of  the  "  Seed,"  70
Storch,  Nicholas,  389
Strasbourg,   190,   192,  218,   221,  244,
247,  249,  255,  274,  334,  386,  390
Stumpf,  Simon,  374
"  Sum  of  Scriptures,  364,  365,  398
Suso,  Henry,  245,  308

life,  282-289

teaching,  289-291
Swyn derby,  William,  359


Tauler,  John,  210,  245,  248,  255,  257,
266,  272,  273,  292,  308
not    "master    of    Holy   Scripture,"

263,  276
life  of,  274-276
views  on  Free  Spirit,  209,  214
doctrine  of  inner  hght,  276-278

of  Absolute  God,  278
stages   of  self-dying   and    consecra-
tion, 279-281
Taylor,  Thomas,  462
"Teaching  of  the  Twelve  Apostles,"
24,  28,  29
an  early  document,  30


Tertiaries,  248

founded,  161,  162

war  forbidden  to,  162

and  organization  of  artizans,  162
TertuUian,  39,  43,  46,  51

on  martyrs,  53

on  coming  of  New  Jerusalem,  54

mysticism  in,  81,  82
Theology,  Germati,  245,  291-297

Luther  on,  291

author,  291

"Absolute"  in,  293-294

on  sin,  295

on  Inner  Light,  296

Spiritual  Ladder  in,  297
Thorpe,  William,  359,  360
Tithes  opposed  by  Anabaptists,  387

by  Baptists,  418,  422,  423

by  Seekers,  462

by  John  Saltmarsh,  483

by  WiUiam  Dell,  489
Transubstantiation,    doctrine   of,    120,
148

views  of  Waldenses,  144,  145

attacked,  332

by  Wyclif,  353,  356
Tyler,  Wat,  and  peasant  uprising,  342,

349.  354
Tylesworth,  William,  359

Universities,      Dutch,      influence       of
Groote,  321

Vadian,  379,  383
Vaudois  {see  Waldenses)
Vitells,  Christopher,  442

Waldenses,  197

attempt   to  revive  primitive  Christi-
anity, 133

connection  with  Cathari,  134,  136

history  of,  137-140

called  "  Insabbatati,"  139

under  anathema,  140

views  of,  140-145,  208

not  strictly  mystics,  146

social  views,  146,  147

influenced  by  Beghards,  a  10

and  Amaurians,  191

and  sect  of  Free  Spirit,  195
Waldo,  Peter,  137-139.  147

made    translations    from    Scripture,

139
War,  opposed  by  Cathari,  135

by  Waldenses,  142
forbidden  to  Tertiaries,  162
opposed  by  Lollards,  365,  397

by  Anabaptists,  387

by  Menno  Simons,  395

by  John  Smyth,  411


512


MYSTICAL  RELIGION


War,    opposed    by    Henry   Nicholas,

436.  437
by  Family  of  Love,  444
by  John  Saltmarsh,  487

tolerated  by  General  Baptists,  415

"  Great  Civil,"  243
Wesley,  John,  316,  360
Whitehead,  George,  468
Wibald  on  Erigena,  178
Windesheim,  323
Winstanley,  Gerrard,  467,  485

on  Seekers,  460

on  Ranters,  480

social  views,  494,  499,  500

mysticism,  493-497

shows  a  Seeker  attitude,  498
Woman,     consecrates    Eucharist,    46,

145.  191
Women    may    preach     among    Wal-
denses,  141
among  Baptists,  419-421,  423


Wrighter   Clement,  458
Wyclif,  149,  333,  338,  342

life,  340-341

and  the  Pope,  348

theory  of  Dominion,  348-349,  350.

and  Individual  Soul,  349,  350

and  John  of  Gaunt,  350,  354

Trialogus,  352

on  transubstantiation,  353,  356

charge  of  heresy,  354-356

translates  Bible,  335.  355,  357

and  Lollards,  357,  359

influence  of,  366-368


Zurich,  Council  of,  375

"Discussion,"  375,  379,  380
Zwickau  Prophets,  389

revolutionary  views,  390
ZwingH,  370,  372,  373,  380

and  Infant  Baptism,  377


THE    END


Printed  by  R.  &  R.  Ci.ark,  Limited,  Edinbwgh.


7Q88    083
