THE HARVARD ORIENTAL SERIES

VOLUME SEVENTEEN


HARVARD ORIENTAL SERIES

EDITED

WITH THE COOPERATION OF VARIOUS SCHOLARS

BY

CHARLES ROCKWELL LANMAN

PBOranOB IK BilTAW UNIVBSSITY, MONOBABY MEMBER or THE ASIATIC
SOCIETY or BENGAL, THE BOTAL ASIATIC SOCIETY (LONDON), AND THE
DEUTSCHE MOBGENLilNDISCHB QBSBLLBCHATT, BTC., COHBESTONDING
Mann or THE IMPERIAL BUBS1AN ACADEMY or SCIENCES AND
or THE INSTITUTE or IHANCE ( ACADEMIC DEB INSCBIFTIONS
BT BELLES-LETTRES)


Volume Seventeen


(AUTHORISED REPRINT)


THE

STOGA-SYSTEM OF PATANJAU

® r Ancient MnOu Doctrine of Concentration of fiMnO

embracing

THE MNEMONIC RULES, CALLED YOGA-SUTRAS, OF PATANJALI

, and

THE COMMENT, CALLED YOGA-'bHASHYA, ATTRIBUTED TO VEDA-VYASA

AND

ME EXPLANATION, CALLED TATTVA-VAICARADi. OF VACHASPATI-MICRA

TRANSLATED FROM THE ORIGINAL SANSKRIT
BY

JAMES HAUGHTON WOODS

PROFESSOR or PHILOSOPHY IN HARVARD UNIVERSITY


/ ,


V


)


“OTI^L BANARSIDASS

DELHI :: VARANASI :: PATNA


4

\

t

)

\

4

)


MOTILAL BANARSIDASS

BUNOALOW ROAD, JAWAHAR NAOAR, DELHI-7
NEPAL! KHAPRA, VARANASI-1
BANKIPORE, PATNA-4


By arrangement with the Harvard University Press

First Edition 1914
Second Edition 1927


IVSOAUW
lOMBMUt


II jambmu
AMS VtllUM
H WO A LBW


HVNC • LIBRVM

IN • MVLTIS • ET • L0NGINQVI8 • TERRIS
ELABORATVM • ATQVE • NVNC • DENIQVE ■ CONFECTVM
SOCIIS FIDELIBVS

QVORVM • MEMORIA • LABOR • ILLE • FELICITER • COMPENSATVR
ALII& • MAQI8TRIS ■ OMNIBV8 • SEMPER • AMICIS

D,


CONTENTS


Preface PAGE

1. Bensons for taking up the work ix

2. Difficulties of dbmprehending the work ix

8. Difficulties of style ix

4. Translation of technical terms x

5. Punctuation x

6. Texts and manuscripts xi

7. Acknowledgements * xi

Introduction

1. Authorship of the Yoga-sUtras: The two Patafijalis .... xiii

2. Tradition of their identity not earlier than tenth century . xiii

8. Comparison of philosophical concepts does not confirm the tradition . xv

4. Date of the Sutras (between a.d. 800 and 500) xvii

6. Date of the BhRsya (between ▲. d. 650 and 850) xx

6. Date of V&caspatim^ra’s Tattva-v&i^radl (about a. d. 800 to 850) xxi

Analytical Summary of the Yoga-sutras

1. Book 1, Concentration (sam&dhi) xxiv

2. Book 2 , Means of attainment (s&dhana) xxv

8. Book 8, Supernormal powers (vibhuti) xxvii

4. Book 4, Isolation (kftivalya) xxviii


The Yoga-suthas translated without the Comment or the Explanation
Being the Sutras translated in groups, with group-headings by translator xxx

Translation of Pata&jali’b Yoga-sutras or Mn^ionic Bulks
Together with the Comment or Yoga-bh&sya, attributed to Veda-vylsa


And Vaoaspatimi^ra’s Explanation or Tattva-vai^aradl-

1. Book 1, Concentration (samftdhi) 1

2. Bool 2, Means of attainment (sadhana) * 101

8. Book 8, Supernormal powers (vibhuti) 201

4. Book 4, Isolation (kRivalya) 297

Afprndixrs

1. Bibliography of works referred to in this volume • .851

2. Index of quotations in the Comment, in the order of citation 859

8. Inddk of the same grouped according to their sources .... 861

*4. Index of quotations in the Tattva-vli^aradl, in the order of citation 862

6. Index of the*amq grouped according to their sources .... 864

$. Quotations not yet traoed to^heir sources 866

7. Index o# words in the Yoga-eUtna 866


PREFACE


1 . Bmwm for up the work. — It is not without misgiving that one

ventures to render into English the texts of an intricate system which
have never, with the exception of the sutras, been translated in Europe
or America. But the historical importance of those texts, as forming
a bridge between the philosophy of ancient India and the fully developed
Indian * buddhism and the religious thought of to-day in Eastern Asia,
emboldens one to the attempt. For this system, together with the Nyaya
and Vai 9 e 8 )ka systems, when grafted upon the simple practical exhortations
of primitive Buddhism, serves as an introuuction to the logic? 1 end meta-
physical masterpieces of the Mahayana.

3. Difficulties of comprehending the work. — Even after a dozen readings
the import of some paragraphs is not quite clear, such for example as the
first half of the Bhasya on iii. 14. Still more intractable are the single
technical terms, even if the general significance oi the word, superficially
analysed, is clear. This irreducible residuum is unavoidable so long as
one cannot feel at home in that type of emotio&al thinking which culmi-
nates in a superoensuous object of aesthetic contemplation.

3. Difficulties of style. — The Bh&sya and, still more, the Tattva-v&i$aradi
are masterpieces of the philosophical style. They are far from being a loosely
collected body of glosses. Their excessively abbreviated and disconnected
order of words is intentional. The MTmartsft discussed first the meaning of
words (padartka ) ; *then in a distinct section the meaning of the sentences
( v&ky&rtha ) ; and finally and most fully the implication (bhavdrtha) of the
sentences as a whole. Wherever the sentence-form is lacking, I have intro-
duced in' brackets the words needed to make a declarative clause. Much
more obscurity remains in the tyh&v&rtha section of the Bhaeya. For here
many extraneous technical terms are surreptitiously introduced under the
guise of exegesis. Thus polemic with an opponent whose na gie is suppressed
b


Preface [x

creeps into the argument. The allusions are suggestive, but obviously
elusive. The passage at iii. 14 might be quite simple if we had before
us the text which it criticizes.

4. Translation of technical terms.— A system whose subtleties are not
Vhose of Western philosophers suffers disastrously when its characteristic
concepts are compelled to masquerade under assumed names, fit enough for
our linguistic habits, but threadbare even for us by reason of frequent
transpositions. Each time that Purusa is rendered by the word “ soul ”,
every psychologist and metaphysician is betrayed. No equivalent is found
in our vocabulary. The rendering “ Self ” is less likely to cause misunder-
standing. Similarly, and in accordance with the painstaking distinctions
made at the end of ii. 5, it is most important to remember that the term
a-vidya, although negative in form, stands for an idea which is not nega-

i

tive, but positive. Bearing in mind the express instructions of the text,

I have adopted “ undifferentiated-consciousness ” as the translation of avidyd.
Another word, which Professor Garbe discussed more than twenty years
ago (in his translation of the Samkhya-pravacana-bhasya, S. 70, Anm. 1), is
guna. I prefer to translate this term by “ aspect ” rather than by “ con-
stituent ”, because, in addition to the meanings “ quality ” and “ substance ”,
it often seems to have the semantic value of “ subordinate ” as correlated to
pradhana. Three other words sattva and rajas and tamos seem untrans-
latable, unless one is content with half-meaningless etymological parallels.
In another case I have weakly consented to use “ Elevation ” as equivalent
to prasaihkhydru* ; the original word denotes the culmination of a series
of concentrations; the result is the merging of the Self in the object of
contemplation.

6 . Punctuation. — 1 . Quotations from the Sutras are enclosed in single
angular quotation-marks (< >). 9. Quotations from the Bhifya are enclosed
in double angular quotation-marks (4 »). 8 . Quotations from authorita-
tive texts are enclosed inordinary double quotation-markB (“ \ 4. Objec-
tions and questions by opponents, and quotations from unauthoritative texts,
are enclosed in ordinary single quotation-marks (‘ ’). Hyphens haVe bepn
used to indicate the resolution of compound words. A half-parenthesis on*
its side is used to show that two vowels are printed in viola&on of the rules
of euplumic combination (Lanman’s Sanskrit Reader, p. 288).


xi] Preface

0 . Texts and Manuscripts. — The text of the sutras of the Yoga system,
like that of the sutras of all the other five systems, except perhaps the
V4ice$ika, is well preserved; and there is an abundance of excellent
printed editions. The most accessible and the most carefully elaborated
of these books is the one published in the Anand& 9 rama Series and edited
by Kacin&tha Shastri Agfye. Variants from twelve manuscripts, mostly
southern, are printed at the foot of each page ; and Bhojadeva’s Vrtti is
appended ; also the text of.the sutras by itself and an index thereto. Another
edition, in the Bombay Sanskrit Series, by Rajaram Shfistri Bod as, is also an
excellent piece of work. I have, however, made use of the edition by Svami
Balar&ma (Calcutta, Samvat 1947, a.j>. 1890; reprinted 1 in Benares A..D
1908) because it is based on northern manuscripts and because of the valuable
notes in the editor's tippana. Of manuscripts, I have collated, with the kind
permission of the Maharaja, during a charming week’s visit at Jammu just
below the glistening snows above the Pir Fanjal, two of the oldest manu-
scripts in the library of the Baghunath Temple. In Stein’s Catalogue these
are numbered 4375 and 4388 and the former is dated Samvat 1666. Two
other manuscripts were lent me, one by the courtesy of the most learned
Gangadhara Shastri, the other the very carefully written Bikaner manuscript,
sent to me by tlie generosity of the Bikaner government, which proved to
be extremely valuable for disputed readings in the Tattva-vai 94 radL This
latter manuscript seemed to be about a hundred and fifty years old and is
described in Rajendralala Mitra's Catalogue of Sanskrit Manuscripts in the
Library of His Highness the Maharaja of Bikaner (Calcutta, 1880) under
the number 569. An old Sh&rada manuscript, which, by the kind mediation
of Mukundaram Shastri of Shrinagar, was put into my hands, proved,
upon critical examination, to have been so badly corrupted as, on the whole,
not to be worth recording.

7. Acknowledgements. — At the end of one’s task comes the compensation
of looking back to old scenes, and to the friends and helpers who have
watched the progress of the book. First of all I remember the delightful

m the reprint, the pagination is unchanged, but the lines vary a little. Hence there
are some small apparent inaccuracies in the references. The reprint may be bad
from iftrrassbwitz in Leipzig ; it is catalogued there as PSlanjala-danfattatya
yoga-tattva.


Preface [xii

visit on the island of Fbhr, where, besides the long friendly walks npon
the sands, I enjoyed the inestimable opportunity of reciting and reading the
Yoga-sutras with Professor Deussen. The next winter, at Benares, Mr. Arthur
Venis opened the doors of the Sanskrit College to me and with the utmost
generosity smoothed my way through my first winter in India and initiated
me into the methods of many controversial sutras. Since my return he has
always been ready to assist, and I thank him for illuminating for me the
perplexing debate on the sphota in iii. 17. Besides all this I am most
grateful to Him for an introduction to the lamented Shriman Mukunda
Shftstri Adkar, a scholar who has put the wealth of the ancient tradition
and his own ripe scholarship at my disposal for many years.

To many other scholars in Benaree and in Kashmir and in Poona I wish
to express my thanks, especially to Dr. Shripad Krishna Belvalkar and to
Mr. V. V. Sovani. To Professor Arthur W. Byder, of the University of
California, I am also much indebted. Furthermore, my thanks are due to
Colonel George A. Jacob of the Bombay Staff Corps for his courtesy in
searching after quotations, and to Dr. Frederick W. Thomafe of the India
Office Library for similar favours too many to enumerate or to repay.

My deepest insight into this system and into what little I know of the
philosophy of India I owe to Professor Hermann Jacobi of Bonn. Each
visit to the little city on the Rhine adds to my debt of gratitude to him
and reveals to me the beauty of the scholar's life.

On my return from each visit to India I laid the work in its several stages
before Professor Lanman, rily teacher in my student days and now my
colleague. To him I owe the revision of the manuscript for the press
and a comparison of most of the translation, either in manuscript or in
proof, with the original. His rigorous criticism has detected many over-
sights which strike a fresh pair of eyes more quickly than those of the
author. For his ready and ungrudging help through many yean of
intimate friendship my hearty thanks.


Jambs Haughton Woods.


award University,
July, 1914


INTRODUCTION


1. Authorship of the Yoga-sfttr&s. — Identity of Patanjali, author of
the ifitrai, and of Patanjali, author of the Mah&bh&fya, not yet proved.

The opinion in India and in the West that the author of the Yoga-sutras
is also the author of the gseht grammatical comment upon Panini has not
been traced definitely any farther back than to the tenth century. The
Yoga-bha$ya (about a.d. 650 to 850) makes no statement as to the
authorship of the Yoga-sutras, unless the benedictory verse at the be-
ginning be regarded as valid proof that Patafljali wrote the sutras. Still
less is there any statement in the Yoga-sutras about the author of the
And conversely there is no reference in the Mahabhasya
to the author of the Yoga-sutras. On the other hand, there is ground
for believing that the author of the Comment on Yoga-sutra iii. 44 may
have had the author of the Mahabhasya in mind when he quotes a certain
formula and ascribes it to Patanjali. This is the only mention of Patanjali
in the whole Comment. The formula is Ayviasiddha^avayava-bheda^anu-
gatah samuho dravycun; and although it is ascribed to Patanjali (iti
Patanjalik), it has* not been found in the Mahabhasya. Nevertheless the
Yoga-bha§ya does here seem to contain an allusion, more or less direct,
to the theory of the unity of the parts of concrete sub&tances as set forth
in the Mahabhasya. But the allusion is not direct enough to serve by
itself as basis for the assertion that the Yoga-bhasya assumes the identity
of the two Patanjalis. In other words, it does* not justify us in assigning
to the tradition of their identity a date as ancient as that of the Yoga-
bhasya (eighth century). The allusion is, however, significant enough not
to be lost out of mind, pending the search for other items of cumulative
evidence looking in the same direction.

2, Tradition of identity of two Patanjalis not earlier than tenth
oentury.— So far as I know, the oldest text implying that the Patanjali
who wrote the gutras is the same as the Patanjali who wrote the Maha-
bhasya, is stanza 5 of the introduction to Bhojadev&’s comment on the
Yoga-sutras, his R&j amartanda. This I would render as follows :

Victory be to the luminous words of that illustrious sovereign, [Bhoja]
Rana-rangamaUa, who by creating his Orammar, by writing his comment
on the rttaijslan [treatise, the Yoga-sutras], and by producing [a work]
on medicine 'ailed K&jamrg&hka, has— like Pat&fijali — removed defilement
from our speech and minds and bodies.


Introduction


[xiv

Bhoja’s Grammar, bis comment called R&jam&rtai^da, and his medical
treatise are all extant. The stanza must mean that Patafijali and Bhojh
both maintained a standard of correct speech, Patafijali by his Mah&bh&sya
and Bhoja by his Grammar ; and that both made our minds clear of error,
Ritafijali by his Yoga-sfitras and Bhoja by his comment upon them;
and that both made our bodies clear of impurities, Patafijali by his medical
treatise and Bhoja by his Rd.jamrg3.nka.

This certainly implies that the writer of this stanza identified Patafijali
of the Yoga-sutras with Patafijali of the Mah&hhasya. If the writer of
the stanza of the introduction is the same as the Bhojadeva who wrote
the Rajamartanda, we may note that he is called Ranarangamalla here,
Maharaj&dhiraja in the colophon in Mitra’s edition, and Lord of Dhara
or Dharecvara in the colophon in the edition of Agace. There were a
number of Bhojadevas; but whichever of them the author of the Raja-
m&rtanda may be, no one of them is earlier than the tenth century of
our era.

The tradition of the triple activity of Patafijali as a writer on Yoga and
grammar and medicine is reinforced as follows :

Yogena dttasya , padena vacant
malam , qarira&ya tu vdidyakena
yo ’pdkarot, tarn pravaram muninam
Patanjalim pranjalir dnato *smi.

This is cited in Qivarftma's commentary on the Vasavadattft (ed. Bibl. Ind.,
p. 239), which Aufrecht assigns to the eighteenth century. The stanza
occurs also in some MSS. just before the opening words of the Mahabh&sya
(KielhonTs ed., vol. I, p. 503) — that is, not under circumstances giving
any clue to its date. We % may add that an eighteenth-century work,
the Patafijalicarita (v. 25, ed. of Kavyamala, vol. 51), vouches for Patanjali's
authorship in the fields of Yoga and medicine in the following giti
stanza :

Sutrdni yogaqdstre

vaidyakaqddre ca vdrttikdni tatah
krtvd Patanjalimanih

pracaray&m dda jagad idam trdtwq i.

As to the precise medical work of which Patafijali was the author or
with which he had to do, all three stanzas leave us uninformed. JNot
so the following stanza from the introduction to the commentary on<
Caraka, composed by Cakrapani, who (according to Jollyjs book on
Medicine in Biihler’s Grundriss, p. 25) wrote ab^ut 1060 :

PdtanjcUa^Mahdbhd^a-Carakapratisa^hskrtdih
ma no-vdk-kdyadosdndth hantre ' hipataye n amah.


Introduction


xv]

This agrees in sense with the other stanzas, and in addition informs os
that Patafijali's medical work consisted in a revision ( pratiaaimkrta ) of
the great compendium of Caraka.

Accordingly, the Bhoja-stanza appears to be the oldest external evidence
thos far at hand for the tradition as to the identity of the two Patafijalis?
and this tradition is not older than the tenth century, a thousand years
and more after Patafijali the author of the Mah&bh&gya.

8. The identtfoatfan of the two Patafijalis not confirmed by a comparison
of philosophical concepts. — Inconsistent use of terminology and con-
flicting definitions of concepts in the case of a single writer of two books
are frequently explained by the fact that quite distinct subjects are dis-
cussed in the different works. In other cases the subject under discussion
is the same and such an explanation of the inconsistency does not hold
An instance of the latter is the discussion of the nature of substance
( dravya ) in the Toga-system and in the Mahabh&sya. In the commentary
on Yoga-sutra iii. 44 we have the following definition, “ A substance is a
collection of which the different component parts do not exist separately
(xyutaaiddha^a/vayavarbheda^anugatah eamuho dravyam iti Patan-
jalih ),” and the definition is attributed to Patafijali as being consistent with
his sutras. This quotation is of the most technical kind and is in the
same style as the Nyaya- sutras. A similar use of language, for instance,
is found in Ny&yh-sutra ii. 1. 32 (Vizianagaram edition, p. 798). On the
other hand this phrase Is not to be found in the Mah&bh&gya, which
however does repeatedly analyse the concept of substance. And, what
is more important, nothing so precise as the formula attributed (iii. 44)
to Patafijali is found in the Yoga-sutras themselves. Yet substance is
partially defined in Yoga-sutra iii. 14, “ A suBstance ( dharmin )' conforms
itself to quiescent and uprisen and indeterminable external-aspects
(dha/rma)." In this terminology dharmin and dharma of the Yoga-sutra
are substitutions for dravya and guna of the Mahabhasya. In neither
case is the description of substance discriminating. Yet such as it is,
the difference is very slight. In the Mahabhasya it is substance, we
are told, which makes the difference in weight between iron and cotton
of the sam& bulk r„nd dimension (Mah&bh&fyat Kielhom’s edition, vol. II,
p. 866“ ) ; and it is that which causes the difference between penetrability
and impenetrability. Or again it is that which does not cease to be, even
4rhen a succession of properties appears within it (vol. II, p. 366®). Of
what kind ^jjen is this form of being (tattva) 1 The answer is that when
the various reds and other^properties of a myrobalan fruit, for instance,
successively appear within it, we have the right to call it a substance
In short a substance is a concretion of properties ^guna-satitdravo dravyam


Introduction


[xvi

Kielhom, vol. U, p. 366 M ) ; or, as it is put elsewhere, it is a collection
of properties (giiM-aamudaya) such that the various states (bhdvc i) depend
upon it (EL 200 14 ). This collection is loosely paraphrased as being a group
(mukgha) or mass (samuha, II. 356*).

In order, however, to make the comparison of the dharwin of the Yoga-
sutras with the dravya of the Mah&bhasya, we must assume that the
interpretation of the Yoga-sutras, as given in the Comment, correctly
represents the concept in the mind of the author of the sutras. There
might well have been a series of redactions *bf the works of PataBjali,
as of those of Caraka. The later interpretation, such as the formula in
the Comment on iii. 44, might give us the original thought in more tech-
nical form. If this be so, we find a great similarity in the discussion
of the relation of whole and parts in the two works. In the Comment
on the Yoga-sutra iii. 44 a collection (mmuha) is of two kinds: 1. that in
which the parts have lost their distinctness, for example, ‘a tree*, ‘aTierd’,
‘ a grove * ; 2. that in which the parts are distinctly described, for example,
( gods and human beings.’ The second class has two subdivisions: 2*. one
in which the distinctness of parts is emphasized, for example, * a grove of
mangoes’; 2 b . one in which the distinctness is not emphasized, for
example, * a mango-grdve.’ From another point of view a group is two-
fold : # 1. a group whereof the parts can exist separately, for example,
f a grove wherein the trees exist separately from the aggregate whole ;
2. a group whereof the parts canno't exist separately, for example, ‘ a tree ’
or * an atom \ The question now arises, To which of these kinds of groups
does a substance belong? A substance {dravya) is an aggregate of generic
and particular qualities (eamanyor-vi^a-damudaya). This is the definition
of substance from the point of view of its relation to its qualities.
Furthermore, the substance is a group of the second subdivision of the
second kind; it is € a collection of which the different parts do not exist
separately *. This then is the resultant definition of substance according
to the traditional interpretation of the Sutras.

What now is the relation of whole and parts in the Mah&bh&gya, with
especial reference to the substance and its qualities ? A collection (eoratt-
ddya) is loosely paraphrased as being a group {samgha) or mafcs {eamuha,
Kielhom, vol. II, p. 856 6 ). It is, etymologically at least, a concretion of
properties (gu/nardaThdrdva II. 866). It is a collection of parts? the
characteristics of the parts determine the characteristics of the wholtf
<m. 8 M ; avayava/ir arthavadbhih mmudayS apy artfyavajjfo bhamanti
1. 217 ,e ; I. SO®' 7 ; avayave krtam liHgam Bam^iddyouya viqequka/rh bhavati
L 289* r ; and I. 877 n ). All these cases would belong to the ftrsfrlrolxjm-
rion of the second kind of group, whereof the parts can exist separately


Introduction


xvii]

Yet a collection ( samuddya ) is not merely an assemblage of parts, but is
a unity performing functions which the parts by themselves cannot
perform, for example, the blanket, the rope, the chariot, as compared with
the threads, the fibres, the chariot-parts, I. 220 16 ” 23 . All these cases would
belong to the setond subdivision of the second kind of group, wherein
the parts cannot exist separately ( ayutasiddhavayava ). Such then are
the different groups {samuddya).

With regard to the substance ( dravya), its relation to its qualities ( guna )
is analogous to the relation o£tfte parts to the group, I. 220, vart. 11.

Just as a collection {samuddya) is characterized by its parts (avayavat-
maka) III. 3 14 , so the substance {dravya) is characterized by its qualities
(gunatmaka) or is a collection of qualities {gunasamudaya) II. 200 1$ .
This last formula iB given tentatively as a not quite final conclusion ; yet
the definition is not rejected. And elsewhere, I. 41 1 16 , II. 356 17 , II. 415 1S ,
and especially IL 366 14_afl , it is accepted as a working definition. Some
qualities' like sound, touch, colour, and taste belong to all substances; they
at least are present L 246 ff , II. 198 flff . Nothing, however, is said about
a generic-form being required to constitute a substance {drawfa). At the
most it is true tl^gt when one asserts the reality of a species {akrti) one
does not deny the reality of the substance {dravya) ; and conversely.
For each person who makes the assertion, the reality of both is asserted.
Either the species or the substance may be dominant in anything, and
the other subordinate. It is only a matter of the relative emphasis in
the use of words. But the word substance is used for mass of particular
qualities; it is not a concretion of species and quai ties, but is contrasted
with species. Accordingly even if we admit that the formula ascribed
to Patanjali in the Comment on iii. 13 is the correct rendering of the
thought in the mind of Pateftjali, the author of the Yoga-sutra, it is not
true that Patonjali, the author of the Mahabhasya, when speaking of
a substance {dravya) means what is contained in this formula. And
there is nothing here to indicate that the tradition which identifies the
two Pat&njalis must be correct.

4. Bate of the YogMutras between A.B. 300 and A.D. 600.— If Patanjali,
the author of thg Mahabhasya, is not the author of the Yoga- sutras, when
were they written) *The polemic in the Yoga-sutra s themselves against
the nirdlambana school of Buddhists gives the answer. Very probably
in the twt> Yoga-sutras iii. 14 and 16 and certainly in iv. 14 to 21 this
school is attacked. The idealism of the Vijfiana -v&da is attacked in iv. 15,
18, and 17. We «eannet, it is true, maintain that the Vijnana-vdda here
attacked by the Sutra must be* the idealism of Yasubandhu. But the

C [m.o.h. uj


Introduction


[xviii


probability that the idealism is Vasubandhu’s is great. And the earlier
limit would then be the fourth century. There Burely were idealists
before him, just a 9 there were pre-Patafljalan philosophers of yoga. Yet
we have the great authority of Y&caspatim^ra to support the obvious
probability that the school of Vijndnavddine is here combated by
Patafijali. He accepts the interpretation of the Comment which intro-
duces a Vijnanavddinath Vdindfikam (p. 292 17 , Calc, ed.) as being
intended by the author of the Sutra. It is true that the Sutra itself
obviously does not make explicit references to this or any other school.
Still the fact remains that the Sutra is attacking some idealist ; that the
Comment explicitly states the idealist's position ; and that Yficaspatimi^ra
identifies the idealist as being a Vijndnav&din. Elsewhere Y&caspatimi 9 ra
contrasts this school with other Buddhist schools. And the possibility
that he is referring to some Vijndnn-vada other than Yasubandhu’s is
remote. If this be so, it becomes clearer why N&g&rjuna (a little before
A.D. 200), the great expounder of the (Junya-vada, does not, so far as
we have discovered in the portion of the Mulamadhyamika-karik&s thus
far published (fasc I-V), mention Patafijali. Yet from the Chinese transla-
tions of N&g&rjuna it is clear that he was familiar with the philosophical yoga.
For example in the Chinese translation, 1 made in A. D. 472, of N&g&rjuna’s
Up&yak&ufalyahrdaya-(&stra (Nanjio, No. 1257), eight schools of philo-
sophers and logicians are enumerated: 1. Fire-worshippers, 2. Mim& n sakas,
3. Y&icegikas, 4. S&mkhya, 5. Yoga, 6. Nirgranthas, 7. Monists, 8. Pluralists.
There was then a philosophical school of Yoga about a.d. 200* Patafijali
was not unknown to Buddhist-writera, But there is nothing to indicate
that N&g&rjuna is referring to Patafijali, the philosopher, who would then
have preceded both niralambana schools. More probably, we may suppose,
he refers to some one of the authorities on Yoga, such as J&igijavya or
Pafica^ikha who are quoted in the Yoga-bh&fya.

With regard to the later limit, a reference, if historically sound, would
make it certain that Patafijali lived before A.D. 400. In the Mah&va&sa,
chap. 37, vs. 167 (Turnour, p. 250 ; compare Dines Andersen, Pali Header,
I, p. 113, st. 3), we have the words

Vihdrarr ekam dgamma rattitk Pdtanjall-mataik
parivatteti.

The verse refers to Buddhaghosa, who lived in the first half of the fifth


I am indebted to the Rev. Kentoku Hori
of Tokyo for thii reference.

Profeieor Jacobi hai proved the existence
of a philosophical Yoga lystera, retting


upon logical inferences an <9 net upon
intuitive processes, as early as 800 B.O.
(SB. der kflfngL preuse. Ak. dor Wise.,
18. Juli 1911).


Introduction


xix]

century. But unfortunately the Mah&vansa proper, the work of Mah&-
nftma, ends, according to the judgement of Professor Qeiger, at chapter 37,
verse 50, at which point also the tiki stops. The quotation therefore belongs
to the Culavaosa. And if, as Professor Qeiger concludes, the work o£
Mah&n&ma is to be placed in the first quarter of the sixth century, the
verse in question comes later, and probably later to such a degree that its
value as evidence is almost nothing. If this be so, one can easily explain
how it is that Buddhaghosa in the whole Visuddhimagga and in the
Atthasftlini makes no allusidn to Patafijali.

Much more conclusive is the fact that Um&sv&ti in his Tattvarth&dhigama-
sutra ii. 62 refers to Yoga-sutra iii. 22. There can be little doubt of the
reference Bince Umasv&ti’s Bha$ya repeats (Bib. Ind. ed. p. 53 13 and 65 3 )
two of the illustrations given in the Yoga-bh&fya, of the fire set in the dry
grass and of the cloth rolled up into a ball. Other references (Tattvartha-
dhigan»-ctMtra xii. 5 and 6 and ix. 44-46) are quite as likely allusions to
ancient Jain formulae as to Patafijali. By how much Um&sv&ti’s date
precedes that of his commentator, Siddhasena, cannot be said until the
complete text of Siddhasena is published. The date for Siddhasena is Bet
by Professor JacCbi (ZDMG. 60. 289, Leipzig, 1906, reprint p. 3, Eine Jaina-
Dogmatik) at the middle or end of the sixth century. Umasvati precedes
him; and Patafijali the philosopher would not be later than a.d. 500 and
might be much earlier.

On the other hand I should guess that he is not much earlier. Because, for
one reason, as Professor Stcherbatskoi reports, TMgn&ga (about a.d. 550
or earlier) seems to know nothing of him. And secondly because it is
improbable that the Yoga-bh&gya was composed very much later.

Other confirmatory evidence, somewhat later but more certain, would
be the reference to Yoga-sutra i. 38 in M&gha’a Qifupalavadha iv. 55
Professor Hultzsch has kindly pointed out another reference at xiv. 62 of
M&gha’s poem. In respect of the date of M&gha, Professor Jacobi concluded
(WZKM. vol. Ill, p. 121 ff.) that Magha lived about the middle of the sixth
century. But Mr. Qaurishankar Ojha’s discovery of the Vasantgadh inscrip-
tion dated Vikrama 682 adds new and most convincing evidence. Professor
Kielhom (Gottfnger Nachrichten, philol.-histor. Klasse, 1906, Heft 2, p. 146)
is of the opinion th&t M&gha, the gra. Ison of a minister of the King Varrna-
l&ta, must be placed at about the second half of the seventh century.

Still latter, G&udap&da (about A.D. 700), in his comment on the S&mkhya-
K&fik& 28, quoteB Yoga-sutra ii. 30 and 82 and names Patafijali as the
author.

The conclusion would be then that Patafij&li’s sutras were written at some
time iu. the fourth or fifth century of our era.


Introduction


(xx

5. Sate of tko Toga-bh&aya botwosn A.D. UO and A.D. 850.— Of this

the limits are easier to fix. Three pieces of evidence help us to determine
the earliest limit.

cA« The Comment could not in any case be much earlier than A.D. 860.
For (at the end of iii. 53 or 52) it quotes Var§aganya in the words

murli-iyavadhi-jati-bkeddbhdvdn ndati mulaprthaktvam iti Vdr§aganyah.

And again (iv. 18) the Comment quotes from datr&nuqasanam as follows :

Gundndrh paramarh rupam na dvstipatham rcchati
yat tu drstipatham prdptant tan mdyeva sutucchakam.

Fortunately V&caspatimitjra offers us the information that this is an exposi-
tion of the teaching of the Sha§ti-tantra. And furthermore, in the Bh&mati
on Vedanta-sutra ii. 1. 2. 3 (Nirnayas&gara edition, 1904, p. 852, line 7 of
the Bh&mati), we are told that it is V&rsaganya, the founder of tfie Yoga
system, who said these words ( ata eva yoga-yxstram vyutpadayitd dha vma
Bhagavdn Vdrmga.iyah “ gunandm paramam . .

Thus the Comment contains two quotations from V&rsaganya. There is
little reason to doubt that V&rsaganya was an oldei^con temporary of
Vasubandhu. Professor Takakusu 1 by a combination of dates centering
about the Chinese translation of Paramarthas Life of Vasubandhu estimated
that Vasubandhu lived from about A.D. 420 till 500! Professor Sylvain
L^vi (Asahga, vol. II, pp. 1 and 2) .accepted the result of these discussions.
But Professor Wogihara 2 had conjectured that the date of Vasubandhu
must be set back. An elaborate confirmation of his suggestion is now
offered by Monsieur Noel Peri, 3 who places the death of Vasubandhu
at A.D. 350; and by Mf. B. Shiiwo, 4 who estimates that Vasubandhu’s
life was from A.D. 270 to 350. This is a return to the fourth century,
the date for Vasubandhu which Biihler 6 favoured. Accordingly the Bh&sya
must in any case be later than A. D. 350.

B. Another kind of evidence which helps us to determine yet more closely
the earliest limit is the fact that the decimal system is used by way of


Bulletin de rticole Fran^Be d’Extr$me-
Orient, 1904, tome IV, pp. 48 and 56 ;
and JEAS. Jan. 1905, pp. 16-18 of the
reprint.

Asanga's Bodhisattv^hhumi, Leipzig,
1908, p. 14.

“A propos de la date de Vasubandhu’ 1
(Bulletin de l'£cole Fian^aite d’Ei-
trtme Orient, tome XI, 1911, p. 839).


‘Doctor Takakoau and Monsieur Peri
on the date of Vasubandhu " in the
Tetsugaku Zasshi, vol. 27, Nov.-Dec. f
1912. I am indebted to Mr.H. Tabula
for this. ’ .

4 Die indischen Inschriften und das
Alter der incTitche? Kunst-Poesie,” in
Sitzungsberichte der Kaiserl. Akad.
der Wiss, Wien, 1890, p- 79£


Introduction


xxi]

illustration in the Comment on iiL 13. The oldest epigraphic 1 instance
of the use. of the decimal system is in the Gurj&ra inscription of a.d. 595.
With one obscure and doubtful exception, there is no literary evidence
of the use of the decimal Bystem before Var&hamihira, who lived in the
sixth century. • If we consider this kind of evidence alone, it is improbable*
that the Comment precedes the year A.D. 500; it is probably later.

O. There is evidence which determines that the earliest limit of the
Comment is still later, as late as the seventh century. In the stanza
iv. 55 of the Qifup&lav&d^cb' by M&gha (circa a.d. 650), not only Yoga-
sutra i. 88 is referred to, but also the words of the avatdrana in the
Comment. In the Comment the parikarma of the citta is enjoined. This
is an uncommon term. Even if citta-parikamma might be found in
Buddhist books, the fact that it here immediately precedes the quotation
from sutra i. 38, makes it almost certain that such a mixture of termino-
logy is impossible, in fact the stanza is full of specific yoga-terms in
each line to such an extent that reference to any other system, much
less to some heretical book, is quite excluded. The point is then that
the words citta-jxiriJearma together with the first word of the sutra
have »been wrought into the metre of the poem as one word. The poet,
as we saw, probably lived in the second half of the seventh century. If
this is trustworthy evidence, the Comment cannot be earlier than a. d. 650
D. The later limit is set by the date of V&caspatimi$ra’s Ny&ya Index.
a.d. 841 — see below, page xxiii.

Accordingly the date of the Bh&gya would be somewhere between about
a.d. 650 and about a.d. 850.

«. Sat* of Vacaopatiinigva’s Tattva-vMgimJfr about A.D. 850.— In the

verse at the close of his Bh&mati-nibaqdha, V tca^atijn^ca gives the names
of his works, seven in number :

Tan NyayakaniJcd-TattvammiJcsd-TaUvabindubhih »

Yan Nydya-S&ihkhya-Yogdn&m, Ved&ntdn&ih nibandkandik ii
Samacdifath mahat punyath, tat phalam puskalam mayd l
Samarpitam; athditena priyaidfh Parameqvarah il.

The Nydya*)drttika-tdtioarya~ttkd is on the Nyaya system ; thei Taitva-

See p. 78, of Bhhler's Palaeographie, in “ place-value ” ii utilized. Moat of

hia Orondriaa. In hia Notea on Indian these he thinks are worthless aa evi-

Ifatbematios (Journal of the Asiatic dence for the introduction of the

•Society of Bengal, July 1807, vol. Ill, decimal system. The same conclusion

number 7, p. 482, note 5), Mr. G. R. is reached in a later article (JRAS.

Kaye gives a*tist dt epigraphies! in- July 1910, p. 749).

stanoes of the notation in Vhich


Introduction


[xxii

k&wnudl is on the S&ihkhya system ; the Tattm-vdiqdradi is on the Yoga;
the Nyaya-kanikd, a gloss on the Vidhi-iriveka, is on the Mim&ns&; the
Tattva-bindu is on Bha^a's exposition of the Mim&fisS. ; the Tattva-aamityd
and the Bhdmatl are both on the Ved&nta.

?n the same verse at the end of the Bhamati he speaks of hhnself as living
under King Nfga :

tasmin mahvpe mahanlyakirtdw Qr^/rrui n- Nrce ’kdr-i maya nibandhah.
Unfortunately there is (as Professor Liidere informs me) no epigraphical
record of this king and we cannot say when', or where he lived. V&cas-
patimi<jra was a native of Mithila, 1 the northern part of Tirhut, and the
latter part of his name would indicate, as Fitz-Edward Hall has pointed
ont, that he was a native of Oangetic Hindustan.

In, the introduction to his edition of the Kuaum&fij&li (Calcutta, 1864, p. x),
Professor Cowell thinks that V&caspatimifra lived in the tenth century.
Barth (Bull, des Bel. de l'lnde, 1893, p. 271) would set him at the end of
the eleventh or beginning of the twelfth century. Professor Macdonell
(Hist, of Sansk. Lit., p. 393) places him soon after a.d. 1100.

These judgements rest, more or less, upon the opinion that the R&ja-varttika,
quoted by V&caspatimifra in his Samkhya-tattva-k&umudi on Karika 72,
was composed by, or for, Bhoja Raja, called Ranaranga Malta, Kmg of Dh&r&
(1018-1060). This opinion accords with the assertion of Pandit K&t;in&tha
Qastri A^aputra of Benares College, who assured Dr. Fitz-Edward Hall that
a manuscript of the R&ja-v&rttika had been in his possession several years
(Hall's edition of the S&mkhya-pravacana-bhasya, 1856, p. 33). But the
visible basis for this assertion that the R&ja in question is Bhoja is not
now at hand.

Similarly, Professor Pathak in his article on Dharmakirti and Shankarft-
c&rya (see Journal of the Bombay Branch RAS., vol. XXVHI, no. 48, 1891,
p. 89, and also the table in the same Journal, p. 285, no. 49, note 74) is
content to rest his conclusions as to the date of V&caspatimiqra upon the
fact tht (yribb&rati, the pupil of Bodh&ranya, in his edition of the S&mkhya-
umud* t Benures, Jainaprabbakara Press, 1889, p. 182), prints, in a
note at the enl, ih« word Bhoja before the word R&ja-v&rttika. Thus it
wouid appear that this varttika is by Bhojar&ja and that V&caspatimifra,
who quotes it, must be later than Bhojar&ja, that is, later than the tenth
century. But we are not at all sure from other manuscript evidence
that- the word Bhoja should be read before the word R&ja-v&rttiJ^a, and
the date of this R&ja-v&rttika is therefore undetoi mined.

1 See the beginning of the Nyayaautro- pree&d ^Setri, Votioeaof SanskritMSS.,
ddbarah by VUcaspatunifra QrivAca- Second Series, vol. II, p. 98).
fDOtwciena Mithtltfrara’ilrinS (Hava-


Introduction


xxiii]

By way of contrast we now have the direct statement of Vacaspatimfyra
that he finished his Ny&yasuclnibandha in the year 898. For on the first
page of this appendix to the Nyaya-v&rttika, as given in the edition of the
Ny&ya- v&rttika in the Bibliotheca Indica, 1907, he says that he is about to
compose an index for the Ny&ya-eutras

Qrtvacaepatirnifrena, mayd «ud vidhdsyate.

And in the colophon ho says that he made the work for the delight of
the intelligent in the year 898.

Ny&yamcl mbandfio ’sav akdri mdkiyam mude

Qrivacaspat imiqreiia, vasv-anka-vaau-vatMre.

It remains to determine whether this year belongs to the era of Vikrama-
ditya or of Qaliv&hana. In the introduction to his edition of Six Buddhist
Ny&ya Tracts (Bibl. Ind., 1910), Mah&mahopadby&ya Haraprasad Shastri
gives the date as belonging to the second era, to i^aka 898. He says (p. iii)
that the author of the Apohasiddhi “ takes a good deal of pains in elaborately
refuting the theory of Vaeaspatimipra”, and that he does “ not quote or refute
Udayana, whose date is Caka 905 = A.D. 988”. In his Notices of Sanskrit
Manuscripts, second Beries, vol. II, p. xix, this distinguished scholar had
come to* the s«me conclusion with regard to the era to which this date of
V&caspatimi^ra should be assigned. This conclusion seemed doubtful to
Mr. Nilmani Chakravarti, M.A., in his valuable Chronology of Indian
Authors, a supplement to Miss Duff’s Chronology of India (Journal of the
Asiatic Society of Bengal, voL 3, 1907, p. 205). And one cannot refrain
from thinking that the other era is presumably mo T e likely for a Northern
writer; and that more especially a great difficulty created if only seven
years are supposed to separate Vacaspatimi^ra and D jayana. The difference
between the two philosophers is of such a kind that one must assume a much
longer interval between their writings. And furthermore, would it not be
an extraordinary coincidence that the author of the Apohasiddhi should
be so minutely familiar with the work of V&caspatimicra, and yet not
have the dimmest sense of the existence of Udayana, the light of a new
dawn in the world of Ny&ya? Accordingly, the date of Vacaspati’s
Ny&ya-index would appear to be Samvat 898 = a.d. 841 ; and the dates
of his six other works, including the Tattva-vai^&radi, may be presumed
to be not manjr years earlier or later. We are therefore safe in making
the statement that the date of the * attva- v&ic^Lradi is not far from the
middle of tne ninth century, or approximately a.d. 850.


ANALYTICAL SUMMARY OF THE YOGA-SUTRAS

BOOK FIRST— CONCENTRATION

PAGE


1. Reasons for beginning the book * 8

2. Characteristic mark of yoga is the restriction of fluctuations . . 8

8. Intelligence in the state of restriction 13

4. Intelligence in the state of emergence 14

5. There are five fluctuations ( . 17

C. List of the five fluctuations 19

7. The first fluctuation is the source of valid ideas .... 20

8. The second fluctuation is misconception 24

9. The third fluctuation is predicate relation ‘26

10. The fourth fluctuation is sleep . . . . . . . 29

1 1. The fifth fluctuation is memory 81

12. «Two methods of restriction of the fluctuations 34

13. The first method is practice 84

14. The confirmation of practice 85

15. The second method is passionlessness 36

16. Characteristic mark of the highest pa&sionlessness .... 37

17. Result of these methods is conscious concentration of four kinds . 40

18. Characteristic mark of Unconscious concentration • . ♦ . 41

19. A fir*t way of approach to unconscious concentration ... 48

20. A «'xond way of approach to the same as used by yogins ... 45

21. Gradations of methods and intensities 47

22. Yet another way of approach • . 48

23. Devotion to the Iovara is this way of approach .... 48

24. Characteristic mark of the devotion to the Invars .... 49

25. The Ifvara is unexcelled in his power of knowing .... 55

26. The l 9 vara has no linrit v time . . . . * , . . 59

27. The symbolic expression of the Ifvara 60

28. Description of the devotion • . 61

29. Two results of this concentration * 62

30. List of nine obstacles removed 63

«•

81. Five accompaniments of the obstacles 66

82. Prevention of these by calming the mind-stuff ... .66


xx^] Analytical Summary of the Yoga-sutras

88. Four ways of calming the mind-stuff

84. Breathing^ calm the mind-stuff

85. Fixed attention steadies the mind

86* Fixed attention to processes of thought steadies the mind .

87. Attention Jo the mind-stuff of great yogine ....

8& Fixed attention to objects seen in sleep

80. Contemplations of the most desired object ....

40. Mastery of the mind-stuff the result of attentions

41. Balanced state of the steady mind

42. Balanced state with regsri to a coarse object ....

43. Balanced state with regard to a super-coarse object .

44. Balanced states with regard to subtile and super-subtile objects

45. Extent of the existence of subtile objects

46. These balanced states are seeded concentrations

47. Result of the super-subtile balanced state

48. Truth -bearing insight

40. Object of the truth-bearing insight

50. Latent impressions from this insight inhibit others .

51. Seedless concentration is the restriction of even these impressions


page

71

72
72
74

76
7i

rnn

t 4

77
77
M)
82
68
01

92

93

94
94
96
98


BOOK SECOND— MEANS OF ATTAINMENT


1. Yoga of action 103

2. Result of yoga of action 106

8. The five hindrances 106

4. The root of the other hindrances is undifferentiated -consciousness . 106

6. Undifferentiated-consciousness is the first hindrance . .110

6. Feeling-of-person&lity is the Becond hindrance 116

7. Passion is the third hindrance 116

8. Hatred is the fourth hindrance 117

9. Will-to-live is the fifth hindrance 117

10. Remedy for hindrances when subtile U&

11. Remedy* for fluctuations which result from hinjirances . . .120

12. Latent-deposit of karma the cause of hindrances .... 121

18. QQhzee kinds of fruition of karma 122

44. Results of fruition 161

15. Pleasure to be rejected, inasmuch as it is intermingled with pain • 162

16. A. FuturS pain avoidable 169

d [s-f i»]


<• Analytical Summary of the Yoga-sutras (xxvi

PAGE

17. B. Cause of future pain. Correlation of seer and seen . . . 140

18. Nature of an object for sight 144

19. Subdivision of objects for sight 148

20. Nature of seer 154

21. Object for sight subordinate to seer 157

' 22? Plurality of objects for sight 159

28. Nature of the correlation 160

24. Undifferenti&ted-consciousness the cause of the correlation . . 166

25. C. The escape from pain is the isolation of the f seer .... 168

26. D. The method of escape is discriminative insight .... 169

27. Seven forms of discriminative insight 170

28. Means of attaining discrimination 172

29. The eight aids to yoga 177

30. i. The five abstentions 178

81. Qualified abstentions 180

82. ii. The five observances 181

88. Inhibition of obstacles to abstentions and observances . . . 188

84. Nature of perverse-considerations 188

86. Consequences of abstention from injury 186

86. Consequences of abstention from lying 186

87. Consequences of abstention from stealing . . . ^ . . 186

88. Consequenees of abstention from incontinence 187

89. Consequences of abstention from property 187

40. Consequences of observance of cleanliness . 188

41. Further consequences of cleanliness 188

42. Consequences of observance of contentment 189

48. Consequences of observance of self-castigation 189

44. Consequences of observance of study 190

46. Consequences of observance of devotion to the I?vara . . .190

46. iii. Nature of. postures 191

47. Ways to success in postures 192

48. Consequences of postures 192

49. iv. Nature of restraint of the breath 198

50. Three kinds of restraint of the breath 198

61. A fourth kind of restraint of the breath 195

52. Consequences of restraint of the breath 196

58. A further consequence is fixed attention • . 197

54. ▼. Nature of fixed attention 197

55. Consequences of fixed attention ^198


xxvii] Analytical Summary of the Yoga-sutras


BOOK THIRD— SUPERN OEM AL POWERS


PAGE

1. vL Characteristic mark of fixed-attention 203

2. vii. Characteristic mark of contemplation 204

8. via. Characteristic mark of concentration ,204

4. The three last together are called constraint 205

6. Consequences of mastery of constraint 203

6. Three stages of constraint ( ,* 206

7. Last three aids more direct than first five 207

8. Even last three less direct than seedless concentration 208

9. Characteristic mark of restricted mutations 208

10. Peaceful flow of mind-stuff due to subliminal impressions . 210

11. Nature of mutations in concentration 21 1

12. Characteristic mark of focused mutations 211

18. Mutations of external-aspect and time-form and intensity . 212

14. Characteristic mark of a substance 224

16. Reason for the order of mutations 229

16. Consequences of constraint upon the mutations . . . 232

17. Consequences wf discriminating things from words and ideas . . 233

18. Consequences of direct perception of subliminal impressions . . 247

19. Consequences of direct perception of presented-ideas of another 249

20. Object of such a presented -idea not perceived 249

21. Consequences of constraint upon the form of the body . . , 250

22. Consequences of constraint upon karma ...... 251

28. Consequences of constraint upon acts of sympath * 262

24. Consequences of constraint upon powers . . 253

26. Consequences of constraint upon luminous processes . . v 263

26. Consequences of constraint upon the sun . . 254

27. Consequences of constraint upon the moon 260

28. Consequences of constraint upon the zenith 260

29. Consequences of constraint upon the navel 260

80. Consequences of constraint upon the throat ..... 260

81. Consequences of constraint upon the tortoise-tube . .261

82. Consequences of constraint upon the radiance in the head 261

88. Consequences of constraint upon the vividness . . .261

84. Consequences of constraint upon f^e heart . • 262

86. Consequences of constraint upon knowledge of the Self 262

86. Cohsequences of direct perception of the Self 265

*8?. Supernormal powers obstructive to concentration .... 265

88. Mind-etuff^enetratea into the body of another 266

.89. Consequences of constraint eipon Uddna 267


Analytical Summary of the Yoga-&utra& [xxviii

FAG*

40. Consequences of constraint upon Samdna 268

41. Consequences of constraint upon relation between the ear and air • 268

42. Consequences of constraint upon relation between body and air • 271

48* Dwindling of the obscuration of light 272

44. Atomization and other supernormal powers . ♦ w . 278

4 46. Perfection of body 278

46. Method of mastering the organs 280

47. Consequences of mastering the organs ...... 280

48. Mastery over all matter . . c 282

49. Means of attaining Isolation . • ♦ » • • 288

60. Means of reducing opposition to Isolation ..... 284

61. Consequences of constraint upon moments and their sequence . 286

62. Object of discriminative perception 287

68. Characteristic mark of discriminative perception .... 290

64. Consequences of the discrimination 294

56. Isolation is purity of the sattva and of the Self 296


BOOK FOURTH-ISOLATION


1. Different causes of supernormal powers .

«

•

299

2. Reasons for mutations into another birth ....

•

•

800

8. No impulse given by karma

•


801

4. Created mind-stuffs .

•


808

5. Mind-stuff which gives the impulse

•


808

6. No latent-impressions in created mind-stuffs


804

7. Varieties of karma


805

8. Latent impressions conform to karma ....


806

9. Continuity of impressions.


•

807

l’O. Latent impressions from time without beginning -


•

809

11. Termination of impressions


•

814

12. External-aspects in all three time-forms ....


815

18. Extemsl-aspects phenomenslized or subtile


817

14. Activity of a thing due to a single mutation .


•

818

16. Things and mind-stuff oq different levels ....

• *

•

828

16. Things not dependent Upon . single mind-stuff.


•

825

17. Rejection of idealism .......


827

18. The Self undergoes no mutations

9

a

828

19. Mind-stuff doss not illumine itself


%

a

82B •

20. Fallacy in confusing thinking-substance and thing . , .

l *

a

880

21. One mind-stuff not illumined by another ...

•

a

881


zxix] Analytical Summary of the Yogariutras

PA OK


23. Intelligence aware of its own mind-stuff 882

28. Mind-stuff, when affected, oapable of perceiving all objects 884

24. Intelligence distinct from mind-stuff ...... 886

25. Change in the habits of the mind-stuff 887

26. Change in the nature of the mind-stuff 888

27. Disturbances in the discriminating mind 889

28. Escape even from subliminal-impressions 840

29. Means of attaining the Rain«cloud 840

80. Consequences of the Raimofoud 841

81. Condition of mind-stuff in the Rain-cloud 842

82. End of the sequences of mutations 843

88. Characteristic of a sequence 343

84. Nature of Isolation * 847


TRANSLATION OF THE YOGA-SUTRAS .WITHOUT
THE COMMENT OR THE EXPLANATION


Being the SOtras translated in groups, together with

GROUP-HEADINGS ADDED BY THE TRANSLATOR

BOOK FIRST-CONCENTRATION

Goal of Concentration

i. 1-4, Yoga is the concentration which restricts the fluctuations. Freed
from them, the Self attains to self-expression.

i. 1 Now the exposition of yoga [is to be made], i. 2 Yoga is the
restriction of the fluctuations of mind-stuff, i. 8 Then the Seer [that is,
the Self] abides in himself, i. 4 At other times it [the Self] takes the
same form as the fluctuations [of mind-stuff ].

Forms of the mind-stuff

i. £-11. The fluctuations are all exposed to attack from the hindrances
and are five in number: 1. sources-of-valid-ideas"; 2. misconceptions;
3. predicate-relations; 4. sleep; 5. memory,

i. 5 The fluctuations are of five kinds and are hindered or unhindered,
i. 6 Sources-of-valid-ideas and misconceptions and predicate-relations and
sleep and memory, i. 7 Sources-of-valid-ideas are perception and inference
and verbalr communication, i 8 Misconception is an erroneous idea
not based on that form [in respect of which the misconception is
entertained], i. 9 The predicate-relation ( vikalpa ) is without any [corre-
sponding perceptible] object and follows as a result of perception or
of words, i. 10 Sleep is a fluctuation of [mind-stuff] supported by
the cause of the [transient] negation [of the waking and the dreaming
fluctuations], i. 11 Memory is not-adding-surreptitioualy to a once
experienced object.

Methods of restricting fluctuations

L 18-16. An orientation of the whole life with reference to one ictaa; £n
emotional transformation corresponding to this focused state.

i. 12 The restriction of them is by [means] of practice lnd passionless
ness. i. 18 Practice is [repeated] exertion to the end tha^[the mind*-


xxxi] Translation of the Yoga-sutras

stuff] shall have permanence in this [restricted state], i 14 But this
[practice] becomes confirmed when it has been cultivated for a long time
and uninterruptedly and with earnest attention, i. 15 Passionlessness
is the consciousness of being master on the part of one who has rid
himftelf of thirst for either seen or revealed objects, i. 16 This [passion-
lessness] is highest when discernment of the Self results in thirstles^iess
for qualities [and not merely for objects].

Kinds of concentration

i. 17 - 18 . Four kinds bf conscious concentration, and the concentration of
subliminal-impressions alone.

i. 17 [Concentration becomes] conscious [of its object] by assuming
forms either of deliberation [upon coarse objects] or of reflection upon
subtile objects or of joy or of the feeling-of-personality. i. 18 The other
[concentration which is not conscious of objects] consists of subliminal-
impressions only [after objects have merged], and follows upon that
practice which effects the cessation [of fluctuations].

Degree* of approach to concentration

L 10 - 88 . 'the worldly approach, the spiritual approach; the combina-
tions of methods and intensities ; and the devotion to the highest Self.

i. 19 [Concentration not conscious of objects] caused by worldly, [means]
is the one to which the discarn&te attain and to which those | whose
bodies] are resolved into primary -matter attain, i, 20 [Concentration
not conscious of objects,] which follow* upon belief [And] energy [and]
mindfulness [and] concentration [and^ insight, is that to which the
others [the yogins] attain, i. 21 For the keenly intense, [concentration]
is near. i. 22 Because [this keenness^ is gentle or moderate or keen,
there is a [concentration] superior even to this [near kind], i 23 Or
[concentration] is attained by devotion to the I$vara.

Analysis of the highest Self

®*- 88 . Unique quality of the highest Self; proof of His existence, His
temporal priority ; His symbolical realization.

i. £4 Untouched by hind ranees or karmas ox fruition or by latent-deposits,
the I(vara is a special kind of Self. i. 25 In this [Igvara] the germ of
the omniscient is at its utmost excellence, i. 26 Teacher of the Primal
[Sages] also, forasmuch as [with Him] there is no limitation by time,
i 27 The word-expressing Him is the Mystic-syllable, i. 28 Repetition
of ft and\*fleotion upon its meaning [should be made].


Translation of the Yoga-sutras [xxxii

Obstacles to the calming of the mind-stuff

i. 90-34. The inner sense is exposed to distractions which may be over-
come by focusing the mind; by the cultivation of sentiments; one may
also practise breathings.

i. 29 Thereafter comes the right-knowledge of him who thinks in an
inverse way, and the removal of obstacles, i. 80 Sickness and languor
and doubt and heedlessness and worldliness and erroneous perception and
failure to attain any stage [of concentration] and instability in the state
[when attained]— these distractions of the mind-stuff are the obstacles,
i. 81 Pain and despondency and unsteadiness of the body and inspiration
and expiration are the accompaniments of the distractions, i. 82 To
check them [let there be] practice upon a single entity, i. 88 By the
cultivation of friendliness towards happiness, and compassion towards
pain, and joy towards merit, and indifference towards demerit, i. 84 Or
[the yogin attains the undisturbed calm of the mind-stuff] by expulsion
and retention of breath.

Attainment of Stability

i. 35-39. Suitable objects for fixed-attention and contemplation.

i 85 Or [he gains stability when] a sense-activity arises connected with
an object [and] bringing the central-organ into a relation of stability,
i 86 Or an undistressed [and] luminous [sense-activity when arisen
brings the central-organ into a relation of stability} L 87 Or the mind-
stuff '[reaches the stable state] by having as its object [a mind-stuff] freed
from passion. L 88 Or [the mind-stuff reaches the stable state] by
having as the supporting-object a perception in dream or in sleep, i. 39 Or
[the mind-stuff reaches the Btable state] by contemplation upon any Buch
an object as is desired

Mastery and concentration

i. 40 47. Classification of concentration with reference to different single
objects or absence of objects, or to the mental act, or to a fusion of object
and knower.

i. 40 His mastery extends from the smallest atom to the greatest
magnitude, i. 41 [The mind-stuff] from which, as from a precious gem,
fluctuations have dwindled away, reaches the bslanoed-Btate, which, in
the case of the knower or of the process-of-knowing or of the object-
to-be-known, is in the state of resting upon [one] of these [three] end in
the state of being tinged by [one] of these [three]. L 42 Of [thesft
balanced-states] the state-balanced with deliberation i^ confused by
reason of predicate-relations between wqrds and intended-objects and


{xxxiii without the Comment or the Explanation

ideas. L 48 When the memory is quite purified, [that balanced-state] —
which is, as it were, empty of itself and which brightens [into conscious
knowledge] as the intended-object and nothing more — is super-delibera-
tive. L 44 By this same [balanced-state] the reflective and the super-
reflective •[balanced-states] are also explained, i. 45 The subtile object
also terminates in unresoluble-primary-matter (alinga). i. 46 These
same [balanced-states] are the seeded concentration. L 47 When there
is the clearness of the super-reflective [balanced-state, the yogin gains]
internal undisturbed calqi.

Normative insight

i. 48-51. After-effects of concentrated insight efface after-effects of con-
centration upon objects.

i. 48 In this [concentrated mind-stuff] the insight is truth-bearing,
i. 49 Has another object than the insight resulting from things heard
or from inferences, inasmuch as its intended-object is a particular

i. 50 The subliminal-impression produced by this [super- reflective
balanced-state] is hostile to other subliminal-imprebsions. i. 51 When

. this [subliminal-impression] also is restricted, since all is restricted, [the
yogin gaind] seedless concentration.

BOOK SECOND— MEANS OF ATTAINMENT

Novices for weakening r .jtdrances

i i. 1-11. Aids serviceable to Che beginner who is on the path to con-
centration.

ii. 1 Self-castigation and study and devotion to the Iyvara are the Yoga
of action, ii. 2 For the cultivation of concentration and for the
attenuation of the hindrances. ii. Undifferentiated -conscious ness
(avidyu) and the feeling-of-personality and passion and aversion and the
will-to-live are the five hindrances, ii. 4 Undifferentiated-oonsciousness
is the field for the others whether they be dormant or attenuated or
intercepted or sustained ii. 5 The recognition of the permanent, of
the pure, of pleasure, ana of a self in whatsis impermanent, impure,
pain, and not-self is undifferentiated-consciousness (avidya). ii. 6 When
the power of seeing and the power by which one sees have the
appearance of being a single self, [this is] the feeling-of-personality.
ii 7 Paggion is that which dwells upon pleasure, ii 8 Aversion is that
whict- dwells upon paiifc ii. 9 The will-to-live sweeping on [by the
force* of] its own nature exists in this form even in the wise, ii 10

C [■.©.». it]


Translation of the Yoga-sutras [xxxiv

These [hindrances when they have become subtile] are to be escaped
by the inverse-propagation, ii. 11 The fluctuations of these should 1 m
escaped by means of contemplation.


li. 12-14. Origin of karma in hindrances; result of karma in state-oi-
existeuce, length of life, and pleasure or pain.

ii. 12 *The latent-deposit of karma has its root in the hindrances and may
be felt in a birth seen or in a birth unseen. iL 18 So long as the root
exists, there will be fruition from it [that is] birth [and] length-of-life
[and] kind-of-experience. ii. 14 These [fruitions] have joy or extreme
anguish as results in accordance with the quality of their causes whether
merit or demerit.

All is pain

ii. 15. Present and future and past correlations with objects result un-
avoidably in pain.

ii. 15 As being the pains which are mutations and anxieties and
subliminal-impressions, and by reason of the opposition of the fluctuations
of the aspects (puna ), — to the discriminating all is nothing but pain.

There is an escape

iL 1C. Only yogins are sensitive to future pain. This may be avoided in
that it has not expressed itself in actual suffering.

ii. 16 That which 13 to be escaped is pain yet to come.

Cause of pain

ii. 17-24. The Seer-sight relation implies 1. complexes of potential
stresses between aspects (yuna) and between sense-organs and elements,
2. the power of the Seer who is undefiled by aspects, 8. the actual correla-
tion until the purpose of the Seer, which is to differentiate consciousness, is
completed.

ii. 17 The correlation of the Seer and the object-of-sight is the cause
of that which is to be escaped, ii, 18 With a disposition to brightness
and to activity and to inertia, and with the elements and the organs
as its essence, and v ith its purpose the experience and the liberation
[of the Self], — this is the object-of-sight. ii, 19 The particularized and
the unparticularized [forms] and the resoluble only [into primary matter]
and irresoluble-primary-matter — are the divisions of the aspects \juna).
ii. 20 The Seer who is nothing but [the power of seeing], although'
undefiled ( ptddha ), looks upon the presented idea.* ii,fli The object-
of-Bight is only for the sake of it [the^Self], ii. 92 Though it has #


xxx v] without the Comment or the Explanation

ceased [to be seen] in the case of one whose purpose is accomplished,
it has not ceased to be, since it is common to others [besides himself],
ii. 28 The reason for the apperception of what the power of the
property and of what the power of the proprietor are, is correlation,
ii. 24 The •reason for this [correlation] is undifferentiated-consciousness ,
(avidyA).

The escape

i L 95. Positive state of Isolation follows the ending of the correlation.

ii. 26 Since this jnon-sigbi] does not exist, there is no correlation. This
is the escape, the Isolation of the Seer.

Means of escape

ii. 96-97. The act of discrimination leading up to the act of insight.

ii. 26 The means of attaining escape is unwavering discriminative
discernment, ii. 27 For him [there is] insight sevenfold and advancing
in stages to the highest

Sight aids to yoga

ii. 98-99. To purify the aspects and to intensify intuitive thinking there
are five indirect aids and three direct aids.

ii. 28 After the aids to yoga have been followed up, when the impurity
has dwindled, there is an enlightenment of perception reaching up to the
discriminative discernment, ii. 29 Abstentions and observances and
postures and regulations-of-th e-breath ard withdrawal- of-the-senses and
fixed -attention and contemplation and co mtration.

First indirect aid: i. Five abstentions
ii. 30-31. The elements and degrees of morality in the form of prohibi-
tions.

ii. 80 Abstinence from injury and from falsehood and from theft and from
incontinence and from acceptance of gifts are the abstentions, ii. 31 When
they are unqualified by species or place time or exigency and when
[covering] all [these] classes — there is the Great Course-of-conduct.

Second indirect aid: ii. Five observances

ii. 39. Advances in morality in the form of voluntary action.

ii. 82 Cleanliness and contentment and self-caStigation and study and
devotion to the fyvara are the observances.

Besnlts of the abstentions and observances

ii. 33-45. Perqj^ten^ inhibitions of certain kinds reorganize an increase of
activity of the opposite kind.

ii^ 88 11 there be inhibition by perverse-considerations, there should be


Translation of the Yoga-sutras [xxxvi

cultivation of the opposites. ii. 84 Since perverse-considerations such
a® injuries, whether done or caused to be done or approved, whether
ensuing upon greed or anger or infatuation, whether mild or moderate
or vehement, find their unending consequences in pain and lack of
thinking, there should be the cultivation of their opposites, ii 85 As
soon as he is grounded in abstinence from injury, his presence begets
a suspension of enmity, ii 86 As soon as he is grounded in abstinence
from falsehood, actions and consequences depend upon him. ii. 87 As
soon as he is grounded in abstinence from theft, all jeweh approach him.
ii 88 As soon as he is grounded in abstinence from incontinence, he
acquires energy, ii. 89 As soon as he is established in abstinence from
icceptance of gifts, a thorough illumination upon the conditions of birth,
ii. 40 As a result of cleanliness there is disgust at one’s own body and
no intercourse with others, ii. 41 Purity of sattva and gentleness and
singlenesa-of-intent and subjugation of the senses and fitness for the
sight of the self. ii. 42 As a result of contentment there is an acquisition
of superlative pleasure, i L 48 Perfection in the body and in the organs
after impurity has dwindled as a result of self-castigation. iL 44 As
a result of study there is communion With the chosen deity, ii. 45
Perfection of concentration as a result of devotion ,to the Icvara.

Third indirect aid: iii. Postures

iL 46-48. Bodily conditions favourable to concentration.

iL 46 Stable-and-easy posture, ii. 47 By relaxation of effort or by a
[mental] state-of-balance with reference to Ananta. iL 48 Thereafter
he is unassailed by extremes.

Fourth indirect aid : iv. Restraint of the breath

IL 48—52. Calming of effective states is favourable to concentration.

ii. 49 When there is [stability of posture], the restraint of breath, a
cutting off of the flow of inspiration and expiration, follows, ii. 50 [This
is] external or internal or suppressed in fluctuation and is regulated by
place an<f time and number and is protracted and subtile. iL 51 The
fourth [restraint of the breath] transcends the external and the internal
object. iL 52 As a result of this the covering of the light dwindles away.

Fifth indirect eid : v. Withdrawal of the sefese^organs

iL 58-55. The span of attention is confined to an inner object.

ii. 58 For fixed-attentions also the central organ becomes fit iL 54 The
withdrawal of the senses is as it were the imitation of the mind-stuff
as it is in itself on the part of the organa by disjaininythemselves from
their object ii. 56 As a result of this' '[withdrawal] there is a complete
mastery of the organs.


xxxvii] without the Comment or the Explanation

BOOK THIRD— SUPERNORMAL POWERS
Tint direct aids tL Pixed-attcntion
iiL 1. The knower focuses the process of knowing upon the object to be
known.

iii, 1 Binding the mind-stuff to a place is fixed-attention.

Second direct aid: viL Contemplation
iiL 2. A two-term relation between the process of knowing and the object
to be known.

iii. 2 Focusedness of the presented idea upon that [place] is con-
templation.

Third direct aid: viii. Concentration
iii. 3. A fusion of the knower and the process of knowing with the object
to be known.

iiu 3 ThL same [contemplation], shining forth [in consciousness] as the
intended object and nothing more, and, as it were, emptied of itself, is
concentration.

Transition to seedless concentration

iiL *-10. The direct aids in combination result in insight and restricted
subliminal-impressions and the calm flow of the mind-stuff.

iiL 4 The three in one are constraint. iiL 5 As a result of mastering
this constraint, ihore follows the shining forth of insight, iii 6 Its
application is by stages, iii. 7 The thre*> are direct aids in comparison
with the previous [five], 'ii. 8 Even t' «e [three] are indirect aids
to seedless [concentration], iii. 9 When here is a becoming invisible
of the subliminal-impression of emergence and a becoming visible
of the subliminal-impression of restriction, tSs mutation of restriction
is inseparably connected with mind-stuff in its period of restriction,
iii. 10 This [mind-stuff] flows peacefully by reason of the subliminal-
impression.

Mutations of substances

iii. 11-15. In the focused state the concentration holds two time-forms
within the span of attention. Mutations are in fixed orders of subliminal-
impressions in the restricted state.

iii. 11 Thd mutation of oon filtration is the dwindling of dispersiveness
and the uprisal of ainglenessrof-intent belonging to the mind-stuff.
iiL ^2 Then again when the quiescent and the uprisen presen ted-ideas
> are similar [in respect of having a single object], the mind-stuff has
a mutation uingle-in -intent. iiL 18 Thus with regard to elements and
to organs, SSutations of .external-aspect and of time-variation and of
intensity, T *ave been enumerated, iii. 14 A substance conforms itself to
quiescent and uprisen and indeterminable exteniaLaspeetp* UL15 The
order tg the sequence is the reason for the order of the


Translation of the Yoga-mtras [xxxviii

Application of constraints to different orders of natations

iii. 16 - 52 . Given a single mutation of external-aspect or time-form or in-
tensity, the whole sequence comes under control of the concentrated insight,
iii 16 As a result of constraint upon the three mutatioffs [there follows]
the knowledge of the past and the future, iii 17 Word and intended-
object and presented -idea are confused because they are erroneously
identified with each other. By constraint upon the distinctions between
them [there arises the intuitive] knowledge of the cries of all living
beings, iii. 18 As a result of direct perception of subliminal-impressions
there is [intuitive] knowledge of previous births, iii 19 [As a result of
constraint] upon a presented-idea [there arises intuitive] knowledge of
the mind-stuff of another, iii. 20 But [the intuitive knowledge of the
mind-stuff of another] does not have that [idea] together with that upon
which it depends [as its object], since that [upon which it depends]
is not-in-the-field [of consciousness], iii. 21 As a result of constraint
upon the [outer] form of the body, when its power to be known id
stopped, then as a consequence of the disjunction of the light and of the
eye there follows indiscemibility [of the yogin’s body], iii. 22 Advancing
and not-advancing is karma ; as a result of constraint upon this [two-
fold karma] or from the signs of death [there arises an intuitive]
knowledge of the latter end. iii. 23 [As a result of constraint] upon
friendliness and other [sentiments there arise] powers [of friendliness],
iii. 24 [As a result of .constraint] upon powers [there arise] powers like
those of an elephant, iii. 25 As a result of casting the light of
a sense-activity [there arises the intuitive] knowledge of the subtile
and the concealed and the obscure, iii. 26 As a result of constraint
upon the sun [ther^ arises the intuitive] knowledge of the cosmio-spaces.
iii 27 [As a result of constraint] upon the moon [there arises the
intuitive] knowledge of the arrangement of the stars, iii. 28 [As a result
of constraint] upon the pole-star [there arises the intuitive] knowledge
of their movements, iii. 29 [As a result of constraint] upon the wheel
of the navel [there arises the intuitive] knowledge of the arrangement
of the body. iii. 30 [As a result of constraint] upon the well of the
throat [taere follows] the cessation of hunger and thirst iii. 81 [As
a result of const? rint] upon the tortoise-tube [there follows] motionless-
ness of the mind-stuff, iii 82 [As a result of constraint] upon the
radiance in the head [there follows] the sight of the Siddhas. iii 88 Or
as a result of vividness the yogin discerns all. iii 84 [As tf result of
constraint] upon the heart [there arises] a consciousness of the mind-ltuff.
iii 85 Experience is a presented-idea which fails fco distinguish the sattva
and the Self, which are absolutely un commingled [in the presented-idea].
c Since the sattva exists as object for another, the [intuitive] knowledge
of the Self arises as the result of constraint upon that which exists for


xxxixj without the Comment or the Explanation

its own sake, iii. 86 As a result of this [constraint upon that which
exists for its own sake], there arise vividness and the organ-of-[su pernal ] -
hearing and the organ-of-[supernal]-touch and the organ-of-[supernal]-
sight and, the organ-of-[supemal]-taste and the organ-of-[8upemal]-smelI,
iii. 87 In concentration these [supernal activities] are obstacles ; in the
emergent state they are* perfections ( siddhi ). iii. 88 As a result of slacken-
ing the causes of bondage and as a result of the knowledge of the procedure
[of tLe mind-stuff], the mind-stuff penetrates into the body of another,
iii. 89 As a result of mastering the TJd&na there is no adhesion to water
or mud or thorns or similar objects, and [at death] the upward flight,
iii 40 As a result of mastering the Samdna [there arises] a radiance,
iii. 41 As a result of constraint upon the relation between the organ-of-
hearing and the air, [there arises] the supernal-organ-of-hearing. iii. 42
Either as a result of constraint upon the relation between the body and
the air, or as a result of the balanced -state of lightness, such as that of
cotton-fiLre, there follows the passing through air. iii. 48 An outwardly
unadjusted fluctuation is the Great Discarnate ; as a result of this the
dwindling of the covering to the brightness, iii. 44 As a result of con-
straint upon the coarse and the essential-attribute and the subtile and
ch* inherence and purpose eness, there is a mastery of the elements,
iii 45 Ab a result of this, atomization and the other [perfections] come
about, [there is] perfection of body ; and there is no obstruction by the
properties of these [elements ]. iii. 46 Beauty and grace and power and
compactness of the thunderbolt, — [this isj perfection of body, iii 47 As
a result of constraint upon the proof ; -of- knowing and the essential-
attribute and the feeling-of-personality ind the inherence and the
purposiveness, [there follows] the subjugation of the organs, iii. 48 As
a result of this [there follows] speed [g eat a^that] of the central-organ,
action of the instruments [of knowledge] disjunct [from the body,, and
the subjugation of the primary-cause, iii. 49 He who has only the full
discernment into the difference between the sattra and the Sell uie
who has authority over all states-of-existence and is one who knows*
all. iii. 50 As a result of passionlessness even with regard to thes
[perfections] there follows, after the dwindling of the seeds of the
defects, Isolation, iii. 61 In case of invitations from those-in-high
places, thes^ should arouse no attachment^ or pride, for undesired
consequences recur, iii. 6 a As a result of constraint upon moments
and their sequence [there arises the intuitive] knowledge proceeding from
discrimination.

Culmination of concentration

i$L 88—55. The particular wBich is indiscernible in respect of class or
term oy poiftt in-space is intuitively discerned ; the widest span of* objec-
tivity is also discerned. This is the attainment of Isolatioff.


Translation of the Yoga-sutras [xl

iii. 53 As & result of this there arises the deeper-knowledge of two
equivalent things whioh cannot be distinctly qualified in species of
characteristic-mark or point-of-space. iii. 54 The [intuitive] knowledge
proceeding from discrimination is a deliverer, has all things as its object,
and has all times for its object, and is an [inclusive' whole] without
sequence, iii 55 When the purity of the sattva and of the Self are equal
there is Isolation.

BOOK FOURTH— ISOLATION

• i.

Substances and subconsciousness

iv. 1-13. Correspondence between imperceptible forms of substance and
latent-impressions of concentrated states.

iv. 1 Perfections proceed from birth or from drugB or from spells
or from self-castigation or from concentration, iv. 2 The mutation into
another birth is the result of the filling in of the evolving-cause.
iv. 3 The efficient cause gives no impulse to the evolving-causes but
[the mutation] follows when the barrier [to the evolving-cause] is cut,
as happens with the peasant, iv. 4 Created mind -stuffs may result from
the sense-of-personality and from this alone, iv. 5 r While theta is a
variety of actions, the mind-stuff which impels the many is onai iv. 6 Of
these [five perfections] that which proceeds from contemplation leaves
no latent-deposit, iv. 7 The yogin’s karma is neither-white-nor-black ;
[the karma] of others is of three kinds, iv. 6 As a result of this
there follows the manifestation of those subconscious-impressions only
which correspond to the fruition of their [karma], iv. 9 There is
an uninterrupted-causal-relation [of subconscious-impressions], although
remote in species and point-of-space and moment-of-time, by reason of
the correspondence between memory and subliminal -impressions, iv. 10
Furthermore the [subconscious-impressions] have no beginning [that
we can set in time], since desire is permanent hr. 11 Sinoe [sub-
conscious-impressions] are associated with cause and motive and mental-
substrate and stimulus, if these cease to be, then those [subconscious-
impressions] cease to be. iv. 12 Past and future as such exist ; [therefore
subconscious-impressions do not cease to be]. For the different time-
forms belong to the external-aspects, iv. 13 These [^xternal-aspects
with the three time-forms] are phenomenalized [individuals] or subtile
[generic-forms] and their essence is the aspects {guna ).

Polemic against Idealism

iv. 14-23. Knowledge of the stream of conscioiisnesB is impossible unless
it be a permanent order as contrasted yrith a succession of transient
appearances.

iv. 14 Thj that-pess of a thing is due to a singleness of mutation.


xlil without the Comment or the Explanation

iv. 15. Because, while the [physical] thing remains the same, the mind-
stuffs are different, [therefore the two are upon] distinct levels-of-existencel
iv. 16 And a thing is not dependent upon a single mind-stuff, [for then
in certain cases] it could not be proved [by that mind-stuff], [and] then
what would it be? iv. 17 A thing is known or not known by
virtue of its affecting [or not affecting] the mind-stuff, iv. 18 Unintef-
mittently the Master of that [mind-stuff] knows the fluctuations of
mind-stuff [and thus] the Self undergoes-no-mutations. iv. 19 It does
not illumine itself, siiice it is an object-for-sight iv. 20 And there
cannot be a cognitioA *of both [thinking-substance and thing] at the
same time. iv. 21 If [one mind-stu^j were the object-for-sight for
another, there would be an infinite regress from one thinking-substance
to another thinking-substance as well as confusion of memory, iv. 22
The Intellect (dti) which unites not [with objects] is conscious of its own
thinking-substance when [the mind-stuff] takes the form of that [thinking-
, substance by reflecting it], iv. 23 Mind-stuff affected by the Seer and by
the object-for-sight [leads to the perception of] all intended-objects.

Complete Self-realisation of the Self

iv. 24-34. All # hindrances subside; all acts of the Self are spontaneous
and free; absence of limitations which thwart one who wishes to attain
the ultimate ideal of his own nature.

iv. 24 This [mind-stuff], although diversified by countless subconscious-
impressions, exists for the sake of another,, because its nature is to produce
[things as] combinations, iv. 25 Fc~ him who sees the distinction,
pondering upon his own scates-of-beir oeases. iv. 26 Then the mind-
stuff is borne down to discrimination, onward towards Isolation, iv. 27
In the intervals of this [mind-stuff] there are.pther presented -ideas [coming 1
from subliminal-impressions, iv. 28 The dbcape from these [subliminal-
impressions] is described as being like [the escape from] the hindrances
iv. 29 For one who is not usurious even in respect of Elevation, there
follows in every case as a result of discriminative discernment the
concentration [called] R&in-cloud of [knowable] things, iv. 30 Then
follows the cessation of the hindrances and of karma, iv. 31 Then,
because of the endlessness of knowledge from which all obscuring
defilements have passed away, what is yet to be known amounts to little,
iv. 32 When as a regal! rf this the aspect (guna) have fulfilled their
purpose, they attain to the limit of the sequence of mutations, iv. 33
The positive correlate to the moment, recognised as such at the final limit
of the mutation, is a sequence, iv 34 Isolation is the inverse generation
of theMtspeots, no longer provided with a purpose by the Self, or it is
the Energy of Intellect^grounded in itself,
f It]


BOOK FIRST
CONCENTRATION


«3


NOTICE TO THE READER


PaiaFljalTi Mnemonic Buie# or Yoga-siitras are divided into four books as follows :


Book 1. Concentration or Sam&dhi, with 51 rules or sfitras,—
Book 2. Means of attainment or SSdhana, with 55 s&traf,—
Book 8. Supernormal powers or Vibhuti, with 55 sfitrasi-*
Book 4. Isolation or Ki&ivalya, with 34 sfltras,—


pages 1 to 100 ;
pages 101 to 200;
pages 201 to 290 ;
pages 297 to 848.


In all, there are 195 rules. Their extreme brevity is apparent when they are printed
continuously, as at the end of the Anand&v&^rama edition, where the entire text of
the rules occupies only between four and five pages.


The Comment or Bh&§ya, usually after a brief introductory paragraph or phrase (called
avatarana), takes up the rules, one by one, and gives first the text and then the
meaning thereof.


V&caspatimigra's Explanation is of course in the first instance an explanation of the
Comment; but since the Comment comprehends also the Rules, it is in fact an
explanation of both RuleB and Comment. In the body of this volume, the Explana-
tion is not put all together by itself, but is made to keep paice with the Comment,
rule by rule.


Meaning of the Differences of Type

The translation of the Rales is set in pica type of full-faced Clarendon style ;

The translation of the Comment is set in pica type of Roman style ;

The translation of the Explanation is set in long primer type of Roman style.

•

Single angles (like these < >) indicate that the words which they enclose are taken from
the particular Rule or Yoga-sfitra under discussion.

Double angles (like these « y>) indicate that the words which they enclose are taken
from the Comment or Yoga-bhifya.

Double quotation marks (“ *’) indicate that the words which they enclose are taken from
some authoritative text

Single quotation marks (‘ ') indicate that the words which they enclose are the objections
or questions of an opponent, or are a quotation from some unauthoritative text.

A half-parenthesis on its side (*) is used between two vowels to show th&t they are
printed in violation of the rulbs of euphonic combination.


BOOK FIRST

CONCENTRATION

May he, who, having abandoned his primal form, exercises his
power to show kindness to the world in many ways — he with the
beautiful hood and many mouths, possessed of deadly poison and
yet abolishing the mass of hindrances — he the source of all know-
ledge, and whose girdle of attendant snakes produces continual
pleasure, — may be, the divine Lord 1 of Serpents, protect you, with
his white stainless body— he, the giver of concentration {yoga), and
himself concentrated in concentration.

1. Now the exposition of yoga [is to be made].

The expression <now> indicates that a distinct topic 1 commences
here. The authoritative book which expounds yoga is to be
understood as commenced. [To give a provisional definition:]
yoga is concentration ; but this is a quality of the mind-stuff ( citta )
which belongs to all the stages. The tages of the mind-stuff are
these : the restless ( ksiptd ), the infatuated (mudha), the distracted
( viksipta ), the single- in-intent (ekdgra), and$he restricted (niruddha).
Of these [stages the first two have nothing to do with yoga and
even] in the distracted state of the mind [its] concentration is [at
times] overpowered by [opposite] distractions and [consequently]
it cannot properly be called yoga. But that [state] which, when
the mind U single-in-intent, fully illumines a distinct and real
object and causes the hindrances ( klepa ) to dwindle, slackens the
bonds of karma, and sets before it as a goal the restriction [of all

8ee I^nga Pur&ua, I., lxiii. 22-87. application (attdefa). The word atha

i The re are six kind* of eatraa according *o may introduce a topic {adkikfroMiftha)

the MimihsK : the definition (mritfRd), or give the purport {prast/foa~artha), or

.the key tp (interpretation (pcHMtyd), atate the (ubject-matter of the die-

the (Moment of a general rule (oidW), comma (AmmMauartto). Tbi* i* di*-

the rmtciciive rale (n<fatN«),aa original earned in Cloka-*Srtlik» i. 1. 22-24.

■Moment (adWMrc), an analogical


Book I Concentration or Samddhi


[4

fluctuations], is called the yoga in which there is consciousness of
an object (sampraj ftata). This [conscious yoga], however, is
accompanied by deliberation [upon coarse objects], by reflection
[upon subtile objects], by joy, by the feeling-of-personajiity (asmitd).
This we shall set forth later. But when there is restriction of
all the fluctuations (vrtti) [of the mind-stuff], there is the con-
centration in which there is no consciousness [of an object].

I prostrate myself before him who is the cause of’tbe world’s origination, before
Vrsaketu, who— although for him fruition and other results of karma proceeding
from the hindrances have ceased— is yet kindly [to the world he has made].
Prostrating myself before Patafijali the sage, I proceed to set forth a brief, dear,
and significant explanation of the Comment by Vedavytea.

For here the Exalted Patafijali — wishing to announce in brief the import of the
book which he is about to begin that he may thus assist the procedure of men
of understanding and that he may, more especially, make the hearer easily
comprehend — composed this sQtra : L Now the exposition of yoga [is to be
made]. Of this [sOtra] the first portion, the word <now>, he [the author of
the Comment] discusses in the phrase The expression <now> indicates that
a distinct topic commences hereJ^ [The word <now> is used]* as in [the sQtra]
“ Now 1 this is the Jyotis It does not imply that it is to be preceded [by condi-
tions as in the first Brahma-satra]. Now by the word <exposition> he means
the authoritative book in the sense that it is that whereby ft thing is expounded.
Moreover the book may enter upon its activity when preceded not only by
calm 9 and the other [five conditions required by the Br&hma-sQtra] ; but it
must be preceded also by [Patafijali’s] desire to announce [his] truth. [Calm],
on the contrary, would follow when once there had been a desire to know and
when the knowledge [had entered into action]. As it is written [BAU. iv. 4.
28 or 28], “ After that, calm and subdued and retired and resigned and concen-
trated let him behold himself in the Self only.” Although it would be possible
[for the book to enter into action] immediately after advantage bad been taken
of such things as students’ questions or performances of austerities or elixirs of
life, [still these are] not mentioned. The reason for this is that these things
would be of no use either to the student’s knowledge or to [his] feeling inclined
( pravrttf) [for it]. [What then would be advantageous? The book’s authori-
tativeness.] If the book be Authoritative, then, even if there *Sre no [questions
or austerities or elixirs], the exposition of yoga is to be accepted ; but if not
authoritative, then, even if [there be questions and all the other conditions* still]

•

1 These words are from the TSntfya-MahSbr. soma. See Caland and Henry : L’Agni-

xix. 11. 1 (Biblioth. Ind.). The jyotis gtoma, I, p. 166.® Anfrfiompare ^aetra

is a chant by the udg&tar in the Agni- DTpfltS (Benares edition), p. 280*.

9 $oma jlirectly after the filtering of the 9 See Vedftnta S&ra 4 and 14 eftd 17. ^


5] Condition * required for a beginning [ — i. 1

the book is to be rejected. Thus it is [by insisting upon the authority
tiveness of the book] that [Patafijali] refuses to say that [the book may begin]
immediately after his understanding the truth and his desire to announce. But
if it be agreed that [the word <now> indicates] that a distinct topic commences,
then when once ypga has been mentioned as the topic of the book the student
easily understands the announcement of the import of the book as a whole and
is started into action. — Now every one knows from $ruti and Smrti and the
Epics and the Pur&pas that concentration is the cause of final-bliss [and that
yoga is authoritative]. Some one might ask, ‘ If the word <now> indicates that
a distinct topic commences in all those works to which it is attached, then, if
this is so, would not such an announcement 1 as, “Now therefore the inquiry
into Brahma [is to be made] ” also be included ? ’ To prevent this mistake [the
commentator] uses the word «here.^ [Again], some cne cites the Yogiy&jfia-
valkyasmrti, “ Hiranyag&rbha and no other of ancient days is he who gave
utterance (vaktti) to yoga” and asks how it can be said that Patafijali gives
utterance to the authoritative book on yoga. In reply the author of the
stitra says <the exposition) : exposition in the sense of expounding something
previously expounded. When then the word <now> signifies that here a dis-
tinct topic commences, then the point of the statement is quite consistent —
Accordingly he says, «The authoritative work which expounds yoga ... as com-
menced^. Here an*objector interrupts, ‘ The topic which is commenced here is
not the authoritative work, but yoga in so far as it is taught’ In reply to
which, he says «3s to be understood. » True, we are beginning yoga in so far
as it is taught. But thS instrument which is to teach this [yoga]* is the authori-
tative work which deals with the same. Moreover the teacher’s activity has to
do more immediately with the instrument than* i the thing he works upon.
Accordingly, with emphasis upon the activity of ie author (forfr), we are to
understand that the authoritative work which deals with yoga is commenced.
But the topic commenced is that yoga only which is limited in its activity by
an authoritative work. This is the real point — And one must suppose that
the hearing of the word <now>, which means that a distinct topio has com-
menced, suggests — like the sight of a water-jar* carried [on a girl’s shoulder
at early morning] — another meaning, [namely,] it serves as an auspicious
beginning.— Doubt as to the actual thing [yoga] is occasioned by doubt as to
the meaning of the word [yoga]. This [doubt] he removes by stating that
[4tyoga» in the phrase] «yoga is concentration^ is etymologically derived
from the stem yuya [Dhfltupfitha iv 68] in the sense cst" concentration and not
from the stem yuj-i [vii. 7] in the sense of conjunction^

Another objection is raised, 1 The yoga which is to be described is a whole, and
concentration is a part of it ; and a mere part is not the whole.’ The rd|»ly is

1 Brahma-sfttra i. 1??. which one makes a circumambulation

* This is in the of auspicious objects to (ptxuiakptna), Vw^u-siurti lxiii, 89.


Book 1. Concentration or Samadhi


i. 1-]


in the words «But this.* The. word ca has the sense of 4Cbut* and distin-
guishes the whole from the pari — «Which belongs to all the stages* refers,
to the staged or states which are to be described : Hadhumatl [iii. 54], Madhu-
pratikft [iii. 48], Vi$oktt [i. 86], Samak&ra$es& [iii 9]. These belong to the
jcnind-stuff. In all these [stages] is found that yoga the [mere] special mark
of which is the restriction of the mind-stuff. But concentration is a part
[of this] and has not this as its special mark. And the words 4Cyoga is concen-
tration^ are a statement for etymological purposes only, in so far as one is not
dwelling upon the difference between the whole and the pari But [when he is
referring to] the practical purpose of what he calls «Cyoga,* [he says] it is the
restriction of the fluctuations of mind-stuff : this is the stricter sense of the
term. To those [Vai^efikas] who hold the view that fluctuations are sensations
inherent in the soul and that therefore the restriction of them would also involve
the soul (atman) in which they inhere, — to these in rebuttal he says, «a quality
of the mind-stuffy — The term <mind-stuff> (citta) he usee as a partial expression
for the inner-organ 1 (antahkarana), the thinking-substance ( buddhi ). The point is
that the Absolutely-etemal Energy 6t Intellect (citi^akti), [since it. is] immutable,
cannot have sensations as its properties ; but the thinking-substance may have
them. — An objector says, ‘This may be so. But if yoga belongs to all its
stages, — why then ! Sir, [since you concede that] the restless and the infatuated
and the distracted states also are stages of mind-stuff, and [since] there would
be |tmong these states, Reciprocally at least, also a restriction of fluctuations, —
then <yoga> would have to include these states also (tatrapi). 9 In replying to
this difficulty he makes clear which stages are to be included and which not
included [in yoga] by the words beginning with <the restless.) L The restless
incessantly thrown by force of rajas upon this or that object is excessively
unstable ; ii. the infatuated because of a preponderance of tamos is filled with
the fluctuation of sleep ; • iii. the distracted differs from the restless in that,
although prevailingly unstable, it is occasionally stable, this prevailing instability
being either natural or generated by diseases and languor and other obstacles
later [L 30} to be described ; iv. the single-in-intent is the focused ; v. the
restricted mind-stuff is that in which all the fluctuations are restricted and in
which nothing remains but subliminal-impressions (i samskdra ). In spite of the
fact that certain fluctuations of the restless and the infatuated, [the first two] of
these [five stages], are restricted each by the others, still, since these two are
not even indirectly causes of final bliss and since they contend against it, they
are so far removed from 1 } the possibility of] being called yoga that he has not
expressly denied that these two are yoga. But in the case of the distracted
[state]^ since occasionally it has stability when directed towards a real bbject, he
denies that it can be yoga in the words «Of these stages.* When the miiftl is
distracted, the concentration which is .the occasional stability ef the mind-stuff


1 Compare QSihkant Bhl$ya on ii. 4. 6 (NirQayaaagara edition, p. 71 1 11 ).


7] States of mind-stuff jit for Yoga [ — i. 1

when directed to a real objeet, cannot properly be called yoga. Why [cannot
this be called yoga]? Because it has come under the adverse influence of
distraction, which is the opposite of this [yoga]. When fallen into the hands
(antargata) of a troop of opponents, it is hard for a thing to be even what it is
and it is still harder for it to produce effects. Just as any one can see that
a seed which has fallen into the fire and stayed there three or four moments
has not power, even if sown, of sprouting : this is the real meaning. If then
oonoentration which has come under the Adverse influence of distraction be not
yoga, what then is yoga? To tfeis he makes answer, {But that [Bt&te] which,
when the mind is single-in-inteAt.* By the word {real* (bhuta) he excludes
[any] imaginary [object]. Since sleep, a fluctuation of mind-stuff, is also single-
in-intent with regard to tamos , — a real (bhuta) object, the peculiar (wa) [aspect of
a substance '] upon whioh it [sleep] depends (dlambana^ — so he says {distinct*
(sad) ; which means is clear (fobhana), in which the sottva [aspect] becomes evident
in a very high degree. But that thing is not clear in which the tamos is in
preponderance, inasmuch as it, [the tamas f '] is the cause of hindrances. Now
the perception of a thing either by verbal communication [ Ogama ] or by inference
may, we grant, be luminous (dyotanarh bhavad opt); still, in so far as it is
mediately known, it does not destroy undifferentiated-consciousness (avidyd)
which we directly experience. For in such [illusions as the sight of] two
moons 01 a defective sense of orientation, [verbal communications or inferences]
do not destroy undifferentiated-consciousness. Accordingly he uses the word
{fully* (pm), because it means luminous to the full extent (pra-karjam) and
because it alludes to immediate perception [in the case of yoga]. The feeling-
of-personality (oarotfd) and the other hindrances have their root in undifferen-
tiated-consciousness (avidyd). Furthermore, si&vr knowledge (vidyd) destroys
undifferentiated-consciousness (avidyd); and since when knowledge emerges,
the hindrances [arising] from undifferentiated-consciousness and so on are
destroyed, inasmuch as they are contrary the vne to* the other, and inasmuch
as [then] the cause [of the hindrances] would be destroyed ; therefore he says
{and causes [the hindrances] to dwindle.* This, then, is the reason why
[yoga] slackens the bonds which consist of karma.— And in this passage by
a figurative use of the cause for the effect he employs the word {karma*,
whereas subtile-influences (apOrva) are intended. — The word {slackens* means
brings [them] down from their operation. For later [ii 18] he says, “ So long
as the root exists, [there will be] fruition from it.” And finally it {sets before
it as a goal the 'restriction [of all fluctuations].*— Moreover since this [yoga]
conscious of objects is four-fold, he employs the words [beginning] {This
[conscious yoga].* He describes [the yoga] not conscious of objects with the
wonjp {all the fluctuations.* [In other words,] we know (kilo) that souAes-of-
valid-ideas and other fluctuations ( vramanodivrtti) made of rajas and tamos are

1 ^Aspect of a substance 1 is dhaima (see iii. 18) or parinSma.


i. i — ] Book I. Concentration or Samddhi [8

restricted in [ yoga] conscious [of objects] while fluctuations of sattva are retained ;
but that in [yoga] not conscious [of an object] all fluctuations whatsoever are
restricted. Therefore [the final result] is established (siddham) that ^belonging
to all stages^ means occurring in all these [four] stages, UadhumatT and so
o.j, whioh [four] are [all] included in these two stages [of ther conscious and
the unconsoious yoga].


The intent of the following sutra is to state the distinguishing
characteristic of this [yoga],

2. Toga is the restriction of the fluctuations of mind-stuff.

By the non-use of the word ‘ all ’ [before <the fluctuations^, [the
yoga which is] conscious [of objects] is also included under the
denomination of yoga. Now mind-stuff has three aspects (guna),
as appears from the fact that it has a disposition to vividness
( prakhya ), to activity (pravrtti), and to inertia ( sthiti ). For the
mind-stuff’s [aspect] sattva, which is vividness, when commingled
with rajas and tamas, acquires a fondness for supremacy and for
objtcts-of-sense ; while the very same [constituent-aspect, saffva,]
when pervaded with tamos, tends towards demerit and non-
perception and passionatefiess and towaids a failure of [its own
rightful] supremacy; [and] the very same [sattva \ — when the
covering of error has dwindled away, — illumined now in its
totality (sarvatas), bu|» faintly pervaded by rajas, tends towards
merit and knowledge and passionlessness and [its own rightful]
supremacy ; [and] the very same \sattva \, — the stains of the last
vestige of rajas once removed, — grounded in itself and being
nothing hut the discernment ( khydti ) of the difference between the
sattva and the Self (purusa), tends towards the Contemplation of
the Bain-cloud of [knowable] Things. The designation .given by
contemplators ( dhy&yul ) to this [kind of mind-stuff ] il I the highest
Elevation ( prasathkhydna). F or the Energy of Intellect (citirfakti)
is immutable and does not unite [with objects]; it has* objects
shown to it and is undefiled [by constituent-aspects] and is unending.
Whereas this discriminate discernment {vivska-Jbhydti), whose
essence is sattva, is [therefore] contrary to this [Energy ^of Intellect


9 ]


1.2


Provisional definition of Yoga

and is therefore to be rejected]. Henoe the mind-stuff being
disgusted with this [discriminative discernment] restricts even this
Insight. When it has reached this state, [the mind-stuff], [after
the restriction . of the fluctuations,] passes over to subliminal
impressions (samskdra). This is the [so-called] seedless concentra-
tion. In this state nothing becomes an object of consciousness :
such is concentration not conscious [of objects]. Accordingly the
yoga [which we have defined* as] the restriction of the fluctuations
of the mind-stuff is two-fold.

He introduces the second antra with the words <Cthe distinguishing charac-
teristic of this.y The words <£ of this» refer to the two kinds of yoga mentioned
in the previous antra. 2. Toga is the restriction of the fluctuations of mind-
stuff. Yoga is that particular Btate of mind*stuff in which souroes-of- valid-
ideas ^rd*the other fluctuations are restricted. The objection is made that
this cannot be the distinguishing characteristic [of yoga] since yoga conscious
[of objects] would be excluded. For in this [conscious yoga], [those] fluctua-
tions of mind-stuff which have the sattva- aspect are not reetricted. The reply is
«by the ifon-^se of tte word 1 all \» If yoga had been said to be the restric-
tion of all the fluctuations of mind-stuff, [yoga] conscious [of objects] would
not have been* included. But [if the objection be made that this includes too-
much since thfere is restriction of sattva in the first three states, the reply is,]
the restriction of the fluctuations of mind-stuff which are hostile to the latent-
deposit (afayaparipanthin) of karma from the hindrances [he. the restriction, as
thus qualified] includes this [yoga] alrr* [And this i so] because there is a
restriction of those mind-stufFs fluctuations which i.&ve the rajas and tamas
aspect in this [conscious yoga] also, and because this (tod) [hostility to the
hindrances] is (bhcMlt) a part of that (tasya) [restriction]. But why is this
mind-stuff, which is a single thing, in connexion with [its own] restless and
other stages ? And since some one might be in doubt why the fluctuations
of mind-stuff which is in such [a three-fold] state should be restricted, he now
makes clear first of all the reason for [the mind-stuffy] connexion with [these]
states. CNow mind-stuffy [is in this threefold state] since the aspect sattva has a
disposition to vividness [and] since the aspect rajas has a disposition to activity
[and] since tht'iap^et tamas has a disposition to inertia. The use of the woid
4Cvividness$ is .the use t>f a part for th<> whole (upaiakfapk). It alludes also to
other kinds of sattva, to serenity and Lghtness and joy (prtti) ; and <£aotivityy
alludes to [the other] kinds of tstf as, to pain and grief. Inertia is a property
of the •tottta*‘fluetuatiou and is opposed to activity. The use of the word
Cinertia> is a partial expression for heaviness and covering and dejection and
s i m i la r state#. What he means to say is this : thejnind-atuff, although a single

•2 Im o.a»nl


Book I. Concentration or Samadhi


no


i.2-]


thing, has, inasmuch as it is made up of three aspects and inasmuch as the
aspects are not in equilibrium, a multitude of mutations (parindma) arising from
a multitude of reciprocal antagonisms ; and thus may consistently have many
states. He shows that the restless and other stages of the mind-stuff have
'affording to circumstances a variety of subordinate states. &For . . . which is
vividness.» Mind-stuff’s sattva is sattva in its form as a mutation of mind-
stuff; [and] this [mind-stuff's sattva ] in its form as vividness is thus shown
to be a preponderance of sattva in the mind-stuff. In this mind-stuff when
rajas and tamas are somewhat less than the sattva^ and when they two are equal
each to the other, then (tadd) [that mind-stuff) is that thing thus described
[in the Comment] which acquires a fondness for supremacy and for objeots-
of-senae, sound and so on. Although the mind-stuff under the predominance of
sattva desires to meditate upon reality ( tattva ), still, when the reality is concealed
by tamas , it thinks that such supremacies as atomization (animan) are the reality
and desires to meditate upon them (tad). It meditates a moment, and then,
caught by rajas , although obtaining no permanence [in its meditation] j>n them,
it gains nothing except a fondness for these things. But its natural inclination
towards sound and so on [the objects of sense] is quite well known. Accord-
ingly in this way the mind-stuff is said to be distracted. — While describing the
restless mind-stuff, he alludes also to the infatuated : <Cthe very same . with
tatnas.?> Now when tamas suppresses rajas and extends itself, then, since rajas
has become incapable of removing the tamas which covers the mind-stuff s sattva 9
the mind-stuff covered with tamas tends towards demerit and other [forms of
ignorance]. ^Non-perception^ is declared to be miscohceived perception [i. 8],
and also to be sleep-perception [i. 10] which is supported (dlambam) by a cause
(piahjaya) of a [transient] negation. And from this [word] comes the sug-
gestion (sMCifa) of the infatuated state also. A ^failure of its [own rightful]
supremacy» is an obstruction to one’s will in every direction. Thus it is that
mind-stuff becomes pervaded with demerit and the other [forms of ignorance].
But when this 6ame substance ( sattva ) of the mind-stuff comes to have its
saftw[-quality] manifest [and] its cover of tamas removed [and] is accompanied
by rajas, then it tends, as he says, towards merit and perception and passionless
and [rightful] supremacy, as he says in the phrase ^dwindled away.» That
[substance of the mind-stuff] is referred to, the covering, that is, the tamas
[•quality], that is, the infatuation of which has almost entirely (prakarsena)
dwindled. For the same reason «it is illumined in its totality^: in substances-
as-effects (vifesa) and Jhostances-as-causes (avifesa) and Sn tfie linga and the
lingin [see ii 19] and the Self. Still it has not the capacity for merit snd
[rigl^ful] supremacy since it lacks activity. With regard to this he sayg ^pervaded
by rajas only.$ In other words when rajas is the active agent, merit t^d the
rest do persist Accordingly for the two middle classes of yogins, 1 the


1 8ee below, iii. 51, and cf. Kern’s * Lotus SBE. xxi. 887.


11] Functions of the mind-stuff [ — i .2

MadhubhOmika and the Prajfiajyotis who have attained to concentration oon-
■eious [of an object], the substance (sattva) of the mind-stuff is included.— He
now describes the state of the mind-stuff of the fourth class of contemplators,
the Atikr&ntablj&vanTya, with the words «the same.* Since the stain of th^
last vestige of rqjas is removed, the mind-stuff is grounded in itself. Now the
gold of the substance (sattva) of the thinking-substance {buddhi 1 ), — when once the
stain of the rajas and tamos is purified by the joining [of the upper and lower
parts] of the crucible {jputa-pdka), which are piactice and passionlessness, and
when it has withdrawn [see ii 54 ] the organs which are concerned with objects-
of-sense, and is grounded in itself, — has still a further function to perform
(para kdrya), namely, the discriminative discernment [referring to the sattva
and the Self], which performs its function in so far as its task (adhikdra) is un-
finished. With this in mind he sayB tithe mind-stuff.* The mind-stuff which
is nothing else than the discriminative discernment referring to the sattva and
the Self tends towards the Contemplation [called] the Bain-cloud of [knowable]
THng.,.* The Rai'. cloud of [knowable] Things will also be described [iv. 29].
He tells what is perfectly clear to yogins with regard to this [state] in the
words, «this ... is the highest.* The mind-stuff which is nothing else than
the discernment of the difference between the sattva and the Self and which
lasts unti 1 the Rain-cloud of [knowable] Things, is designated by contemplators
as the hignest Elevation. And if one does not wish to make the distinction
between the substance and its property, [this Elevation] may be regarded* as
having the same office as the mind-stuff [:the mind-stuff itself is the Eleva-
tion.}— In order to introduce the Concentration of Restriction as the ground for
rejecting the discernment of the difference and as the ground for accepting the
Energy of Intellect, he shows the excellence oftb' Energy of Intellect and the
inferior value of the discriminative insight by the phrase «the Energy of
Intellects and the following words. — Impurity has as its essence pleasure and
pain and infatuation. For even pleasure and infatuation give pain to the man
of discrimination [it 15]; therefore, like pain, they too are to be escaped.
Moreover exceptional beauty also comes to an end and so gives pain. Accord-
ingly, that too the man of discrimination can only reject Since this same
impurity and this coming to an end do not occur in the Energy of Intellect
[which is] the Self, it is said to be 4Iundefiled and unending.* An objection is
made, * How can this (»yari») [Energy of Intellect] be free from defilement, if, in
being aware of things which have as their essence pleasui * and pain and infatua-
tion, it assumes their form ? and how *an it be unending if it accepts and rejects
their forms ?’ In reply it is said 4Cit has objects shown to it.* It [the Energy
of Intellect] is that to which the various objects are shown. That [objection]
wofild be sound, if, like the thinking-substance (buddhi), the Energy of Intellect
assumed the forg^of objects ; but it is the thinking-substance only which, because
it undergoes mutations (pari$at9 soft) in the form of the objects, shows the
oftiact to ths»E;»rev of Intellect, which Hatter however) does not take»their


i. 2 — ] Book I. Concentration or Samddhi [12

form. And when this happens, the Self is then said to become aware [of
the objects]. The objector asks, ‘How can the Energy of Intellect unless
it strike upon the thinking-substance which has taken the form of some object,
know [that] object ? or, if it do strike upon [that] object, how is it that it does
not undergo a change into the form of that [object] ? * To this he replies <does
not unite [with objects].* Union is contagion ; not any of this is in Intellect :
this is his meaning. If any one asks why there is no [union] of this [Intellect
with objects], the reply is, it is immutable. Mutation, which has the three-
fold character [see iii. 18] of external aspect (dharma) and time-variation
(laksana) and intensity (avastha), does not appertain to the [Energy of] Intellect
also (apt) [as it does to the mind-stuff] in any such way that (yena), by passing
into a mutation in the form of an action, the Energy of Intellect should mutate
in correspondence with the thinking-substance. That it, [this Energy,] even
if it does not unite [with objects], can [nevertheless] be conscious of objects,
he will now show to be possible. This [much] is established, that the Energy
of Thought is unsullied by [the aspects (yuaa)]. But it has been acrid that the
discriminative discernment, since it has as its essence the substance of the
thinking-substance is not unsullied. It is «[therefore] contrary to this*
Energy of Intellect. And since even the discriminative discernment is to be
rejected, then how can you make mention of the oth^r fluctuations which
abound in defects : this is the real meaning. Thence, [that is,] for this reason,
the introduction of the Concentration of Restriction is fitting. And so he says,
4CHence . . . with this.* The meaning is that he restricts even the discrimina-
tive discernment by the higher passionlessness which, surely, is nothing more
than the complete calming 0 of the perceptions.— Now, what kind of a mind-
stuff would that be that has all its fluctuations restricted ? In reply he says
«[When it has reached] this state.* He speaks of that [mind-stuff] the state
of which has restriction. — He tells what restriction itself is: «This is the
[so-called] seedless.* 'The latent-deposit (tyaya) of karma, which corresponds
with the hindrances— birth and length-of-life and kind-of-enjoyment [ii. 18],—
is the seed. That which is exempt from this is <Cseedless.* For this same
[seedless concentration], he indicates the proper technical term which is current
among yogins when he says <dln this state nothing.* He sums up with the
words 4tthe yoga [which we have defined as] the restriction of the fluctuations of
the mind-stuff is two-fold.*

The mind being i.t this [unconscious] state,* what will then be
the condition of the Self? For it is the essence ( dtman ) [of the
Se^f to receive] knowledge ( bodha ) [reflected upon it] the
thinking-substance ( buddhi ), [as this in its turn receives the
impression of external objects, and, in this dhsej there is a [total]
absence of objects [in the thinking-substance!


[— i. 3


13] Consummation of Yoga

►

8. Then the Seer [that is, the Self,] abides in himself.

At that time the Energy of Intellect is grounded in its own self,
as [it is] when in the state of Isolation. But when the mind-stuff
is in its emergent state, [the Energy of Intellect], although really
the same, [does] not [seem] so.

To introduce now the next antra, he raises the question beginning «The
mind being in this [unconscious] state . . ,y> The question has the force of
an objection: 4 Now this Self, whose essence is [that it receives] the knowledge
(bodha) [reflected upon it] by the thinking-substance which is mutated into
the form of one [objectj after another, is always undergoing an experience,
[but there is] no [experience] when [the Self] is deprived of the knowledge
from the thinking-substance. For the very nature of this Self is the know-
ledge ( boclha ) thrown upon the thinking-substance precisely as shining is [the
nature] of the sun. Moreover this [knowledge of the thinking-substance]
does net occur nx that kind of mind which consists of subliminal-impressions
( sariiskdra ) only. And further a thing cannot exist without its own nature.
If this is so, then why does not the Self know that thinking-substance also
which consists of subliminal-impressions only?' To this he replies «there
is a [total] absence of objects.^ The thinking-substance as such (buddht-mfttra)
is not the object of the Self, but (apt tu) only in so far as it fulfils the purposes
of the Self [iv. 32 J. Now the two purposes of the Self are discriminative
insight and the enjpyment of objects ; and these do not exist in the restricted
state [of the mind-stuff]. Thus the [total] absence of objects is established.
The rebuttal is [also] given in the sQtra: 3. Th^n the Seer [that is, the Self]
abides in himself. The words <in himself> n. n that the peaceful and the
cruel and the infatuated nature falsely attributed ^ to the Self] has ceased. For
the Selfs Intelligence ( dlitanya ) is himself (srarfljpa), [and is] not conditioned ;
while the knowledge of the thinking-substance has the various forms peaceful
and other. And so it is subject to conditions just as the crystal which is in its
own nature absolutely transparently white [is subject to conditions] the
redness of the [orystal] is its condition of being near the China-rose. And
when a condition ceases, there is no cessation of the thing conditioned ; since
this would prove too much. This is the real point. And although [the Seer]
in himself [svarupatah) cannot [actually] be divided, 1 still wheh-he [the author
of the Comment^ -supposea-a-predicate-relation (viko'tya) [between the dra*(r
and his warftjpa]* the words tin h Mself> (svariipc) ire put in the locative case.
This same meaning is made clear by the author of the Comment when he says
£groufided in its own self.* CAt that time» means in the state of restriction
(and] not in the state of emergence. [The objection is made,] 4 Thft may be
true. But iftwhil* in the state of emergence the Energy of Intellect is not

* 1 Literally, eltb'rfgh the esneatial*at tribute (arsrfyxi) cannot be divided [from the Self]-


i. 3 — ) Book I. Concentration or Samadhi [14

grounded in itself and while in the state of restriction is grounded [in itself],
then it would enter into mutation ; or else if in [the state of] emergence It
[remains] grounded in itself, [then there would be] no difference between
emergence and restriction.' In reply to this he says <But when the mind-stuff
is in its emergent stated Never does the Energy of Intellect, [in that it is]
absolutely eternal, deviate from itself. Accordingly, as [it is] in restriction,
just so [is itj in emergence also. Assuredly, mother-of-pearl as such (svarOpa)
does not suffer increase or decrease of being, no matter whether the perception
( jAana ) which refers to it (gocara) be the amerce of a valid idea (pramUno) or
[the source of] a misconception. The observer however, although the thing
is really the same, is under the illusion that it is not so (atath&lvma).
Compared with the concentration of restriction, even [the concentration that
is] conscious [of an object] is nothing more than emergence.


How in that case [is it that the Energy of Intellect does n&t seem
the same in the emergent state] ? [The answer is,] Since objects 1
are shown to it.

4. At other times it [the Self] takes the same form AS the
fluctuations [of mind-stuff].

Ii^ the emergent state [of the subliminal-impressions], the Self has
fluctuations which are not distinguished from fluctuations of the
mind-stuff ; and so we have a sutra [of Panca^ik ha *], “ There is only
one appearance [for both], — that appearance is knowledge.” The
mind-stuff is like a magnet ; and, as an object suitable to be seen [by
the Self as Witness], it gives its aid [to the Self] by the mere fact
of being near it, and thus the relation between it and the Self is
that between property (svarn) and proprietor (xvamin). Hence the
reason why the Self experiences ( bodha ) the fluctuations of the
mind-stuff is its beginning-less correlation [with the thinking-sub-
stance].

To introduce the next antra, he inquiree tHow in that caae ?* If [the Energy
of Intellect], though rerlly the same, [does] not [seem tq be]%o, in what kind
of a way in that case does it assume an appearance? such is the moaning .
He supplies the words «8ince objects are shown to it* which give the reason,
and [y>en] rehearses the sQtra. 4. At other times it takes the same tong, as
the fluctuations [of mind-stuff]. <At other times> means 4Cin the emergent


1 Compare Viatju Pur. i. 14. 35.

' flee jQarbe : Pafica^ikha und Mine Frag-


ments in Feitgrun an Roth, Stattgyrt,
1808, p. 75.


15] The Self correlated with its thinking-substance [ — i, 4

state <the fluctuations [of mind-stuff ]> are the tranquil and the cruel
and the infatuated ; «Cnot distinguished^ means not different. These [three]
are those [fluctuations] which the Self has. — <The same form:> in these
words the word 'same' is synonymous with 4 one’. What he means to Bay
is this: when, by reason of nearness to each other, the difference between
[the colour] of the China-rose and of the crystal [vase] or analogously, between
the thinking-substance and the Self, does not come to consciousness ( a-bheda -
grahe), then the individual by wrongly attributing the fluctuations of the
thinking-substance to the Self, recognizes [wrongly] that he is tranquil or
pained or infatuated. Likewise, wrongly supposing that his face when reflected
upon the dirty surface of a mirror is itself dirty, [the individual] bemoans
himself at the thought that he is dirty. Although 1 the fluctuation of the
thinking-substance, like the perception of sounds or other [perceptible] things,
is also wrongly attributed to the Self, and although in so far as it is primary-
substance it should be experienced os being unintelligent, nevertheless by
l..«4fcferring the quality of the Self to the thinking-substance, [the fluctuation
of the thinking-substance] appears as if it were a fluctuation of the Self, as
if it were an experience [of the Self]. And so although the Soul (dtman) has
no misconceptions, it seems to have misconceptions; although not an ex-
perience^ it sqpms to be an experiencer ; although it lacks the discriminative
discernment, it seems to be provided with it, [and] it shines forth by the
discriminative discernment. 2 And this will be set forth in detail in this [satra]
[iv. 22], “The intellect ( citi ) which unites not [with objects] is conscious of
its own thinking-substance when [the mind-stuff] takes its form [by reflecting
it];” and in this [iiL 35], “Experience is undistinguished from a presented-
idea on the part of the sattva :^pect and ‘ot 'ie Self, each absolutely uncom-
mingled [in the presented ideaj.” And this r.as been established in another
system also [the Sftihkhya]. Accordingly with the words 4£and so» he intro-
duces (dha) the BQtra of Panca^ikJha the dcarya, # There is only one appearance
[for both], — that appearance is knowledge.” The question is raised, 4 How
is there one appearance ? considering that you say that the fluctuation of the
thinking-substance— occupied on the one hand with the different kinds of
things, and occupied on the other hand with insight, and perceptible as
being unintelligent in so far os it is primary-substance — is appearance; and
[considering that you at the same time say that] the Selfs intelligence (c&itanya),
which is Afferent from this and which is the perception, is [also] appearance.’

1 Literally: Although yet anoth^ Self- native discernment [that i’s, so long as

wrong-attribution possesses a fluctua- there is no discriminative discernment:

lion of the thinking-substance like the reading iva d vivehakhy&ty&h]. Or: it

perception of sounds and so on, and seems to be provided with it during

the time of non-discrixninative discern-
Ox : it seems meat [reading iva a^vivekakhydtydm].

to b% p^vided with it up to disc rim i-


&1 though . .

9 Beading iva pitdcakhy&tyd*


Book I. Concentration or Samddhi


[16


To this he replies [in the words of Paflcafikha] Cth&t appearance is know-
)edge.» When he says «only one», he says it with reference to ordinary
( laukika ) knowledge, [which is] a fluctuation subject to origination and dissolu-
tion. 1 But knowledge (khydti) is not intelligence (cditanya), [which latter is]
Jhe very nature of the Self. On the contrary that [i.e. intelligence] is concerned
not with an ordinary perception (lokapratyafaa), but rather with verbal-com-
munication and inference. Consequently after [the author of the Comment]
has shown that undifferentiated-consciousness (avidyft) is the original cause
[of making wrong attributions] in the emergent state, he suggests that this
[consciousness] is the cause of the contact [of {he Self with the thinking-
substance], and also that the relation between property and proprietor is the
cause of experience. He makes this [series of assertions] consistent by saying
«the mind-stuff.» Mind-stuff is the property of its proprietor, the Self: this
is the connexion [of the statements]. The objection is made that that-by-
which-one-ia-intelligent (cdana), [namely,] the agent that is Master of the
mind-stuff, accepts aid {upakdra) afforded by the mind-stuff, whereas it is
impossible that he [the Master of the mind-stuff should accept] aid afforded
by this [mind-stuff] The reason for this is that there is no correlation [of
the Self] with this [mind-stuff], since [the Self] cannot be aided [by it].
But on the other hand (ca) if it be the case (4ve) that theje is a connexion
with this [mind-stuff] or that aid is accepted from it, one would have
to admit that [the Self] enters into mutation. In reply to thi* objection he
says "«1 ike a magnet; and, as an object suitable to be seen [by the Self as
Witness], it gives its aid [to the Self] by the mere fact of being near it.» The
mind-stuff is not in connexion ,with the Self, but is near it. [ This] nearness,
moreover, does not result from a correlation either spatially or temporally of
the Self with it [the mind-stuff]. But the distinguishing characteristic [of this
nearness] is [that the Self stands to the mind-stuff in a relation of] pre-
established harmony {yogyatfi ), Moreover the Self has the capacity for being
the experiencer [while] the mind-stuff has the capacity for being experienced.
Accordingly [mind-stuff] is described «as an object suitable to be seen.» In
other words it is described as an object-for-experience when it enters into
mutations which have the forms of various kinds of things (fa&dadi). Although
experience is a fluctuation in the form of sounds and of other [perceptible]
things and is an external aspect (dkarma : see iii. IS) of the mind-stuff, still
it [experience] belongs to the Self, because the Self <takes the same form as
the fluctuations:) [that is, # because they result from the false supposition of
an identity between mind-stuff and intelligence (c&itartya) : this is what is

1 The original, udaya-vya ya-dh armin i, may Digha-mkaya, ii. 157, ed. PTB. But

be a Reminiscence of one of the most Vacaspati seems to undeistand it mom

famous of all Buddhist g&th&e, pregnantly here as 4 subject to rising

antccd vata sanJchdrd into and passing <AA of conscious*

vppdda-vaya-dhammino, neit 1 .


17 ]


Five kinds of fluctuations [ — i. 5

meant. Therefore although there la no correlation with the mind-stuff, still
It ia established that the Self accepts aid afforded by it, and that it does not
enter into mutation. A question is raised, 'The relation of property and
proprietor is [we grant] the reason for experience and is subject to the condi-
tions of uddifferentiated-consciousness. But subject to what conditions is
undifferentiated-consciousness? Not subject to conditions (as everybody admits)
no effect is produced. As they say, "Is there any commencement of un-
differentiated-consciousness for him [ that is, man] as in the case of sleep and
so on?’" While apparently summing up, he [in fact] removes this doubt
with the words iHence’ the reason why . . . experiences the fluctuations of
the mind-stuff.^ The reason for the [Selfs] awareness of the mind-stuff’s
fluctuations in the form of tranquil and cruel and infatuated forms is the
[above-mentioned] correlation, which is without beginning Bince it in under
the conditions of undifferentiated-consciousness which is without beginning.
And the serial-order (santana) of undifferentiated-consciousness and of the
subconscious-impressions ( vasaud ) is, like the serial-order of Beed and sprout,
without beginning.

Moreover these — for there are many such found in the mind-stutf —
Aust be restricted.

5. The fluctuations are of five kinds and are hindered or
unhindered.

The hindered (klista) are those which are caused by the hindrances
{kief a) [undifferentiated-consciousness, &c. : see ii. 3] and are the field
for growth of the accumulation of the latent-deposits of karma ;
the unhindered have discriminative Iscemment as their object and
thus obstruct the task ( adhikara ) of thg aspects (guna). These are
still unhindered even when they occur id the stream of the hindered.
For even in the midst of the hindered [fluctuations] they are un-
hindered ; while in the midst of the unhindered [they are] hindered.
Corresponding subliminal-impressions are produced bv nought else
than [these] fluctuations, and fluctuations [are made] by subliminal-
impressions. In this wise, the wheel of fluctuations and subliminal-
impressions, ceaselessly rolls 1 on [until the highest concentration is
attained]. Operating 1l. this wise, this*mind-stuff, hawng finished
its task, abides in its own likeness, or [rather] becomes resolved
[into primary substance]. — These, either hindered or unhindered,
are the fi^e-fold fluctuations.

1 Cftmpttrt i. 11, p. 288 (Calc. ed.).


3 17]


i. 5 — ] Book I Concentration or Samddhi [18

Lei this be granted. Still a man is qualified for that in which he has capacity.
Furthermore the restriction of fluctuations is impossible unless one has an idea
of the fluctuations. And yet no one even in a thousand years could count them.
Numberless as they are, how [then] can they be restricted ? In reply to this
<yfficulty he introduces the sntra whose purpose is to teach us their number and
their nature with the words ^Moreover these— for there are many such found
in the mind-stuff — must be restricted :£ 5. The fluctuations are of flve kinds
and are hindered or unhindered. The fluctuations form a single whole.
Of this [whole] there ar«* five parts, and of them the first is the source- of-a-valid*
idea. Accordingly, there is a fluctuation which has the parts of this [whole],
[namely] five-fold, [that is] of five parts. And since these fluctuations are many,
inasmuch as there are different mind-stuffs belonging to Chftitra and to M&itra
and to other people, the use of the plural is consistent What he wishes to say is
this : Whether Chftitra or Maitra or any one else — of all these without exception,
the fluctuations are of exactly five kinds [and there are] no more [fluctuations].
And the word «Cmind-jtuff,» which has a collective sense (jdtyabhiprdya), is
a singular, but is to be taken as [a plural,] mind-stuffs. He shows that there
are differences of a subordinate kind which are serviceable in the pursuit [of
yoga] in the words <hindered or unhindered.) By the help of the unhindered
[fluctuations], the hindered should be restricted ; and the firmer, [should be
restricted] by the higher passion lessneas. He gives the explanation of this in
the words «caused by the hindrances ;» in other word the fluctuations have
the fueling- of-personality and the other hindrances as their cause of action.
Another interpretation would be that, for a person whose chief end is to fulfil
the purposes of the Self, those fluctuations which consist of rajas and tamos act
as hindrances in so far they cause hindrance. «Hindrance» is in the sense
fJPan. v. 2. 127] of having something hindered [as its effect]. This [hindrance]
belongs to those [fluctuations] and therefore they are called hindered. — Since
the action of those [hinderedjeluctuations tends towards an increase of hindrance,
It if they which are the field for growth of the accumulation of the latent-
deposits of karma. For this observer [namely, the thinking-substance whose
chief end is to fulfil the purposes of the Self] decides definitely (ava $Aya) by
souroes-ef-valid-ideas and in other ways what the [intended] object is and becomes
attached to it or averse to it and [then ] accumulates latent-deposits of karma.
Thus, hindered fluctuations become the soil for the propagation of the accumu-
lated merit and demerit. He expluins the unhindered [fluctuations] by saying
that they Chave discriminative discernment as their objects 0 When the sattoa
of the thinking-substance is cleansed of rajas and lamas and flows calmly
onwards, the clearing of the insight ( prajnu ) is the [discriminative] discernment.
By [thus apeak ing of] that which has discernment as its] object he partially*
describes that discrimination (viveka }, tx tween sattca and the -Belt which is the
object of this [insight]. Accordingly, dnee [tig) unhindered] have as their
object the dlleriini nation of [ the diffei er.ee between 1 the sattva and the Self, for


19 ]


Mingling of fluctuations r — i. 6

this very reason they obstruct the task of the aspects Now the aspects

have the task to develop products. Since moreover this [development] lasts
until the end of discriminative discernment, and since when the aspects have
aceomplished their task (adhik&ra) [these unhindered fluctuations] restrict their
authority (adhQtfXra), for this reason sources-of valid-ideas and the other fluctua-
tions are these unhindered ones. [The objection is made :] 4 This may be trife.
But all living creatures have hindered fluctuations only, since there is nothing
born that is free from desire. Furthermore, unhindered fluctuations cannot
exist in the stream of hindered fluctuations. And even if those [unhindered
fluctuations] could exist, they •could not produce effects since they have fallen
into the midst of obstructors. For this reason restriction of the hindered by
the unhindered and of these latter by the higher passionlessness is nothing more
than a wish.’ In reply to that objection he says «in the stream of the hindered. »
Practice and passionlessness are produced by devoting oneself steadily to verbal
communications and to inferences and to the instruction of teachers. <6ln the
midst of the hindered» [means] among [them]. That they occur there means
that they are in themselves quite unhindered although they occur in the stream
of tho hindered. Surely a Brahman, although he reside at 9&lagr&ma which is
crowded with hundreds of Kiratas, is not [on that account] a Kir&ta. This is an
example of what is meant by [occurring] in the midst of the unhindered. And
in so Mr as the^are found amonp the hindered, the unhindered, without being
suppressed by the hindered, do after all, as gradually their own sublimiral*
impressions come to fruition, suppress the hindered. ^Corresponding^ jneane
that unhindered subliminal-impressions [are produced] by unhindered fluctua-
tions. This is that wheel of fluctuations and subliminal-impressions which
ceaselessly rolls on until the concentration of restriction [is attained]. Operating
in this wise, the mind-stuff reaches the state restriction and, coming [then]
to consist of nothing but subliminal-impressions, abides in its own likeness
(dtmahalpena ) : this is the superficial view. Or«else— and this is the stricter
view— -it becomes resolved into primary substance. — He joins together the
meaning of sQtras [6 and 6] by the word «These.^ — The word «five-fold»
[literally, five times] is an expression of the sense merely ; but it is not a literal
rendering of the force (irtti) of the termination (pahda), because it is not taught
[by Panini, at v. 2. 42] that the termination taya {tayap) has the meaning <?f
4 kinds


6. Sources-of- valid- idea? and misconceptions and predicate-
relations and sleep and memory.

These [five] he announces by their technical names. 8 . Sources-of- valid-idea a
and misconceptions and predicate-relations and sleep ann mexnSry. [The
compound] 4* analysed according to the order of words in the enumeration J of
the sntral. The compound it a copulative (c&rthc dvamdvah , Pflnini ii. 2. 291 in


7 'S’r' LIBRARY

v Accession No^5?..^T (..

i O'-^ s


i. 6—]


^filALA,

Book I. Concentration or Sam&dhi


the sense of mutual conjunction. — Just as once more in the statement [ii. 6],
44 The recognition of the permanent, of the pure, of pleasure, and of a self in
what is impermanent, impure, pain, and non-self, — is undiiferentiated-conscious-
ness,” such illusions as the loss of the sense of orientation or as the fire-brand
[whirled about so as to be seen as a] circle, are not expressly excluded, — so here
also, even in the mentioning of the sourcea-of- valid-ideas and the rest, sinoe doubt
as to the real existence of other fluctuations would not [otherwise] be excluded,
in order to exclude them [these others], the words * of five kinds’ should be
added. Thus it becomes dear that fluctuations are just so many and no more.


7. Souroes-of-valid-ideas are perception and inference and
verbal-communication* i. Perception is that source-of- valid-
ideas [which arises as a modification of the inner-organ] when the
mind-stuff has been affected by some external thing through the
channel of the sense-organs. This fluctuation is directly related-to
that [object], but, whereas the intended-object ( artha ) consists of a
genus 1 and of a particular, it [the fluctuation] is chiefly concerned


with the ascertainment of the particular [the genus bejng subordi-
nate in perception to the particular]. The result [of perception] is
an illumination by the Self (pauru§eya) of a fluctuation which
belongs to the mind-stuff, [an illumination which is] undistinguished
(a-vipifta), [that is, one in which the Self does not distinguish itself
from the thinking substance], [as] we shall explain in detail hereafter
£ii. 17] in the passage 3 beginning *• Self is conscious-by- reflection of
the thinking-substance/’ ii. Inference is [that] fluctuation [of the
mind-stuff] which refers (-vi§aya) to that (tat ) relation (sambandha)
which is present in things belonging to the same class as the subject-
of-the-illation (anumeya) and absent from things belonging to
classes different [from that of the subject-of-the-illation] ; and it is
chiefly concerned with the ascertainment of the genus. Thus, for
instance, the moon and stars possess motion, because, like [any man.


for instance,] Chaitra, thrv get from ,p»e jd&ca
because [negatively] the Vindhya
[from one place to another, it] does ZH^'possess mofci
which ha^heen seen or inferred Jro a trastwRcfti


1


1 Compare ii. 14, p. 214* ; Mi, 44^, S
• Compare alto i.

* \ '0


another ; and
rctaloes not get
A thing
AfSfeJpn is men-


. =? V 1 ™ :■


Moot Ag*


21 ] Sources of valid ideas l — i 7

tioned by word in order that his knowledge [thereof] may pass over
to some other person. The fluctuation [in the mind-stuff] of the
hearer which arises from that word and which relates to the object-
intended by that [word] (tad-artha-vi$aya) is a verbal-communica-
tion. That verbal-communication is said to waver, the utterer of
which declares an incredible thing, not a thing which he himself has
seen or inferred ; but if the original utterer has himself seen or
infeiTed the thing, [then. the verbal-communication] would be un-
wavering.

Among these [five], [of one, that is,] the fluctuation which is the source-of-Yalid-
ideas, he gives (&ha) [what may pass as the naturally expected] general dis-
tinguishing characteristic (la&fana), by analysing [that pne into three and
saying] : 7. The sources-of-valid-ideas are perception and inference and
▼erbal-oommunioation. A valid -idea (pramd) is an illumination of a thing 1 not
*lieauy 1 ’ presente I and is caused by the operation of the Self. The instrument for
this is the source-of-the-valid-idea ( pramdna ). And the mention [of the souroes-of-
valid-ideas] analytically [is] for the purpose of definitely excluding either a loss
or a greater number.

i. Of these [threap he gives first the distinguishing-characteristic of percep-
tion, since it is the root of all the [other] sources-of-valid-ideas, in the words
beginning <dof the sense-organs. » By using the words 4Cintended-objpct^
he rejects [the doctrine of mOy& according to which the object is] a false
attribution. With the words 4Cdirectly related to that,^ in bo far as [the
fluctuation] has an external field-of-action, he renounces [the Buddhist doctrine
whioh conceives] the field-of-action as h&vit the form of mental-objects
[literally, form of knowledge]. With the worus ^affected by some external
things he shows what the relation is between something to be externally
known and [the object] in the form of a sensation which is found in the mind-
stuff. With the words ^through the channel of the sense-organs^ he telis the
reason for the affect of this [external thing] upon the [mind-stuff which is]
separated * [from it by the sense-organ in question]. — The object is the genus and
nothing more : thus some maintain. Particulars only : thus others. Members
of yet other s< bools [say that the object is something that has] the genus and
the particular as its properties. To reject theee [points of view] he says that
[the object] ^consists of a genus and of a particular. » The object does
not have these two a* fU| property ; but it consists* of these two [by a relation
of identity]. ThifKwilt again be the topio of discussion in that passage [iii. 18]
where ft is said “since we do not maintain an absolute unity/’ With t£e words

1 Literally, Of a that-ness not j^x^esgnted recognised as existent but of unknown
to consoiouft^ss. "That' is, quality.

* * Vyawxhita : compare Sftihkbjra K&nk& 7.


Book I Concentration or Samadhi


[22


i. 7-]

^Cchiefly concerned with the ascertainment of the particular} he distinguishes
that which relates to perception from that which relates to inference and to
verbal-communication. In other words, although the genus itself does Bhine forth
[into consciousness] in perception, still it is subordinated to the particular. This
would also be a partial characterization of direct experience (sdk^dtfi&ra). And so
etffen the discriminative-discernment receives its characteristic mark. — With the
words «The result [of perception] is an illumination by the Self of a fluctuation
which belongs to the mind-stuff} he denies that there is any contradiction in
the result. An objector asks how an illumination which is found in the Self
can be the result of a fluctuation situated in the mind-stuff? For surely when
an axe 1 is busy with a khadira-tree, it is not chopping on a palft^a-tree. In reply
[Vyasa] says «undistinguished.} For the illumination whose seat is in the
Self is not produced, but is the result when the intelligence (cditanya) is reflected
in the mirror of the thinking-substance and assumes the form of that [thinking-
substance] in so far as the fluctuation of the thinking-substance has tha form of
the object. And this [intelligence] in this [assumed] condition is undistinguished
from the thinking-substance and has its being in the thinking-substance. 'More-
over since the fluctuation has its being in the thinking-substance there is ground
for the relation of the source-of-the-valid-idea to the result in the fact that [both]
have the same locus [namely, in the thinking-substance]. And this he # says
eCwe shall explain} in the passage “ Self is conscious-by-reflectfcm.”

ii. After perception [and before verbal-communication], because [in the first
place] verbal-communication depends upon inference, in so far as it obtains its
validity* from & knowledge of the con nective-power- of- words (sambandha) result-
ing from an inference with regard -to a cognition ( buddhi ) on the part of the
hearer which [inference] is based on actions and so on, and [in the second place]
because [in this sntra] the inferred is folio wed-in-enumeration by verbal-commu-
nication, — [therefore] he give3 the characteristic marks of inference, before [he
gives those of] verbal-comiyunication, in the words ^aubject-of-the-illation.}
A subject-of-illation is a subject (dharmin) distinguished by attributes (dharma)
which we wish to know. Things belonging to the same class with it [the
subject-of-illation], [are] objects similar to the genus which is an attribute of the
migor-term (s&dhya), [that is, objects that are] similar instances (sapaksa).
dtWhich is present} in these [things belonging to the same class], — with these
words he excludes [both] contrariety 8 and lack of community as between an
attribute of the middle-term ( sddhana-dharma ) [and the attributes of the major]."
Things belonging to different cl ( sea are dissimilar instances, ^nd they are other
than the similar instances, [that is,] contrary to them and containing the nega-
tion of them. «Absent} from these [things belonging to a different class].

1 See 0. M Jacob . A Handful of Popular 9 Samutthatayd : s&marthyaih BSli*

MaxiniB, part 1, 2nd edition, 1907, rSma.

* 3* 9 See AtJjalye and BOdas, T&rka-saihgraha,

§ 54, p. 306, and $ 58, p. 802.


23] Perception and inference and verbal-communication [ — i. 7

Accordingly ( 1 tad} by this he rules out over-inclusive (s&dh&rana) non-coextensive-
neas (an&ikdntikatva). Things-are-brought-into-relation — such is the use of the
word 4Crelation&, a syllogistic-mark (lihga). Thus describing the minor premiss
(paksa-dharmatd) he avoids the fallacious-reasoning (asiddhatd) [of the svarupa
type 1 ]. — « Refers* to that» [means] having [necessary] con-nection with that,*
because of the etymology 9 of the word <Crefers» (virsaya) based on this [statement
of Dh&tu-p&$ha, v. 2, that] “the root si means -nect.” — With the words <£tbe
ascertainment of the geuus» he distinguishes [the object of an inference] from
the object of a perception. Inference arises on condition that there be an aware-
ness of a relation [between twd forms]. In so far as, in the case of particulars,*
one does not apprehend relations, it is only the genus which, as affording an easy
apprehension of relations, comes into the discussion. For this he gives an
example in the passage beginning «Thus, for instance.^ The word ca [after the
word Vindhya] carries with it a reason. — Because the Vindhya [range] has no
motion, therefore it does not get [from one place to another]. Hence, as there is an
absent of motion 8 (gati-nivrltdu), there is an absence of getting [from one place to
another]. [And conversely,] because they do get from one place to another, the
moon and stars, like Ch&itra, do have motion. Thus [the point] is established.
iiL Of the fluctuation which, is a verbal-communication he gives the distinguish-
ing characteristic in^the words «a trustworthy person^ [and so on]. Insight
and compassionateness and dexterity-of-the-sense-organs combine into trust-
worthiness. A man whose ways are governed by that is a trustworthy one.
He is the one by whom the object is seen or inferred. Unless there be a heard
word, there is no receivfhg [of the seen or inferred object on the part of another
person], because, in so far as this [word] is rooted :n something seen or inferred,
it is only by these two that its meaning becomes complete. «His knowledge
[thereof] passing over)» [to some other person] means that in the mind-stuff of
the hearer there arises [into consciousness] knowlecjge similar to knowledge
found in the mind-stuff of the trustworthy person. * To effect this [passing],
4Ca thing is raentioned» [that is,] is made known, as a means to obtain what is
good for the hearer and to avoid what is bad [for him]. The rest is easy. The
verbal-communication «Cthe utterer of which declares an incredible things — for
example, * These identical ten pomegranates are going to be six cakes 4 ,* — 4Cnot a
thing which he himself has seen or inferred^ — for example, * A shrine let him
worship who desireth heaven,* — that verbal-communication 4Cwavers.»

An objector says^ * If that be so, then the verbal-communication even of such
persons as Manu would waver, [and t'»us they would not be supreme authorities,]
for even they [declared] things which they themselves had not seen or inferred.*

1 See Ath&Qre, p. 310. 1 to stand still means not to mo|e \

1 Acdbrding to this, vi$aya ought to mean 4 This is an allusion to Pataftj&li's Mahft-
‘ dissection J^facUt means ‘sphere bh&$ya on i. 2. 45 (Kielhorn i. 217 1 *).

of action ' from root v% * act Cakes (apdpa) are made with ghee ; to#
8 See Dh&tu-p&ttyt, * 975, p(hd pati-Hivfttdu, S0ja$a on RV. x. 45. 9.


Book I. Concentration or Samddhi.


[24


i. 7-1

In reply he says «but if the original utierer.» For in oase of such persona (fofro),
the original utterer was the Invars, who had himself seen or inferred the things.
For instance, it is said [at Manu ii. 7], “Whatever law has been ordained for any
person by Manu, every such [law had been already] laid down in the Veda.
That, surely, contains within itself all knowledge.” This is the meaning.


8. Misconception is an erroneous idea ( j liana ) not based on
that form [in respect of whioh the misoonception is enter-
tained].

Why is it not a source-of-a-valid-idea ? Because it is inhibited by
the source-of-a-valid-idea, for the reason that the source-of-a-valid-
idea has as its object a positive fact. In such cases there is evidently
an inhibition of the source-of-the-invalid-idea by the source-of-the-
valid-idea, as for instance the [erroneous] visual-perception of two
moons is inhibited by the actual ( sad-vi$aya ) visual-perception of
one moon. This [fluctuation, namely, misconception] proves to be
that [well-known] five-jointed undifferentiated-consciousness [the
joints of which are enumerated at ii. 3 in the words] : “ Undifleren-
tiated-consciousness and the feeb’ng-of-personality and passion and
hatred and the will-to-live are the hindrances.” These same [are
known] by peculiar technical 1 designations : Obscurity and Infatua-
tion and Extreme Infatuation and Darkness and Blind-Darkness.
These will be discussed in connexion with the subject of the defile-
ments of the mind-stuff.

8 . Misconcep+ion is aif erroneous idea not based on that form [in respect
of which the misconception is entertained]. The word <Misconception>
indicates the thing to be characterized ; the words Erroneous idea> and so on
[give] the distinguishing characteristic. A form which appears [in conscious-
ness] as an idea (jnana) is i:n-based on that form, [or, to put it as does the sQtra,]
<not based on that form>. As, [to give another example in which the negation
applies to the action' and not to the object,] ‘ One who eats not the funeral-feast.’
Accordingly doubt also would be included [in the definition ^"misconception].
But there is a distinctionto tnis extent : in this case [the cale of doubt] the failure
to be based [on the true form] is overridden by a [clear] perception ( jndna ) ; but
[in ths other case], such as [the vision J of two moons, [the misconception is qvsv-

' Compare Vignu Pur. i 5. 5. rupa. Copiparg # Patanjali : MahK-

* A case of prasajya-pratiaedha. The nega- ebbSgya, Kielhom’s edition, i, p. 215,
tion applies to pratisfha and not to last line; 221“; 319'*; 841'.


25] Nature of misconception [ — i. 8

ridden] by the perception of the inhibition [of the one idea by the other idea].
An objector says, ‘ If this be granted, the predicate-relation (vikalpa), in that it
ia not based on the true form, would also upon consideration prove to be a mis-
conception/ In reply to this he says 3an erroneous perception.^ For these
words describe an inhibition familiar in common experience to everybody. 1 Now
this [inhibition] occurs in misconception ; but not in the predicate-relation, for-
asmuch as the business-of-life [is done] by this [predicate-relation], and because,
on the other hand, only the learned kind of persons when they might be engaged
in reflection would have in this matter any idea of an inhibition. — [The author
of the Comment] puts forward the objection £Why is it not a source-of-a-valid*
idea ? » The point is that a previous [perception] should not be inhibited by a
later [perception] which has incurred contradiction ; on the contrary the later
[perception should be inhibited] by just that previous [perception] which occurred
first and has not incurred contradiction. He gives the rebuttal in the words
^Because ... by the source-of-a-valid-idea.^ For this rule [of the Mlm&nsa] applies
^hen a later [perception] arises in dependence upon a previous. But in
this present case two perceptions, each from its particular cause, in entire inde-
pendence of each other, spring up. Accordingly the later [perception] does not
attain to a rise [into consciousness] unless it has destroyed the earlier [perception] ;
and in. fact its rise [into consciousness] has its being in the removal of that
[previous perception] by inhibition. But it is not true that the rise [into con-
sciousness] of a previous [perception] has its being in an inhibition of the later^ for
the reason that, at that time [the time of the earlier perception], this [later per-
ception] does not yet etfist. Hence the fact that [one perception] has not incurred
contradiction is the reason why [another perception] is to be inhibited ; and [hence
also] the fact that [a perception] hao incurred con . adiction [is the reason] why it
should act as inhibitor. Consequently it is established that the source of-a- valid-
idea, because its object is a positive fact, can inhibit source-ofan-invalid-idea.
An example is given in the words £ln such cases ? .... by the source-of-the-
valid-idea.» In order that it may be rejected, he shows the worthlessness of
this [source-of-invalidideas, i.e., of undifferentiated -consciousness] in the words
<cThis . . . that , . five.» So, undifferentiated-consciousness as a genus [exists]
in five special-forms [literally, in five joints], namely, undifferentiated-conscious-
neBS, senae-of-personality, and so on. The mental-process (buddhi) which [recog-
nizes : compare ii. 6] the Belf in eight forms which are not the self, that is, in
the undeveloped [primary substance] and in the Great [thinking-substance] and
in the substancfe of personality am 1 ' in the five subtile-elements (tanmatra),— is
undifferentiated-consciousness, the [so-called] Obscurity. Similarly the mental-
process ^hich [recognizes] welfare ftveytw) in forms where no welfare ia, in
atogaization ( animon : technical, see iii. 45) and the rest of the eight sup&macies
of yogins, is eightrfold^the [so-called] Infatuation. [This is] worse than the pre-

1 On the form s&rvajanina see P&n/lv. 4. 99, Siddh&nta K&umudi, $ 1651, or Whitney's
* Grammar, $ d.

4 [a os. it]


i. 8— ] Book I Concentration or Samadhi [26

ceding. And (his is called the sense-of-personality (asmtfcl). In this way, after
one h as obtained eight-fold supremacy by yoga and after becoming perfected ^
{siddha), the resolution (atmika pratipattiji) to enjoy the ten objects which are seen
[in the world] {drtfa*) and taught [in the fOstra] (anugrdvika : see i. 15) is [oalled]
r Extreme Infatuation ; this is desire. In case atomization and the other supre-
macies do not come-into-play (< m-utpattau ), because while working on in this way
with this same intention he is impeded by something or other, [then,] while he is
bound down by this [impediment,] there arises, from the failure to enjoy the
objects seen [in the world] and taught [in the f&stra], anger towards the im-
pediment. This is the so-called Darkness ; this* is hatred. In like manner, if
he have success with the [supernatural] qualities, atomization and so on, and if
he dwell in thought close to the objects seen [in the world] and taught [in the
fOsfra], [then] the fear that all this will perish at the end of the mundane period
is the will-to-live, the [so-called] Blind-Darkness. It hath been B&id [S&mkhya-
karika 1 xlviii] “ There are eight different kinds of Obscurity and of Infatua-
tion. Extreme Infatuation is of ten kinds. Darkness is eighteen-fold ^likewise
Blind-Darkness. 1 '


0. The predicate-relation ( vilcolpa ) is without any [corre-
sponding perceptible] object and follows as a result of
perceptions or of words.

This [predicate-relation] does not amount to a source-of- valid -ideas,
nor does it amount to a misconception. In spite of the fact that
there is no [corresponding perceptible] object, [nevertheless,] because
there is dependence upon the authority of perceptions or of words,
something is evidently said [literally, there appears something-
said (vyavahdra) whiqh possesses a dependence]. Thus for instance,
when it is said [by some philosophers] that ‘ The true nature of the
Self is intelligence ( caitanya ) then in this case [of absence of per-
ceptible object] we may well ask— since the Self is itself nothing
but intelligence — what thing is in the attributive relation to what
[other] thing ? For (ca ) 2 the expressive-force ( vrtti ) [of language]
lies in the attributive- relation, as for instance ‘ Chiitra’s cow\
[The cow is distinguished as being Ch&itra’s, who .is something
different from her.] Likewise [there is expressive-force when the
subject and the predicate are identical, when for instauce],the Self
is saiW to be the unchanging [Absolute and thus is characterised]
by the negation of some quality which is foynd p, some [percep-

1 Compare (the unedited) Civa-ntltras ii. 13. 1 for ca meaning ‘ for *ee d. 23 u . above.


27] Nature of predicate-relation [ — i. g

tible] thing. 1 [Or when there is a connexion between a positive
and a negative, when for instance] it is said, The arrow conies to a
standstill [or] will come to a standstill [or] has come to a stand-
still. The bare meaning of the verbal-root \sthd, ‘ stand still ’ : com-*
pare page 23] is understood to he ‘ not to move ’. [In this case also
there is exprcssive-force in the attributive relation even in the
absence of any factor or IgaraJca .] So too [there is expressive-
force] in the sentence ‘ ThteSelf is something which has the property
that it does not come into existence.’ All that is meant is that there
is an absence of the property of coming into existence ; not [any
negative] property inherent in the Self. Therefore this property
[which is a negation so far as perceptible objects are concerned] is
nro'hVated and as such it is something-that-is-thought ( vyavdhara ).

9. The predicate- relation (vikalpa) is without any [corresponding per-
ceptible] object and follows as a result of perceptions or of words.

The objection is made that; if the predicate-relation follows as a result of percep-
tions or of words, then one would have to admit that it is included under [that]
source-of-valid-ideas [which is termed] verbal-communication, or [on the other
handj, if the predicate-relation has no [corresponding perceptible] object, it ought
to be a misconception. In reply to this he says «^This [predicate-relation] does
not» This is not included among sources-of-valid-ideas nor among misconcep-
tions. Why not ? Because he says «object.» With the words «ln spite of the
fact that there is no [corresponding perceptible object, » he denies that [the
predicate-relation] is included among sources-of-vand-ideas. And with the words
^because there is dependence upon the authority o[ perceptions or of words, £
[he denies] that it is included among misconception^. What he means to say
is that a man in some cases falsely attributes diversity to things that are
identical, and again in other cases identity to things that are diverse. There-
fore since identity and diversity are non-existent as perceptible objects, the
portrayal (ibhdsa) of these two is a predicate-relation [and] not the source-of-
a-vqjid-idea. Nt r yet would it be a misconception, because it is not in contradic-
tion with the fact that something is said. He gives an illustration which is well
established in ^he systems (fdsfra) in the words CThus for instance.^ What
subject (vigefya) is in the attribu, ’ e-relation (vyapadigyate), that is, is defined
(vigefyate) by what [other] thing ? For when there is identity, there is no rela-
tion of sttbject and predicate. Because [for instance] a cow cannot be defined
asa cow ; but by something different [from herself J, by Ch&itra. Tothia he
replies by the, phrase <KFor the expressive-foroe [of language] lies in the
attributive-relation. * The relation between that to which the attribute is
1 >terally ‘ poisoning negated pcrceptible-objcctqualities ’.


Book L Concentration or Samadhi


[28


i.9 — ]

to be applied and that which furnishes the attribute is the attributive-
relation, that is to say, the relation-of-predicate-and-subject. In this [lies] the
expressive-force (vrtti) of the sentence ^Cas for instance Gh&itra’s cow.£ He
adds another example found nowhere but in the books of the systems
<fLikewise [there is expressive-force].^ [A negated quality found in some per-
ceptible thing would be, for instanoe, J motion, a quality belonging to some such
[perceptible] thing as earth [and this quality as belonging to the Self] is negated.
Who would that one [thus characterized] be? y «The Self is said to be the
unchanging [Absolute] » Surely it cannot be urged in a Sftmkhya system that
there is a certain quality in perceptible-objects called non-existence and*that the
Self could be defined by this. — Sometimes there is found a reading 1 Qualities of
a perceptible thing are negated The meaning of this would be that negated
[qualities] are those concomitant with negation ; qualities of [perceptible] objects
cannot be concomitant with this [negation], because [in them] there cannot be
a connexion between an existent and a non-existent. While on the other hand
in this way [by the predicate- relation] there is distinct-knowledge. — In the words
4The arrow is coming to a standstill he gives an example from everyday life.
Now just as when we say 1 he cooks * or ‘ he chops *, we mean that the accumu-
lated moments of an action in serial order and characterized by a unity in the
result are distinctly known, so it is also quite as truly a serial order to which he
refers when he says «comes to a standstills When he says «will come to
a standstill, has come to a standstill,^ — then some objector may say, ‘If we
grant [that the action of coming to a standstill is] like .that of cooking, then
the arrow could have as its attribute an action, namely, stopping still, 1 which
is in a serial order and is over-and-above ( bhinna ) the arrow itself.' To this
he replies, [that stopping still is not a series of actions, but that] «The bare
meaning* of the verbal-root is understood to be 1 not to move*» To begin
with (t&vat), not-to-move is^a mental structure ( kalpita ) ; then too (api) the exis-
tence-in-positive-form (bfidvarupatva) of this [non-moving (reading tasyd api)] [is
a mental-structure] ; [and] then too a serial order in this [existence-in-positive-
form] [is again a mental-structure]— if that’s what you mean (iti), whew! what
a string of mental-structures ! — such is the intention [of the Comment.]— [On
the other hand,] a non-existent is conceived ( gawyate ) as in relation with all the
Salves, [although not with perceptible-objects,] not only (ca) as if it were an
existent, but also (ca) as if it were inherent (anugata ) — [provided it be] a mental-
structure. 1 But a [non-existent is] not any kind of a proj^rtysf existentially]
distinct from the Self. By way of another illustration, he says, «So too ... .

1 The words tth&syati, sthita and so forth of assertion, but no less also 4n terms

explaft tbe succession implied in the of negation, and both may be equally

word titfhati, inherent in the concept of the Self, as

f Compare Patahjali : MabSbhfisya on Pi- wtjfn we say *Not timing into exit-

ijinii. 8. 2, vSrfc. 11 (Kielborn i. 258 1,f )- tence is a property of the 8elf\ o*

* The Self (purufa) can be defined in terms ‘The Self is un-changing*.


29] Nature of sleep [ — i. 10

the property that it does not come into existence.^ — Many thinkers [of the
Mlroahsa and Nyaya schools] have advanced the assertion that there is no
fluctuation [called] predicate-relation other than the source-of-valid-ideas or the
misconception. fo enlighten them, is, as we may suppose, the purpose of this
abundance of illustration.


10. Sleep is a fluctuation [of mind*stuff] supported by the
cause ( pratyaya , that is 'tamas) of the [transient] negation
[of the waking and the* dreaming fluctuations]. 1

And this [fluctuation] by [the operation of] connecting-memory
becomes, upon awakening, a special kind of presen ted- idea
(pratyaya). How is it that one can reflect : * I have slept well, my
mind is calm, it makes my understanding clear ; I have slept poorly,
niy mind is dull, it wanders unsteadfast ; I have slept in deep
stupor, my limbs are heavy, my mind remains unrefreshed (klanta)
and languid and as it were stolen [from my grasp] ? ’ [The answer
is : ] the .nan [just after] awakening would of course not have this
connecting-memory, had there not been [during sleep, some] experi-
ence of [this form] of a cause ( pratyaya , that is tamas ) ; nor would
he have the memories based upon it and corresponding with it [&t
the time of waking]. Therefore sleep is a particular kind of pre-
sented-idea (pratyaya ) ; and in concent.? 'on it also, like any other
presented-idea, must be restricted.

10. Sleep is a fluctuation [of mind-stuff] supported by the cause of the
[transient] negation [of the waking and the dreaming fluctuations]. 1
For, the word * fluctuation * given-in-the-topical [sUtra i. 5] is made-the-subject-of-
an- assertion [here]. Because, with regard to sou rces-of-valid -ideas and misconcep-
tions and predicate-relations and memories being fluctuations, there is no disagree-
ment among investigators, — therefore this word is-made-the-subject-of-an-assertion
(anudyate) [namely, that one of the fluctuations is sleep,] in order that this
particular [fluctuation] may be mentioned. But as to whether sleep is a fluctua-
tion or not, theje is disagreement among investigators. Accordingly it must be
expressly said that ft is a fluctuati a. And the fact that the matter-in-band
[namely, that one of the fluctuations is sleep] is made-the subject'-of-an-assertion
cannot serve as an express statement [to the effect that sleep is a fluctuation].

1 The point here is that *leep is a positive fore of sufficient importance to require
experience adfaot, as some Vedintins, an explicit assertion.

Udayana, for instance, would tealh, the * Compare Jacobi: Anandav&rdhana's
absence of a fluctuation. It is there- DhvanyEloka, p. 28, note 1.


Book I. Concentration or Samadhi


i. 10 — ]


(30


Consequently the word fluctuation is used [here] again. That fluctuation i a
called Bleep the object or support of whioh is a cause (pretfyaya), that is, a cause
(Jfcdmsa),— the tamas which covers over the substance (sattva) of the thinking-
substance,— of the [transient] negation of the fluctuations of waking or of
greams. For the substance of the thinking-substance has three aspects; and
when iamas , the coverer of ail the organs, preponderates over sattva and rajas
and becomes manifest (dm), then, because there is no mutation of the thinking-
substance into the form of an object, the Self, aware of a thinking-substance
which consists of intensified tamas, is in deep r sleep and inwardly conscious.
Thus it is explained.

[An objection :] why not consider sleep to be merely an absence of fluctuations,
as in the case of restricted isolation (kdivalya)? He answers 4This.2> And
this [fluctuation] by [the operation of] connecting- memory, that is, a remem-
brance which can be made the basis of an argument ( sopapatiika ), is a special
kind of presented-idea. How [is the argument? He replies] : When tamos is
manifest in company with sattva , then the connecting-memory of a man just
arisen from sleep is of such a kind that he reflects <Zl have slept well, my
mind is calm, it makes my understanding clear clarifies it, in other words.
But when tamas is manifest in company with rayas, then the connecting-
memory is of such a kind that he reflects (aha) «I have slept poorly, » in other
words, my mind is dull and unfit for work. Why? Since it wanders unstead-
fast. [The author of the Comment] describes the connecting-memory, of a man
[just] awakened, with reference to a sleep in which tamas , preponderating
altogether over rajas and sattva , comes-quite-to-the-fore ( samulldse ), in the words
4CI have slept in deep stupor, my limbs are heavy, ny mind remains unrefreshed
and languid and as it were stolen [from my grasp]. » — In the words 4C • • • of
course not have this . . .,» he gives a negative instance of the middle-term
(A etu), [that is, experience,] in order to show that the major-term (sddhya) [that is,
memories] does not exist. *XAwakening» means just after awakening. C[Had
there not been during sleep, some] experience of [this form] of a caused means
[had there not been] an experience of the cause of the [transient] negation of the
fluctuation. «Based upon it» is said with reference to the time of waking. An
objection is made that sources-of-valid-ideas and other fluctuations have their
locus in the emergent mind-stuff and must be restricted because they are enemies
to concentration ; but that sleep, since it amounts to a fluctuation single-in-
intent, is in no wise a foe to concentration. To this he replies vpth the words
CAnd in concentration.^ Sit ->p, to be sure, does amount to [tf fluctuation] single-
in-intent ; but, because of its quality of tamas , it is a foe to concentration-with-
seed and to seedles8-[concentration], [that is, concentration without subliminal-
impressiens]. And therefore it also must be restricted : this is the meaning. *


31] Nature of Memory [ — i. 11

11. Memory ( smrti ) Is not-adding-surreptitlously (< asampra-
mofa) to a once experienced object.

Does the mind-stuff remember the presented-idea or does it
[remember] the object ? The presented-idea, if affected by the,
object-known ( grahya ), shines-forth-in-consciousness ( nirbhdsa ) in a
form 1 of both kinds, both of the object-known and of the process-
of-knowing (grahana ), and gives a start to the corresponding
subliminal-impression. This subliminal-impression [of these two
kinds changes into] its phenomenal [form *] by the operation of
the conditions-which-phenomenalize ( yyanjaka ) it (eva) [that is to
say, the subliminal-impression], and brings forth [in its turn]
a memory which [also] consists of the object known and of the .
process-of-knowing. With regard to these two ( tatra ). — *n the case
of the idea ( buddhi ), the form of the process-of-knowing is predomi-
nant ; and in the case of memory, the form of the object-known
is predominant. The -latter [that is, memory] is of two kinds, in
that the-things4o-be- remembered are imagined ( bhdvita ) or mt
imagined. In a dream the- things- to-be-remembered are imagined,
whereas in waking the-things-to-be-remembered are not imagined.
All memories arise *out of an experience either of sources-of- valid-


The object at such it not directly per-
ceived, but only its form (dicara) as
reproduced in the thinkingttubstHnce
(buddhi-eattva), which in its turn reflects
the image cast upon it by the Self.

Literally, 44 possessing a manifestation of
themanifeBterof itself.” (1) The word
tva denotes soma mutation or time-
form or intensity [iii. 13] yet to be
phenomenalized. Anger or fear would
serve as an example. (2) The word
vyafyaka denotes the conditions which
transform the unphenomenalisedform
into a pheo Anenon. The approach of
the tiger would be a concrete example.
(3) The word aitfana, that is pruk&fana
or dArbhdoako, is the presented idea of
the tiger. The discussion is not with
regard to thif gs in |hemselves, but to
their phenomenal forms. A pbanome-
nalized'fqpr* {eyakti) is in Vtcaspati-


niifiv i terminology equivalent to a
flu cUa*tion (vrtti). And this pheno-
menalized-form is further conceived
to be any change in a substance
{dharmin} which realizes some purpose
(artkakriydkdritva). When we so regard
a substance that we Bee it doing any-
thing which interests us, we call it
a thing, in other words, a mutation
(pariitdma) or a phenomenalized- form
(ryoJttt). Consequently things do not
arise and pass out of existence, as
Buddhists would contend ; but our
conscious, experience temporarily iso-
lates successive phenomenal aspects of
permanent substances. In fine, all
phenomena are latent or imolioit in
the substance and become fluctuating
or explicit under certain determined
conditions.


i. 11 — ] Book I. Concentration or Samddhi [32

ideas or of misconceptions or of predicate-relations or of sleep or of

memory. And all these fluctuations have as their being pleasure

and pain and infatuation ; and pleasure and pain and infatuation

ye to be explained among the hindrances [ii. 3-9] : “ Desire is that

which dwells upon pleasure ” [ii. 7] ; “ Aversion is that which dwells

upon pain ” [ii. 8] ; while undifferentiated-consciousness is the same

as infatuation. All these fluctuations must be restricted. Because

*

it is [only] upon their restriction that there ensues concentration
whether conscious or not conscious [of objects]. 1

11. Memory (*mrli) is not-addmg-surreptitiously (asampramoia) to a onoe
experienced object.

This not-adding-surreptitiously-to, which is the same as not stealing for, an
object once experienced by means of sources-of-valid-ideas and other fluctuations is
memory. For in the case of knowledge produced by nothing but a subliminal-
impression, the object which appeared in that experience which was the cause
of the subliminal-impression, is the own peculiar [object of that knowledge].
But the appropriation of any object in addition to that [own peculiar object] is
a surreptitious addition, that is, a stealing [from other expediences]. Why [is
there any stealing at all] ? Because there is similarity [between the subliminal-
impression and other experiences].— Sinco this word Surreptitious adding» (sam-
pra-mosa) i* etymologically derived 3 from the root mw* ‘ to steal What he
means to say is this; ail sou rces-of-val id- ideas and other fluctuations give access
( adhi-gatn ), either by the generic or the special form, to a hitherto inaccessible
object. But memory does not go beyond the limits of a previous experience.
It corresponds with that [previous experience] or corresponds with less than that,
but it does not correspond to [any experience] in addition to that. This fact
distinguishes memory from ether fluctuations. — He puts forth for discussion the
problem CDoes [the mind-stuff remember] the presented idea?» Because
experience' {anubhava) directs itself towards the object-known, [therefore] the
subliminal-impression resulting from it (taj-ja), [that is, from experience,] since
it has no [present] experience of its own, makes us remember only the objeot-
known : this is one view of the case. [Another view is that the subliminal-
impression makes us remember] only the experience [of knowing], for the reason
that [subliminal-impressions] are derived solely from experience, ^fcfter putting
forth this problem, [the author of the Comment,] byway of bridging the two views
into consistency, decides that remembrance must be of both kinds. In so
far as it directs itself towards the object-known, [the subliminal-impmslon]
is affecUH by the object-known. But, strictly speaking, it makea-to-shin#*
forth-in-consciousnees, [that is, J it illumines, not only the o^ject-J^aown but also

1 Compare the definition of memory as a tioif’, at Phileba«84A omrripta alnSt?

‘ keeping or maintenance of a eensa- cnwr. • Dhfttu pBtha i. 707.


33]


Contrast between perception and memory [ — i. 11

the process-of-knowing, that is, the form of both kinds, the nature of the two.
This [subliminal-impression] is thus described as one which has the manifesta-
tion (afijana) or form (dkara) of the manifester (vyahjaka) or cause (kdrana) of itself,
in other words, yhich has the form of the cause of itself. [The subliminal-
impression produces a memory corresponding to the cause of that impression, <
that is, to the experience ( anubhava ).] Another interpretation would be that
[this subliminal-impression is one] which has the manifestation (< afijana ) or the
bringing-to-the-point-of-fruition (phcUdbhimukhikarana ) of the manifester (vyahjaka)
or suggestive-stimulus (udbodhafya). An objection is made : 4 in so far as both
refer to the causo [that is, to experience], there is a similarity between the idea
( buddhi ) and the remembrance, then what difference is there between them ? *
In reply to this he says dCWith regard to these two . . . the process-of-knowing. »
i. [Perception :] the process-of-knowing (grahana ) is an apprehending ( upCtddna ).
And there cannot be an apprehending of that which is [already] known.
Accordingly an idea (buddhi) is said to be an illumination ( bodhana ) of that which
has not been already got at (adhigata) by this [process-of-knowing]. This [idea]
is that in which the configuration (dk&ra) or form (rupa) of the process-of-knowing
is the predominant or principal [element]. Though the relation between the
idea and the proceas-of-knowing is one of identity, [still] 1 by predicating [the one
of the oiher] the relation may be treated here as if it were that of principal and
subordinate, i L [Memory :] that whose predominant or primary [element] is the
configuration of the object-known. This same predominance of the object-known
in the configuration of the object-known lies in the fact that the object-intended
(artha) has already been made the object of one of the other [four] fluctuations.
Accordingly memory is declared to be concerned with objects which have
already been made the object of one of the other * actuations : this is precisely
what is meant by not adding surreptitiously [to the once experienced object].
It might be urged that there is even In memory a surreptitious addition. For
in a dream one’s parents and others deceased who hafe been experienced in one
time and place are brought [by memory] into relation with another time and
place not previously experienced. The reply is «The latter [that is, memory]
is of two kinds that [memory] by which imagined or mentally-constructed
things are to be remembered ; [that memory by which] not imagined, that is,
not mentally-constructed [or] real things [are to be remembered]. This [memory
of imagined things] is not [really] memory, but is misconception ; because it
agrees with tli% characteristic-mark [i. 8] of this [misconception]. But it is
called memory in so far as it reset bles memory, just as that which resembles
a souroe-of-valid-ideas is called a source-of-valid-ideas. This is his point--But
why is memory placed at the end [of L 6] ? To this he replies 4LA11 memories.)^
Experience (anubhava) means getting to [an object]. Memory is a fluctuation
preceded by a getting to [an object ]. [Not until] after this [getting to an object]

1 Literally 4 * relation of principal and subordinate ia here (ayam) predicated.’

6 # [*-+•' * T 1


Book /. Concentration or Samudhi


in— ]


[34


do memories associate themselves [with the subliminal-impression and with the
experience]. The objection is made that a reasonable person should restrict
those objects only which hinder 1 a man. Moreover the hindrances [affect him]
thus; but fluctuations do not. Why then should these [fluctuations] be
festricted? In reply he says &And all these. » [The rest is] easy.


Now what means are there for the restriction of these [fluctuations] ?
12. The restriction of them is by [means of] praotice and
passionlessness.

The so-called river of mind-stuff, whose flow is in both directions,
flows towards good and flow’s towards evil. Now when it is borne
onward to Isolation [kdivalya], downward towards discrimination,
then it is flowing unto good ; when it is borne onward to the
whirlpool-of-existence, downward towards non-discrimination, then
it is flowing unto evil. In these cases the stream towards objects
is dammed by passionlessness, and the stream towards discrimina-
tion has *ts flood-gate opened by practice in discriminatory know-
ledge. Thus it appears that the restriction of the mind-stuff is
dependent [for its accomplishment upon means] of both kinds,
[practice and passionlessness].

With the word «now» he asks .what is the means for restriction. He gives
the answer in the [following] sQtra: 12. The restriction of them is by [means
of] practice and passionlessness. If the restriction is to be effected, then both
[these] distinct activities, practice and passionlessness, must operate together,
but not either one or the oilier separately.' Accordingly he says <XThe river of
mind-etuff.» The words «borne onward to» [connote] a continuous connexion ;
^downward towards» [suggest] depth or hottomlessness.


13. Practice {abhyasa) is [repeated] exertion to the end that
[the mind-stuff] shall have permanent in this [restricted
state].

Permanence is the cond : ion of the unfluctuating mind-stuff when
it flows on in undisturbed calm. Practice is an effort ( prayatna )
with this end in view, — a [consequent] energy, a persevering

Read kl >pianti. with the distinction that there be [two]

Literally, There is [« must be] a piling-up- subordinate aetmtife* but not an alter

together (samuccaya) [«* simultaneous nftive [action],

actipn] of practice and passionlessness,


35] Restriction of fluctuations by practice [ — i. h

struggle, — the pursuit (anufthdna) of the course-of-action-requisite
thereto with a desire of effectuating this [permanence].

Of these [two], he characterizes practice by telling what it is (svarupa) and
what its purpose is, [and does so in the words] 13. Practice is [repeated]
exertion to the fend that [the mind-stuff] shall have permanence in this [re*
strioted state]. This he discusses in the words {of the . . mind -stuff. » The word
{unfluctuating^ means without fluctuations of rajas and tamos . Its flowing on
in undisturbed calm is stainlessness, is the flowing on of the fluctuations of sa ttva ;
it is singleness-of-intent ; it is "permanence. It is with this end in view [that
there is practice]. In the w<Jrds <shall have permanence) there is [a piegnant
use of] the locative case expressive of the reason [for the action] as in the phrasj
4< He kills the leopard for the sake of the skin. He makes the word «effort»
clear by a pair of synonyms {a [consequent] energy, a persevering struggled
That this [effort] starts from a specific volition (iccho) he declares in the words
{with a desire of effectuating this.» The word {this» refers to permanence.
In words {the course-of action-requisite thereto)) he describes the goal of the
effort The [eight] means-of-attaining [this] permanence are the [three] inner
means (ahga) and the [five] outer means, of which [eight] the first [two] are the
abstentions and the observances [ii. 30 and 82]. The sense is that the functional -
activity of the agent is occupied with the means [of the action], and not w it a
the result.


14. But this [practice] becomes confirmed when it has been
cultivated for a* long time and uninterruptedly and with
earnest attention.

[Practice,] when it has been cultivated £•- a long time, cultivated
without interruption, and carried out with self-castigation and
with continence and with knowledge and ^ith faith, — in a word,
with earnest attention, — becomes confirmed. In other words it is
not likely to have its object suddenly overpowered by an emergent
subliminal-impression.

An objection is made that practice is obstructed by emergent subliminal-
impressions, which are the foes of practice [from time] without beginning.
How does [practice] conduce to permanence? In reply he says. 14. But this
[practice] beeomqp confirmed when it has been cultivated for a long time
and uninterruptedly and with earnest attention. This same practice
becomes a confirmed state only when (sun) provided with [these] three qualifica-
tions. And its goal, namely permanence, is not suddenly ovenun bygmergent
subliminal-impressions. But if, even after having done practice of this kind,
a man should fflil to persevere, then in the course of time he might be overrun
{reading dthibhiysta], Therefore one must not fail to persevere


i 15 — ] Book /. Concentration or Sam&dhi [86

15 , Fassionlessness is the consciousness of being master on
the part of one who has rid himself of thirst for either seen
or revealed objects.

The mind-stuff (< cittd ), — if it be rid of thirst for objects that are
seen, such as women, or food and drink, or power ,-J-if it be rid of
thirst for the objects revealed [in the Vedas], such as the attain-
ment of heaven or of the discarnate state or of resolution into
primary matter, — if, even when in contact with objects either super-
normal or not, it bo, by virtue of Elevation ( prasarhkhydna ), aware
of the inadequateness of objects, — [then the mind-stuff] will have
a consciousness of being master, [a consciousness] which is essen-
tially the absence of immediate-experience 1 (dbhoga) [and] has
nothing to be rejected or received, [and that consciousness is]
passionlessness.

He describes passionlessness. 15. Faseionlessness is the consciousness of
being master on the part of one who has rid himself of thirst for either
seen or revealed objeots. He describes this riddance from thirst for seen
objects whether animate or inanimate in the words beginning with «wemen.»
«Power» is sovereignty. Revelation is Veda ; «revealed» is that which is
known from this [revelation], heaven for instance. Thirstlessness even for these
things is specified in the words beginning «heaven.» «Discarnate» means
without carnate body. «The discarnate state» is the otate of those who are
resolved into their organs. But there are others deeming themselves to be
nothing but primary-matter, persons who worship primary-matter, who are
resolved into primary-matter, which of course has its task [still unfulfilled in
so far as primary mutter is for them an object of desire ] : the state of these
is ^resolution into primafy- -matter. » A man rids himself of a thirst which
is directed to the attainment of thiB. Now one who is rid of thirst for a revealed
object is said to be rid of a thirst which is directed to the attainment of
heaven or the like. It might be objected : * If passionlessness is riddance from
thirst and nothing more,— why ! then this | riddance from thirst] exists even if
you don’t get to your objects. And for that reason (ff?) [that riddance from
thirst] would [also] be passionlessness.’ The reply to this is in the words ^super-
normal or not.» Passionlessness is not merely riddance from thirst. But it
is [the consciousness of ben ^ maBterj on the part of tho miAd-stuff, and is

This word antibhoga occurs in Asahga's in classical Sanskrit. The fa$t that it

Mahay diia-KutraUmkaia (1907), p. 3 19 . occurs here in another indication of yae

In !!ib translation (1911) on page 8, intimate relation between Patahjaliand

note 7, Sylvain Levi discusses this word the Mahayana* Harsbhadra Suri uses

and states that it appaiently is lacking it%t Yoga-bindu, vs. 91 and elsewhere.


87] Restriction of fluctuations by passionlessness [ — i. 16

essentially the absence of immediate-experience of objects whether supernal or
not, even when in contact with them. This same [consciousness] he makes
more clear by saying €[has nothing] to be rejected.3» The words Chas nothing
to be rejected or received^ mean free from flaw of attachment. This idea,
[a state of] indifference, is the ^consciousness of being master. 2> But whence
comes this idea? In reply he says «by virtue of Elevation.^ Objects ai*
encompassed by the three kinds of pain. That is their inadequateness. By
meditation upon that, [results] a direct perception of it, [and that is] Elevation.
By virtue of that. 1. The Consciousness of Endeavour ( yatamana-samjnd ) ;
2. The Consciousness of Discrimination ; 8. The Consciousness of a Single Sense ;
4. The Consciousness of Being Master : these are the four consciousnesses,
according to those who know the tradition. 1. Such things as desires are of
course taints found in the mind-stuff. By these the senses (indriya) are turned
each toward its particular object. So, in order that the senses may not turn
toward this or that particular object, there is a beginning, an effort [made]
to bring these taints to maturity [and thus to cast them off] : this is the Con-
sciousness of Endeavour. 2. When this beginning is made, some taints have
matured and others are maturing or are about to mature. In this [situation,] the
ascertainment of the matured by [a process of] discriminating [them] from those
about a to mature is the Consciousness of Discrimination. 3. Inasmuch as the
senses an* [now] incapable of turning [toward objects], the matured [taints] per-
sist in the central-organ 1 as a faint [barren] desire : the Consciousness of a Single
Sense. 4. The faint [barren] desire also is destroyed and there is indifference
to objects, whether sqpernal or not, even when they are close at hand : this idea
{buddhi) y higher than the other three [forms of consciousness], is the Conscious-
ness of Being Master. And inasmuch as the [three] preceding ones have their
purpose fulfilled by this same [fourth form of consciousness 1, therefore these are
not separately mentioned. Thus all is quite cleared up.


16. This [passionlessness] is highest when discernment of
the Self results in thirstlessness for qualities [and not
merely for objects].

[One yogin becomes] passionless on knowing the inadequateness of
[all] object^, seen or revealed. Through practice in the vision of
the Self, [another yogin,] because his thinking-substance is satiated
with a perfect discrimination, resulting from the purity of this
[yision], [between the qualities (gun<t) and the Self], [becomes]

1 The central-dtjfhn (lAfiNa#) is co|gntcd an the eleventh sense organ and is the Single
Sense here referred to.


i. 16 — ] Book L Concentration or Sam&dhi [38

passionless with regard to [all] qualities whether perceptible or not-
perceptible. Thus passionlessness is of two kinds. Of these [two],
the latter is nothing but an undisturbed calm of perception
[untouched by any objects whatsoever]. And at the, rising of this
<{state, the yogin] on whom this insight has dawned, thus reflects
within himself, ‘ That which was to be attained (prdpanlya ) has
been attained ; the hindrances which should have dwindled have
dwindled ; the close-interlocked succession of existences-in-the-
world, which — so long as it is not cut asunder — involves death
after life and life after death, has been cut/ It is just this utter-
most limit of knowledge that is passionlessness. For it is with
this that Isolation, as they term it, is inseparably connected.

After describing the lower passionlessness he tells of the higher: 16. This
[passionleBsness] is highest when discernment of the Self results in thirst-
lessnoss for qualities [and not merely for objects]. Lower passionlessness
serves as a cause of higher passionlessness. He points out the means to this
[higher passion less ness ] in the words ^passionless on seeing the inadequatenoss
of [allj objects, whether seen or revealed.^ By this [statement] the lower
passionlessness has been set forth. ^Practice in the vision of the Self)» is the
practice in that vision of the Self who has become accessible through verbal-
communications and inference and the instruction of teaqhers. [This practice]
is a constantly reiterated performance — through this. Purity of this vision
is a focuBedness upon sattva in so far as rajas and tamos have been rejected.
Resulting from this [purity] is that perfect discrimination between the qualities
and the Self — to the effect that the Self is pure and exists from time-without-
beginning, whereas the qualities [in respect of which it is not contaminated]
are the opposite of this — by which [discrimination] the thinking-substance of
the yogin is satiated (a-pydyita). It is to such a yogin that reference is made. Now
these same words (anena) describe the concentration called the Rain-cloud of
[knowable] Things [iv. 29]. A yogin of such a kind as this is altogether passion-
less with regard to qualities (guna\ whether their properties be developed or
undeveloped, — that is to say, even to the extent that he is passionless with regard
to the discernment of the difference between sattva and the Self, [for to this
discernment] qualities are essential. — 4CThus» that is, therefore, passion less ness
is of two kinds. The first is when the substance (sattva) of the mind-stuff has
[all] its tamos washed away by the excess of its sattva , and when the mind-stuff’s
sattva 1 is in contagion with a tiny stain of rajas. This [passionlessnes^I

1 This use of sattva is an intentional am- sattva (as a gun a), w^ch in the higher

biguity. Sattva is not only the 4 sub- stages of attainment preponderates in

stance 1 (of the mind-stuff), but is aiso the eitta (S&mkbya-s&ra, qi, near beg.).*


39] Undisturbed calm of the Self ( — i. 16

moreover, is common to those also whose wishes have been fulfilled (tauftika). 1
For they also have by virtue of the same [discrimination] been merged in
primary matter. In this same sense it has been said [Sftihkhya-karikft 45]

11 From discrimination results resolution into primary -matter.” Among these,
that is, of thege two [kinds of passionlessness] the latter is nothing but an
undisturbed calm of perception. The use of the word9 «nothing but» in&-
cates that this [passionlessness] is without any object. For it is the mind-
stuff’s substance (sattva) of precisely such a kind as this that is untouched by
the stain of even a particle of rajas . This is the substrate for that [kind of
passionlessness]. For this \ejy reason it is called the undisturbed calm of
perception. Because the substance (sattva) of the mind-stuff, although by nature
undisturbed, [sometimes] experiences defilement from contact with rajas and
tamos. But when all defilement by rajas and famas is washed away by a
stream of the undefiled water of passionlessness and practice, it [the substance
of the mind-stuff] becomes absolutely undisturbedly calm and becomes so that
nothing more is left of it than an undisturbed calm of perception. He shows its
qualities so that we may bo inclined to receive it. He says v<at the rising of
this.» The meaning is : When this [state] arises, then the yogin — on whom this
insight has dawned ; in other words, when there i9 this particular insight
[that is, the undisturbed* calm,]-- has present insight [that is, the Rain-cloud
of knowable Things]. «That which was to be found» that is, Isolation, hus
been found. In this sense he will say [iv. 80] * ‘ Even while living the wise man
becomes liberated.” The reason would be that what is nothing but subliminal-
impression has its roqt [in undifferentiated-consciousness] cut: this is the point.
How' is it that [Isolation] has been found? Since all the hindrances which
should have dwindled,— undifferentiated-copsciousness and the [four] others
together with subconscious-impressions (rtomd), - have dwindled. It is urged as
an objection that there is a mass of merit and of demerit ; there is the succession
of existonces-in-the-world, the unbroken sequence of birth and death for [all]
living creatures. How then can there be Isolation ? *In reply to this he says «has
been cut.£— 1 That [succession! the joints of which show no connexion is close-
interlocked. These sections of (he whole ( samUhin ) multitude (samuha) of merits
and demerits, which are the parts, are close-interlocked. For nothing alive is ever
free from connexion with bondage to birth and death. This is that same suc-
cession of existences in-tne-world. When hindrances dwindle, it is cut. To
this same effect he will say [ii. 12] “The latent-deposit of karma has its root
in the hindrances.” Land ii, 18] “So long as the root exists there will be fruition
from it.” Some one might ask Without the full maturity of the Elevation
(prasamkhyona) and the restriction of the Rain-cloud of [knowable Things], what
is this'undisturbed calm of peroeption ? ’ To this he replies «uttermost limit of
finowledge,* Higher passionlessness is only one kind of the Ram-cloud of


* 6p. S&ihkhya-kitrikii 50.


Book I. Concentration or Samadhi


i. 16 —]


[40


[knowable] Things ; nothing but that. To this same effect he will say [iv. 29]
“ For one who takes no interest even in Elevation there always follows, as a
result of discriminative discernment, the concentration [called] the Bain-cloud
of [knowable] Things," and [iv. 81] “ Then, because of the endlessness of per*
tet'Hon from which all defilements and coverings have passed sway, the know*
ftt'lc amounts to little.” For this reason Isolation is inseparably connected with
it [and] is an essential characteristic (avin&bh&viri) of it.


Now when the fluctuations of mind-stuff have been restricted by
these two means, how are we to describe the [ensuing] concentra-
tion conscious [of an object] ?

17. [Concentration becomes] conscious [of its object] by
assuming forms either of deliberation [upon coarse objects]
or of reflection [upon subtile objects] or of joy or of the
sense-of-personality.


Deliberation ( vxtarka ) is the mind-stuff’s coarse direct-experience
(abhor/a) when directed to its supporting [object]. Reflection
(v i card) is the subtile [direct-experience]. Joy is happiness. The
sense-of-personality is a feeling (samvid) which pertains to one self
[wbf rein the Self and the personality are one]. Of these [four] the
first, [that is, deliberation] which has [all] the four associated
together is concentration deliberating [upon coarse objects]. The
second, [that is, reflection,] which has deliberation subtracted [from
it] is [concentration] reflecting [upon subtile objects]. The third,
[that is, joy,] which has ^reflection subtracted from it, is [concentra-
tion] with [the feeling] of joy. The fourth, [that is, the sense-of-
personality,] which has this [joy] subtracted from it, is [concentra-
tion] which is the sense-of-personality and nothing more. All
these kinds of concentrations have an object upon which they rest.


After having mentioned the means (updya), in order that he may state what*
may-be-obtained-by-these-meanB (upeya) in all its variations, he aska 4CNow . . .
by these two means ?3» 17. [Cc -centration beoomes] eonsolpus [ef its object]
by assuming forms either of deliberation [upon ooarse objects] or of
reflection [upon subtile objects] or of joy or of the aense*of-porsonality.
Since [concentration] not conscious [of an object] is preceded by [concentration]
conscious , of sn object], he describes first concentration [conscious] of sn object.
The generic-nature of [concentration] conscious J[of an object] fo<to be learned
from its association with the forms of deliberation and of reflection and of »


41] Concentration conscious of an object [— i. 18

joy and of the senso-of-personality as they are in themselves. He explains
deliberation by the words «the mind-stuff s.» The direct-experience (dbhoga) [of
an object] is an insight (prajhd) with a direct-perception (stifoattora) of the thing
itself. And this is coarse because the object is coarse. For just as an archer,
when he is a beginner, pierces first only a coarse, and afterwards a subtfte
target, so the yogin, when a beginner, has direct experience merely of some
coarse object of contemplation made of the five [material] elements, [for
example] four-armed [Vishnu], and afterwards a subtile [object]. Likewise the
subtile direct-experience, wheif directed to its supporting [object], is a reflection
upon an object which is either the unresoluble-primary-matter (alinga) or the
resoluble-matter (linga) or the five tanmdtra which are the subtile elements,
the causes of the coarse [elemonts]. — Having thus described the object to be
known, he describes the object which is the process-of-knowing with the word
joy.» Happiness is the mind-stuffs direct-experience when directed towards
a sense-organ as a coarse 1 supporting object. Sense-organs, as every one knows,
«tribe from the personality-substance ( aitamkdra ), in bo far as they have a dispo-
sition to illumine because of the predominance of the sattva [quality]. And
because the sattva [gives] pleasure, these sense-organs also [give] pleasure.
Thus direct-experience when directed to them is happiness. — With the words
4Ca feeling which pertains to one self» he tells of the concentration which has
the knower as its object ( grahltrmaya ). Organs-of-sense are produced out of the
sense-of-personality. Consequently the sense-of-personality is their subtile form.
Moreover this [sense-of-personality] together with the [Self as] known becomes
the idea (buddla), that* is, the feeling which pertains to one self. And because
the knower becomes included in this [feeling!, one may say that there is a
[concentration] conscious of the Knower as its ect. — He gives another subor-

dinate difference between [these] four in the words «Cof these [four] the firsts
The effect adjusts itself to the cause, not the cause to the effect. Hence this
coarse direct-experience becomes associated [by inherence] with coarse [objects]
and with subtile [objects], with sense-organs and with the feeling-of-personality,
which are four kinds of causes. Furthermore, the other [first three direct-
experiences, inasmuch] as they have three or two or one cause, assume a triple
or double or single form. The words «A11 theses distinguish [concentration
conscious of an object] from [concentration] not conscious [of an object].


Now by whltt means is that concentration produced which is not
conscious of any object ? or what is its nature ?

18. Tile other [concentration whioh is not conscious of
objeots] consists of subliminal -impressions only [after

1 The word sthMa it used here in tlffc sense of product &• contrasted with *uk$ma in the
sense of : cp. iii. 44.

0 > [a 04. it]


1. 18 — ] Book I. Concentration or Samadhi [42

objects have merged], and follows upon that praotioe which
effects the cessation [of fluctuations].

The concentration which is not conscious [of objects] is that
restriction of the mind-stuff in which only subliminal-impressions
are left and in which all fluctuations have come to rest. The
higher passionlessness is a means for effecting this. For practice
when directed towards any supporting-object is not capable of
serving as an instrument to this [concentration not conscious of an
object]. So the supporting-object [for this concentration] is [the
Rain-cloud of knowable things] 1 which effects this cessation [of
fluctuations] and has no [perceptible] object. For (ca) [in this
concentration] there is no object-intended. Mind-stuff, when
engaged in the practice of this [imperceptible object], seems as if
it were itself non-existent and without any supporting-object.
Thus [arises] that concentration [called] seedless, [without sensa-
tional stimulus], which is not conscious of objects.

To introduce [the topic of] [concentration] not conscious [of objects] which comes
next in order, he asks 4CNow 1» 18. The other [concentration which is not
oonaoious of objects] consists of subliminal-impressions only [after objects
have merged], and follows upon that praotice which effects the cessation
[of fluctuations]. The first ’ clause [<follows upon> to- <fluctuations>] relates
to the means ; and the last two ’ words [from (the other) to (merged)] relate
to the thing itself. The middle words [from (consists) to (only)] are dis-
cussed in the words Call fluctuations.^ He discusses the first’ clause in the
phrase «The higher .... this.)) The cessation is the non-existence of fluctua-
tions. That which effects* this [passionlessness] is the cause [of it]. The
practice of it is the repeated pursuit of this [cause]. [The concentration] is
that which follows upon this same pursuit. If it should be asked why lower
passionlessness is not the cause of restriction, the reply is in the words {when
directed towards any supporting-object.^ A cause ought to be homogeneous
with its effect, not heterogeneous. And, because it is directed towards a sup-
porting-object, lower passionlessness is heterogeneous from its effect, which is
concentration [not conscious of objects], [and] not directed towards a support-
ing-object. This is the ground for the statement that it* [restriction] arises
from the undisturbed calm of perception which is not directed towards a sup-
porting-object. For when all the defilements of rajas and tamos hafe fallen
away from the saliva, it is the concentration of the Bain-cloud of [knowabje]


1 Literally, [the Rain-cloud] i«-madetbe-
supporting-object.


’ The sword* ./?»•»<* and <«> apply to the
original, not to the translation.


43] Concentration not conscious of an object [— i. 19

things which is produced ; its activity continues quite transoendent to any
object ; it has no end ; it beholds the taints in objects ; and because it alto-
gether rejects all objects, it remains grounded in itself and so is not directed
to any supporting-object ; [and thus] it may consistently be the cause of the
concentration wherein subliminal-impressions only are left and which is n*t
directed to any supporting-object because of the homogeneity [between the
restriction and the concentration not conscious of objects] : this is his meaning.
Coming to be directed to a supporting-object (dlambana) is coming into depen-
dence upon [an object] (dfrayalia). It «seema as if it were itself non-existent)^
because it does not perform its functions as a fluctuation. It is ^seedless, »
that is, not directed to any supporting-object. Another interpretation might
be [that ^Cseedless)^] is that from which the seed, namely, the latent-deposit of
the karma from the hindrances, has passed away.


This same concentration is, as every one knows, of two kinds. It
is produced either Dy [spiritual] means [i. 20] or by worldly
[means]. Of these two, that produced by [spiritual] means is the
one Vo which yogins [who are on the way to Isolation] attain.
10. [Concentration not conscious of objects] caused by
worldly [means] is the one to which the discarnate attain
and to which those [whose bodies] are resolved into primary-
matter attain. The discarnate, that is, the gods, attain to the
[concentration not conscious of objects which is] caused by worldly
[means]. For in so far as their mind-c uft‘ uses only their own
subliminal-impressions they experience a quasi- state of Isolation,
and [then] pass beyond [the period during which] the fruit corre-
sponding to their own subliminal-impressions ripens [for their
enjoyment]. [But at the end of this period they must return to
the world.] Likewise those whose bodies are resolved into
primary-matter experience a quasi-state of Isolation, during which
the mind (ceias), with its task still undone, is resolved into
primary-matter* But this lasts only till the mind-stuff, under the
pressure of its [unfulfilled] tusk, returns [to the world].

In order to show what ia to bo accepted and what rejected he points out with
the words 4CThis same ... as every one knows$ a subsidiary distinctfbn [to be
found] in the ^gnce^tration of restriction. The word 4Cthis& meaps the con-
centration of restriction ; it la «of two kinda. It ia produoed. either by
^spiritual] means [i. 20] or by worldly [menna].» He refers to that concent ra-


i. 19 — ■] Book I Concentration or Samadhi [44

tion of restriction produced [or] caused by faith and other [means} as will bo
described [i. 20]. The world 1 (bhava) is undifferentiated-consciousness (avidyd).
It is called the world because living beings are born [or] grow (bhavanti) in it.
Those whose wishes have been fulfilled (fdwtffffca), who have attained to passion-
lessness find the self (atman) in the not-self, either in the elements or the sense-
organs, which are evolved -effects ( vikdra ), or in evolving-causes ( pralcrti ), which
are undeveloped [primary-matter], or in the personality-Bubstance or in the five
fine-substances (tanmdtra ). — The [concentration] produced by worldly [means]
is that concentration of restriction produced [or] caused by the world. Of these
two [concentrations] that produced by [spiritual] means is for yogins who are on
the way to liberation. By specially mentioning [the fact that spiritual means
are for yogins], he denies that the other [means] have any relation with
persons who are merely desirous of liberation [that is, who are not yogins].
To whom then do the worldly [means] appertain? He replies to this
with the antra. 10. [Concentration not consoious of objects] caused by
worldly [means] is the one to which the di^arnate attain and to whioh
those [whose bodies] are resolved into primary-matter attain. In other
words [this concentration] is attained by both the discarnate and by those
[whose bodies] are resolved into primary-matter. This he discusses in the
words «The discarnate, that is, the gods.» By serving one or the other
of the organs or elements they have become identified with them. And
inner-organs are permeated by subconscious-impressions from these [organs
or elements]. After the body falls to pieces th*y are resolved into organs
or into the elements. Their central-organs (mams) contain nothing left but
subliminal-impressions. And they are stripped of the outer six-sheathed
body. 1 [Thus they may be termed] discarnate. For in so far as their
mind-stuff uses only their own subliminal-impressions, they experience a
quasi - state of Isolation. Being discarnate they altain [to tbisj. And the
similarity [of this state] with Isolation is in the absence of fluctuations. Its
dissimilarity is in the presence of subliminal-impressions with their task [un-
fulfilled]. In some [manuscripts] there is the reading *by the enjoyment
of nothing but subliminal -impressions \ The meaning of this would be 4 that of
which the enjoyment is nothing but subliminal-impressions \ The meaning
is that there are no fluctuations of mind-stuff. When they have reached their

VgBfina Bhik$u object* to this interpre- striction which ia temporary and which

tation and interpret* the compound leads again to flucto^ions is called

(bhava-pratyaya) a* that which ha* bhava praiyaya ; that which follows

birth (janma) a* it* cause. But he upon belief (fraddhd) a* the result

teem* to assume that the discussion is of higher passionlessness is up&ya-

in respect of the classification of two pratyaya. This latter is fit for persons

kinds of unconscious concentration. aiming at liberation. The former is a

Whereas it would appear that the pseudo-yoga is te i>e rejected,

classification is of the two kinds of 1 See Mbkp-dharma, MBh. xii. 805. 5 f. -
restriction of fluctuations. That re- 11332-3.


45] Concentration not conscious of an object [— i. 20

limit, they pass beyond or go beyond [the period during which J the fruit
corresponding to the subliminal-impressions ripens. Yet once again they enter
the round-of-rebirth. And so it has been declared in the Vfiyu[-purflna], “Ten
periods of Mami the devotees of sense-organs remain here below ; a full hundred,
the worshippers of elements.” 1 Similarly those [whose bodies J have been resolved
Into primary-matter, — in so far as they have become identified with one or the
other of the five fine-substances or the personality-substance or the Oreat
[thinking-substance] or the undeveloped [primary-matter] by serving [one or
the other] of these, — have • their inner-organs permeated by subliminal-
impressions from one or the other of these. After the body falls to pieces they
are resolved into one or the other [of these] from the undeveloped [primary-
matter] downwards. The words «with its task still undone^ mean that its
purpose is unfulfilled. For that mind would have its purpose fulfilled, if it could
also generate the discernment of the diff rence. The mind, however, which
ha* not generated the discernment of the difference has not fulfilled its purpose
and its task is still undone. Thu*, as he says, they experience a quasi state
of Isolation, during which the mind (cetas), with its task still undone, is resolved
into primary-matter. «But this lasts only till the mind-stuff, under the pressure
of its [unfulfilled] task, returns [to the world].» Even after it has been reduced
to a state of unifortnity with primary-matter, it reaches the limit [of its time]
and yet once again appears, that is, it becomes discriminated from this [primary-
matter]. Precisely so after the rainB are passed, a frog's 3 body, after having
been reduced to an earthy state, when sprinkled with water from the cloud,
experiences yet once again the state of being a frog's body. And in this same
sense it has been said in the Vftyu[-purana], “But those who-identify-them
selves-with-illusions-of-personality (abhimanika), umain a thousand [periods of
Manu] ; those who identify themselves with the thinking-substance, ten
thousand, and from them fevers [of desire] have passed away ; those who
meditate upon undeveloped [primary-matter], remain for a full hundred thousand ;
but after attaining to the Self, who is out of relation with qualities, there is no
tale of time.” 1 ThuB inasmuch as this [state which is resolved into primary*
matter] leads to a recurrence of births, its worthlessness (heyatia) has been
established.

20. [Concentration not conscious of objects,] which follows
upon belief [apd] energy [and] mindfulness [and] concen-
tration [and] insight,* is that to which the others [the
yogins] attain.

Not yet traoed in either edition. pafi&S, Buddha Bays that he t &>, as well

In the corresponding passages i. 27, ae AJSra K&l&ma, inculcates. Majjhima

p. 64 M ; ii. n, # p, 140 1 * (Calc, qpl.), we Nikfcya, i. p. 164. Cf. ‘The Balanco

find * plant * for 4 frog \ of Powers/ Visuddhi Mogga, book 4,

These five, saddhft. viiiva. sati. saxn&dhi. p. Ill of 1st Ranffoon ed.


i. 20—]

[That concentration not conscious of objects, which is] caused by *
[spiritual] means is that to which yogins attain. Belief is the
mental approval [of concentration] ; for, like a good mother, 1 it
protects the yogin. For him [thus] bebeving and setting dis-
crimination [before him] as his goal there is the further ( upa )
attainment of energy. For him who has reached the further
attainment of energy mindfulness is at hand. And when mindful-
ness is at hand the mind-stuff is self-possessed and becomes concen-
trated. When his mind-stuff has become concentrated he gains as
his portion the discrimination of insight, by which he perceives
things as they really are. Through the practice of these means
and through passionlessness directed to this end there [finally]
arises that concentration which is not conscious [of any object].

But for yogins he describes a series of means for the attainment of concentration.

20. [Concentration not conscious of objects,] which follows upon belief
[and] energy [and] mindfulness [and] concentration [and] insight, is that
to which the others [the yogins] attain. It might be objected that those who
reflect upon sense-organs might also be just the persons to have belief. To this
he Replies in the words ^Belief is the mental approval [of concentration].^
This [approval], moreover, has as its object a reality which is quite accessible
by verbal-communication or by inference or by the instruction of teachers.
For it is this mental approval, [which is itself] an extreme delight fandj a great
volition, [that is called] belief. Those who are under the illusion that the self
is in such things as sense-organs, have not an extreme delight. Because it is
a disapproval [of concentration which they feel] ; the reason [for this disapproval
is that] it has its origin in downright infatuation. This is the meaning. —
Why does he speak of just this [particular] belief [in concentration not
conscious of objects] ? He replies, ^for, like a good mother, it protects the
yogins from calamities which follow upon a deviation from the way. This is
a particular kind of volition and it generates an exertion directed towards the
object desired. So he says «For him [thusj believing.^ The exposition for
the words «for him» is ir the words ^setting discrimination [before him] as
his goal.* [For such a man] «there is the further (upa) attainment of energy.^
«:Mindfulness» is contemplation ( dhydna ). «Self-possessed» is undistracted.
^(Becomes concentrated^ means having (yukta) the concentration of the [eight]
aids to # yoga. Atad by mentioning the concentration which is inseparably
connected with the abstentions (yama ) fii. 80] and with the observances (ntyama)

(iL 82], the abstentions and the observance and thcf othCt* [six aids] are
hinted at.

1 Compare Metta Sutta in Sutta Nipflta, i. $ 7 , p. 26, Fausboll's ed.


Methods and intensities


47)


[ — i. 21


In this same way [concentration] conscious [of objects] arises for one who is
endowed with all the aids to yoga. Therefore he says {when his mind-stuff
has become concentrated.* Discrimination of insight, the exceptional quality
( prakarfa ) [of m[nd-stuff], is attained. In the words «through practice of these
means* he states that concentration not conscious [of an object] follows after
conscious [concentration]. After reaching the stages in this same concentration,
one after another, and as a result of passionlessness for the various objects, con*
oentration not conscious [of an object] arises. Now this is the occasion for
Isolation. For the insight intb the difference between the sattva and the Self
is followed by restriction which causes the mind -stuff to cease from working at
its task, since now, inasmuch as all its duties are done, its purpose is fulfilled.


Now these yogins are of nine kinds, as being respectively followers
of the gentle and the moderate and the vehement method ; that is
to say, the follower of the gentle method, the. follower of the
moderate method, apd the follower of the vehement method.
Amdtag these, ^he follower of the gentle method is also of three
kinds : with gentle intensity, with moderate intensity, and with
keen intensity. Likewise the follower of the moderate method [is
found with the three intensities]. Likewise the follower of the
vehement method [is found with the three intensities]. N ow, among
those who follow the vehement method.

21. For the keenly intense, [concentration] is near.

[For them] there is gaining of concentration and the result of
concentration.

Some one raises the objection that if belief and the other qualities are means
for [attaining] yoga, then all [the yogins] without distinction would possess
concentration and its results. Whereas it is observed that in some cases there
is perfection (jiddAi) ; in other cases the absence of perfection ; in some cases
perfection after a delay; in other cases perfection after still more delay ; [and]
in other casef quickly. In reply to this objection be says {Now these yogins
are of nine kindb * Those are called [followers of gentle or moderate or
vehement methods], in whose case, through the force of subliminal-impressions
and the invisible-influences (adrf(a) of previous births, the methods, that is,
belief and the other [means], become gentle or moderate or yehement.
{Intensity* ,if pajsionlessness. And its gentle or moderate or vehement
character is due to the foroe ofc previous subconscious-impressions and invisible-
influences? Among these [yogins,] he describes those who are of such a kind


i. 21 — ] Book I. Concentration or Satnddhi [48

that perfection is [for them] very quick, in the sQtra 21. Tor the keenly
intense, [concentration] is near. This is the statement of the sQtra ; the
comment completes the phrase. The result of concentration conscious [of an
object] is [concentration] not conscious [of an object] ; and [the result] of this
is Isolation.


22. Because [this keenness] is gentle or moderate or keen,
there is a [concentration] superior (vipe$a) even to this
[near kind]. • *

In that there is a gently keen and a moderately keen and a
vehemently keen, there is a superior even to this [concentration].
Because there is a superior to this [near kind], the attainment
of concentration and the result of concentration is near to him
who follows the vehement method and is of mildly keen intensity ;
still more near to him who is of moderately keen intensity ; and
most near to him who is of vehemently keen intensity.

22. Because [this keenness] is gentle or moderate or keen, there is a
[concentration] superior ( viqesa ) even to this [near kind].. This is explained
by the Comment which is explained if you Bimply read it aloud.


Is [the attainment] of concentration most near as a result of
this last [method] only, or is 1 here some other method also for
its attainment, or not 1

23. Or 1 [concentration] is attained by devotion to the
Ip vara.

By devotion, 2 by a special kind of adoration, the Ipvara inclines
[to him] and favours him merely because of [this yogin’s] profound-
desire. Also as a result of the profound-desire for Him, the yogin
becomes most near to the attainment of concentration and to
[Isolation] the result [of concentration].

In order to bring forward another sQtra he puts forth a topic for consideration
in the words 4ls .... as a result of this last [method] only.> The phrase

«or not» is the remover of a doubt. 23. Or [concentration] is attained by

•

1 As distinguishing from the conscious 1 Compare ii. 1, anc^iee Sfeag. Gltfi xi. 55,

concentration of i. 17, aid from the anfolso SBE. xlviii, p. 284
not conscious or f other 1 of i. 18.


49]


[ — i. 24


Nature of the Igvara

devotion to the I$vara. He discusses the words «By devotion. » By devotion
[that ia] by a special kind of adoration either mental of verbal or bodily.
€He inclines^, that is, He is brought near [to himj and favours him. «Pro-
found-desire» is a wish for some thing vet to come, to the effect that this thing
coveted by him may be his. By this means only and not by any other i
functional-activity. The rest is easy.


But it is now asked who is. this [being] that we have called the
Igvara, as distinct from the primary-substance and the Self?

24. Untouohed. by hindrances or karmas or fruition or by
latent-deposits the Igvara is a special kind of Self.

The <hindrances> are undifferentiated-consciousness and the rest
[ii. 3]. The <karmas> are good (kugala) or evil. The <fruition> is
the consequences which these [evolve]. The <latent-deposits>
(afaya) are subconscious-impressions ( vasana ) corresponding to
these [fruitions]. These [hindrances and karmas and fruitions
and latent-deposits], although they are found in the central-organ
( manas ), are attributed to the Self. For it is he that is said to be
the experiencer of the results of these [in the central-organ]. Just
as the victory or defeat which depends upon the combatants is
attributed to [their] lord (svamin). For, the Igvara is a special
kind of Self who is untouched by this [kb i of] experience.

Then there are those who have obtained Isolation ; and those
who are in Isolation ( kevalin ) are many. 1 N # ow these by severing
the three instruments of bondage * have obtained Isolation , and
the Igvara’s relation to this [Isolation] belongs neither to the past
nor to the future, [but is eternal]. Thus it is not with Him as
with the [ordinary] liberated [Self] that there has been expressly
made known a terminus a quo of bondage (purva bandhakoti).
Nor is it with Him, as it is with one [whose body] is resolved into
primary-matter, that there is a terminus ad quem, when bondage


* Aoeordiife to Bftihkhye-satra i. 91-92 the

•Ijrara should be clamed a* one of
these.

* The three bandmm would be l.pvkrtf,

2. viMra, iakfifi. Compare S&m.
7 . [a. a*, it]


Tat. K&um. xliv. The three vipdka are
jiti, ip ut, and bhogo (ii. IS)/ These
three are also the upatarga (V&cas-
pati-miijni, i. 29, Calcutta edition,
p.Se“).


i. 24 — ] * Book I. Concentration or Samidhi (50

might recur. But He is at all times whatsoever liberated and at ‘
all times whatsoever the fyvara.

But it might be asked, ‘ That universally admitted eternal
superiority (utkar§a) of the Iyvara which results from his assuming
a sattva of perfect ( prakrsta ) quality — has that any proof [to
authorize it], or is it without proof? ' [The reply is, His] Bacred-
books (pastra) ar* 1 its proof. [But then] again [it may be asked],
what proof have the sacred-books ? [The reply is] they have their
proof in the perfect quality of [His] sattva. Inasmuch as both [the
sacred-books and the superiority] reside in the Inara’s sattva,
there is a never-beginning relation between the two. From these
[Bacred-books, therefore] this proves to be true that He is at all
times whatsoever liberated and at all times whatsoever the Ifvara.
Now this His pre-eminence ( aipvarya ) is altogether without any-
thing equal to it or excelling it. For, to begin with, it cannot be
excelled by any other pre-eminence, because. whatever might [seem]
to excel it would itself prove to be that very [pre,-eminence we are
in quest of]. Therefore that is the Ifvara wherein we reach this
uttermost limit of pre-eminence. Nor again is there any pre-emi-
nence equal to His. [Why not ? ] Because when one thing is
simultaneously desired by two equals, the one saying ‘ let this be
new ’ and the other saying ‘ let this be old ', if the one wins his
way, the other fails in his wish and so becomes inferior. And two
equals cannot obtain the same desired thing simultaneously, since
that would be a contradiction of terms. Therefore [we maintain
that,] in whomsoever there is a pre-eminence that is neither equalled
nor excelled, he is the Ipvara, and He is, as we Baid, a special kind
of Self.

He anticipates the objection that ‘ the universe (vigva) is pervaded by animat®
and inanimate [beings] onlv and by nothing else. Consequently if the Ifvara be
inanimate, then He is primary-substance ( pradhina ), since what% evolved from
primary-substance also falls within primary-substance. And by this hypothesis
he could not be made inclined since he is inanimate. Or on tire other hand,
if he be animate, still,— since the Energy of Intellect is indifferent (CLudMnya)
and since in so far as it is not in the round-of-rebirths it has no feeling-of*
personality or other [hindrance],— how can thg Energy of Intellect be inclined,
[or] how can profound-desire [have anything to do with Energy o£ Intellect]


51] The Ifvara and the other Selves [ — i. 24

In alluding to this he says 4But now .... primary •■ubat&noe.£ He gives the
reply to this objection in the following sdtra. 24. Untouohed by hindranoes
or karmas or fruition or by latent-depoeita the Iqvara la a apeoial kind of
801C «The <hindrances> are undifferer tinted-consciousness and the rest*, for it
ia these that, by the stroke of various kinds of misery, hinder a man within the
round-of-rebirth. «Good (kugala) or evil* are merit and demerit; and by a
figurative expression they are called karma, because they proceed from karma.
{Fruition* is birth and length-of-life and the [kind of] experience [ii. 13].
{Corresponding to these :* the subconscious-impressions corresponding to the
fruitions. These subconscious-impressions are called latent-deposits because
they lie in the ground of the mind-stuff. For, until [that particular] karma,
[that is, some demerit], which precipitates (nirvartaka ) 1 the birth [of an individual]
as a young elephant, makes manifest an impression (bh&vani) [latent in his
mind-stuff] which is characterised by a previously (prig) [existing] and potential
kind of experience [proper to] a young elephant, — for so long [that karma] is not
c^pal’.o of [producing] the experience proper to a young elephant Therefore it
proves to be true that the impression which produces the experience (anubftova)
of being born as a young elephant corresponds to the fruition as a young elephant.
It might be said : ‘ Such tlyngs as hindrances, inasmuch as they are properties
of the thinking-substance, can by no means whatsoever touch the Belt Accord-
ingly merely by mentioning the word <SeIf) the absence of any trace of these
[hindrances] is established. Consequently what need is there of the words
{hindrances or karmas> and the rest?' In reply to this he says {These.*
These [hindrances and karmas and fruitions and latent-impressions] although
they reside in the central-organ ( manas ) are attributed to the Self who is in the
round-of-rebirths. Why ? {For it is he thtt v said to be the axperienoer of
the results of these [in the central-organ].* Tin' is to say, he is the thinker
(cetayitr). Consequently the fyvara, because he is a Self, comes into relation
with these. For this reason, [because these are only qjtributed to the Self], it is
consistent to make a denial of this [relation]. This he does in the word {who.*
Fof the I$vara is a special kind of Self who is untouohed by this [kind] of
experience, namely, that also found in the thinking-substance and common to
the Selves in general. — It is <a special kind) in that it is specialized [and]
discriminated from [all] other Selves. Desirous of pointing out what is not
to be included in the words <a special kind) he first raises a counter-objection
( paricodana ) and then rebuts it in the words {Now these . . . have obtained
Isolation.* 1. These is the bondage to primary-matter in the case of those
[whose bodies] are resolved into primary-matter. 2. There is [the bondage]
to evolvqd-matter in the case of the discarnate. 8. There is the bondage to

’ This word is glogsed in the Rahasyam mean an elephant which eats grass and
by the word janak-a? And the sword twigs (kafak&tfhflfi hasliti).

’young elf-hant' karnbha is said to


Booh I. Concentration or Samadhi


[52


i. 24—]

sacrificial gifts in the case of those who partake in the experience of objects*
supernal or not supernal. These are those three well-known ^instruments of
bondage.^ For, those whose central-organs are [subliminally] refined (saihshrta)
by impressions from primary-matter, attain to resolution into primary-matter
only after the body has broken up. For the others [the liberated Selves] the
terminus a quo is expressly made known ; accordingly the terminus ad quern
alone is mentioned [as applying to those whose bodies are resolved into primary*
matter, although the terminus a quo also applies to them]. But in this case
[of the l9vara] both the terminus a quo ancf^the later terminus are denied.
Having stated the case in brief he now gives the details in the words ^But He
is at all times whatsoever liberated and He is at all times whatsoever the
I$vara.» He possesses pre-eminence in richness of knowledge and of action
and of power. With reference to this he asks «That universally admitted ♦ . .
which. ^ Perception and action are impossible in the case of the Energy of
Intellect which does not enter into mutations. In case this be admitted and
if it be said that therefore a substrate must be supposed to be made up of pure
sattva without rajas and tamas , then the I^vara who is at all times whatsoever
liberated cannot be in the relation of proprietor to his property towards an
effulgence (utkarta) of the sattra in a mind-stuff which depends upon undifferen-
tiated-consciousness. In reply to this he says ^Cfrom bjia assuming' a sattva
of perfect (prakrtfa) quality.» In the case of the I$vara there does not exist
as in the case of the ordinary man a relation, caused by undifferentiated-conscious-
ness, of proprietor to his property, with the sattra of the mind-stuff. But [the
relation is that] expressed by the resolve, ‘ By the teaching of knowledge and
right-living (dhatma) I will lift up beings, encompassed by the three anguishes,
from the great sea of the state after death (pretya).' And this [knowledge and
right-living] cannot be taught unless there be an abundance of excellence in the
adequacy of [His] knowledge 1 and of [His] activity. And there cannot be this
[abundance of excellency unless a sattva be assumed which has been purified
from stains by the removal of rajas and tamas . With this resolve the Exalted
One reflects, and assumes a sattva of perfect quality. Although He is untouched
by undifferentiated-consciousness, it appears as if He were under the illusion of
identifying Himself with undifferentiated-consciousness and as if He were ignorant
of the real nature of undifferentiated-consciousness. But He doertiot deal with
undifferentiated-consciousness as if it were undifferentiated-consciousness as such.
Tie actor who takes the r !e of Rftma and represents the Afferent kinds of
behaviour [belonging to the character] is not of course confused [as to his real
personal identity]. For he knows that this [rftle] is only a deliberately assumed
form and not his [form] in reality. An objector might say, 'This la sy be so.
It may be* true that the Exalted One must assume sattva in order to uplift^ the
world]. On the other hand His desire to lift it up is based o& His assumption of


1 Compare (JVetJtyvat. Up. vi. 8.


53] The If vara and the worlds [ — i .24

this [sattva] ; and inasmuch as this [desire] is also derived from primary-matter
[the fallacy of] mutual interdependence results.' In reply to this he says
<Eternal.> This [objection] might be true, if this were the very first creation.
But the sucoession of creations and contractions [of worlds] is from time-without-
beginning. And Vvhen the period of the desire for contraction has come to a full
end, then the Exalted One, while in the act of contemplating within Himself,

4 1 must assume a sattva of perfect quality,’ contracts the world. At that time
the sattva of the Igvara’s mind-stuff becomes subconsciously-impressed by the
contemplation. And although the I$vara’s mind-stuff be tending towards a
homogeneity with primary-matteV,*still,---when the period of the great mundane-
dissolution has come to a full end, under the pressure of the subconscious-
impression of the contemplation, — it enters into a mutation of precisely the
same kind as a state of sattva. In precisely the same way Ch&itra contemplates
4 To-morrow I must get up just at day-break 1 ; and then after having Blept gets up
at that very time because of the subliminal-impression resulting from his con-
teiAiplte^on Consequently since [the worlds] are from time- with out- beginning,
and in so far as the fyvara’s contemplation and His assumption of the sattva are
eternal, there is no [logical fallacy] of interdependence. Nor can it be urged 1
that the sattva of the Iyvara’p mind-stuff does not pass out [of the phenomenal
state] into homogeneity with primary-matter. For that which [by reason of its
subconscious-impression] never becomes homogeneous with primary-matter is not
secondary-matter (pradh&nika). And again it is not the Energy of Intellect,
because it is n on-perceptive ( ajna ). This being the meaning, one might assume
another [kind of] thing which pould not be proven by any source-of-valid-ideas.
This too would be a quite groundless [assumptiorl — Because there is no other
[kind of] thing distinct from primal y-matter # ai the Self, has this kind of
universally admitted and eternal superiority of the lyvara any proof [to authorize
it, and] is it baaed on any source-of-valid-ideas, or is it without proof [and] not
based on any sourceof-valid-ideas? The answer is in4he phrase «sacred-books
(fOsfra) are its proofs The sacred books are the Revealed-Word (fru£t) and the
Tradition (sntrtf) and the Epics and Pur&n&s. — He brings forward an objection
in the words Cwhat proof have the sacred -books ?» For sacred books pre-
suppose that there is inference and perception. And no one can perceive or
infer the perfection of the Jfvara’s sattva , Again, there is no ground for saying
that the sacred books have their source in a perception by the I^vara. For even
if we imagine [Him saying that he perceives the sacred books], He would then
be speaking to publish abroad His >wn pre-eminence. [This is inconceivable
•inoeno one could imagine that the I^vara would boast.] Such is the [objector’s]
meaning. • In rebuttal he says 4!they have their proof in the perfect quality of
His €attva.& This is what he intends [to say]. Incantations (mantra) and the
Medical Vedas *r^ composed by the Icvara. In these ftwol caaas their authori-


1 up. uomment 111. is.


i. 24 —] Book L Concentration or Samddhi [64

tativeness is granted by reason of their adequacy in action. [This adequacy] is
undoubted because there is no failure to effect purposes. [The authoritativeness
is granted. He shows that it is not based upon experimental evidence.] And
in the case of the different herbs and of the particular combinations of one [herb]
with another, and in the case of the incantations in so far as single syllables are
connected or excluded, no one who uses only profane methods of proof, could,
even in a thousand lives, make the connexions and exclusions. — Furthermore
there is no ground for asserting that connexions and exclusions [of the proper
herbs or syllables] are a result of verbal-communication (dgama) and that verbal-
communication is & result of these [connexions and exclusions] on the ground
that the succession of these two [1. verbal-communication, 2. connexions and
exclusions] forms a series from time-without-beginning. The reason for this is
that the succession of these two is severed at the time of a great mundane
dissolution. Neither [is there ground for saying that] there is no method of
proving that there is this [great mundane dissolution]. For he will set forth in
detail [iii. 13] that the woild is an evolved-form of primary-substance and is
identical [with it in substance]. There is evidently & heterogeneous mutation
[e.g. curds] of the [original] homogeneous mutation [e.g. milkj. Analogously,
milk or sugar-juice or similar substances assume various forms such as curds
or treacle (and so forth]. And it is evident that* the heterogeneous mutation
presupposes the homogeneous mutation. So in the point at issue, the primary-
substance can also have heterogeneous mutations by assuming such forms as the
Great [thinking-substance] and the personality-substance ; occasionally also it can
have a homogeneous mutation. And its homogeneous mutation is the state of
equipoise [of the prim ary substance]. This, moreover, is the great mundane
dissolution. [There is therefore & great mundane dissolution.] [To revert to the
argument that the authoritativeness of the sacred books is not experimentally
to be found.] Accordingly, the Exalted One is first of all the composer of the
Incantations and of the Jledical Vedns. Hence it must be acknowledged that, in
so far as the obscuration due to the stains of rajas and of tamas has been removed,
the substance of [His] thinking-substance illumines everywhere.

To resume the argument {tatlia ca). Because He was aiming to give instruction
in [worldly] happiness and in [eternal] bliss [incapable of test by experience here],
the Vedas as a whole were composed by the Igvara and must also be supposed
to have their source only in the perfect quality of His thinking-substance. And
in the superiority of the substance (saMta) there is no possibility of error or deceit,
which have their oiigin n rajas and tamas . This [thgn] is established that
sacred books have their proof in the perfect quality of His sattva. — [A further
objection.] ‘This may be so. But then if the sacred books make known the
perfqption in so far as they are the effect of tho perfection, there would be an
inference fiom effect to cause 1 ((CAaraf). But that would not give us a verbal


1 Pec N)fi)R Phit$ya xvni 4


55]


l— i. 25


The Jgvara and the Sacred Word

communication (< agama ).* Replying to this he says « Inasmuch os hoth.» The
sacred books do not make known a relation of cause and effect, but do make
known the correspondence 1 from time without beginning between the word-
expressing-a-me&ning (vdcaka) and the thing-expressed (vdcya). For the perfection
has its existence in the substance of the I^vara’s thinking-substance ; and the
sacred books, in that they give expression to this [thinking-substance], also have
their existence in it. In summing up he says «From theses From these
sacred books, which give expression to the perfection of the substance of the
Inara’s thinking-substance, this*proves to be true, [that is] is known, — since the
object ( visayd ) [the sacred boo&s] is the distinguishing-characteristic of that- to-
which-the-object-refers (vitayin) [the Iyvara], — that «He is at all times what-
soever liberated and at all times whatsoever the I9 vara. Having thus dis-
tinguished [Him] from any other Self, he distinguishes [Him] from any other
Ifvara also by saying <CNow this His.» He describes its being altogether without
anything excelling it, in the words «CFor to begin with.» Whyjs^this ? The
reply 13 ^whatevor . . . very.» For what reason is this pre-eminence altogether
free from everything that might excel it? He replies «Therefore . . . that
wherein.^ In other words, as applied to those who have not reached the
uttermost limit, the term pre-eminence is [only] a figurative expression. — He
describes the state of freedom from anything equal to it by saying CNor again
. „ . equal to His.» Wish is unhindered volition; by failure in this a man
becomes inferior. Or if there be nu inferiority, then it would be that both fail
in their wishes. For no effect would occur, or if it did occur, the effect [of Ihe
two wishes] simultaneously would be perceived to have the logical mark
(samdlingita) of two contradictory qualities. Ajhnk'ng to this he says «And two.»
If however the intentions [of the two J are not cone * dictory and if the pre-eminent
quality (Ifvaratva) is attached to each, then what need of any others ? Because
then [the intention] could be accomplished by single pre-eminent ( yarn ) alone.
On the other hand, if [all] work together, no one wouTd be the I?vara ; but there
would be a parliament Furthermore it is not fitting that those who are fit for
uninterrupted pre-eminence [should rule] by turns. And besides this would be
a more difficult supposition* Since this is evident, all is cleared up.


Furthermore,

25. In this* [Iqyara] the arerm of the omniscient is at its
utmost excellence.

This oijr process-of-knowing (grahana ) the supersensuous, whether
in. the past or future or present, whether separately or ^collec-
tively,— {this, process,] whether it be small or great, is the germ

1 This would constitute an tyama.


i t 25 — ] Boole I. Concentration or Samddhi [56

of the omniscient. He, verily, in whom this germ as it increases
progressively reaches its utmost excellence is the omniscient.
It is possible for the germ of the omniscient to reach this
[uttermost] limit, for it admits of degrees of excellqpce, as in the
case of any ascending scale. He in whom the limit of thinking
is reached is the omniscient and He is a special kind of Self.
[If you object that this argument would prove the omniscience of
Buddha or of Jina, there would be this reply.] An inference ex-
hausts (upaksaya) its force in bringing a general proposition to a
conclusion, 1 but is powerless to prove a particular instance. There-
fore the ascertainment of the [Omniscient] one’s special name is
[not a matter of inference, but is rather] to be sought out in the
verbal-communication, [which excludes the supposed cases, since
their tradition is false]. Although He is above all feelings of self-
gratification, yet [to this l£vara] the gratification of living beings
is a sufficient motive. He may be conceived as resolving, ‘By
instruction in knowledge and in right-living, at the dissolution
of the mundane period and at the great dissolution, I will lift up
human beings, who are whirled in the vortex of existence.’ And
likewise it hath been said, 2 “The First Knower, assuming a
created mind-stuff through compassion, the Exalted, the Supreme
Sage, unto Asuri who desired to know, declared this doctrine.”

After having mentioned the sacred books as a means of proving [His] power of
action and of knowledge, he shows that inference is a means of proving [His]
power of knowledge. Thfts is stated in the words ^Furthermore.^ 26 . In
this [Iqvara] the germ of the omniaoient is at its utmost excellence. He
discusses [the sQtra] in the words ■KThis our.3> In proportion to the degree to
which the tamas which covers the sattva of the thinking-substance has been re-
moved, this our process-of-knowing supersensuous things, past and future and
present, which occur separately as well as collectively,— [this] process may be
qualified as being either si til or great. This is the germ [or] oauBe of the omni-
scient. Some one knowB a very little of the past or of the others times, another


1 Compare sdmdnytnopoiamh&roh, p. 100,
line 4, Calcutta ed. of this work.

* By P#Bca?ikha in the first fragment as
collected by Carbe in bis article on
P&ftcafikha und seine Fragmente (in
Festgruss an Roth, Stuttgart, 1808),


p. 77. This fragment is also discussed
by Fits Edward Hall in hft edition
of the Sfirbkhya-Pravach&na-BhSih^a,
1856, Preface pp. 10 |nd 17. See also
4S*rttda PurSga i. 18.


57] The Ipvara as the limit of thinking [ — i. 25

muoh, another still more. Thus with regard to objects to be known there is a
[relative] smallness or greatness of the knowing-process. He, verily, in whom
this [germ] as it increases progressively has come to a stop because of its excel-
lence, — he is said to be the omniscient. In this wise only the object of proof is
described ; now hd gives the means of proof in the words «£lt is possible.^ In ,
the words 4Clt is possible for the germ of the omniscient to reach this [utter-
most] limits there is a statement of the major term. The limit is the reaching
of the utmost excellence ; it is that state higher than which there is no excellence.
Accordingly it should not be urged that this is establishing what is already
established. For [this higher than which there is no excellence, is established]
only so far as it is a terminal-point. [For, J the middle term (hetu), as he gives it,
is 4Cfor it admits of degrees of excellence^ Whatever admits of degrees of excel-
lence, all that is [capable of reaching] the utmost excellence. Similarly in the
case of the kuvalaya berry and the Amcdaka fruit and the bilva fruit there is a size
that admits of degrees. And in the soul (atman) [there is a magnitude which has
reached its] utmost excellence. Thus he shows that there is a concomitance [of
terms]. — And when he says £as in the case of any ascending scaled it is not
relevant to object that there is a discrepancy in so far as the properties [of a
substance], such as its magnitude, [form an ascending scale but do not reach
utmost excellence]. For in the case of the whole, its magnitude does of course
not excel the magnitude of the parts. But whatever magnitudes there are, each
functioning by itself, from the smallest atom up to the final whole, may be so
arranged that one may assert a progressive increase of magnitudes. But, because
it is not finished as contrasted with the object to be thought, in so far as it
has [successively] one or two or a multitude of obj*vts, thinking may with reason
be said to admit of degrees of excellence. Thus ere is no discrepancy. He
brings the discussion to a close in the words «CHe in whom the limit.»— It
might be objected that there are many authcrs of sacred books (t\rthakara) y
Buddha and Arhata and Kipila the Sage and many ottfers. Why, by this line
of inference, may they not be counted as omniscient? In reply he says «a
genera] propositions Whence then can we be informed of his particular
qualities ? The reply is «the [Omniscient] one , s.» The point is that the pseudo-
sacred-words composed fcy Buddha or by the others are not a Sacred Word
(Ogama). For they give instruction in the way of soullessness and of momentari-
ness, both of which are contradicted by all sources-of-valid-ideas. The reason for
this is that they %re deceitful. A Sacred Word has as its distinguishing-charac-
teristic the Revealed-'Vty'ord (frttfi) and the Tradition (smrti) and the Epics and
Purlpas. The Sacred Word (d-gama) is that from which the [spiritual] means
for [worldly] happiness and [final] bliss come to (d-gam) or strike upqp the
thinlclng-substance. From this [Sacred Word] comes information as to [the
Ifvara’s] particular qualities, suol* ajlfis name — any particular name, for example
Qiv* or the I?v ra— which are fifanly established in the Bevealed Word and in
the other books. Under the word 4 such as’ (Adi) are i^cluded^the seXpartite

a ■ it]


Book /. Concentration or Samadhx


i. 25—]


[58


nature and the ten eternal principles, as described in the V&yu Pur&pa [xii. 8SJ 1 * *
“Omniscience and Contentment and Limitless Knowledge and Freedom and
Ever-unthwarted Energy and Infinite Energy— these, the experts in the sacred
ordinances tell us, are the six parts of the all-pervasive AUhefvara.” Likewise
44 Knowledge and Passionlessness and Pre-eminence and Self-control and Truth
and Patience and Perseverance and Creative Energy and Bight Knowledge of
Self and Competency to Buie [the Universe]— these ten eternal principles abide
eternally in <j/amka?a.” It is objected, 4 This may be so. But inasmuch as the
Exalted One, who is eternally free and who ))aq attained to the utmost excellence
of passionlessness, cannot cherish craving merely for his own self ; and inas-
much as, if he be compassionate, he should create, to the end that every one
should be intent upon happiness, for the reason that we cannot explain the pro-
duction of a world of living beings in which pain predominates; and inasmuch
as, if he have no motive, we cannot explain his act [of creation] as being that of
a being of understanding, — therefore, even if he be endowed with the power of
action, the world cannot be the result of his action.' In reply to this he says
^Although He is above all feelings of self -gratification. S The gratification of
beings in whom is the breath of life is [for Him a sufficient] motive. Now it is
clear that the mind-stuff ceases from the production of its [two kinds of] effects:
the outer experience of the various kinds of things and [secondly] the discrimi-
native discernment. Then it is that the Self enters into its Isolation. Accord-
ingly as a means to motivate this [Isolation] the compassionate [fyvara]
describes the discriminative discernment. Accordingly, although the l£vara
with the help of merit and demerit makes living creatures feel pleasure and pain,
for. the reason that the mind-stuff has its task yet to fulfil, — still he is not inoom-
passionate. — He tells of the way by which he makes known the discriminative
discernment as a [spiritual] means in the words €By instruction in knowledge
and in right-living. S Both in knowledge and in right-living ; by instruction in
both of these. By the combination of knowledge and of right-living as a result of
reaching full maturity of discriminative discernment. 4CAt the dissolution of the
mundane period, S that is, at the end of a Day of Brahma 1 , at which time the world
with the exception of the Heaven of Truth (satya-loka), vanishes. CAt the great
dissolution,)^ at which time there is the destruction of Brahma together with the
Heaven of Truth. « Whirled in the vortex of existences that is, 9 thoee merged
in the [primary] cause , and therefore partaking of the pain of that [cause] up to
the time of death. The words ^dissolution of the mundane periods is an ex-
pression of a part for the whole ; for at other times also [the Ipvara may be con-
ceived as] resolving <dl will lift up human beings.S In other words human
beings by attaining to Isolation are lifted up. It might be objected tha| this


1 AnandSframa ed. t p. 43 1-t . «oot in ths’BiklnSr MS. and may be

1 See Vi$ou Purina vi. 3. a gloss.

9 Tbs Words 14 that it v . resolving M are


[— i. 26


59] The Ifvara unlimited by time

instruction in knowledge and right-living by one whoee motive is compassion is
also well known to the followers of Kapila. In reply to this he says «And likewise
it hath been aaid.* In this sense it hath been said by Paftcafikha the Master
{ScOrya). 4CThe First Knower* is Kapila. The statement of Pahca^ikha the
Master with regard to the First Knower applies to the First Teacher in the succes-
sion (ofteaoherand disciple] to which he belonged ; and [this First Teacher] was
the First Liberated. But it does not apply to the Supreme Teacher who is free
from time-without-beginning. Of (hose who were the First Liberated and of those
[other] knowers who were at other times liberated, Kapila is for us the First
Knower [and the First] Liberated. And it is he that is the teacher, [but not from
time without beginning]. For it is revealed that even Kapila attained to know-
ledge, by the favour of Mahefvara only, just as soon as he was born. He whom
we call Kapila is accepted as being the [fifth] incarnation of Vishnu. [It might he
objected that] Hirapyagarbha is the Self-existent [and thus he would be the First
Know -] [For] it is revealed in the Veda' [that he was the First-bom andj that he
also acquired Saxhkbya and Yoga. [The reply would be that] this same Ifvara,
the Firat Knower, the Self-existent* Vishnu [is] Kapila. “ But [He is] the
Ifvara of those descended frojn the Self-existent.” This is the point.


This same [Ifvara is] —

26. Teacher of the Primal [Sages] also, forasmuch as [with
Him] there is no limitation by time.

No-one-doubts-that the Primal Sages arc limited by time ; [but]
He to whom time does not apply, in so fai & it might be a limiting
object, is the Teacher even of the Primal Sages. As He is perfected
(sit ddha) in that mode-of-existence (gati) which is perfection at the
commencement of the present creation, so He is to be recognized
[as being in this mode of perfection] at the beginning of past crea
tions also.

He now atatee th<> distinction between the I$vara end such beings es Brehma by
saying <This same [I$vara].* These words dtThis same [I$vara]3> form the
transition to the qptra. 26. Teacher of the Primal [ Sages] also, forasmuch
as [with Him] there *is no limits; m by time. He explain! the sQtra in the
words CNo-one-doubts-that the Primal.* Time, however, a period of a hundred
years or softie other period, dose not apply, [that is] has no reference [to HijnJ in

* $vet. Up. iii. 4, iv.,12, vi.^8. this passage tbe term ‘ First Knower

* If the reading be no aw*, tbe mearitng applies to Kapila and not to the Self

Vould be tl-t although the Self- existent,
existent is tbs First Knower, still in


i. 26 — ] Book I. Concentration or Samadhi [60

so far as it might be a limiting object, [that is] limiting motive. The raode-of*
existence of perfection is the attainment of perfection. This is to be recognized
as coming from the Sacred- Word. Such is the inner meaning.


27. The word •expressing Him is the Mystic 'Syllable

(pranava).

The 1 9 vara is the object-expressed by the mystic syllable. Is the
expressiveness of this [Syllable] the work of [ordinary] usage (scwh~
keta), or is it permanent [and self-manifesting] like [the relation of]
the light to the lamp ? The relation of this thing-to-be-expressed
to the expressive-word is fixed. But the usage [as determined] by
the ^vara declares this its fixed meaning. Thus the [actual] rela-
tion of father and son is permanent, but the verbal statement that
that man is this man’s father is suggested [to the mind] by usage.
And the usage with regard to the relation between expressive- words
and things-expressed is made by [the Ijvara] to serve with a dis-
tinct reference to the power of expression which they had in former
creations also. The authoritative sages maintain that the relation
between a word and an intended-object is eternal is so far as the
consensus ( sampratipatti ) [of successive generations of speakers]
is eternal.

In this same aeries [of sntras] the Exalted Ifvara has been made known. Now
in order to make knoWn the devotion [paid] to Him he tells of the word-
expressive of Him. 27. The word-oxpressing Him is the Mystio-sy liable
(pranava). He begins the explanation with the words the object-expreeaed.>
On this point he clears up [the topic] by setting forth for consideration the
opinion of others. [This he begins] by asking Cls the expresaivenees.>
{Expressiveness* is ability to give information. For to others 1 it seems as if
the relation between word and intended-meaning is natural. [And] if this
objeot- in tended is to be recognized as having an essence of such a kind when
it comes by usage from this word, then, whenever thaf [natural] relation does
not exist, that [object-intended] will not be manifested even by hundreds of
usages. For when a water-jar, which is capable of being made manifest by
a lamp, is not [there], then even with thousands of lamps it cannot be* made
manifest. On the other hand, the word vming^iep||iani« {Jcarabha), made by

1 H* refers to the Tliylkamnae, snob at, (Kielhom'e edition)frol. i, p. 6 ,f ?
for example, Pataftjali in Mahlbhlyya


[ — i. 28


61] Symbol of the Ipvara

usage to denote an elephant (vdrana) evidently gives information with regard to
an elephant As a result of this, one might say that expressiveness is made by
usage only. After reflection [as to whether the relation is accidental or eternal]
he determines w)iat the author’s opinion is by saying «is fixed. The import
would be this. All words are capable of naming intended-objects of all kinds of
forms. Thus the natural relation of them [i. e. of words] to intended-objects of all
kinds of forms is most surely fixed. The usage, however, [as determined] by
the Igvara is both a manifester [of this natural relation] and a limitation. And
this [relation] has a word expressing it when the usage [as determined] by the
I^vara [is followed] ; [but the relation suffers] corruption when the usage [as
determined] by the I?vara is not [followed]. This is the distinction. It is this
that he states in the phrase CBut the usage [as determined] by the Iyvara.^ He
gives an example when he says «Thus.» It is objected, ‘ A word is a product
of the primary-cause ; at the time of the great dissolution it tends towards the
primary causal state ; and its [expressive] power would also be resolved [into
primary matter]. Then it would not be possible that the usage [as determined]
by the Great Invars (mdhcgvara) should revive the expressive power [of such
a word] only as had been deprived of its expressive [power] after having been
changed successively into [the different evolved forms of primary matter] begin-
ning with the Great* [thinking-substance].’ In reply to this he says 4Cin former
creational Although the word together with its expressive power passes into
the primary causal state of equipoise, when it appears again it does appear
endowed with the [expressive] power of that [word]. Similarly a plant [udbkijya],
utterly reduced to an earthly condition after the rains have [oeased] to fall,
[becomes as it was before] when sprinkled vigo.^usly with the stream of water
let fall from the clouds. Therefore the Exalted < e makes the usage conform to
the previous relation [of the word to the intended object]. Accordingly, in so
far as the consensus [of previous creations, which is the same as] the series
of similar modes-of-expression (vyavaMra), is eternal, the authoritative sages
(dgamika) maintain 1 that this relation is not absolutely eternal But their point
is that it is impossible without the help of the Sacred Word to assert that the
usage was exactly of the same kind in other creations also.


Now, by the yogin who has recognized the power of the word to
express the iftiing,

28. Repetition of it and refleotion upon its meaning [should
be made].

Ttfe repetition of the Mystic Syllable, and reflection upon the
I$vara who id %igifified by ihe Mystic Syllable. Then in the case

: 5e. PftteltyUi, MftbSbhitfa (Kielhorn), ?ol. i, fy S' and 7*'.


i. 28— ] Book I. Concentration or Samadhi [62

of this yogin who thus repeats the Mystic Syllable and reflects,
upon its meaning, mind-stuff attains to singleness-of-intent. And
so it hath been said, 1

< “ Through study let him practise yoga ;

Through yoga let him meditate on study.

By perfectness in study and in yoga
Supreme Soul shines forth clearly.”

| I

Having designated the Mystic Syllable he tells of the contemplation. 28. Bop*
tition of it and reflection upon its meaning [should be made]. He explains
[the sQtra] by saying «0f the Mystic Syllable.^ Reflection is an absorption in
the niind again and again. Wbat follows from this ? He replies by saying
Cthe Mystic Sy liable. » He attains to singleness-of-intent [and his] mind-stuff
comes to rest in the One Exalted. In illustration of this he introduces a stanza
from Vyilsa (raiy&siki gathA) by saying <3CAnd so.» The Ifvara then gratifies him
by conferring upon him concentration and the fruit of concentration.


What else comes to him ?

29. Thereafter comes the right-knowledge of him who thinks
in kn inverse way, and the removal of obstacles. Whatever
obstacles there he, disease and the rest, all these are removed by
devotion to the Ifjvara, and [the yogin] comes to a sight of his own
real self. He has the right knowledge which sees that as the
l 9 vara is a Self and is undefiled and undisturbed [by hindrances]
and isolated and exempt from accidents, so be also is a Self
conscious [by reflection] of its t hinking-substance.

What in addition comes to him ? 29. Thereafter comes the right-knowledge
of him who thinks in an inverse way, and the removal of obetaolee. One
is inverted who knows in an opposite way [to the ordinary person whose mind-
stuff flows out and becomes modified by objects]! One who thinks in that way
thinks inversely ; [in other words] the [ordinary] man [still] under the condi-
tions of Undifferentiated -consciousness (avidgAvant). In such wise [the author]
demarks [such a one] from the Ifvara who is free from undifferentiated-oon-
sciousnees (vidyAvanf), and who is endowed with eternal superiority of tbs sattva.
Bight- knowledge comes to the kind of thinking which is under the conditions
of nndifferentiated-consciousness and which is inverted. A f perqsgtion of himself
as he is in his own self comes to him.— <0bstad8s> and <the removal) of them are


1 Compare Vif$. Par. vi. 7. 88 f.; Nlradiys Pur. xlrii. 12-14.


03] Results of meditation upon the Ifvara [ — L 30

to be described [iL 82]. The words ^Whatever . . > give the exposition of these
[latter words]. The word Cown* [refers to his] soul (Atman), that is, his self.
The word etedfit (rApo) excludes all qualities attributed [to him] by undifferen-
tia ted -consciousness. One might well say that devotion to the I?vara has the
lpvan as its object ; how then can it apparently give a direct perception
a thinking in the inverse way [upon one’s own real self] ? For this would
prove too much. In reply to this he says €&s the If vara.* CUndefiled :J>
not subject to origination or dissolution in so far as He is absolutely unchanged.
CUndisturbed* means free from hindrances. ^Isolated* means beyond the
scope of merit and demerit [and] consequently ^exempt from accidental «Acci-
denta* are birth and length of life and kind of experience [iL 18], — Since a
homogeneity implies a certain degree of difference, he shows the difference
between [8elves in general] and the Ifvara by saying ^conscious [by reflec-
tion] of its thinking-substance.* In such wise the word <inverse> has been
de«*ribed. — In the case of two objects which are totally irrelevant to each
other, prolonged meditation on either one unfits one for a direct perception of
the other. Whereas prolonged meditation upon one object proves to be of
service for the direct perception of another similar to it. Similarly the
study, ot one book proves to be of service for the acquisition of knowledge of
another book similar to it As for (tw) immediate-perception (pratyOaatti), it is
the cause of direct perception with regard to one’s own selfi but not with regard
to another self. [Thus by meditating upon the Ifvara, we learn about our qwn
selves.] Thus the argument is cleared up.

But what are these obstacles? Thoa*- which distract the mind-
stuff. But what are these [that are disti nctive] and (vd) how many
are they? [He replies.]

80. Sickness and languor and doubt ttnd heedlessness and
listlessness and worldliness (avirati) and erroneous perception
and failure to attain any stage [of concentration] and insta-
bility in the state [when attained]— these distractions of the
mind-stuff are the obstacles.

There are nine obstacles, the distractions of the mind-stuff. These
appear together with the fluctuations of the mind-stuff. And they
are not found Where the » Joresaid fluctuations of mind-stuff are
not. pickness is a disorder in the humours [of the body] or in the
secretions or in the organa Languor is a lack of activity in the
mind-stuff. a J)oubt is a kind of thinking which touches both alter-
natives [of a dilemma], Sb that one thinks * This might be so ;
miorhf iuk he mo.’ Heedlewmeas is a lack of reflection unon the


i. 30 — ] Book I. Concentration or Samddhi [64

means of attaining concentration. Listlessness is a lack of effort
due to heaviness of body or of mind-stuff. Worldliness is greed of
the mind-stuff ; and its essence lies in addiction to objects of sense.
Erroneous perception is the thinking of misconceptions. Failure
to attain any stage is not attaining any stage of concentration.
Instability in the state [when attained] is the failure of the mind*
stuff to remain in 1 he stage attained. If the concentrated stage
of development had been reached, [the mind-stuff] would, of course,
have remained in it. — Thus it is that these distractions are called
the nine blemishes of yoga [and] the nine foes of yoga [and] the
obstacles of yoga.

He asks a question by saying 3what.» He gives the answer in general in
the words «Those which. ^ With regard to their kinds and their number he
asks «But what.» He gives the answer by the sOtra beginning with the word
80. Sickness. Obstacles are nine. These are fluctuations of mind-stuff and
obstructive to yoga and opposed to yoga. Distraction^ of the mind-stuff are, of
course, so-called because sickness and the other [obstacles] distract [or] divert
the mind-stuff from yoga. He gives the reason for their being foes to yoga by
saying «Theao . . . together with.)> First, in the case of doubt and of erroneous
perception, they are foes to the restriction of fluctuations from the mere fact that
they are fluctuations And of those that are not fluctuations, such as sickness
and the rest,— these too are foes to it because they associate with fluctuations.
He explains the things intended, by the words beginning with ^Sickness.*
The humours (dhdtu), wind and bile and phlegm, are so-called because they
sustain ( dhdrana ) the body. A secretion is a special kind of mutation of nourish-
ment eaten or drunk. The organs are the senses (i mdriya ). A disorder in them
la a state of defect or excess. A lack of activity is an incapacity for action.
Doubt is a kind of thinking which touches both 1 alternatives [of a dilemma].
Although there is no difference between doubt and error (vipary&sa) in so far as
both do not remain in the proper form of that [in respect to which they are
entertained], still, — by emphasizing the subsidiary difference, that is, the touch*
log or not touching of the two alternatives [of the dilemma], the distinction in
this case [of doubt] is made lear. A lack of reflection is a lack ofnetion. ‘This
is about the same as saying that it is a lack of effort with regard to this thing.
Heaviness of the body is the result of phlegm ; heaviness of the mind-stuff is the
result of tamos. Greed is thirst The stages of concentration are the Madhu*
matt and the other [three]. If after reaching a given stage [the yogin] should
deem himself sufficiently well off with only so much [progress], Ahere would be
a breach in the concentration ; and as a result Si this there would be a retro*


1 (Compare Nylya-efitrm i. 1. 28.


I— i. 32


65] Varieties of distractions

gression even from that stage. An effort should therefore be made in such
a wajr that when [the yogin] has reaohed concentration, [the mind-stuff] should
be stable there.


31. Pain and despondency and unsteadiness of the body
and inspiration and expiration are the accompaniments of
the distractions.

Pain proceeding from self [and] pain proceeding from living crea-
tures and pain proceeding from the gods. Pain is that by which
living beings are stricken down and for the destruction of which
they struggle. Despondency is agitation of mind due to an
impediment [to the fulfilment] of a desire. U nsteadiness of the body
is that which makes it unsteady [and] makes it tremble. Inspira-
tion is breathing which sips in the air which is outside. Expiration
is that which makes abdominal 1 air flow outwards. These are the
accompaniments of -the distractions. These occur in one whose
mind stuff is distracted. These do not occur in one whose mind-
stuff is concentrated.

Not only the nine obstacles but alBO pain and the other accompaniments of these
[obstacles] occur to this [yogin]. So [Vy&sa] recites the sQtra beginning with the
word 31. Fain. Pain is that which is to be felt as unpleasant. [Pain] pro-
ceeding from self is bodily by virtue of aid less, or mental by virtue of Buch
things as passion. [Pain] proceeding froi living creatures is such as is
generated by tigers. [Pain] proceeding from the gods is such as is generated
by the baleful influence of planets. And this pyn, inasmuch as living beings
in general would feel * it to be unpleasant, is to be rejected. Accordingly be
says Cby which . . . stricken down.* The breathing which without volitional
action sips in the air whioh is outside [and] drinks it [or] makes it enter, — this
inspiration is opposed to emission ( recdka ), whioh is accessory to concentration.
The breathing also, which without volitional action makes abdominal air flow
outwards [and] expels it,— this expiration' is opposed to inhalation (pQraka),
which is an accessory to concentration.


Furthermore these distractions, the foes of concentration, are to


1 Only one MS. has hoffMpam. YetatBKla-
rfana pqjnt* oqf> the rale as given in
n?ini v. 1. 6 (see SiddhBntwKKumudI,
third* .liraaya SKgara edition, 1904,
p. 266*1 would require that the vj-ddM

lb [lM If]


shonld not take plaoe When the ter-
mination pat is affixed to a item signi-
fying a member of the body.

' See Tarkaeaihgreha, } 67.

' pSrmka are Tolitionjdi (ii* 51).


i. 32 — ] Book I. Concentration or Sam&dhi [66

be restricted by the same 1 * * practice and passionlessness. Of these
[two], in summing up, he describes the object to which the practice
[applies].

32. To oheok them [let there be] praotioe upon a single entity.

To check them let [the yogin] practise his mind-stuff by making it
rest upon a single entity. But one whose mind-stuff is nothing
more than an idea limited to one object after another, and is
momentary {ksanika), — of this [Buddhist].the mind-stuff as a whole
is surely not single-in-intent and it is surely not distracted. But
if this [mind-stuff when single-in-intent] is withdrawn from all
[objects] and concentrated upon pne [entity], then it may be said
to be single-in-intent [and] hence not limited to one object after
another. If, on the other hand, — [in the opinion] of him who main-
tuns that the mind-stuff becomes singlepin-intent as a stream of
similar ideas, — singleness-in-intent be a property of the mind-stuff
[conceived] as a stream, then the mind^stuff [conceived as] a stream
could not be a single thing, ^because [as he insists] it. changes from
moment to moment. If however [it be maintained * that] single-
ness*>f-intent is a property of an idea only in so far as it forms a
part of the stream, then — whether it consist in a stream of similar
ideas or in a stream of dissimilar ideas — it is all of it in nowise
other than single-in-intent, inasmuch as it is limited to one object
after another, and the fact that mind-stuff is distracted is unex-
plained. Therefore it mgy be said that mind-stuff is a single thing
[and] has many intended objects [and] is stable.

Furthermore if ideas accidentally related and different in nature
were produced by a single mind-stuff, then what a situation t One
idea would be the remembrancer of a thing seen by another idea ;
and one idea would, be later the experienoer of the latent-
impression of karma accumulated by another idea. Even if this
could in some way be harmonized * (samddhiya), it Voiud surpass
[in falsity] the maxim of the Cowdung 4 as a milky preparation.

1 8m L 12. 4 See Colonel Jacob’* HandfM of Popular

* A, for example, by Dharmakfrti. Mirim, Part 1, Sad N.*p.M. Com-

* TUe earns word alao ha* the meaning of pare Sarradaiyana-eaifayrahp (Anandft-

‘ concentrated '. prama ed), p. 16*.


67] One common substrate of ideas [ — i. 32

Moreover if the mind-stuff is to be [one idea after] another, then
[the Buddhist who holds this opinion] denies the experience of his
own self. How does the idea ‘ I ’ in such expressions as * I am
touching what I have seen ’ and ‘ I am seeing what I have touche^ ’
inhere in one common ( abheda ) substrate-of-ideas, if all the ideas
have nothing in common ? How could the idea ‘ I am this un-
divided self’ — which has^a single idea [‘ I ’] as its object and which
persists in absolutely different mind-stuffs — become hypostasized
(dprayet) in one generic substrate-of-ideas ? The idea * I am this
undivided self’ is knowable in one’s own experience. Moreover
the authority of a perception is not overthrown by [that of] any
other source-of-valid-ideas. Whereas any other source-of-valid-
ideas comes into use only by virtue of a perception. Consequently
the mind-stuff is one [and] has many objects and is stable.

He introduces a sOtra which summarizes the meaning which he has been stating.
Thia he does by saying ^Furthermore these. » Furthermore [that is] after the
meaning which he has been stating. The connexion [of the sentences] is that
he sums up by reciting this sotra. The reason why [the distractions] must be
restricted is told in the words «the foes of concentration.^ Although the words
beginning ‘By devotion to the If vara ’ [i. 28] refer to practice only, still in'this
case passionlessness must be deemed to be a co-operator with this [practice].
Accordingly he says <Cby the same two. 3 ^ B/ the same two already character-
ized, by practice and by passionlessness, [distil tions are] to be restricted. The
words «of theses [mean] of these two, namely, practice and passionlessness ;
the words «the practiced, that which is to be described next. 32. To oheok
them [let there be] praotioe upon a single entity? A single entity, that is, the
Ifvara. For [He] is the subject-matter [of the discussion].— According to the
Destructionists the mind-stuff as a whole is single-in-intent, [that is] is not in any
degree whatsoever distracted. Consequently their teachings and their actions
subservient to their teachings ore meaningless, as he says in the words £But one
whose. 2 > [He refers to one] in whose opinion [the mind-stuff] is directed to
one object after another whether to one [at a time] or to more than one [at a
time} LixniJ&d [in time], that is, present {samutponna) only so long as the
intended-object is vivid (dbtasa), [and] ending juBt there [and] not going else-
where. ‘ Why not first take the foremost intended-object and afterwards take the
next ofiject?’ In reply he says Stand is momentary.^ Inasmuch as 9 moment
ft indivisible, it cannot have [within itself] the relation of before and after. In
our system, however, since mjpd-stuff is not momentary ; and since it can be
.stable with egard to its object, whether this be one or many ; and since at each
moment, in so far as one obieet is taken and another left. — fmtnd-sft’ff. can bel


Book I. Concentration or Samddhi


[68


i. 32 — ]

distracted. Consequently, by removing the mutations of distraction, singleness*
of-intent may be imposed [upon the mind-stuff ]. That the teaching and the doing
of this is not futile, is stated in the words <cBut if.» He sum s up by saying whence
noty> He sets up for refutation a Destructionist (v&in&yka) by the words €on
tin other hand . . . who.» The meaning is that there shall be’ no attempt to
impose singleness-of-intent upon a mind-stuff that is single and momentary. But
in the case of 'a mind-stuff in serial order that is from time without beginning and
that is not momentary, distraction will be removed and singleness-in-intent will
be imposed. He takes up these two alternatives and shows the faults [qf the one]
by saying «of him.» In his system, if singleneseiftntent is to be the property of
the mind-stuff conceived as a stream or of a serial-order of mind-stuff, then the
stream of mind-stuff is not a unit and is not persistent in the presented-ideas as
they successively arise. Why [is this so] ? Because in your system whatever is
at all is all of it momentary, and there is nothing not momentary : this is the
point. He takes up the other alternative in the words «If however. » A pre-
sented idea which is a portion of [this whole] subjective (sdihvrta) stream might
be real. For this reason the singleness-of-intent with reference to this presented-
idea would be a property [belonging to a portion of the stream] [and] to be
obtained by an effort. He shows the fault [in this alternative] by saying «Call of
it.» Accordingly in so far as it has the form of real being, it is — since it
[must] be limited to one object after another [and] because it therefore arises
during the vividness (abhdsa) of the object-intended by this (yat) [presented-idea]
and because it is finished during this [moment of Vividness] — single-in-intent only.
And thus the fact that mind-stuff'is distracted remains unexplained. While it
is to remove this [distraction] that singleness-in-intent is imposed. He sums
up by saying «Therefore.» Hence also mind-stuff is one and has many objects
and is stable as he explains by saying «Furthermore if.» For just as Ch&itra
cannot be he who remembers the book read by M&itra and just as Chaitra cannot
be the enjoyer of the fruit of the latent-impressions of karma, heaped up by M&itra,
with which he has had no connexion, whether meritorious or bad, so likewise
something seen by one presented-idea cannot be remembered by another presented-
idea ; nor can the fruit of a latent-deposit of karma heaped up by one presented-idea
be experienced by another idea. [The Destructionist might reply that his doctrine
of momentariness] does not prove too much, provided we add the qualification
‘if there be a relation of cause and effect’. For in such cases as the funeral-
sacrifice (<;r&ddha) and the vdtyv&nart sacrifice (iafi) [at the birth of a^pon] we find
that the fruition [of the sacrifice] passes [in the one case] to th^ father and
mother and [in the other case] to the son, whereas none [of the three] is the

actual agept 1 [in the sacrifice]. Or [again] in such cases 9 as that of the [bitter]

•

1 In the yiiddha the son sacrifices for the the two sacrifices is found in the

benefit of the father; in the viifvtinari, Bhitfa M^imini-slftA ir. 8. 88.
the flfther for the son. For the latter feUifteemi'taf refer to Kum&rila’s refuta- •
see Vittiriya Ar. ii. 6. A discussion tion of the Buddhists in Qmkav&rttika,


60 ]


Permanence of the ego


[— i. 32


mango-seeds that have been nourished with sweet juices [we see] that the fruition
by an indirect process must become sweet [Thus the effort of one momentary
idea oould find its result in another idea single-in-intent and indirectly related to it
through a serial-order.] In reply to this he says ^Even if this could in some way
be harmonized.^ The connexion of thought is this. What shall we say is the
difference between ideas resident in one serial-order and different 1 ideas resident in
another Beiial-order, so that — when [something] has been experienced or 9 when
[some] latent-impression of karma has been heaped up by an idea resident in one
serial-order — [another] idea belonging to the same serial-order should be the one to
remember or to enjoy it and not'an idea belonging to a different serial-order ? For
this that we call a serial-order is not such a [materially] real thing that it could
[as such] distinguish the unit-in-the-serial-order (santdnin) from [ideas] resident in
other serial-orders. Furthermore an imaginary distinction cannot consistently
exert aotivity. Surely the Brahman-boy cannot cook with fire that he imagines to
be present. Moreover the relation of cause and effect is also -nothing that is
[ma^A^lly] real [in this case of the two ideas, one of which appears in a series
after the other has disappeared]. Because it is impossible that there should be in
the present time a substrate for two things which are not co-existent, just as
there cannot be [a substrate] for two things [separate in space] like the left
horn and the other horn which do however coexist [in time]. For the past and
the future cannot function as the present by being-partially-in-relation-and-
partially-out-of- relation 3 (vydsanj) [since momentariness is by hypothesis assumed].
Consequently ideas are not under the limiting-conditions either of a serial-
order or of a causal relation which is a part of their being ; [and], because they
are real, they cannot, in so far as there ar$ u c reciprocal contacts, be dis-
tinguished from other ideas whether resident in it same serial-order or in other
serial-orders. This same line-of-reasoning is continued by an allusion to the
cow-dung and the milk , cow-dung is milk, because it is a product of the cow,
like milk, which both sides admit [to be a product of the cow], [The Buddhist
argument] Csurpasses» this [in falsity] because it is superior [in falsity] even to
this [line-of-reasoning] in so far as it has the false appearance of being a line-of-
reasoning. — And this [system of oursj cannot bo charged [with the fault of]
destroying* what has been accomplished and accepting what has not been
Accomplished. For [we hold that] it is mind-stuff that is the agent of actions ;


pp. 262 and 267 (Chowkambha ed.).
Compare DeMPVall^e Poussin’sLefr ud-
dbit me, 1902*page 63, notes 177 and 178.

1 Beading bh inn apreUyaydn&m with the
Bombay Sanskrit Series edition and
*rith the Bikfiner MS.

9 This word is ozyi^ed bj th$ $wo text!
just mentioned and
• before harr^^ayasya.

1 That whioh is in several simultaneously


and is not completely in anyone. See
Ny£yako 9 a s.v. vy&sanga and contrast
it with its opposite ekapary&ptatva.

4 See Bh&skarodaya (Nir$. S&g. ed.), p. 49 s .
The chaige by the Buddhist is Mmt the
Yoga system assumes a common sub*
stance for the thinking-substance as
causal agent and for the Self as ex*
periencer. Whereas the Yoga system
itself denies such a oymxuo? substrate.


Book I. Concentration or Samddhi


[70


i. 32—]

it is this [mind-stuff] that is connected with the pleasures and the pains
generated by these actions. For the mind-stuff when changed [by receiving] the
image (chdyd) of the intelligence experiences pleasures and pains. Henoe the
supposition that experience in the Self is because of the assumption (grdha)
<of an identity of the mind-stuff and the Self. Such is the very nature itself of
these [mental pleasures and pains], which originate in dependence upon their
own causes, 1 that they themselves remember and experience later the conse-
quence, while others * do not [remember]. And the very-n&tures [of these
mental pleasures and pains] ought not to be au injunction [niyoga) so that one
says * Let this be so ' or k Let this not be so nor should it be a question
(parganuyoga) so that one asks 1 Why is .this not so ? * — To him who will not be
satisfied with what has already been said he speaks with the words fiCMoreover
. . . his own self.)» The idea 1 1 ’ is bound up with the mind-stuff which is not
distinguished [from the idea] and is the substrate of experiences and of memories
of experiences that have qualities of originating and of ceasing, however varied
they may be. How can [this idea] be attached to ideas that are absolutely
distinguished from itself? It might be objected that — inasmuch (a) as there is
a distinction between the two causes 1. the process-of-knowing [in direct percep-
tion] and 2. memory, and inasmuch (6) as there is a- coherence (samsarga) of the
two contradictory qualities of immediate-perceptibility and of mediate-percepti-
bility — the so-called recognition [that this was that] (pratydbhijhdna) is not a
single idea such that there could be a unity of the mind -stuff which contains these
T Contradictory] ideas. For this reason he says «in one's own experience.^ The
objector might reply that ‘ 1. the distinction between the two causes and 2. the
coherence between two contradictory causes have been mentioned as inhibiting
this [one’s own experience].' In reply to this he says 4CMoreover ... of a per-
ception . . . not.» The totalitiee-of causes ( sdmagri ) do not remain distinct, —
on one condition only, that they are xeduced-to-terms (anusdra) of perception.
And [that the totalities-of-causes do not remain distinct] is not contradicted by
the fact that the qualities are immediate-perceptibility and mediate-perceptibility,
— this is shown to be consistent in the Ny&yakanikft. And the action of objeots-
intended by a [mind-stuff] that is not momentary is shown to be consistent in the
Ny&yakanika 9 and in the Brahmatattvasamlksa. Thus all is made clear.

Of which [stable mind-stuff] this purification 4 is enioined by the
system. By what means is this ?

1 Compare C&ihkarabh&tfa ii. 2. 21 (Nirn. book called Vidhiviveka, the second ia

Sag. ed . 1904, p. 457, last line). a gloss on the Ved&nta rrtork called

* It i t the agent himself that has the Brahma-eiddhi. The first has been

experience of the consequences. published in Benares by E. J. Lasarus,

3 Both these books are in VacaspatimicmH first in the Pandit (1907) and later as

Own list of his works which be gives a separate volume,
at the close of the Bh&matl-vygkhyft ; See pp. 80* and 84 l ® (Calc. ed.).

the first is % gloss on the MimSnsS


71 ]


Friendliness , compassion , joy , indifference * [ — i. 33

83 . By the cultivation of friendliness towards happiness
and compassion towards pain and joy towards merit and
indifference towards demerit [the yogin should attain] the
undisturbed calm of the mind-stuff.

Of these 1 [four] he should cultivate friendliness towards all living
beings that have reached the experience of happiness ; compas-
sion towards those in pain ; joy towards those whose character
is meritorious ; indifference towards those whose character is
demeritorious. When he £ hus cultivates [friendliness and the rest]
the white 2 quality [of karma] comes into being [within him].
And then the mind-stuff becomes calm ; and when calm it becomes
single-in-intent and reaches the stable state.

Because one whose central-organ is unpurified and full of such [feelings] as
cannot successfully {sarhpatti) effect concentration and the means of
concentration, he proceeds to set forth the means of [securing] undisturbed calm
of the mind, which are hostile to such [feelings] as jealousy. This he doeB
by saying «Of which [stable mind-stuff] this.» In other words, of which
stable Fund-stuff this is the purification. The antra begins with the words
83 . . . friendliness and compassion and ends with 'the words undisturbed
calm .... When towards those who are happy the mind-stuff 9 cultivates
friendliness, that is, cordiality \ [then] the taint of envy ceases. Whan
towards those who are in pain [the mind-stuff ] cultivates compassion, that is,
a desire to destroy pain in another as if it were his own, [then] the taint of a
desire to injure othera ceases from the mind. 1 ’ Tien towards living-creatures
whose disposition is meritorious the mind cultivates joy, 9 that is, gladness,
[then] the taint of jealousy ceases. When towards those whose disposition is
demeritorious, the mind cultivates indifference, that; is, neutrality, [then] the
taint of wrath ceases. And then, after the qualities (dharma) made of rajas and of
tamos have ceased, the white quality made of sattva comes into being. One may
say that he becomes endowed with a superiority of sattva. When there can-
properly-be-said-to-be (paksa) a restriction of the fluctuations, his mind-stuff,

1 These form the chapter on the Brahma 9 Medhfttithi on Manu, m a charactensti-
vih&ras in the Visuddhi-Magga. cally Schopenhanrian frame of mind,

1 Compare the statements in iv. 7 on white informs us that friendliness is the

and black kkrma* and in ii. 18 0 Tie absence of aversion (dves&bh&va) and

rise of white karma. not an attachment to one’s fnends.

1 This construction is a good instance of For that would be bondage. Similarly
dsro lour ov (kSkdhfi). joy is the cessation of grief but not

4 This form {sduhdrdam) does not seem to positive gladness. Because tSat would

accord witl^ Jbe examples given in be the result of passion. SeeB&lar&ma's

SiddhSnta k&umudfon vi. 8. Mb{Niiq notetp.77(Calc.ed.). 1 have not traced

* SSg. ed., J5 4, p. 207;. the passage to Medh&titbi-bhatt*.


i. SB—]' Book I. Concentration or Scmddhi [72

because its true nature is undisturbed calm, becomes undisturbedly oalm. And
when undisturbedly calm, by means which are to be stated, 1 it becomes single*
in-intent and gains the stable state. But if there be no cultivation of friendliness
and the other [feelings] these means are not adequate for stability.

84. Or [he gains stability] by expulsion and retention of
breath.

Expulsion is the ejection of the abdominal air through the aper-
tures of the nose by a special kind of effort. Retention is restraint
of the breath. — <Or> by these two he should attain to a stability
of the central-organ.

He now states these means of [obtaining] stability.

84. Or [he gains stability] by expulsion and retention of breath.

The word <Or> signifies that there is a choice with regard to other means [now]
to be stated, but not with regard to cultivation of friendliness and of the [other]
feelings; because [the alternatives now mentioned] are in addition to that
[cultivation]. He explains the expulsion by saying 4of the abdominals By
a special kind of effort, described in books of Toga, by means of which the
abdominal wind is gradually emitted through the apertures of the nose.- He
explains retention by saying ^Retention is restraint of the breath.* It is the
restraint of that portion of the abdominal wind that is emitted breath ; it is the
keeping of it outside ; it is, on the other hand, not allowing it to enter suddenly.
By these two, the expulsion amd retention of wind, his body beoomee light and
his central organ gains the stable state. In this [sQtra] we have to supply
(dlff) the word ‘ stability ’ from the phrase ‘ comes into a relation of stability ’
found in the next sotra ; and this is to be connected with the words ‘ should
attain ’ as is understood from the context ( artha ).

86. Or [he gains stability when] a sense-activity* (pravrtti)
arises connected with an object [and] bringing the oentral-
organ into a relation of stability.

The consciousness of supernormal (divya) odour in one who attends
fixedly to the tip of his nose is sense-activity with odour [as object] ;
on the tip of the tongne, the consciousness of supernormal taste ; qn
the palate, supernormal colour ; on the middle of the tongue, the
consciousness of touch ; on the root of the tongue, the conscious-
ness of sound. These sense-activities when arisen bring the myid-
stuff into a relation of stability [and] dispel doubt and beoome a
way of approach to concentrated ixfeight . 1 ^Thus sense-activity
1 Book ii. Iff. 1 Compare L2&*


73] Steadying the mind-stuff [ — i. 35

with regard to the moon or the sun or planets or gems or [the
rays of] a lamp or similar objects, when it arises, should be
regarded as being connected with an object. For although the
true nature of things as they really are 1 becomes accessible by
means of the various sciences and by inferences and by the
instruction of masters, — since these [means] are adequate to
inform us of the things # as they are, — still, so long as any part
whatsoever has not becenae consciously knowable by the appro-
priate organ, the whole seems mediately-perceived. And the
thinking-substance is not made to arise firmly with regard to
such subtile intended- objects £0 Release. Therefore [if] only for
the sake of reinforcing books and inferences and the instruction of
masters, some one particular thing must necessarily be made an
object of perception. Then after a portion of the intended-object
as taught by these [three means] has been made the object of per-
ception the whole, even unto such an exceeding subtile object as
Release, is thoroughly belie”ed. For precisely this purpose the
purification 2 of the mind-stuff is enjoined. If there are fluctua-
tions unrestrained [as contrasted with this portion], then, when the
Consciousness of being Master with regard to these has been pro-
duced, [the mind-stuff] would be adequate to effect a perception of
these various intended-objects. And t s done, [the yogin] will
without hindrance acquire belief [and] energy [and] mindfulness
[and] concentration [i. 20].

He tells of another means for stability. 85. Or [he gains stability when]
a sense-activity (pravrtti) arises connected with an object [and] bringing
the central-organ into a relation of stability. He explains by saying «m
one who attends fixedly to the tip of his nose.^ In one performing fixed-
attentions [and] contemplations [and] concentrations there arises, as a result
of sucoees in these, that direct-perception which is a supernormal consciousness
of odours. Similarly [what is said] ia applicable to the other sense-activities
also. And this is, to be believv*' on the strength of the authoritative-word'
and not horn probable-reasonings (upapattilas). An objection, ‘This may be

1 Thu wtd yathdbhiita is though* by Mn. hen is another proof of the intimate

Rhys Davids to be ‘ specifically and connexion between the Yoga System of

uniquely Gotamic *. (C. A. F. Rhys philosophy and Buddhism.

Davids : 8e8hfg Things as thej^Really 1 See also above, p. 70 end, or text, p. 77'
an. In BvMhism, vol. i, no. 8, p. 882, (Calc. ed.).

March, 1904.) The fact that it occurs * Compare M&itri Un. si. 20.

10 [nos. it]


i. 35 — •] Book I. Concentration or Sam&dhi (74

so. But of what use is this kind of fluctuations which are of no service as.
regards Isolation?’ In reply he says «These.» These fluctuations, when
once arisen, in a very short time bring the mind-stuff into a relation of
stability with the object whether it be the I$vara or the discriminative
discernment. Another objection, ‘How could a fluctuation in relation to
one object bring [the mind-stuff] into a relation of stability with another
object?* In reply to this he says ^dispel doubt.» It diBpelB [that is] it
removes. Consequently [it becomes a way of approach] «to concentrated
insight.» By the word «Thus» he shows b*y Analogy that other fluctuations
also, which are taught in the revealed word, can be made objects. If it be
objected, ‘ Whence can there be a -doubt with regard to matters made known
by the revealed word and by other [authorities],* he replies with the words
«For although.» For Yoga is based upon belief. And when a portion of
the intended-objects taught is made the object of perception, contemplation
and the other [states] which are based upon this [belief], follow for him
without obstruction.

36. Or an undistressed [and] luminous [sense-activity when
arisen brings the central-organ into a relation of stability].

The words ‘sense-activity when arisen brings the central-organ
into a relation of stability ’ are supplied from [sutra 35], This is
that consciousness of the thinking-substance which occurs when
[the yogin] fixes his attention upon the Lotus of the Heart. For
1. the sattva of the thinking-substance becomes resplendent and
[all-pervasive] like the air (akdga). By skill in keeping [his central-
organ] stable in this [Lotus], this sense-activity, because resplen-
dent as the sun or tfie moon or planets or gems, becomes trans-
formed in appearance. Thus 2. his mind-stuff comes to a state of
balance with regard to the feeling-of-personality and becomes wave-
less like the Great Sea [and] peaceful [and] infinite [and] the feel-
ing-of-personality and nought beside. With regard to which it has
been said 1 “ Pondering upon this self which is a mere atom, one is
conscious in the san c way as when one is conscious Jto the extent
that one says ‘ I am This undistressed sense^activity is of two
kinds : 1. in connexion with an object, and 2. the feeling-of-per-
sonaKty and nought beside ; [and] is called luminous. By means
of which the mind-stuff of the yogin gains the stable state.

1 Garbe (Feetgnue an Roth, p. 78) from *not however refer to a parnooiar ctaU

jhie fragment infer* a doctrine of the only of the self 7
atomic nature of (file telf. Might it


75] Pondering upon the self [ — i. 36

86. Or an nndistressed [and] luminous [sense-aotivity when arisen brings
the oentral-organ into a relation of stability]. Without distress means
freed from pain. Luminous means something having lumination. Luminous
in the form of [casting] radiance 4Cupon the Lotus of the Heart.» That lotus
eight-petalled which is situated with head downwards between the abdomen
and the thorax, he should turn, by the force of an emissive restraint of breatU,
head upwards and fix the mind-stuff attentively upon it. In the middle of
this [lotus] is the circle of the sun [and] the letter A 1 [and] the locus of the
waking-state. Above it is the circle of the moon [and] the letter U [and]
the locus of sleep. Above this is the circle of fire [and] the letter M [and]
the locus of deep-sleep. Above which is the highest, whose essence is the
air [and] the prolonged nasal ( brahma-nada ) [and] the locus of the fourth
[tuflya] state [and] a half-measure. [All this] the knowers of Brahma relate.
In this [Lotus], that is, in the pericarp [of the lotus], is the tube (nadi) of
Brahma, with upturned face, and reaching to the circle of the sun and the
other [circles]. And upward from this there extends the tube called Sushumna. 2
This passes through the outer circles also beginning with that of the sun.
Now this [tube] is the locus of the mind-stuff. And by fixing attention upon
this [tube] the yogin acquires in addition the consciousness of mind-stuff.
After showing the consistency [of his statement] he indicates what the appear-
ance cff the consciousness of the thinking-substance is by saying ecFor 1. the
sattva of the thinking-substance.» The words dike the air (dkaraty describe
its pervasive character. It takes various forms, it is transformed into the
appearance [that is] into the form of the splendours of such [bodies] as the Am.
And here thinking-substance ( buddhi ) is understood to be the central-organ
(manas) and not the Great Principle (mahat-tctva) Moreover, placed in the
Sushumnft and produced from the personality-sv 3tance which is itself evolved 3
[from sattva\ it has an abundance of sattva ; fci this reason its luminosity is
emphasized. Furthermore, in so far as it is concerned with various objects,
its pervasiveness is also established. Having shown, the state of balance
(sam&patti) with regard to the central-organ, an effect of the feeling- of-per-
eonality, he describes what the state- of-balance is in itself with regard to the
feeling-of-personality by saying «Thus . . . comes to a state of balance.^
«CPeaceful2> [that is] that from which the waves of rajas and tamos have passed
away, dnfimte^ is all-pervading. «CThe feeling-of-personality and nought
beside^ is a form in which the splendouia of various kinds do not reoccur.
He makes Ins own opinion accord with another authoritative- work (agama,
by saying 4CWitlf regard to w. With regard to which this has been

said by Paficacikha, It is called an atom because it is hard of access [to
knowledge]. The self has the personality-substance as its basis. Pondering
[that is] reflecting [upon it], one knows in the same way as when ohe knows
I am \ An glgectc{ says, 4 This may be true that the luminous [sense-activity]
1 8eo MM- Up. 0. * do MSS , not tufumnd, 1 See Sam. Kar xx\


i. 36—]


Book I Concentration or Samadhi


[76


assumes various forms of splendour, but how can the luminous [sense-activity]
assume the form of the feeling-of-personality and nought beside ?’ In reply
to this ho says «This ... is of two kinds. The point is thAt the sense-of-
porsonality is itself, when cleansed from the defilement of rajas and tamas ,
liMnination. He states also the consequences of the two-fold luminous [sense-
activity] by saying CBy means of which. »


37. Or the mind-stuff [reaches the stable state] by having as
its object [a mind-stuff] freed from passion. Or influenced by

having as the supporting-object a mind-stuff freed from passion, 1
the yogins mind-stuff reaches the stable state.

37. Or the mind-stuff [reaohes the stable state] by having as its object
[a mind-stuff] freed from passion. Those freed from passion are Krsnadv&i-
pfiyana* and certain others. Mind-stuff is affected by having as the supporting-
.object the mind-stuff of these.


38. Or [the mind-stuff reaches the stable state] by having as
the supporting-object a perception in dream or in sleep. Or,

assuming that form which has as its supporting-object either a
petception in dream or in sleep, the yogins mind-stuff reaches the
stable state.

38. Or [the mind-stuff* reaches the stable state] by having as the support-
ing-object a perception in dream or in sleep. For when in his dreAm he
adores the Exalted Mahe^vara’s image which abides within a sequestered forest
and seems as if it were sculptured out of the moon’s orb ; [and] its members and
limbs are soft as lotus stems ; it is made of precious moonstone-gems and
festooned with garlands of exceeding fragrant jasmine and M&l&tl flowers ;
it captivates the heart — When in the very [act of adoration] he awakens with
mind in undisturVed calm ; then, reflecting upon that same [image] which had
become the object supporting the perception in his dream, while his central-
organ is identical in form with that [object], bis mind-stuff reaches a stable
state in that very [condition]. — And sleep in this case is to be understood as
having the quality of sat ia. Of which sleep, when be wakgs, he has the
connecting-memory * I slept well’. For in this sleep his central-organ has
become single-in-intent And to this extent only [that is, in a sleep tainted only
in so fcyr as it refers to some sattva aspect of a thing], the knowers of Brahms

f

1 For an illuminatingingtance, see Hopkins, 1 See £&ihkara Bhasya Niro. S&g.ed.p.782 M .

Yoga-terhnique (1901), Journal Am. CempareTelaug, Journal of the Bombay

Oriental Soc., vol. xxii, pt. 2, p. 356-7. Br. RAS., vol. xvi (1885), p. 196.


77] Mastery of the mind-stuff [ — i. 41

toll ua that the fora of Brahma is in a state of deep sleep.— Moreover, since
perception severed from the object to be perceived cannot come within the
range [of the sense-organs], lie brings that object also which is to be perceived
within the range [of the sense-organs].


39. Or [the mind-stuff reaches the stable state] by contem-
plation upon any suoh an object as is desired.

Let [the yogin] contemplate whatever object he desires. Having
reached stability there, the mind-stuff reaches the stable state
elsewhere also.

80. Or [the mind-stuff reaohes the stable state] by contemplation upon
any suoh an objeot as is desired. Why Bay more ? Whatsoever [object] is
desired, [let him contemplate] just that, whichsoever particular deity it be.


40. His mastery extends from the smallest atom to the
greatest magnitude.*

e

The mind-stuff entering into a. subtile thing reaches a stable state
which extends to the smallest atom ; entering a coarse thing it
reaches a stable state which extends to the greatest magnitude.
This freedom from obstruction of his, while advancing in this way
to both of these kinds of limits, is complete mastery. So the yogin’s
mind-stuff filled full of mastery needs : ot again the purification
perfected by practice.

But how is the becoming one’s self (&ttn\bMva) tq be understood ss being
a stable state ? In reply he says, 40. His mastery extends from the smallest
atom to 'the greatest magnitude. He explains by saying £into s subtile
thing. ^ Summarizing the meaning given above he tells the meaning of the
word <mastory> by the words <£both of these kinder He telle of the secondary
results of mastory by saying «So ... of mastery.^


Now when the mind has rt ached stability, what is the balanced-
state (samdpattt) as such (svarupa) and (vd) as directed to an
objeot ? This is told [in the sutra].

41. [The iflipd-qtuff] from whioh, as from a precious gem,
fluctuations have dwindled away. is. with reference either to


1. 11— 1


Book I. Concentration or Samadhi


[78


the knower or to the process-of-knowing or to the object-to-
be-known, in the state of resting upon [one] of these [three]
and in the state of being tinged by [one] of these [three], and
[thus] is in the balanced-state.

•The meaning of the words <from which .... fluctuations have
dwindled away) refers [to the mind-stuff] of which the presented-
ideas have come to rest. He takes as the example the words <as
from a precious gem .) 1 Just as a crystal is tinged by the various
colours of the different things next to which it lies and appears as
having the form of the coloured (rupa) thing-next-to-which-it-lies
(upagraya), so the mind-stuff is influenced by referring to the
object-to-be-known and comes into a state-of-balance with the
object-to-be-known and appears as having the form of the object-to-
be-known as it is in itself. Influenced by a subtile element it comes
into a state-of-balance with the subtile element and seems to be
the subtile element itself. Likewise, influenced by referring to a
coarse [element] it comes into a state-of-balance with a coarse form
and seems to have a coarse form. Similarly, influenced by particu-
lar things of the world it comes into a state-of-balance with the
particular thing of the world and seems to have the form of the
world. An analogous situation would be found to exist also with
reference to the processes-of-knowing, [that is] in the organs of
Bense. Influenced by referring to a process-of-knowing it comes
into a state-of-balance with the process-of-knowing and appears as
having the form of the process-of-knowing as it is in itself. Simi-
larly, influenced by referring to the Self as knower it comes into a
state-of-balance with the Self as knower and appears as having the
form of the Self as knower. Similarly, influenced by referring to
a liberated Self it comes into a state-of-balance with the liberated
Self and appears as having the form of the liberated Self. Thus it
is that the mind, which is like a precious gem, in th^ state of rest-
ing upon [one] of these, upon the knower or upon a process-of-
knowing or upon the object-to-be-known [that is] upon the Self or
a sense-organ or an element, [and which is] in a state of bqjmg
tinged by [one of] these, [that is] while resting uponjone of] these,

1 Compare $4ktrat*la, Fint prose speech after ii. 7 (Pischel, p.^125 1 *).


Conscious balanced-states


79 ]


l— l. 41


changes into their form — this [mind] is said to be in the balanced-
state.

Thus the means for stability of the mind-stuff have been stated. The mastery
of that mind-stuff which has reached stability has also been shown. Now
a question is asked, 'When the mind has reached stability, what object has
[concentration] conscious [of an object] and what is [concentration] itself?’
This he asks by saying «Now.» Referring to this he introduces the next
sQtra by saying CThis is told.» He recites the sQtra 4L [The mind-stuff] ....
as from a precious gem . ..the balanood-state. He explains this by the
words ^dwindled away.» The mind-stuff from which such fluctuations as
sources'of-valid-ideas, when they are of rajas or of tamos , have dwindled away
as a result of practice and of pasBionlessness. The explanation of this is
<£of which the presented-ideas have come to rest* In this manner it is stated
that the sattva of the mind-stuff, which is naturally pure, is not overpowered
by the rajas and the tamos. He makes the example clear by saying ^Just as ^
— «Tlie thing next to which it lies» is the limiting condition, such as the
hibiscus flower. — influenced by» means changed into its likeness. It*
appears as if marked by the form of the red or blue or other colour which is
peculiar to the thing nexf to which it lies. He applies [the illustration] to the
thing* illustrated by saying «so . . . the object-to-be-known.* It is influenced
by, [that is] it penetrates into, the object-to-be-known to which it refers. In
this way he distinguishes the object-to-be-known from the knower and from the
process-of-knowing. [The mind-stuff] covers over its own peculiar form as inner
organ and comes into a state of balance with the object-to-be-known ; or it might
be said that it seems to change into an Qbjf- tive state of being known. As
a result of this it appears sb having the form f the object-to-be-known as it is
in itself. Influence (upardga) comes only from an object-to-be-known. [This]
he subdivides into subtile and into corrse [forms] by saying subtile
element.* The particular things of the world aVe evidently those with an
animate nature, for instance, cows ; and those with an inanimate nature, for
instance, water-jars. In accordance with this it has been shown that there are
two concentrations : that accompanied by deliberation [upon coarse objects] ;
and that accompanied by reflection [upon subtile objects]. When he says
4CAn analogous situation .... also with reference to the proceases-of-knowing,
[that is] in the organs of sensed he means that sense-organs are processes of
knowing in £hat by them intended-objects are known. He makes the same
dear by saying Preferring to * process of knowing.* Since the process of
knowing iB itsdf that to which it refers, it is influenced, [that is] permeated,
by thi& It covers over its own peculiar form as inner organ and seems to be
Changed 1 into a process of knowing, as if it were an outer organ. Having
described in this wqy [the concentration] accompanied by joy, he tells of that

1 Thf analogue i a found in iii. 26. d. 240. last line’ ( Calc, ed.h


i.4i — 1 Book /. Concentmtion or Samddhi [80

accompanied by the feeling-of-personality by saying {Similarly . • . the Self aa
knower. » Because the Self as Knower is the locus of the feeling of personality :
this is the point Since there is no distinction between Solves, released Selves,
like <JJuka x and Prahlftda, as objects of concentration, must be included as being
described by the words {Similarly . . . released.} Coming to a dose he explains
the words <reeting upon [one] of these [three] and in the state of being tinged
by [one] of these three) by saying {Thus it is that} The mind-stuff's sattva
freed from the defilement of the rajas and tamos [aspects], by virtue of the
purification by contemplation, rests upon [that is] fixedly attends to one of
these, either the knower or the process-of-knoVring or the object- to-be-known.
This state of being tinged by [one] of these [three], [that is] taking the form
of [one] of them, is called the balanced-state^ in other words, Yoga with the
distinguishing-characteristic of being conscious [of an object].— And here the
order of words in the sQtra <knower or process-of-knowing or object-to-be-
known) need not be heeded since it runs counter 1 * * to the order of objects-
intended [as given in experience]. Similarly, in the Comment also, the clearing
[of the statement with regard to the concentration upon] the subtile elements
as being the first [in the order of statements] is not to be respected. Thus all
becomes satisfactory.


42. Of these a [balanced-states] the state-balanced with de-
liberation is confused by reason of predicate-relatlons
between words and intended-objects and ideas.

For example, although the word 4 * * * * ‘ cow * and the intended-object
4 cow 9 and the idea 4 cow * are things distinct from each other, one
finds that in the process-of-kriowing they are undistinguished.
When these are distihguished from each other, the properties of
words are of one kind, the properties of objects-intended are of
another -kind, [and] the properties of thoughts are of another kind.
Thus the levels-of-existence (panthan) are distinct If now a
yogin has come into a state of balance with one of these [objects in


1 The Yedftnta books plaoe Quka in the suc-

ceauon between Vy 9sa and G&ufcpSda.

1 See the discussion by Jacobi : the Dates

of the Philosophical Stttras, JAOS.,

vol.gxxi <19U), p. 26.

1 Rijendr* LSla Mitra apparently omits

this word from the stltra in his edition

of Bhojari^a’e Afijam&rta^da (1888).

1 Compare Pataijali: Mahibb&gya, voL i,


p. 1" (Kielhorn’sedition),and the elabo-
rate discussion* in Vficaspatimi^ra’s
Tattvabindn in which he contrasts two
different theories of the Vftivikarauas
(Bhartrhari in his Yikyapadlya and
Vfttsyiyana) with three schools °of
Mlmftnsakas (1. foljojrers of Upararya,
s#oh as gsihkara, 2. Prabhftkara, 8.
Kumftrila).


81] Wm'ds, ideas , and things [ — i. 42

the predicate-relation], and if such an intended-object as ‘ cow ’
strikes upon his concentrated insight, and if it comes to him
permeated with predicate-relations between words and intended-
objects and ideas, then that confused balanced-state is said to be
<with deliberation.)

The balanced-state in general has been described. classification into sub-

divisions there are four kinds of it : deliberative and super-del iberative, reflec-
tive and super-reflective. Of tBese [four] he describes the state-balanced in
deliberation [upon a coarse object] in the sQlra beginning with the words 42.
Of these and ending with the words balanced-state . . . <Of these) [that is]
from among these balanced-states it is the state balanced in deliberation that is
to be understood. Of what kind is this [balanced-state] ? Although in reality
diverse, words and intended-objects and ideas have predicate-relations because the
words and the other [twoj are attributed the one to the other. And the predi-
w^t6- A "l# f i"u rep^sents tlio diversity that there is in one thing tnd the identity
that there is in diverse things. Consequently [the balanced-state] is confused
or mixed with predicate-relations between words and intended-objects and ideas.
When he says «For example . . . the word ‘ cow ’» it is evident that there is a
predicate- relation which identifies the word with the intendecFobject and < the
idea, both of which Save been appropriated by the [word] 1 cow \ When he says
«Cthe intended-object 4 cow ’» it is evident that there is a predicate-relation
which identifies the intended-object with the word and the idea, both of whifih
have been appropriated by the [iutended-object I • cow \ When he says ^the idea
‘cow *» it is evident that there is a predicate-rx. lation which identifies the idea
with the word and the intended-or>ject, both of ^ ich have been appropriated by
the [idea] ‘cow\ .Thus in ordinary life it is evident that, although word and
intended-object and idea are distinct, in the process of knowing they are not dis-
tinguished. If in the process of knowing they are not distinguished, why then
should there be any distinction ? In reply to this he says «When these are dis-
tinguished^ When in accordance with methods of agreement and difference
they are distinguished by experts, then 1. properties of words are of one kind
[that is] a word which is nothing but a mutation of sound has such properties as
high [pitch], 2. [ properties] of an intended-object are of another kind [that is] such
properties as insensibility and [definite] shape, 3. properties of an idea are of
another kind [that is] illumination and no [definite] shape. Therefore the level
{panthan) of their existences is disc let [that is] the way which leads to the various
things themselves. When it is said that a yogin has come into a state of balance
with onertof these intended-objects, such as a cow, then the lower perception of the
yog in has been described. — The rest is easy.


11 [not. it]


i. 43 — ] Book I. Concentration or Samddhi [82

When however the memory is purified from [remembrances of] the
conventional-use ( samketa ) of words and when the concentrated-
insight is free from predicate-relations [in the form] of ideas either
of inferences or of something that has been heard, the intended
bbject remains as it is in itself and nothing more, and is specifically
characterized as having just that form which it has in itself and
as nothing more. And this is the super-deliberative balanced-
state. This is the higher perception. And this is the ge m of
inference and of anything that has been heard. From it inference
and anything heard have their being. Moreover this knowledge
( dargana ) is not accompanied by an idea either of an inference or
of anything that has been heard. Therefore the yogin’s know-
ledge derived from super-deliberative concentration is not con-
fused by any other source of a valid idea. He illustrates the dis-
tinguishing characteristic of the super-deliberative concentration
by the sutra.

43. When the memory is quite purified, [that balanoed-
state]— which is, as it were, empty of itself and whioh
brightens [into conscious knowledge] as the Intended object
and nothing more— is super-deliberative.

That insight which, when thei memory is quite purified from pre-
dicate-delations [in the form] of ideas either of inferences or of any-
thing that has been heard, and from the conventional usage of
words, is influenced by the thing in itself (svarupa) which is to be
known ; and which, after as it were in its form of insight throwing
off itself, the -essence of which is a process of knowing, becomes
the thing-intended (padartha) and nothing more ; [and becomes]
as it were changed into the thing in itself which is to be known, —
this is fhe super-deliberative balanced-state* And as such it has
[just] been explained. For to this [balanoed-state] the world [so^
far as it is visible], whether [it be an animate object] such as a
cow or whether [it be an inanimate object] such as a water-jar, is
1. the formation of a single mental-act (buddhi), 2. its essence is
an intended-object, 3. [and] its essence is that it is a special kind
of conglomeration of atoms. And this particular kind of arrange-
ment 1 [which constitutes the object] is an apparenf-form ( dharma )

* For this word aamMMna mo pp. 170* 205“ 210 272 T (Catered.).


83 J The coarse object and nothing more [ — i. 43

common to the subtile elements [which compose it] and it is in-
ferred [as being a whole] from its phenomenalized effects 1 * ; it is
self-dependent and presents itself by [changing] into its pheno-
menal* form by the operation of the conditions-which-phenomenai
lize it (sva) ; and it disappears when another apparent-form arises
in consciousness. This same apparent-form is called a whole
(avayavin). And it is this that is one 3 and great or very small
and tangible and that in which actions occur and impermanent. By
this [kind of] wholes the business-of-life is carried on. But one to
whom such a particular conglomeration is not [perceptibly] real —
since by an indefinite-first-impression 4 (avikalpa) a subtile cause
is imperceptible — for him, since there is no whole, nearly every-
tni».g, in accordance with the statement that an erroneous idea is
not based upon the form [i. 8] of that [in respect of which the idea
is entertained], is reduced to erroneous ideas. And then what
would be a complete idea, seeing that there are no objects to which
it would refers For whatever is perceived, all that is a bit
influenced by its nature of being a whole-having-parts. Therefore
a whole exists which becomes changed by receiving what is called
sizes and the like. This is the object of the super-deliberative
balanced-state.

In order to Bhow the connexion of the sQtra he 'plains first super-deliberative
[concentration] by saying 4CWhen however.* — Purification is removal For
certainly inference and verbal-communicatior begin to function when occasioned
by memories of the conventional use of words. And\his conventional-usage has
its essence in the false attribution to each other of the word and the intended
object and the idea ‘cow ’. And as a result of this the two predicate-relations in
the form of an idea either of an inference or of a verbal-communication arise. So
when occasioned by one of these, concentrated insight still has deliberation
[upon some coarse object]. But when the mind, — in so far as it is absorbed in
the intended object and nothing more and is zealous for the intended object and
for nothing M»re,— reaches by practice upon this [intended object] a state of
inseparable fusion [with this object], [then] the memory of conventional-usages

1 The stem carries within itself the minis- in NySya-sGtra ii. 1. 86 and iv.2. 14 ff.,
tore of its effects and also in Udayana’s AtnA-Tattra-

1 The expression Ma-vyaHjakaafyana also Viveka.

occurs at pfl $7, M2, 207, a%4 282 4 All the MSS. inclnding the Bikaner and

(Oslo, ed ' GafigSdhara ShSetrih MSS. omit this

The relation cf whole and part is discussed word.


Book I. Concentration or Samddhi


i. 43—]


[84


is thrown off. And when these are thrown off, predicate-relations in the form of
an idea either of an inference or of anything heard, which two are rooted in
memory, are thrown off. Then in the concentrated insight, freed from these
predicate-relations, the intended object remains as it is in itself and nothing more ;
and becomes accurately characterized as having just that form whioh it has in
itself and as nothing more, and as not having any form of predicated-ielation.
This is the super-deliberat i ve balanced-state. This is the higher perception of
the yogin, since in it there is not even a trace of false attribution. An objec-
tion might be raised, ‘ This may be so. But yogins, having known the that-ness
of the intended object, make it consistent [with other knowledge] and teach it.
And (rd) how can this intended object be taught by verbal communication or be
made consistent by inference which is intended for another, both of which cases
not referring to that [object which is intended in the higher perception]?
Accordingly verbal-communication and inference [must] refer to that [higher
object]. And since these two are predicate-relations, the higher perception is
also nothing but a predicate-relation.’ In reply to this he says «CAnd this . . .
anything heard.» For if this [knowledge], like that with deliberation, were
accompanied by inference or by anything that had been heard, that is, if it had
been tainted by either of these, then it would be confused. But it is only the
germ of these two. For from it inference and anything that has been heard have
their being. And it is not the rule that whatever is a cause of an effect has the
same object as itself as its effect. For because the idea of smoke is the cause
of the idea of fire, it does not therefore have this [fire] for its object Con-
sequently [the yogins] having known [the thatness of the intended object] by
a perception free of predicate-relations teach it and make it consistent through
the medium of predicate-relations. He sums up by saying <CTherefore,& and
shows the connexion with the sQtra which is to be explained by using the
word «super-deliberative.^ The slltra begins with the words 48. When the
memory is quite purified. The purification 1 is the removal of the memory
which follows (tasmad) upon the predicate-relation which is nothing but the
idea of the inference and of anything that has been heard and of the con-
ventional-usage of words. When this occurs (tasyam). And in this case the
purification from the memory of conventional-usages is the cause (i hetu), and
the purification from the memory of ideas, such as, of anything that has been


1 A favourite verse to illustrate the gradual
advance from the first dim impression
to an assertion in distinct predicate
form is M&gha’s verse in Qi$upilavadha
i»3. First a ball of light; then a body;
then a person h seen ; finally one says
“ It is Narada!" as one beholds him
falling from the sky.

This purification seems to be a relaxation


of attention which has been given
to a too desely limited field. Our
deepest convictions may speak to us
in dissociative processes wherein aqy
fixed succession of apperceptive acts
has ceased. The purification fies in
a distribution of attention so that it
regards a whole and disregards the
successive parts.


851


[ — i. 43


Nature of the subtile object

heard, is the effect (hetumant ). — And the word inference* is to be understood
as expressing the object 1 * * 4 of the action [aa expressing that which is inferred, and
not that from which an inference is drawn] ; it is a word denoting the thing
to he inferred. — The word 3as it were* (wa) in the clause <&as it were . . .
itaelf* (seam tva) is out of its right position and should be construed aft^r
the words ^throwing off.* — He rejects the theory ' that there is [in this
state] a diversity of objects by saying mto this ... a singled It is 1. the for-
mation of a single mental-act, in the sense that it form8* or brings forth a
single mental-act. Consequently since it is [single], the atoms, in that they
are many, are not the objects of the super-deliberative [balanced-state]. What
he has wished to say is this : Assuming that they are fit [to be the object of
the balanced-state], still, in that they are very subtile, and because they are collected
into a manifold [each unit of which has its own subtile idea], they are not fit
to be the objeot of a presented idea which brightens [into a conscious know-
ledge] of the unity of the single intended-object which has magnitude [mahattva
as wuirasted with <««]. An objection, ' Granted that the atoms are real exis-
tences, then the [so-called] coarseness would be [only] a subjective (aamvfia)
property of that whioh shines dearly [in consciousness].’ In reply to this*
he says <2. its essence is «n intended objects The point is that when once
a coarse objeot [as a whole] has been established in experience, it cannot, unlcis
there be something inhibitory, be denied. — To those [Vai$esika] who think that
[animate things] like cows and [inanimate things] like water-jars are produced •
by binary and other atoms in gradations, he says €8. conglomeration of atoms.*
A conglomeration ef atoms is a mutation in gross form and this [form of]
mutation differentiates T it t om other [coarse] mutations. That of which this
[differentiated] mutation is the essence ’, in othr>' words, tbe-thing-itaelf (tvahipa),
is that which is called [<a conglomeration O atoms*]. [Animate] things
such as cows possess an [animate] seat-ofexperienoe,* And such [inanimate]
things as water-jars are [merely inanimate] objects [of this balanoed-st&te]. And
both of these same two kinds of objects are also seen (lokyate ) ; and so [each] may
be called the world (Idha) [so far as it is visible to this balanced-state]. It might
be objected that this [conglomeration, which is a gross form of mutation] might

1 Pip. iii. 8. 118. * This would be the doctrine of the Yogfr

* The theory of the SarrletirBdin. See eft School.

Samdaryanaaaihgtaha (An and. ed.), * See on the whole (object Jaoobi'* illomi-

p. 7, L 9. # noting article on the * Atomic Theory ’

* This would be the theory of the 1 dbhfr in Hasting’* Diet, of Religion and

Ilka school, which aaaerts the peroep- Ethics, and especially p. 801*, line 10.

tion,of outer objects. See Sarradar- 1 Compare Vli|efika«8tra vii. L 9 and
faiuwuhgraha (Anand. ed.), p. 7*. Caifckara on ii. 9. 12.

4 Compare Dharmaklrti’i NyiyabindutlkK * As contrasted with a special kind of con-
(Reter*on'sed.},p.lV, (Tscherbatakoi’s glomention (ptweunt r p iftfa) .
ed. BibL Buddhka), p. 18, also the * This aaab-ofexperienos ia, according to
rippapl, p 87. the FMalUala Rahaavam. the bodv.


Book I. Concentration or Samadhi


[86


i. 43—]

be either different from the subtile elements or not different [from them} 1. If
it be different from them, how can it be the [common] substrate of them and*
how can it be the form (tiMra) [which gives them oneness]? For a water-
jar is a different thing from a piece -of-cloth and cannot be the substrate [of
(fhe properties of the piece-of-cloth] nor can it be that whieh gives the form
| of oneness] to this piece-of-cloth. 2. If, on the other hand, it [the object* so
far as visible, which is a conglomeration of atoms] be not different [from its
subtile elements], then it would be, like them, subtile and not common [to the
whole group]. The point is this : any such thi^g as a water-jar is not absolutely
different from the atoms, neither is it absolutely identical [with them} In case
it were different, as a horse and a cow are different, the relation [between
them] of substance to its properties could not be consistently explained. In
case it were identical, [so that the atoms were] like the substance, then this [sub-
stance] could not be consistently explained. Consequently it is in some respects
different and in some respects identical. And so it must be, if all is to be con-
sistently explained. By putting the words «subtile elements^ in the genitive
case, he indicates that there is in some respects a difference ; and by the words
4it is self-dependents, that there is an identity. [It is inferred] by its
phenomenalized effects: phenomenalized in the sense that its [effect] is ex-
perienced ; and phenomenalized in the sense that it [serves] the busineed-of-life.
[And] it is proven by inference to any one who takes the opposite view. And
in so far as it is identical with its cause, we may consistently say that it has the
form of its cause. Accordingly he says «by [changing] into its phenomenal form
by the operation of the oonditions-which-phenomenalize it.» — 4 Is this apparent-
form (< dharma), which is identical with it, permanent ? 9 He gives a negative
answer in the words 4Cwhen another apparent-form^ Another apparent-form
[that is,] as a potsherd [is another apparent-form of a water-jar broken in pieces].
— That this whole has a form not- to-be-found (vydrrttam) in the atoms he shows by
saying CThis same.» Fo- it has properties, which give it a specific-character,
such as the holding of honey or of water, which actions are other than actions
which could be accomplished by atoms. 1 |The whole is known] not only by
[perceptual] experience, but also by the business-of-life since the conduct of men
depends upon these [wholes]. This he states in the words £and by this.^
▲ [Buddhist] objection, 4 This may be true. If there were nothing to oontradict,
experience might establish [by the help of inferences] that [the mutation in its
gross form] is a whole-ha* ing-parts. But (co) there is a contradiction. [For in
the line of reasoning,]— (a) All that exists is without prfrts, (/5) like thought
(egfidna), and (y) such things as cows and water- jars exist,— we have a natural
[and Vflkf] middle-term * [that is, existence]. [But the point is made that there

1 The system insists that not even the 1 This is a term of thel'Kastern school" of
subtile (tukfma) is perceptible to the logicians, equivalent in their usage to
Ofikalpita type of thinking. an unconditioned midlie tern, whibh


87 ]


Subtile object permanent and impermanent [ — i. 43


ia no existence in coarse form.] For existence is subsumed (vydpta) under
absence of contradictory qualities. 1 And connexion with contradictory qualities,
which is contradictory with it [that is, existence], being found to exist in a
thing-having-parts, excludes existence also, since in such a case something contrary
to the subsumer [which is, absence of contradictory qualities] has been found. Afid
so [to revert to the original point] there is in the whole a connexion with con-
tradictory qualities, for example, belonging to that place and not belonging to
that place, being covered an^ not being covered, being red and not red, moving
and not moving. [Accordingly wholes in gross form do not exist.] ' In reply
to this he says 4CBut one to whom.» The intention [of what was first assorted]
is this. [The whole in gross form is now said to be given in experience and to
be an action realizing a purpose.] The existence which is given os the middle-
term ( hetu ) must either be given by experience and be such as even a ploughman 1
with dusty feet can understand, or it must be other than what is given by
experience. Of these two the latter is not a middle-term since it is not given in
experience, [that is, it must itself be established as existing in the middle-term].
But water-jars and such things have an existence given in experience, namely,
activity realizing a purpose. [This form] is not other than its gross [form]. This
[form given by experience and realizing a purpose] is the middle-term, [that is,
existence], and by removing [the existence of] coarseness [as thus defined, this
middle-term] destroys itself. In reply to this [the Buddhist] says, i Existence
is not [a permanent] coarseness, but is the negation of non-existence. And
coarseness is negative non-coarseness. Moreover negativations differ according
to the variations of th6 things negatived. So even when there is no coarseness,
there is no destruction of existence.' [The reply to this would be :] By reason
of variations in the negativations we may admi. that there is a variation in the
objects of the determination (avastiya), But would you, Sir, be good enough
to say what the object is of the source-cf-the-valid-idea which is not a first
faint impression (vikalpa), and which is the necd&sary-condition for

the determinations? For if you say that the atoms of colour which arise con-
tinuously, and the minute that-ness of which is unknown, [are the object J,
the reply is, Very well. These are intermingled 1 with the atoms of odour and taste
and touch and are [therefore] not continuous. Therefore if it be unaware of the


would not be a hetvdbk&sa, but a valid
(sad) term. The later term would be
8ad~anui*&na. # See Ny4yi-F -a, b. v.
Such terminology points to the ^astern
country as the home of Vftcaspati-
uff$ra. Compare for this kind of logical
language Dharmaklrti’s NySya-bindu-
tikS (Peterson'c ed.), p. 104.

See Nyaya-blnSu-ftkft ii. 2 (Pete icon's ed.),

p. ioe;


* Compare Patahjali : Mahabhasya on 1 1

23 (Kielhorn i. 81 1 )

* One doc* not see merely the colour series.

For this is intersected by the taste and
smell and touch series. On the other
hand the continuum of colour is not an
illusion as the VedSntin, Wdayana foi
example, would say (Atma-Tattva-
Viveka, Jib&uanda’s ed., Calc., 1873,
p. 88 l ). The YogasyBtem explains these
series as the mutations of a substance.


i. 43— ] Book L Concentration or Samadhi [88

intermediate [atoms], this indefinite-first-impression, based upon the atoms, like
the presen ted-idea of a forest as single and as dense [although it too is full of
intermediate spaces,] would be false. Accordingly the indefinite-first-impressions
proceeding from this [other first faint impression] are not even mediately in
relation with a [perceptible] object. Thus how could one succeed in establishing
that there are no parts in existences which are determined by these [indefinite-first-
impressions] ? Therefore if one desires to hold to the validity of perceptions
which are definite-later- impressions, the existence A that very coarseness which
is being experienced i y this [perception] niubt Oe admitted, [oven] if one does
not assent to that which is to be determined by [perception which is] definite-
and-later-impression. To proceed : if existence inhibits this [kind of percep-
tion], it would inhibit itself. That the atoms are exceedingly subtile and that
they become the objects of experience through the medium of other kinds of
atoms — to acknowledge this is self-destructive. Having this in view he says
«One to whom this particular conglomeration which is not [perceptibly] real»
[is the object of a perception which is a definite-and-later-impression], one, that
is, who says that the subtile atoms should therefore be objects of percep-
tions which are definite-and-later-impressions — to him he replies «since by an
indefinite-firBt-impression a subtilo cause is i m perce pt:ble.» For the reason that
for him there is no whole, everything, — according to the characterization' given
[i. 8] that “ an erroneous idea is not based on that form [in respect of which it
is entertained],*’ — is reduced to erroneous idea, all that which rests upon coarse-
ned and all that which rests upon the existence which is the locus of this
[coarseness]. - It might be objected that even so [and finallyj knowledge is
not erroneous in regard to one's self, because this does not appear as a whole
having parts. In reply to this he says «Nearly.» The objector might reply
1 What even if it be so?* In reply to this he says &And then.» If such
an idea as that of existence be erroneous, then such an idea, caused by existence
or something of the kind ao this that thero are no wholes having parts, would
also be erroneous. Because its obiect also, in so far as it is something to be
determined, is certainly nothing coarse 1 [and this latter is] not concerned with
definite-anddater-impressions. And this [object] does not exist. Such is the
meaning of the argument And if it bo asked why there is no object, he
replies with the word «wh^tever.» And the [apparent] contradiction must
be removed in accordance with the explanation (upapatti) previously given
based on identity in difference and on manifoldness in mutations. Then all
would be satisfactory.

44. B y this same [balanced-state] the reflective and the
super-reflective [balanced-states] are explained as having
subtile objects.

1 One suepectB that the reading might be sthuhm.


89] The subtile object and nothing more [ — i .44

Of these [two], that is called the reflective (savicara) balanced-state
whieh refers to subtile elements the apparent forms of which have
been manifested and which are characterized by an experience of
place and time and cause. In this case also a subtile element
capable of being apperceived by one idea and particularized by
uprisen (udita) apparent-forms serves as that upon which the con-
centrated insight rests.. But that balanced-state which in all ways
and by all means refei% to such [subtile elements] as are free from
characterization by apparent-forms whether quiescent {ganta) or
uprisen {udita) or indeterminable ( avyapadegya ) and which yet
corresponds to all apparent-forms and is the essence of all apparent-
forms is called super-reflective {nirvicara). Since the subtile
element is of this kind, it becomes, in this very form, that on which
the concentrated insight rests and it influences the insight itself.
When moreover the insight becomes, as it were, emptied of itself
and becomes the intended object and nothing more, then it is
ca»«d super-»eflective. Of these [four] the deliberative and the
super-deliberative have as object 1 something great ; while the
reflective and the super-reflective have a subtile object. Thns by
this same super-deliberative [balanced-state] the destruction of
predicate-relations of both 2 kinds has been explained.

44. By this same [balanoed-state] the 1 teotive and the super-reflective
[balanced-states] are explained as having subtile objects. Those [whose
apparent-forma have been manifested] are those by which the apparent-forms of
such things as water-jars have been manifested, Si other words, those that have
included the apparent-forms of such things as water-jars. «Placs» [for instance]
above or below or at one side. 4:Time» [for instance] the present. 4Cause» [for
instance] the atom of earth is produced by the five fine elements among which
the fine element of odour predominates. Likewise the atom of water [is pro-
duced] frc.n the four fine elements among which the fine element of taste pre-
dominates. Likewise the atom of fire [is produced] from the three fine elements,
excluding jhe fine element of odour and of taste, and among which the fine
element of colour predomun as. Likewise the atom of wind [is produced]

from the [two] fine elements beginning with odour, and of which [two] the

•

1 VijSSna Bbik?u glosses mahad-vcutu with tive and the Buper-rcfleotfve ; and not,

the words 1 coarse * (sthula) and 1 modifi- as VijMna Bhiksu says, the reflective

cation only * (kemalavikrti), # This is the and the super-reflective* This would

use of the word in iii. 44. be a gross inconsistency. For the

1 The tw<* « inds must be the super-delibera- reflective kind has predicate relations.

12 [m.o.s.1?]


i. 44 — ] Book L Concentration or Samadhi [90

fine element of toueh predominates. Likewise [the atom] of air from the fine
element sound alone. — This is the cause in the case of the subtile elements.
These [subtile elements] are experienced when they have a place and a time
and a cause. An idea (buddhi) which is capable of being particularised does
nA follow unless it be particularized by [such] an experience. An objeotor
might ask, 4 What similarity is there between [the balanced-state] with delibera-
tion and [that] with reflection ? ’ In reply to this he says €ln this case also.^
For the atom of earth which consists of the conglomeration of the five fine
elements may be apperceived by a single idea, k Similarly the atom of water
and the other atoms [too] which have as their essences four or three or two
or one fine element may be apperceived by a single idea. — CUprisen^ means
a present apparent-form ; [the element]* would be particularized by that. And
finally with regard to this [uprisen apparent-form], it is pointed out that there
is an interpenetration of the predicate-relations of verbal-communications and
of inferences by the memory of the conventional-use [cf words]. For when
something coarse is the object of perception, the atoms do not appear. But
[(bey do appear objectively] as the result of veri al-communications and of infer
ences. Thus it is consistent that this [balan cud-state] should be confused. —
He describes the super-reflective [balanced -state] in the words ^CBut that
which.» «In all waya» means in all forms [of phenomenalization 1 , such as blue
and yellow. The termination 1 - tas [Pan. iv. 8. 18] in the word <tearvatas» is used
[as equivalent] to all inflected case-endings. In other word? it means 4Cby all
means» [that is] by experiences of place and of time and of cause. By this
statement it is shown that the atoms as such are not particularized by time.
Neither are they . [particularized by time] medi&Uly through apparent-forms
which have their origin in these [atomsj. It is Uiis that he describes in the
word ^quiescent. » «Quieecent» are past. «lTprisen» are present. Clnde-
terminable» are future apparent-forms. [Atoms] are not characterized by these.
Nob beinr characterized hf apparent-forma, is it quite right to say that atoms
are unrelated to them ? In reply to this he says ^correspond to all apparent-
forms.^ — With 1 which kind of a relation do these atoms correspond to
apparent-forms? In reply to this he says 4Care the essence of all apparent-
forms. » In othei words, the apparent-forms are different from the atoms in
some respects and in other respects not different. --But why has this balanced-
state this kind of an obiect ? In reply to this he says <Since ... of this
character^ In other words, having an apperception of the tha^-ness of a per-
ceptible object, it does not become active with regard to that’whieh has not this
that-ness — Having stated the object of this [balanced-state], he tells what it
is itself by saying ^Moreover the insight. & ^fijringing the [four] together, he

* The termination tan is the same as tori sy %m thinhfc$W sorts words ha/e seen

(P&q. v. 8. 7). lort at this point from the Tattva

* B%haricanda%ti in hie PStanjala Raha- Vtif&radi of Vttcaspali-nA^ra.


91] The limit of subtile objects [ — i. 45

describes the object as being serviceable to distinguish what they an them-
selves by saying 0f these. He sums up with the word 4Thus.* «0f both
kinds* means both its own [super-deliberative] and also super-mfleotive forms.


45. The pubtile objeot likewise terminates in tmresoluble-
primary-matter (aliiiga).

In the case of the earthen atom the fine element of odour, [which is
the cause of the atom of earth,] is the subtile object of the [reflec-
tive and super-reflective] balanced-states ; in the case of the watery
atom the fine element of taste [is the subtile object] ; in case of
the fiery atom the fine element of colour ; in case of the windy
atom the fine element of touch ; in case of the aerial atom the fine
rhr^ent of s^und. The personality-substance which is the cause
of these [elements is also the subtile object of this balanced-state].
Besoluble-primary-matter-as-such ( lingamatra ) [which is the cause]
of thip [personality-substance] also is the subtile object [of the
balanced-state].* UnresoluLle-priraary-matter [which is the cause]
of this [resoluble-primary-matter-as-such] also is the subtile object
[of the balanced-state]. And beyond the unresoluble-prinMfry-
matter there is nothing subtile. If the objection be raised that the
Self is subtile, the reply is that this .is true. The subtilty of the
Self in relation to the resoluble-pri: .iry-matter [thinking-sub-
stance] is, however, not that of the unresoluble-primary-matter to
the resoluble-primary-matter. For the Self is not the material
cause (anvoytn) of resoluble-primary-matter, but the instrumental
cause (hetrj).

Accordingly it is explained that subtilty reaches its utmost degree
in the primary-substance.

Does the balanced -state, which has a thing-to-be-known as its object, end in the
subtile element only ? No. But, 45. The subtile object likewise terminates
in unresolublb-prfen&ry-matte. aUUga), That state of the fine Moment of odour
which is in relation to the earthen atom is the subtile object of the balanced-
state. {S imil a r ly in the later cays also the connexion is to be made. The
r^luble-primary-mattay^lW d&inga-matra) is the Great Principle •[that is,
the thinking-subs ts> neaJ|MfclM£], For it goes to dissolution (foyu) in the primary-
substance. Unresol uk P fi rinUBy-matter is primary -substance. For it does not
dissolve intc anything. This is the meaning. He says that subtilty terminates


Book I. Concentration or Samddhi


i. 45—]


[92


in unresoluble-primary-matter in the words {And beyond the unresoluble-
primary-matter there is nothing subtile.* He raises a doubt by saying {If
the objection be raised.* That is to say, the Self also is subtile not the unre-
soluble primary-substance alone. He rebuts [this objection] by saying {true.*
In qther words, in so far as it is a material cause there is in the unreeoluble-
primary* substance subtilty, but not in the other [that is, the Self]. In
this case, since the purpose of the Self is the instrumental oause of the
Great Principle and of the personality-substance and of the others, the Self is
also, like unresol ublcrprimary- matter, a cause. Having in mind the question as
to how subtilty, characterized in this way, is to be' understood as regards the
unresoluble* he asks {however.* He gives the answer in the words {not that
of the resoluble-primary-matter.* True, [the Self is] a cause, but not a material
cause. For the Self is not, like the primary-substance, a oause of these [states],
in so far as being the Great or the other [states] it enters into mutations. This
is the meaning. He sumB up in the words {Accordingly it is explained that
subtilty reaches its utmost degree in the primary-substance.*


46. These same [balanced-states] are the 'seeded concentra-
tion.

These four balanced-states have external [perceptible] things as
their seed. Therefore the concentration is seeded. Of these four
the deliberative and the super-deliberative refer to a coarse intended-
object, the reflective and super-reflective to a subtile intended-object.
ThuB in four kinds, one after another, concentration has been
enumerated.

And in the four balanced-states the object of which is a thing-to-be-known he
says that [concentration] conscious [of an object may occur]. 40. These same
[balanoed-states] are the seeded oonoentration. The word eva is out of place
and should be understood after <seeded.> As a result of this, the four balanced-
states, the objeot of which is the thing-to-be-known, are limited in so far as they
are seeded. The seeded state* however, is not limited [to the thing-to-be-known],
since, even in the case of the balanced-state the object of which is the knower
or the process-of-knowing, it persists, not being negated by the distinction into
predicate-relations and unpred’cated-relations [with reference to therihing- to-be-
known]. Bo with regard to the thing-to-be-known there are four balanced-states
and four in respect of the knower and the process-of-knowing: thus there
are eight 1 gf these [concentrations]. The Comment is explained by a [mere]
reading.

1 The Bittner MS. and the Bombay San. Ser. text read iiddhd in place ef U.


Internal undisturbed calm


93]


[— i. 47


47. When there is the clearness of the super-reflective
[balanoed-state, the yogin gains] internal undisturbed calm.

When freed from obscuration by impurity, the sattva of the think-
ing-substance, the essence of which is light, has a pellucid steady
flow not overwhelmed by the rajas and tamas . This is the clear-
ness. When this clearness arises in the super-reflective balanced-
state, then the yogin gains the internal undisturbed calm, [that is
to say] the vision by the flash (sphuta) of insight which does not
pass successively through ’the serial order [of the usual processes
of experience] and which has as its intended-object the thing as it
really is. And in this sense it has been said , 1 “ As the man who
has climbed the crag sees those upon the plain below ( bhiimistha ),
so the man of insight who has risen to the undisturbed calm of in-
himself escaped from pain, beholds all creatures in their pain/
Of the four balanced-states which have as their object the thing-to-b^known,
excellence belongs to the super-reflective [balanced-state]. [This] he describes in
the sQtra 47. When there is the clearness of the super-reflective [balanced-
state, viie yogin grains] internal undisturbed calm. He describes the meaning
of the word <cleameas> by [the words beginning with] 4Cimpurity.» Impurity
is an accretion of rajas and tamas . And it is the defilement which has the
distinguishing-characteristic of obscuration. [Clearness] is freed from this.
«The essence of which is light» means naturally light. For this reason the
sattva of the thinking-substance is not overwhelmed. An objection is made,
* This may be true. But if the jJanced-stht* has as its object the thing-to-be-
known, how could the undisturbed calm have iself as its object? ' To this he
replies with the words «has as its intended-object the thing as it really is.» In
other words, it does not have the self as its object but as its substrate 1 (adMra),
4£Doos not pass successively through the serial orders means that it is simul-
taneous. On this very point he cites the teaching of the Supreme Sage (para'
mdrfirf) gdthdm) with the words 4CAnd in this sensed Seeing that he is above all
by virtue of the perfection of his perceptive vision,® he knows that the creatures
are 4Cin their nain^, encompassed by the three kinds of pain.


Compare MBh. xii. 17. 20 ; 151.11 ■ Dham-
mapada 28. Compare also aeon's
Essay on Truth, 11 No pleasure is com-
parable to the standing upon the
vantage-ground of truth (a hill not to
be pommanded and where the air is
always clekr and ’serene) an 4 to see
the en^rs and wanderings and mists


and tempests, in the world below ”

* This is explained in the Pi tan j ala Raha-

syam thus, 1 There is a doubt as to
there being a relation of cause and
effect in things which are ^n different
places (vyadhikaranatve k&ryakdranatd
ndstltjf Sqankya)'

* Compare p. 62* and SQtra ii. 15.


Book I. Concentration or Samadhi


[04


i. 48 — 1

48. In this [calm] the insight is truth-bearing.

In one whose mind-stuff is concentrated, the insight 1 * which arises ,
in this [calm] receives the technical name of <truth-bearing.> And
this is a [term] whose meaning is intelligible of itself : [this insight]
bears truth 1 and nothing else ; in it there is not even a trace of mis-
conception. And in this sense it has been said, “ By the Sacred W ord
[and] by inference and by eagerness for practice in contemplation,
in three ways he promotes his insight and-gains the highest yoga.”
With regard to this same point he givee the consensus of yogins by telling of the
term current among yogins which itself expresses the intended-object. 48. In
this [calm] the insight is truth-bearing. The Comment is easy. By the
expression « Sac red Word» is meant the hearing (c t ravana) prescribed by the Vedas ;
by the expression «mference» is meant consideration (manana). Contemplation
is reflection. Practice in this is following it up one o' me after another. Eager-
ness for this is close attention [to it]. So in this way absorption (nididhyOsana)
is described.

But this [insight]—

49. Has an object other than the insight resulting from
things heard or from inferences inasmuoh as its intended-
object is a particular.

<A thing heard> is knowledge derived from verbal-communication.
This deals with generic objects. For a particular cannot be con-
noted by a verbal-communication. Why [not] ? Because a word
does not have its conventional-usage established by the particular.
Similarly inference deals with generic objects only. [For instance,
compare i. 7], we say, where there is getting [to a place], there is
motion ; and where there is no getting [to a place], there is no
motion. And by an inference we get a conclusion in generic
[terms only]. Therefore no particular can be the object of verbal-
communication or of inference. And of this subtile and hidden
and remote 3 thing there is no knowledge by ordinary percep-
tion. Furthermore we cannot assert that this particular has no
validity and does not exist. Therefore this particular as object,
whether it belofig to a subtile element or to the Self, is apper-

1 See lii. 51. ’ P&tafijala Rahaayam gives the gloqs : dtna*tattvam.

1 Compare S&ihkh Kir vn


95] Normative insigh [ — i. 49

ceptible by the concentrated insight only. Consequently this
iqsight has an object other than [the object of] the insight result-
ing from a thing heard or from inference, inasmuch as its intended-
object is a particular.

The objeotion is made, * This may be true. But the super-reflective [balanced
state] which is produced by perfection of impressions whoee objects 1 refer to that
which is known by verbal-communication or by inference can refer (gocarayet)
only to the objects of verbal-communication and of inference. For surely a sub-
liminal impression derived from tt^e experience of one object is not able to pro-
duce knowledge with regard to another. For that would be an unwarranted
assumption. Therefore if the super-reflective [balanced-state] is truth-bearing,
verbal communications and inferences must also be assumed to be this [that is,
truth-bearing].’ In reply to this he says 49. Has an object other than the
insight resulting from things heard or from inferences inasmuch as its
intended-object is a particular. For the sattva of the thinking-substance is
«iatui7iily bright , although it has the power of seeing all intended-objeots, it
becomes obscured by tamos ; only when by rajas it is set-free-to-stream-forth, then
only does it know [the object]. But when by practice and passionlessness the
defilement of rajas and tamaf is cast off and it shines forth spotlessly clear, tb n
passing beyond the ^mits of all measures (mdna) and of all things measurable
(meya) and having endless brightness — what then, pray, can there be that is not
within its scope ? He explains [the sQtra] in the words 4CA thing heard is know-
ledge derived from verbal-communication. This deals with generic objects.^
Why? 4CFor a particular cannot be connoted by a verbal-communication.^
For what reason ? Because a word does not have its conventional usage estab-
lished by t particular, since [the v»v>id] is an te and since it has a too- wide-
pervasion (vyabhicOra). For we do not perceive 1 relation of word and thing
expressed in connexion with any particular instance of this [wordj. And
furthermore the sense of the sentence cannot be such ^particular. Even in case
of an inference which depends for its origin upon the knowledge of the relation
between the syllogistic-mark (lifiga) and the subject-of-the-proposition (lingin), the
same procedure holds good, as he says ^Similarly inference.^ In the expression
4where there is no getting to a placed the words «where» and Cthere* should
by logical conversion be made to indicate the pervaded and the pervader. There-
fore here by an inference we get a conclusion in generic [terms only]. He sums
up with the wprd «Therefore,» It might be admitted that then we have
ordinary perception Irrespective * a knowledge of the relation [between the
word and the thing-expreesed] and that this [perception] does not deal with
generic objects only. In reply to this he says, «And of this . . . no.» It may
noC be admitted that ordinary perception depends upon a knowledge of Ihe rela-
tion [of word and ihing^xpressed]; but it must be admitted that it depends upon

1 The sequence is, first an anubhata, next a samskdn 1 , and then a mrti.


i. 49 — ] Book L Concentration or Sanxadhi [96

the senses. And with this [higher insight] the senses have no pre-established
harmony. This is the meaning* It is objected that if the individual is not
within the scope of verbal-communications and inferences and perceptions! then
it does not exist. For there is no source-of-valid ideas for [it]. In reply to this
he says ^Furthermore . . . not.» For a source-of-valid-ideas is not [necessarily]
*a pervader nor a cause of the object-of-knowledge (prameya) to the extent that, if
that [source-of- valid-ideas] should cease, the [object-of-knowledge] would cease to
be. For surely, when the moon is a slender crescent (J kaldvant ), those who accept
sourcea-of-valid-ide&s do not doubt the real existence of the deer 1 which is situated
in the other part [of the moon's surface not then visible]. £Therefore,$ for this
reason it «Cis apperceptible by the concentrated insight only.& And here the
atoms and the selves which are subjected to [this] discussion are endowed with a
particularity peculiar to themselves, because, being substances, they are distinct
from each other. Whatever things, being substances, are distinct from each
other, these are endowed with particularity peculiar to themselves, like a cripple
or a man with a shaven head. According to this inference, and to the verbal-com-
munication which is devoted to teaching what the truth-bearing insight is, [the
peculiar individuality of this insight has been defined]. Although the individual
is described, still in the absence of such a description doubt might arise, because
it has been obtained by a line of-reasoning ; yet in so far as it is not far 1 or re-
mote, this sattva is brought, with some difficulty, within the scope of verbal-com-
munication or of inference. But they do not [make evident the existence of the
particular] by as direct an experience as words of connexion, for instance, through
their application of gender and number, [bring] the meaning of the word 1 and ’
[within the scope of verbal-communication or of inference]. Therefore it is
established that [this insight] has an object other than the insights resulting from
things heard or from inferences.

When the yogin has gained concentrated insight, the subliminal-
impression made by the insight is reproduced again and again.

60 . The subliminal-impression produced by this [super-
reflective balanced-state] is hostile to other subliminal-
impressions.

The subliminal-impression arising from concentrated insight inhi-
bits the latent-impression from the emergent subliminal-impres-
eion. After emergent subliminal-impressions have bdfen repressed,

1 Compare 8ubh&ptamtimbh&i}<j&g&r&m which there reeulte a generic idea
(Nir. SSg. fourth ed.), p. 818, no. 162, (s&m&nyato bodhayatah ) ; and of *re-

.?c ankafh ke 'pi. See also Kuvalajfr mote \ that from which there matt

nanda K&rikS (Nir. 8&g. ed.) # p. 2V. no particular idea viftfato no boHr

* According to PStahjala Rahaayam the agato iti.
meaning of J not far 1 is that from


97] Inhibition of emergent subliminal-impressions ■[ — i. so

the presented-ideas arising from them do not occur. When
presented-ideas are restricted, concentration follows after. Then
concentrated insight ; after that, subliminal-impressions made from
insight ; thus latent-impressions from subliminal-impressions are
reproduced again and again. Thus first comes insight and then
[follow] subliminal-impressions. How is it that this excess of sub-
liminal-impressions will not provide the mind-stuff with a task ?
[The answer is :] these subliminal-impressions made by the insight
do not provide the mind-stuff with a task since they cause the
dwindling of the hindrances. For they cause the mind-stuff to
cease from its work. For the movement of the mind-stuff termi-
nates at [the time of] discernment ( khyati ).

4 Let this be granted. Let the [concentration conscious [of an object] have a
rcaht, its object by the practice of the aforesaid means. But this concentrated
insight may be obstructed by beginningless emergent subliminal-impressions in
so far as it is closely enveloped [by them], like minute flashes [of light] from a
lamp in the eddy of a whirling wind.’ To remove this doubt he introduces the
next sUt r u with the words ^concentrated insight. » He recites the sUtra 00.
The subliminal-impression produced by this [ super -r efleotive balanced-
state] is hostile to other subliminal-impressions. The word <this> refers to the
super-reflective balanced-state. The word <other> describes the emergence. It
is the nature of thoughts to incline 1 * * to intended-objects as they really are.
This instability continues unsteady only so long as it does not reach the reality
[literally, that-ness]. After reaching that anti ? cause it has taken a stable
position there, [this] idea from the subliminal-ir pression does most certainly
inhibit the series of ideas from subliminal-impressions which refer to what is
not reality, even although | this series] is beginningless and rolls on as the wheel *
of the series of [fluctuations and] subliminal-impressions. And in this Bense
outsiders 8 also say, “ There is no inhibition of the unviolated essence of a thing*
as-it-really-is by contradictions even although these latter be from time without
beginning. For it is the nature of the mind to incline to things as they are.”
The objector would say, 4 This may be true. We may admit that, as a result of
oonoentrated insight, there is a restriction of a subliminal-impression produced
during the emergent state. Still there exists uninjured (avikala) an excess of
subliminal-impressions which is p duced by concentration and which causes the
generation of the concentrated insight. So the fact that the mind-stuff has a
task still remains.’ — With this in mind, he raises an objection, «How is it that

1 Compare S&ihkh. Tatt. K&u. lxiv. tion is found in VScaspatimifra’s Bb5-

1 Compare i. 5, p. 20*tCalcf ed.). mat! (Jibin. ed.), p. 60”.

• Either Jains or Buddhists. The quota-

13 1*jsh]


L so — ] Booh I. Concentration or Scmadhi [98

this,* which he removes with the words 4Cthese ... do not* For the work of
the mind-stuff is of two kinds, the enjoyment of sounds and other [perceptible]
things (ptbdadi) and discriminative discernment. With regard to these two
[kinds of work], the mind-stuff, when it has latent-impressions of karma from
the hindrances, proceeds to the enjoyment of sounds and other [perceptible]

* things ; but for the mind, all of whose latent-impressions of karma from the
hindrances have been uprooted by subliminal-impressions arising in insight, and
whose state is that its task is nearly ended, the only work that remains is dis-
criminative discernment. Accordingly subliminal-impressionB from concentra-
tion are not the reasons why the mind-stuff has 'enjoyment as its task. On the
contrary they are hostile to that They cause the mind-stuff to cease from its
work ; they make it incapable [of that work] which has the character of enjoy-
ment This is the meaning. Why ? 4CFor the movement of the mind-etuff
terminates at [the time of] discernments Since in order to enjoy, the mind-stuff
moves until it experiences discriminative discernment But when discrimina-
tive discernment has come to pass, hindrances cease and it has no longer the
task of enjoyment. Consequently the complete quiescence of the task of enjoy-
ment is the purpose for which subliminal-impressions from insight exist. It is
this that has been stated here.

, •

What further does he gain ?

51. When this [subliminal-impression] also is restricted,
since all is restricted, [the yogin gains] seedless concentra-
tion.

This [seedless concentration] is counter not only to concentrated
insight but is opposed even to subliminal-impressions made in
insight. Why? Because the subliminal-impression produoed by
restriction inhibits the subliminal-impressions produced by concen-
tration. The existence of subliminal-impressions made by the
mind-stuff in restriction may be inferred from the experience of the
lapse of time during which there is stability (sthiti) of the restric-
tion. Together with the subliminal-impressions which arise out
of the emergent and restricted concentrations and which are con-
ducive to Isolation, the mind-stuff resolves itself into its own per-
manent primary-matter. Therefore these subliminal-impressions
are counter to the mind-stuff’s task and are not ca us es of its
stability. Consequently, its task ended, together with the sub-
liminal-impressions which are conducive to Isolation, the mind-
stuff ceases [from its task]. When it ceases,, the. Self abides in
himself and is therefore called purer apcl liberated.


99 ] Attornment of Isolation [ — 1 . 51

He asks, «What further ?£ What does he also gain ? [Since] the mind-stuff
contains subliminal-impressions [produced] in insight, it has, as before, in
so far as it is capable of generating a stream of insight, a task [to fulfil]. Thus
to remove the task something else is also still required. This is the meaning.
He gives the answer in the stttra 61. When this [subliminal-impression] also
is restricted, since all is restricted, [the yogin gains] seedless concentration
The higher passionlessness, 1 which has as its distinguishing characteristic the
undisturbed calm of perception, by an increase in subliminal-impressions restricts
even those subliminal-impressions /nade by insight and not merely the insight
[itself]. This is the meaning of the word Ceven.^ Since the whole stream of
subliminal-impressions as it rises [into consciousness] is restricted, [then,] in-
ssmuch as there is no cause, no effect can be produced. This same is seedless
concentration. He explains [the sntra] in the wnrds «This [seedless concen-
tration].^ €This& is seedless concentration arising out of higher passionless-
ness, which is counter to concentrated insight, and which with the help of itself
oh cause” becomes not only counter to concentrated insight, but also contra-
dictory to subliminal-impressions made by insight. It might be objected that,
‘ A distinct-idea (tnjndna) produced by passionlessness would, since a distinct-idea
is real, inhibit what is insight and nothing more. But how does it inhibit a
subliminal -impressioij which is different in kind from a distinct-idea? For
evidently a man even when awake has a memory of the object seen in [his]
dream. [Therefore subliminal-impressions are not inhibited]/ With this in
mind he asks, «Why?» He gives the answer in the words ^produced by
restriction.^ Restriction is that by which insight is restricted. It is the higher
paasionlessness. Produced from this it is [c&lledjp 'bliminal -impression produced
by restriction. Only by the subliminal-impression : educed by the higher passion-
lessness when it has been cultivated for a long tune and uninterruptedly and
with earnest attention, and not by a distinct-ide«, are the subliminal-impressions
of insight inhibited. This is the meaning. — The objector continues, 4 This
may be so. But what is the source-of-valid-ideas for the existence of subliminal-
impressions produced by restriction ? It might be either perceived directly, or
inferred from memory, its effect. And when all the f mind-stuff's] fluctuations are
restricted, the yogin has no perception nor yet memory, forasmuch as, in so far ts
he has destroyed all fluctuations whatsoever, it is impossible for him to produce
a memory. 9 In reply to this he says, «in restriction. » The stability of the
restriction is the^restricted state of the mind-stuff. — [The existence of subliminal-
impressions is proved] by an experie so of the lapse of time in [periods of] eight-
and-forty minutes (mukUrta) or half-a-watch or a whole watch, or a day and night
and so forth. What he means to say is this : according to the degree of the gerfec-
tionPin passionlesanese and in practice, perfection of restriction is experienced by
the yogin. And^Uje mqpaents of the higher pasaionleeaness, in so far as they are

1 PStaSjala Rahaiiyuui identifies this with dharma-mtgha.

* ts explained in i. 18.


i. 51] Book L Concentration or Sarhddhi [100

not related to each other in a fixed sequence, are not capable, in so far as they
last for various periods of time, of producing the full excellence of restriction.
So the point is that we must admit that there is a permanent accumulation of
subliminal-impressions produced by the accumulations of the various moments of
passionlessness. The objector says, 4 Subliminal impressions from insight may
perish, but why should the subliminal-impression from restriction perish with
them ; or if it does not perish, [then the mind-stuff would still] have its task [to
perform]. 1 In reply to this he says, «out of the emergent.)* [This is the
analysis of the compound :] conscious [concentration] has (tasya) both 1 emergence
and the concentration of emergence which restricts this [emergence]. The sub-
liminal-impressions arising out of these two are the subliminal -impressions which
are conducive to Isolation. [And these are the same as] those produced by re-
striction. The subliminal-impressions of emergent insight are resolved into
mind-stuff. Thus the mind-stuff contains subliminal-impressions of emergent
insight But the subliminal-impression from restriction lies (fiste) just uprisen
in the mind-stuff. Although [this] subliminal-impression is [uprisen], the
mind-stuff has no task [to fulfil]. For the mind-stuff has its task [to fulfil]
when it is bringing to pass the two purposes of the Self, the experience of sounds
and other [perceptible things] and the discriminative discernment. Such are the
two purposes of the Self. But when nothing is left bu* subliminal-impre&sions
[of restriction], — now that the Self is not assimilated by-reflection 1 ( pratisam -
vedin) to the thinking-substance, — this is not one of the purposes of the Self.
On the other hand, in the case of the discarnate and of those [whose bodies] are
resolved-into-primary-raatter, the mind-stuff, — not only in so far as it is conducive
to restriction, but also in so far as it is pervaded (vdsita) with hindrances,— still
has its task [to fulfil]. With this in mind he says «Consequently.» The rest
is easy.

The announcement (udde^a) and the definition ( nirdefa ) of Yoga, the characteristic-
mark of the fluctuations which exist for the sake of this [Yoga], the means of
Yoga and its subdivisions, — [these] have been sketched in this Book.


Of Patafijali’s Yoga-treatise entitled Exposition of Sariikhya
( Sdmkhya-pravacana ) } the First Book, on Concentration.

Of the Explanation ot the Comment on Patanjali’s-Treatise; which Explanation
is entitled Clarification of Entities (Tattva'Vaiq&radi) and was composed by the
Venerable Vftcaspatiinfyra, the First Book, on Concentration, is finished.


1 Compare pp. 22 l ; 66\- 138’; 1$2; and 305 (Calcutta ed.).


BOOK SECOND

MEANS OF ATTAINMENT


BOOK SECOND

MEANS OF ATTAINMENT


It has been stated what the yoga is of one whose mind is concen-
trated. [This sutra] gives the start to the problem [which considers]
how even one whose mind-stuff is emergent may be concentrated
(yulcta) in concentration {yoga).

1. Self-castigation and study and devotion to the I$vara
are the Toga of action.

Yoga is not perfected in # him who is not self-castigated. Impurity
— which is variegated with subconscious-impressions {vdsana), from
time without beginning, coming from the hindrances and from karma,
— and into which [the meshes of] the net of objects have [there-
fore] found entrance, is not reduced {sambhedam apadyate) except
by <self-castigation.> This is the use 1 of self-castigation. And
this [kind of self-castigation], not being nhibitory to the undis-
turbed calm of the mind-stuff, is therefore deemed [by great sages]
to be worthy of his {anena, the yogin’s) earnest attention. <Recita-
tion> is the repetition 1 of purifying formulae* such as the Mystic
Syllable (pranava) or the study of books on Liberation, devo-
tion to the fyvam is the offering 3 up of all actions to the Supreme
Teacher or the renunciation of the fruit of [all] these [actions].

If it be- objected that the First Book described yoga with its means [and] with
its subordinate divisions [and] with its results, and that no mason remains
why a Second £ook should be begun, he replies in the words «has been
stated. » For in the 'First Book practice and passionlessness were described
as means to yoga. And since these two, for one whose [mind-stuff] is
emergent, Mo not instantly come into being, he stands in need of the Ricans
taught in the Seoond Book in order to purify the saliva. For by these he
quite purifies tbetsottw and performs the protective ordinances and daily

* Similarly i. 41, y. 85* (Calc. ed.). * Contrast this with L 28 and see also Lihga

' 8ee ii.44 and compare Lifiga Par. viii. 89. Par. viii. 40. 1


ii. l — ] Book II. Means of Attainment or S&dhana [104

cultivates practice and passionlessness. The state of being concentrated is the
state of being undistracted.— How could even a man whose mind-stuff is
emergent be, because concentrated (yukta) by the means which are to be taught,
a yogin? This is the meaning. From among those observances which are
to be described, having made a selection [of some] as being rather more service-
able to the beginner, the author of the sQtras first of all teaches [what] the
yoga of action [is]. 1. Self-castigation and study and devotion to the

I$vara are the Yoga of aotion. Action which is itself yoga is the yoga of
action since it is a means-of-effecting yoga. Therefore, in the Visnu Pur&na,
in the dialogue between Kh&ndikya and Ke^idhvaja, starting with the passage, 1
4 At first the yogin who is [just] beginning to apply himself is called a novice
(yoga-yuj),' self- castigation and recitation and the like are set forth. With the
words {in him who is not self-castigated* he shows by a negative instance
that self-castigation is a means. By the words {from time without beginning*
he shows that self-castigation has a subsidiary function which is serviceable
as a means 1 [of attaining yoga]. Variegated by reason of the subconscious-
impressions, from time without beginning, coming from hindrances and from
karma, [and] therefore that in which [the meshes of] the net of objects have
found entrance, that is, inserted themselves, impurity, which is the excess of
rajas and tamos, is not thoroughly reduced without self-castigation. Reduction
is the thorough thinning out of that which was closely woven. — The objection is
raised: ‘Even if we have recourse to self-castigation, still — in so far as it
causes disorders of the humours — it is hostile to yoga ; how then is it a means
[to attain] this [yoga]?' In reply to this he says, {And this 1 [kind].*
Self-castigation should be performed only so long as it does not bring on
a disorder 4 of the humours. This is the meaning. {Such as the Mystic
Syllable* that is, such as, the Hymn to the Purusa [RV. x. 90] or the Rudra-
mandala® or a Brfthmapa or the like from the Vedas, or the Brahma-pir&yapa"
from the Purftnas. — Igvara, that is, the Supreme Teacher, the Exalted,— to
him. With regard to Whom this 7 hath been said, “Whatever I do, whether
auspicious or inauspicious, whether intentionally or unintentionally, all that
is committed unto Thee. Moved by Thee I do [it all]." — Renunciation of the
fruit of [all] these [actions] is doing the actions without attachment to the
fruit [thereof]. And with regard to this it hath been said, 1 11 You are concerned
with actions only and never with fruits. Do not be one whose motive is the
fruit of actions. Nor let your attachment be to inaction."


VP. vi. 7. 88. See also Nftxmdiya Pur. xlrii.
Literally, is serviceable by being a means,
uptyoifaupayoyinam.

As opposed, for instance, to VP. ii. 1J.
Compare i. 80, p. 67* (Calc. ed.).

This seems to refer to the Qatanidriya


homamantras, TtittiriyarsaifahiU iv. 5,
Vljasaneyi-samhit* rri, Ktyhaka xvii.
9 Refers perhaps to Vifco Pnr&qa i. 15.

1 Vijftftna Bhikfu calls this mfti
9 Bhagavad Gitft ii. 47.


[ — ii. 2


105] Purposes of the yoga of action

Now this yoga of action is —

2. For the cultivation of concentration and for the attenua-
tion of the hindrances.

For when the yoga of action is given earnest attention, it cultivates#
concentration ; attenuates the hindrances to an extreme degree ;
[and] will make the hindrances, when they are extremely attenuated,
disqualified for propagation, like seeds burned by the fire of Eleva-
tion (prasamkhyana). Buu the subtile inright, which is the dis-
criminative discernment between the satlva and the Self, untouched
by the hindrances because they are so much attenuated, with its
task finished, will be ready for inverse-propagation 1 * * ( pratiprasava ).
In order to mention the purpose of this [yoga of action] he introduces the
slltra with the words 4CFor the.» 2. For the cultivation v of concentration
and for the attenuation of the hindrances. It is objected that if the yoga
of action alone is able to attenuate the hindrances, then there is no need of
Elevation. To this he replies with the words Cthe extremely attenuated.»
The yoga jf action operates* only for the extreme attenuation, but not for the
sterilizatK u of the lyndrances, but Elevation [operates] for the sterilization
of those [hindrances]. The words «like burned seeds» indicate that the
burned seeds of winter rice [and the hindrances] are of the same kind in sg
far as both are sterile. The objector says, * This may be true. But if Elevation
alone can disqualify the hindrances from propagation, then there is no n$ed
for their attenuation.* In reply tz this he'se”, 4Cof these. » For if th9
hindrances are not attenuated, the discriminati discernment between the
sattva and the Self, submerged (grasta) by mighty foes, is incapable even of
uprising, still less of sterilizing them. But when the hindrances are quite
thinned out and impotent, [the discernment], although in opposition to them,
does, with the aid of passionlessnesa and of practice, finally arise. And when
the discernment which is nothing more than the [sense] of the difference
between the sattva and the Self is finally arisen, it is un-touched by them, —
that is, not overwhelmed by them, — for just so long as it is not touched
[by them]. t£The subtile insights is so-called, because its object is subtile
inasmuch as its object is beyond the range of the smses. «Will be ready
for inverse-proppgation,$ that is, *or resolution. Why? Because its task
is finished. [In other words,] that is said to be of this kind by which, acting
as a cause, the task of giving starts to the effects of the aspects (gupa) has
been finished.

1 Compare ii. 2, f. }07 4 ;*ii. 10, p, 4B0 1 ; * Deussen'a excellent rendering of unsworn

. it 27, p. 167* • iii. 60, p. 266 1 ; it. 84, is Verinnerlichung.

p. 812* (Calc. ed.).

H [■ o.*. it]


ii. 3 — ] Book II. Means of Attainment or S&dhana [106

Now what are these 1 hindrances and (vd) how mauy are they?* -
3. Undifferentiated- consciousness {avidya) and the feeling-
of-personality and passion and aversion and the will-to-
live are the five* hindrances.

This means that the so-called hindrances are five misconceptions
[i. 8 ], These when flowing out make the authority (adhikara) of
the aspects {guv a) more rigid ; make a mutation more stable ; swell
the stream of effects and causes ; aim, becoming interdependent
upon one another for aid, bring forth the fruition of karma.

He raises a question by saying «Now» and replies [to it] by the sQtra
upon <<Undifferentiated-consciousness.>> 3. UndifTerentiated-consoiousness
(avidya) and the feeling-of- personality and passion and aversion and the
will-to-live are the five hindrances. He explains the word «hindrances^
by the words «five misconceptions. » UndifFerentiated-consciousness, to begin
with, is nothing but misconception. The feeling-of-personulity and the others
also have undifferentiated-consciousness as their material cause, [and] since
they cannot exist without it, [they too] are misconceptions. And hence when
undifFerentiated-consciousness is destroyed, there would follow the destruction
of them also. He mentions the reason why they should be destroyed, in that
they are the cause of the round-of-rebirths. This he states in the word
«CThese.» When flowing out [that is] moving 8 continuously forth, ^Cmake
the authority of the aspecta more rigid, » that is, more powerful ; [and] in
consequence «make a mutation [more] stable. » For in successive forms as
unphenomenalized [primary matter] and as the Great [thinking-substance]
and as the personality-substance, they swell, that is, they intensify, the stream
of cause and effect. He shows for what purpose they do all this in the words
€one another.» The [three] fruitions of karma, distinguished [ii. 18] as
being birth and length of life and kind of experience, have their purpose (artha)
in the Self. That [purpose] those hindrances bring to pass, that is, accomplish.
Do they accomplish this singly ? He says, 1 No/ But Cupon one another for
aid,» that is, the hindrances [aided] by the karmas, and the karmas [aided] by
the hindrances.


4. Undifferentiated-consciousness {avidya ) , is the field for
the others whether they be dormant or attenuated or
intercepted or sustained.

jDf these [five], undifferentiated-consciousness is the field *[or]
propagative soil. The others are feelyig-of-peusonality and the rest

1 Many MS8. omit te . * Many MS8. omit paftca.

Compare ii. 4 , p. HO* ; iii. 18, p. 207*.


107] Varieties of undifferentiated-consciousness [— ii. 4

[of the five hindrances]. In four kinds of forms, the dormant and
the attenuated and the intercepted and the sustained. — 1. Of these
[four], what is the dormant state ? It is the tendency [of the
hindrances] which remain merely potential in the mind towards the
condition of seed. The awakening of that [dormant hindrance] is
the coming face-to-face with the [particular] object [which makes
that dormant hindrance manifest]. But for one who has [reached]
Elevation (prasamkhyana),* and whose hindrances have become
burned seed, there is not that [awakening of the hindrances] even
when he is brought face-to-face with the object [which manifests
them]. For out of what can burned seed germinate ? For this
reason the fortunate (kugala) man whose hindrances have dwindled
away is said to be in his last 1 body (caramadeha). In him only
the burned state of the seeds, the fifth stage of the hindrances [is
found], and not in other [persons]. So although the hindrances
are exirtent, the vitality 'samarthya) of the seed is 6aid to be
already burned. Accordingly, even when the object is face-to-face,
there is no awakening of these [hindrances]. Thus dormancy and
the failure of the burned seed to propagate have been described.T-
2. Attenuation is now described. The hindrances, when over-
powered ( upahata ) by the cultivation of their opposites,* become
attenuated. — 3. When this is the case, [ti other hindrances] inter-
cept [the attenuated hindrances] repeatedly, and move forth actively
again in this or that [unattenuated] form (atijiand). In that case 3
they are called intercepted. How is this ? Since [for instance]
when one is in love, no anger is felt, inasmuch as, when one is in
love, anger does not actively move forth ; and love, when felt in
one direction, is by no means unfelt towards another object. When
Chaitra is known to be in love with one woman, it is not assumed
that he is out of love for other women. Bather, his love finds its
fluctuation fixed in this direction, in other directions its fluctuation
is yet to come. For this [third fluctuation] is for the moment both
dormant and attenuated and intercepted. — 4. That fluctuation
which is fixe^ jipon an object is sustained ( udara ). No one of all

1 £ee VP. 10 " and Bh. Oltft ?iii. 26. * When they form a succession of tana and

* Bee ii. 88. atanu*


ii. 4 — ] Book II Means of Attainment or Sadhana [108

these [four] passes beyond the limits of the hindrances [and there-,
fore all four are to be rejected]. If this is so (tarhi), what is this
hindrance that is intercepted [or] dormant [or] attenuated or
rustained ? The answer-is-now-given (ucyate). It is exactly true
[that all hindrances are forms of undifferentiated-consciousness].
But only when these [hindrances] are particularized, do they
become intercepted and so on. For just as these stages cease
when their opposites are cultivated, so they become manifest
(abhivyakta) when [changed] into the phenomenal-form (a fljana)
by the operation of their phenomenalizing-conditions (vyahjaka).
So all those hindrances without exception are varieties of
imdifferentiated-consciousness. Why is this ? Since it is un-
differentiated-consciousness and nothing else that pervades 1 all
[hindrances]. Whatever [perceptible] object is given a form by
the undifferentiated-consciousness, it is that [object] which is per-
meated 54 by the hindrances. Whenever there is a misconceived
idea, they become apperceived ; and when undifterentiated-con-
sciousness dwindles, they too dw indie away.

He shows that hindrances are to be rejected in that they have their root in
undifferentiated-consciousness. .4. Undifferentiated-consciousness (avidyti) is
the field for the others whether they be dormant or attenuated or inter-
cepted or sustained. When he asks «1. Of these [four], what is the dormant
state ?» his intention is to say that there is no proof for the real existence of
hindrances, if they are not performing their peculiar purposeful activity. He
tells the answer in the words «in the mind.» The hindrances may not indeed
perform their purposeful activity, but in the case of the discamate and of those
[whose bodies] are resolved into primary matter, they assume the form of seed
and exist merely potentially, as curds exist in milk. For other than discrimina-
tive insight there is nothing to cause the sterility of these [hindrances]. Henoe
the discarnate and those [whose bodies] are resolved 'into primary matter, who
have not obtained discriminate discernment, have their hindrances dormant,
until such time as [these hindrances] reach the time of their imitation. But
when they reach that, since the hindrances revert once more, they come face-to-
face with the various objects [of sense]. Thus these [hindrances] are those of
which tfre basis is merely potential. In this way their potential riling [into
consciousness] is described. By the words ^tendency . . . towards the condition

1 Balarama fays, • Undifferentiated • con- 1 B&Ihrama explains the word anuferate
•ciousness is inseparably -connected by saying 'become inherent in' (eAa-
wlth hindrances ’ (klqefo avidyiinvlya). gat a bhavanti).


109] U ndiferentiated-consciousness the source of hindrances [— ii.4

of seed* their potentiality of aetion is indicated. To meet the question why,
in the case.even of one who haa discriminative discernment, hindrances are not
dormant, he says, <tfor one who has [reached] Elevation.* «In his last body,*
in other words, in his case no other body will be produced with reference to
which [this] body of his could be called prior. 4CNot in other persons,* in other
words, not in the discarnate and similar cases. An objection is raised, 4 Since
there is no total destruction of any existing thing, what, we ask, becomes of the
force of the magical powers of this kind of yoga? Are not the hindrances
awakened when face-to-face with objects ? * In reply to this, he says, ^existent.*
Although the hindrances are existdht, still in their state as seeds they are burned
by the lire of Elevation (prasathlchyana). This is the meaning. — 2. The opposite
of the hindrances is the yoga of action ; by the cultivation, by the following up,
of this, the hindrances become overpowered, that is, attenuated. Or we may say
that thinking-focused-to-a-point ( samyag-jiiana ) is the opposite of undifferentiated -
consciousness ; that the knowing of distinctions is [the opposite] of the feeling-
of-personality ; that the detached attitude {madliyasthya) is [the opposite] of
passion and aversion ; [and] that the cessation of the thought of continuance is
[the opposite] of the will-to-live. — 8. He describes the interception with the
words «When this is the case.* Either because overcome by any one of the
hindrances which moves actively forth, or because resorting excessively to objects,
they intercept repeatedly and move actively forth in one form or another, that
is, come into appearance (i dvirbkavanti ), either as the result of using aphrodisiacs
and the like or as the result of the weakness of [the other hindrances]'whioh
overcome it. By the repetition he signifies the reiteration of the interruption
and of the moving actively forth. Thus the difi> , ence [of this] from the afore-
said dormant [hindrance] has been described. \ - nen love moves actively forth,
anger which is different in kind is overpowered ; or again love itself set upon
one object overpowers, though like in kind, another love which is set upon
a different object. This he states by the word 4Clove.* — The fluctuation which
is yet to come is to be understood as having a three-fold course according to
circumstances. With this in mind he says, «For this.* The pronoun [‘ this’]
refers only to the hindrance from the fluctuation which is yet to come ; it does
not refer to Ch&itra's love, just because that [love] is intercepted.— 4. He describes
the sustained [hindranco] in the words 4Cupon an object.* If some one
suggests as an objection that the sustained [hindrance], since it hinders men,
might be [properly] called a hindrance, but that the others do not hinder [and so
can] by no means be Called hindrances, he says in reply Call these [four].* They
do not pass beyond the limits of the hindrances, that is, beyond the limits of the
thing expressed by the word hindrance, when they become changed into the
sustained state. Therefore they too are to be rejected. This is the $oini —
Presupposing th% unity of the hindrances 1 he raises an objection in the words


Literally, Presupposing a unity in so far as the quality of being a hindrance goes.


ii. 4—] Book II. Means of Attainment or Sddhana [110

«If this is so, what» He rebuts it by showing that although they are of the
same kind in so far as they are hindrances, they are particular because of the
different previously described states. This he does in the words €The answer-
isr-now-giveiL It is true.» The objector says, 1 1 This may be true. The
hindrances may result from undifferentiated-consciousness ; still why Bhould they
cease when undifferentiated-consciousness ceases? For surely no one would
suppose that a piece of cloth ceases to be, when the weaver ceases to be.’ In
reply to this he says 4C&11 these • . . without exception.^ The distinctions 1 * * are
only apparently distinctions, that is to say, thoy do not exist separably from
this [undifferentiated-consciousness]. He asks a question in the words dCWhy
is thisft^ He gives the reply in the words «all [hindrances].^ This same
point is made clear by the word dCwhatever.^ <Cl a given a form» [that is] is
falsely attributed. The rest is easy.

‘ In the case of those who have been resolved into entities, the hindrances are
dormant ; for yogins, attenuated ; and in case of those attached to objects,
hindrances are intercepted or sustained.' This is the summarising -stanza.*


At this point undifferentiated-consciousness itself is described.

5. The recognition of the permanent of the pure, of pleasure,
and of a self in what is impermanent, impure, pain, and not-
self is undifferentiated-consciousness.

1. It is the recognition of the permanent 4 in an impermanent
effect, for example, that the earth should be perpetual, that the
sky with the moon and stars should be perpetual, that celestial
beings are deathless. — 2. Likewise in the impure and highly re-
pulsive 5 body there has been the recognition of purity. And it


1 Namely, in reply to the hedgings which
in the Comment follow 4Clt is true>h.

1 Compare K&v. Prak. Ullftsa iii. and the
verse quoted in the comment on Appa-
yadikfita'u Kuvalay&nandak&riki p. ll l
(Nir^aya Sfig. ed., 1903).

Oaganam gagandkdram
sdgarah sdgaropamah
Bdmardvanayor yuddhath
f&mar&vanayor iva .

9 Discussed in PataS^jali’s MahSbhSfya
(Kie)hora’s ed.), p. 6 1 *. The application
is only general here.

4 The parallel between this and the dis-


cussion in Aryadeva*s Catufefataka is
very striking. The concept of avidyd
is fundamental in the Mohfty&na. Arya-
deva Is said to be the pupil of N&gftr-
juna; consequently he wrote a couple
of centuries before PataSjali. We are
indebted for thu important discovery
to Mahftmahopftdhyftya Haraprasftd
Shfetri (Notes on the newly -found
Manuscript Chatubsatika by Aryadeva,
Journal Asiatic Society of Bengal, rfew
Series, vol. vr , no. 1911, p. 481).

8 Compare Mftitri Up. iii. 4.


Ill] Four errors of undifferentiated-consciousness [ — ii. 5

has been said, “ Because of its [first] abode [and] because of its
origin [and] because of its sustenance [and] because of its exuda-
tions [and] because of its decease and because it needs [constant]
cleaning, the learned recognize that the body is impure.” Here
the recognition of the pure in the impure is evident. If we say,
'This girl, beautiful as the sickle of the new moon, her limbs
formed of honey and nectar, her eyes large as the petals of the
blue lotus, seeming to refresh the living world with her coquettish
glances, so that we think that she has issued forth from the moon,’ —
then what could be the connexion of this [body] with that {kena)
[to which it is compared] ? Just so 1 it is that there is a miscon-
ceived idea of the pure in the impure. In this way, [by showing
the recognition of the pure in the impure, one sees that there is]
the [misconceived] idea of merit where there is only demerit and of
the useful where there is only the useless. — 3. Similarly [Patafijali]
will describe 4 the recognition of pleasure in pain in the words, “ By
reason of the pqins of mutations and of anguish and of subliminal-
impressions and by reason of the opposition of fluctuations of the
aspects ( guna ) — to the discriminating all is nothing but pain.” Hn-
differentiated-consciousness is the recognition that there is pleasure
in this [pain], — 4. Likewise the recogi. • ion of a self in the not-self,
either in external aids 3 whether anin tte or inanimate, or in the
body as the seat of outer experience, or in the central-organ which
aids the Self, — this is the recognition of a self in the not-self. In
this sense it has been said of this, “ He who counts any existing
thing, whether phenomenalized or unphenomenalized [primary
matter], as himself ; or who rejoices in the success of these ( tasya )
[things], deeming it his own success, or who grieves at the ill-
success of these [things], deeming it his own ill-success, — these (so)
are all unenlightened.” Tt is this four-fold undifferentiated-con-
sciousness which becomes the root of that unbroken-series (santdna)
of hindrances and of latent-impressions of karma together with its
fruition. And this undifferentiated-consciousness ( a-vidyi ), pre-

Gompare the* tale in Henry Warren'* * Bftlartma mju • Snob a* *ona or cattle or
Bnddhuui in Tnuulatione, p. 297. Mirant* or beds or seat*, which an

See ii 15. the nlf ’.


ii. 5 — ] Book II. Means of Attainment or Sadhana [112

cisely as in the case of a foe (a-mitra) or of a trackless forest (a-
go§pada), is to be conceived as a really existing object (vastusa-
tattva). Just as a foe (amitra) is not a negative friend [and] not
something^amounting to a friend, but the opposite of this [friend],
a rival, — so too a trackless forest 1 (a-gospada) is not [a place]
not-visited-by-cows (go$pada-abhava), nor again is it merely a
[quantity of] land which has a cow’s foojt as its measure, but, on
the contrary, it is nothing less than a* definite place, a different
thing, other than these two [and the opposite of a cow’s footprint].
Precisely so, undifferentiated-consciousness is not a source-of-valid-
ideas nor the negation of a source-of- valid-ideas, but another kind
of thinking the reverse of knowledge.

5. The recognition of the permanent, of the pure, of pleasure, and of a
self in what is impermanent, impure, pain, and not- self is undifferentiated*
consciousness. 1. The word {effects is a qualification which serves [to
indicate] the impermanence. Some indeed, deeming the elements permanent and
longing to attain to the form of these, pay devotion even to these. Thus deeming
the moon and sun and stars and heavenly regions permanent, in order to attain
these, they pay devotion to the Paths [that is, the Way of the Fathers and the
Way of the Gods] which begin with the Smoke. Similarly deeming the celestial
beings, that is, the gods, to be deathless, they drink soma in order to reach their
condition. For it is written [RV. viii. 48. 8], “We have drunk the soma; we
have become deathless.” It is this recognition of the permanent in the imper-
manent that is undifferentiated-consciousness. 2. {Likewise in the impure and
highly repulsive body^ — when the sentence is only half-finished he recites a
stanza ( g&thd ) from Vy&sa * to show the repulsiveness of the body. The words
are {Because of its [first] abode.^ The abode is the mother’s womb polluted
by such things as urine ; the seed is the mother’s blood and the father’s semen.
The sustenance is formation into juices of the food eaten and drunk ; for by it
the body is held together. Exudation is sweat. And death defiles the body of
even a scholarly man. Inasmuch as a bath is required after his [dead body] is
touched. — An objector might say, * If the body is impure, there is no use in
cleansing it with earth and with water.’ To this he replies {because it needs
[constant] cleaning.^ Although the body is naturally impurd, purification must
be applied [to it], just as women produce fragrance [by applying] ointments

This illustration occurs in Siddh&nta 2. 'Measure 9 pramdne; thus goppadt -

KaumudI, { 1060, on vi. 1. 145. matram * kfetrpm.

The word has the two meanings given * PataBJali discusses the word V&iyGtikih
in the Comment : 1. ' Not-visited 9 in the first vftrttika on iv. 1. 97.

; thus gofpoddyy » arangdni ;


113] Uridifferentiated-consciousiiess is something positive [ — ii. 5

to the body. He completes the half-finished statement by saying CHere . . .
in the impure.^ The meaning is that it is impure on the grounds stated
before. He describes the recognition of purity [in the impure] by the words
4Cthe new.3» 4CCoquettish» is that which is playful as the result of an
erotic-mood. What could be the connexion of the highly repulsive body, by
a highly remote (numdatama) similarity, with such a thing as the sickle of the
new moon? — 4Cln this way,^ by showing the recognition of purity in the impure
body of a woman. Where there is only demerits as in the case of murder
(hinsd), there is [the discovery gofj an idea of merit in things which liberate from
the round -of-rebirths. Similarly in case of a thing that Is useless, such as money,
because of the amount of pains [required] for getting it and keeping it, it is
explained that there is [a discovery of] the idea of the useful [in the useless].
All these in that they are abhorrent are impure. — 8. ^Similarly ... in pain.>
Easy. — 4. «Likewise ... in the not-self.» Easy. — It was Pafica?ikha 1 * who
^noke of this in this way. — The “ phenomenal ized ” [primary-matter] is the ani-
mate, such as sons or wives or cattle ; the “ unphenomenalized ” is the inanimate,
such as beds or seats or food. — «These (sa) are all unenlightened^ [that is]
stupid. — It is called four-fold (catmpadd) because it has four parts (pada), four
places [where it becomes ]>henomenalized]. It might be objected, 4 * * * * There is
also another kind of undifferentiated-consciousness which has as its object such
[states] as loss 9 of the sense of orientation or as [the sight] of the firebrand [whirled
about so as to be seen as a] circle. Undifferentiated-consciousness has [therefore]
an indefinite number of parts. Why then say that it is four-fold ? 9 In reply
to this he says, «the root ... of that.& There may also be of course other
undifferentiated-consciousnesses, ’at the undir 'entiated-consciousness which is
the seed of the round-of-rebirths has only four ^ .urta.

An objector says, 4 Undifferentiated-consciousness (chvidyd) might be a nega-
tive determinative 3 compound [nari-sam&sa). In which case. 1. the first member
(a-) might be determinative ( pradh&na ), as for example, without-flies (a-mateika) ;
or 2. the final member might be determinative, as for example, not a-king’s
officer ( 1 a-rajapurusa ) ; or 8. [the compound] might have a third thing as deter-
minative, as for example, a flyless place (amakfika dega). This being the
situation, if we suppose 1. that the first member is determinative, then un-
differentiated consciousness (a-tndyd) would be understood as a negation whereto
an affirmative is expected 4 (prasajjyaprrtiftdha). And this [kind of a nega-
tion] could not bq the cause ' such things as the hindrances. Or if we

1 This is the fifth fragment according to 4 A negative connected with a verbal stem.

Gart>e : Festgruss an Roth, 1898, p. 78. See Patafyali : Mahibhfifja (£ielhorn's

* See also Garbe's Introduction to his ed.)i. 215, last line; 221 u ; 319 11 ; 841 s ;

translation* of th* S&mkhya-Tattva- iii. 85, last line. 8ee also the discussion

KftumudT p. 7. in Apodeva : MXmftfisft-nyfija-prakftca

* Compare i. p. 21 s (Calc. ed.). (1806), p. 109. There is also a chapter

•Pi* ii 2. 0. on thii in Bkim*.

* 15 • [■•«* •»]


i. 5 — ] Book II. Means of Attainment or Sddhana [114

suppose 2. that the final member is to be the determinative, then it ia undifferen-
tiated -consciousness that is to be particularized by the negation of something.
And this [kind of] undifferentiated-consciousness would be destructive of such
things as the hindrances and not the seed of them [because it would be
* consciousness of the absence of something]. For it cannot be that the
[member] subordinate (guna) to the determinative (pradhAna) [member of the
compound] should break down that determinate. Therefore in order to
sure that it does not break down the determinative, something irregular, [that is,
the absence of something] must be supposed, on \he other hand, to be found in
the subordinate [member of the compound]. Accordingly, in order that un-
differentiated-consciousness as such should not be broken down, another meaning
must be given to the negative or [another] negative must be supplied. Or if we
suppose, on the other hand, 8. that another thing be the determinative [to the
compound], we should have to say that [undifferentiated-consciousness] is a state-
of-mind (buddhi) in which knowledge (wfyd) does not exist. And that could not
be the seed of such things as the hindrances merely in bo far as it is the absence
of knowledge. For then a similar-state-of-things would also have to be admitted
in the case of that [form of undifferentiated-consciousness] which is attained in
the restriction when preceded by discriminative discernment, [since here too
there is absence of knowledge]. Accordingly in all [these three] ways [it has
been shown] that undifferentiated-consciousness is not the root of such things as
the hindrances/ In reply to this he says, «And this . . . has.* <dA really
existing objects is the state of existence of a real object, that is, really existing
objectivity. So in this way [it is evident] that undifferentiated-consciousness is
neither 1. a negation-whereto-an-affirmative-is-expected ( prasajjya-prtUiicdha ) ;
nor again 2. nothing but [a defective kind of] knowledge ; nor even 8. is it
a state-of-mind characterized as being the absence of jbhis, [that is, knowledge] ;
but 4. undifferentiated-consciousness is described as being misconceived thinking,
the opposite of knowledge (t ndya). For the relation of word and thing is
determined by conforming to the [usage of the] world. And because [according
to the usage] of the world even a [compound] whose final member is determina-
tive and which is a negative compound and which suppresses (upamardaka) the
thing to be described by the last word [of the compound] is now and then found
in a sense contrary to this [final member as determinative] and [at the same
time] suggested by this [final member], — there is [therefore] in this case also
an expressive-meaning (vrlti) in the sense of being contrary to thig [knowledge],
— He ^analyses the example 4CJust as a foe (a-mitra) is noE.* [A foe] is not
4Ca negative friends nor again <C. . . amounting to a friend.* Supply 1 at this
point [im the text] 1 Some other thing, but Cthe approach of this, a’rivaL*’
4cSo too a trackless forest* is not a negative cow’s* footprint, nor again is*t
merely a [quantity of] land which has a cove’s foot as«its measure; but, on

1 It would appear that VScaspatimipra did * See the discussion s v. gofpadam in 9*bda«
not read the wprds kin^tu . . . sapatnah. Kalpa-Dnuna.


115] Mistake of the feeling-of-personality [ — ii. 6

the contrary, nothing less than a spacious place, the opposite [in extent] of a cow's
foot and other than the two negative a-go*pada [that is, 1. without footprints-
of-the-cow, and 2. not-a-cow’s footprint would form together the first nogative
oow*s footprint ; and 8. land covered by a cow's footprint would form the second
negative cow’s footprint], in fact, a different thing [altogether, the trackle&s
forest]. He applies this to the matter in hand which he is illustrating, with the
words ^Precisely so.»


6. When the power of Seeing and the power by which one
sees have the appearance dva) of being a single-self, [this is]
the feeling-of-personality.

The Self is the power of seeing ; the thinking-substance is the
power by which one Bees. The hindrance called the feeling-of-
personality is a change by which these two appear to become
a single essence ( svarupa ). When there is any kind of failure to
distinguish him who has the power of the enjoyer from that which
has the power of beirfg enjoyed, which are as distinct as possible
and as unconfused as possible, enjoyment is ready at hand. But
when each has recovered its own essence, there is Isolation. — How
is it that [at that time there could be anything] that could *be
called enjoyment ? In this sense it has been said, 1 “ He who
should fail to see that the ^lf is othex han the thu. king-substance,
distinct in nature and in character a d in consciousness and in
other respects, would make the mistake of putting his own
thinking-substance in the place of that [Selfc].”

Having aaid that undifferentiated-coneciousness (avidya) is the cause, he says that
the feeling-of-personality is the effect, which [in its turnj is supreme (vantfhd)
over passion and the other [hindrances]. 6 When the power of seeing and
the power by whioh one sees have the appear&noe of being a single-self,
[this is] the feeling-of-personality. The seeing and that by which one sees are
precisely the two powers of the two, the self and the not-self. That undifferen-
tiated-consciousness (avidyd) wh-'ch is characterized as being the perception of
a Self in what is Che not-self, and which has the appearance of being a single
intended-objeot, but which, in the strict sense, is not a single self, — this [aotdyd]
is the feeling-of-personality. Instead of saying 1 of seeing and of that j^y which
dne sees he uses the words <power of> in order to indicate the relation between
them, that is^tfee capacity to be an enjoyer and to be objects to be enjoyed —
He elaborates the sQtra by saying «The Self.»— It might be asked, ‘ Why, since

1 This is the sixth fragment of PaBcafikha according to Qar^e. Corpus Bh C>t6 vi 41


ii. 6 — ] Book II. Means of Attainment or Sddhana [116

they are perceived as identical, should they not be identical and why should [the
appearance of] unity hinder the Self? ’ In reply he says £he who has the power
t>f the enjoyer . . - that which has the power of being enjoyed.* He who has
the power of the enjoyer is the Self ; that which has the power of being enjoyed
is the thinking-substance. These two are as distinct as possible. If it be asked,
‘Whence comes this distinction?’ the reply is, 4Cas unconfused as possible.*
Immutability and other [qualities] are the properties of the Self ; mutability and
other [qualities] are th^ properties of the thinking-substance. Thus there is no
confusion. Thus by these words it is asserted that the identity, although
presented-as-an-idea, is not in-the-strict-sense-real. — The words failure to dis-
tinguish* state the fact that hindrances exist. After having given an affirmative
[line of reasoning], he states a negative [line of reasoning] in the words «its own
essence.* The recovery is the discriminative discernment. That another also
holds this same opinion he says in the words &In this sense it has been said*
by Panca$ikha that 4Cthe thinking-substance.* — 4Cln nature* means in its own
self, which is, at all times whatsoever, pure [of aspects (guna)] ; 4Cin character*
means in its detachment ; «in consciousness* means in its intelligence
(c&itanya) ; whereas the thinking-subject is impure and not detached and inani-
mate ijada). Undifferentiated -consciousness (avidyfl) is the mental state with
regard to these two [to the effect that they are one] self. 4CThe mistake* is a
subliminal-impression generated by a previous undifferentiated-consciousness ;
or else it is the tamos [quality], because undifferentiated-consciousness is tamos .


7. Passion is that whioh dwells 1 upon pleasure.

That greed [or] thirst [or] desire, on the part of one acquainted
with pleasure, ensuing upon a recollection of pleasure, for either
the pleasure or for the. means of attaining it, is passion.


When one feels the discrimination, suoh states as passion cease. So the feeling-
of-personality brought to pass by undifferentiated-consciousness (avidyd) is the
root (niddna) of such states as passion. Accordingly, directly after the feeling-of-
personality he gives the distinguishing-characteristic of passion and of the rest
[of the hindrances]. 7. Passion is that whioh dwells upon pleasure. Since
memory [of pleasure] is impossible in the case of one unacquainted with pleasure,
the text says ^acquainted with pleasure.* Passion for a recollected pleasure
emnsMT €upon a recollection of pleasure.* But while a pleasure is in experience
there is no need of recollection. Since, however, the means tor attaining
pleasure are either remembered or perceived* the passion must ensue upon a
recollection of pleasure. And even wh e cow s *ns of attaining pleasure ale


See the gloee tukham anuetU , .. P * 1 - t »«•/>

(Matipnbht). ComparTi. llTpTf * of J* £>&%» on It. 88

(Grflc. «L). 8m klao Y&CMtwti'i glow K ^sfwith B&lartana'i note.


a co^s’a foot as*its . .


/» P- ■ „ - 1 *«• ® d -)> “ d


(Otic. ad.). also YiKeatpati'i glow


117] Passion, aversion, mll-to-live [ — ii. 9

perceived, it is only after remembering' that one of this same kind is the source
of pleasure that he infers that this one is a source of pleasure in so far as it is of
the same kind. After this follows the desire. He explains the words <dwells
upon) by the word iThat*


8. Aversion 1 is that which dwells upon pain.

That repulsion [or] wratfi [or] anger, on the part of one acquainted
with pain, ensuing upon a recollection of pain, for either the pain
or for the means of attaining it, is aversion.

8. Aversion is that whioh dwells upon pain. The words ^acquainted with
pain» are to be explained as [in the] previous [BQtra]. He explains the words
<dwells upon) by the word «that.» Repulsion in the sense that it repels. The
same he elaborates by synonyms, [for instance,] « wrath. »


0. The will-to-livo (dbhinivefa) swooping on [by the force of]
its own naturfe * exists in this form even in the wise.

In all living beings this craving for one’s self ceaselessly rises,
‘ May I not cease to live 1 May I live 1 ’ This craving for one’s
self does not arise except in one in whom the experience of death
resides. And from [the existence] of * is [hope] the experience of
other births is made clear. And this is that well-known hindrance
[called] the will-to-live. This [feat of death], inconceivable as a
result of either perception oi inference of verbal-communication,
sweeping on [by the force of] its own nature, as a vision of extermi-
nation, forces the inference that the pangs of death have already
been experienced in previous births. And just as it is evident that
this fear is to be found in the unspeakably stupid, so also even in
the wise, who have some understanding of the prior limit [of
human lives], {that is, t; e round-of-rebirths,] and of their final

Professor Deusssn quotes moat appositely * See Ruyyaka: AluhkKnaaxraava (KStya-
Spinoza, Ethica iii. 18, Scholion, . ! main 86), p. 55*, interpretiVhe word m

nihil aliud est, quam lattitia coma meaning merely to ipto or by its own

tout* idta dhteasYrtsms*; 0 nature. Compare RftmKnanda Yati in

nOtU atu d, quam trioHUa eoneomitqglfi ®* r Mtyipnbkl (Benares Sanskrit Senes),
Mss eautat txternae, ' A 1908, p. 80’, vitanS-itohgak stunts- *-


ii. 9 — } Book II Means of Attainment or Sadhana [118

limit [that is, Isolation]. Why is this ? Because this subconscious*
impression, the result of the fear of death, is alike in both fortunate
and unfortunate.

a. The willto-live sweeping on [by the force of] it s own nature exists in this
form even in the wise. He discusses the meaning of the term £will-to-live* in the
words «Call living beings.* 4CThis craving for one’s self* is the longing for one’s
self expressed in the words 4CMay 1 not cease to live,* that is, ‘ Hay 1 not become
non-existent,’ [and also expressed] in the words £<May I live (AAdydsom)* [that is]
‘ May I be alive (fivy&sam). 9 The longing for one's self is not possible unless the
living creature have had residing in himself an experience of death. It is he only
that has this craving for himself, [that is] the will-to-live, the fear of death. In
the course of the discussion (prasangatas) he refers by the words, &And from [the
existence] of this* to a heterodox-person (ndstika) who denies that there is
another birth. From the fact that the present body is being held together, it
follows that there is an experience of a previous birth. In other words, a birth
is a conjunction 1 [of the soul] with a body and sense-organs and feelings which
are different from those of any previous [conjunction] and are characterized by
the [definite location] in the collection. This [birth J is experienced [or] attained.
And it is this [experience or attainment] that is made clear. f How is this? In
reply he says «CAnd this is that well-known will-to-live.* Breaking off the
sentence in the middle he tells of its hindering character in the word hin-
drance.* This [will-to-live] is called a hindrance because it hinders, [that is]
pains, living-creatures with unkindly actions and the like. He finishes what he
had begun to say by the words ^sweeping on by its own nature.* It has
a disposition to sweep on by virtue of its own nature in the form of subconscious-
impressions. But this disposition is not accidental. Even in the case of a worm
just bom [that is] full of pain and- low in intelligence [this disposition] is not
accidental. He tells the reason for this in the words £as a result of perception.*
This fear of death, being inconceivable, that is, not acquired in this present
( prxUpudita ) birth as a result of perception or inference or verbal-communication,
it must be inferred that the pangs of death have been experienced in a previous
birth. This is the point at issue. For even a child just bom trembles at the
sight of a murderous thing. And from this peculiar quivering [the child] infers
the nearness (jpntfyOaatti) to himself of the experience of death and is found to be
afraid of it Thus we see that fear results from pain or from whatever leads to
pain. Moreover in this birth he haa not experienced or inferred or heard of death.
So we gather that he haa known only in a previous [birth] the pains [of death] or
that whifth loads to the pain. And from this a memory of himself as he wal in that
condition persists. This moreover does not occur unless there be subliming*
impressions, Furthermore this subliminal-impression [eannot scour] without
experience end the experience does not belong to this Ilfs. Therefore the onlj

1 See Cjpbkara^a Brahma sfltfi ii. 2. 98 with Anandagiri's gleet.


119 ] Removal of hindrances by contemplation [ — ii. 10

remaining alternative is [a subliminal-impression] from a pre-existent birth.
Thus there was a connexion with a previous birth. — The word <so [tatte)>
requires a correlative 4 Cjust as.& Thus by supplying the word <£just &s$
from the sense of the sentence, he shows, in the words ^just as . . . this,» how
the meaning of the sentence wou ii be. — «In the unspeakably stupids
means in the most sluggish intelligences. — He shows [what the kind of] learning
is by saying «some understanding of the prior and of the final limits [of human
liv 68 ]«» The limit is the end. Now the prior limit of man is the round-of-
rebirths ; the latter is Isolation. He by whom this has been understood from
things heard or from inferences 43 called [one who has understanding of the
prior and of the final limits]. — This well-known fear exists [and] has become
established in the case of the worm and of the wise man. It might be objected
that in the case of the unwise fear-of-death is conceivable, but not in the case of
the wise man, since [in him] it has been eradicated by knowledge. Or else if the
fear-of-death has not been eradicated, it would be eternally present. With this
in view he asks «Why is this?» The answer is ^Because ... it is alike.)>
He d06o not refer .o the wise man who has conscious [concentration], but to him
who discriminates upon the basis of things heard and of inference. This is
the point.


10. These [hindrances] [when they have become] subtile are
to be escaped by the inverse-propagation. 1

These five hindrances when they have become like burned seeds,
after the mind which has predominated over the deed<s oftheyogin
is resolved [into primary maUu], come w \ it to rest.

Thus the hindrances have been characterized, anu of those which should be
escaped, four states, the dormant and the attenuated and the intercepted and the
sustained, have been shown. But 4 why is not the fifth state, which is subtile,
mentioned by the author of the sQtras, inasmuch as it is in the state of burned
seed ? ’ To this he replies, 10 . These [hindrances] [when they have become]
subtile are to be escaped by the inverse-propagation. It is that of couis>e
which is within the scope of the exertions of man which has been described ;
but the subtile v not within the scope of a man's exertions that he might escape
(hana) [it]. It may, however, be escaped <by the inverse-propagation) [that isJ
by a reduction of the mind-stuff, which is an effect and w toich is characterized by
the feeling-of-personality, to the sta. of its own cause, [the thinking-substance}
He explains [the sQtra] by the word ^cThese.)> Easy.


1 Compare ii. 2, p. 107® (Calc, etl ) and the passages given above, at p 105.


ii. ii~] *Book II Means of Attainment or S&dhana [120

But of permanent hindranees consigned to the condition of seeds —
11. The fluctuations of these should be es aped by means of
contemplation.

Those fluctuations of the hindrances which are coarse, after having
•been attenuated by the yoga of action, should be escaped by the
Elevated ( prasamkhydna ) contemplation until subtilized [and]
made like burned seeds. And just as a spot of coarse matter upon
pieoes of cloth is first shaken off and* afterwards the spot of fine
matter is removed with an effort and by [some appropriate] means,
so coarse fluctuations are thos* who<e opposition to hindrances is
very slight, but the subtile fluctuations are those whose opposition 1
is very great.

1 Now when the hindranees have been attenuated by the yoga of action, by
directing his exertions towards what, does a man accomplish the rejection
[of these hindrances] ? ’ In reply to this be says «But of permanent hindranees
consigned to the condition of seeds.» By these words he distinguishes them
from those that have been sterilized (vandhya). He recites the sfltra. II. The
fluctuations of these should be escaped by means of contemplation. He
discusses [the antra] in the words «of the hindrances.» Now when attenuated
by the yoga of action these also may be eradicated— themselves and their
effects — by reducing them to the condition of [their «wn] causes, fThis is
the] inverse propagation. Thus the coarse fluctuations have been explained.
When a man’s exertion is [still] within the scope of the Elevation, [the Author]
states what the limit is in the words [beginning] <KuntiI He elaborates
the expression «subtilized» by spying «burned.» On this same point he
gives a simile in the words &And just as . . . upon pieces of cloth » With
an effort, such as by washing it [and] by some means, such as an alkahnn (kfdra)
mixture. The likeness between the simile and the thing to which it is com-
pared lies merely in the fact that there is a coarsenoss and a subtilty, but not
in the [fact that they are both] removable by an effort. For this [removal]
is impossible in the case of hindrances which are to be escaped by the process
of inverse propagation. — Those whose opposition is very slight, which have
been described, are such as have [slight] causes of destruction. Those whose
opposition is very great are such as have [great] causes of destruction. And
next below ’ the inverse propagation as a means of attaining the destruction

1 Some MSS read pratipaheti. If correct. minute by alkali. Hindrances which
lyjase of double sandhi. Corrected in are sustained are attenuated by yoga

the Benares revision of the Calcutta of action , the attenuated are reduced

edition. to burned seed by Elevation; the

9 Coarse stains are removed by shaking; burned sefed is«deatroyed by inverve

minute stains by washing ; more propagation.


Karma rooted ir hindrances


121 )


' [ — li. 12


of the hindrance* would be the Elev&tior ( prataihkhyA na). In view of this
inferiority the Elevation has been called very slight


12. The latent-deposit of karma has its root in the hindrances*
and may he felt in a birth seen or in a birth unseen.

In this oase we have a latent-deposit of the karma of merit and of
demerit propagated 1 * * from Inst [or] from greed [or] from infatuation
[or] from anger. And this may be felt either in a birth seen or
may be felt in a birth not seen. Of these, that [latent-deposit of
karma] which, in so far as there is keen intensity, proceeds from
sacrificial formulae [and] from self-castigation [and] from con-
centration, and which is perfected by worship of the Ifvara [or]
of a deity [or] of a sage or magnanimous * beings, has instantly
its fruition as a latent-deposit of meritorious karma. Thus [for
instance] when, in so far as the hindrance is keen, contempt U
shown egain and again to tho^e who have sought protection in
terror and in sickness and in wretchedness, or again to those
magnanimous beings who castigate themselves, this [contemptj
also has fruition* as a latent-impression of evil karma. Just as
the youth Nandlfvara passed out of thi human form and was
transformed into a divinity, so also Nahi Prince of the Gods,
passed out from his proper mutation and was transformed into the
condition of a brute. 4 Among these [latent-deposits] there is, in
the case of those who dwell in the underworlds, no latent-deposit
of karma which might be felt in a birth seen [in this life] ; and in
the case of those hindrances which have dwindled, there is no latent-
deposit of karma which might be felt in a birth unseen [that is, in
another life].

'This may be true. Hindrances [are hindrances] because they hinder [and
because] they are the causes of b’.^h and of Iength-of-iife and of kind-of-
experience ; and the lltent impressions of karma are of this kind (tatkA). But
undifferentiated-oonsdousness (avtdyd) and the other [hindranoea do not hinder

1 A better reeding u prabhava. end SiddhKata Kftom. (Nir. Slg. ed.),

1 If were a title of respeot, it 1904, p. 155*.

would precede tie otffer members of 1 Bee Li Age Pm. nil. 48. 7-53.
the oompound a oording to Pi 9. ii. 8.80 'See MBh. v. 17.

16 [a... »t]


U. 13 —] ' Book II Means of Attainment or S&dhana [122

and are not such causes]. How then can undifferentiated-consciousneas and
the rest be called hindrances?’ In reply to this he says 18* The latent?
deposit of karma has its root in the hindrances and may be felt in
a birth seen or in a birth unseen. That for whose production and causal
k activity a hindrance is the root, — that [is the latent-deposit of karma j. What
he means to say is this. The latent-deposit of karma which is the cause of
birth and of length-of-life and of kind-of-experience has its root in undifferen-
tiated-oonsciousness. So undifferentiated -consciousness and the rest are also
the causes of them — He explains the sutra'with the words 4Cln this oase.>
That in which all Selves in the round-oPreWfchs are latent (dgerate) is 1 a
latent-deposit (fyaya). The latent-deposits of karma are merit and demerit.
Merit which is the cause of heaven and similar states occurs when, as a result
of some desire, there is an inclination for a work which is desirable. Similarly
there is demerit in such cases as when from avarice another is robbed of his
money. Likewise there is nothing but demerit in such cases as when from
infatuation the idea of merit directs itself to killing or something of the kind
which is demerit. But there is no merit which comes from infatuation.
Merit does, however, come from anger, as for instance, the case of Dhruva a
from anger at the slight [put upon him] by his r fathcr [UttanapftdaJ. For as
a result of the meritorious latent-deposits of karma which were performed
in the desire to surpass his father, he obtained a position above the dwellers
in regions of the sky. Demerit, however, due to anger and resulting in the
murder of Brahmans is well enough known to every one. He describes the
double character of this [latent-deposit J by saying «And this may be felt in
a birth seen.» He describes- this that may be felt in a birth seen by saying
«in so far as iheie is keen intensity.» In their respective order he gives
examples in the words «Just as Xandi 9 vara.» The dwellers in the under-
worlds are those who make latent-deposits of karma as a result of which certain
underworlds, such as tjie Cooking Pot, 3 are reached. These have no latent-
deposits to be felt in & birth seen [in this life] For no human body nor any
kind of mutatibn of it can endure such torment [vedan&) as is to be endured
by them and uninterruptedly for thousands of years. The rest is easy.


13. So long as the root exists, there will be fruition from it
[that is] birth [and] tength-of-life [and] kind-of-fixperience.

While the hindrances exist, the latent-deposit of karma starts the
fruition, but not so the cut root of the hindrances. JuU as the

1 This, sentence is omitted in the Bikaner * Manu xii. 76; Bh^.^ur. v. 26. 13; com-
JJS. It might well be a gloss. • pare JftUka, vol. iii, p. 48, no. 814.

* VP. i. 11. 24 with the context.


128] Three-fold fruition of karma [— ii. is

grains of rice, when encased within the chaff, as seeds in an un-
burned condition, are fit for propagation, but neither the winnowed
chaff nor seed in the burned condition is so [fit], similarly the
latent-deposits of karma, when encased within hindrances, are pro-
pagative of fruition, but neither the winnowed hindrances nor seed
in the condition of having been burned by the Elevation {pra-
samkhyana ) [is propagative]. , And this fruition is of three kinds,
birth and length-of-life and kind-of experience. In regard to these
[three,] this is under discussion, whether 1. one karma is the cause
of one birth, or whether 2. one karma gives the impulse to more
than one birth. There is a second discussion as to whether

3. more than one karma projects more than one birth, or whether

4. more than one karma projects one birth. Now it is not true
1. that one karma is the cause of one birth. Why so? Because
if the karma remaining > over, accumulated from time-without-
beginning and innumerable, and [the karma] of the present, should
not have in their Jesuits an order limited [in its time], discourage-
ment would be inflicted upon everybody. And this is prohibited.
Neither 2. is one karma the cause of more than one birth. Why*
is this ? Because if, while there were more than one karma, only
one karma at a time were to he the cause < ’ more than one birth,
a lack of time for fruition would be inflicted upon the remaining
karmas. And that too would be prohibited. Neither 3. is more
than one karma the cause of more than one birth. Why is this ?
Since it is impossible that more than this one birth should occur
simultaneously, it must be supposed that they occur successively.
This, likewise, would involve the same difficulty as in the last [case].
The result is then 4. the diverse accumulation of latent-deposits of
karma, whether of merit or of demerit, made between birth and the
end of life, remains in a relation of subordinate [parts] and a dominant
[part]. This is made manifest at the ending of life after growing
compactly one single impulse ( ekapraghattakena ). After accom-
plishing death, it assumes a rigid form and causes a single birth
only. And this tyrtlveceives its length from that same karma. And
agfun in that s»me length -of-fife from that same karma it attains to
its kind-of-experience. This latent-deposit of k%rma since it is the


ii. is—] Book II. Means of Attainment or Sddhana [124

source of the birth and the length-of-life and the kind-of-experience,
is said to have a three-fold fruition. Consequently [this] latent-
deposit of karma is said to have [its limit in] one existence. On the
other hand [a latent-deposit of karma] which is to be felt in [this]
seen birth is said, since it is the cause of the kind-of-enjoyment only,
to originate a single [kind of] fruition {and not a single existence].
Or, when it is the source of the length-of-the-life and the kind-of-
enjoyment, it is said to originate two fruitions, as for instance in the
case of Nandifvara or of Nahusa. But this mind-stuff like a fish-net
made in different shapes on all sides and having, from time without
beginning, a form-fixed ( sammurchita ) by subconscious impressions,
which are like knots, caused by the experience, of the fruition of the
karma from the hindrances, is spread abroad. Therefore these sub-
conscious-impressions are said to be preceded by more than one
existence. It is this particular latent-doposit of karma, however,
which is said to have [its limit] in one existence. Those sub-
liminal-impressions which produce memory 1 are said to be sub-
conscious-impressions (vdsand) and these are said to subsist from
time-without-beginning. But that latent-deposit of karma which
has [its limit] in a single existence has both a fruition limited [in
time] and a Fruition which >'s without limit [of time]. Of these
two. [orders], the limitation [in time] ( niyama ), [in so far as it has
its limit in one existence], belongs only to the fruition which is to
be felt in a birth of [this] seen [life] and which is limited [in time];
whereas the fruition which is not to be felt in [this] seen [life] and
which is without limit [of time] does not [have the limit in time
which has its limit in a single existence]. Why so ? Because
that fruition which is not to be felt in [this] seen [life] and which
w without limit [of time] has three kinds of outcome * (gait ) :
Either i. it is annihilated (ndpa) when this {latter] fruition is
finished and become unfruitful ; or 2. it is cast away (dvdpa-gomana)
intone dominant karma ; or 3. it may continue for a ltmg time,
subjected to the dominant karma which has a fruition limited [in
time]. Of these [three], 1. the annihilation of [the karma] which is
finished and become unfruitful is iike the annihilation in this present

1 See ill. 18? p. 2«#(0»lc. ed.). • Coniult ?bd-Klp-Dni£*y p. 846".


126] Three outcomes of karma [ — ii. 13

world of the dark karma when once the bright karma has dawned.
With regard to which this has been said, “ Verily indeed karmas
should be known to be by twos and twos. A single mass made of
merit destroys [the dark and the dark- bright] evil 1 [mass]. Wish
thou then to do well-done deeds'. Bight here to thee the wise make
karma known.” — 2. Casting away into the dominant karma : with
reference to which it hag been said *, “ Should there be a very
slight admixture of guilt in the sacrifice, it is either to be removed
or to be overlooked. [Therefore this admixture is] not enough to
remove the good-fortune [won by merit]. Why [not] ? Because
in my case there is much other good-fortune. Where then this
[admixture of guilt] is cast away [into the dominant karma], even
m heaven it will make only a slight reduction [of merit].” —
3. When he said, * it may continue for a long time subjected to
the dominant karma Tyhich has a fruition limited [in time],’ how
was this ? [The answer is], because, in the case of the karma the
fruition of which is not to be felt in [this] seen [life] and which is
limited [in time], death is said to be the appropriate cause of the
manifestation. Not so, however, in the case [of the karma] the
fruition of which is not to be felt in [this] seen [life] and which is
without limit [of time], Cu the coht»* ry, [in this latter case],
karma the fruition of which is not to be ielt in [this] seen [life] and
which is not limited [in time], either h annihilated or is cast away
or is quiescent (updslta) in subjection [to thfe dominant karma] for
a long time until the appropriate manifesting-conditions of the
cause of the karma bring it dose to its fruition. But since of this
very fruition [of karma] the place or the time or the cause is none
of them determinable, therefore it is that the ways of karma are
[known as] mysterious and not easily discernible. Moreover, since
the general*rule. is not broken down, even if there be exceptions,

1 The genitive is object of apahanti ac- 1 See the careftil discussion of this fragment
cording to the V&rttika, which refen of Paficapkha in Qarbe's translation of

to Pftoini ii. 8. 56. V&oaspatimip* the S&ihkhja Tattva K&umudI, 1892,

makes an accusative p. 588, note 2. Compare also

object of anvkomH. In this ease p&pa* stttra so (1861)and Cowell's translation

fceiyawouk* mean belonging to a sinful (1878), p. 96.
pan (see p. 129 below).


ii. is—] Book II. Means of Attainment or Sddhana [126

therefore the latent-deposit of karma having [its limit in] a single
existence [must] be acknowledged.

[The objector says,] ‘Let this be granted. Sinoe the latent-deposit of karma
cs based upon undifferentiated-consciousness (avidyd), there may result, after the
production of knowledge (tridyd), a destruction of undifferentiated-consciousness,
and so there might not be any subsequent latent-deposit of karma. Still the
latent-deposits of karma, done previously and accumulated by the succession from
time without beginning of innumerable births, being unsettled in their period
of development, it would be impossible by realizing the effects to cause [these
latent-deposits] to dwindle in so far as they might be experienced. Because of
this it would be impossible to cut off the round-of-rebirths/ To this he
replies with the sQtra IS. 80 long as the root exist s, there will be fruition
from it [that is] birth [and] length-of-life [and] kind-of-experienoe.
What he means to say is this. The result of the latent-deposit of karma is
pleasure and pam, and, in so far as both birth and length-of-life have the
same purpose [as the latent-deposit] and are the necessary consequence of it,
[these two] are also propagated [by the latent deposit] Moreover pleasure
and pain are attached to passion and aversion. And the latter are the necessary
conditions [for pleasure and pain], since pleasure and p^in are not possible
in the absence of these [that is, passion and aversion]. Furthermore it is
impossible to say that that wherein a man is pleased or disgusted is not to
him, as the case may be, either a pleasure or a pain. So this soil of the self
sprinkled with the water of the hindrances becomes a field propagating the
fruits of karma. Thus it is true that the hindrances co-operate with the latent-
deposit of karma foi producing also the after effects of the fruits. So when the
hindrances are quite cut off, [the latent-deposits] are deprived of this [aid]
also. Therefore, although the latent-deposits are endless and their period
of ripening is unsettled, still, when in their condition as seeds, they are burned
by Elevation ( prasamkhyana ), they cannot be in a position to bear fruit.
The sense expressed is made clear by the Comment in the words, «While . . .
exists With regard to this same point he gives a simile «Just as . . . the
chaffs Although they have their chaff, their condition as seed is burned
by heat (sveda) and in other ways. He applies the simile to the point-to-be*
illustrated by saying, ^similarly.* If it be objected that the hindrances
cannot be removed, becaus no [really] existing things are removed, he replies
in the words, £nor seed in the condition of having been burned by the
Elevation.* He shows the threefold character of the fruition in the words,
CAnd t^is.* Fruition is that which is brought to fruition or brought to
perfection by kannas. Th first point-under-discussion [ 1 . and 2.] deems (he
unity of karma to be fixed and considers whether births oneoi^more tihmn one*
The second [ 8 . and 4. ], however, deems the manifoldness to be fixed and consider*
whether births are one or more than one. Thus there are four alternatives


127] Limits of time for fruition [ — ii. 13

(vtkalpa)* Of these he refutes the first with the words 4CNow it is not trua
1. that one karma is the cause of one birth.» He asks, <OrVhy so?* He gives
the answer by saying, «from time-without-beginning.* If the karma accumu-
lated by each birth, one after another, in time without beginning, and therefore
innumerable, which remains over after the karma which has been mad^ to
dwindle in each life, one after another, has been deducted, the world would
feel discouragement. And this is prohibited. What he means to say is this.
Sinoe the dwindling of karma is broken-by-intervals ( virala ), and since [karma]
is produced in abundance, th» latent-deposits pressing one against the other
and springing up incessantly, in breathless haste, towards their own fruition, —
[for this reason] even a very clever man could not determine the order of
the results. Thus discouragement as regards the following up of meritorious
[acta] would be inflicted [upon everybody]. — He rejects the second alternative
in the words ^Neither 2. is one karma the cause of more than one births
He asks, <CWhy is this?» He gives the answer by saying, «of more than
one births If a single karma only belonging to (ahita) more than one birth
is the cause of a fruition which characterizes more than one birth, then a lack
of time would be inflicted upon the remaining karmas. And that too would
be prohibited. Thus in so far as karma would be fruitless, there would be the
likelihood that it yould not be followed up. And if there would be discourage-
ment on the ground that there is no order of fruition limited [in time] (niyaia\
in case one karma is to be uprooted in one life, how much more there would
be in case one karma must be uprooted during more than one life. For then,
since there is no chance, [one would infer] that there would be no time [in the
future] for the fruition of the present karma and thus again discouragement
would follow]. — He refutes the third alterative with the words, ^Neither
8. is more than one karma the cause of more than one birth. * He gives the
reason for this in the word, «this.* Since for those who are not yogins it is
impossible that more than this one birth should o&cur simultaneously, it must
be supposed to occur successively. For if a thousand karmas could simultaneously
generate a thousand births, there would be — since a thousand karmas would
have dwindled away — time for the fruition of the remainder and an order of
results limited [in time]. But there is no such simultaneity of births.— Having
thus rejected the three propositions, he accepts as the result of the process of
elimination 4. the proposition which remains, to the effect that more than one
karma is th% cause of one birth, as he says in the words, «The result is . . .
birth.* The compound ^between-birth-and-tho-end-of-life* means in Uhie
interval [that is] between the two, both birth and the end -of-life.— [This
accumulation is] diverse because it gives forth results diversified by pleasures and
pains. That is dominant which will give its result with absolute intensity and
immediately.* Whereas that insubordinate which [gives its result] after a delay.
,The Cendin# ofdiie* is death. 4CMade manifest* by it means being brought
into the presence of that which tends to produce its effects. — By one single impulse


ii, 13 — ] Boole II. Means of Attainment or Stidkana {128

m««m simultaneously. Growing compact or rolled 1 together into one lump
in relation to the effect to be produced [that ia] the next birth, it produces one
birth only and not more than one birth. And this birth is the human or some
other state. {And this birth receives its length-of-life from that same karma*
[would mean that] its life is limited by various periods of time. CAnd again
in that same length-of-life from that same karma it attains to its kind-of-
experience* [would mean that] a direct experience of pleasure and of pain is
attained. Thus this latent-deposit of karma sinqe it is the source of the birth
and of the length-of-life and of the kind-of-experience is said to have a threefold
fruition. He sums up the main statement in the words, {Consequently [this]
latent-deposit of karma is Baid to have [its limit in] one existence.* — Having
one existence is one existence. [This] compound is in accordance [with
Papini’s antra ii. 1. 40] beginning with the words, “ A temporal antecedent,
tka, Ac.” The termination [-ika] is in the sense of possession (motaiWAlya). 1
Thus the meaning [of the compound] is 1 one who has one existence ’. Else-
where the reading is (Aikabhavika). In this case the dhdk termination [-ika] in the
sense of ‘ existing in ' is added to the word 1 one-existence ’. Then the meaning
would be that its existing is limited to one birth.* Thus having announced
his main statement, namely, that [this] karma which [has its limit] in one
existence has a three-fold fruition, he now distinguishes (he three different
kinds of fruition which belong to the karma that is to be felt in [this] seen
birth and that is a part of this-present-world (Oihika). By the word {seen*
he refers, of course, to Nandiyvara whose length-of-life in a human birth was
cut off at eight years. [Here] was a particular kind of merit produced by
a vehement method of keen intensity. This merit had two fruitions in that
it was the source of the length-of-life and of the kind-of-experienoe. But in
the case of Nahusa, since the length of his life had been determined by
a karma which led him to the attainment of Indra’s position, there was a
particular kind of demerit, leading only to a kind-of-enjoyment, by reason
of the contrary [karma] coming from his striking* Agastya with his heel. An
objector asks, 'Have the subconscious-impressions from the hindrances, like
a latent-deposit of karma, their [limit] in one existence? And [if] the sub-
consoious-impressions of the experiences of the fruition of the karma are
favourable to [the pointing out of] the kind-of-experience, then a human
reduced to the body of a beast would not experience (Mh^Ko) what is proper
to his species.' In reply to this he says {the karma from the
Having a fixed form (sathmUrchita) means rolled together into one lump. He
desoribee^the subconscious-impression as such in order to distinguish *it from

1 VyEfas Bhikfu glosses the word «atk- • This stoiy is given in its setting by
murchita by pravpidhavepa (p. 106*) Jagobi in hit artiefc on Agastya

and by upocitam or puftam (p. 107* (Hastings : Cyd. of Bel. and Ethics, I,

Benares ed.). p . 181*, line 10).

* Pipin' v. 2. 115.


129] Fruitions not limited in time [ — ii. 13

right-action (dharma) and from wrong-action by saying Csublimin&l-impres-
aions which.* — In order to state certain exceptions to the*general proposition
[that the latent-deposit of karma] has [its limit in] a single existence be
prepares the ground by saying 4But that . . . which.* By the word CQut*
he shows that there is a distinction from the subconscious-impressions.
The limitation [in time] of having [a limit in] a single existence is that which
belongs only to the fruition which is to be felt in a birth of [this] seen [life]
and which has a limit [in time] ; whereas the fruition which is not to be
felt in [this] seen [life] does not [have the limit in time which has its limit
in a single existence]. — Of what kind then is fruition which is not limited
in time ? He asks the reason in the words £Why so ?* He tells the reason
in the words ^Because that* First he gives one outcome (gati ) in the words
<is finished ;* the second, in the words ^dominant •>* the third, in the words
€has a limit [in time.]* Of these three he analyses 1. the first by saying *Oi
tuese [three] ... is finished.* Other than the karmas of the mendicant (sorii-
ngtoin), which are neither bright nor dark, there are only three karmas, the
dark and the bright-dark and the bright. Now in this world a latent-deposit
of bright karma, to be -obtained by self-castigation and by recitation and by
other means, when onoe uprisen [in the mind,] is the annihilator of dark
[karma] which lias not yet given its fruit. And because there is no distinction
[between the dark and the dark-bright] we must suppose [that it is the
annihilator] of the many-coloured [that is, the dark-bright karma] by reason
of the conjunction [of this last] with the dark part. With reference to the
same the Exalted [Vy&sa] cites the Sacred Word when he says, £With regard
to which this.* Verily indeed karmas [shou\ be known to be] €by twos and
twos,* that is, the dark and the dark -bright [These the mass made of merit]
destroys. Such is the construction [of the sentence]. By repeating the word
<twoa* he indicates that there is a very grea£ number. In reply to the
question, ‘Belonging to whom’ he says, ^belonging to a sinful.* In other
words, belonging to a sinful man. What is it that destroys? To this he
replies, <dA single mass made of merit.* Because a collection includes the
units-of-the-oollection (samtihin). Thus the bright latent-deposit of karma is
described as the third. What he means to say is this. This bright latent-
deposit of karma, which is to be obtained by methods which are free from
injury to others, is of such a kind, we may say, that although it is single, it
destroys dirk and dark-bright latent-deposits of karma, which are absolutely
opposed, even when they are in great numbers. — The word €then (tat)*
means therefore. — The word <Wiah thou* is middle because Vedic. The rest
is easy. And so we see (ofm) that the power in the uprising df the bright
karma is |c indescribably great that it alone makes the others oease ‘to be.
But one opuld not say that they cease because of the pain resulting from recita-
tions and other [right actions]. For a wrong-action (adharma) does not have, as
i^i opposite, pain in general, but only that particular kind of pain whioh is

jy [«.*.». .»]


ii. 13 — ] Book II. Means of Attainment or Sddhana [180

the effect of itself [that is, the wrong-action]. Now the pain resulting from
recitations and other [right actions] is not their effect. [And if this pain resulting
from recitations and other right actions] is supposed to be the effeot of this
[wrong-action], then it is needless to make [special] prescriptions of recitations
and 'other right actions, because then these [recitations and right actions] could
be produced (utpatti) merely by the help of those [wrong-actions]. And if [this
wrong-action] should not produce (anutpatti) [the pain which results from
recitations and other right actions], then the Cocking Pot [Hell] and other
[pains] are [specially] pu scribed, — [because ther \£rong- action must result in
something— and] because, if [Hells and other pains] be not [specially] pre-
scribed, these [Hells] would never be produced at all. 1

Thus all is four-square. — He analyses 2. the second outcome in the word
4Cdominant.$ In the dominant karma, as for instance in the Jyotistoma and
similar [sacrifices], that which is accessory ( anga ) [karma] to this, namely the
killing of the animal, is^ast away [into the dominant karma]. For there are
two effetts of killing and of the other [acts] : i. since it is prescribed [by the
tradition] in so far as it is accessory to the dominant [karma], it assists;
2. since killing is forbidden by the rule “Let no living being be killed ”, it
is needless. We see then that [killing], because it is performed as accessory
to the dominant [karma] and not as being the dominant, oughUnot immediately
[drag] and independently of the dominant [karma] to generate its own fruition,
a useless result, but that it remains rendering assistance to the dominant [karma],
the fruition of which has already commenced. And while rendering assistance
to the dominant karma it remains, with reference tc its own effect, as seed
only, and is cast away into the dominant karma. «With reference to which
it has been said» by Paiica^kha. The slight admixture of the invisible-
influence (apurva), which is the dominant [karma] resulting' from the Jyotistoma
and other [sacrifices], with the invisible-influence resulting from the killing of
the animal and similar [acts] and producing what is not desired (anartha\ — [this
admixture] may be removed. For, by doing a certain amount of penance
it may be removed. Or should a man heedlessly not have gone through the
penance, [the alight admixture of guilt] comes to fruition at the time of the
fruition of the dominant karma. In spite of all this, whatever undeaired result
be generated by this [accessory invisible-influence] may be overlooked. For
the fortunate (feifoi a), plunging deep into the great pool of the nectar of pleasure
brought near by the gathering * ogether of merit, overlook \ slight spark of

1 Since however Hells are produced without fore right-actions and the pain resnlt-

any special prescription ( vidhdna ), it ing from right-actions cannot Vb the

follows as a general rule that the con- consequences of wrong-actions. Not

tequenceb of wrong-actions requite no being such a consequence, the pain

special prescription. But in the case from ught-action cannot annihilate

of recitations and other right-actions wrong-action,

there ijthe special prescription. There-


Fruition limited in time


131]


l— ii. 14


the fire of pain brought about by a very little evil. Hence [the slight ad-
mixture] is not enough or adequate to remove or to cause to dwindle good-
fortune or great merit. He asks ^Why [not]?» The answer is «the
good -fortune.^ For in the case of me, the meritorious, much other good-fortune
exists, the fruition of dominant karma, beginning with the initiatory fites
and ending with the donations. Where then this admixture is very slight,
it will make even in heaven, the result of it, a slight commingling of pain,
that is, a slight reduction from the heaven which, [although] its beginning is
gained by mixed merit, is j*in itself] quite untouched by pain — He analyses
8. the third outcome in the words, «limited [in time].» The predominance
here is conceived as being extremely powerful but not as having accessories.
And it is powerful in so far as its fruition is without limit [of time], because
there is no opportunity [for its fruition] at any one time. But in the case
of [the dominant karma] the fruition of which is without limit [of time] there
id a weakness, because there is an opportunity [for its fruition] at some other
♦iifi The continuance for a long time is only in the condition of seed, but
not as [actively] helping the dominant [karma] because this latter is inde-
pendent. It is objected, 1 It has been stated that the latent-deposit of karma
is by the ending-of-life made manifest at one point of time only. Where&B
now you say that it continues a long time. How then is the latter

[statement] not In opposition to the previous [statement]?' With this in
mind he asks, «how was this ?» He answers in the words, 4Cnot ... in [this]
Been [life].» The singular number denotes a class. He determined the
outcome of that which is different from this by the words, «On the contrary
. . . not ... in [this] seen [life].» The rest \* easy.


14. These [fruitions] have joy or extreme anguish as results
in accordance with the quality of their causes whether merit
or demerit.

<These> [that is] birth and length-of-life and kind-of-experience.
Those with merit as cause have pleasure as result ; those with
demerit &$ cause have pain as result. And just as the nature of
this pain is counteractive, so for the yogin, even at the moment of
pleasure in an object, there is nothing but counteractive pain.

It has been stated that karma is rooted in hindrances and that fruitions are
rooted in kajgqju Ifyw the question is, 1 of what are the fruitions the root, since
you say that these are to be renounced In reply to this he says, 14. These
[fruitions] have joy or extreme anguish as results in aooordanoe jvith the


iL 14 — ] Book II. Means of Attainment or Sddhana [182

quality of their onuses whether merit or demerit. He explains the SQtra in
the words, «<These> [that is] birth and length -of-life and kind-of-experienoe.>
Although birth and length-of-life, since they precede joy and extreme anguish,
do have the latter as their results, — whereas the kind-of-experienoe follows the
rise [in consciousness] of joy and extreme anguish and in fact has its essence in
the' [direct] experience ( anubhava ) of them,— still in so far as being [direetly]
experienced is the same as a kind-of-experience (bhoga), we may suppose that
[joy and extreme anguish] are results of the kind-of-experience only so far as they
are the objects of the kind-of-experience. It is objected, ' The birth and length*
of-life and kind-of experience, which are the results of extreme anguish, are
things to be rejected (hey a), since they are felt to be counteractive. But why
should those [fruitions] which have merit as cause be renounced ? they have
pleasure as their result since they are felt to be co-active (anukOla). Nor oan
their co-activity, which may be felt by every one, be gainsaid by even a thousand
verbal communications and inferences. Moreover neither joy nor extreme
anguish can exist without the other. For while joy is being received, extreme
anguish, since it cannot be driven off, may also fall to one’s lot, because the two
have separate causes and because they have separate forms.’ In reply to this he
aaya, «CAnd just as . . this.» Although ordinary individuals, at the time when
there is pleasure m objects, are not conscious of them as counteractive, still
yogins are conscious of this [counteractiveness].


How can this be accounted for ?

15. Ab being the pains which are mutations and anxieties
and subliminal-impressions, and by reason of the opposition 1
of the fluctuations of tbe aspeots (guna ),— to the discriminat-
ing all is nothing but pain.

1. For every one this experience of pleasure is permeated with
passion and is dependent upon animate and inanimate instruments.
In this case we have a latent-deposit of karma arising from passion.
Likewise also [a man] hates the instruments of pain and becomes
infatuated [by the instruments of infatuation]. Thus there is «.1«o
a latent-deposit made bj aversion and by infatuation. And in
this sense it has been said, “Enjoyment is impossible unless one
has killed some living creature.” Therefore there is also the
latent-deposit of karma, effected by killing, belonging to the bodyt
Thus it has been said, “ Undifferentia^ed-consoiousaess (o vidyd)

1 This eOtra seem* to have influenced Umtaviti : TattvtrthKdhigama-efltra vii. 6.


138] Inevitability of pain [ — iil 15

is pleasure in an object of sense 1 .” That which is the subsi-
dence of the organs because of their satiation with enjoyments is
pleasure ; after there has been a craving, the failure to subside
is pain. And by the application of the organs to enjoyments
one cannot make one’s self free from thirst [for enjoyment].
Why is this? Since passions increase because-of (amt) applica-
tion to enjoyments, and the skill of the organs also increases.
Therefore application to* the enjoyment of pleasure is not a way
of approach [to freedom ‘from thirsi for objects]. Surely one
aiming at pleasure and permeated by objects is sunk in the deep
bog of pain, like the man who, while in fear of the scorpion’s
poison* is bitten by the poisonous snake. This is the so-called
painfuiness of mutation ; it is counteractive ; even in a condition of
pleasure it hinders the yogin himself. — 2. Now what is the pain-
fulness of anxiousness ? Every one has the experience of anxious-
ness ; it is permeated by aversion and is dependent upon animate
and inanimate instruments. Here we have a latent-deposit of karma
arising from aversion. And [a man] yearning for the instruments of
pleasure, throbs in the body and in [the organs of] speech and in the
central-organ (manas). Since it then aids or ( ca ) thwarts others
by aiding them or by injuring them, it amasses right- actions and
wrong-actions. This latent-deposit of karna is the result of greed
and of infatuation. For this reason it is called the painfulness of
anxiousness. — 3. But what is the painfulness of subliminal-
impressions? There is a latent-deposit of, subliminal-impressions
of pleasure arising from the experience of pleasure ; and there
is a latent-deposit of subliminal-impressions of pain arising from
the experience of pain. Thus analogously (evam), while the
fruition from the karmas is under experience, there is on the other
hand an accumulation of a latent-deposit of karma. Thus this
stream of ^ain from time-without-beginning, spreading wider and
wider, agitates feven the yogin because its essence is counteractive.
Why is this? It is because a wise man is like an eyeball. Just

1 Perhaps an allusion to the phrase ukka Maxims, 2nd ed., 1909, p. 76) points out

khtfUir cm&yB (ii. tf, Calc. ed. 514'). that Vficupati QMS this nydya a gain

* Colonel Jacob > r .-cond Handful of Popular in the TitparyatfkK (1808), p. 53“.


ii. 15 — ] Book II. Means of Attainment or Sddhana [134

as a fine thread of wool fallen upon the eyeball by its touch gives
pain, but not so when it falls upon other parts of the body, so these
pains [from subliminal-impressions] hinder the yogin only, who is
like an eyeball, but not any other perceiver. But upon the other,
[not a yogin], — who casts off the pain received time after time
which has been brought upon him by his own karma, — and who
receives the pain cast off time after time, — and who is as it were
permeated through and through from, all sides with fluctuating
mind-stuff complicated from time-without-beginning with its
subconscious-impressions, — and who under [the influence of]
undifferentiated-consciousness ( avidya ) conforms [himself] to the
‘ I-substance ’ and to the ‘ Of me-substance ’ with regard to
those very things which are to be rejected, — upon him, born again
and again, the triple anguishes from both kinds of causes, both
inner and outer, sweep down. This being so, the yogin, having
seen himself and the whole multitude of creatures borne away by
this stream of pain from time-without-beginning, seeks refuge in
the focused-insight ( samyag-daiyana •), the cause <5f the dwindling
of,all pain. — <And by reason of the opposition of the fluctuations
of the aspects (cjvna ), — to the discriminating all is nothing but pain.>
The aspects (guna) of the thinking-substance in the form of bright-
ness and of activity and of inertia, having become interdependent
by aid given each to the other, give rise to a presented-idea either
tranquil or cruel or infatuated, [either one or the other] of just
these three aspects. * “ And because the changes (vrtta) of the
aspects ( guna ) are unstable, the mind-stuff is in rapid mutation.”
Thus we have been told. 1 “ The [outer] forms [when developed to]
a high degree and the [inner] fluctuations [when developed to] a
high degree oppose each other ; but the generic forms co-operate
with [these when developed to] a high degree.” Thus since these
aspects (guna) have presented-ideas of pleasure and of pain and of
infatuation obtained by reliance of one [aspect] upon another, each
(sarve)fof them] has the form of each of [the others], But the
distinction between them is due to their being either in a subordi-
nate (guna ) or in a dominant state. ^Therefore <tg the discrimi-

1 By PaBcayikha. Conpaie in 9 and 13, pp. 199* and 204*; iv. 15, p. 298 1 (Calc, ed.)»


136] Medical analogues to the Four Noble Truths [ — ii. 10

nating all is nothing but pain.) So the seed out of Which this
huge ag gregate of pain grows forth is undifferentiated-consciousness
(avidyd). And the reason for the failure-of-growth (abhdva) in
this \avidya\ is the focused-insight. — Just as a system of medicine
has four divisions, [on] Disease [and on] Cause of Disease [and on]
Health [and on] Remedy, so this system also has four divisions,
[on] the Round-of-Rebirth [and on] the Cause of the Round-of-
Rebirth [and on] Release [and on] the Way to Release. Of these
[four], the Round-of-Rebirth with its mass of pains is that which
is to be escaped ; the conjunction of the primary-cause and of the
Self is the cause of this which is to be escaped (heya) ; the final
destruction of the correlation is the escape (liana) ; the means
of eSi^tpc is focused-insight. In this [focused-insight] he who
escapes — as he is in himself — can neither be accepted nor rejected
(heya). For if there be a rejection ( hana ), that would involve the
doctrine of the extermination of him [who escapes]. And 1 if there
be an acceptance* [that would involve] the doctrine [that he has]
a cause. And 1 by denying both [the rejection anil the acceptance],
we have the doctrine [that the Seer as he is in himself is] eternal.
This is the focused-insight.

In order to account for this he introduces the sQtra i < er first asking the question.
«CHow can this be accounted for?» The sQtra begins with the word 16 . . . .
mutation and ends with the word discriminating . . . [The compound in the
sQtra is analysed,] mutation and anxiety and subliminal-impression-- these
themselves are the pains — it is by these . . . He describes the painfulness of
the pleasure in objects of sense in so far as mutatious are painful by B&ying,
«For every one this.» Pleasure is surely impossible unless it be permeated by
passion. For one cannot possibly say that one finds no happiness in a thing
and at the same time take pleasure in it Moreover, since pleasure leads to
action and action causes a latent-deposit of merit and demerit, there is also
a latent-deposit of karma produced by passion, because a thing which does not
exist cannot be produced. Under the Jb circumstances ( tada ), a man experiencing
pleasure and feeling attachment to it, feels aversion towards the instruments of
pain with an aversion that is in an intercepted state. Furthermore, being unable
to prevent these [instruments of pain] he becomes infatuated. Thus there is
also a latent-degodt of jearma made by aversion and by infatuation. And there
is nothing contraaietory in makifig infatuation, whose other name is misconcep-
tion, the cause of a latent-deposit of the karma of infatuation also. If it be asked,

1 Omitted in most M$S.


ii. 15—] Book IL Means of Attainment or S&dhana [136

How can a man in love feel aversion or infatuation, since, when he is in love,
aversion and infatuation are not evidently existent, he replies, 4CAnd in this
sense it has been said» by us when explaining [ii. 4] hindrances with intercepted
states. In this way merit and demerit have been shown as produced by sense*
Activities of speech and mind. Because a mental volition produced by passion,
so that one wills, 4 this must be done/ is also not to be distinguished from the
verbal form [of the volition] in so far as it is equally desired. As they say,
'A volition with desire does not go beyond intended-objects which can be
expressed by words.’ He also shows a latent-deposit of karma belonging to the
body in the words, «“ Impossible . . . unless one has killed ”*. Hence authors
of the Law Books say [Manu iii. 68, Visnu lix. 19], “ Five kinds-of-slaughter are
open to the householder.*' The objector says, * This may be true. Yet it is not
fitting that a yogin should reject pleasure in objects-of-sense which can be felt
by anybody. For that would be running counter to experience.' In reply to this
he says, «it has been said, 44 Undifferentiated- -consciousness (amdyO) is pleasure
in an object-of-sense "» by [us when] showing [ii. 5] that undifferentiated-
consciousness is characterized by four kinds of misconceived ideas. The ancient
sages (vrddha) do not pay heed to anything merely at the first impression.
There is of course, merely at the first impression (apatatas), an experience which
any one can feel of pleasure which follows even after eating food mixed with
sweet poison ; but after a lapse of time there is no pleasure. And as such it has
been shown by The Exalted [I$vara in the Gita xviii. 38], “ After there has been
contact of the sense-organs with objects, that pleasure which is at the beginning
like nectar and in the course of tim^ like poison is known to be full of rajas .' 9
He raises a doubt by saying, «which . . . with enjoyments.* The objector says,

4 We do not accede to the statement that pleasure is the joy in objects. On the
contrary, when men are not satiated and when their minds are afflicted with
yearnings for one object after another, it is the very thirst itself that is the
great pain. And this [thirstj does not subside unless enjoyment follow.
Furthermore the full subsidence of this [thirst] is not permeated with passion
and similar [states of mind]. Thus it cannot be said that this subsidence has
the painfulness of mutation. 1 This is the point.— ^Because of their satiation*
means: Because the thirst [for enjoyment] has dwindled, there is a subsi-
dence of the organs, in other words, there is no activity [of the organs] with
regard to objects-of-sense. He makes this same clear by a negative instance
in the words Arising from a craving.* He rebuts an objection ^lith the words
CAnd ... by the organs . . . not.* The word Cbecaule of (oft) is used fat
the of cause. It is true that the dwindling of thirst [for objects] is tfa*
ffjf A PP^ cat * on *° ^joyment is not the cause of this

[dwiticu* - 6 .... —irst] ; but it is the osuse of the thirst which is just the opposite
of this [dwindling of thirst J. Jusfc ?H§ they Ay/ 44 Lust by ihe enjoyment of

^llfthout the flaw of " fftisdfya Puri xxxiii. 88; Liftga

4|a Manu ii. 94 f Vi W u 9 9 ; * PaHfea lxvii. 17.


137] Pain is past and present and future [ — ii. 15

lusts never subsides ; just as by the butter-oblation the flames flare up yet
ones again.” — The rest is without obscurity.— 2. He asks a question with regard
to the painfulness of anxiety in the words, «Now what?* The answer is
Cevery one.* As everybody knows what it is, he does not make a detailed
statement of it as such. And the detailed statement is analogous to that of the
painfulness of mutation. — 3. He asks about the painfulness of subliminal-
impressions by saying «\\hat ?* He gives the answer in the words 4Cthe
experience of pleasure.* For an experience of pleasure gives rise to a subliminal
impression and this to a memory of pleasure ; and this to a passion ; and this to
movements of the central-organ and of the body and of [the organ of] speech ;
and this [gives rise] to merit and demerit ; from these [comes] the experience
of fruition ; from this a subconscious-impression. Thus there is a beginningless
[chain]. Here the connexion should be understood in this way. There is
a memory of pleasure and of pain according to the variation in the degree of the
subliminal-impressions of pleasure and of pain ; and from this comes passion
and aversion ; from these two come karma; from the k&rinas, fiuition. Streaming
on in this way the stream of pain hinders the yogin only, but not the other
perceiver, [that is] any ordinary person, as he eays in the words «CThus this . , .
from-time-withoul-beginning.* But the triple anguishes sweep down upon the
other. This is the> construction [of the sentence]. — In so far as the two
anguishes, that from the gods and that from the elements, are [each] external,
their unity is emphasized. — Since it is a fluctuation in the mind-stuff, undifleren-
tiated-consciousness (avidyO) is said to be ^fluctuating mind-stuff.» Under [the
influence of] this, «with regard to those very things which are to be rejected*
[that is] with regard to the thinking-substance am he organs and the body and
so on [as the ‘I*,] and with regard to wife and children [as the ‘of me’], «£he
conforms [himself] to the ‘ I substance * and tc the 4 Of-me-substance.’* This
being the case, there is no other refuge for him thasi the focused-insight. So
he says ^This being bo.* This being so. he has mentioned the extrinsic
(&u$&dhika) painfulness of the pleasure in objects as a result of mutation and
of subliminal-impressions and of contact with Tiri^usness. He [now] indicates
the intrinsic [painfulness] by saying «XAnd by reason of the opposition of the
aspects (guna) >* He explains [this part of the sCha] by sa>mg ^brightness.*
Brightness and activity and inertia are the forms, in so far as they are forms
of the thinking-substance, which enter into mutation. The aspects are

satlva and mjos’and tamas [and they] are interdependent upon each other. They
git# rise to either 1. a tranquil (its essence is pleasure), or 2. a cruel (its
' MHOM is pain), or finally (sm) & an infatuated (its es 9 er no ^ win)

presented -idea of [these] three a*pwtp| although its form ... J , -.~.uCO of

pleasure. And p<^ even this SU^S&ioa & jflua [thinking-substance] having such
a presented -idea a* its form is fbtad. $pluse of this he says «“ And bsMppr
thi changes of the aspects towns) tea unstable, Om mind-etuff js in rapid t&O*
It .is objected, ' [Them Is] one pr ' v.. how can it at one time


ii. 15 — ] Book II Means of Attainment or Sadhana [138

make known tranquillity and cruelty and infatuation, which are opposed to each
other?’ In reply to this he says, 4C“The [outer] forms [when developed to]
a high degree and the [inner] fluctuations [when developed to] a high degree
qppose each other.”» The «forms» are the eight states 1 (bhdva) beginning
with rightaction. The «fluctuations» are pleasure and so on. So in this case
wrong action, since it is in such a condition [of high development], is opposed by
right-action when it is in process of fruition. Similarly with knowledge [and]
with passionlessness [and] with power [as well hs] with pleasure and 90-On their
corresponding contraries are in opposition. But the generic 9 forms, which are
not actively moving forth, since they do not oppose [those which are developed]
to a high degree, co-operate with those which are actively moving forth. — The
objector says, 4 We know [all] this. Yet how can pleasure in objects have an
intrinsic painfulness ? ’ In reply to this he says, dSThus since these.^ Because
the material cause [of both] is not different and because their essence is the
material cause, theie is also no difference in the material effects ( up&deya ).
4 So then is this identity absolute ? If so, the difference [between the two terms]
in the attributive relations of the thinking- substance would not be possible.*
In reply to this he says, «in a subordinate or in a dominant.» In relation to
the generic element (atmnn) there is subordination ; in relation to the element
[which is developed] to a high degree there is dominance. a So both extrinsically
and intrinsically (svabhavatas) <to the discriminating all is nothing but pain.>
Consequently by men of insight pain should be escaped (heya). And it cannot be
escaped unless its cause (mdana) be escaped. Moreover it cannot be escaped
unless its cause bo thoroughly understood. So he shows what its radical cause
is in the words, «So ... of this.» That seed out of which the aggregate of pain
grows forth [or] arises. He shows the reason for the extermination of this
growth in the words «And ... in this.» Now he shows that this system which
has entered upon its activity for the sake of showing favour [L 1] to all is similar
to another system of the same kind by saying, «Just as.» [A system described
as being of four divisions] is one of which there are the four divisions, that is,
four compactly arranged parts. — It is objected, ‘Why is there not a contradiction
when you said that pain is to be escaped and when you [now] describe the
round-of-rebirth as something to be escaped ? ’ In reply to this he says <HOf these
[four], .... with its mass of pains.2> That, by doing which undifferentiated-
consciousness (axndyd) mak j the round-of-rebirth, [that constitutes] its special
form of activity which is the cause of the round-of-rebirtha. This he describes
in the words, <C.oi the primary cause and of the Belf.^ He tells what liberation
is ir"* e '*^rds, <Cof the correlation.^ He tells what the means of> liberation
are words^ «the means of escape.^ Some 1 there are who regard the

extermination of him-who-escapes (/toff) — as he is in h«mself-rto be liberation,

slight-action, knowledge, paaionlessnew, * The onspecialized forms. See iiL 44.*
Itower, and 1 their e opposites. See 9 The Yogftc&ra school of Buddhists,
Samkhja Kar. xl.


130 ]


The Self may escape pain [ — ii. 16

In this sense they say, “ Like the blowing-out (nirvdna) of a lamp is the deliver-
ance of this anguished 1 (tdpin) [mind].” Others 2 again teach that, as a result
of the extermination of the hindrances with their subconscious impressions,
purified mental-states (vijhdna) are produced ; and that this itself is liberation.
In reply to these he says, «In this [focused-insight].» In thiB case he first
finds fault with the escape by saying, «cFor if there be an escape ... for him.»
Since no rational man ever exerts himself to exterminate himself. It is objected,
‘ We see some persons, all of whbse pleasures are uprooted by intense disease and
who drag about their bodies, as if were, laden with pain, striving to exterminate
themselves/ True, he says in reply, there are a few such. But not of this kind
are men living in [the ordinary] round-of-rebirth. [For] their lot is to enjoy diverse
and strange and celestial delights. Even those [others], howe\er, are evidently
desirous of liberation. Accordingly we should not concede that liberation is
the extermination of him who escapes — as he is in himself — since that would
invAl/( w hat is not one of the aims of man. The objector says, * Very well then f
let us say that he who escapes — as he is in himself — is something that may be
accepted/ In reply to this he says, «And if there be an acceptance . . . the
doctrine [that he has] a causal For if there be an acceptance [of him], then,
because he would be impermanent in so far as he is an effect, he might also fall
even from [his] stated of liberation. For liberation is deathlessness. And [we
couldj not [say] that an uninterrupted succession of purified mental-states is
deathless. Because the uninterru/ed series, over and above the members -of-the-
series ( samtdnin ), not being anything [perceptibly] real, does not exist ; and
because the members-in-the-series are not perprar.ont. Therefore we should
strive to have such a theory as [would teach that th Self as he is in himself is]
eternal. For this being so, liberation (apavarga) might be [one of] the aims of
men. So he says, «And by denying both.» Consequently, liberation is nothing
but [the Seer] abiding in himself [i. 3J. Precisely this is the right point of view.

This same system i s set forth in its four divisions.

16. That whieh is to be escaped is pain yet to come.

Pain past, that is, transferred beyond experience, cannot properly
be called ( paksc vartate) a thing to be escaped. And present pain in
its own moment [of existence] has attained experience ; so it cannot
at the next moment be so changed that it can be escaped. Conse-
quently only that pain which is yet to come is that which hinders
thc^yogin only, who is like an eye-ball, 3 but [this does] not [Hinder]
any other peiyeiver* Only this pain becomes so changed that it
may be escaped

1 The Bik&ner MS. reads cvfaso iti. Tdpin 9 The Mfidhyamika school of Buddhists-

appean tp be correot instead of tfytn. 3 Compare ii. 1 ?. p. 13 (Calc. cd.).


ii. 16 — ] Book II. Means of Attainment or Sadhana [140

4CThis same system is set forth in its four divisions.^ 16. That which is to be
escaped is pain yet to come. The words <£yet to corned exclude the past and
the present. He makes this consistent by saying €pain past.» If it be
objected that present pain now in expeiience is not to be transferred beyond
experience, he replies «And present. » Easy.


Therefore the cause of this same thing that is described as some-
thing to be escaped is once more specified.

17. The correlation of the Seer and the object-of-sight is the
cause of that which is to be esoaped.

The Seer is the Self conscious by reflection of the thinking-
substance. Objects-of-sight are all external-aspects (dkarma)
which have struck upon the sattva of the thinking-substance. So
this same object-of-sight giving its aid, like a magnet , 1 by the mere
fact of being near, becomes, by reason of its being an object-of-sight,
the property of the Self, its proprietor, whose nature is seeing. It
becomes changed into an object upon which experience operates, —
in so far it has the nature of another. Having acquired [this new]
being, although self-dependent, [it becomes] by serving one-not-
itself, a dependent on one-not-itself. The correlation of these two,
the power of seeing and the power by which one sees, is from time-
without-beginning and is effected for [two] purposes. [This corre-
lation is] tlio cause of that which is to be escaped, in other words,
the cause of pain. And in this sense it has also been Baid, “ By
avoidance of the cause of correlation with this [thinking-substance]
the antidote for pain would be absolute." Why [would this be so] ?
Because we know the antidote to prevent the cause of pain. For
example, we know that the liability-to-scratches inheres in the
sole of the foot, the power to scratch inheres in- the thorn,
the prevention [of scratching] is either by not stepping with the
foot upon the thorn or by stepping [upon it when the sole
of the foot] is covered by a foot-protector. Whoever understands
these three [scratch and cause and prevention] has begun the
antidote therefor and is not exposed to the pain from scratches.

* Comjpre i. 4, p. 17* ; it 18, p. 143* ; if. 17, $00’ (Oslo. ad.).

* Compare it. 24.


141] Cause of pain [ — ii. 17

Why [is this] ? Because of his power to apperceive the three-fold
character [of the case]. And to resume the argument ( atrapi ), the
sattva , the castigated, comes under the ownership of rajas , the
castigator. Why [so] ? Since it stands in a passive relation to
the activity of the castigator. The act of castigation affects
the sattva as a passive object, but does not affect the immutable
and inactive Soul (kgetvajHa). [Why inactive ?] Since it has
objects shown to it. But* ff the sattva be under castigation, the
Self, it appears, conforming itself to the form of this [ sattva ] is
itself castigated along with [the sattva].

That which is to be escaped has been described. Its cause (niddna) is [now]
described 17. The correlation of the 8eer and the objeot-of-sight ia the cause
of that whioh is to be escaped. He tells of the Seer himself in the words
4CThe Seer . . . conscious by reflection of the thinking* 3 ubstance.» The intelli-
gence (citi) belonging to the Self ( Pums ), although it is detached, becomes con-
scious by reflection of the thinking-substance, and this consists in the thinking-
substance being imaged (chCtya) [in the intelligence 1. It is objected that ‘even if
this be so, [the Self] could see the thinking-substance only, but could not Bee
the various things (<;abdddi) which are absolutely shut off [fiom it] \ To this he
replies, «Objects-of-sight . . .the ( sattva ) of the thinking'substance.» When by
the channel of the senses the thinking-substance enters into mutations having
the forms of various things and when it is an obj^ct-of sight, the various things,
the external-aspects, are also object of-sight. 'It \ objected, ’In so far as the
thinking-substance has assumed the form of these [.aings] it may have the form
of the various things. But if, in the case of the Self, his relation to the think-
ing-substance be assumed, he would be mutable. Yet if there be no relation
between them, how can the various things, although present in the (sattva) of
the thinking-substance, be objects-of-sight ? For surely an object-of-sight not
in relation with the 8efer Cannot be called an object-of-sight/ To this he replies,
£thisiMU&eebject-of-sight.> All this has been given in detail by us in Book First,
where we showed [L 7, p. 23] that (lie sattva of the thinking-substance, although not
in combination with intelligence (cdtfatt^a), in so far as it is absolutely clear, still,
in so far as it contains the image (Hmba) of the intelligence, seems to come into
a balanced state [with the intelligwm] and [so] experiences the various things.
Hence also the Seer, enjoying within himself the pleasures and other [experi-
ences] offered by the sattva of the thinking-substance which has entered into
nutation in the form of the various things, becomes the proprietor. • And the
sattva of the thinking substance [having mutations] of such a kind becomes his
property. So &ia same saltv&of the thinking-substance, containing the forms
of the various things, becomes the object-of-sight ; and being like a magnet, it
becomes the property of the Self whose nature is seeinjpand who is the proprietor.


ii. 17 — ] ‘ Book II. Means of Attainment or Sadhana [142

Why [is this] ? He says, «the experience. » Because [the sattva of the think-
ing-substance] is changed into an object upon which experience operates. The
4Cexperience» is the enjoyment on the part of the Self ; the 4Coperation£ is the
activity ; the «object» is the condition of being enjoyed ; because it is 4Cchanged
iptcft this, it becomes the property [of the Self]. — The objection is made, 4 How
can the sattva of the thinking-substance, which is luminous in itself, be the
object o^ an experience ? ’ In reply to this he says, «in so far as it has the
nature of another.?; For if the sattva of the thinking-substance were really like
the intelligence (caitani i), it would be luminoysdn itself. But it has acquired
[this new] being, it is property ($w»), it is other than intelligence (i c&itanya ), and
inert in nature. Therefore it is the object of the experience on the part of this
[intelligence]. It is objected, 4 One thing is dependent upon another thing, when
in some way or other it exerts itself for the sake of the other. Whereas the
sattva of the thinking substance does not in any way exert itself for the Self
which is detached [from it]. And how can [the thinking-substance] be depen-
dent on this [intelligence] ? And this being so, it cannot be an object upon
which [the Self] operates.’ In reply to this he says, ^although self depen-
dent.^ «By serving the purpose of one-not-itself,» by serving the purpose of
the Self, it becomes «dependent on one-not- itself^ dependent upon the Self.
The objector says, ‘ This relation between the power of seeing and the power by
which one sees must be either natural or accidental. If it be natural, since the
two terms of the relation are permanent, the relation is one that cannot be exter-
minated ; and this being so, the round -of- rebirth v«ould be permanent. But if it
be accidental, then in so far as hindrances and karma and its subconscious-im-
pressions are fluctuations of the inner-organ, the former exist only so long as
the inner-organ exists, and if at the same time (ca) the inner-organ is to have
these as its cause, there would be the fault of mutual interdependence ; and
[you could not explain this fault away by bringing in a series without begin-
ning,] because it is impossible that there should be anything from time-with-
out-beginning at the beginning of the creation, for then the round-of-rebirth
would not be produced at all. On which point it has been said, 41 Even in the
opinion of those who think that the Self is not an agent, how can the aspects
(puna) bring about the very first activity ? For then karma does not yet exist.
Neither is there then an erroneous idea nor passion nor hatred nor similar
[hindrances]. For all these are fluctuations of the central-organ and the central -
organ has not been produced at that time. 1 ” This doubt he removes by the
words, <CThe correlation of these two, the power of seeing and the power by
which one sees, is from time-without-beginning and is effected foj [two]
purposes.^ It is true that the relation is not natural, but accidental. But it is
not to b6 supposed that it has a beginning. For in so far as it is the result of a
cause (nimitta) which is from time-without-begixHiing, it itself is also from time-
Without-beginning. Furthermore the uninterrupted succession of hindrances
and karma and subconscious-impressions of these is from time- without- beginning.


143 ]


Return to the state of equipoise [ — ii. 17

And although at the time of [each] reversal of creation [this succession] has
been reduced to the state of equipoise (sdmya) in the primary cause, still at the
beginning of a creation it becomes again as before, just as some kinds of plants 1 *
(udbhyja), reduced at the end of the rains to a state of earth, when the rains
[return], assume again their proper form. More than once this has been made
known previously. In so far as it brings it to growth, undifferentiated- conscious-
ness is the cause of the correlation ; in so far as it is the reason for [its] stability,
the purpose of the Self is the cause. For this [conjunction] is stable by virtue
of this [purpose of the Self], t J,t is this that is stated in the words, ^effected for
[two] purposes.^ 4£And-m-this sense it has also been said» by Pafica^ikha.*
4CBy conjunction with thrs^means by conjunction with the thinking-substance.
This same is the cause of pain. By the avoidance of this [conjunction] this
antidote for pain would be absolute. So what is implied is (arthdt) that pain
results from a failure to avoid it. In connexion with this same point he states
an extremely well-known simile in the words, «For example.» «CA foot-pro-
tector# is a sandal. An objector says, 1 Let this be granted. But if it be said
that correlation with the aspects (guna) is the cause of the castigation, then we
must say that the aspects (guna) are castigators. And since the action of casti-
gating does not remain within the agent, as is the case in such an [intransitive] act
as being, we mus^ expect some other thing to be castigated. And the Self is not
the passive object of this [act] as being something to be castigated, for in so far as
he is immutable, it is not fitting that he should be such os to [reap] the conse-
quences which come from actions. Therefore we come to the result that the act
of castigating, which is concomitant with the thing castigated, ceases when [the
thing castigated] also ceases, just as there isjahs« nee of smoke when fire is lack-
ing/ So he says, «And to resume the argum t . . . . the castigators It is
the aspects (guna) only that are in the relation of castigated and costigator. Of
these [three], sattva , because it is soft like tlu sole of the foot, is the object to be
castigated. Whereas rajas , inasmuch ks it is keerf, is the castigator. This is
the point He asks, CWhy [so] ?» That is to say, why is sattva alone, and
not the Self, the object to be castigated ? He gives the answer in the words,
4Cthe sattva as a passive 3 * * objects 1 Is not then the Self castigated at all? If
so, let it be the inanimate sattva that receives the castigation. What does it
matter to us ? 9 In reply to this he says, «3ince it has objects shown to it But
if the sattva be unde. castigation, the Self, it appears, conforming itself to the
form of this (isatfrq] is itself castigated along with [the saftoo].# The cause of its
being castigated along with it is that objects are shown to it and this has been
explained previously [L 4].

1 'The frog’s body (mandOko-deka) is used 1 1. kartar k an taka rajas tftpaka

as the siosil# in i. 49, p. 51 10 (XJalc. ed.). 2. kriyft bheda abhibhava tfipa

9 T^his is the seventh in Garbe't collection 8. karma pldat&la sattva tapya

of Pahca^ikha s fragments! Festgruss 4. upftya p&datr&qa viveka parihSra

.ha Roth, p. 79.


ii. 18 — ] Book II. Means of Attainmr or Sadhana


He tells what the object -of-sight itself is.

18. With a disposition to brightness and to activity and to
inertia, and with the elements and the organs as its essence,
ai\4 with its purpose the experience and the liberation [of
the Self],— [this is] the object-of-sight.

The sattra has the disposition to brightness ; the rajas has* the
disposition to activity; the tamas has the disposition to inertia*
These aspects (yuna) with the [three] separate parts influencing
each other, — with external-aspects ( dharma ) in conjunction or in
separation, — with limitations s -in-extent ( murti ) brought aboht by
basing them upon an interdependence of one upon another, —
with separate powers, although in subservience to each other,
still unconfused,— with conformations ( anupdtin ) according to
various disparate and comparate powers, — with their presence
manifested at the time when they become dominant, — with their
existence, although subordinate to the dominant [aspects] yet from
their functional-activity ( ryilpara ) inferred as included in the
dominant, — with their faculties employed as effective for the
purposes of the Self, — with their aid gi\en, like that of a magnet,
from the mere fact of being near, — following without any external
cause after a fluctuation of any one of themselves — these aspects
( gunci ) are denoted by the word pi imary-cause. And this is called
<the object-of-sight.> This same object-of-sight enters into muta-
tion as elements and os organs, — as elements such as earth and
the others in coarse 2 and in subtile [form]. It enters likewise into
mutation as organs such as the organ-of-hearing (p'otra). But it
is not without an impelling force. On the contrary, it acts only
by accepting an impelling force. For the object-of-sight exists for
the sake of the experience and the liberation of the Self. Of these
[two], experience is the ascertainment of things witji desirable
qualities and of things with undesirable qualities so long


as this ^ascertainment] does not divide [the Self from the
thinking-substance]. Liberation is the, ascertainment* of the

1 Compare iii. 44, p. 254* (Calc, od.% tiling, it itself i/llnd 2 of p. 144

* This refer* forward to the important and aterrupfad aucceeeion of _

peculiardefinition.ofcoiy.eand .ubtile * ; B from tfme-without-bemiu..
in m . 44. See toe illuminating words


145 ]


False objectification of the Self [ — ii. 18

enjoyer himself. Thus there is no other prooess-of-knowing
in addition to these two. And in this sense it has been said, 1
“ But he who in the three aspects ( guna ) which are agents and in
the Self which is not an agent, — but which is of the same kind-in
some Respects and of a different kind in other respects, — sees all
the produced states presented to the fourth, the witness of their
action — he has no suspicion that there is another kind of know-
ledge [the pure intelligence]. ‘ How is it that these two, experience
and liberation, made by the thinking-substance and existing in the
thinking-substance only, are attributed to the Self?’ Just as
a victory or a defeat on the part of actual fighters * is ascribed to
their commander, for he as we know is the experiencer of the
result, so bondage and release, existing in the thinking-substance
only, are ascribed to the Self. For he as we know has the
experience of the results of these. Bondage is of the thinking-
substance only and is Che failure to attain the purposes of the Self.
Belease is the termination of the purpose of the Self. Thus it is
that processes-of-knowing and processes-of- retent ion and cornpre-
hensions-of-particulars 3 (uha) and removals-of-faults ( apoha ) and
real-knowledge and the will-to-live, [aH] existing in the thinking-
substance, are assumed to exist in the Self. For he as we know
has the experience of the results of these.

He explains the object-of-sight by the sQtra beginning with the word 18. . . .
brightness and ending with the words objeoWof-sigbt. Brightness is a
portion of the sattva ; it is influenced by dejection which is a quality of tamos
or by pain which is a quality of rajas. Similarly it must be understood in
the case of the quality of rajas and the rest It is this that is stated in the
words $with the [three] separate parts influencing each other. » dcWith
external -aspects ( dharma ) in conjunction or in separations with [or from] the
Sell As it is written [pvet. Up. iv. 6], “ One male goat [i.e., the unborn soulj
has pleaaure^in leaping upon the one female goat [i.e. primary matter] which is

This is Garbe’s eighth fragment of PaTica- of the Self, who never acts, who is

fi^ha. It is introduced to support the different in nature from the gunat, and

statement that experience consists in who merely witnesses th^ir changes,

determining the nature of * i He punas He does not suspect the existence of
which haired -■ *.V, p. 51* ■ with the an intelligence which is an insight

Self. Atieventh in Garbe's Svuec. are discriminated from the gunas.

acti-ancajikhas fragments, FestgiAg * Compare i 24, p. 55* (Calc. ed.).

.Sn Roth, p. 79. -jeds 1 See Nyiya-iflira i. 1. 40.


ii-18 — ] Book II. Means of Attainment or Sddhana [146

red and white and black and which brings forth many offspring like herself ;
while another male goat deserts her after having enjoyed her.” — Limitations-in*
extent, such as earth, are those which have been brought about by basing them
upon interdependence of one upon another. The objector says, 4 This may be
trur. When a quiescent idea is to be produced by sattva , since rajas and tamos
.also, in so far as they are accessory to sattva , are the causes of this [idea],
there is a power in them., If this be so (tit), and whenever rajas or tamas might
be principal, then always a quiescent idea might arise, not a cruel nor an
infatuated one, just as in the case when sattva was dominant.’ In reply to this
he says, «with separate powers, although in subservience to each other, still
unconfused.^ Let it be granted, when a quiescent idea is to be produced, that
rajas and tamas are in an accessory relation, still their powers are not com-
mingled. For the fact that their powers are not commingled may be inferred
from the fact that the re is no commingling of effects. Whereas effects of the
quiescent and cruel and infatuated forms arc seen to move actively forth in so far
as their form is uncommingled. Thus it is established that the powers are
unconfused. The objector says, * Suppose this be granted. If the powers are
unconfused, then the aspects (guna ) cannot be supposed to work harmoniously
together. Evidently things whose powers art different never have effects that
are produced by a harmonious working together. Threads,* for instance, and
lumps of earth and dry grasses do not work harmoniously together and produce
a jar/ In reply to this he says, ^with conformations according to various dis-
parate and comparate powers.» Although the power of serving as material
cause is in [a thing which isj comparate [with its effect], and not elsewhere,
and although the power of serving as co-operative [cause may be] in disparate
things, still when it is a water-jar that is to be generated, it is not in the
power of the dry grasses to serve even as co-operative [causes], and this being
so, these [grasses] do not work harmoniously with threads. This is the point.
— [He analyses the compound.] Those are referred to whose character it is
to conform to certain kinds of powers with regard to possible disparates and
comparates. - «At the time when they become dominant.^ When a super*
normal body is to be generated, the sattva is dominant and the rajas and tamas
are accessory. Similarly when a human body is to be generated, the rajas
is dominant and the sattva and tamas accessory. Likewise when an animal
body is to be generated, the tamas is dominant and the sattva and rvyas
are accessory. Thus these aspects (guna ) have their presence manifested at
the time when they become dominant. In other words, they contribute to
the effect in proportion as they become reintensified. And the •word
4Cdominanft> is to be taken as the abstract form of dominance 1 (bhdvapradh&na ). •

He wishes to exclude tbe other meaning this yord has thte sens# Of 'dominant 1

of pradhana , that is, primary cause. and of 'primary cause’. See Pi?.

Just as 4 one and two ' have an iii. 4. 69.
abstract and a paeticularwense, so also


[— ii. 18


147 ] The aspects are foreign to the Self

Just as [in the phrase of P&nini’s sQtra i. 4. 22,] “ The dual and singular are
used in ease of two and one ”, [the words two and one are] in this case to be
understood a 3 twoness and oneness ; in other cases [such as of measurable
numbers], they are to be understood as two and as one. — An objector s^ys,

1 At that time [of dominance], it is possible to say that the dominant exists in
so far as it is in its intense form. But is there any source-of- valid-ideas [to
prove] the real existence of its accessories which are not in the intense form ? *
In reply to this he says, «a!though subordinate. » Although not intensified,
still, because they have no discrimination [to recognize that they are themselves
inanimate], and [yet] because they do work harmoniously together, — from the
mere fact of their functional-activity in so far as there is co-operation,
— their existence is inferred as being included in the primary cause. The
objector says, 4 We may grant that the aspects (guna) have faculties and
work harmoniously together, but why do they perform this [co-operation]?

surely just because ono says there is a faculty, one generates no
[actual] effect on the ground that there may not be any cessation in the
production of effects. 1 In reply to this he says, ^employed as effective for
the purposes of the Self.» After this [purpose has been effected], when all
the purposes of the Self have been ended, the aspects [afterwards] cease and
produce no effects? This is what he means to say. If it be asked, * How can
a thing which does not aid tho Self, use impelling force as being a purpose of the
Self/ he replies «aid given merely by being near.» It is objected that 11 the
impeller of the aspects is a cause characterized only as being merit and demerit ;
but can [those aspects be made to produce off. # s] when impelled by the purpose
of the Self?’ In reply to this objection • a says, « without any external
caused — [He explains the phrase.] «The rest» [of the aspects], even «with-
out any external-cause (, pratyaya )» [or] efLoient-cause (i nimittoi ) such as merit,
^following the fluctuation of any ono of them,» either of saitva or of rajas or
of tamos , as dominant and as being active towards the production of its own
effect In which sense he will say later [iv. 3], * * The efficient -cause gives no
impulse, but [the mutation] follows when tho barrier to the evolving-oauses
is cut, just as in the case of the peasant.” — The construction of the sentence
ii, these aspects (guna) are denoted by the word primary-cause (pmdhdna).
According to its derivation [the word pradhana] is that by which the universe
is produced (jpradhtyate) or put forth. 1 This is naid to be the object-of-sight.
— Having mentidbed the nature of the aspects (guna) he describes the effect
of this disposition in the words, €this same.* In order to establish the
dootriite of the pre-existent effect (satk&ryavAda), ho says that a thing enters
ihto mutation as a form of that thing, whichever it may be, that is its essence.
He makes deaf thafc its essence is elements and organs by the words begin-
ning, an element.^ To the words, <with its purpose the experience and

Compare ii. 23, p. 159* (Calc, cd .).


ii. 18 — ] Book II. Means of Attainment or Sadhana [148,

the liberation,) whioh are a part of the sdtra, he gives an introduction by
saying «not without an impelling-force.^ He elaborates the word <ezperienee>
by saying these [two].£ For pleasure and pain belong to the thinking-
substance as such in so far as it has three aspects (puna). Because this thinking-
substance enters into mutation as being of such a kind [as one that has three
aspects]. There is said to be experience in so far as there is an ascertainment
[of the things] as belonging to [these] qualities. 1 Accordingly he says, €so
long as undivided.)) And this has been made krfown by us more than once. —
He elaborates the word (liberation) by saying «of the enjoyer.3P Liberation
is that by which one is liberated [literally, wrenched off]. He states that
there is no other impelling- force [than these two] by saying €in addition to
these two.^ — «And in this sense it has been said^ by Panca^ikha in the
Words «“ But he who ” 3) An objection is raised, 1 As matters of [perceptible]
reality, experience and liberation are made by the thinking-substance How
are they attributed to the Self who is neither their cause nor their locus?*
In reply to this he says, «These two.» And that the Self is enjoyer has
been explained and will be stated later [lii. 34]. But in the strict sense it
is as the text says, «Bondage is of the thinking-substance only and is the
failure to attain the purposes of the Self.)) «Thus» means in the way that
experience and liberation are mentioned as being related to the Self. [So]
processes of-knowing and the rest are also to be understood as being related
to the Self. Of these, «the process-of-knowing» is the thinking of the intended-
object as it is in itself ; the process-of-retention is memory with regard to this
[object] ; ^comprehension-of-particrilars (rtfai)» is the maintaining (tlhana) of the
particulars belonging to a thing ; «Cremoval-of-faults (apoha)% is the removal for
statable reasons (yukti) of particulars when falsely attributed ; it is by these two
only, by co, iprehension-of-partirulars and by removal-of-faulta, that the given
thing is determined, that is, that there is real knowledge ; and will-to-live is
rejection or acceptation preceded by this determination of the reality.


This sutra is begun with the intent of determining the variotti
forms of the aspects (guna), the objects-of-sight.

19. The particularized and the unparticularized [fonnar] And
the resoluble only [into primary matter] and irresoluble 1 -
primary-matter— are the divisions of the aspects (puna).

Of thesS [fou r ], the elements air And wind and fire and water and
earth are the particularized [forms] of the unpaHipi)jbrized fine

lie VSrttika mye ijtani?tagunah are three 4 aspects ' to the common use of
suJchfiduhkK&tmaJc&h. Tms lliuatmk* v the term as ‘ quality r
the closeness orthe teim guna as 45 .


149] Successive developments of the aspects [ — ii. 19

elements ( lanmdtra ) sound and touch and colour and taste and
smell. Similarly the organs of the thinking-substance are ear and
skin and eye and tongue and nose, and the organs of action, voice
and hands and feet and organ-of- excretion and organ-of-generati<fn.
And as the eleventh the central-organ which has all kinds of things
as its intended object. These are the particularized [forms] of the
unparticularized [personality-substance] which is characterized as
having the feeling of personality. This is the sixteen-fold mutation
of the aspects (gtina). The unparticularized [forms] are six,
namely, the fine element of sound and the fine element of touch
and the fine element of colour and the fine element of taste and
the fine element of smell. Thus, as we know, sound and the rest
w one or two or three or four or five distinguishing characteristics
are five unparticularized [forms]. And the sixth is that of which
we can only say that .it is the feeling-of-personality. These are
the six unparticularized forms of the Great thinking-substance of
whose being we ean only say that it exists. That which is prior to
the unparticularized [forms] is that of which we can only say that
it is resoluble [primary-matter], the Great Substance ( mahat-tattva ).
Remaining in this Great Being (atman) of which all that w r e can
sayis that it exists, these [six] unpartirlarized [forms] experience
the limit of development. And reversing the process of creation
they remain in that same Great Being of which all that we can say
is that it exists, and revert to that which hdfc neither existence nor
non-gxistence, from which both existence and non-existence have
been removed, from which non-existence has been removed, to
the unphenomenalized and unresoluble primary -cause. This [Great
ftsfeg of which all that we can say is that it exists], is the [first]
fkUtation of these aspects. And that [Being] which has neither
fcristenee nor nop -existence is the mutation [of these aspects] which
is unresoluble [priroaiy cause]. So the purpose of the Self is not
the reason for the unresdliible state. Since the fact that the Self
has a purpose is not known (hhavati) at the beginning as the
cause of the state unresolubie [into primary matter], therefore the
fact that Sha Self has a purpose is not a cause 1 of this [state].

ed.).


ii. 19 — ] Book II. Means of Attainment or Sadhana [150

And since that state is not effected by the purpose of the Self, it is
called permanent. But at the beginning of the three states that
are particularized, the fact that the Self has a purpose is known
t6 be the cause. And this purpose is known to act as purpose
and as efficient cause. Hence this state is called impermanent.
But the aspects, which conform themselves to all kinds of external-
aspects ( dharma ), neither cease to be nor come into being, but
appear as if they had the properties of coming into existence and
of passing out of existence by reason of the [individual] phenome-
nalized forms, past and yet to come, going and coming, inseparably
connected with the aspects. As for example we say, * Devadatta
is poor ’. Why ? ‘ Because his cows are dying.’ Since his poverty
is due to the dying of his cows and not to his loss of himself, the
parallel ( samadhi ) [to the going and coming of the phenomenalized
forms as affecting the aspects {guna)] applies (sama ). — That of
which we can only say that it is resoluble [into primary matter] is
next [in development] to that which is irresolubie [into primary
matter]. Formed therein it becomes distinguished from it [as its
effect], since the order [of the development of the mutations] is not
transgressed. Likewise the. six un particularized [forms] formed in
that of which we can only say that it is resoluble [into primary
matter] become distinguished [from it]. Because the order of
mutations is fixed. Similarly the elements and organs formed in
these unparticularized [forms] become distinguished [from them],
as has been already described. There is no other entity ( tattva )
beyond the particularized [forms]. So there is no mutation into
any other entity beyond the particularized [forms]. But their
mutation into external-aspect and time-variation and intensity are
to be explained [iii. 13] later.

<This satra is begun with ti e intent of determining the various forms of tho
aspects (puna), the objects-of-sight.& The satra begins with tho words 10. Tho
particularised and ends with the words divisions . . . Ho mentions the
particuldtized [forma] which are the evolved-matter (mhOra) of tho unparticu]^-
tized [forma] which [latter] are without the serene and oruel and infatuated
characteristics — [the evolved forms], but not thr [forma] Svolvifig* 1 other entities
(fatted). He describes the [forms] belonging to these [entities] in the words,
* 1 See the diicuuien by Vacupsti in S&mkbya Tsttva-Kium. on KXr. iii.


151 ] Mutations of primary substance real { — ii. 19

« 0 f these [four], . . . air.^ The order of explanatory-statement follows
exactly the order of production. The organs o* intelligence {buddhi) am particu-
larised [forms] of the | ppisonality sul stance ( 'Uuh}hn < ) 1 win* h is chaiacterizod as
having the feeling nf-perwur'Wy , and tvrmdi has sutha a-, its dominant [aspect].
But the organs of action [are particularized fniros of the personality substance]
which has )uj>ts as its dominant ‘rvqxctj Whereas the cential organ (wc/wzs),
the essence of which is of both kinds mud be supposed to he the [paiticulan/ed
form of the personality-substance] wlu<l h.M buth kinds [that is, raja s and
sattt a] as its dominant \ aspects l And [Mi* .< j s *< mfeienccl on this point, that
the five line nlomonts have the thinking ^ *is then can ,p, because tliey

are impaihcuhuizod [forms), like the teelmg o» p< / uality Moreover, being an
unpaiticulanzed foiiu is |_tho same asj bung <h* cuu^s of evolved matter; and
both in the line elements and in the feeling of personality there is nothing
particularized. After grouping them together h« * numerates the particularized
[forms] in the wolds, <£This ... of the aspects » lie numbers the unpariicu-
! r u I /nnii^ also with the word «six » lie gioups Gioin together and sums
them up with the word «namely.» Now thi pmu js particularized by the
subsequent. So smell itself [tog<th*r with the ub^punt loin ] has five 1
chaiactf rishes ; ta-le itsr If •[fogeth*»i with tbi subsupunt throe has four
charact* iMic •> , udoui its«ll , tog« tbu* With th< m.I mi u nt twoj has three
chariictonstK , tnui.fi itself , with the Mihsoquont sound hM> two iharacteiistics ;
sound ha-» iho rh/uacteiistii of sound only ‘ T 3 u t of what an- these bix
unpin ticul iMz id [foniis t lie effect *' In leply to this ho >ays « r Ihtse .... of
winch ve can only say that it exists. » The existent (srzf) w that which is
capable of actions fulfilling a purpose; having 'xist< roe f stiff i) is tho abstract
fonn of this. The Gi eat Substance is that wh< u made of ibis. In other
words, whatever action fulfilling a purp< so there be, whether its characteristic
be enjoyment [of vario s tilings from so* nd downwards, or whether its
chauieUnslK be frn* dho minent of the difference Wlwioii tho sattia and the
Self, it ,i all of it compiehended in the Great Dunking substance. By saying
«&of who-o bmng» he shows what it really is and denies fliat it is nothing at
all (liucha) I his i equivalent to saying that this fiist mutation of primary
matter is a real thing, 4, nd not an appearance (i uartta). That vrhich is prior to
these, [that is j distant in time as cow pared with the unpartieularized [forms]
which are near m time, is that of which wo can only say that it is resoluble
[primary-mattej], the Great Substance (ma/taMatfta). Remaining in this Great
Being of which all that we can say is that it exists, these six unparticularized
[forms], — since it is established that tho effect pre-exists [in its cause],— experi-
ence [or]* reach the limit of development. On the other band, of thAe non-
particularized which have particularized [forms] there are also the mutations of
external-aspect fdkarmaj and of ti^ne- variation and of intensity. It to this that
is A the limit o f development, that is, the limit of mutation of these particu-
1 See Gar be : S&thkbya Philosophic, p. 236,«ioteS. a


ii, 19 _] Book II Means of Attainment or Sadhana [152

larized [forms]. Having thus mentioned the order of growth he describes the,
order of dissolution in the words, ^reversing the process of creation.* CRe-
versing the process of creation* [means] beooming resolved (prallyamdna)
[into primary-matter]. In other words particularized forms are resolved into
their own form, that is, become non-particularized. And they remain [or]
are dissolved (mllya) in that same Great Being of which all that we can say
is that it exists. And then even with the Great [Being], these unparticu-
laiized [forms] revert to unphenomenalized ^[primary-matter], called unre-
soluble because in none (a) else are they resolved (ft). This same
[unphenomenalized primary matter] is qualified by the words, «which has
neither existence nor non-existence.* Existence is that which is capable of acts
fulfilling a purpose of the Self. Non-existence is worthlessness (tucchatd) as
regards the purpose of the Self. That Is so-described [as having neither
existence nor non-existence] which is beyond- the- range of both existence and
non-existence. What he means to say is this. The stato when sattva and rajas
and tamas are in equipoise is never of use in fulfilling a purpose of the Self!
And so it is not existent. Neither does it have a worthless kind of existence like
the sky-lotus. Therefore it is also not non-existent. The objector says, 1 This
may be so. Still in the unphenomenalized state there are the Great [Thinking-
substance] and the other [entities] in so far as these are identical with this
[unphenomenalized state]. For there is no utter annihilation of the existent, or if
utteily annihilated it cannot be made to grow again. For because one cannot
make the non-existent grow, the Great [Thinking- substance] and the other
[entities | would really exist [in' the unphenomenalized state] and therefore might
function &s acts fulfilling the purpose of the Self [and so the unphenomenalized
state might be said to exist ]. Then how could you say that it has no existence? 9
In icply to this he says, «from which both existence and non-existence have
been removed.* [The non existent] is a cause which [exists] beyond any
existing effect. Although in the causal state the effect does exist os potential
being ($r ihtyatmana ), still in so far as it does not fulfil its peculiar purpose it is
s.ud to he non-existent. This cause does not however have an effect [worthless
ior the purpose of the Self] like & hare’s horns. Accordingly be says €from
which non-existence has been removed.* [A cause which exists] beyond an
fcffeet that is non-existent or worthless [with rogard to the purpose of the Self].
For if that were so, the effect would not be produced from this [cause] any
moie than the sky-lotus [would be produced from this caufijp]. This is the point
He brings the [topic of the] reversal of creation which has been described to
a clos»e in 'the words, «This ... of these.* The word 4ffhis* points back to
that wtiich lias fajeen stated just prior to that which immediately precedes. JThe
slates b^m^tap#{th that of which we can only say that it is resoluble [into
since they are effected by a purpose of 11 the Self, are not
permanent. Whereas the state which is unresoluble [into primary matter], since
it^is«not effected by rv purpose of the Self, is permanent. He gives the reason


[ — ii. 19


153] Order of development fixed

for this in th« words, €of the state unresoluble into primary matter.» But why
is the purpose of the Self not a reason ? In reply to this he says, 4C not ... of
the state unresoluble.^ By using the object ( virnya ) [the purpose of the Self]
in place of that which contains the object (t mayin) [the unresoluble state he
partially describes the knowledge [in the Self of this state]. What he means to
say is this. For this being so, it should be known that the purpose of the Self
acts as a cause in the state unresoluble [into primary matter], provided the
state unresoluble [into primary matter] could produce (nirvartayeta) the enjoy-
ment of objects or the discernment of the difference between the scittva
and the Self, [either of which is] a purpose of the Self. When however these
two are produced, there can bo no longer a state of equipoise. Therefore this
[unresoluble state] is not known as a cause of the fact that the Self has a pur-
pose. Thus the fact that the Self has a purpose is not the reason for this
[unresoluble state]. He concludes with the words, «that . . . not.» The
word iti is used in the sense of therefore. — He describes the ^permanent state
in the words «of the three. » In other words, that of which we can only say
that it is unresoluble, the unparticularized, and the particularized. Having
shown what the divisions are, he tells what the aspects are in the words, «But
the aspects.)^ He gives a simile in the words, «Just as Devadatta.» In case the
increase or decreasnof the cows, which are absolutely distinct from Devadatta, is
the reason for Devadatta's increase or decrease, how much more | in the parallel
case] of the growth or decline of the [individual] pheiuunaiized [forms], which
are not different in some respects and different in other respects from the
aspects (guna). An objector asks, ‘ Is then the order of production not fixed ? *
No. As he says in the words, «thut of * . hich we can only say that it
is resoluble.» For surely the seeds of the Njagrodha tree do not in a singly
day Bhoot forth the Nyagrodha tree, with its dense mass of green leaves,
which has absorbed in its branches and twigs ^ multitude of the fierce
rays of the sun ; but gradually, through contact with earth and water and
warmth, they produce in succession sprout and leaves and stalks and stems and
the rest. So here also an order 1 [of production] must be accepted in that it is
established by reasoning and by verbal-communication. — How are the elements
and organs formed from unparticularized [forms]? In reply to this he says,
<Cas has been already described» [by u$] when explaining the first part of this
very stltra. And if it bo asked why, in the case of the particularized [forms],
there is no ihutation into any other entity, he replies <Hno . . . the par-
ticularised [forms]. £ So is it true then that the particularized [focjns] actually
enter into no mutations? And if that were so, would notone have t# say that
they are permanent? In reply to this he says, «But their.


1 For example, tbe SSmkbya-sQtra i. 02, and Sfiifikhya*lifarfk&.xxii
20 [ro.« it]


ii. 20 — ] Booh II. Means of Attainment or Sadhana [154

The object-of-sight has been explained. Now this sutra is intro-
duced with the intent of determining what the Seer as such is.

20. The Seer, who is nothing but [the power of] seeing,
although undefiled (guddha), looks upon the presented-idea.

<Who is nothing but [the power of] seeing) means who is nothing
but the power of seeing untouched by any qualifications. This
Self becomes conscious-by -reflection (praUsamvedin) of the think-
ing-substance. He is not homogeneous with the thinking-substance
nor utterly heterogeneous. Why [do we say that the Self] is not
even heterogeneous [to the thinking- substance] ? Because the
thinking-substance is something that enters into mutations , 1
inasmuch as an object is known or not known [according as the
thinking-substance has or has not changed into the form of that
thing]. And the fact that an [external] object, for instance, a cow
or a water-jar, is sometimes known and sometimes not known,
proves that the thinking-substance is something which enters into
mutations. Whereas the fact that, in the case of the Self, its
object is always known, proves that the Self does not enter into
mutations. Why [do we say this]? Because it surely is not
possible for the thinking-substance to be an object to the Self, and
at the same time be something now comprehended and something
again not comprehended [by the Self], Hence it is proved that
the Self always knows its object. And from this it follows that
the Self does not enter into mutations. Moreover the thinking-
substance exists for the sake of another, since it acts by combining 8
causes. Whereas the Self exists for its own sake. Thus [continuing
the argument], the thinking-substance is a complex of the three
aspects, because it determines * each thing ( sarva-artha ) [as
consisting of one or another of the three aspects, that is, as
pleasurable or as painful or os indifferent]. And sinfte it consists
of the three aspects (guna), it is inanimate. The Self on the
other hand is that which later beholds the aspects [by being
reflected in them]. Hence it ^ is not homogeneous with [the

1 Compare ii, 15* p. 185 11 ; ii. 18, p. 152? » 8 Compare MfcchakA^ika, act 10, verse 59

iii. 85, p. 244; if. 17, p. 301 ; i? 22, and YS. iv. 24.
p. 806; if, 83 p. 8)6 <(Ca1c. ed,). 8 The concept adhyavas&ya is defined in the

comments on »S&ihkhya-k&rik& xxiii.


165] Presented~idea8 instruments of the Self [ — ii. 20

thinking-substance]. ‘ [Very well] then, suppose the Self to be
heterogeneous [to the thinking-substance].’ [Still], it'is not utterly
heterogeneous. Why [do we say this] ? Because though pure 1
in itself, the Self beholds the presented-ideas, that is to say k it
beholds that [mutation of matter which the thinking-substance
undergoes when it takes the form of an object, and] which is a
presented-idea of thinking-substance ( bauddha ). Looking [thus]
upon this [change in the* thinking-substance] the Self seems to be it
[the thinking-substance], although it really is not it [the thinking-
substance]. And in this sense it has been said,* “ For the power
of the enjoyer enters not into mutation nor unites [with objects].
Seeming to unite with a thing in mutation [the thinking-substance],
L conforms itself to the fluctuation [which that thinking-substance
undergoes]. And it is commonly termed a fluctuation of the
thinking-substance in so far as it resembles ( anukaramdtratayd )
a fluctuation of thinking-substance that has come under the
influence (upagraha) of intelligence ( caitanya ).”

«CThe objoet-of-aight has been explained Mow this satra is introduced with
the intent of determining what the Seer as such is.» 20. Tlfe Seer, when is
nothing but [the power of| seeing, although undefiled (futMAa), looks
upon the presented idea. He explains sQtra] by the wordB ^nothing
but [the power of] booing.» The qualifitr ions are the properties. «CUn-
touched» by these in this wa\ shows the import of the words ^nothing but.»
An objector says, * This may be true. I* the power of seeing is without all
qualifications, then [the various things] from soui*d downwards would not be
known. For the object-of-sight cannot be something out of contact with the
seeing.’ In reply to this he says, «This Self.» The union (samkrAnii) of the
reflection of the Self with the mirror of the thinking-substance is itself the Selfs
consciousness by reflection in the thinking-substance. And so the [various
things] from sound downwards become connected with the thinking-substance
which has been changed into the likeness (chdyA) of the power of sight. In
other words, [they become] ohjects-of-sight. The objector says, ‘ This may be
true. Still why Is not the unity, even in the strict sense, of the thinking-
substance and of the Self to be accepted ? What is the use of changing it into
the likeness of this [Self] ? r In reply to this he says, «It is not homogeneous
Vith the thinking-substance » ( In this case it would be difficult for it to

change into* tjie likeness [ of the Seer].' In reply to this be aays, <nor

1 That ip to say, unspecialised.

* This is PaStaapikha's ninth fragment. It is quoted again in it. 22;


ii. 20— ] Book II Means of Attainment or Sadhana [156

utterly heterogeneous.» Of these [two], he rejects the homogeneity in the
words, «not even homogeneous.» The reason [for this] he asks by saying
^Cwhy?» For the heterogeneity he gives a reason which itself contains a
reason, in the words, «known or not known. & Because the thinking-substance
entenrs into mutations, it is heterogeneous. When, as wt know, this [thinking-
substance] changes into the form „o f [the various things from] sound down-
wards, then the object, having the distinguishing characteristics of [the various
things from] sound downwards, becomes known f to this [thinking-substance] ;
but when not so changed into the form of these *[things], the object does not
become known to it. And so only occasionally it assumes the forms of these
[things] and enters into mutations. And the argument is [of this kind] : The
thinking-substance enters into mutations ; since objects are [sometimes] known
and [sometimes] not known by it ; just as the organ of hearing and other
organs [are sometimes active and sometimes not], And the Self proves to be
of different properties to this, because the middle term [that is, always-known]
is contrary to this, as he says, Galways known. $ The objector says, 4 This
may be so. But if the Self always has its object known, then he could not
be isolated.' With this in mind, he asks, <CWhy £do we say this]?» He
gives the answer in the words, «Because surely . . . not ... for the thinking-
substance^ In the state of restriction the thinking-subs tsyice may exist and
at the same time there may be no process of apperception [by the Self],
Therefore in order to indicate the contradiction, it is said, «an object to the
Self.» So the first «and» (buddhxq ca) has an accumulative force and makes
the thinking-substance an object; but the two remaining «ands^ (vi*aya$ ca
and ’grahit& ca) are to make the contradiction clear. The argument, however,
is this. The Self enters not into mutation ; because objects are always known
to it in the conscious and emergent states 1 ; whatever enters into mutation
does not always have its objects known ; just as the organ of hearing or other
[organs]. This is a negative* instance of the middle term [saM-jMtam*ay<Uv&t\
He gives another [instance] of difference in properties in the words, <CMoreover
• • . for the sake of another. & For the thinking-substance, in so far as it fulfils
the purpose of the Self by combining with hindrances and karma and sub-
conscious-impressions and with objects and organs, is for the sake of another.
The argument, moreover, is this : The thinking-substance is for the sake of
another ; because it acts by combining causes ’ ; like a bed or a seat or an
ointment But the Self is not like that, as he says €the Self pxista for its own
sake.* Everything serves the purpose of the Self, but the Self serves no other.
This is the pofbt He gives yet another [instance] of difference in properties in
the words, # 4CThus . . . each thing. > The thinking-substance determines all
things as being serene or cruel or infatuated when it mutates into their forms.
And these [three] are mutations of the sattva and wajas and {smasls^ects. Thus

1 This excludes the state unconscious of objects.

1 Compare S&mkhya-kftriki xvii.


[ — ii. 21


157] All objects subordinate to Selves

it is established that the thinking-substance is a complex of the three aspects.
And again the Self is not like that, as he says, «The Self, on the other hand,
later beholds the aspects.^ It beholds them in that it is reflected in them, but
it does not become mutated into their form. He brings the discussion to a close
with the word, 4CHence.3> ^[Very well] then, suppose . . . heterogeneousf»
[But] it is not utterly heterogeneous [to the thinking-substance]. Why [do we
say this] ? Because though pure in itself, it looks upon the presented-ideas.
And that this is so, is [also] stated in these [words i. 4], “ At other times it takes
the same form as the fluctuations [of mind-stuff]/' And in this sense it has
been said by Paflca^kha For the power of the enjoyer enters not into muta-
tion.*^ [The power,] in other words, the self (dtman). And therefore it does
not unite with the thinking-substance. ^Seeming to united with the thinking-
substance which is in mutation, Git conforms itself to the fluctuation^ which that
thinking-substance [undergoes] An objector asks, * If it does not unite, how is
it it seems to unite, or how does it conform itself [to the thinking-substance]
without [assuming] a fluctuation [of its own] ? ' To this he replies with the
words, GAnd it» That thing has come under the influence of intelligence
whose form has been affected (uparakta) [by intelligence]. What he means to
say is this. Although the moon does not unite with the clear water, still it
seems to unite [with it] in so far as its reflection unites [with the water].
Similarly in this case also, although the power of intellect (crt?) does not unite
[with the thinking-substance], still it seems to unite since its reflection has
united [with it]. Thus the power of intellect, changed into the essence of the
thinking-substance, conforms itself to the £ actuation which the thinking-
substance undergoes. In this way the word s, ^holding^ has been explained.
It beholds it in the sense that it sees [itself] as resembling it.


21. The being (dtman) of the object-of-sight is only for the
sake of it [the Self].

Since the object-of-sight is changed in so far as it becomes the
object of the action of the Self who is so much ( riipa ) seeing (c/rpi),
<the being (dtman) of the o’. ’^ct-of-sight,> that is to say, the object-
of-sight itself (svarupa) exists only for the sake of the Self. But
inasmuch as it is itself only so long as it has acquired it§ being as
having the form of another, it is no [longer] seen by the Self when
once it haa accomplished the purpose of the Self, [of giving the
Self] expe lence and liberation. So by escaping from itself it
attains cessation ; but it does not utterly ceage to he.


ii. 21 — 1 Book II. Means of Attainment or S&dhana [158

Haying stated what the Seer and the object-of-sight are, ho says that the object-of*
sight serves the purpose of the Self. [ And this purpose is | based upon the relation
characterized as being that of proprietor and property. 21. The being {Atman)
of the objoct«of-sight is only for the sake of it [the Self ]. He explains [the
stfcral in the words, «who ia so much (rupa) seeing (dryi).» Since the object-of-
sight has become the object-of-action (karma-rujpatd), [that is) has been changed
into the object-of experience by the experiencer [that is] the Self who is so much
seeing, — tlierefoie th being of the object of-sigl:t must be only for the sake of
the Seer, but not for the sake of the object-of-sight. The objector asks, 4 How
can the being t atma in drfydttna ] be fox the sake of this [ alma in tadatma J [that is,
the Self] ? ' In reply to this he says, «is itself. » What he means to say is this :
The object of-exporience is the object-of-sight as having pleasure or pain. And
pleasure and pain being co-agents or counter-agents persist as such (tattvena)
only for 1 hi^ purpose [of acting with or against the Self l For the [various
things j fr un sound downwards as object s-of sense are co-agents or counter-agents
[for the fcelf only because they aro identical I with pleasure and p«unj. And it
cannot be *aiu l hat they exist to bo active or to be counter active to themselves.
For that would be a contradiction of a fluctuation with itself. Therefore by
a process of elimination it is the power of intellect (citi) only for which they are
co-active ijr counter activo. Consequently the object-of-sight is foi this [Self]
and not for the ohitH-ol-neht [itself] And therefore the <objoct-of sight is
only for the sake ot it [the Selfj,> not for the sake of the object-of-sight.
Because (yat) it is .tsolf long as the puipose of the Self continues. And when
the purpose of the >>ell i-> complete it is also completed. Aecoidingly he bays,
4CBut . . . it . . itself. » But the object-of-sight itself is inert (jada) t yet it has
acquired it « being . tliat is] it is experienced as having the form of anotftor [that
is] the form of :hc soul (utman) L that is] the intelligence (caitanya). When
experience and libei avion Jbave been accomplished it is no [longer] seon by the
Self. [This wa.ii the kind of-experienco. 1 the perception (anubhavai of sound
and the othei ^ perceptible j things. Liberation is the perception (anubhava) of
the difference between sattiKi and tho Self, Both these two kinds [of things,
experience and liberation, j belong to the Self only who, by reason of the fact
that the likeness of the Self becomes changed by the inert thinking-substance,
[does know them both]. And so when experience and liberation have been
accomplished for the Self, ( Jie subservience of] the object-of-sight to the purpose
of the Self is finished. Hence it ia said, «when once it has accomplished the
purpose of ( the Self.» Meanwhile he raises an objection in the words, &by
escaping ^trom itself. » He rebuts [this] with the words, «Cbut it does not
utterly cease to be.»


1 Viji&na Bhikgu expands tins definition
and emphasizeAhe faefthat experience


is a fluctuation of the mind (sukhaduh*
khdtmakofabd&d t vrttih).


169] One primary substance and many Selves [ — ii 22

Why [does it not utterly cease to be] ?

22. Though it has ceased [to be seen] in the case of one whose
purpose is accomplished, it has not coased to be, since it is
common to others [besides himself].

Although the object-of-sight has ceased in so far as one Self whose
purpose has been accomplished is concerned, it has not ceased to be,
because it is common to others besides him. Although it has ceased
so far as one fortunate man is concerned, f still] it has not ceased in
the case of unfortunate men, since their purpose has not been ful-
filled. So for these persons it becomes the ohjeot-of-the-aetion of
seeing and receives its form of being as having the form of another.
And therefore since the power of seeing and the power by which
one sees are permanent, t he conjunction [of the two] is 6aid to be
from time-witbout -beginning. And in this sense it has been 6aid,
“ The substances being in correlation from time without beginning,
the external-aspects in general are also in cot relation from time
without beginning. f1

A11 objector say, 1 If [the objtct ofnightj is absolutely inaj/perceptible, how is it
that it does nut ceas© to be?’ With this in mind he asks, <KWhy [is this] ¥»
In th© silt™ bn tolls the answor thinning with the words 22 . . . whose
purpo&o 10 accomplished and ending witu he words uiuoe it is common to
othore j besides himself J. A Solf whose pi. *ose has been accomplished is of
such a kind. For bin. the object of-sight although it has ceased [to be seen],
has not ceased [to be j. Wh> * Since it common to all Selves fortunate or
unfortunate. He [the sntraj iu th© wonds, 4Cone whose purpose has

been accomplished, » (Cessation is the absence of that by which one sees. But
the object-of-sight has not <xa«ui to bo, since it is common to other Selves.
Hence the nature (rupu) of the being (diman) who is higher than the object*
of-sight is intelligence (c&itanya). So (tena) hero we have that [being] which is
made known iu the Sacred Word and the Saored Tradition and in the Epics
and PurBnas, the unphenomenalized, the whole-without-parts, the one, the
independent^ all-pervasive, permanent, [and] capable of producing-all-effects.
Although [the object-for-sight] is not seen by the fortunate man, since for him
its effect has been accomplished, it is not, however, something n<jf seen by the
unfortunate man. For because colour is not seen by the blind man^jt does not
Ibecome non-existent, since it is seen by the man who has eyes. For the Self
is not, like«th# primary cauag, only one. Because its plurality is established 1
, in so far a< there is the orderly arrangement of births and deaths, pleasures and


1 Compare SiUkkhja-aGfcra i. 149.


ii. 22 — J Booh II. Means of Attainment or Sadhana [160

pains, later kind-of-experience and release and round-of-existence ; and because
the passages of the Sacred Word which teach the unity [of the Self] and which
contradict the other sources-of-valid-ideas, can somehow be made consis-
tent, as partial statements, by supposing that there is no division 1 in plaoe or in
timfe ; and because the fact that primary matter is one and the Selves many
is expressly taught by the Sacred Word 1 itself, “ One male goat [the unborn
Soul] has pleasure in leaping upon the one female goat [primary matter] which
is red and white and black and which brings forth many offspring like herself,
while another male goat deserts her after having enjoyed her.” And the
meaning of this same Sacred Word is said over again by this sutra. Although
(he object'-for-sight has ceased [to be seen], still so far as another Self is
concerned it has not ceased to be. Therefore, since the power of seeing and the
power by which one sees are permanent, their correlation is said to be from
time-without-beginning. He states that those who have the tradition a (Ogamin)
concur with this teaching, as he says, <&And in this sense it has been said.*
Since the correlation of substances, in other words, of the aspects (guna ), with
the souls is from time without beginning, [so] in the case of the mere external
aspects (guna), such as the Great [thinking-substance], there is a correlation
from time without beginning. The correlation of the Great [Thinking-substance]
and of the rest, one by one, although from time without beginning, is not
permanent. Still it is permanent when we regard the Great [thinking-
substance] and the rest as a whole, since [these external aspects] are common to
the other Selves. Accordingly he says «the external-aspects in general.^ The
words «Cin general» (mdtra) point out the comprehensive character [of the
compound]. Hence what follows is this : Although the correlation of one
Great thinking-substance has become changed so that it is past, still the
correlation of one Self 4 with another Great [thinking-substance] is not past*
So [the correlation is] said, to be permanent.


TOie intent of this sutra is to describe what the correlation itself is.
28. The reason for the apperception of what the power of
the property and of what the power of th6 proprietor are is
correlation.

The Self as proprietor becomes correlated for the purpose of sight

The PMaitfafit Rabasyam says that the * (Jvet. Up. iv. 5. >.

unity of all aonla ia only figurative. 1 The attribution of this quotation tft
All Selves an permanent and all- PaKcapkha rests upon the authority
pervasive. The unity is that of a of VySSna Bhityu.
collection, like that of a forest or of an * Reading purufdntanna with the BikKnar ,
army, in so far as no division is made US.
in time or in plaSe.


161 ]


Explanations of non-sight of the Self [ — ii. 23

with the object-for-sight as property. That apperception of the
object-for-sight which results from this correlation. is experience.
Whereas the apperception of what the Seer is, is liberation. Since
the coVrelation lasts until sight is effected, sight is said to be the
cause of discorrelation. Since sight and non-sight are opposite to
each other, non-sight is said to be the instrumental cause of corre-
lation. Sight in this [system] is not the cause of release ; but the
absence of bondage results from the absence of non-sight. This is
release. Where there is sight, non-sight, which is the cause of bond-
age, ceases [to be felt]. Thus the perception which is sight is said
to be the cause of isolation. And what is this so-called non-sight ?
i. Is it the authority (adhikara) of the aspects ( guna ) [over the
Seiij ? 2. Or is it the case that, when in [the equipoised state of]

the primary-cause, the mind-stuff, by which the objects are shown
to the proprietor in his capacity as Seer, fails to produce [effects],
there is non-sight, 1 although the property, the object-for-sight,
exists ? 3. Or is it that the aspects ( guna ) possess the intended-

objects [in potential form] ? 4. Or is undifferentiated-conscious-

ness (avid yd), which, together with its own mind-stuff, has been
restricted, the seed for the production of its peculiar mind-stuff ?
5. Or is it the manifestation of sublin al-impressions in motion
(gali) after the subliminal-impressions in equilibrium ( sthiti ) have
dwindled away ? Of which [theory] this has been said,* “ The
primary cause if it existed, on the one hand, in equilibrium (sthiti)
only, would be a non-primary cause, because it would not cause
any evolved effect. Similarly, if on the other hand it existed in
motion (gati) only, it would be a non-primary cause, because the
evolved effects would be permanent. And since it does act * in
both ways [equilibrium and motion] it is ordinarily termed primary
substance ; qot otherwise. Also with regard to other supposed
causes the same reasoning [applies].” 6. According to some
non-sigbt is nothing but the power by which one sees", as the
Sacred Word says, “The primary cause acts with the intent of
displaying itself.” .The Self capable of illuminating all illuminable

1 Compare iv. 84.

1 Udfinna B&lar&ma attribute# this to Paficafikba. • Reading vrtti.

21 [*■<•.■. it]


ii. 23 — ■] Book IL Means of Attainment or Sadhana [162

things does not, before the primary cause acts, see. [On the other
hand], the object -for-sight. capable of making all kinds of effects is
not then [without the Self] seen. 7. According to others non-
sight is a property of both kinds also. From this point of view,
this sight, although independent of the object -for-sight, requires
a presented-idea [that i&, the reflection] of the Self; and so is a
property of the object-for-sight. Similarly sight, although not
independent of the Self, still requires a presented idea in the object-
for-sight ; and appears as if it were actually a property of the Self.
8. Certain others assert that non-sight is only the perception [of
things only] by sight. These are the alternatives found in the
books on this [topic of the nature of non-sight]. These many alter-
natives deal with a common subject matter, the correlation of all
the Selves with the aspects (guna).

Thus the serving the purpose [of the Self] a-> tbt cause of correlation has been
Btated. And as incidental [to this] tli® cau^o of the permanence of the primary
cause and the cause of the permanent*' of thn correlation jin general have been
stated. With the intent to tloscnlv what ^relation itself is, in other words,
it§ special paiticului • nature J. th» ^Utra iuiu come into being 23. The
reason for the apperception of what tho power of tho property and of
what the power of tho proprietor are j t coi relation Because the object-far-
sight is for his sake, thorcioxc the S*df, accepting the aid rendered by this
[object], becomes its piopnotoi. And ihe ubjoct- for-sight becomes his property.
And the correlation of these two which has had a merely potential arrangement
is the reason for the apperception of what the two are in themselves. This
same is made clear in tiio commentary in the words «The Self.» The Self
as proprietor merely by [his] pre-established harmony becomes correlated with
the object-for-sight as his property far the sake of sight The rest is easy. An
objector says, * This may be true. Liberation may l>o said to oe the apperception
of what the Seer himself may be, [that is, i( may bo] that by which he is
liberated. And moreover release in not the effect of means. Should this be
so, it would cease being what could be rightly called release/ In reply to this
he says, <Cuntil sight is effected. » Until sight is effected fhere*is a correlation
of a particular Self with a particular thinking-substance. Thus sight is said to
be the cauSe of discorrelation. ‘But how does correlation last until sight is
effected f' In reply to this he says, ^nonsight.» Non-sight, undifferentiated
consciousness (avidyti.), is said to be the instrumental cause of correlation. He
makes clear the meaning of what he aaid before by saying, «iif iftis [system] . . .
not> The objector says, ‘ Sight may quite remove non-sight, its opposite. But
how can it remove bondage * In reply to this he says, 4is sights Release has


163 ]


[ — ii. 23


The Self and the aspect#

been stated [i. 3] to be the seifs (dtman) abiding in his own form as dis-
criminated from the thinking-substance and other [ subs tan ces]. And the
means for effecting this i« not only .ught, hut the removal of non-sight. This
is the meaning. — In order to obtain a paiticular kind of non-sight as the
special reason for the correlation h« juts forth the following alternatives with
respect to non-sight in the word«, «Aud what is this.» 1. Assuming that
[non-sight] is some positive thing f r>ayu fnsud j not sight] he asks, «1. Is it the
authority of the aspects (<]una\ i over th Solti ?» Authority is the competency
to initiate effects. For it is as Ofo result #»i that the correlation, wdiich is the
reason for the round-of-existence. is produced.- 2 Assuming that j non-sight] is a
negation where there is a possibility of an affirmation ( pra^apja-pratisedha)* he puts
forth a second alternative with tlm word, «CJ. O r„>> ^ISon-sight] is the failure, by
the mind-stufF which shows objects obsunv' r to (he Self), to produce either the
[various things] from sound downwards or the ( discrimination ofj the difference
between sat tva and the S<df. I( is (bis tbpf is made clear by the words, «the
property.» The objecbfor sight is both I (ho various? things from sound down-
wards and the diffeienc>* b-dwo* n sof,ia '..ml th*' Self. The primary cause is in
motion only so long as it has not o unphded the two fold Mght. Rut when both
kinds of sight havo been accomplished, \t from h^ing further in motion]. —

3. OnJthe assumptym that [ ru»n- ' m w m* po live Unrig [not sight 1, ho
puts forth th“ third alternative, <01 Oi h *1 <h:u the a^po'-ts {( f una) possess
the intended-objects J in potent ml burn, 1 .✓> Fo» if the doctrine of pre-existent
causes (snthirya) is established, * \’pMiw>c* ami bneratu n are also vet to come
in so far as they are (at pMWitj uideteinunahle. This is the meaning. —

4. Assuming that | non-sight j io , uie pn* iti<e * ng | not sight!, he put 3 forth the
fourth alternative and a^ks «i. f'" i undifforent » teU consciousness (aruhja ) . . .?»
At the time of the reversal of creation, it is i^tneted together with its peculiar
mind-stuff [that is to say) it is redincd to nm state of equipoise in the primary
cause, the seed for tlm pioumtn n o( il> ptculi.ii mind stuff. To thisextent (Zewa)
a subconscious-irnpresaiou uf unditWentmted consciousness is other than sight
and is precisely what is call' 1 ' cm oght f « .Wumimr that [non-sightl is
some positive thing [not sight’, ho puN i‘«M?h tno fifth alternative and asks,
4C6, Is in equilibrium*^ When the ibliunnal impressions in equilibrium,
[that is] existing in the primary cause, and flowing on in a succession of
mutations in the equipoised [state of the primary cause!, have dwindled away,
there is a start given to ovolvi j-efTeota (riAvira), such as the Great [thinking-
substance] and the rest,— this is motion (pci/i)- The reason for this [start given]
is a subliminal-impression of the primary cause, the subliminal-impression
irVmotion. The manifestation of it is its readiness to produce effects. He says
that another theory admits the real existence of subliminal-impressions of both

'Compare F^ft$jali: MahSbhS^ya (Kiel- 343; iii. 85*; and elsewhere

horn’s ed.) i. 93* ; 101* ; 167*; 183 7 ; 1 Compare p. 24, note 2 ; and n. 113, note 4

2!6* ; 819 1 ; 834 ; 341* ; ii. 338*;


ii. 23— ] Book 11. Means of Attainment or Sadhana [164

kinds in the words, «Of which [ theory] this has been said» by those who deny
the absoluteness of either one. Primary cause (pra-dhdna) is that by which the
totality of evolved effects is put forth ( pra-dhiyate ) or produced. 1 If this primary
cause always remained in equilibrium and never in motion, then because it
wtmld not cause any evolved effect, it would not put forth anything, and would
not be a primary cause ( pra-dtona ). Or if it always remained in motion
and never in equilibrium, then he says, «Similarly ... in motion.^ Else-
where the reading is ‘for the purpose of equilibrium, for the purpose of
motion’; the dativt is here purposive and we must supply (dratfavyak) ‘only’
(eva) after it. If it did not act for the purpose of equilibrium, no evolved
effect would ever cease to be. And this being so, if a thing (bhdva) exists and
does not cease to be, it could not rise [again]. Thus there would be a cessation
of evolution of effects altogether. And there would likewise be nothing put
forth in this case and [thus] it would be a non-primary cause. Therefore its
activity must be of both kinds, in equilibrium and in motion, [and] it is
ordinarily termed primary substance ; «not otherwise, » as when for instance
the absoluteness [of either] might be assumed. This reasoning or argument
applies not only to the primary cause, but also to other supposed causes, to
the higher Brahman or to its illusion (mayd) or to atoms or to other
[causes]. For these also if they existed in equilibrium qnly, would not be
causes, since they do not cause evolved effects ; and if existing in motion only,
would not be causes, since the evolved effects would be permanent.— 6. Assum-
ing that [non-sight] is some positive thing [not sight], he puts forth a sixth
alternative in tho woids, «nothing but the power by which one sees.» Just as
in the vow of Fraj&pati [Manu iv. 37], “ One should not look upon the rising
sun,” a mental resolution [in positive form] closely related to not looking is
understood so in this case* also [of non-sight ), when there is a negation of sight,
a power closely related to it and based upon it is described. And this [power]
in order to give birth to sight characterized by experience and so forth brings
about the pre-established harmony of the Seer with the object-for-sight. On the
same point he recites a [passage from] the Sacred Word, «The primary caused
The objector says, ‘This may be true. But the Sacred Word says that the
primary cause acts with the intent of displaying itself ; yet it does not say that
it acts as the result 2 of the power by which one sees.’ In reply to this he says,
^capable of illuminating all illuminable things.» Because before the primary
substance acts, mere displaying of itself is not capacity as aq impelling force for
action. For there is no ground for this [activity] in the absenoe of oapacity to
act as impelling force. Therefore in accordance with the Baored Wqrd it ia
said thaf capacity is the impelling force for aotion. — The sixth alternative
is based upon the assumption that the power by which one sees is in the
primary cause. — 7. The seventh alternative makes this same*pdwer reside in
both kinds [the primary cause and tho Self], as he says, ^Non-sight * . . of both
1 Compare ii. 1g, p. 144 9 (Calc. ed,). 3 Reading $akt<h t p. 160* (Calc, ed


Mi. 23


165] Correct theory of the correlation

kindfi also.^ Some say that non-sight belongs to both kinds, both to the Self
and to the object-for-sight and that it is a power [or] a property of sight.
An objector says, 4 This may be true. We may grant this with regard to the
object-for-sight, because it is the repository of all powers; but we could not
grant it with regard to the Seer, because the power of perception does cot
reside (Adhdra) in him, for the reason that perception does not have the relation
to him of part to whole ( samavaya ). Should that be so, he would be subject
to mutation.' To this he replies, «From this point of view, this.^ That non-
sight might be included in the object-for-sight might be conceded, still, since the
object-for-sight is unintelligent (jada), seeing, which is an effect of a power residing
in this [object-for-sight], would also be unintelligent (jada ). So sight cannot be
thought as a property of this [object-for-sight], for an unintelligent [thing]
has not illumination in itself. Hence sight becomes, [that is] is known as,
a property of this [object-for-sight] only as based upon the presented-idea of
the Beer, the self that is, upon a change into the likeness of the

intelligence (c&itanya), Because that which-haa-to-do-with-the-object (visayin)
[that is, the power of seeing] is partially expressed by the object [that is, the
object-for-sight]. The objector says, 1 Even so, this perception becomes a pro-
perty of the object-for-sight, but not a property of the Self.' To this he replies,
^Similarly ... of the Self.» It U true that it is not independent of the Self,
still it does appear to become a property of the Self as based upon tho
presented-idea [that is] the likeness of the intelligence ( cditanya ) in the sativa
of the thinking-substance of the object-for-sight, but it is not actually a property
of the Self. What he means to say is this. In so far as there is no difference
between intelligence and the t'^king-subetar the external-aspects (dharma)
of the thinking-substance distinctly appoar (ca, *satt) as if they were external-
aspects of intelligence, in so far as they receive the image of intelligence. —
8. He describes the eighth alternative in the words, «non-sight is only the
perceptions Only perception of thj [various things] from sound downwards
is non-sight ; but not the perception of the difference between sativa and the
Self. So some say. Just as the eye, although tho source-of-a-valid-idea for
colour, is not the source-of-a-valid-idta for hute and the other [sensations].
What follows is this : The perceptions of the [various things], of sounds and
so on, have the forms of pleasure and other [ forms] and imply the correlation
of the Steer and the object-for-sight, in so far as it is necessary for the sake
of their perfection. — Having thi« » put forth alternatives, and in order to accept
the fourtn alternative, he points-out-the-flaws in the other [seven] alternatives
mentioned in the S&rhkhya system, on the ground that they weald lead to
tjx ftbsenot of diversity in experience, since [non-sight according to tehe other
theories] is oommou to all the Selves. So he says, <£These ... are found in the
books.»


li, 24 — ] lio )/ 77 fl/mns o/ 1 or Sadhana [166


But when theie is a eon elation of an individual consciousness with ,
its own thinking substance,

24. The reason fox this [correlation] is iindiiForon Mated
consciousness (<n/<h/a)

In othei woid< , [umlitFeicntiated-con c ciousness] is a subconscious-
impiession [v<t \<uia) from enoneous thinking The thmking-
suhstinoc peivadc l ( dsita) bv subconscious impressions from
enomov 1 * Mnnkmg dois not ittim to f hc'd»sec) nment the Self,
which k the goal of i 4 s actions [and] k turns again with its task
yet uni il*di» <1 Hut th it [Unnkn g sub t \\\<\] which tei nunatt\s m
the disc mm r t ot tlm StJi attains the r roal of its actions, and its
task dm* ml a non sight jep) cs^hI, does not, since the cause
Of its h t li i no longer e\i Is return igam Some [heterodox j
pemoi » i ! mb •> his [tc m hag of I ol it i in] with the anecdote 1 of the
imp)* 1 1 n i • lb m told bx hi -» impl< mimbdvift,, O im jioif nt ni\
weddt i 1 id u v jst i h i' l ( U i ) , (oi \ h t umsoii ha\< tut I ? ”

If/ s ( > s ■ o 1 1 i V V I n i <lf nl ! will hmt tine a son ”

Nnul.uH [t t 1 o J >i ( Mi * | -one tins thinking [of the
disromnut] me i 1 1 m iL doo not m ikr n iepiession of

liund st \ hat * { i no then that it will in the futuie
make n i^um l> Ik h ’his point one who is almo r t a master
(tlcdn/ftih f n 1 t) sa 1 o h isc nivtliuig hut tlm cessation of
the thinking sul st u M N \ hen theie is no cause of non-sight the
tlnnkmg-suhsram t cc i < v d Mu-. no*-agbt \ Inch is the cause

ci n nclagecei m wlwtt Mu o «<- Mght I hm t i lease is nothing

bm o cess.tdun A tl tin iking ->ul -a mce Why then is there
Ihi il soiiot idt 1 )j ti o nut li out of place '

In or< n t fix upon the fouth UMnnfj\e he introduces the eatra with thf
words M * hfn their is i correlation of an individual consciousness with
its own hi *i ^ -ajhxtance.'' Individual (pt aty-aiu) m the sense that it turns


* $ee hefb \o \ h l 1 2 U e d
1 r lwo nit* ’ ( i seem justif cri 1
iiu tjl le |>i-» 4 c to the i nd ;f thf*
f n ( "l ( n ‘his sutr > w M « t)
f«t it# >t f t lif 5 * 7f tyadu'^a An i
any a u \ } refer to the n in* k » °

The hi t two gcntfncfft would be ibdt
of the m *hor of the comment and axyc


would refer to ttie <lc iryadef fy a, The
difference between these two would
he that the latter teaches thaA i el ease
is uni) a cessation of imitations, wheie-
a* thp i omment t*at hes that release
s Spfotution dV the ftiiflking-substance
ihu iher t Anya) mto the primary
cause


107] Ending of undifferentiated-coyiscioimxess [ — ii. 24

(ahcaii) [or] gets back (jprati) [or] in the opposite direction {pratipam ). A
special correlation of each single Self with each single thinking-substance is the
reason for the diversity between [individuals]. He recites the stttra 24. The
reason for this [correlation] is undifferentiated-consciousness (avidyd).
An objector says, 1 Undifferentiated-consciousness is erroneous thinking. And
the reason for this is the correlation of the Self with its own thinking-substance,
just [as correlation is the reason] for experience and for liberation. For unless
correlated with a thinking-substance, undifferentiated-consciousness (avidyti) does
not arise. How then is undifferentiated-consciousness the reason for a particular
kind of correlation ? ’ In reply to this he says, «a subconscious-impression
from erroneous thinking.^ From undifferentiated-consciousness (avidyb), even
when belonging to another creation and restricted together with its own mind-
stuff, a subconscious-impression exists in the primary -cause. And the primary-
cause pervaded with the subconscious-impression from this [undifferentiated-con-
so^nusneas] sends forth the same kind of a thinking-substance for the sake of
correlation with one Self or another. Similarly in successive previous creations.
And since [the series] is from time without beginning, there is no flaw in
the argument. For this very reason the Self at the time of [mundane]
dissolution is not released/ as he says, «erroneous thinking.» When [the
thinking substance] reaches the goal of its actions [that is] the discernment of
the Self, then siflce theie is no subconscious-impression from erroneous
thinking, which is the cause of bondage, the thinking-substance does not return
again, as he says, «But that.» Some heterodox person makes fun of this
teaching with regard to Isolation by [telling] the anecdote of the impotent man.
He tells the anecdote of the impotent mart b* the words, <£simple-minded.»
The word treason (< artha )» in the expression <for what reason» signifies a
ground, because a motive is also a ground. He draws the analog}’ with the
anecdote of the impotent man in the words, «Similarly since this.^ ‘This
existing perception of the discernment of the • difference between the
aspeota (puna) and the Self does not cause a repression of the mind-etuff;
what expectation is there that the mind-stuff, when it together with its
subliminal-impressions is restricted by virtue of the higher passionlessness,
will cease to be? The point is that a thing has an effect when it exists;
and not, when it does not exist.’ With regard to this he gives a rebuttal
by means of an opinion which partially [agreer], «On this point one
who is almost a r Aster.$> One who is little short 1 of a master. A master,
moreover, has This characteristic given iu the declaration of the V&yu, 1 “ One
who not only oolleets (dcinolt) the meaning of the books, but alsd* makes Ike
people steadfast in good conduct, and observes (dcarate) good conduct hhnself, he
ia 4 master (&c&rya)” Release is nothing but the repression of the thinking-
substance whyjh # has entered into mutations in the form of experience and of
See Pttgini v. 8. 67.

4 Bee Viyu Purina lxix. 2 ; and Linga Purft^x. !&-]£.


ii. 24 — ] Book II Means of Attainment or Sadhana [168

discriminative discernment But there is no repression of the thinking-substance
as such. This [repression], moreover, takes place only after the [thinking*
substance] is established in the discriminative discernment which lasts up to the
Bain-cloud of [Knowable] Things (dharmcHnegha). Even though the thinking-
substance abides as itself and nothing less, [still it does exist elsewhere].
He makes this clear by the words, ^non-sight. There is a repression
of the thinking-substance when there is no non sight [which is] the cause
of bondage. And this non-sight [which is] the cause of bondage ceases
as a result of sight. But as for the repression of sight, [that] is to be
effected by the higher passionlessness. The point is, although the thinking-
substance abides in itself and nothing less, there is release, Having cleared up
the opinion which* partially [agrees], he states his own opinion in the words,
dCThen release is nothing but the cessation of the thinking-substance.^ An
objector asks, Have you not already 1 said that, when seeing is repressed, there
results soon after a repression of the mind-Btuff itself. How then can [this
repression] be the result of sight ? ’ In reply to this he says, «CWhy then is there
this confusion of ideas of his that is so much out of place ?5» The meaning is
this. If we were to admit * that sight is the direct cause of the repression of the
inindstuff, then we Bhould be subject to this rebuke. But we take our stand
upon the view that discriminative sight reaches its limit of perfection when the
mind-stuff is repressed and when it is subservient to the abiding of the Selt
ii\ his own form, according to its degree of perfection in the cultivation of
restricted concentration. How then should we be subject to this rebuke ?

The pain which is to be escaped and the cauje of pain, the so-called
correlation, together with their reasons, have been described.
Next the higher escape ( hdna ) is to be described.

25. 8ince this [non*sight] does not exist, there is no correla-
tion. This is the esoape, the Isolation of the Seer.

Since this non-sight does not exist, there is nO correlation of the
thinking-substance and of the Self, in other words, a complete
ending of bondage. This is the escape, the Isolation of the Seer,
the unmixed state of the Self ; in other words, the state in which
[the Self] is not agaL correlated with aspects (guna Upon the
repression of the cause of pain there follows the dnding of pain, the
escape. *Then the Self is said to be grounded s in his own self.

Having thus spoken of two divisions, with the intent to describe the tjiird
division, he introduces the eOtra with the words, 4^he pain which is to be

1 See p. 162 s (Calc. ed.). MS. and the Anaikdftpama ed. (96 ,T J.

* Beading *kw^mahi f jrith the Bikiner • Compare L 8.


169] Meant of attaining escape [ — ii. 26

escaped.* 95. Sinoe this [non-sight] does not exist, there is no correlation.
This is the esoape, the Isolation of the Beer. He explains the eutra in the
word, 4this.* For even in the great mundane dissolution there is no correla-
tion. For this reason he uses the word «coiuplete.* The wordB ^the
ending of pain, the escaped show that this is a fulfilment of the purposes
of the Self The rest has nothing obscure.


Now what is the means of attaining escape ?

26. The means of attaining escape is unwavering discrimina-
tive discernment.

Discriminative discernment 1 of the presented-idea of the differ-
ence between sattva and the Self. But this discernment wavers
when erroneous perception is not repressed. When erroneous
perception, reduced to the condition of burned seed, fails to repro-
duce itself (vandhya-prasava), then the flow of the presented-ideas
of discrimination — belcfhging to the sattva, which is cleansed from
rajas belonging # to the hindrances, and which continues in the
higher dearness [and] in the higher consciousness of being master
— becomes stainless. This unwavering discriminative discernment
is the means ( updya ) of escape. After this, erroneous perception
tends to become reduced to the conditio of burned seed. And its
failure to reproduce itself is the Path (marga) to Release, the
way-of-approach (updya) to escape.

‘Wishing to denominate the fourth division as having the distinguishing-
characteristic of the means of esoape, he introduces the stktra with the word
«Now.* 96. The means of attaining esoape is unwavering discrimina-
tive discernment. Even by vernal communication and by inference there is
discriminative discernment. This [kind of discriminative discernment] does
not however, repress Emergence or the subliminal impressions from emer-
gence, because these two latter follow a man who has both [the verbal-
communication and the inference]. Accordingly in order to repress this
[emergence] he says, € unwavering.* Wavering is erroneous perception
[unwavering] is free from that. What he means to say is this, jle obtains
discrimination by perception derived from something heard ; and hg makes
this logically tenable (vyavatthQpya,) [by ideas] derived from reasonings. The
discriminative discernment, which in concentration has reached the utmost
perfection of cultivation for a long time, uninterruptedly, and with earnest

1 Discussed in Shhkhya Tattra EXamudf on EKr. 51.

99 I* »♦]


ii. 26 — ] Book II. Means of Attainment or Sddhana [170

attention, [and which] has direct perception and has uprooted erroneous per -
ceptions together with their subconscious impressions, [and whioh is thus]
unwavering, — this is the means of escape. The rest of the comment is easy.


27. For him [there is] insight seven-fold and advancing in
stages to the highest.

The words <for him> refer 1 to him 2 fln whom discernment is
re-uprisen. The word <seven-fold> means that the insight of the
discriminating [yogin], after the removal of the defilements from
the covering of impurity, when no other kind of presented-idea is
generated in the mind-stuff, has just seven forms, as follows.
1. The thing to be escaped has been thought out ; nor need [the
yogin] think it out again. 2. The reasons for the thing to be
escaped have dwindled away ; nor need they dwindle away again.

3. The escape is directly perceived 3 by the concentration of
restriction , [nor need anything beyond this be discovered].

4. The means of escape in the form of discriminative discernment
has been cultivated ; [nor need anything beyond this be culti-
vated]. So this is the four-fold final release ( vimukti ), belonging to
insight, which may be effected. But the final release of the mind-
stuff is three-fold [as follows], 5. The authority of the thinking-
substance is ended. 6. The aspects ( guna ), like rocks fallen from
the top of the mountain peak, without support, of their own
accord, incline towards dissolution and come with this [thinking-
substance] tc rest. And when these [aspects] are quite dissolved,
they do not cause growth again, because there is no impelling-
cause. 7. In this stage the Self has passed out of relation with
the aspects {guna), and, enlightened by himself and nothing more,


1 See Nyaya-Ko^a, b.v. prutyamnaya ^f,

1 The V&rttika insists that <formm> is rather
<for it^and that it refers to the means
of ^pcape. It denies that the reference
is to the Self since there is no mention
of the Self in the previous afitra. BSla-
rSma replies that the Comment ex-

pressly wishes to avoid reference to

the means of escape in the previous


Butra and that it says that <for him>
means «chim in whdm discernment is
re-uprisen.^ This explanation is cor-
roborated by the use of the words
vivektno bhavati. #

5 See i. 3 and compare iii. 16, p. 2P18 4 ;
iii. 18-19, pp. 23fj* end 281“ ; iii. 26,
p. 241 4 ; iii. 51, p. 266 4 ; and iii. 52,
p 269* (Calc. ed.).


171] Seven stages of insight [— ii. 27

is stainless and isolated. — The Self beholding this seven-fold insight
advancing in stages to the highest is denominated fortunate
(kufala). Even when there if also the inverted generation of the
mind-stuff the Self is said to be released [and] fortunate, becafise
he has passed beyond the aspects (guna).

He describes the goal as such which belongs to discriminative discernment
in the satra 27. For him [tfhere is] insight seven-fold and advancing in
stages to the highest. He explains [the satra] by saying «C<for him.»» «Cln
whom discernment is re-uprisen», that is to say, theyogin in whom discernment
is present. The word «refer» means allude. One whose mind-stuff has
reached the goal of discriminative discernment, since the defilement of impurity,
which is the covering of mind-stuff, has been taken off, and because no other
presen ted-idea arises, that is to say, no presented-idea belonging to emergence
o* famas or of rajas , — in him there is the insight of just the seven forms
which belong to the discriminating. There ara different discernments according
to the different objects.— --The compound [advancing in stages to the highest] means
those stages [or] states the end of which is perfection. Complete perfection 1 is
that higher than which there is nothing. That insight [or] discriminative
discernment [is advancing by stages] whose stages are advancing. These seven
kinds of stages he takes up beginning with the word «as follows.^ Of these
[seven], from among the four stages which may be completed by a man’s effort,
he takes up the first with the words, 4Cl. The thing to be escaped has been
thought out.» Whatever is an effect of the primary-cause, all that is surely
nothing but pain by reason of th- j pains due mutations, to anxiety, and to
subliminal impressions, and by reason of the opposition of the fluctuations, —
and is therefore to be escaped. This has been thought out. — He shows what
the advancement to the highest is in the words «por need he think it out
again.^— 2. He describes the second in the words ^dwindled away.3> He
tells what the advancement to the highest is by saying 4Cnor . . . again. » —
8. Ho describes the third in the words ^directly perceived. Even in the
state conscious [of objects] I have discovered uy perception the escape which
I am to perfect in the concentration of restriction. We need to supply the
words, 4 nor need anything beyond this be discovered. * — 4. He describes the
fourth by saying 4teultivated.$ The cultivated i* the perfected means of
escape belonging to discriminative discernment. We need to supply the words,
4 nor need anything beyond this be cultivated.’ . This the four-fold final release
[or] completion may be effected. And in so far as it may be effec^d, it is
ahoyrn t<$ be included within the efforts [of a man]. Elsewhere the reading
is kAiyavimiMi. This would be the final release of insight with respect to
effects. — He desciibes Che final felease f of the mind-stuff which is not to be

l This word (t^mprakorpa) does not occur elsewhere in the Comment nor elsewhere in
Vftcasp&ti's Explanation. 9 Compare $B& xsi. p#81 (Lotus).


ii.27 — ] Book II. Means of Attainment or Sddhana (172

accomplished by effort, but whioh is to be Moomplished eubeequent to that
which is to be attained by effort by saying tilut the final release of the*
mind-stuff is three-fold.* — 5. He describes the first [of these last three] in the
wo^ds « 6, The authority 1 of the thinking-aubstanoe is ended.* In other
words, the two tasks (faJryo) of experience and liberation have been done. —
6. He describes the second [of thetfe last three] in the words <The aspects.* —
He shows what the advancement to the highest is in the words <And . . . they
do not.* — 7. He describes the third [of these lasts three] in the words tin this
stage.* In this stage, even while alive, the Self is called fortunate [and]
released, since [this] is his last body. Accordingly he says, tibia.* He says
that [the yogin] is not released in a figurative 1 a£nae [as merely being free
from his last body] in the words, tin verted generation.* Even when his
mind-stuff is resolved into the primary cause, he is said to be released and
fortunate,* because he has passed beyond * the aspects (puna).


When discriminative discernment is perfected there is the means
of escape. And there is no perfection without the means [of
attaining it]. So this [topic of the means] is begun.

28. After the aids to yoga have been followed up, when the
impurity has dwindled, there is an enlightenment of percep-
tion reaching up to the discriminative discernment.

The aids to yoga are the eight which are about to be enumerated.
As the result of following them up there is a dwindling or oessation
of the five-sectioned [ii. 3] misconception. Upon the dwindling of
this follows the manifestation of focused thinking. And in pro-
portion as the means [of attaining discriminative discernment are
followed up], so the impurity is reduced to a state of attenuation.
And in proportion as it dwindles, the enlightenment of perception
also, in accordance with the degree of dwindling, increases. Now
this same increase experiences a perfection reaching up to discrimi-


1 Compare ii. 10, p. 120* ; i ; 24, p. 162* ;
iii. 55, p. 274*. The phnw earito-artha
occur* i ii. 50, p. 265* (Calc. ed.).

* Compa§6 dupaeirOeam Hftatyam L 24,

p. 59* (Calc, ed.) i and for definition of
Supacirikam iii. 55, p. 274* (Calc. ed.).
See alto for use of word iv. 10, p. 286*.

* Fortunate because he it free from attach-

ment to the ccntequencet of hie own


uctioni which an the canto [of bond-
age]. Becauee* of thia he it 'not
bound, (httvfu Icarmatu phalataHffa-
rahilatvin no baddho bhavo'Tti huff
ZoM.)— This it the raggeition of fk$
P&taSjala Rahatyam. For other in-
trance* tee £ 24, p 54 T ; ii. 0, p. 119* ;
iv. 80, p. 814* (Calc. ed.).

Compare Bh. GltX xiv. 20.


173]


The nine causes


[ — ii. 28

native discernment [or] up to the perception [ii. 26] which dis-
tinguishes between the aspects [gund) as such and the Self. The
following up of the aids to yoga is the cause of disoorrelation
(viyoga) with impurity, just as an axe [is the cause of the disjunc-
tion ( viyoga ) of a tree] which is to be cut [from its root]. Now
[the eight aids] are the cause of attaining discriminative discern-
ment, just as right-livifig (dharma) is [the cause of getting] to
happiness; in other ways it is not a cause. — Furthermore how
many of these causes, according to the system, are there? Just
nine, he 1 says, as follows, “ Cause is nine-fold, rise [into conscious-
ness] and permanence and manifestation and modification and
presentation and attainment and disjunction and transformation
c.r.d auBtentation.” Of these [nine], 1. The cause of rise [into con-
sciousness], [is for instance] the central-organ [as the cause] of
a mental-process ( vijhdna ) ; 2. the cause of permanence : [for
instance] the fact that the Self has purposes [is the cause of the
permanence] of the central-organ, just as food [is the cause of the
permanence] of the body ; 3. the cause of manifestation [is for
instance] the shining [of the Self upon a fluctuation as the cause of
the manifestation] of colour, just as the perception of colour [which
is in the fluctuation, is the cause which manifests the shining of the
Self] ; 4. the cause of modification [is ; jt instance] another object-
of-sense [which modifies] the central-organ, just as fire [is a cause
which modifies] food to be cooked ; 5. the* cause of presentation :
[for instance] the thought of smoke [is the cause of the presenta-
tion] of the thought of fire ; 6. the cause of attaining : [for
instance] the following up of the aids to yoga [is the cause of
attaining] discriminative discernment ; 7. the cause of disjunction
[is for instance] the same [following up as the cause which disjoins
the Self] from impurity ; 8. the cause of transformation is for
instance the goldsmith [as the cause which transforms] the gold.
Similarly if a single presented idea of a woman has th$ quality of
infatuation, undifferentiated-consciousness ( gvidyq ) [is tne trans-
forming cause] ; if it has the quality of painfulness, hatred [is the
transforming cause] ; if it*has the quality of pleaaurability, passion

1 Apparently this is a laihffrahafloka. Vijh&na Bhikfu y%Mrfkofy(ini naru ktr*$&ni.


ii.28 — ] Book II. Means of Attainment or Sadhana [174

[;s the transforming cause] ; if it has the quality of the detached
attitude, 1 the recognition of the reality [is the transforming cause] ;
9. tb cause of sustentation [is for instance] the body [as the cause
which sustains] the sense-organs, and these [organs as the cause
sustaining] + h'-> [body], [and again] the great elements [as the
sustaining cause] of bodies, and these [elements] reciprocally of all
[element's], since nunan and animal and supernormal bodies depend
upon each other. — So much then for the nine causes. And these
so far as possible are also to be applied to other things. But as
for the following up of the aids to yoga, it comes into play as cause
in two ways only, [as the cause of disjunction and as the cause of
attainment].

So much for the foui divisions which have been described. Since discriminative
discernment, tho means of escape, which falls within these [four], cannot be
perfected before [one follows up the means 1 , as in the process of milking a cow :
and since what is not perfected cannot be a ineftns [to something else], he
proceeds to describe the means for its perfection in the words, «When .
perfected » At this point the way by which the means-of-attainment, which
are about to be mentioned, serve as a means for discriminative discernment
is shown by the stitra which begins with the word 28. . , . yoga and ends
with the word discernment. • For the aids to yoga, according to circumstances,
by seen or unseen 2 methods, cause the impurity to dwindle away. That
misconception has five sections must be understood as a partial statement,
since merit and demerit, in so far as they are causes of birth and of length-
of-life and of kind of-enjoyment, are also impure. The rest is easy. Since we
find that causality fs multiform, what kind of causality belongs to the following
up of the aids to yoga? In reply to this he says, <After the aids to yoga have
been followed up>. Since it disjoins the sattva of the thinking-substance from
impurity it is the cause of disjunction frum impurity. He gives a simile in
the words, «just as an a\e.» An axe disjoins the tree to be cut from its
root. The sattva of the thinking-substance, when disjoined from impurity,
causes one to attain to discriminative discernment. Just as merit is [the cause
of attaining] pleasure, so .he following up of the aids to yoga is the cause of
attaining discriminative discernment. And [it is a causd] in no other form.
So he says.<3^N'>w . . . discriminative insight.^ Having heard the denial in the
words other ways . . . not,)S> he asks, ^Furthermore how many of these ?>
The answer is, nint y> He shows what these are by a memorial verse

(tonka), fo’lowb. “ . , rise [info consciousness }.”$ fie gyres an illustration

1 Read thclVem if C ‘ ,T arre.i Euddhism 8 A visible means would be f&uca; an In-

in Ti«ini at iosV f > 29$ visible means would be ««! rfAyfra.


175 ]


Causes as aids to yoga [ — ii. 28

of this ip the words, <SX)f these [nine], 1. The cause of rise [into consciousness].^

1. The central organ is the cause of the origin of a mental process because it
brings out a mental process from an indeterminable stage to the present stage.

2. The cause of permanence [is lor instance] the fact that the Self has purposes.

The central organ rising [into consciousness] out of the feeling-of-perscfhality
lasts only so long as the two-fold purpose of the Self is not fully accomplished.
When the two kinds of purposes of the Self are accomplished it passes out
of permanence. Therefore* the fact that the Self has purposes is the cause
of the permanence of the central organ which has risen [into consciousness J
out of its own cause. He gives a simile in the words, £just as food is of
the body.» 8. The efficient cause of perceptive thinking, the preparation
(saihskriyO) of an object either of itself or by a sense-organ, is manifestation.
The cause of this manifestation [is for instance] the shining [of the Self uppn
a fluctuation as the cause of the manifestation] of colour. 4. The cause of
’modification [is for instance] another object-of-sense [which modifies] the
central organ. For just so Mrkandu, whose central organ had become con-
centrated, heard the fifth 1 note ripening upon the lute, and lifted up his eyes
and beheld the heavenly-nymph Umloca a in the perfection of beauty and
loveliness, so that he lapsed from concentration, and his central organ became
attached to her. * He gives an instance bearing upon the same point in the words
«just as fire.» For just as fire is the cause of the modification of a thing to be
cooked, like rice, in such manner that a thing whose arrangement of parts was
compressed becomes loosely conjoined in parts. 6. An object which is definitely
existing is the cause of presentation [just as! the thought of smoke [is the cause
of the presentation] of the id p of fire, 't he means to say is this. The

thought (jhana) is that which is thought ; a i, the thought of fire is fire and it is
thought [that is, it is a descriptive compound]. 8 6. The cause of attainment.
The natural action of effects belonging to causes which are independent is [what
he means by] attainment. Occasionally there is 2n exception to this [action of
the effects, which is the] non-attainment. Just so waters whose nature it is to
flow down a slope (nimna) are held back by a dam. Similarly also in this case,
the sattva of the thinking-substance, which la disposed to pleasure and bright-
ness, is by its own nature the producer of pleasure and of discriminative dis-
cernment. This is attainment. Sometimes this [attainment], because it is held
back, by reason of demerit or of tamos, does not follow. When by reason of
merit or of Jfoll owing up the * ; ds to yoga this [holding-hack] is removed, then
as a reason merely of the nature of the fluctuations of the thinking-substance’s
sattva when not held back by this [demerit or tamos], and in so far Ik it [this sattva]
is the producer of this [pleasure and discernment], [thi9 sattea] attains [them\

1 See RagbuvaA^a ix. 26 and 47 ; KarpOra- 1 Compare MBh. i 4821 ■* i. 123. 64.

maitjarl* i. # 16 s (!lOS^vol. A p. 228). * The compound is not a genitive depen-
The jnth note of thlTtute resembles dent (pafthftatpuntfa), but rather a

the cooing of the kotl descriptive tkarmadhfiraya).


ii. 28—] Book 1L Means of Attainment or Sddhana [176

m 1 he will [iv. 8] say, “The efficient cause gives no impulse, but [the muts*
tion] follows when the barrier to the evolving causes is out, just as in the case
of the peasant’ 9 Thus there is said to be a cause of attainment only with
reference to the effect characterized as discriminative discernment 7. In
respect to anything subsidiary [to discriminative discernment] the same thing
would be a cause of disjunction. So he says, *7. the cause of disjunction.]^
& He describes the cause of transformation in the words {the goldsmith . • .
the gold.* In so far as the emphasis is upon the difference with respect to the
gold, which is both different and not different from the bracelets and ear-rings
and anklets, and in so far as the emphasis is upon the absence of difference
[in the gold], which is not different from the bracelets and other things, there
is a cause which transforms [the gold] from the bracelet [into something else].
And the goldsmith, who made the bracelet, in so far as he transforms the gold,
which is [now] identical with the ear-ring, becomes the cause of transforms-
tion. Although fire [given as an example of 6. modification] is a cause of
transformation with respect to the thing to be cooked, still since the difference
between the substance* and the property, the rice-grains and the lump of rice,
is not emphasized, therefore even though the properties come and go, still the
substance persists. It is not possible therefore to say that [the fire] is a cause
of transformation. For this reason it was said that the Are is a cause of
modification. And accordingly there is no cross-division. Moreover it should
not be supposed that the cause of transformation in the case of the substance
is merely a difference in the arrangement of parts. For this would be incon-
sistent with the words {the goldsmith.* Having made clear what the oauee
of outer transformation is, he illustrates the inner [cause] in the words
{Similarly if a single.* {Undifferentiated-consciousness (ovidyd),* that is, such
a thought as * This girl is to be loved 9 . The very same presented idea of
a woman becomes, in the # case of Ch&itra, in consequence of his complete
infatuation, infatuated, that is to say, dejected. For he says to himself, 1 Alas 1
that jewel of a woman has come into the hands of that lucky Maitra, not into
the hands of me, bereft (Also) of luck. 9 Similarly the rival wives’ hatred
of her is the cause of the painfulness of the idea of [this] woman. And again
the passion of her husband Maitra for her is [the cause] of the quality of
pleasurability in this same idea of the woman. The recognition of the reality,
that the body of the woman is a congeries of skin and flesh and fat and botaes
and marrow, and is impure because of its [first] abode 9 [and] because of its
origin and threat, becomes, in the case of the discriminating, the cause of the
detached a^itude [that is to say] passionlessness. 9. The cause of susteptation
la that which sustains the body and organs. And in the case of the body
it is the organs For the five breaths, beginning with the vital air, are functions

1 Compare ii. 18, p. 144* (Calc. ed.).

9 Compare Patafljali: Mabibh&fya, vol. I, p. 7 middle (KielhonT* ed.).

9 Compare if. 5, p. HI 1 .


*

177] Eight aids to yoga [ — ii. 29

of the organs in general. For if they were not, the body would fall. Similarly
in the case of the parte of the body, the flesh and the other [parts], there is the
reciprocal relation of sustained and sustainer. Likewise the great elements,
that is, the earth and the other [elements] ; and these [elements] are in the
reciprocal relation [of sustained and sustainer] in the case of bodies dwelling
m the worlds of human beings or of Varupa or of the Sun or of the Wind
{gondh&vohQ) or of the Moon. Thus in the case of earth, which has the qualities
(gupa) of odour atid taste and colour and touch and sound, there are five great
elements standing in the reciprocal relation of sustained and sustainer ; in the
case of water there ore four ; in the case of fire three ; in the case of wind two.
Furthermore animal and human and divine [bodies] stand in a relation of
sustained and sustainer. Some one asks, * How can this [reciprocal relation of
sustained and sustainer] be so, if the bodies are not in the relation of holder
and held?’ He replies, dCsince human . . . depend upon each others For the
human body is sustained by the use of the bodies of tame animahrand of birds
and of wild animals and of plants. Similarly bodies like the tigers [are
sustained] by the use of the human bodies and those of tame and wild animals
and of others. And again in the same way the body of the tame animal and of
the bird and of the wild Animal [is sustained] by the use of plants and similar
things. Likewise the divine b( dy [is sustained] by the use of sacrifices, of
goats and deer ahd the flesh of grouse and ghee and baked-rice-cakea 1 and
branches of mango (sahakdra) and handfuls-of-darbha grass ( prastara ), offered
by human beings. In the same way the deity also sustains human beings and
the rest by granting boons and showers. Thus the dependence is reciprocal.
This is the meaning.—- The rest is easy.

In this [sQtra] the aids to yoga are determined.

28. Abstentions and observanoeb and postures and regula-
tions-of-tho-breath and withdrawal-of-the-senses and fixed
attention and oontemplation and concentration are the eight
aids.

The following up of these must be performed in succession. And
what they are we shall describe.

Now with the intent of excluding either a larger or a smaller number he
determines what are the aids to yoga by saying Cln this [sQtra] the aids to
yoga are determined.* The at Ira begins with the word 29. Abstentions and
ends with the word aide. Practice and passionlessneas and beljgf and energy
and the rest [i. 20], both by reason of their own selves and in so fyr ss they
gre indispensable, are also properly to be included among these same.

1 Their use is described in Aqp*tamba- in £fctapstba»BrthmaQa 1. 2. 2. 1 f.

Ya)&a-Fribhfcfft8fitra xcix and cxxix And again in Mann vi. 11 and vii. 2L

(SBE., vol. xxs), and their preparation

. 28 ["-an


ii. 30 — ] Book II. Means of Attainment or Sadhana [178

Of these [eight] —

30. Abstinence 1 from injury and from falsehood and from
theft and from incontinence and from acceptance of gifts are
thq abstentions.

Of these [five] abstinence from injury means the abstinence from
malice towards all living creatures in every way and at all times.
And the other abstentions and observances are rooted in it. In so
far as their aim is he perfection of it, they are taught in order to
teach it. And in this sense * it has been said, “ Surely this same
brahman in proportion as he desires to take upon himself many
courses-of-action, s in this proportion refraining from heedlessly
giving injury, fulfils [the abstention of] abstinence from injury in
order to give it the full character of its spotlessness/' Abstinence-
from-falsehood (sotj/a) means speech and mind such as correspond to
the object-intended ; and speech and mind corresponding to what
is seen or inferred or heard . 4 If speech it* spoken in order that
one’s own knowledge may pass to some one else, it should not be
deceitful or mistaken or barren of information ; [then it would be
abstinence from falsehood]. It should be used for the service of
all ; not for the ruin of creatures. And even when used thus,
should it be only for the ruin of creatures, it would not be an
abstinence from falsehood ; it would be nothing less than wrong.
In so far as there would be a false kind of merit [and] a resemblance
of merit, it would become the worst of evils. Therefore let [the
yogin] consider [first] tohat is good 4 for all creatures and [then]
speak with abstinence-from-falsehood. — Theft • is the unauthorized
(apastrapurvaka) appropriation of things-of- value from another.
While abstinence from-theft, when free from coveting, is the refusal
to do this. — Continence is control of the hidden organ of genera-
tion. — Abstinence -from -acceptance -of- gifts is abstinence-from-
appropriating objects, lx ■‘ause one sees the disadvantage^ in acquir-

1 This siltra ami the following are quoted • The principle would seem to be that
in Gawjrfpfcda’s Bhagya on Saihkhya- a speech which does not harm %n y one

k5rik#xxiii. and which does some good, although

* Similar plans of life in Bha^ Pur, xi, untrue, must be regarded as true. 8*6

second half. Man a iv. 188 and vii^ 188.

* JAOS. Proceedings, xi. 229. • Compare Linga PurSjja ?iii, 15.

4 Compare Longa Purina viu. 13.


Five abstentions


179 ]


[ — ii. 30


ing them or keeping them or losing them or in being attached to
them or in harming them. These then are the abstentions.

Having announced the aids [to yoga] of which the first are the abstentions and
the observances, he introduces a satra which specifies the abstentions by saying
Cof these [eight]. » The sQtra begins with the words 80. Abstinence from
injury and ends with the word abstentions. He describes the aid to yoga [called]
abstinence from injury by saying, «£in every way.» He praises such abstinence-
from-injury with the words* «And the others ^Rooted in it>» would mean
that, even if these are performed without observing abstinence from injury, they
are as if they had not been performed, since they are quite fruitless. This is
the meaning. The following up of them has nothing as its aim but the perfec-
tion of this [abstinence-from-killing]. * If abstinence-from-killing has the others
rooted in it, how can it be that they aim at the perfection of the abstinence-
from-injury ? * To this he replies, «in order to teach it.» ^CPerfection^in other
words] the rise into consoiousness of a thought An objector asks, * This may be
true. But if the others exist for the sake of knowing abstinence from injury,
what need of them, since this thought comes from the other source?* In reply
he says, SCits spotlessness. » If the others were not followed up, abstinence-from-
injury would be defiled by falsehood and other [vices]. With reference to this
same point he tqjls of a concurrent opinion of those- whobave-the-ti dition
{(Xgamika) in the words, «And in this sense it has been said,3» Easy. — He gives
the distinguishing characteristic of abstinence-from-falsehood in the words
Cspeech and mind such as correspond to the object-intended.» The word such
(yathd) raises an expectation which is fulfilled by the words ^corresponding to
what is seen.» He brings this into cOnn xion with the correlated word
4Ccorresponding-to (tathd)' s> in the expression <* • pee ch and mind corresponding
to.» [This should be,] whenever there is a desire to say [something]. [If spoken]
otherwise [than as seen], it is not abstinenoe-from-falsehood. This is stated with
an explanation in the words «to some other person. $ In order that knowledge
thereof may pass to some one else, speech is spoken [or] uttered to produce know-
ledge similar to one’s own knowledge. If it is not deceitful [or] the cause «*f
deceit, [it is abstinence-from-falsehood J. Just as when Drona the Master [MBh.
viL chap 190] asked Yudhisthira [the king] with regard to the death of his own
aon A(vatth&man, 4 Venerable sir (tfywfwwn), thou who art rich in truth, has
A^vatthftman been slain?* And he having in mind the elephant who bad
the corresponding name said, It is true, A^v&tthftin&n is slain.' This is an
answer whicli does not make Yudhisthira’* own knowledge pass to (the other
person]. For his own knowledge derived from the sense-organ* had as its
q^ject’the slaying of the elephant and this [knowledge] was not (based [to
propa]. But quite another knowledge, that of the slaying of the letter’s son,
was formed [ir^Dropa’s mind].— «0r mistaken^ means due to a mistake, either

1 Reading . with the Bik&ner MS. and the Bombay and Poona edition i


ii. 30*— ] Book II. Means of Attainment or Sddhana [180

at the time when one desires to say something, or at the time of determining
what the object-to-be-perceived is. — ^Barren of information} is barren as regards*
information, as for instance an outlandish tongue is barren of information to
Aryans; or it might be purposeless, as for instance speech the utteranoe of
whith is not meant to be uttered. For in this [latter case], although one’s own
knowledge does pass to the other person, still it is exactly the opposite of making
[knowledge] pass [to another], because it was not purposed. 1 An abstinence-
from-falsehood even when it has these distinguishing characteristics, if it results
in injury to another, would be a false kind of abstinenoe-from-falsehood, but
would not be abstinence-from-falsehood, as he says in the words, 4Clf it.} For
example, one who practises austerities in abstinence-from-falsehood, when asked
by robbers which way the rich merchant had gone, told the way the rich merchant
had gone. £lt should be used,} that is, uttered. The rest is easy.— Since an
[explanatory].hegative idea depends on that of the positive he explains the
distinguishing characteristic of theft by saying, 4CTheft is the unauthorized.}
Here the generic idea is characterized by a qualification. This is the meaning.
Since verbal and bodily operations are preceded by mental operations, it is the
operation of mind, because it is dominant, that is mentioned in the words,
Stfree from coveting.} — He tells what continence cs in the word bidden.}
For even if his organ of generation is held in control, still if he beoome attached
at the sight of a woman or upon [hearing] her talk or Upon touching her limbs
which are the seats of Kandarpa, he has no continence. So to exclude this case
he says, dCthe hidden organ.} Other organs also that are very ardent for this
[woman] are to be watched.— He tells what abstinence-from-acceptance-of-gifts
is by saying, 4Cobjecta.} He mentions the disadvantage due to attachment to
these [objects] in the words [ii. 16], “ Since passions increase because of applica-
tion to enjoyments, and the skill of the organs also increases.” The disadvantage
which is characteristic of injury is also expressed by the words,’ “Enjoyment is
impossible unless one has harmed some living creatures.” Although obtained with-
out effort, objects if unauthorized have disadvantages when one acquires them,
since the acquisition of such things is censured. And even authorized objeots,
when acquired, are evidently disadvantageous, in that they must be kept and so on.
Therefore abstinence-from-acceptance-of-gifts is the refusal to appropriate them*


Now as for these [five abstentions] —

31. When they are unqualified by species or plate or time
or exigency and when [oovering] all [these] classes— [under
these circumstances exists] the Oreat Course-of-oonduot.

Of these [five], abstinence-fiom-injury is qualified in respeot of
species as follows, a catcher of fish does injury 'to fishes only and

1 Mrcchak. (Nirg. SSg. edition), p. 288. , 1 Compare ii. 15, p. 182 (Calc. ed.).


181]


Five observances


[ — ii. 32


to nothing else. — The same is qualified in respect of'place, as when
one says, ' I will not slay in a holy place.’ — The same is qualified
in respect of time, as when one says, ‘ I will not slay on the
fourteenth day [of the lunar fortnight] nor on a day of good omen.
—-The same, in the case of one who refrains from [these] three is
qualified in respect of exigency, as when one says, ‘ For the sake of
gods and brahmans and not otherwise I will slay.’ Likewise also
in the case of the warrior who says, ‘ In battle only [I will do]
injury, and nowhere else.’ Abstinence-from-injury and the other
[abstinences] unqualified by these species or times or places or
exigencies must be kept when [covering] no less than all [these]
cases. <In all [these] classes) means with regard to all {these]
objects. Without exceptions in no less than all [these] classes —
this is what is meant by speaking of the Great Course-of-conduct 1
when [covering] all [these] stages.

6CNow as for these. 2> The sot re begins with the words 31 ... by species and
ends with the words Great Co'irse-of-oonduot. <When [covering] all [thesej
glasses) means of those which are found in all [thesej stages which are chai sc-
terized as being species and the other [three stages]. The words Abstinence-
from-injury and the other [abstinences])) mean that the definition [of the Great
Courae-of-conduct] must be asserted in the case of the other abstentions also.
The Comment is easy.


32. Cleanliness and contentment and self-castigation and
study and devotion to the Igvara are the observances.

Of these [five], cleanliness is produced by earth or by water or the
like, and by the consumption and other [requirements] with regard
to pure sacrificial food. This is outer. Inner [cleanliness] is the
washing away of the blemishes of the mind-stuff. — [To practise] con-
tentment means not to covet more than the means at hand. — Self-
castigatiort is <?he bearing of extremes, hunger and thirst, cold and
heat, standing and sitting, stock-stillness and formal stillness,
and, according to usage, courses-of-conduct such as modifications
( krcchra )* and lunar fasts 3 and rigid penances. 4 — Study is the

* Compare Manu xfl. 1-6. * Manu »i. 20, Ac.

1 Manu zi. 106, Ac. * Manu xi. 213, Ac.


ii. $2 — ] Book II. Means of Attainment or Stidham* (182

recital of books that treat of release' or the repetition of the*
syllable of adoration (joranava). — Devotion to the Ifvaia 1 is the
offering up of all actions to the Supreme Teacher. “ He who rests
in .himself, for whom the network of perverse-considerations
(t fitarka) has been destroyed, whether resting upon a bed or on
a seat, or wandering upon a road, would behold the destruction of
the seed of the round-of-rebirths, would be permanently released,
would participate in deathless delights.” With regard to whioh
this has been said, [i. 29], “ Thereafter comes the right knowledge
of him who thinks in an inverse way, and the removal of
obstacles.”

He expounds cleanliness end the other observances. The BQtra begins with the
word 82. Cleanliness and ends with the word observances. He explains [the
sdtra] by saying ^cleanliness.^ The words «or the like» are meant to include
cow-dung and such things. Pure sacrificial food is the barley [mixed with]
oow’s urine and the rest [eaten at the Qrftv&pl festival]. There is a consumption
and other [requirements] with regard to this [food]. CThe other require-
ments^ are meant to cover regulation of the dimensions and of the number of
these morsels. Instead of saying ‘produced by the consumption and other
requirements with regard to pure sacrificial food ’ he says-Cand by the consump-
tion and other [requirements] with regard to pure sacrificed food.* For in the
effect the cause is supposed figuratively to exist — The Cs tains of the mind-
stuff* such as arrogance and pride and jealousy ; the removal of this is cleanli-
ness of the central-organ. — ^Contentment* is the desire to take no more than is
neoessary for the general maintenance of life, because it follows the renunciation *
of what had been before one’s own property. This is its distinction [from
abetinenoe-from-acceptance-jf-gifta], — ^Stock-stillness* is the absenoe of any
indication of one’s intention even by signs ; ^formal stillness* is merely refraining
from speech. — In the phrase 4Cfor whom the network of perverse-considerations
has been destroyed* the words ^perverse-considerations* will be [later ii 88]
described. And doubts and misconceptions should be added [as parts of the
network]. To this extent his intention is said to be pure. — These abstentions
and observances are also described in the Vishpu Purftna [vi. 7. 86-87], 1 “ Wish-
ing to reduce the mind to its proper state he should resort to abstinence from
incontinence and from injury and from falsehood and frdm tfieft and from
acceptanoe-ofagifts. A man whose self is curbed should practise study and
cleanliness and contentment and self-castigation. He should also m*lt« Km
mind incline towards the higher Brahman. These abstentions together with

Compare ii. 1, p. 106* (Calc. ed.). * Illustrated in ChSnd. Up. L 10. 1>11.

* See also Nbadlya Purina xlvii. 12-14.


i


183] Inhibition of abstentions and observances [ii. 34

the observances are declared to be five each. They give a special result when
they are approached with a desire [for some special thing], and in the case of
persons free from all desires they yield final release.”


As for these abstentions and observances,

33. If there be inhibition by perverse-considerations (vUarka),
there should be cultivation of the opposites.

Whenever [in the mincf] of this brahman [practising the absten-
tions and observances] injuries and similar [faults] arise as
perverse-considerations, such as for instance, ‘ I will kill him who
hurts me ; I will also lie ; I will also appropriate his money ; and
I will commit adultery with his wife ; and I will also make myself
master of his property.’ Thus inhibited by the blazing fever of
perverse-considerations, let him cultivate the opposites of these.
Let him ponder, * Baked upon the pitiless coals of the round-of-
rebirths, I take my refuge in the rules ( dharrna ) for yoga by
giving protection 1 to every ’iving creature. I myself after ridding
myself of perverse-considerations am betaking myself to them once
more, like a dog. As a dog to his vomit, even so I betake myself
to that of which I had rid myself.’ Other similar [inhibitions of
perverse-considerations] should be applied in the other s&tras also
[upon the aids to yoga].

Since “ good things* ore full of difficulties ”, he introduces s sQtra whose object
is to give advice which will prevent the possibility of exceptions to these [absten-
tions and observances]. So he says, <As for thete abstentions and obser-
vances.^ The sotra, 88. If there be inhibition by perverse -considerations,
there should be eultivation of the opposites. In the Comment upon perverse-
considerations there is nothing at all that seems obscure.


34. Sinoe perverse-considerations suoh as injuries, whether
done or caused to be done or approved, whether ensuing
upon greed or anger or infatuation, whether mild or moderate
or vehement, find their unending oonsequenoes in^ain and
in laofc of thinking, there should be the cultivation df their
opposites.

1 This phraM occurs in Manu nil. tiddXayeh, plkuntala, Aot iii, near end ;

* bomnara aXo mahnavatwaX vrSrlhitdrtha- and niiti rd «U Rennb. 485c. 497 D.


ii. 34 — ] Book II. Means of Attainment or Sadhana (184

Of these [considerations], first of all, injury, since it is done or caused
to be done or approved, is. three-fold. Moreover, each of these
ie three-fold, in so far as there is greed [such as] desire for the
meat or for the skin, or in so far as there is anger as when a man
thinks he has been ‘ hurt by that man ’, or in so far as there
is infatuation as when a man thinks [that what he is doing] ‘ will
be merit for me ’ Again, since greed and anger and infatuation are
three-fold as being mild and moderate and vehement, there are
thus seven-and-twenty varieties of injuries. Yet again, Bince
[these are] gentle and moderate and extreme [these are] three-
fold as follows, gently mild and moderately mild and keenly mild ;
similarly, gently moderate and moderately moderate and keenly
moderate ; likewise, gently keen and moderately keen and vehe-
mently keen. Thus injury is of one-and-eighty varieties. It is,
however, innumerable because of the varieties due to specifications
(niyama) and to options ( vikalpa ) and to aggregations (samuecaya),
due to the fact that the varieties 1 of those-who-breathe-the-breatli-
of-life are innumerable. In the same manner [the classification] is
to be applied to falsehood and to the other [crimes]. Now since
these perverse considerations have endless consequences in pain
and in lack of thinking, one should cultivate their opposites. [In
other words], there is a cultivation of those things the endless
consequences of which are pain and a lack of thinking. — And to
continue, he who commits an injury first of all reduces the strength
of the victim, then causes him pain by falling upon him with
a knife or something of the kind, [and] afterwards even deprives
him of life. When once he has taken away [the victim’s] strength,
his own animate or inanimate aids 2 begin to have their strength
dwindle away. As a result of causing pain, he himself experiences
pain in hells and in [the bodies of] animals and of departed spirits
and iri^bther [forms]. As a result of uprooting [the victim] from
life, lie himself continues from moment to moment air the # very
point of departure from life. And even while wishing for dectth he

» RighavSoandain the Pata£jala-Raha»yam * with a change in the order of worde,

attribute* thie quotation to Pakfila- by the Udyot&kba in the HyEya-

•r&min. U ie fobnd in VUayKyana'r VSrttika (Bibl. Ind.p. 9 10 ).

Bhtjya (Vizian. ed. p. I’) ; and qaoted, * See Vlcupati on ii. IS, p- 114* (Gala ed.).


185] Varieties of injuries [ — ii. 35

pants laboriously since the fruition 1 of pain is to be felt in a
fruition which has 2 a limit [in time]. Furthermore, even if [the
effects of] injury could be somehow "done away 5 by merit, even
then, if he obtained happiness, it would be [on condition
that] his length-of-life be short. — In the same way, so far as
possible, [the classification] is to be applied to lying and to the
other [violations of the* abstentions]. Thus pondering on that
same [painful consequence] of perverse considerations, which is
inevitable ( anugata ) and undesired, the yogin should not devote
his central organ to perverse considerations. As a result of the
cultivation of the opposites, the perverse considerations become
things that may be escaped.

*«Yiui the inteiu to describe what the cultivation of the opposites is, he states
the different natures and kinds and causes and properties and results of the con-
trary-considerations, as well as the objects for the meditation on the opposites in
the sdtra which begins with thb words 84. , .. perverse-considerations and ends
with the words cultivation of their opposites. He explains [the sQtra] with
the words, <tOf these. . . injury. Because the varieties of those-who-breathe-
the-breath-of-life are innumerable, specifications and options and aggregations
are possible with regard to injuries and the other [crimes]. In this situation,
because there is a preponderance of tamos, as a result of wrong living, a lack of
thinking also arises characterized V* the four 5 s of misconception [ii. 5]. So
it ia that these perverse-considerations also resul. >n lack of thinking [as well as
arise out of undifferentiated-consciousness]. For the cultivation of their oppo-
sites is precisely [the thought of] the endless consequences in pain and in lack
of thinking. By virtue of this there a revulsion from these. This same culti-
vation of the opposites he makes clear by the words, «Cof the victim.* The
victim is some tame animal. ^Strength* is the energy which is the cause of the
functional activity of the body. [This] he first u duces by tying him to a sacri-
ficial post. For in this way the animal loses his spirit. The reat is very clear.


When [the py verse considerations] become for this [yogin] unsuit-
able for generation, then the power caused by this facW becomes

indicative of the yogin's perfection. For example,

•

1 Tift word ripdka is omitted in the Bik&ner * The better reading is aripogot*. In this
and the two K^mlrsmd several Jtther case, the injury would not be inde-
good MSS. pendent fruit since it would be cast

• Otopare tbe discussion in ii. 18,eapeoially away as a portion of the sacrifice,

p. 127 (Calc. ed.).

24* n]


ii. 35 — ] Book II. Means of Attainment or Sadhana (186

36. As soon as he is grounded in abstinenoe from injury, his
presence begets a suspension of enmity.

[This] occurs on the part of all living creatures. 1 *

The abstentions and observances have been described, and the escape from the
exceptions to these, the perverse considerations, as a result of the cultivation of
the opposites has been described. Now he makes clear the signs indicative of
thorough knowledge of perfection in these various abstentions and observances
which results from practice in these [latter]. 1 By a thorough knowledge of
which signs [the yogin] accomplishes what is to be done in each particular case
and acts with reference to what is yet to be done, as he says, dCWhen ... for
this [yogin].» 35. As soon as be is grounded in abstinenoe from injury,
his presence begets a suspension of enmity. Even [enemies] whose hostility
is everlasting 1 like horse and buffalo, mouse and oat, snake and mongoos, in
the presence of the Exalted [yogin] who is grounded in abstinence from injury,
conform themselves to bis mind-stuff and renounce altogether their hostility.


86. As soon as he is grounded in abstinenoe from falsehood,
notions and oonsequenoes depend upon him.

If [the yogin] says to a man ( iti ), • Be 3 thou right-living,’ the man
becomes right-living. If he expresses the wish (ttt) * Attain thou
heaven/ the man attains heaven. What he says (v&k) comes true.

85. As soon as he is grounded in abstinenoe from falsehood, notions and
oonsequenoes have their residenoe [in him]. Actions mean right-living and
wrong-living ; and consequences of these are such things as heaven and hell.
Dependence upon the sense that these same depend upon him. Having depen-
dence upon him is tip abstract state of this [dependence]. Since such a thing
happens in the case of the Exalted One’s speech, [ he Comment] says that actions
depend upon him by saying ^right-living.^ He says that consequences depend
upon him by saying Aheaven.A <KComes true» signifies that it is not prevented.


37. As soon as he is grounded in abstinenoe from theft, all
jewels approach him.

From all directions jewels approach to be his.*

87. A#soon ae he is grounded in abstinenoe from theft, all jewels approaoh
hilfi. Easily understood.

1 Compare Raghova&fa ii. 55, xiii. 50, xiv. kiumudi. Compare also BKsa'e KS-

79 and Kirgta iii. 2. dambaff p. 981 (Pareb’s ed.) and £lkun-

* See PlQini ii. 4. 9 with the illustrations tala (Nir. Slg. ed.) p. 98, two Usee up.
fromth^KSfikJrfttiandtheSiddhlnta- » Whitney: Grammar 994.


w

187] Revolts of abstentions [ — ii. 39

38. As soon as he is grounded in abstinenoe from inoon-
tinenoe, he aoquires energy.

By the acquisition of which the yogin. increases [his] unhindered 1
qual : ties. And when he is perfected he is able to transfer [his]
thinking to [his] pupils.

88. As soon as he is grounded in abstinenoe from inoontinenoe, he acquires
energy. Energy [that is] power. By the acquisition of which he increases
[or] accumulates qualities, sucH as minuteness, which are unhindered [that is]
which have not been hindered. And when perfected he is endowed with the
eight perfections of which the first is [called] ton* * and also by other names
suoh as Seasoning (Aha). He is able to transfer his thinking which relates to
the aids to yoga to his pupils [or] disciples.


39. As soon as he is established in abstinence-from-accept-
ance-of-gifts, a thorough illumination upon the conditions of
birth—

— Becomes- his. ‘ Who was J ? How was I ? Or what [can] this
birth be? Or hlbw [can] this [birth] be? Or what shall we
become ? Or how shall we become ? ’ Such a desire to know his
own condition in former and later and intermediate times becomes
of itself fulfilled 3 for him. These when he is established in the
abstentions are the perfections.

89. As soon as he ii established in abstinence-from-eooeptanoe>of>gifts, a
thorough Ulumination upon the conditions of birth. Birth is [coming into]
relation with a body and with sense-organs and the re^t which are particularized
as belonging to some class [of beings]. There is a thorough illumination, a
direct perception of the conditions [of birth] [or] of what kinds [of birth]. That
is to say, a thorough knowledge of a quiescent or uprisen or indeterminable
birth together with its form [of experience]. He desires to know the past in
the words, 4C‘ Who was I ? 'Jh He desires to know the different details as to
origin and persistence of this same [birth] in the words, A* How was I ?*> .He
desires to know what the present birth itself is in the words, «' Or what ? >
Is the body mdBe directly of elements, or is it nothing but an aggregation of
elements, or iB it other than these ? Here also the words ' Or hosgj might be
supplied/ Elsewhere this is the actual reading. He desires to know t$e future
inwhe words, C Or what shall we become ? > Here again the words * Or how '
am [to be] supplied.* .ASuch ... for him.> The former [time] is past time ;

1 gee Manu xi : 38. * 8hhkhym-k&riM li. * The VKrt. says vififfd Msratt.

4 la the text of YScaspati baths* «< apparently was lacking.


ii. 39 — •] Book II. Means of Attainment or Sddhana [188

the later is future ; the intermediate is the present. The existence of the self
in these is a relation with a body and the rest. There is a desire to know this
and from desire comes knowledge according to the maxim, “ He who desires
anything, does that same thing.”


We will speak with regard to observances.

40. As a result of cleanliness there is disgust at one’s own
body and no intercourse with others.

As soon as there is disgust with his own body, he has begun
cleanliness. Seeing the offensiveness of the body , 1 he is no longer
attached to the body and becomes an ascetic ( yati ). Moreover
there is no intercourse with others. Perceiving the true nature of
the body, desirous of escaping 4 even his own body, even after
he has washed it with earth and water and other [substances], not
seeing any purity in the body, how could Jie have intercourse with
the bodies of others absolutely unhallowed as they are ?

40. As a result of cleanliness, there is disgust at ono's own body and no
intercourse with others. By this [sQtra] it is told what is indicative of per-
fection in outer cleanliness.


Furthermore [as other results],

41. Purity of sattva and gentleness and singleness-of-intent
and subjugation of, the senses and fitness for the sight of the
self—

The word * arise ’ completes the sentence. As a result of cleanli-
ness there is purity of sattva ; therefrom [it acquires] gentleness ;
from this [it acquires] singleness-of-intent ; therefrom [it acquires]
subjugation of the senses ; and from this fitness for the sight of the
self is acquired by the sattva of the thinking-substance. So to
this [last] there is access, as a result of his befog established in
cleanlinera.

Ha tails what is indicativa of innar perfection by saying ^Furthermore.* 41.
Purity of sattva and gentleness and singleness-of-intent and subjugation
of the senses and fitness for the sight of thf self. When the defilements of


1 Compare t ii. 5, p. ( 118‘ (Calc. ed.>


1 See Lifiga Pur. viiL 82-83.


189] Results of observances [ — ii. 43

mind-stuff are washed away, the mind-stuff comes-forth-to-sight undefiled. And
as a result of freedom from defilement there is gentleness [or] transparency of
sattva. In the transparent [ sattva ] there is singleness-of-intent. Therefrom,
by the subdual of the central-orgau, there results the subdual of the sense-
organs which are dependent on the central-organ. After that the sattva of the
thinking-substance becomes fit for the sight of the self.


42. As a result of contentment there is an acquisition of
superlative pleasure.

And in this sense it has been said, 1 “What constitutes the
pleasure of love in this world and what the supreme pleasure of
heaven are both not to be compared with the sixteenth part of the
pleasure of dwindled craving ( tr§nd ).”

£'.• A a rerjit of oontentment there is an acquisition of superlative
pleasure. Superlative is that beyond which nothing more excellent exists. As
was said by Yayati 2 when he conferred youth upon his [father] Puru, 11 The
wise man, casting entirely away that craving which is hard for the strong-
willed to cast of!' and which even in the aged ages not, is filled quite full
with pleasure and, nothing else.’* This same he shows by the words beginning
^What constitutes the pleasure of love.»

43 Perfection in the body and in the organs after impurity
has dwindled as a result of self-easi : nation.

Self-castigation in the very act of completing itself destroys the
defilement from the covering of impurity. As a result of the
removal of the defilement of the covering of this [impurity] there
is perfection of the body, such as atomization [iii. 45] ; likewise per-
fection of the organs, such as hearing and seeing at a distance [that
is, telepathy].

He tells wh&* is indicative of perfection of self-castigation. 48. Perfection
in the body and in the organs after impurity has dwindled aa a result
of self-castigation. Whatever covering has the characteristics of impurity, has
the qualities *nd go on which a. effects of the tamos . «Such as atomization^
would be greatness or lightness or getting [to any place]. Easy.


MBh. (Jttntiparvan 174. 46 andVftyuPur. f Vipju Pw>j* iv. 10. 12 and Vfiyu Pur.
xciii. 101 and Lifiga Pur. btyii* 28. xciii. m and Linga' Pur. lxvii. 20.

Compare "Hhartjhari 1 VSir. 49 and Compare also M^h. i. 89-91 « 8577 if.

Dhfanjfctoka, p. 176 (KftvyamftlS ed.).


ii. 44 —] Booh II. Means of Attainment or S&dhana [190

44. As a result of study there is oommunlon with the ohoseit
deity.

Gods and sages and perfected* men come within the range of vision
of {the yogin] who has the disposition to study ; and are helpful
to his work.

He tells what is indicative of perfection in study. 44. As a result of study
there is oommunlon with the choeen deity. Eaqy.


46. Perfection of concentration as a result of devotion to the
Igvara.

One whose whole nature is surrendered 1 to the fyrara has perfec-
tion of concentration. By which [concentration] he knows as the
thing really is ( avitatham ) all that he desires to know, in other
places and in other bodies and in other times. Thereafter his
insight sees into things as they are {yathabhutam ).

40. Perfection of oonoentration ... of devotion to the iQvara. And it
should not be urged that if, only as a result of devotion to the Ifvara, concentra-
tion conscious [of objects] has its perfection, there is no need of the seven [other]
aids. Because these [seven] by subsidiary activity, both seen and unseen, are
of service to the perfection of 'devotion to the Invars, and at the same time
to perfection of concentration conscious [of objects]. Just as by a separation
of correlations’ curds fulfil the purposes of the sacrifice and also fulfil the
purposes of men. Thus if this is so, [one should not say] that fixed-attention
and contemplation and concentration are not the immediate* aids [to yoga].
Because it is clear that these [three] (osya) are immediate aids, in so far as
for ths perfection of [concentration] conscious [of an object] these [three]
have the same object as [concentration] conscious [of an object], whereas the
other aids [which have the Invars as object] have an object whioh is not this.
For ths devotion to the Invars has also the Invars as its object, and has
not as its object that which iB to be consciously known. Accordingly this is
a mediate aid. Thus all is cleared up.— The words «aees into& are intended
to show the etymology of tn« word ^insight.*


1 See ii. I.

* See JSimini MfmMsB-sQtm iv. 8. 5. f.

* BSl&rima defines antaranga by the words

• whatever happens immediately next


to a thing is the antatpfiga of it ’ Thus
devotion to the I$vara is the last cause
of the effect (antamngatddhana) of
concentration conscious of an object.


191] Varieties of postures [ — ii. 48

The abstentions and observances together with their perfections
have been described. We have the following to say of the postures 1 * * * * * * *
and the other [aids to yoga]. In thitf [sutra, it is said] —

46. Stable-and-easy posture.

For example, the lotus-posture and the hero-posture and the decent-
posture and the mystic^diagram and the staff-posture and [the
posture] with the rest and the bedstead, the seated curlew and the
seated elephant and the seated camel, the even arrangement, the
stable-and-easy — also called, as-is-easiest — and others of the same
kind.

He introduces the next satra with the words «The abstentions and observances
na.« Wn described. We have the following to say of th* postures and the
other [aids to yoga].» In this [satra, it is said] 40. Stable-and-easy posture.
Stable means motionless. That posture which is easy, which brings ease is
the one intended by the sQtra. The word Osana means either that whereon
a man sits [that is, a seat] or the manner iu which he sits [that is, a posture].
The lotus-posture if well known.' — A man settled down (sthitasya) i'ests one
foot on the ground and the other is placed over the partially contracted knee,
— this is hero-posture. — Bringing the soles of his feet near to each other
close to the scrotum, he should make a hollow of his hands and place them
over it in the shape of a tortoise, — this k. the decent posture. — Inserting
the contracted left foot into the space betwei the right shin and thigh and
inserting the contracted right foot into the space between the left
shin and thigh,— that is the mystic diagram.— Sitting down with the great-
toes placed together and with ankles placed together and stretching out upon
the ground shins and thighs and feet placed together, let him practise the
staff-posture. — Because there is a use of the yogic table 1 (yoga-pattaka), this is
[the posture] with the rest. — Lying down with the arms stretched around the
knees is the bedstead. — The curlew and the other seats may be understood by
actually seeing a curlew and the other animals seated. — The two feet are
contracted and pressed against each other at the heels and at the tips of

1 Lifiga Pur. viii. 87-90. of this book, and there is a vast

* An illustration of this by a native hand number of fantastic and repellent

is given in Richard Schmidt's Fakire additions. %

and Fakirthum, to face p. 19; hero- 9 Bflstea says that this yqgic table is

posture faces p. 28 ; decent-posture a Special kind of support for the arms

faces p. 18, but di^prges from this de» of a who is about to practise

scription \n its details ; mjetiogftiagram concentration. It is made of wood

fiaoes p. 24 The order of the illustra- itojl is well known among ud&tin by

lions does not correspond to the order the name of * ohnngan '.


ii. 46 — ] Book II. Means of Attainment or Sddhana [192

the feet,— this is the even arrangement. — That arrangement in which one
finds entire ( sidhjati ) stability and ease, — this is the posture that is stahle-and-
easy. This is the one from among these [postures] which is approved by the
Exalted Author of the sQtras. An elaboration of this u» given in the words,
4Cas-is-easiest.^

C


47. By relaxation of effort or by a [mental] state-of-balance
with reference to Ananta—

a

— [A posture] results. With these words the sentence is com-
pleted. When efforts cease the posture is completed, so that there
is no agitation of the body. Ur the mind-stuff' comes into a
balanced-state with reference to Ananta 1 and produces the
posture.

Having stated what the postures are, he tells what are the means of attaining
them. 47. By relaxation of effort or by a [mental] state-of-balonoe with
reference to Ananta. A natural effort sustaining the body is not the cause
of this kind of posture which is to be taught as an aid to yoga. For if its
cause were such, the preaching of it would be purposeless in that it could
be naturally perfected. Therefore this natural effort does pot accomplish this
kind of posture which is to be taught and is contrary [to it]. For in so far
aa this [natural posture] is the cause of an arbitrarily chosen posture it is
the destroyer of the specific kind of posture. Consequently a man, practising
the specific posture as taught,* should resort to an effort which consists in the
relaxation of the natural effort. Otherwise the posture taught cannot be
accomplished.— «Or . . . with Ananta,^ the Chief of Serpents, who upholds
the globe of the earth upon his thousand very steadfast hoods, — [with him]
the mind-stuff comes into a balanced state and produces the posture.


48. Thereafter he is unassailed by extremes.

As a result of mastering the postures he is not overcome by the
extremes, by cold and heat and by the other [extremes].

He tells what is indicative of complete mastery of postures by saying 48. There-
after he is unassailed by extremes. The Comment explains itself by a mere
reading. Posture is also described in the Vishnu Pur&pa [vi 7. 89], “ Having
assumed a posture so as to poetess the excellences of the decent-postiyre and
the other [jpostures].”


1 Compare Bh. Gita x. 28. Anaat|%V&auki, the iford of 8erpenta. See alto MBh.
i. 85. 5 ff.


193] Varieties of restraint of breath ( — ii. 50

49. When there is this [stability of posture], the restraint of
breath cutting off the flov of inspiration and expiration
[follows].

After the mastery 1 of posture [follows the restraint of the
breath]. Inspiration is the sipping in of the outer wind ; expira-
tion is the expulsion of the abdominal wind. Restraint of the
breath is the cutting off of the flow of these two, the absence of
both kinds.

After describing [postures ], be shows that these precede restraint of the breath
and tells the distinguishing characteristic of this [restraint of the breath].
49. When there is this [stability of posture], the restraint of breath cutting
off the flow of inspiration and expiration [follows]. In the case of emission
(recdka) and inhalation ( puraka ) and suspension (kumbhaka), the words 4Cthe cut-
ting off of tt u flow of inspiration and expiration^ give the general character-
istic of restraint of the breath. To explain : when in inhalation the outer wind
sipped in is held inside, there is a break in the flow of inspiration and expiration ;
again when in emission the abdominal wind forced out is held outside, there is
also a break in the flow of inspiration and expiration. Similarly in the case of
suspension also. .This same is said by the Comment in the words CAftei the
subjugation of posture.^


But this [restraint of breath] is,

60. External or interne! or suppr» sed in fluctuation and is
regulated 1 in plaoe and time and . umber and is protraoted
and subtile.

It is external in case there is no flow [of breath] after expiration ;
it is internal in case there is no flow [of breath] after inspiration ;
it is the third [or] suppressed in fluctuation in case there is no
[flow] of either kind [neither of expiration nor inspiration], as the
result of i* single effort [to suppress both], just as water dropped
upon a very-hot stone shrivels up wherever it falls, so both at once
cease to be. And each of these three is regulated in space ; [each]
deals witff a certain amount of space. [Each] is regulated in time ;
in other words, defined by a limitation to a certain number of
‘moments. [Each] is regulated in nuq$£r ; the first rising up [of
the vital current from the navel to the p^&te is measured] by so

1 Many MSSt tjnifc this word^eand read jo ty tame.

1 The V&rttika says pandfito friyomto.

29 [■• nj


ii. 50 — ] j Book II. Means of Attainment or Sadhana [194

many inspirations and expirations. In the same manner, the
second rising up of the checked [vital current] is measured by so
many inspirations and expirations. Likewise the third. Similarly
it is gentle [in method] ; similarly it is moderate ; similarly it is
keen. Thus it is regulated by number. So then, practised in
these ways, [it becomes] protracted and subtile.

He introduces the sntra which gives the characteristics of the three particular
restraints of the breath by saying, 4tBui this.* The sQtra begins with the word
60. External and ends with the word subtile. The words 4Cin fluctuation*
are connected with each [of the three]. He refers to emission ( recaka ) when he
says £ln case . . . expiration.* He refers to inhalation (pftrafaz) when he says
<In case . . . inspiration.* He refers to suspension (kumbhaka) when he says
4?the third.* This same he makes clear when he says £in case ... of either
kind.* When by only one effort of retention there results an absence of both
inspiration and expiration, and when there is not, as before, an effort to prolong
a long stream of efforts of emission ; but, on the other hand, just as water thrown
upon a very-hot stone dries altogether and shrivels up wherever it falls, so this
wind, whose nature it is to flow, when its action is restricted by a mighty effort
of retention, becomes subtilized and remains in the body. "[Suspension] does
not inhale and so is not inhalation ; does not emit and so is not emission. The
words ideals with a certain amount of spaced means as measured by a span, [the
space between the outstretched tips of the thumb and the forefinger], by a vitasti
[from the extended thumb to the tip of the little finger], or by a hand. And
it is inferred as being external [in bo far as it causes] motion in a blade of grass
or a piece of cottbn in a windless spot Similarly if internal, it begins at the
sole of the foot and extends to the head. And it is inferred by [an internal]
touch light as that of an ant. [moving on the body]. A moment is one quarter
of the time required for the act of winking. [The wind] is defined by the limi-
tation of a certain number of these [moments]. An instant (main l) is the time
limited by strapping thumb and forefinger after having three times rubbed one's
own knee-pan with the hand. The first rising up (udghdta) measured by thirty-
Six such instants is called slow. The same [udghata] when doubled is moderate.
The same tripled, called the third, is keen. This same restraint of the breath
he describes as being regulated by number in the words 4fl>y number.* The
time for snapping thumb and forefinger as described is equal 1 6 the time defined
by the action o# inhalation and exhalation of a man in good health. 1 * * The rising
up* which has been made the object of the action of the first rising-up ts con
quered [and] mastered [a!^J checked. It is intended [by these measures oil

1 The meaning of the word ncutha might elaborated at length in moct of the

also be 4 at eaee ’ or 4 motionless \ later books of decadent yoga. Com* •

• See Karma Pur. ii. f ll. Tljii process is pare also Vftyu Pur. v. 79-81.


195] Fourth restraint of breath [ — ii. 51

instants to indicate] the time of a certain number of moments. [And this time
is equal to] a certain number of inspirations and expirations. Thus there is a
alight difference [between the two kinds of measures, between the mdtrd and the
inspirations and expirations]. This Bame [restraint of breath] when practised
day by day, [increasing gradually] by a day [at a time] or by a fortnight jor by
a month becomes, in so far as it is made to cover an increasing number of places
or of times, protracted. And in so far as it is reached by a concentration of the
most extreme delicacy it is $aid to be subtile, but not in so far as it is weak.

51. The fourth [restraint of the breath] transcends the ex-
ternal and the internal object.

The external object regulated in place and time and number is
transcended ; the internal object regulated in the same way is
transcended.; in both kinds of cases [restraint] is protracted and
subtile. Following after these there is no flow of either kind.
This is the fourth restraint of breath. Now the third restraint of
breath is without regard to objects, has no flow [of breath], is
begun once only, is regulated in place and time and number, and
is protracted Und subtile. But the fourth , 1 because, in consequence
of its mastery of the stages in order, it has made out the objects
of both expiration and inspiration, after transcending both [ex-
ternal and internal objects], is without flow and is the <fourth>
restraint of breath. This is the dit notion.

Thus the three particular restraints of breath have been characterized. The
fourth he characterizes with the words S-. The fourth [restraint of the breath]
transoendB the external and the internal objeot. [The Comment] explains
[the sotra] in the words «place and time and number.* Transcended means
cast down because its form has been mastered by practice. It is also protracted
and subtile. Similarly, ^Following after theses means the restraint of breath
which has external and internal objects and which follows after knowledge of
place and time and number. The fourth does not, like the third, arise by a
tingle effort and instantly. But while in practice and after having reached the*
various stages according as "t auoceeds in one stage after another it proceeds as
he says 4Cin co’nsequence oi its mastery of the stages. * It is objected, ‘In the
repressed fluctuation also there is no flow of either. Wha^then is [its] dis-
tinction from this [fourth]?’ In reply he says, «the third.* ^The third does
not follow after any regard paid to [objects] and ^completed by a single effort


* See Lings Par. viii. 111.


ii. 51 — ■) hook II. Means of Attainment or Sadhana [196

But the fourth is preceded by the regard paid to objects and has to be completed
by many efforts. This is the distinction. The object of these two, the inhale*
tion and the emission, is not considered ; but this [object] is regarded in respect
of place and time and number. This is the meaning.

r>a! As a result of this the covering of the light dwindles
away.

I n the case of the yogin. who is practising restraints of breath, the
karma capable ol covering discriminative thinking dwindles away.
What this is they tell in the words, “ Having covered the sattva
which is disposed to light with delusion (indr aj ala) made of infatu-
ation, [undifferentiated-consciousness] assigns the same [obscured
form] to deeds which are not to be done.” Therefore by practising
restraint of breath his karma which covers the light, together with
its bondage to the round-of-rebirth, becomes powerless. And from
moment to moment it dwindles away. And in this sense it has
been said, “ There is no self-castigation higher than restraint of
breath ; from it comes purity from defilement and the clear shining
of thought.”

He describes the subsidiary purpose [served by] restraint of breath. 02. As a
result of this the oovering of the light dwindles away. The covering is that by
which the sattva of the thinking-substance is covered, in other words, hindrances
and evil. He explains [the sQtra] in the words ^restraints of breath » Thinking
(jfiana) is that by which anything is thought. It is the light of the sattva of the
thinking-substance. Discriminative thinking is the thinking of discrimination.
For this [hindrance], s$Bce it covers discriminative thinking,' is called the coverer
(dvaranlya) according |to the sQtra of Pftnini iii. 4. 68 which says that] bhavya
and geya and pravacCfma and similar forms have been shown to be used as
exceptional forms in|th| sense of agent, just as for instance the words kopaniya
and rahjanlya. So Ijpmtalso the affix of the future passive participle is used to
denote the agent, ’fmf JWord «karma» connotes the merit which results from it
and the hindrance M^rict is the cause of it. On this same point he states that
there is a concurrent ofropinion with those who have the tradition ( Agamin )
in the words «'YV]}(£ A is they tell.* Extreme infatuation is passion.
Undifferentiated -consciodralb ss ( avidyb ) too. which is inseparable from it, is also
to be understood by tf- g* A deed «not to be done* is wrong-living. An

objector ag|s, ‘If re&««. , re restnct^fi* 68 ev ^ to dwindle, what need is
there of self-castigatto# I^gpepiy , • "^_^ay8 ^becomes powerless.

It does not dwindle away emereq^ *Therefomio make it dwindle away altogether
self-castigation is needed. On this point alsonws&tes that there is a concurrence
of opinion with those who have the tradition (dgamin) by saying CAnd in this


• m


197] Fixed attention and withdrawal of the senses [ — ii. 54

sense it has been said.lb Uanu also [vi. 72] says, “ By restraints of breath one
should bum up defects.” And that restraint of breath is also an aid to yoga
is also stated 1 by the Vishnu Purina [vi. 7. 40-1], “But restraint of breath
which masters by practice the wind called breath is to be recognized as being
seeded and as seedless. When the two winds, breath (prana) and out-bfeath
(apdna) have overcome eaoh other, that is two-fold. The third is the reeul t of
s subdual of these two.”

Furthermore,

68. For fixed attentions also the central organ becomes fit.

Merely in consequence of practice in restraint of breath [the
central organ becomes fit for fixed attentions] in accordance with
the statement [i. 34 ], “ Or [he gains stability] by expu lsion and
retention 01 breath.”

Furthermore, S3. For fixed attentions also the oentral organ becomes fit.
For restraint of “ f °adies the central organ and makes it fit for fixed

attentions.


Now what is the withdrawal of the senses ?

64. The withdrawal of the Benses is as it were the imitation
of the mind-stuff itself on the part of the organs by dis-
joining themselves from their obj^ts.

When there is no conjunction with t. ir own objects, the organs
in imitation of the mind-stuff, as it is in itself, i become, as it were,
restricted. When the mind-stuff is restricted, *like the mind-stuff
they become restricted ; and do not, like th<p Subjugation of -the
senses, require any further aid. Just as whdnAhe king-bee 1 * flies
up, the bees fly up after him; and ".hen hb kettles down, they
settle dow n after him. So when the mind -stuff’ is restricted, the
organs are restricted. This then is the witfyfla*|jyval of the senses.
The [yogiq] being refined i n this way by ^Abstentions and other

[aids], begins, tor the sake [of attaining] constraint* the withdrawal of the
senses. In order to introduce the sQtra giyijjo' ^wjguishigg characteristic
he asks the question, 4tNow ?» _ 3dgtlMK4pe»4|^ ’ word 6j- . ■ . them-

selves and ends with tb' rfM i 1 ^ 1 **. ...narawhfr Of fib hepses. The mind-stuff
also is not in contact with the fevarious kintf'Of tBings], Bounds and so forth,

1 Compare Ntradfya Pur. xlvii. 16-17. ,

* .Compare Prajna Up. ii. 4. Repeated below iii. 38. Tlyfc iff wfypt we call queen-bee.


ii. 54 — ] Book II. Means of Attainment or S&dhana [198

which bring about infatuation and attachment and anger. And because it is not
in contact with them, the eye and the other organs are not in contact. This is
what is called the imitation of the mind-stuff by the senses. Because, as the
mind*stuff settles down upon an entity, the organs of this [mind-stuff] cann ot be
said to imitate the mind, since their object is always external, — therefore he
says tin imitation ... as it were.> [In the compound beginning] with the
word tiheir own ($va)& he shows by the locative case [in the word o&Mtw] that
the reason why the mind-stuff is imitated is because of the property common [to
the mind-stuff and to the organs], namely, the disjunction from their own objects
of sense. He elaborates [the meaning of J the imitation by saying tirhen the
mind-stuff is restricted.^ The similarity is that the effort which causes the
restriction of both is similar. Here he gives a simile 1 by saying tifust as when
the king-bee.^ He applies [the simile] to the thing illustrated by Baying CSo.>
On this point also [he quotes] a sentence from the Vishnu Purina * [vi 7. 48],
“A man skilled in yoga, having restrained the organs attached to [the various
things], sound and so forth, should make them imitate the mind-stuff, in that
he is intent upon the withdrawal of the senses.” And the motive for this is
shown in the same place [vi. 7. 44], “ In the case of men who have become
motionless, the result of that [withdrawal] is perfect mastery of the organs. A
yogin with unmastered [organs] cannot accomplish yoga.”


55. As a result of this [withdrawal] there is complete mastery
of the organs.

There are some who think 1. that the mastery of the organs is
a lack of desire for the various things sounds and so forth.
Longing (vyasanei) is attachment in the sense that it puts him
a long way from | vy-asyati) a good. 2. [Others think that] unfor-
bidden experience is legitimate. 3. Others, that there may be
conjunction [of the organs] with the [various things] sounds and
so forth as one desires. 4. Others think that there is a subjuga-
tion of the senses when there is no passion or aversion after the
thinking of the various things is without pleasure or pain. 6. Jsigi-
favya thinks that it is refusal to perceive [the various things
beginning with sound] as a result of the mind-stuff’s singlenees-of-
intent. And as^rwesvlt^f this, when [the yogin's] mind-stuff is
restricted, the orgsms-a rAetnctefcfd, land] there is not as* in Ijjie
case of the subjugmion of the other vJf^ans, any further need*of


* Compare iii. 38.


* See also Nfcradlya Pur. lxvii. 19-20.


1 ®®] Complete mastery of the organs [ — ii. 55

means performed with effort. But this mastery whiph is this
singleness-of-intent is the complete [mastery].

The eQtra is explanatory of this [mastery], 66. As a result of this [with-
drawal] there is complete mastery of the organs. An objector asks, ‘Are
there other and incomplete masteries in comparison with which this may be
called complete? * Undoubtedly, [he says in reply]. He shows what these are
in the words Cthe various things beginning with sounds He elaborates the
same by saying ^desire.* Desire is passion, attachment. According to what
derivation ? It is that which rejects him [or] throws him away from a good.
When there is none of this, there is absence of desire, in other words, mastery,
2. He describes yet another [incomplete] mastery in the words lunforbidden.*
That devotion to things which is not forbidden by the Sacred Word and other
[authorities], and the absence of sense activity with regard to those things which
are forbidden by these. Such is legitimate because it does not depart from the
iaw. o. He describes yet another [incomplete] mastery in the words ^contact
[of the senses] with the [various things] beginning with sounds Contact of
the organs with the [various things], sounds and so forth, as one desires. The
meaning is that with regard to matters of enjoyment he is independent and not
dependent on enjoyment. 4. He d scribes yet another [incomplete] mastery in
the words, 4tao passion and no hatred.* Some say that it is a thinking with-
out pleasure or pain, of the [various things], sounds and so forth, by a detached
observer. 6. He describes that mastery which is approved by the author of the
sntras and is also approved by the Supreme Sage, as he says, 4Cas a result of the
mind-stuff’s BinglenesB-of-intent.* J&igisavya rr s that when the mind-stuff
together with the organs is aingle-in-intent, ti e is no sense-activity with
regard to [various things] beginning with sound. The [commentator] says that
this is the oomplete mast >ry in the words, it . , . the complete.* The word
Cbut* distinguishes it from other masteries. For the other masteries, in so
far as they are in eontact with the poisonous snake 1 (Sfitn^a) of objects-of-sense
(etfaya), do not esoape the possibility of contact with the poison of the hindrances.
For even a man who knows the lore of poisons and who is a perfect master of
serpents does not take a serpent on his lap and quietly go to sleep. This
mastery, on the other hand, from which all intermixture with objects has been
removed, since [in it] there is no distrust, is called complete, as he says, Cnot
ss in the ease the subjugation of the other organs.* Although, in the oase of
consciousness of endeavour [ii. 15], when one organ is subdued there is still
used of another effort to conquer the other organs, yet, when the nfind-stuff is
restricted* there is no suoh need of further exertion in-order to resfcict the
other se ns— > This is the meaning.


* * Os# is v hick poise*  129 1 iAeordins to the Gana on Ptnim ti. S. 100.


ii. 55 ] Book II. Means of Attainment or Sddhana [200

Here in this Book he has taught the yoga of action and the hindrances to karzba
and the fruitions of karma ; the painfulnees of these [karmas] and also the
[four] divisions: a group of five subjects appertaining to yoga.


Of Patanjali's [Yoga- treatise] the Second Book, entitled Specifi-
cation of the Means of Attainment


Of the Explanation of the Comment on Pataftjali’s [Yoga-treatise], whose
Explanation is entitled Clarification of the Entities (Tattva- V&if&radl), and
which was composed by the Venerable V&casp&timiyre, the Second Book,
called Specification of the Means of Attainment, is finished.


BOOK THIRD

SUPERNORMAL POWERS


26 (■-•••- «]


BOOK THIRD

SUPERNORMAL POWERS


The five indirect aids [to yoga] have been described Fixed

attention 1 is [now] to be described

1. Binding the mind-stuff to a place is fixed-attention.

Binding of the mind-stuff, only in so far as it is a fluctuation, to
i! ? navel or to the heart-lotus or to the light within the head or
to the tip of the nose or to the tip of the tongue or to other * places
of the same kind or to an external object, — this is fixed-attention.

The Fi^t and Second Books described Concentration and the means thereto. In
the Third Book the supernormal powers are to be described which are reasons
for propagation of Celief and which are favourable to this [concentration and
its means]. These supernormal powers are to be accomplished by constraints
(samyama). And constraint is the combination of fixed-attention and of con-
templation and of concentration. So inasmuch as these [three] are the means of
accomplishing the supernormal powers, we-L* « here a mention of these three,
in order to make known the particular quality f each as being direct aids to
yoga and as contrasted with the five which are indirect aids. And with
regard to these [three ], fixed-artention and contemplation and concentration
are in the relation of cause to effect, and the serial order 9 [of causes and
effects] is specified. Therefore this order is followed in the order of the state*
ments. Accordingly, fixed -attention is the first to be characterized. So he says
1. Binding the mind-stuff to a plaoe is fixed-attention. He describes a
place belonging to one’s self by the wordB {to the navels By the words
Mother places of the same kind» we must understand the palate and so forth.
The binding is a relation. He describes an external place by the words {or
to an external.* And with an external object the mind-stuff as such cannot
have a relation. 8o it is said, {only in so far as it is a fluctuation,* in other
words, only so far as it is a perception. On this point also thereto a Pursna, 4
“ Having mastered his breath by restraint of breath and his organaeby with*
•

* See also ii.29 and 58. , I. 856 (K*thora » ed.) and frequently.

1 Compare Mftitri Upan. ti. 20 and fiaruda 4 Vithpu Pur. ri. 7. 45 and Nftradiya Par.

• Par. ec*sri. 21. lxrii.21.

* CnmntrA Patnfiiali i Mahlhhfava L 225* :


ii. l — ] Book III. Supemoi'mal Powers or Vibhuti [204

drswal of the senses, he should make a localisation of the mind-stuff upon some
auspicious support” Auspicious supports are external, Hirapyagarbha and
V&sava and Prajspati and so forth. And this has also been said,* “The incarnate
form of the Exalted One leaves one without desire for any [other] support.
This should be understood to be fixed-attention, when the mind-stuff is fixed
upon this form. And what this inoarnate form of Hari, on whioh one should
ponder, let that be heard by thee, 0 Euler of Men. Fixed-attention is not
possible without something on which to fix it. HU face is calm, hu eye like the
lovely lotus petal, his cheek is beautiful, the expanse of his broad forehead is
resplendent [with the light of thought], the charming ornament of the ear-ring
is placed under the lobes of his ears whioh are equal in sue, his neck is [marked
with three lines] like a shell of the sea, his great broad chest is marked with
the £rivatsa, his belly has a deep navel and broken folds, he has eight long
arms or, as Vishnu, four arms, his thighs and legs are evenly placed, his excel-
lent ' lotus feet [are arranged] as a mystio diagram. He is like Brahma with a
stainless yellow garment, and is adorned with a diadem and with charming
armlets and bracelets ; he has ^Brftga [Vishnu’s bow] and the discus and the
mace and the sword and the conch and the rosary — upon him, Visbpu, let
the yogin ponder ; and, lost in him, concentrate his own mind until,
O King, the fixed-attention becomes firmly fixed upon him only. While per-
forming this or while doing, as he wills, some other action wherein his mind
does not wander, he should then deem this [fixed-attention] to be perfected.”

2. Focusedness of the presented idea upon that place is
contemplation.

The focusedness of the presented idea upon the object to be
contemplated 5 in that place, in other words, the stream [of presented
ideas] of like quality unaffected by any other presented idea.

He characterizes the contemplation which is to be effected by fixed-attention.

2. Foousedneee of the presented Idea upon that plaoe is contemplation.
Focusedness is singleness-of-intent. The Comment is easy. On this point
also there is a PurBna, 4 “ An uninterrupted succession of presented-ideas single-
in-intent upon Hie form without desire for anything else, that, 0 King, ia
contemplation. It ia brought about by the first six aids [to yoga].”

3. This feme [contemplation], shining forth [in conscious-
ness] Its the intended object and nothing more, and, as. it
were, emptied of itself, is oonoentration.

When the contemplation only shines fojth [in consciousness] in the

* Vishpu Pur. vi. 7. 77-85 sad Nlradlya * Sae Garuds Pur. ccxxxv. 88. 29.

Pur. Ixvii. 54g62. 4 Viahqu Pur. vi 7. 89-

* Readies vara, not kara.


205] Contemplation and concentration [ — iii. 4

form of the object-to-be-contemplated and [so] is, as it were, empty
of itself, in so far as it become s identical with the presented-idea
as such, then, by fusing [itself] with the nature of the object-to-
be-contemplated, it is said to be concentration.

He gives the characteristic of concentration which is to be attained by concen-
tration [in the sQtra] S. This same [contemplation] .... concentration.
He explains [the afltra] in the Words, «the contemplation only.* The words
(•shines forth [in consciousness] in the form of the object-to-be-contem-
plated* signify that it shines forth in the form of the object-to-be-contemplated
and not in the form of the contemplation. That is why he says, (Cempty.*
An objector asks, 1 If it be empty, how could the object-to-be-contemplated
appear?’ In reply he says, «as it were.* He gives the reason for the same
in the words, «by fusing [itself] with the nature of the object-to-be-con*
♦emulated. » On this point also there is a Pur&na, 1 “The knowing of this
same [VishnuJ as he is when free from two-term ed-relations (kalpand) is a
completion of the contemplation by the central-organ, — this iB termed con-
centration.” A two-termed-relation (kalparUi) is & distinction between the
contemplation and the object-to-be-contemplated. Concentration is free from
this. This is the meaning. Kevdhvaja after having described to Kh&ndikya
the eight aids to yoga, sums them up by saying/ “The soul (kietnjna) has
the means. Thinking is the means. It is inanimate. When [thinking]' has
completed its task of rolease, it has done what it had to do and ceases.”


These same three, fixed-attention am. contemplation and con-
centration, in one are constraint.

4. The three in one are constraint.

When having a single object the three means are called constraint.
So the technical term [now laid down] in this system for these
three is constraint.

These three, fixed-attention and contemplation and concentration, era used in
many pieces [as one]. It would be laboured to enunciate [each time] their
respective technical terms. So for brevity’s sake he introduces e aQtre
which [leys down] e technical term (jparibhOfo-sttru) by aaying (These same.*
4. The three in ond ere constraint. He explaine [the sQtia] by aaying CWhen
having a single object* He removes a doubt aa to whether [these three]
art the* [naturally] expressed meaning [of the word constraint] by aaying
Cfor these three.* The system (/antra) is that autuoritative-book (fAi/ra)
by which yoga is systematised or expounded, (la this system* mesas in

1 Vishnu Pur. vi. 7. OOssd NlmdTye Pur. Ixvii tt.

* Vishyu Pur. vi. 7, 92 and Nlradlys Pur. Ixvii ft.


iii. 4 — ] Book III. Supernormal Powers or Vibhuti [206

what belongs to this [system]. And the passages [where the word] constraint
[ia used] are such as [iii. 16], “As a result of constraint upon the three
mutations.”

5. Ah a result of mastering this constraint, there follows
the shining forth of insight.

As a result of mastering this constraint- there follows the shining
foith <y concentrated insight. 1 Just in* proportion as constraint
enters the stable state, in that proportion the concentrated insight
becomes clear. „

He mentions the result of success in constraint, for which the means-of*
attainment is practice, by saying, 6 As a result of mastering this con-
straint, there follows the shining forth of insight. The shining forth of
insight is due to the fact that it remains in the clear stream of [the yogin who
is] not overcome by other ideas. The Comment is easy.


6. Its application iB by stageB.

The application * of it, that is, the constraint is t6 that stage which
is next the stage already mastered. For by overleaping the next
stage without having first mastered the lower stage, [the yogin]
does not gain constraint in the highest 3 stages. If he did not
[gain that constraint], how could he gain the shining forth of
insight ? Again, the constraint of one who by the grace of the
Ifvara has gained a higher stage does not apply to such things as
the mind-stufF s thinking 4 in other persons who are on the lower
stages. Why is this ? Since the purpose of this has been obtained
from elsewhere. Yoga is itself the only spiritual guide [which can
show] that this stage is next to that stage. How is this ? Because
it has been said to be thus,

By yoga, yoga must be known,

Yoga increaseth yoga’s store. .

10 fl ox who fc> r yoga care hath shown
In yoga rests for evermore.

* Sec elso L S&ja SO* ; i. p. 88* ; L 44, * A good iUustration is found ia bung,

p. M; I. WS1, pp. 100 7 , 101-, 102*, £nr. ii. 2, m which Vifsu »■ edored
108; iv. 28, p. 80S. In this system jwu- Rom his feet np to his smile. ,
jM is psychological rather than ethical * Compare ii. 27. 4 See iii. 19.


207] Stages of concentration [ — iii. 7

Bat when applied, in what cases can this constraint have these results ? In
reply he says, 8, Its application is by stages. The author of the Comment
particularises [the meaning of the word] stage by saying, dCof it.* Its appli-
cation is to that state as yet unmastered which is next to the stage [already]
mastered. When the reflective concentration, whose object is ooarscf ia
mastered by constraint, the [next] application of constraint is to super-reflective
concentration which has not yet been mastered. When this too is mastered
the application [of the restraint] is to deliberative [concentration]. Similarly ,
[when this is mastered], the* application is to super-deliberative [concentration j.
Hence in the Purftna, 1 when the balanced-state the object of which is coarse is
perfected, then there ’a later introduced that concentration the object of which is
subtile, in that the various weapons and ornaments are removed : “ Then the
wise man should ponder upon the serene form of the Exalted One, without its
conch-shell and mace and discus and Qirftga, but having its string of beads.
When the fixed-attention has become stable upon this form, then he should keep
mmind the form without the ornaments, especially the diadem and the armlets.
The wise man should make the god to have only one limb and [should think]

4 1 am he Then after that he should devote himself to thought of 4 1 V* But
whv after having mastered a lower stage does he master a higher stage ?
[And] why is there not a reveise process ? In reply to this he says, ^without
having first subjugated the lower stage, [the yogin^does not.* For a man pro-
ceeding to the Qanges from Qilahrada does not reach the GangeB unless he first
get to the Meghavana. CAgain of one who by the grace of the I?vara has gained
a higher stage* — why does he say this? Because the purpose of this, the
success in the higher stage whnh comes ne* has been obtained from elsewhere,
that is, from the devotion to the I^vara. Fo* *rhen an act has its action finished,
then a means-of-att&ining, which does not produce anything in particular, falls
outside the function of [what can be calleo] a means. The objector says, 4 This
may be true. It it» known in a general way (tyamatak) what the different
subordinated stages are. But how is there a knowledge of which comes after
the other?' In reply to this he says, Cthis stage.* Yoga which has been
previously mastered is the reason for procee iiug to the thinking of the yoga
which comes after. This passage is to be understood by supposing that a stale
ia equivalent to [a yoga which] contains a state.

7- The thfee are direct aids in comparison with the previous
[five].

The same three, fixed-attention and contemplatp^^

jtion, are direct aids to conscious concentration with

the previous means, the five * beginning wtyh the abstentions.

1 Vishnu Pur. vi.7. 8S-88 and Niradiya Pur. Ixrii. tft-65.

• Reading ye mddtbhynh ptHcabhyah.


Hi. 7 — ] Book III. Supernormal Powers or VibhQti (208

But why it constraint applied in various placet, and not the other five aide
to yoga, although all without distinction are aids to yoga? In reply he aaya,
7. The three are direot aids in comparison with the previous [five]. These
thrqp means-of-attainment, inasmuch as their object is the same as [the object of
the yoga] to be accomplished, are direct aids. But abstentions and the other
[four] are not so. They are therefore indirect aids. These three means-of-
attainment are direct aids only with reference to [yoga] oonscious [of objeots],
but not to [yoga] not conscious [of an object]. Foj; since [yoga] not oonscious
[of an object] is seedless [and has no object], it does not have the same objeot as
these [three]. And since after these have been restricted for a long time, [uncon*
scious yoga] arises subsequent to the higher pauionlessness consisting in the
undisturbed calm of perception, another name of which is the higher limit of
conscious [yoga]. So he says, «dThe same three.$


8. Even these [three] are indirect aids to seedless [concen-
tration].

Even these, the three direct means-of-attainment, are indirect aids to
seedless yoga. Why is this ? Since this latter occurs even when
these are absent.

8. Sven these [three] are indireot aids to seedless [oonoentration]. Hence
that which determines the relation of direct aid to this is sameness of objeots and
not a mere sequence. For this [sequence] in so far as it might exist in the case of
devotion to the Ifvara, which is an indirect aid, would make the application [of
direct aid] too wide (vyabhicAra). If this is established, even this over-wideness
of the characterization which would include mere sequence could not apply to this
[constraint]. Therefore it is still less probable that [this] constraint would be a
direct aid to [concentration] not oonscious [of an object]. To show that this is
so it is said, CSince this latter occurs even when these are absent. >


Now since during the restricted moments of the mind-stuff the
changes of the aspects ( guna ) are unstable, 1 of what sort at those
times is the mutation of the mind-stuff?

9. When there ia a becoming invisible of the subliminal-
impressioff of emergenoe * and a blooming visible of the


1 Tbit again it apparently a portion of the
fragment of Pafiea$ikhg quoted in
ii« 15 (p. 18S* 1 of tbeOalootta text), to
Jbe placed before fragment 11 of Garbt.
The phrase >■ alio found at ii. 15,


p. 185“ ; iii. 18. p.204* ; iv. 15, p. 8ft$.
Compare for pas of word tfttm is the
muss of * behaviour ’ ii 88, p 177*

(Calc. ed.).

Reading sMiMsiwp ><U u rMdrS u.


209] Alternation of emergence and restriction [ — iii. 9

subUminal-impression of restriction, the mutation of re-
striction iB inseparably oonneoted with mind-stuff in its
period of restriction.

The subliminal-impressions of emergence are external-aspects
(dharma) of mind-stuff ; since they do not consist of presented-
ideas they are not restricted when presented-ideas are restricted.
The subliminal-impressions of restriction are also external-aspects of
mind-stuff. <When these two [states of mind-stuff] become visible
or become invisible^ [that is when] the subliminal-impressions of
emergence are withdrawing and the subliminal-impressions of re-
striction are being brought into place. The period of restriction is
inseparably connected with the mind-stuff. Accordingly the muta-
tion of restriction is this periodic alteration of subliminal-impressions
of a single mind-stuff, because then the mind-stuff has nothing but
subliminal-impressions, as has been explained [i. 18] with reference
to the concentration of restriction.

With the intent to«give information here about the three mutations which are to
be made use of in the BQtra [iii. 16], 14 As a result of constraint upon the three
mutations, ” he asks, incidentally to the topic of seedless [concentration], d^Now ?£
In the case of emergence and of yoga conscious [of objects], since there is an ex*
perience of an accumulation of various ver clear mutations, there has been no
introduction of the question. liut in the c. of restriction the mutation is not
experienced. Furthermore it cannot be saia that because it is not experienced
it does not exist. For inasmuch as mind-stuff is made up of three aspects
( guna) } and since also the changes of the aspects are unstable, an absenoe of
mutation even for a moment is impossible. The answer to the question ia the
satra 9. . . . emergence «... mutation of restriction .... In comparison with
concentration unconscious [ of any object] conscious concentration is emergence.
Restriction is that which restricts. It is the undisturbed calm 1 of perception
[and it is nlso] the higher passicnlessness. There is a becoming visible and a
becoming invisible of these two subliminal impressions of emergence and the
subliminal impression of restriction, that is to say. the becoming invisible of the
subliminal-impression of emergence and the becoming visible of the subliminal-
impression of restriction. The mind-stuff vhich is the substance in the period
of mutation, that ia, on the occasion of restnction, is inseparably connected with

This does not refer to sarnddAi in general, is an undisturbed succession of clarified

but only to the ooncentiaU^L insight eamsfcdrs. See also i. 18, p. 47* ; ii. 27,

iprqjku) described in i. 47-48, which p. 166 1 (Calc, ed.) ; also j 51 and the

is without influence from objects and sfitras iii. 9-15.

27 [*.©.•, if]


[210


iii. 9 — ] Book III. Supemoi'mal Powers ^or VibhUti

both of these states. For the mind-stuff as substance, whether in the eonseious
or unconscious state, doeB not differ in itself in so far as subliminal impres-
sions become visible or become invisible [within it]. An objector says, 4 Just as
later hindrances based upon undifferentiated-consciousnees iavidyti) cease when
undifferentiated-consciousness ceases, and consequently there is no need of further
special effort to repress them, so the subliminal-impressions based upon ideas of
emergence may cease at the very moment of the cessation of the emergence. And
therefore for the repression of them there should be no need of the subliminal-
impressions of restriction.’ With thiB in view he says, «Tbe subliminal-impres-
sions of emergence.^ The cessation of a cause in general is not a reason for the
cessation of the effect. So that even if the weaver cease to be, there need be no
cessation of the cloth. But with the cessation of that cause which is constitutive
of the nature of the effect, there is a cessation of the effect. Now the other
hindrances have been said to consist of undifferentiated-consciousnees (awdyd).
So with the cessation of that undifferentiated-consciousn^ss it is right that these
[hindrances] should cease. But the subliminal-impressions whose essence is
presented ideas are not such. For even if the idea be restricted for a long time,
we observe a connecting recollection at the present time. Therefore even if the
presented-ideas are repressed (nnrtti\ still an accumulation of subliminal-impres-
sions of restriction must be resorted to in order to repress these [subliminal-
impressions from presented-ideas]. This is the meaning. The rest is easy.


10. This 1 [mind-stuff] flows peacefully by reason of the
subliminal-impression.'

By reason of the subliminal-impression of restriction, the peaceful
flow of the mind-stuff requires dexterity in the application of the
subliminal-impressions of restriction. When these 2 subliminal-
impressions become weak, the subliminal-impression which has
external aspects of restriction is overwhelmed by the subliminal-
impression which has external aspects of emergence.

But if there be an overwhelming (abhibhava) of the emergent subliminal-impres-
sions in all respects, of what sort is the mutation with a powerful subliminal-
impression of restriction ? In reply to this he says, 10. This [mind-stuff]
flows peacefully by reas of the subliminal-impression. Calm flowing is a
flowing of a succession of restrictions only undefiled by the ‘subliminal impres-
sions of emergence. Why is dexterity of subliminal impressions needed, but
not ordinfry subliminal-impressions ? In answer to this he says, 4CWh%n thqpe

Us* t *

1 The sQtra is an initatyg% of dharma * * If the variant ndbhibkuyaU

parin&ma , as explained in the Com- be^a^ep^d, tat must refer, as Visa*
men t on iii. 13. gpati points out, to tytfttfcAso*

a In the text as received, tat refers to


211] Substantial and temporal sing leness-of -intent [ — iii. 12

subliminal-impressions become weak.^ The word «these (tatty refers back to
restriction. But those who have the reading ‘are not overwhelmed’ would
refer by the word «these (lad-aty to emergence.

11. The 1 * * mutation of concentration is the dwindling 9 of
disperstveness and the uprisal of singleness-of-intent
belonging to the mind-stuff.

Dispersiveness * is an external-aspect of the mind-stuff. Single-
ness-of-intent is an external-aspect of the mind-stuff. The
dwindling of dispersiveness means that it disappears ; the uprisal
of singleness-of-intent means that it becomes apparent. The
mind-stuff is inseparably connected with both of these as the
substance [in which they inhere]. This same mind-stuff being
inseparably connected with these two external-aspects which
belong to itself, — the passing away [of the distributiveness] and
the coming forth [of the singlene6s-of-intent], — becomes concen-
trated. This is the mutation of concentration

He shows what tbe state of the mind-stuff is in the mutation of concentration
conscious [of objects]. 11. . . . dispersiveness .... mutation of concentration.
Dispersiveness is distractedness. Being existent ! it does not (sow na) cease to
be. Dwindling ie disappearing. Because a non-existent does not arise [in con-
sciousness], an uprisal is a becoming appare” t. The mind >tuff which is insepar-
ably connected with the passing away oi «' oersiveness and the coming forth
of singlenese-of-intent, which are its external-. ^pects — the dispersiveness having
the passing away and the singleness-of-intent having the coming forth — this
mind-stuff is concentrating itself, that is, is becoming qualified as having a
concentration which ib to be attained in successive steps.


12. Then 4 * again when the quiescent and the uprisen pre-
sented ideas are similar 6 [in respect of haying a single
object], the mind-stuff has a mutation single-in-intent.

The quiescent is a previous presented idea of one whose mind-stuff
is ooncentsated ; the upi *en is a later presented-idea of the same


1 The tfltra if an instance of lakfona *

• porindma, as explained in iii. IS.

1 Bee i?. 28. *

* If the reading be sd no? v |(rt3f4fc»lation

rs* simpler, * It does %ot cease


According to the echeme gf iii. 13 this
would appear to be an instance of
aoa$tk&-pannama.

The MaQl)tlabh& explains the word 4 alike'
(tnlya) b j adding rfcartf 0 yatr*na.


iii. 13 — •] 'Book III. Supernormal Potvers or VibhUti [212

kind as this [previous presented-idea], But the mind-stuff of
concentration is likewise inseparably connected with both. This
is so until the breaking down of the concentration. This same
notation of singleness-in-intent belongs to the mind-stuff in which
it resides ( dharminah ).

IS. Then ... a mutation . . . Then again, that is, when the aerial order of-
the states of concentration is completed, the quiescent and the uprisen [that is]
the past and the present are similar-preaented-ideaa) that is, similar and presented-
ideas. But the similarity is a result of the singleness-in-intent. The words
Sfof one whose mind-stuff is concentrated* indicate that the concentration ia
completed. ' The words «This is eo* mean that it is single-in-intent He tells
what the limit of this is by saying Cuntil the breaking down of the concentra-
tion* [that is] until there is a falling [of the concentration].


18. Thus, with regard to elements and to organs, mutations
of external-aspect and of time-variation and of Intensity
have been enumerated.

<Thus,> by the already (iii. 9) described mutations of mind-stuff in
external-aspect and in time-variation and in intensity. The muta-
tion of external-aspect in elements and organs, the mutation of
time-variation and the mutation of intensity are to be understood
as having been described. Of these [three] the mutation of ex-
ternal-aspect takes place in the substance and is the becoming
invisible of the external aspect of emergence and the becoming
visible of the external aspect of restriction. And the mutation
of time-variation is the restriction having the three time- variations,
[that is,] connected with the three time-forms (< xdhvan ). This
[restriction], one may say, puts aside the first tin e-form whose
time-variation is yet to come, and passes into the present time-
variation, without however passing out of its state as external-
aspect. But in this [condition] it becomes manifest as being what
it is. This is its second time-form. And it is* not completely
severed from past or from future time-variations. — Likewise
emergence has the three time-variations ; it is connected with the
three time-forms. Having put aside the present time-variation it
passes over into the past time-variation, without however passing
out of its state as external-aspect. This is its third time-form.


213] Three types of mutation [ — iii. 13

And it is not completely severed from the future and the present
time-variations. In the same manner, emergence, completing itself
again [as a phenomenalized form], having put aside the future time-
variation, and not having ppssed out? of its state as external-aspect,
passes into the present time- variation. In which [time], since 4h is
[emergence] manifests itself as it is, it obtains its functional
activity. This is the second time-form of this [emergence]. And
it is not completely released from past and future time-variations.
— In the same way it continues, now restriction, now emergence. —
Similarly the mutation of intensity [is described]. In it, during
the moments of restriction, the subliminal-impressions of restriction
become powerful and the subliminal-impressions of emergence
become weak. This then is the external-aspects’ mutation of
Intensity. In these cases the substance has a mutation in its
external-aspects ; the external-aspects have mutation in time-varia-
tions ; and the time-vr> nations also have mutation in intensities.
Coneyquently the changes of the aspects {puna) do not remain,
even for a moment, devoid of mutations of external-aspect and of
time- variation and of intensity. For ( ca ) the changes of the aspects
( guna ) are unstable. 1 And we say [hereafter in this sutra] that it
is of the very nature of the aspects to cause activity. — Thus we
have to understand the three- fold mu* ition [of external-aspect and
of time- variation and of intensity] i, the case of elements and
organs, because there is the distinction between the substance and
the external-aspects. But in the strict sense there is but a single
mutation. For the external-aspect is nothing more than the sub-
stance itself. Since it is merely an evolved form of the substance
amplified in the form of an external aspect. In such cases there
is within the substance an alteration of the condition of the present
external-aspect with regard to past and future and present time-
forms. There is no alteration of the matter. Just as by dividing
a plate of gold 'there is an alteration of its condition, in so far as it
is altered ; [but] there is no alteration of the gold. \n opponent
pbjects as follows, ‘A substance is nothing over and above the

> Once more this appears to be quoted, from fragment If of PaScafikha in its completer
. form. Compare above, p. 18 t, note, and p. 206 , note.


iii. 13 — ] Book III. Supemoi'mal Powers or Vibhuti [214

external-aspects [which as properties depend upon it]. For [a sub-
stance] cannot pass beyond its [own] previous existence. If, again, '
[substance] were a something present in all its external-aspects, but
different from them, then it would come to be known 1 * ( viparivarteta )
as a something itself absolutely unchanged, although connected*
with a series of changes [in the external-aspects].’ But this, [he
replies, involves] no weakness Lin our position]. [And] why [not] ?
Because we do net maintain an absolute 3 knity. [The fact is that
all] this world passes out of the state of a phenornenalized
[individual] form. 4 And this we say because [we are bound to]
deny that [the world] is permanent [in the sense of not entering
into mutations]. Again [the world of things] continues to exist
even after it has passed out [of phenornenalized individual existence].
For [we are obliged] to deny its annihilation. On being refunded
[into its primary cause by the dissolution of the coarse elements,] it
[the world takes on] a subtile form. And by reason of this Bubtile
form it becomes unapperceived. An external-aspect * in the
mutation of time- variation exists really in [all three] time-for ms
[It is said to be] past [that is] having the past time- variation,
though not completely severed from future aDd present time-
variations. [So too it is said to be] future [that is] having the
future time- variation, though not completely severed from present
and past time-variations. [So also it is said to be] present [that
is] having & present time-variation, though not completely severed
from past and future time-variations. Take the case of a m an
enamoured of one particular woman— he has not thereby lost his
sexual feeling for the rest of women-folk. Here the difficulty is


1 Compare abhidMna-fakti-parivfita iii. 17,
p. 223* (Calc. ed.).

9 The word viparivarteta implies a series
of changes in some subordinate and
additional thing, or some added pro*
pert jin tte unchanged thing. Compare

panvqrtanam in Sarva*dar 9 ana-saih-
graha (Anand&prama Sanskrit Series),
page 8, line 8 from below.

1 This word is discussed fn Patafigali :


Mah&bh&sya I. 180\ 207”, 266* (Kiel-
horn).

4 This vyakti is the condition of the thing
when so changed as to be manifest to
our consciousness, that is, when we
can observe the effects it brings about.

8 In the Yoga system the dharmd is real ;
in the Vedanta it is unreal (vivaria).
The dharma is constantly changing
injo another thing ; but involves the
J toZefpt of permanence.


215] External-aspect, time-variation, intensity [ — iii. 13

brought forward by others * that since all three time-variations are
[thus said to be] connected with everything that is in the mutation
of time- variation, it must follow ( prdpnoti ) that the time-forms ^are
confounded.’ We meet this objection thus ( tasya parihara). What
is termed the common nature of things as external -aspects cannot
be brought into existence [at our pleasure]. The common nature
[as external aspect] exists [independently] and therefore in regard
to it the distinctions of time-variations must be maintained. Thus
it must not be said that the common nature of this or that thing
exists only in the present time. Because if this were so, the mind-
stuff could never become subject to passion [for a certain object].
For anger [against some other object being by supposition now
present in the mind-stuff], desire would not move actively forth.
Moreover it is not possible for the three time-variations to belong
simultaneously to one and the same [individual] phenomenalized
form. But what is possible is the presentation ( bhava ) in successive
times of its pherfomenal 1 [form] by the operation of the conditions-
which-phenomenalize ( vyaiijaka ) it. Thus it has been said,* “ The
[outer] forms [when developed to] a high degree and the [inner]
fluctuations [when developed to] a high degree oppose each other ;
but the generic forms co-operate with these when developed to]
a high degree.” Hence [time-variations] are not confounded. To
take an example. When we say absolutely ( eva ) that passion for
a certain thing has shown itself, [we do not mean] that at that
time [passion] for another object is non-existent ; [but we mean
that passion for another object] continues to be present [in the
mind-stuff] though in a generic [unphenomenalized] form. Hence it
[the passion] for that [other object] exists at that time ( tada tatra
tasya hhava). A similar [explanation can be given] in the case of
time-variation [also]. The three time-forms do not belong to the
substance but to the external- aspects. These [external-aspects]
have ft time-variation or do not have a time-variation. *And as
entering into various intensities are known by different names
[which imply] an alteration of intensity but? not of matter. Thus

1 Compare i. 11, p. 87* (Calc. ed.).

* Compare ii. 15, p. 136* (Calc, ed.) and the parallel* give* there.


iii. 13 — ] Book III. Supernormal Powers or Vibhuti [216

the same stroke is termed one 1 * * in the unit-place and ten in the.
ten’s place and a hundred in the hundred’s place. So too the same
wojpan is called a mother and a daughter and a sister. Some
persons have objected ‘ that in the case of a thing which mutates in
intensity [the substance of the thing] must logically be held to be
(prasanga) absolutely permanent. How*is this ? On the ground
that it is functional activity 8 of the thing which determines the
[special] time-form of the thing. Thus a thing is said to be a future
thing when it is not exerting its own activity, and a present thing
when it is thus active, and a past thing when it has ceased from
activity. Hence, say these persons, it follows that substance and
external-aspect and time-variation and intensity are all absolutely
permanent.’ But that [alleged] weakness, [we say], does not exist
[in our position] ; for we hold that although a substrate ( gunin ) is
permanent, its aspects ( guna ) suffer a variety of antagonisms.
Just as any arrangement of parts, (sarhsthdna) [which are coarse
elements,] is only an external-aspect of the imperishable subtile
elements, sound and the rest, and has a beginning and an end, so
the resoluble [into primary matter] is only an external-aspect of
the imperishable aspects (puna), the sattva and the others, and
has a beginning and an end, and to it [and to the rest] the term
evolved-form ( vikard ) is applied. The following serves as an
illustration. 1 . The substance clay passes from its external-aspect
in the form of a round lump of clay into another external-aspect.
And thus as an external-aspect enters into mutation in the
form of a water-jar. 2. The water-jar-form putting aside its future
time-variation assumes its present time-variation; here is the
mutation as time-variation. 3. The water-jar is every moment
undergoing oldness and newness [in its parts] and thus passes
through mutations of intensity. Thus the substance also has
another external-aspect, which is, the intensity ; and the external-

1 Contrary to Mr. G. R. Kaye's opinion the Mihira (born 505 near Ujjain) in ibis

following passages showjbat the place- PaftcaaiddhfintikS (ed. Thibaut, 1889),

system of decimals was known as early p fe xxx.

ae the sixth century a.d. See Aryabhata * The point is that the thing is neither

(born 476 a.d.) in his Aryabhata produced nor destroyed, but is its

(ed. Kern, 1874), p. x And 3 4 * * »* ; VarSha actmty.


217) One ultimate type of mutation [ — iii. 13


aspect has also another time-variation, which is, the intensity.
There is therefore only one [kind of a] mutation of matter, though
variously described [by us]. The same explanation is applicable
to other things 1 also. The mutations of external-aspect ancf of
time- variation and of intensity [as here described] do not transcend
the substance 2 as such. .Hence there is only one kind of a muta-
tion which includes all those varieties we have described. 3 * * What
then is a mutation \ It is the rise of another external-aspect in
a permanent matter after an earlier external-aspect has been
repressed.


As being relevant to the discussion and as being useful to further discussion
he gives the divisions of the mutations of elements and of organs in the sQtra
Thus . . . enumerated. He explains [the sG f a] by saying «CThus.^ An
objector asks, ‘It is only the mind-stuff that has been described as being in
mutation, not its various kinds, the mutation of external-aspect and of time-
variation and of intensity. «So how can this [that has been said] be extended
by analogy * to these latter ? 9 In reply to this he says, <£ot emergence and of
restriction.^ Although the words external-aspect and time- variation and inten-
sity have not been previously mentioned, it is not however true that the mutations
of external-aspect and of time-variation and of intensity have not been described.
This is the point in brief. — To continue. The mutation of external-aspect has
been described in the words of this sQtra [iii. 9], ‘‘subliminal-impression
of emergence . . . subliminal-impiesaion of rer «ction.” And in showing this
mutation of external-aspect, he has at the aam* time indicated the mutation of
time-variation, which has its locus in the external -aspect, as he says in the
words, «the mutation of time- variation. » A time-variation ( laksana ) is that
by which a kind of time is characterized. For, characterized by this, a thing is
distinguished from other things with other times connected with them. The
expression, «tho restriction having three time-variations» has its explanation
in the words «connected with the three time-forms.^ The word Ctime-form^
is an expression for time. «This [restriction], one may say, puts aside the first
time-form whose time-variation is yet to corned Does it then go beyond its
state as an external-aspect possessing a time-form ? No, he says. ^Without
however passing out of its state external-aspect,^ That very mutation which
was yet to come is now present ; but the restriction [whioh was •yet to come]


1 This would apply to the whole itfopor.

* fhe mutations do not differ from the

substance, but are the conditions for

the self-identity of the substance.

* For the reason that all change depends

28 [«o,b it]


upon the dharmin which remains un-
changed amid change.

The words Btidefa, anudefa, and fide$a are
discussed in Pat&qjali's Mahabh&gya
on i. 1. 56, vRrt 1, p. 133 foot (Kiel-
horn's ed%


iii. 13 — ] Book III. Supernormal Powers or Vibhiiti [218

does not [now] cease to be a restriction. This is the meaning. — Now comes his
explanation of the present in the words «in which condition it becomes manifest
as being what it is» in other words, in its nature 1 as producing certain effects
peculiar to it. «CA manifestation» is a moving actively forth. This is its
second time-form as compared to its first time-form which was yet to come.
An objector says, 1 This may be so. But if one has reached the present after
having put aside the future time-form, and after having put aside this [present] he
is to reach the past, then Sir, there would be a creation and destruction of [these]
time-forms. And tpls is not a desired result. For nothing is made to grow out
of a non-existent, nor is an existent ever destroyed.’ In reply to this he says
And it is not.» The meaning is that he is not disconnected from the future
and the past time-forms, inasmuch as they persist in their generic form. Having
shown that the future restriction has a present time-variat‘on, he Bhows that the
present emergence has a past, its third form, by saying, «In the same way,
emergeuce.» So then is the restriction alone future, and is the emergence not
[future]? No. As he says, «Inthe same manner, now emergences So there
is a re-existence as regards the generic form of emergence, but not as regards the
[individual] phenomenal ized form. For the past does, not exist again. — Manifesta-
tion of itself, as it is, is the same as the fact that that which is able to produce
effects becomes visible. This mutation of time-variation, a& described, recurs again
and again in things of this kind, as lie says, «In the same way . . now.» — Ho
describes the mutation of intensity, which has only been pointed out by the
mutation of external-aspect, by saying, «Similarly, . . . intensity.» In the case
of external-aspects, the time-foym of which is present, the intensity i9 equiva-
lent to the prepuce or absence of power. And the mutation is the gradation of
this [intensity] from moment to moment. He concludes this discussion by
the words «In these cases.» He specifies the various mutations as having a
variety of relations 2 * * * in accordance 8 with the teaching of the system, as he says
^In these ca9es the substance.» Then is this mutation of the aspects (guna)
occasional? The reply is, No. As he says Consequently. » But why is this
mutation perpetual ? In reply he says ^cFor ( ca ) . . . unstable. » The word
4CFor (ca)» is in the sense of cause. The «changes» are the behaviour (prac&ra).
Why is it just so ? In reply he says «that which constitutes the aspects (guna)J>
4:1s said to be» later in this same [sQtra]. — So this three-fold mutation of mind-
stuff also is expounded by the author of the sQtr&s with regard to elements and
organs as he says <cThus.>? This three-fold mutation is the result of the distinc-
tion between substance and external-aspects ; it is based upon the distinction
between the substance and the external-aspects. So we have (tatra)* a mutation

1 The thing i* what it i*„frn£f n) because is a thing in relation.

the mutation is fulfilling a purposed 0, Referring to the Pancafikha’s calarh ca

This is the essence of any individual gunavrttarri\ which is not, however,

form. ' here expressly attributed to him. Com-

* A sambandha if a relation ; a sambandhin pare p. 213, note 1.


219] Substances and external-aspects contrasted • f — iii. 13

such as a cow or a water-jar as an external-aspect of the substances earth and
other elements. And the external-aspects have mutations of time-variation such
as past and future and present. Again the cow or other [animal] changed into
its present time-variation has mutations of intensity, such as childhood and boy-
hood and youth and old age. And the water-jar or other [thing] has its mutatioiv>f
intensity, such as newness or oldness. — Similarly organs, which are substances,
have external aspects, which are the seeing of blue or of other colours. The
external aspect has the present and the other time-variations. The time-variation
which has the seeing of a jewel or some other [ thing] has a mutation of intensity,
such as the clearness or lack of clearness [of the seeing]. This mutation, thus
described, of elements and of organs, is to be understood as being based upon
the distinction between the substance and its external aspects and time-variations
and intensities. But as referring to the lack of distinction between them, it is
mentioned when he says «But in the strict sense. » The word «but» differen-
tiates this from tho view that they are distinct. The absolute reality of this
[mutation] is asserted, but [the absolute reality] of the other [three-fold] muta-
tion is not denied. Why ? «For the external-aspect is nothing more than the
substance itself.^ An objector Bays, ‘ If the external -aspect is merely an evolved
form of the substance, how t^en should the idea prevail in the world that there
is no confusion in the case of these [three] mutations ? ' In reply to this he says,
<tin the form of an external-aspect.^ The word ^external-aspects is here equiva-
lent to external -aspect and to time-variation and to intensity. It is the substance
that enters into evolved-forms through the medium of these. So the [evolved-
form] is one and is also not confused with [another]. Because [the
external-aspects] the medium of this [substance!, although not distinct from the
substance, are not confused with each other. An objector says, 4 If the external-
aspects are not distinct from the substance, and if „e time-forms of the substance
are distinct, then since the external-aspects are not different from the substance,
the external-aspects would be like a substance. 1 To which lie replies, «Cln
such cases ... of the . . . external-aspect. » The «state» means a particular
arrangemont-of-parts. 1 Just as a plate of gold* or of some other substance
may receive a particular name and [be called] a necklace or a svastika, [so] there
is an alteration only as [concerns the form of the ornaments], but the matter
gold does not become something not gold, because there is no absolute distinction
[between the substance and the external-aspect]. This is the intention of what
he is about to say. He brings forward a Buddhist, who holds the doctrine of
the absolute unity [of .substance and of external-aspect], by saying, «CAn opponent
objects as follows.^ 4 For the necklace and other things thus coming into
existence are external-aspects only and are real in the strict sense. Bu^ there is
no such thing called “gold”, someone thing present in many external-aspects [and
yet different from them} But if it ^e plumed that tljt matter persists even in

1 Compare i. 43, p. 90 l the parallels given there.

9 See ;i. 38, p. 170* (Calc. ed.).


iii. 13 — ] Book III. Supernormal Powers or Vibhuti [220

the external-aspects which are ceasing to be, then [the matter], like the Power
of Intellect (citi), would not enter into mutations, but would continue existing ^
absolutely unchanged. The continued existence in another form means the
throwing away of its own form as consisting of mutations and the exchange of
thi?for another, the absolutely changeless. Just as the Power of Intellect (citi),
although the aspects divide themselves into one alteration after another, does
not relapse from its own self and remains absolutely unchanged, so likewise
gold, &c. y would remain absolutely unchanged, — pi ©position which you do not
admit. So matter is something not different from Kb external-acpects.’ This ob-
jection he refutes by saying «this, [he replies, involves] no weakness.^ «Why?»
«Because we do not maintain an absolute unity.» Had we to admit the absolute
permanence of matter, as of the Power of Intellect 1 (citi), then we should have
lain open to this taunt. We, however, do not take our stand upon the doctrine
of absolute permanence. On the contrary, we say that all these three worlds,
and not merely master, pass out of their phenomenalized individual forms, as pro-
ducing effects fulfilling a purpose. Why ? «CFor [we are bound to] deny that
[the world] is permanent^ on the ground of a source-of-valid-ideas. For if the
water-jar were not to pass out of its [individual] phenomenalized form, then eve~
though reduced to the condition of potsherds or of broken bits, it would be as
before clearly apperceived as a water-jar and it would have to fulfil the purposes
[of a water-jar]. [But this cannot be.] Consequently the* three worlds are not
permanent. 4 Very well then, suppose that [the jar] does not exist permanently
in so far as it is not apperceived and does not fulfil the purposes of a water-jar,
because like the sky-lotus it is illusory (tucchaV In reply to this he says, «even
after it has passed out.^ It is not absolutely illusory existence, so that it would
be absolutely impermanent. Why? Because [we are obliged] to deny its
annihilation, on the ground of a source-of-valid-ideas. To explain. Whatever is
illusory existence, cannot be apperceived or produce effects, quite as in the case
of the sky-lotus. Whereas these three worlds are from time to time apperceived
and do produce effects, [and bo are not absolutely illusory existences]. Similarly
we should cite as illustrations proving existence (sattvahetu) (a) capacity for rising
into consciousness, (b) materiality, (c) fitness for external-aspects and time-varia-
tions and intensities and others, [which proofs] are wanting in the case of the
sky-lotus or the man’s horns, which are absolutely illusory existences. Similarly
[the jar] is not absolutely permanent so that it would be absolutely permanent like
the Power of Intellect (citi), but on the contrary it is [only] in some respects
permanent. And thus it *4 established that it enters into mutations. So we
must unders&nd that, in the states of the lump of clay and of tho following
states, thf effects such as the water-jar, which are yet to come, have an existence.
The objector says, ‘ This may be true. But if an effect even after it has passed
out [of individual phenomenalized existence] exists, why is it not apperceived ?
The reply is, 4SOn being refunded.^ «Refund#l» [that is] resolved into its own

1 Reading c%Ur t akUr.


221] Simultaneity of contrary qualities [ — iii. 13

oause. subtile forint [that is] one not capable of being seen. And hence
there is no apperception of it. — Having thus substantiated the mutation of
externa] -aspect, he substantiates the mutation of time-variation also, in so far as
they are inseparably connected with each other, by saying, {in the mutation of
time-variation.* The meaning is that each time-variation is inseparably con-
nected with the two others. The objector says, 1 When one time-variation*is in
connexion, other time-variations are not perceived. How then [are these] connected
with the former ? ' In reply he says, {Take the case of a man.* For an absence
of experience does not do away with that which is established by the spurce-of-a-
valid-idea. For the very fact that thiB [time-variation] has been made to rise
[in consciousness], is the source-of-the-valid-idea for the real existence of these
[other time-variations], because a non-existent thing, such as a man’s horns,
cannot be made to rise in consciousness. Hr sets up the objection uttered by
another when he says, {Here ... in the mutation of ti me- variation. * * If when

an external-aspect is present, it is at the same time past and future, then all the
three time-forms would be confounded. And if the time-forms are to be in
successive times, then it would follow that the production of the non-existent
[becomes possible].’ He meets the objection with the words, {We meet this
objection thus.* For the existence of external-aspects in the present only
is established by experience. From this it follows that [external-aspects are]
in relation to easier and to liter time. [Why does it follow?] Because of
course a non-existent does not come into being, nor is an existent annihilated,
as he says, {Because if this were so, the mind-stuff could never.* For the
mind-stuff at a time following after anger, is experienced as having the external-
aspect of passion. And if passion did not exist at the time of anger, in so far as
[passion] was [at that time] future, how then could [passion] rise into conscious-
ness? And if it should not rise in consciou. .ess, how could it be experienced?
[The objector continues,] ‘ Even if this be granted, why would there not still be
confusion of time-forms ? ’ The question is [contained in the phrase,] {Moreover
it is not possible.* ‘ What (Asm) cause is there for not confounding [the time-
torms]? ’ And (ca) is used in the sense of 'but ’. The answer is given in the
words, {the three.* The three time-variations cannot possibly exist simul-
taneously. In what? In one fluctuation cf mind-stuff. But in successive
times it is possible for each one of the time-variations to exist in its phenomenal
[fbrm] by the operation of the conditions whioh phenomenalize it [the time-
variation]. Since the discussion of the time-variations depends upon the things-
which-havmtime*variationg, therefore the time-variations, in so far as they have
the form of the things-which-have-time- variations, belong tojor have the same
nature as (tad^sttA)] these, that is, the things-which-have-time- variations.

• On this same point he states his concurrence of opinion wilt Pafioafikha
the Master by saying {it has been said.* This has been explained 1 before.
Me brings the discussion to* close by the word ^Hence.* The time-forms are

* ii. 15, p. 135" (Calc. ed.).


iii. 13 — ] Book III. Supernormal Powers or Vibhuti [222

not confounded in so far as external-aspects which are opposed to each other, for
instance, those that have become visible and those that have become invisible,
are refunded into [their own causes]. He gives an illustration in the words <KTo '
take an example.^ Previously it was shown that anger must be thought to be
in relation with passion. Now a passion referring to one object is shown to
be iff relation to a passion referring to another object. He takes up the subject
referred to in the illustration by saying, «A similar [explanation] in the case of
time-variation.» An objector says, ‘ Even when it is assumed that [the mutations]
are not absolutely distinct, the distinction tnay yet qxist. So when the external-
aspect or the time-variation or the intensity alters, the substance, in that it is not
distinct from tl em, should also alter. And it is just this that we do not accept,
because it is contrary to the experience that the [permanent] substance is in-
separably connected [with its own states which are impermanent].* In reply to
this he says, «The three time-forms do not belong to the substance.^ Because it
is the external-aspects, which are distinct from it, that have the three time-forms.
That it is the external-aspects which are connected with the three time-forms is
made clear by the words, «£These [external -aspects }>> CHave a time-variation»
means manifested [that is] present. «CDo not have a time-variation» means un-
xnanifested [that is] future or past. Of these [two], those-that-have-a-time-varia-
tion, when they attain to the various intensities, either to powerfulness or to
weakness, are referred to as being different 1 from other intensities, but not from
other matter. The word «intensity» is here used in the sense of external-
aspect and of time-variation and of intensity. What he means to say is this :
Now it is experience alone which determines the difference or the absence of
difference between the substance and the external-aspects and the other [muta-
tions]. Since the external-aspects and the rest are not absolutely identical with
the substance, to the extent that the common nature of the external-aspect and
of the other [mutations] should have the form of the substance. Nor is theie
absolute difference, to the extent that the common nature of external-aspects
should be [as different as] horses and cows. Experience moreover although
not establishing the fact that there is absolute [identity or difference], does
show the substance as one * and as persisting in the external-aspects and other
[mutations] which have the quality of coming into and of passing out of experience,
and it does exclude the external-aspects from each other. [All] this is experienced
by every one. So we conform ourselves to this experience. We are not at
liberty to throw it away, and to dispose of the experiences of the external-aspects
as we like. On this same point he gives an example from ordinary lifo in the
words, CTlius the same stroke.» Just as the stroke, which in itself is precisely
the same, in relation to the various positions is called a hundred and other
names, so &e substance, which in itself is precisely the same, is repeatedly
given a name in accordance with the alteration of its external-aspect and its

1 Reading any attend

3 Thus the bauddha theory p. 205 4 (Calc, ed.) is partially conceded.


228] The Self does not pass through mutations , [ — iii. 13

m

time-variation and its intensity. This is the meaning. To illustrate the matter
he gives another simile in the words, «So too the same woman. » At this point
he raises an objection, made by an opponent, by saying, «intensity.» When
there is a mutation of intensity, [that is] a mutation of external -aspect and of
time-variation and of intensity, one would be involved in a fault with regard to
the absolute [permanence] of the substance and of the external-aspect and of the
time-variation and of the intensity. He asks, «How?» [The objector] gives the
answer in the words, «On the ground that the functional-activity . . , the time-
form.^ For we can see that functional-activity of that which is future in its
time-form as belonging to curds is present as belonging to milk, because [the
functional activity of the future] is shut off by this [functional-activity of the
present]. For this reason when the external -aspect which has the time-variation
(laktana) of the curds, although existent in the milk, does not exert its own
functional-activity, then the undertaking of the business [of the effects to be
accomplished] by curdling and the other [changes], is called future. And it is
called present when it is thus active ; and past when it has done the business
of curdling and the other [changes] and stopped. To this extent then it
must follow that the substance and the external -aspects and the time-variations
and the intensities, although persisting in all three times, are absolutely [per-
manent]. For permanence is existence at all times. And in [these] four cases,
whether they exist all times or do not exist [at all times], there is no produc-
tion. 1 This much only is the time- variation (lafatana) of the absolutely permanent.
And in the case of the Power of Intellect (citi-fdkti) also, which is absolutely
permanent, th re is no other special feature. This is the point. He meets the
objection in the words «But that [alleged] weakness does not exish» There is
no weakness there. Why ? Because although f v \ substrate {guniti) is permanent,
the aspects (guna) suffer antagonisms, 3 * * the one [the aspects] being capable of
being overcome and the others of overcoming. This is their variety. What he
means to say is this : Although there is existence at all times in the case of all
four, still, in so far as there is a variety in the antagonisms of the aspects i$una\
in that the various evolved-forms of which this [variety] consists become visible
or invisible, and in so far as they enter into mutations, there is no absolute
[permanence]. Whereas in the case of the Power of Intellect (citi^akti) there is
no becoming visible or becoming invisible of evolved-forms which belong to itself.
Thus [this] is absolutely permanent. As they say, 9 44 The learned call that perma-
nent the nature of which does not perish.' 1 That this variety of antagonisms is
the cause of the variety of the evolved forms in the case of both the evolving-
substanoe and the evolved-substance is shown by the words, €J*ist as.» Just

1 U it is to exist at all times, then, like the 1 This word vimarda occurs on<& only in the

citifaktif it oould not be produced. Or Bh&gya. But Vficaspati uses it four

if it is not to exist at any time, then, times besides this. i. 2, p. 11 s ; iii 13,

like the horns of a man, it ccftild not pp. 209 15 , 210 1 * 9 (Calc. ed.).

be produceu. This is B&lar&ma’s gloss. * Compare MBh. xii. 318. 102 (« 11826).


iii. is — ) Pooh III. Supernormal Powers or VibhUti [224

*

M the arrangement of parts, 1 * * as distinguished (lakfana) by being a mutation of
earth and of other [coarse elements], is itself merely an external aspect and has a
beginning and an end, in that it becomes invisible, — [so] resound and the rest,*
the subtile elements sound and touch and oolour and taste and smell, are not
perishable as compared with their own products, and do not, like them, become
invisible. He shows how this is in the oase of the evolvlng-raatter by the
words, «so the resoluble.* €To it the term evolved-form (vikOro) is applied.*
But the Power of Thought (citi-fdkti) is not subject to this kind of evolution of
form. This is the point. — Having thus taken up by way of illustration both
the evolved-matter .and the evolving-cause, which are well enough known to
thinking persons, he takes up in the case of the evolved-matter only, whioh is
well enough known to the popular [mind], the varielty of the antagonisms of the
aspeots (gum) which leads to variety in the mutations of external-aspect and of
time-variation and of intensity, by saying, «The following serves as an illustra-
tion.* There is no necessity that the mutation of intensity should belong to
time-variations only. For all [three], external-aspect and time-variation and
intensity, are expressed by the word ‘ intensity Therefore the one [kind of]
mutation is intensity which is common to all. Accordingly he says, CThus the
substance only.* He gives the distinguishing-characteristic of the mutation
which includes [all] by saying, «in a permanent.* The word ‘external-aspect’
is an expression for external-aspect and for time-variation n and for intensity, in
so far as it is that in which they inhere.


Among these [mutations],-

14. A substance conforms itself to quiescent and uprisen
and indeterminable external-aspects.

An external aspect * is [to speak precisely] only a power of the
substance as limited by its pre-established harmony * [with regard
to effects]. And it is known as an actual existence, of wljich the
existence is inferred by the kind of ettect which it generates, as


1 V&caspati uses samsthdna as the equiva-

lent to saihnivefa iii. 26, p. 288*, and iv,

18, p. 291*. It is applied onlj to collec-

tions of mahdbhuta ; and is sometimes

notdiffer^nt from external form (mfirtt),

iii. 58, p. 272 1 , and iii. 18, p. 210* ; or

agairf? the parts of grains, iii 18,

p. 205 4 * * * * * , iii. 15, p. 216 s ; or the parts of

words, iii 17, p. 222 11 ; ex of the limbs

of birds, ii. 46, p. 185 10 . See also ii. 28,

p. 170“ and iii. 26, p. 289* (Calc. ed.).


* The same entity, regarded from the side
of permanence, is a mutation (part-
ftSma) ; from the side of change is an
external aspects '

1 The word yogyatd is used in the sutra
ii. 58. The word y^gyatva^iM in the
sQtra ii. 41 and in the fih&fya, p. 182“
(Calo. ed,). V&caspati uses it *flve
times : ii. 6, p. 116* ; ii 28, p. 157* ;
ii* 82, p. 176 10 ; iii. 14, p.211 10 «


225] The three states of substance [ — iii. 14

one or another [form] of the single [substance]. Of these [forms]
that is called present, if it be that the external-aspect is passing
through [the state] of its peculiar functional -activity. This is different
from the other external-aspects both {be quiescent and the indeter-
minable [states]. But when it has rejoined its general [or latent]
form, then how could that external-aspect be distinguished from
any other, since it is then.of the very nature of the substance itself?
There are, as every one knows, three of these external-aspects
within the substance, the quiescent and the uprisen and the indeter-
minable. Of these the quiescent are those that have come to rest by
finishing their functional-activity. The uprisen are those in active
function ; and these [uprisen] are immediately-contiguous ( sam -
anantara) to the future time- variation. While the past come after
tuo present. Why do not the present come after the past ? Because
there is no relation of antecedent and consequent [between them].
The relation of antecedent and consequent in the case of the future
and the present 1 is not the same as [this relation] in the case of the
past * [and of tKe present]. Therefore there is [no later external-
aspect] immediately contiguous to the past. Consequently the
future only is immediately contiguous [as being antecedent] to the
present. — Now the indeterminable [external-aspects], what are
they? Everything containing the e^ence of everything. Upon
which it has been said, “ That which in the various forms 8 of taste
and other [subtile elements] contains the mutations of [the coarse
elements of] water and of earth is found in plants ; likewise [that
which is mutable] in plants is found in animals, and of animals in
plants.” In this sense, in so far as the common nature is not
destroyed, we use the term ' everything contains the essence f
everything.’ Still, because of connexion with place and time and
form 4 and cause, the external-aspects do not of course manifest
themselves at the same time. 5 That which passes through a

* The Vttrttika Bays that this it pr&gabh&va. crimination is mafie. The contrast

1 In ttxis case there is pr&gdhvansa. between the two is similar to the

* Compare VBcaspati’s quotation iv. 13, Cartesian use of 'clear* and 'distinct.*

p. 291* from the Vfiju Pur. ; and also 8 The Bi^Sner MS. and the text of Bodos

Yogavasifla, Utpattiprakai^a 78. (Bom. Sanskrit Scr.) f p. 134 B , both read

4 The word ? *pa is used for colour and form ; vpabandh&t.

the word dkdra for form when a dis-
29 [b.o.b, it]


in. 14 — ] Book III. Supernormal Powers or Vibhuti [226

succession of these external-aspects, whether manifested or unmani-
fested, and which has as its essence the generic form and the
particular , 1 and which is present-in-all-but-diflerent-from-them*
(anvayin), — that is a substanfce. But the [Yogacara] who holds
that this world is nothing but external-aspects without [a sub-
stance] present-in-all-but-different-from-them, — for him there would
be no experience. Why would this be so ? [The reply is,] how
could one consciousness of a subject-of-experience ( bhokrtvena ) be
held responsible nr a deed done by another consciousness? And
there would also be no memory of this [consciousness]. For there is
no such thing as recollection by one consciousness of something seen
by another [consciousness]. And it is the substance permanently
present-in-all-but-different-from-them which, upon the recognition
of a thing is recognized as participating in the alteration of the
external-aspect. Consequently it is not true that [this world] is
nothing more than external-aspects without [a substance] present-
in-all-but-different-frora-them.

He gives the distinguishing-characteristic of this substance t6 which the three-
fold mutation belongs by the sotra. 14. Among these [mutations] a substanoe
conforms itself to quiescent and uprisen and indeterminable external-
aspects. A substance ( dharmin ) is a thing that has external-aspects (dhartna).
And because, unless one knows the external-aspects, one cannot know the
substance, he makes known what the external-aspect is in the word «pre-
established-harmony.» «The substance^ means a material object such as clay.
«Only a power» [that is] the power of producing the dust and the lump of
clay and the water-jar. This is the external-aspect,' in so far as these are
contained in this [substance] in an unphenomenalized state. This is the point.
An objector says, ‘ In so far as these exist therein in an unphenomenalized state
they may become visible from within it, but how can the capacity to fetch
water [in the jar] and similar [ purposeful acts], which could not have been got out
of their cause [the clay], be obtained by them [that is, the finished products] ? ’
In reply to this he says, <Cas limited by its pre-established -harmony.^ The
power to produce the water-jar is defined as being pre-established-harmony for
things which fetch water. Hence the power to fetch water aid the other
[purposeful] act* are also obtained by the water-jars and other things from their
own cause £nly. Thus [the capacity to fetch water] is not aecidental*|

' Compare i. 7, p. 21, and iii. 44, p. 257' * See also L 45, p. 96 ; iiL 13, p. 205* ;

(Calc. «d.). iii. 44, p. 257* (Calc. ed.).

* Reading dharmah. ,


•f 1


227 ]


Past and present and future [ — iii. u

regard to the substance]. This is the point. — There is another interpretation.
One might be asked, 4 What are substances? * The. reply is, «of the substance
as limited by its pre-established-harmony .» One might be asked, 4 What is
an external-aspect?' The reply is, «An external-aspect is only a poMter. , »
The meaning is that an external-aspect is only a pre-established -harmony
belonging to these [substances]. Hence it is proven that the thing which has
this [external-aspect ] is the substance. Thus it becomes clear. — He describes
the source-of-the-valid-idea*[ which proves] the real existence of these [external,
aspects] in the words, «And it ... is inferred by the kind of effect which it
generates.» Of the single substance in one or another form as dust or as a
lump of clay or as a water-jar. This is the meaning. And it differs because
there are evidently different effects. This is another way of putting it (iti
y&vat). It is observed [or] apperceived. With regard to these ( external-aspects]
he describes the difference bf tween the lump of clay, which strikes upon [the
linking substance of] experience and is present, and the quiescent state of the
clay as dust, and the indeterminable state of the clay as water-jar by saying «Of
these [forms] that is called present.» If there be no difference, then the dust
and the water-jar would l^ive their functional-activity co-extensive with that of
the 1 *mp of clay. This is the point. But in the case of the unphenomennlized
lump of clay, the establishment of the difference, as stated above, is impossible.
[This] he says in the words, «But when.» What [then] is this [difference 1 ?
By establishment of what difference will there be a differentiation ? Having
thus mentioned that there [this] establishment of a difference between the
external-aspects, he analyses this difference Li the words, «There are, as every
one knows.5» The word «upusen» mean oresent. He now deduces the
priority and the sequence of the time-forms in the words, «And these.» A
question is raised in the words, «Why does not?» 4 For what reason does not
the present come after the past ? ’ This is the meaning. * The reason is, «CThere
is no relation of antecedent and consequent [between th£m].» By speaking ^f
the object [that is, absence of antecedence and consequence] he indicates that
which contains as its object [tho absence of antecedence and consequence],
that is to say, the non -apperception [of this object]. He shows what this same
non-apperception is, in so far as its properties are opposite to those of appercep-
tion, in the words, «in the case of the future and the present.» He brings the
discussion to a close with the word, «Consequently.» Consequently (tat)
means for this rpason. The ture only is immediately contiguous as being
antecedent to the present ; but the past is not. The present is immediately
contiguous to the past as being antecedent to it ; but the indeterminable is not.
•Therefore it is established that the youngest of the time-forms is the past An
objector says, 44 This may be true. The uprisen and the past may be surmised

Compare tho passage at the 4tad of the intensified. It is an external-aspect of

Explanation of iii. 15, 41 Power also is the mind anil it is inferred only by the

a subtile state of effects that arc expcrfcgcc of iff coarse effects."


iii. 14 — ] Book III. Supernormal Powers or Vibhuti [228

to be those external-aspects which are in experience and those which have beea
experienced. But external -states which are indeterminable cannot, in so far as
they are indeterminable, be surmised.” With this in mind he asks, <CNow . . . ?>
WhaJ; are the indeterminables ? In what things do we look 1 for them ? To
this the answer is in the words ^Everything containing the essence of every-
thing. Upon which it has been said.^ This is made consistent in the words,
4C . • • of water and of earth.& For, in the case of water which contains [the
subtile elements of] taste and colour and touch and sound, and in the case of
earth which contains odour and taste and colour and touch and Bound, various
forms containing the mutations are observed as perceived in the taste and other
[subtile elements] which are found in the root and fruit and blossoms and foliage
and in the other parts of trees and creepers and shrubs. This cannot be a
mutation of earth which is not of a similar essence, or of water which is not of a
like kind. For, os it has already * been consistently stated, there can be no pro-
duction of that which does not already exist. Similarly in the case of animals,
human beings and beasts tame or wild, various tastes, &c., are observed coming
from mutations of plants. For these [human beings and other animals] in eating
the fruits [and leaves] and so on acquire a rich variety of forms, &c. In the same
way, plants are observed to have a variety of forms coming from the mutations of
animals. For it is known that pomegranates become as large as coco nuts when
sprinkled with blood. He brings the discussion to a close with the words,
€ln this sensed Thus everything, earth and water and all, contains all tastes
and other [subtile elements]. He gives the reason for this in the words, 4Cin so
far as the common nature i» not destroyed.^ Because, in so far it is
recognized everywhere, that-which-is-aaserted (jdti) of the common nature <jf
earth and of water is not destroyed. An objector says, ‘If everything
contains the essence of everything, then, Sir, since everything everywhere is
always in every part close at hand, there would be a manifestation of all existences
whatsoever at one and the same time. For an effect whose cause, lacking nothing,
is close at hand, ought not long to delay.’ With this in mind he says, 4Cwith place
and time.^ Although everything containing the essence of everything is a cause
[of everything], still there has to be [a manifestation] 1. of that [particular]
place which belongs to a [particular] effect [of this cause]. For instance,
Kashmir is the place of the saffron-plant. Because although these [causes]
exist in P&iicftla and other countries, there is no coming actively forth 1 [of the
plant]. Accordingly there ' no manifestation of the saffron-plant in a place
such as PaficsAa. 2. Likewise during the hot season, since no rain moves
actively forth, there is no manifestation of rice-plants. 8. Similarly a doe
1 Heading samVcfamahe. spati it is the equivalent of dbhivycfati

* Compare ii. 19, p. 149° ; iii. ( 11, p. 201* ; and occurs ii. 4, p. 111 s ; iii. 13, p. 203 1 ;

iii. 13, pp. 206 17 , 207*; and asato iii, f 14, p. 214 9f . B&larama glosses the

’ nupajanandt , ii. 15, p. 132*. word vtdyamdnatd dvirbhdva iti, p. 214,

* The word aamudacdfv occupy once only in note 3 (Calc. ed.).

the Bh^ya m.’ 13, p. 207*. In V5ca-


220 ]


Reason for the order of mutations [ — iii. 15

does not give birth to a human being, because in her the human form does not
develop. 4. In the same way, a non-meritorious person does not experience
anything like pleasure, because in him no .meritorious cause moves actively
forth. Therefore because of connexion [or] separation by place or time or
form or cause, things [that is] forms of being do not manifest themselves 1
at the same time. — Having thus given a classification to the external-aspects,
he shows that the substance is present-in-all-but-different-from-them by saying,
4 . . which ... of these . . ^ The generic-form is the substance as such ; the
particular is the external-aspect. The meaning is that its essence is of both
these kinds. — Having thus shown that the substance which is established by
experience is present-in-all-but-different-from-them, he reminds the Annihila-
tion^ {v6inAfika) t who does not assent to this and who assents to the theory
of a momentary mind-stuff made of consciousness only, of the undesired
contingency previously [i. 82] mentioned, and he does so in the words, €But
the [Yogftcftral * [Also in the words,] dCAnd . . . upon the recognition of a
thing.* For a thing observed by Devadatta is not recognized by Yajfiadatta.
Accordingly it is he who experiences that also recognizes.

15. The order of the sequenoe (Jcrama) is the reason for the
order of the mutations.

If it be possible * that a single substance has only a single muta-
tion, then the order of the sequence is the cause of the order of the
mutation. One finds, for example, clay in the form of dust, clay
in the form of a lump, clay in the form f a water-jar, clay in the
form of potsherds [and] clay in the form of small bits. It is in this
sense that there is a sequence. 1. W henever one external-aspect is
immediately-contiguous to another external-aspect, it is [then in]
sequence with it. The lump of [clay] falls away and the water-jar
comes into existence. It is in such cases that a sequence in the
mutation of external-aspects occurs. 2. There is a sequence in the
mutation of time- variations. By reason of there being a future [time-
variation] of the water-jar, there is a sequence [to it in the] present
[time- variation].* Likewise by reason of there being a present [time-
variation] of the lump [of clay], there is a sequence £to it in the]

1 Reading with Bik&ner MS. dtmandrh . possible. The form woulfrbe used as

* Reading prtwakU, which represents this equivalent to a verbal form in * ya

system. But if the reading be pra - according to Pag. i. 4. 31 with Siddh.

' sakUh (Kashmir MS. and Gang&dhara K&um. (Nir. SSg., ed. 1904), p. 144, last
8hftstri's MS.), then the word would line,
be used as indicating that this is not


iii. 15 — ] Book III. Supernormal Powers or Vibhuti [230

past [time-variation]. There is no sequence for the past. Why is
this ? When there is a relation of antecedent and sequent there
is an immediate contiguity. But this relation does not occur in
thfe case of the past. Consequently there is a sequence for two
time-variations only. 3. There is none the less a sequence in the
mutations of intensity, as when the oldness of a brand-new water-
jar becomes evident first on its rim 1 2 (prante), and then manifesting
itself in a sequence which conforms to the succession of moments,
[finally] reaches a complete [individual] phenomenal [form]. This
then is the third mutation and it is other than the external-aspect
and the time-variation. These same sequences become what they are,
so long as the distinction between the substance and the external-
aspect holds. For the external-aspect as such also can become the
substance in so far as another external-aspect is concerned. But
since, strictly speaking, this same substance can be named external-
aspect by virtue of attributing to it an identity with the substance,
therefore this sequence shines forth in consciousness as a unit only.
The external-aspects of the mind-stuff are of two kinds, those
that are perceived and those that are unperceived. Of these
two, the perceived have as their essence presented-ideas ; those
that are unperceived have as their essence real-things ( vastu ) only.
These latter are moreover just seven ; by inference the existence
of [these external-aspects] as real things only is brought within
reach. “ Restriction - and right-living and subliminal-impressions
and mutations and vitality and movement and power are external-
aspects of mind stuff excluded from sight.”

15. The order of the Bequenoe (hrama) is the reason for the order of the
mntations. [A question is Btated for discussion.] ‘ Does one substance have only
one mutation characterized (lakfana) by external-aspect and time-variation ( laktana )
and intensity? Or does it have many mutations characterized by external-
aspect and time-variation ar intensity ? Of these two which seems plausible ?
[The answer K the objector is,] because the substance is one, the mutation is
only one.'* For from a cause, which as such is one, there ought not to be a'diversity
of effects, because that diversity would have to be the result of chance.’ If this
be taken so, the reply is» given. As a result of the order of the sequence

1 In making a jar the rim is moulded first. th<* author of the Comment. Compare

2 This seems to b§ a mnjiflonic verse by iii. 18, p. 2S0 4 (Calc, ed.).


231 ]


Continuity of successive mutations [ — iii. 15

there is an order of the mutations. Both ordinary men and men of trained
minds search out with their own eyes, in clay which is one, a sequential
succession of mutating form of dust and lump and water-jar and potsherds and
small bits. And the immediate succession between the dust and the lump is
one thing; and that between the lump and the water-jar is anothei ;*and
that between the water-jar and the potsherds is another ; and that between the
potsherds and the small bits is another. Whatever is sequent with respect
to the one is antecedent wjth respect to the other. This same difference of
sequences, since it does not correspond to a single mutation, leads one to
conclude that there are different mutations. Moreover the clay, although a
single substance, undergoes a succession of mutations in sequences following
the sequence of contact ( samavadh&na ) with various co-operating causes which
fall one after another into the sequence, and does not leave it [the succession
of mutations] to chance. And as in the case of the order of the mutation of
the external-aspects, so the reason for the order of the mutation of time-variations
and for the order of the mutation of intensities is of the same kind as the order
of the sequence. All this is made luminous in the words of the Comment, {a
single substance.* On the assumption that there is an identity between the
sequence and that which is in the sequence, it is said that this is its sequence, in
the words, {There^is none the less a sequence in the mutations of intensity.*
For it is thus when rice-grains, carefully guarded in a granarjrby a miser, after
very many years become reduced to atoms, in that the arrangement of the parts
[of the grain] is likely to crumble even at a touch of the hand. Such a
[condition] would not result so suddenly ( dbasmat ) in the case of brand-new
rice-grains Therefore in the sequence of succe* ve moments this fact [that they
are reduced to atoms] is seen to characterize ihose [grains] which have gotten
into the sequence of very large and less large and large and minute and more
minute and very minute. This same order in the sequence does depend upon the
distinction between the substance and the external-aspects, as he says, {These
same sequences.* Extended from the evolved-effect and up to resoluble [primary
matter] there is this contingent relation of substance and external-aspects.
Even [coarse elements] such as earth are external-aspects as compared with
subtile elements, as to says, {the external-aspect also,* Because unresoluble
[primary matter] is, strictly speaking, the only substance, it is usual to
attribute identity to it {By virtue of (taidvdrenap [that is] by virtue of
having a ooihmoD locus the Substanoe would itself be an external-aspect For
this very reason there would be only one mutation, that of the aubstance, since
external-aspects and time-variations and intensities have entered jpto the sub-
stance itself* If this is so, it is almost equivalent to saying that the substance
is far-removed from being absolutely permanent. — Awhile discussing the mutations
of the externabaspeots he also states the diversity in the kinds of extemal-
aspeoti of the mind-stuff by saying {of the mind-stuff.* {Perceived* means
direct perceptions ; {unperceived* means indirect perceptions. Of these two.


iii. l o — ] Book III ’ Supernormal Powers or Vibhuti [232

those whose essence is presented-ideas are sourees-of-valid-idess and passions
and the like. By the words «real things only» he refers to the non-illuminating
character [of things]. An objector cays, ‘This may be so. But if unperoeived,
theypsurely do not exist.’ In reply to this he says <£by inference.^ These
[external aspects] aie so described whose existence as real things only is brought
within reach by inference. The word inference (anu-m&na) means the proof (m&na)
which comes after ( anu ), and, as having the same nature) verbal -communication
is also [included in the term]. He brings together in a memorial-verse the
seven unperceived external -aspects by saying, ^Restriction.^ 1. The restriction
of fluctuations is the unconscious stage [i. 51] of the mind-stuff. We come
to a knowledge of it by verbal-communication and by inference as being a
state in which subliminal-impressions alone remain. 2. The word bright-
living» is meant to include merit and demerit. Elsewhere the reading is ‘ karma'.
In this case also merit and demerit produced by this [right-living] would have to
be understood. And these are known either by verbal-communication or by
inference based upon a knowledge from an experience of pleasure or of pain.
8, But «subliminal-impression» is inferred from memory. 4. Likewise,
since the aspects ( guna ) are three, the changes 6f the aspects of the mind-
stuff are unstable, and so «mutation» from moment to moment is inferred.
6. Similarly «vitality» which is a kind of effort to sustain the breath. And
since it is not known [to the mind], this external-aspect is inferred from
expiration and inspiration 6. Likewise «movement» of the mind (cetas) is
activity, in accordance w ith its activity in connexion with the various senses
and portions of the body, and this [activity] also is inferred from the
connexion with it [that is, the mind]. 7. Similarly tfpower^ 1 also is a
subtle state of effects that are intensified. It is an external-aspect of the
mind and it is inferred only by experience of its coarse effects.


From here on the field-of'-operation for the constraint [reached] by
the yogin who has acquired all the means for the attainment of
the desired object is discussed.

16. As a result of constraint upon the three mutation*
follows] the knowledge of the past and the ftiture. *

Yogins ac^uife knowledge of the past and of the future as a reshit
of constraint upon t the mutations of extera&l*aapects and of timj-
variations and of intensities. Fixed-attention and contemplation
and concentration, three in one, has been^ called [iii. 4] constraint.
By this [constraint] ^he three mutations directly experienced

1 Compare ii. 14, p. 211” (Calc. ed.).


283] Words and objects and ideas [ — iii.17

produce knowledge of the past and of the future in these [three
mutations].

From this point up to th© end of the [third] Book the fiel d-of-operation for the
constraint and th© supernormal powers indicative of the mastery over objeefe
will be described. Here we have first discussed as the fie] d -of-operati on for
constraint, for that yogin who has appropriated 10 himself all the aids to
just those three mutatiogh which have been, described in detail. This
is in the words, 16 . As a result of constraint upon, the thr ee mutations
there follows the knowledge of the past and of the future. An objector
asks, 1 Direct-experience occurs only where there is constraint. How then
can constraint upon the three mutations directly-experience the past and the
future ? * In reply to this he says, «By this [constraint ].» When the three
mutations are brought under direct-experience by this [constraint], those [time-
variations] of the past and the future, inseparably-connected-with-the-muta-
tions-yet-different-from-them, become the objects of [intuitive] knowledge. And
the direct-experience of the three mutations itself has as its essence the direct-
experience of the past and the future which are included in [the three
mutations]. Thus there is no difference of objects in the two cases of the
constraint and of the c^rect-experience.


17. Word and intended-object and preBented-idea are con-
fused because they are erroneously identified with eaoh
other. By constraint upon the disti notions between them
[there arises the intuitive] knowledg (jfldna) of the cries of
all living beings.


With regard to these [three,] voice has its function [in uttering]
only the [sounds of] syllables. And the organ-of-hearing has as its
object only that [emission of air] which has been mutated into
a sound [by a contact with the eight pla^s of articulation belong-
ing to the vocal organ]. But it is a mental process {buddhi) that
grasps the word [as significant sound] by seizing 1 the letter-sounds
ewh in tatfa and binding them together [into one word]. Sounds-
Of-syllables (ttorna) do not Rurally * aid each other, for they


1 Thi* eeme point ia much more elebecaWly
0 twwi by Vteupati ia Ufa Tattra-
Hilda (Ben mm, 1892), os page 10 at
tbe top, rad alee p. 8*.

* The quwtioa ie whether the eorade one
fcy cue or collectively oik e&he proto-
type (spftcfa) manifest The reply Beems
to be that just as the fall knowledge
30 * h]


of the real jewel does not shine out clear
at the first sight, but shines* ut in its
Hllnoe* itcihe flaai idea, the nenltent
of eere ral empr ee fl ona-io the eoande
■ingly do make the prototype maaifeet,
but do not immediately make the pro-
totype in ifc jperfectfep minify


iii. 17 — ] Book III. Supernormal Powers or Vibhuti {234

cannot coexist at the same time. Not having at£ained-to-the-
unity-of a word and not having [conveyed a definite meaning], they
become audible (avis) and they become inaudible (tiros). Hence it
is said that individually [letter-sounds] lack the nature of a word.
On the other hand the [sounds of the] syllables one by one may
be said to have the essence of a word 1 as being filled (pracita) with
the power to furnish expressions for everything through their asso-
ciation with other [sounds of] syllables which also co-operate [in this
result]. And so they seem to pass into a multiplicity* of [word]-
forms. A preceding [sound of a syllable] is mentally determined
by the following and the following by the preceding to become-a-
distinct-and-separate word. Thus a group of [sounds of] syllables
follows in a sequence [of utterance] and is assigned by conventional
usage to a [single] intended-object (artha). Hence though com-
petent to indicate a great-number-of-things (sarva), a certain
number of these [sounds of syllables], whatever that number may
be, makes [but the one] object clear [to consciousness]. For example,
g-o-h indicate [only that] thing [known as ‘ cow ’] with its dewlap
and other specific features. Hence [also] the unity, which the
mental-process makes, known out of these [many sounds of
syllables], determined as these are by conventional-usage by a
single intended-object and seized and bound together into a fixed
sequence of sounds, is the word. This unity [termed] a word is
in every case the object of a single 3 mental-process and requires
a single [distinct] effort [of the organs of articulation]. It is a
thing not having parts, and not having a sequence 4 [of parts].
It does not consist of [sounds of] syllables. It is a thing of the
mind, and is brought into its function by means of the presented-
idea [which we retain] of the final syllable-sound [in a group of these
sounds]. If a man vish to convey information tp another, he must
express himself by these same syllable-sounds to which the others
must listen. This use of speech to whioh no beginning [can be

r

1 Compare Tattva Bindu, 6 fl (Ben. ed.). • Thai it, a separate and difUnot mental

1 A universe of meanings attached to one process.

word. The concept vdifvartipyam it 4 Compare Eatatyjali Mah&bh. (Kielbora),
approached by VK^aspatimtyra in i. 6 11 ; i. 7 1 ; L W ; L 112“ ; U. 128\ and

Sdxhk. Tatt. K&um. 6n Kurikft xv, elsewhere.


235 ]


Doctrine of the word-prototype [ — Hi. 17

assigned] permeates the thinking-substance of the ordinary man ’frith
subconscious-impressions [which come from the syllable-sounds].
Thus as a result of common understanding ( sampratipatti ) [the
word] is thought to be something real in itself. It is owing to our
knowing what this [word] means in accordance with conventional-
usage that we attempt to divide it [into sounds of syllables]. Thus
we say that the seizing-fn-tum-and-binding-together of thiB or
that number of [sounds of] syllables in some such kind [of fixed
sequence] is a word expressive of a single intended-object. But
conventional-usage is essentially [what has been handed down] by
the memory [of man]. It is a kind of erroneous identification
of the word and the thing signified. So that there is a confusion
of the word with the intended-object, and of the intended-object
with the word. Here We see _ how conventional usage is a
kind of erroneous identification of each with the other based
upon memory. Thus it is that these [three], the word ' cow ’ and
the intended-objeQt * cow ’ and the presented-idea ‘ cow get con-
fused, because erroneously identified with one another. But he
who recognizes these three as quite distinct is the knower of all.
Furthermore, every word has the power 1 to express a [complete]
sentence. Thus when we utter the wo- d ‘ tree we imply that it
exists. For no intended-object of a .vord can lack existence.
Similarly no action expressed [by a verb] is possible without the
means-of-attaining [the action]. And so when we utter the word

* cook-s’, certain relations which are later expressly mentioned 2 are
supplied to specify the meaning [by excluding other relations].
Thus we mention the man Chiitra as the agent, 3 rice as the object, 4
and fire as the means * of the action [expressed by the verb ‘ cook ’].
We observe also that words are so constructed as to give the
meaning of t^e sentence ; thus a * Header ’ * is ‘ one who recites
Vedas ’ ; thus if we say * lives we mean [that he] ‘ keep^the breath
of life.’ .[And conversely] in this sentence there is a manifestation

1 The v&kyafttfcti w discussed in the T&ttra 9 P&q. i*4. 54 btrtr.

Hindu, p. 1R (Benares ed.). • 4 PSj>. i. 4. 49 k arnta*

* In accordance vith PataSjali Mah&bbKgya * Pttq. i. 4. 42 farmwe.

on i. 2. 45, vfcrt. 4 ; Kielhorn, i. 218\ # v.%? w S4.


iii. IT — ] ' Book III. Supernormal Powers or Vibhuti [286

of the meaning of words. But to determine whether a particular
word denotes an action [described by a verb] or some relation
[therewith, we must withdraw it from the sentence] and analyse
its formation by making distinctions. Without such an [analysis]
many a word such as bhavati or agvah or ajapayah 1 would remain
ambiguous, because as regards its outer form it might be analysed
either as a noun or as a verb (akhyatjx). There is a distinction
between thes<- words and intended-objects and presented-ideas.
To illustrate this [distinction]. ‘ The palace whitens ' ; here the
action [of a verb] is meant. * The white palace ’ ; here a relation is
meant, [that of the quality white with the action or process which
produced it]. The word is in essence both an action [denoted
b y a verb] and a relation, and the termination [at the end of the
word] conveys these meanings of [action and of relation]. But why
is this so ? Because this [process of whitening] is identified with
that, [its result, the quality white] ; so' that in conventional-usage
the presented-idea [of these objects seems to b$] one and the same.
But the white intended-object is that which becomes the thing
upon which the word and the presented-idea depend. For this
[intended-object] by reason of its own intensities passes-through-
evolved-forms and does not correspond to the word nor to the mental-
process [which are unchanging in themselves]. Similarly the word
and similarly the presented-idea do not correspond the one with
the other. The word [changes] in one way ; the intended-object
in another way ; and the presented-idea in another way. Thus
there is a distinction. And so it happens that by constraint upon
this distinction a yogin attains [intuitive] knowledge of the cries
of all creatures.

Here is another field-of-operation for constraint stated in satia 17 Word . . .
knowledge ... In this [antra] while his intention is to explain a word as an
expression of meaning, he describee first of all the object of the functional*
activity oflhe vocal-organ by saying din this [sOtra].& The *voice& is the
organ df voice ; it is that which phenomenalizee [the sounds of the] syllables
and it has eight places of articulation. As is said [in the £ika& 18], “There
are eight places of articulation of the [sounds of the] syllables, the chest and the
throat and the head and the root of the ton^be and the teeth and the noqp and

* Whitney: Grammar, 2nd ud., 1042, 1.


Sounds and words


l — iii. 17


237 ]

the lips and the palate.” This vocal organ has its function only in [uttering the
sounds of the] syllables as they are known to ordinary sense-perception, and not
as expressive of meanings. He explains the object of the functional-activity of
the organ of hearing in the words Cthe organ-of-hearing.» The organ-of-hearing,
however, has that only as its object which is mutated in the form of a particular
[sound of a] syllable, which has as its essence a particular mutation of an
emission-of-air (uddna) subjected-to-contact (abhlghatin) with [the various places-
of-articulation] belonging t<* the vocal organ. But its object is not a word-
expressing-a-meaning. This is what he wishes-to-say (ity artha). He distinguishes
the word-expressing-a-meaning from the [sounds of the] syllables as known to
ordinary sense-perception, by saying «the word [as significant sound ].» But it
is the mental-process that grasps the word as expressing-meaning by seizing the
letter-sounds each in turn ( anu ) and binding them together [into one word].
Having grasped the letter-sounds (nada) as [the sounds of] syllables (larnn) one
by one as they are known in sense-perception, it binds them in turn [that is]
afterwards so that they are made to change into a unity and we can say g-o-h
[that is to say] one word. By this [mental-process] the word is grasped.
Although each of the preceding mental-processes [by stages] brings each word,
[so long as It] has the fortn of the [sounds of] syllables, into consciousness,
still the word [expressing meaning] does not clearly lie [before us]. But at the
last mental-act ( vijndna ) it becomes clear. Thus it is said «Ca mental-process
(buddhi) grasps the word [as significant sound] by seizing the letter-sounds each
in turn and binding them together [into one word].» To [the Mimahsaka] who
maintains that the [sounds of the] syllables in themselves express a meaning, in
that a word cannot be discerned as one becat e the [sounds] Are heterogeneous,
he replies 4£the [sounds of the] syllables.» ‘iow these [sounds of the] syllables
must either 1. each singly {pratyeka ) arouse the idea (dhi) having a word expressing
meaning as its content, like a row of pegs 1 upon which a bag-of-netted-cords is
hung ; or 2. in combination (samhata) like the stones which when together hold
the pot. Not, in any case, 1. the first alternative, because from the single [sound
of a syllable] the sense-perception of the thing does not rise in consciousness ;
or because if it did proceed from a single one, the second and the third need not
havo been uttered. For when an action is completed, a means-of-attaining [that
action] which adds nothing new cannot be counted as (nyayaltpdta) a means-of-
attaining. Therefore 2. the second [alternative] remains. For the stones in com-
bination can,hold a up the pot, bcause they are there at the same time. But the
[sounds of the] syllables cannot be simultaneous. Accordingly, since it cannot
be thqt aid is reciprocally given and received, they cannot by being together
arouse the idea of the meaning. These [sounds of syllables] not*attaiiiing by
themselves to a single special word and therefore not conveying [the meaning],
become now audible {duns) an now inaudible (<tno4» Like the iron rods [of a

1 Tlii# phrase in almost the same words occuis in Tilth a Hindu, p.


iii. 17 — ] Book 111. Supernormal Powers or Vibhuti [288

tripod which co-operate to hold a vessel] they are not, as being each by itself;
termed a word. If, however, the [sounds of the] syllables were to attain to a
word as a unit by being [each by itself] identical with the word, then the defect
mentioned before would not apply, as he says ^On the other hand the [sounds of
tliej%yllables one by one may be said to have the essence of aword.» — «Being filled
with the power to furnish expressions for everything^ [means] having anaccumu*
lation of a great number of powers to indicate [things]. For the letter 4 g ’ occurs
in words like gau and gana and gaura and naga exp fessing various meanings such
as, for instance, the * mimon-nature-oi-cows. Thus [this letter] has the power to
express this or that [meaning]. Likewise the letter 4 o 1 occurs in words like
somah and f oc\k in words denoting the I<?vara as the object-intended. This is to be
said mutatis mutandis with regard to all [the letters]. Furthermore the [Bound of
a] syllable such as ‘g ’ which co-operates 1 [in one set of cases], is the very same
which is associated [and] connected with [the sound of] another syllable such as
‘o’. These [sounds of the] syllables which have been so described are a general
condition (bhdva) or state. Therefore they seem to pass into a multiplicity of forms
[or] a plurality. But it does not actually pass into a plurality juBt because of
[its own peculiar] state. — The £preceding& [sound of a] syllable, the letter 4 g f
by association with the following letter 4 o * is thus distinguished from words like
gana ; and the following letter 4 o 9 by association with the letter 4 g * is dis-
tinguished from words like qocth and thus becomes determined in the mental-
process which seizes each in turn and binds them together to become a distinct-
and-separate word-expressive-of-the-meaning ( vdcaka ) of the common-nature-of-
the-cow, [to become] the word -prototype of the word 4 cow \ The connexion of
ideas is this. [This happens in this way] because the presen ted-idea of the thing
cannot be effected by successive [sounds of J syllables which do not occur [inaword]
in a fixed sequence. Nor, when heaven or the highest sacrificial-merit (apurvd)
is to be brought to pass, is it proper to say that just as sacrifices such as the
Agneya* co-operate (sahitya) by means of purifications (samskdra), so the [sounds
of the] syllables [by means of subliminal-impressions (sarhskdra)] co-operate in the
production of the mental-process of the thing. [It is not proper tosay this,] because
the argument breaks down when we apply the method of alternatives (vQcalpa).
Surely this subliminal-impression ( samskdra ) produced by the experience of [the
sounds of the] syllables is either the one which generates memory, or it is the
other, which is called sacrificial-merit * (apurva) and is likened to the purification
(samskdra) by the Agneya at d similar [sacrifices]. Now first of all the second

1 Discussed at length on p. 6 14 of the Tattva after the new moon. All six have the
Bindu (%nares ed.). name of darfojfiirnamfoay&ga. •

* Six sacrifices are performed in two groups, a Compare the discussion of the sphofa si

three without a break in the groups. analogous to the sacrifice in (Sstra

Three on the first day affcr the full Dipika i. 1. 5, p. 68 ; i. 2. 10, p. 127.

moon, the Agneya, the Up&ftfu, the See flso Tattva Bindu, p. 6 1 *. On the

Agni«toma ; three yflga onihe first day intermixture of apurva sec 9fist. Dip.

i. 1. 5, p. 200.


239 ]


[— iii. 17


The sphota

[of these alternatives] cannot [be admitted], because, of the difficulties in the
assumption. It must be assumed that this [purification] is the very same as
that which follows (j y&rva) sacrificial- merit. # Whereas this [word-type] which is
one cannot be produced by experiences of [sounds of] syllables in sequences.
Sinoe we should have to assume [the existence] of many subsidiary purifications
(sadisk&ra) each of the same kind [as the others]. It is this that is the difficulty.
Furthermore so long as we do not know that this purification serves as a cause
to make the intended-object known, it cannot be accepted as serving to produce
this [meaning]. For a relation which is not known to serve the purpose of pre-
senting the intended-object, cannot be accepted as serving [that purpose]. And,
as for the subliminal-impression which is inferred from the memory which is its
result, it is restricted [L 11] to that object, namely, the experience which was
its cause. And it is therefore not in a position to arouse a subliminal-impres-
sion which has something else, [namely, the presentation of the intended-object of
tVt experience] as its object. For if this were so, any one having experienced
any one object, would be able to know any [other] object. And it is not right to
say that [sounds of] syllables which arise in the mirror of such a memory as takes
' its origin in the sum-total (pinc/a) of subliminal-impressions — produced by the
experience of each syllable singly — can express meaning [because the sounds of
the syllables] are recognized as belonging together. For that would involve-tlie-
conclusion that the idea of the intended object could be produced indiscriminately
(avifesena), whether the [sounds of the syllables] be experienced in a sequence or
out of a sequence or in reversed sequence. And it cannot be that this knowledge
from memory can bring before itself ( gocarayii * «t) that succession of sounds of
syllables which was active in the previous ex . trience. Hence in so far as it is
not possible from the [sounds of the] syllables to have the presentation of the
intended -object, it must be supposed that there is an experience 1 of the word as
being single which could give rise to [the presentation of the intended-object*].
The same objection, moreover, does not apply with reference to the word. For
the word is phenomenal ized by [sounds of] syllables only when single and differ-
ing according to the difference 3 in the effort [of articulation]. And inasmuch
as the words are alike in so far as they are produced through the action of the
like places fof articulation] by sounds which are the conditions-which-pheno-
menalize the various words each unlike the other, [the sounds] do make a word
similar [to other words]. This word [</o] is similar to other words which have
the 4 g * sound, but In other respects it is dissimilar, since their dissimilarities
are different in so far as the various other [syllables] are associated [with this
syllable]. Because of [this] peculiarity of this [word], although it ?s one, and

j

1 8o his position is this. The sphota is a * The word ♦ spa evidently refers to the
•ublimiqal-impression in the Jwddhi. bracketed phrase.

The biMhi forms the intended-object * See Patanjali : MahSbh&fja on i. 1. 9,
under the influence of the sphota. vRrt. 2, *ol. i, p. pi ; also on viii. 4.

48, yoI. iii, p. 466(Kielhorn).


iii. 17 — ] Book III. Svpei'no't'mnl Powers or Vibhvti f240

/

altogether a unit (< anavayava ), still the sounds-of-the-syllables make it appear as
a collection (savayava) and not as a unit. Just as a face, although it is one, with
a definite colour and dimension^ and look, is made to appear, by [reflection in] a
gem 1 * * or a ^word-blade or a mirrot*, to be more than one and as having more
than one colour and dimension and look. But this is not so in the strict
sense. Whereas the [sounds of thej syllables are parts of the partless word and
are formed of the similarities and peculiarities.

Therefore the mental-process ( buddhi ) of this [wind], in the case of a particular
word, supports itself upon the word-prototyjpp (spllota) which is undivided and
partless, although it seeihs to be divided and seems to have parts. Therefore
a port, the letter ‘ g *,'of one particular word-prototype, the word 1 go 9 cannot
cause that [namely, the partless prototype] of which it [the ‘ g 9 ] is part to come
forth, because of the similarity of this word-prototype with that of words like
gaura. Therefore when made special-and-distinct by the letter 4 o ’, it is able to
cause that of which it is a part, [namely the word-prototype 4 go *,] to come forth.
Similarly the part which is the letter 4 o ’ is also not able, because of its similarity
with words like <;ocik, to cause that of which it Is a part, namely the word-prototype
‘go’, to come forth. So when made special-and^Jistinct by the letter 4 g', it is
able to cause [its own prototype] to come forth. And although [these two ‘g 9
and ‘o’j do not naturally belong together, still through [their] subliminal-
impressions they do belong ; together. And thus it is consistent to have the
relation of qualified and qualifier between them. Nor can it be said that the
two subliminal-impressions have each a different object, since the experiences
whose objects were the two parts, and also ^he two subliminal-impressions
which result from the experiences, have one word as their object. The word
moreover is not distinctly ( avyakta ) experienced when only part of it is experienced.
Whereas it is perceived distinctly by the idea which seizes the [sounds of the]
syllables in tuin and binds them together, — [the idea] which is produced by the
subliminal-impressions which arise from the experience of the parts. This is
the difference. And we find that the first indistinct experience does produce
a distinct experience by arousing subliminal-impressions in a sequence [of
degrees of distinctness], just as the presented -idea that the tree when seen from a
distance is green 1 (harita), although indistinct, leads to the distinct Jteesented-idea
of the tree. But this kind [of an idea] is impossible in an experience wherein
the [sounds of the] syllables should represent intended-objects. For surely one
cannot say that the [sounds of the] syllables do each singly give rise to an indistinot
presented -idea^of the intended-object, and ultimately to a distinct idea. For
distinct ne|^ and indistinctness are restricted to cases of perceptive thinking.
But [in this case] the presentation of the intended-object is to be aroused by file

1 The illustration and discussion are given passage in the Tattva Bindu [p. 5*] by

more fully in the Tattva Bindu, p. 6. the same” author seems preferable to

•This reading gijett in # file analogous the reading of 4 elephant 1 (Haiti).


241] Wor d- prototype and syllables [ — iiL 17

syllables, and is not a perception* So if this [unperoeived presentation of the
intended-object] is produced by the [sounds of the] syllables, it would be
produced quite clear (sphufa) or it would not be produced at alL But it could
not be unclear. Whereas for the word»prototype you have to assume a clear
or an unclear form in that there is a perception of it made distinot by "sounds.
So the case is not analogous fin that the word cannot be perceived unless the
sounds be distinct, whereas the sounds can be distinctly perceived]. Thus
the [sounds of the] syllables combined in the mental-process which seizes them
in turn and binds them together, and which has its origin in the organ-of-hearing,
in this, together with the subliminal-impressions generated by experience of
the [sounds of the] syllables, one by one, become the word-prototype of a single
word. If there should bean alteration of the sequence, [then], in so far as there
might not be any speeial-and-distinct effort [of the org&n-of-voioe], giving heed
to the fixed order, 1 which would set in operation the special-and-distinct
effort that alone can make this [word-prototype] manifest, it -would follow that
there would be no manifestation of it at all. In so far as the [sounds of
the] syllables conform to [this] sequence and are determined by being the
conventional-usage for an intended-object they display as their object a word
as-it-is-usually-understoofl as having parts and as having its determination by
conventional-usage only. — ^Whatever that number might be* means two or
three, three or four, five or six. Though competent to indicate a great number
of things, a certain number of these [sounds of] syllables makes but the one
intended-object clear [to consciousness, for example] g-o-h [makes cl(v\r to
consciousness only the one object known as ‘cow’] having its dewlap [and
other specific features]. It might 4h*- r be said that the [sounds of the]
syllables only, in bo far as they* accost with conventional-usage, have ex-
pressive power, and accordingly there is no so-called word which is a unit.
In reply to this he says, whence ... of these.* — &Into a fixed sequence of
sounds^ means a sequence caused by sounds. — ^Seized and bound together*
are those in whose case the sequence of sounds is of that kind. — « Which the
mental-process makes known* in the sense that it is made kn own or becomes
clear by reason of the mental-process. II has been said, in harmony with the
view of persons of not very fine insight, that the ‘g' and ‘o' and ‘h f are
determined by conventional-usage [as denoting the thing termed ‘cow’]. And
this is so because, in so far as the ‘ g ’ and the other [sounds of syllables] are
parts of tjiis [word], they are identical with it and so express its meaning.
But we are of opinion, that, as any one can see, it is a unity t^at is called a word
which expresses a meaning. This he makes clear by saying 4CThis unity
The connexion [of ideas] is that this unity [termed] a word is \y an ordinary
mental-process believed [to be made of sounds of syllables]. Why should it be
a unit? In reply to this he says ^object of a "single mental-process.* It is

1 Precisely as there is a fixed sequence without beeak of thftevera) sacrifices.

31 f"*O.S. it]


iii. 17 — •] Book III. Supernoi'mal Powers or Vibhuti [242

a unit sihce it is the object of that mental-process which is a unit in form so
that one says ‘g-o-h’ [that is] one word. He shows what it is that makes this
distinct by saying «requires a single [ distinctl effort.) The effort [of articulation]
which makes the word r-a-s-a distinct is different in character from that which
makes the word s-a-r-a distinct ( vyanjaka ). This [effort] moreover is determined
by the result in the form of the manifestation of the word s-a-r-a in that 1 it
begins [differently] ; it has a definite succession [of sounds] ; and this is the single
[and distinct effort]. This it was which was required. «It is a thing without
parts) because in reality it has no parts. These we only assume because of
certain similarities and dissimilarities. Hence also it is ^without a sequence
of parts» because there it has no definite succession. An objector says, ‘The
[sounds of the] syllables have a definite succession, and they are parts of this
[word]. How then can the word be without parts, and without a sequence of
parts f 9 In reply to this he says «Clt does not consist of [sounds of] syllables.)
For it does not have the [sounds of the] syllables as its parts. On the contrary
the word itself, because of oertain similarities and dissimilarities, is generally
assumed to have the form of this or that [sound] and [so] appears in what is
not its real form. For the faces as reflected in a jewel or a sword-blade or
a mirror are not parts of the real face. «Clt is a thing of the mind) made known
by the mental-process which seizes in turn and binds together [the sounds of
the syllables]. «It is brought before [us]» [or] made an object by the operation
(vy&p&ra) of the presented-idea of the final [sound of the] syllable, — [by the
operation, that is, of] the subliminal-impression [of the final syllable] together
with the subliminal-impressions generated by the experience of [sounds of] the pre-
vious syllables. For it has already (adhasttU) been explained that the experience
of the syllables and of the subliminal-impressions arising from them are the
object of the word. The objector says, * This may be so. But if the word-as-
such ( pada-tattva ) has no parts or sequence or [sounds of] syllables, why is it not
generally assumed to be of such a kind ? For a bead of crystal, when overlaid
with a coating of red-dye, does not, when that coating is removed, cease to be
perceived as transparent and white. Therefore the [sounds of the] syllables are
real [parts of the %ord].’ In reply to this he says <£to another.) If a man wish
to convey information he must express himself by, he must utter, the very
[sounds of the] syllables to which the hearers must listen. This use of speech,
to which no beginning [can be assigned], depends upon words consisting of
distinct syllables. And the lubconscious-impression produced by it has also no
beginning. Th^mental-process of the ordinary man (loka) is permeated [and]
pervaded (v&mta) by this [subconscious-impression] and has to do with a word
constructed of separate [sounds of] syllables. Thus as a result of usage, by thef
consensus of the elders, thig word is thought of as something real in itself,
as having reality in the strict sense. What he means to say is this : There is
a certain thing, the limiting-condition, which is in correlation with the thing*
1 Does Kpakramaias mean 1 which is under consideration ’ ?


243 ]


The real word


[— iii. 17

to-be-exposed-to-limiting-conditions (upadheya) and which is sometimes in
correlation and sometimes out of correlation with it. Such a thing is red-dye.
Now when this is out of correlation, the ciyBtal shines forth in its natural trans-
parent and white form. And it is quite proper [that the crystal should then
shine forth]. But the presen ted-idea of the word, — because it is not brought into
[consciousness] (anutp&da) by anything other than the particular sound brought
about by the particular effqrt [of articulation], and in so far as this [presented-
idea] is always turbid with flaws of dissimilarity, — can generate the presented-
idea [of the word] only as being in essence [sounds of] syllables. So how can
there be the ordinary knowledge of a word when divested of its limiting
conditions? As they 1 say, “ Sounds because in themselves alike bring about
false notions ; that which makes these [sounds] apperceived is the cause of this
false notion. And for those whose knowledge of words is made known by the
means [which produce it, that is, the sounds of the syllables] there is an
inevitable false notion. This results in an overthrow (b&ahd) of [all] knowledge
and would cause an unfailing confusion of [all dealings] in the world.”
Because the essence of a word shines out turbid with separate [sounds of] syllables,
for this reason persons of not very fine insight, deeming the syllables themselves
to be the word, use conventionally these very [sounds of] syllables, which have
taken certain forms, with certain intended-objects, as he says «of this.» This
word, although by nature (ajdnat<i$) a unity, is separated on the basis of the know-
ledge of the conventional-usage [of this word] to suit the purposes of persons
whose insight is not very fine, as if its essence were separate [sounds of] syllables.
He describes this separation of the word into [sounds of] syllables by saying
OCthis or that number.» Of this or thatl^ ber [that is] neither more nor less.
€ln some such kind2> means a particular continuous sequence. «The seizing in
turn and binding together» means under the influence of a single mental-process.
[This is] a word expressive of a single intended-object, such as a cow. The
objector says, ‘If conventional-usage is such a word expressive of a single
intended-object only, then, Sir, there would be an erroneous identification of
word and intended-object.’ In reply to this he says £But conventional-usage.*
^Essentially . . . memory* is that which in itself is memory. For conventional-
usage, merely because you can say that it prevails (fcrfa), is not sufficient to define
the intended-object ; but it must also be remembered. What he means to say
is this. In a conventional-usage which makes no difference a difference is
somehow imagined. [And therefore] the genitive oase is usgd [to denote the
distinction between the word and the thing].— When one who knows ths

1 Professor Ga&gftntth JhS has found a Consequently they are not from any
reference to these same verses in the Mim^tsS work. Possibly they may be

NySyaratnftkaia, a comment%ry on the found in the unpublished portions of

QlokSvArttika (Chaukhambha Sans. the Vftkyapadlya. 1 have not found

Series, p. 880). Herein we find them them it |hc printed fascicles,

referred to as MyUkam^dir uktnm.


Hi. 17 — ] Book III. Supernormal Powers or VibhtUi [244

*

distinction between these [three] performs constraint upon this [distinction]
he becomes the knower of all, — has an [intuitive] knowledge of the cries
of all living beings.— Thus having analysed that unit, the word, which is
without parts, although the parts are assumed to be in the [sounds of the]
syllables, he says, with the intent to analyse the sentence^ which has an
imaginary division into parts, but which is a unit and has no parts ^Further-
more, every word has the power to express a [complete] sentence.^ The
connexion [of ideas] is this. A word is used to convey information to another.
And the other should have precisely that information conveyed to him which
the words are intended to convey. And these [words] are also capable of giving
that same information which deals with acceptance or [rejection [Mna) or
indifference (upefod)]. And they do not deal ( tadgooara ) with the meaning (artha)
of the word only, but with the meaning of the sentence. So all words must
subserve the meaning of the sentence. And accordingly the meaning of the
sentence is that of these [words] also. And it is for this reason that whenever
a word is used alone, it is always associated with another word, and the sense
follows from that word, but not from the [first] word used alone. Why?
Because by itself ( tanmatrosya ) it has no capacity. Thus it is the sentence that
in all cases expresses the words ; but the words do not. However, as forming
parts of this [that is, the sentence], the words also have expressive power with
respect to the sense of the sentence, just as with respect to the word the [sounds
of the] syllables as constituting it have also expressive power. Thus then just
as each single [sound of a] syllable embraces the power to exprees all intended-
objects of words, so also each single word embraces the power to express the
meaning of all sentences. This is what fir expressed by the words ^Furthermore,
every word has the power to express a [complete] sentence. Thus when we
utter the word * tree we imply that it exists.^ The meaning is that the word
‘ tree 9 in conjunction with the implied word ‘ is 9 leads to the meaning of the
sentence. Therefore as forming part of the sentence, the word 4 tree 9 produces
that meaning (latra variate ). But if it be asked why the word 1 is 9 is implied,
the reply is CNo intended-object can lack existence.^ For the means for
defining the meanings of words is popular-usage 1 (loka). And this popular-
usage combines the meaning of the word as it is alene with the neaning * is '
and in all such cases makes the meaning of a sentence. This same [popular-
usage] is the meaning of a word which cannot lack existence. Office those *
who know the finxotions of words have [this] agreement-of-usage (vyavah&ra),
“Wherever Upre is no other verb, 1 is 9 in the sense of being should be yeed.”
— Having stated that a nominal-base 11 never lacks its action [expressed by a verb], <
he shows that any particular tbrb is never without a relation by saying CAnd so

1 Compare Patafijali llahftbhfttya i. 2. 1, bhS$ya on j. 2. 94.

▼lit. 2 roL f, p. 217). 1 Discussed in Patafyali Mahlbh&gya on

* See also for comparison Pata^jah Mah5- i. 2 45.


245 ]


The unity of the word [ — iii. 17

•

when we utter. ^ For when we utter the word * cook-s all relations which are
suitable for association with it are implied. For this reason there is an express
statement of thespecial relations of this [■ verb£ and the purpose [ of this statement]
is to exclude other [relations]. Thus the meaning of the sentence consists in
nothing but the specializing [of the relations]. Similarly although out of all
relations, a word is found to stand foi the meaning of the sentence ; and the
sentence is still more potential in the words. So he says «We observe » But
this does not mean that words like Reader, which are complete in themselves,
can present a meaning so long as they are not combined with words like ‘is*.
So even in the case of this word [Reader, as complete in itself], the meaning is to
be assumed only in so far as it forms part of a sentence. This is the point. [An
objector] says, ‘This may be true. But if the words by themselves have the
expressive power of the sentence, then there is no further need of the sentence,
since its meaning can be ascertained from them/ In reply to this he says
conve’i»ely] in this sentence.» It has been said already that if there be
a desire on the part of the speaker to convey information, the meaning of [his]
words is not understood from the words alone, so long as these words are not
brought into combination vfith other words So then supposing the words
to be separated from the senten^, a part of it, the relation or the verb, is to be
explained by analysing [and] enumerating those [words], by allotting tile shares
to this word, the bases (pratyaya) and so on. 4 But why is so rtiuch trouble taken
to go through this account [of the analysis of words] ? 1 In reply to this he says
^Without such [an analysis], » Because of the similarity of noun and verb in
such cases 1 as, 4 A water-jar is (hhavati) thfev and ‘O Lady (bhavati), give an
alms' and 4 While Your Honour (bhavati jarflb ng * 2 • or similarly in such cases
as 4 Thou didst go* (afeas)’ and ‘The horse (ofixw) walks* ; or similarly in such
cases as ‘Goat’s milk (ajti -pay as) drink thou * and ‘Thou didst conquer (ajtipayas) the
foes/ — because there is a likeness [in the form] of the verb and of the noun, it
is ambiguous whether the words might be analysed as nouns or as verbs. And
when there is no such accounting [for the form of the word, and because] when
withdrawn [from the sentence] it cannot be known [whether it is a noun or
a verb], how can it be analysed as a noun or as a verb? 4 Therefore the words
should be withdrawn from the sentence and analysed. But by a mere accounting
[for the form of the word] there is not strictly speaking a distinction of the
words [from the mtepded-objecta and the preeented-ideas]. Having thus treated
the [different] kinds of words etymologically, he has the intention of telling
that [in Reality] there is no confusion between words and intended'qfljbcts and
•

1 Ifjrould appear that Vfic.ispatimifra is greater elaboration in another work

referring to ^loka-vgrttika i v 191. by VScaspatixn^ra called Tattvabindu

9 Or possibly, ‘Something is standing upon (Benares, reprinted from the Pandit,

* Your Hon jut (bkavati).' 1898). This particular passage occurs

9 Or 1 swell \ from root fw or fi. on p 15 of yiaMiit^

9 This whole subject is discussod with much


iii. 17 — ] Book III, Supernormal Powers or Vibhuti [246

<

presented -ideas which had got into confusion as a result of conventional-usage
[which erroneously identifies one with the other], and proceeds to say {Theft is
a distinction between these words and intended-objects and presented- ideas *
4CTe illustrate this [distinction]. 1 The palace whitens ’ ; here [the word *]
means the action [of a verb].* For here it is quite clear that this action
1 grows white which is of a kind yet to be completed and which takes place
by a succession [of acts], is different from the action 1 white which is of the
completed kind. And even in those cases wheie both the word and the in-
tended-object are of a completed kind, there also the word is different from the
intended-object, as he says {‘The white palace’; here a relation is meant. *
Here® there is no case-ending expressing relation because this is expressed [by
the nominative case according to P&nini ii. 8. 1]. — He makes the distinction
between the intended -object [and the word] by saying, {in essence both an action
[denoted by a verb] and a relation . . . the intended-object of which.* The
meaning is that the intended-object of both these words is in essence an action
[denoted by a verb] and it is in essence a relation. — He makes the distinction
between the presented-idea [and the word] by saying {and the presented-idea.*
The woid {and* shows that the words {the intended-object of which ife this [the
action and relation]* are to be supplied. The word «thia* is to be understood
(sambadhyate) as in subordination to another word [in a possessive compound]. It
is so-described as being that of which the intended-object is in essence an action
[denoted by a verb] and a relation because they are understood as alike. An
objector asks 1 Since words and intended-objects and presented-ideas are confused,
how can there be any distinction between them?’ With this in mind he asks
{But why is this so ?» He gives the answer by saying {Because this [process]
is identified with that, [its result, the quality white].* The presented-idea
which identifies them is limited by conventional-usage [which erroneously
identifies them with each other]. But this presented-idea has no basis in
fact. The word conventional-usage is in the locative case. This shows that
conventional-usage is the cause [of the presented-idea which fails to distinguish
the act of whitening and the quality white]. He states what <the leal fact is
in the words {But the white intended-object is that which.* Intensity such
as newness or oldness. {Correspond* [that is] be confuspd. Thus by the yogin’s
constraint upon the distinctions [he knows] the cries of all living beings, tame
and wild animals, creeping things, birds and the rest, even the unphenomenalised
speech among them and the intended-objects [denoted "by these cries] and
the presegted-ideas of them. Bo in this case constraint performed upon the
presented-ideas of the things-expressed by the utterances of human beingp is
performed upon these [objects and words] also, since they are comparate. Thus

♦

1 VIoMpotimifra Mem. to have read fabdah belonging to OaBgldhara Shletrl.

in hie text o&he Com&ent And tbit * Compare the phraae f veto 'fro in Tattva
reading u alio in the exeeilont MS. Bindu. n. 18’*.


247] Jaiglmvya and Avatya [— iii. 18

*

it is established that the yogin has [intuitive] knowledge of these cries and of
the objects intended by them and of the presented-idea of them.


18. Ab a result of direct-perception of subliminal impressions
there is [intuitive] knowledge of previous births.

Those subliminal-impressions are of course of two kinds. 1. The
causes of memory and of the hindrances in the form of subconscious
impressions ; 2. the causes of fruition in the form of right-living
and wrong-living. These subliminal-impressions formed in previous
births are, like mutation and movement and restriction and power
and vitality and right-living, unperceived external-aspects of mind-
stuif [iii. 16], Constraint upon these is sufficient for direct-perception
oi subliminal-impressions. Moreover there is no direct experience of
these, unless there be experience of place and time and cause. It is
thus, therefore, as a result of [intuitive] knowledge of subliminal-
impressions that the knowledge of previous births arises [in the
mind] of the yogin. Precisely as in other cases there is also, as
a result of the direct-perception of subliminal-impressions, a con-
sciousness (samvedana) of the births of others. On this point this
tale is handed down. “ To the Exalted Taigisavya, who as a result
of direct-perception of sublimmal-impret ons beheld the sequence of
his birth-mutations in ten great creat : ve-periods,the knowledge born
of discrimination became visible. Then to him spake the Exalted
Avatya who had assumed a [coarse] body [for the purposes of this
speech]. ‘In ten great creative-periods, forasmuch as the sattva
of [thy] thinking-substance is unsuppressed [by rajas and tamas ] in
consequence of spotlessness, thou beholdest the pain caused by
birth in hells and in the bodies of brutes ; coming into existence
over and over again among gods and human beings, which hast
thou appercdived* to be m re, pleasure or pain ? ’ Jaigi^avya 1
spake to the Exalted Avatya. ‘ In ten great creative^periods;
fotyuunuch as the sattva of [my] thinking-substance is unsuppressed
[by rajas and tamos'] in oonsequenoe of spotlpssness, I behold the


1 8e« Ikbo ii 5ft. p. I92 T , and Afnghop’i
Bnddhscarita xii. Compare Q&rbe :


Mondacheig d. Sankhyn-Wahrheit,
p. 85 1 and Qnrbe: Ainddht, p. vii.


iii. 18 — ] Book III Svpernormal Powers or Vibhidi [248

pain caused by birth in hells and in the bodies of brutes ; coming
into existence over and over again among gods and human beings
this I trow. Whatever [pleasure] I have passed through, all 1 this is
nothing but pain.’ The Exalted Avatya spake thus. ‘ Are Your
Worship’s mastery 2 over the primary-cause and the pleasure of
bliss ineffable, — are these also to be counted as pain ? 9 The Exalted
Jaigisavya spak< : ‘ This can be called the pleasure of bliss ineffable
only in comparison 3 with pleasure from objects of sense ; but it is
nothing but pain in comparison with Isolation. Because this [bliss
ineffable] is an external-aspect of the sattva of the thinking-
substance and [so] has the three aspects {gnna) } and because a pre-
sented-idea of anything having the three aspects is counted as
something to be thrown aside, the thread of desire [in the bliss
ineffable] is of the nature of pain. But by the removal of the
anguish of the pain of desire, this pleasure [of bliss ineffable] is
undisturbed-calm, 4 uninhibited, favourable in the eyes of all.’ ”

18. As a result of direct-perception of subliminal-urtpressions there is
[intuitive] knowledge of previous births.

For the subliminal-impressions which are produced by knowledge are the causes
of memory, whereas the subliminal-impressions produced by undifferentiated-
consciousness aie the causes of the hindrances which begin with undifferentiated-
consciousness. As to the causes -of fi^ifion. Fruition is [ii. 13] birth and
lengtli-of-life and kind-of-enjoyment. 'Trfe causes of it are the kinds of right-
living and wrong-living. The subliminal-impressions put together in previous
bii ths are completed by their own pccul : causes. Just as a cui ry (vyaujana) is put
together (samArta)j by combining many undistinguished things] so it follows that it
has been made. Mutation and movement and restriction and power and vitality
are external -aspects of the mind-stuff. Likewise, the unperceived [subliminal-im-
pressions] are external-aspects of the mind-stuff. Constraint upon these together
with their attachments [of place and time and cause], whether they are some-
thing heard or inferred, is adequate to bring to pass diiect perception of both
kinds of subliminal impi ssions. And if it be asked how there c^n be direct per-
ception of pre^jous births, even if it be possible to have direct perception of these
| subliminal-impressions in place, time and cause] through constraint, he replies
^Moreover there is no . . . of place.» *cCause» is the previous body, tlie orgqps
and the rest. Direct-perception of sublixninal^impressions, with their adjuncts, 9

1 Compaie ii. 15. * 4 See iv. 29, p. 313 5 (Calc. ed.).

2 See Anmiddba on Saikkhya-E>ntz£K v * 82. r ‘ Balarama mentions os instances of jrt-

" Compare Aniruddha on £uihkfoMhttr. tachments, mother and father or birth

P- 3®. or country or city or time.


249]


Specimens of intuitive knowledge t — iii. 20

necessarily involves the direct-perception of such things as births. This
is the meaning. The constraint with respect to one’s own sublimimil-
impressions he extends by analogy to those of others also m the words «Precisely
as in other cases also.£ With this in view he introduces as an aid to faith the
dialogue between Jaiglsavya and Avatya, who had passed through the experience,
by saying <COn this point this tale is handed dcwn.» A great creative-period is
a great mundane cycle. By the words 4Cwho had assumed a [coarse] body» the
perfection of a created body 1 is described. Spotless is brilliant ; that from which
the stains of rajas and tamos have been removed. Mastery over the primary
cause means power. By having this [power] and by creating movements in the
primary-cause he gives to any one that kind of perfection of body or of organs
which he wishes to confer upon him ; and further having created his own bodies
and organs by thousands ho roves through air and sky and earth at will. Bliss
(santosa) is the dwindling of desire and the external -aspect of undisturbed calm
belonging to the sattva of the thinking-substance.

19. [As a result of constraint] upon a presented-idea [there
arises intuitive] knowledge of the mind-stuff of another.

As a result of constraint upon a presented-idea, in consequence of
the direct-perception of the presented-idea, there arises the [in-
tuitive] knowledge of the mind-stuff of another.

19. [As a result of constraint] upon a presented-idea [there arises intuitive]
knowledge of the mind-stuff another. '

«CAs a result o£» direct-perception 6t prese. ied-idea, [that is] of mind-btuff
in general of another.


20. 2 But [the intuitive knowledge of the presented-idea of
another] does not have that [idea] together with that upon
which it depends [as its object], smce that upon which it
depends is not-in-the-fleld [of consciousness].

The yogin knows that the presented-idea is affected. But he does
not know that it is affected in dependence upon [this or] that
[object]. When ihe prese* ted-idea of another [person] is in de-
pendence upon something, this [object] does not become something
upon which the mind-stuff of the yogin depends. But it is the
other’s presented-idea only upon which the yogin s mind-stuff
comes to depend.

1 For the wcud ninnOpa see Garbo: , conaqguently the numbering of

Featgroaa an Roth, p. 78. t$Urpaini»g sQtnft of the third part

1 This atitra ia omitted by VijfiSna Bhik$u of Yoga-v&rttika is at fault
32# [*»o«a. w]


iii. 20—3 Book III. Supernormal Powers or VibhUti [250

Just as the direct-perception of subliminal-impressions implies the direct-percep-
tion of previous births and of the adjuncts to these, so the direct-perception 6f
another’s mind-stuff might imply the direct-perception of that upon which that
[mind-stuff ] depends. To this conclusion (prOpta) he says 20. Bat [the intuitive
knowledge of the p resen ted-idea of another] does not have that [idea]
together with that upon whioh it depends [as its object], sinoe that upon
which it depends is not-in-the-fleld [of consciousness]. That constraint
[ii. 19] has for its object the subliminal-impressions with their adjuncts 1 ; but
this has as its object the other’s inindtstuff and nothing more. This is what he
means to say.

21. As a result of constraint upon the [outer] form of the
body, when its power to be known is stopped, then as a con-
sequence of the disjunction of the light and of the eye there
follows indisoernibility [of the yogin’s body].

As a result of constraint upon the form of the body, [the yogin]
inhibits that [imperceptible] power by which [the coarse and
external] is known. When its power to Be known is stopped, as
a consequence of the disjunction of the light [that is, of the other
person, the observer] and of the eye [that is, the organ], in-
discemibility of the yogin is produced. In this way it must be
understood that indiscemibility to sound and to other objects of
sense has also been described.

21. . . . Dody . . . indisoernibility.

A body has its essence in the five [coarse elements]. And as having form it
comes under the eye. For as having form the body and the colour of the body
pass through the experience of being the object-of-the-action of the proeess-of-
knowing by the eye. Thus when the yogin performs a special kind of con-
straint upon the [external] form, then the power of being known, which belongs
to the colour and which is the source of the direct-perception of a body having
form, is stopped. Therefore when the power to be known is stopped, the yogin
becomes indiscernible. In other words, the body of the yogin does not become
the object of the thinking [coming from] the eye. The meaning is that when
this is done, indisoernibility is the cause. — gin this way.B When ss a result
of constraint Sipon sound or touch or taste or smell with reference to the body
the powentof those [four objects of sense] to bo known is stopped, and when there
is no connexion between the light [that is, of the other person, the observer] ynd
the [other’s] organ -of-heaijng or of touch or of taste or of smell, — then [the yogin]
becomes indiscernible to these [organs]. Buqji, mvtatis mutandis, is the mean-
ing of the satra.

1 These Bslarihna has defined in his note (5) on p. 280* (Calc. ed.).


251] Fast and slow development of karma [ — iii. 22

22. Advancing and not-advanoing is karma; as a result of
constraint- upon this [two-fold karma] or from the signs of
death [there arises an intuitive] knowledge of the latter end.
Karma having its fruition in length-of-life is of two kinds, the
advancing 1 and the not-advancing. Of the two, 1. just as a wet
cloth spread-out dries in a shorter time, so is advancing karma ;
2. and just as the Bfghe [cloth] rolled into a ball becomes dry
a long time after, so is not-advancing [karma], 1. Advancing
karma is also like fire set in dry 2 grass, which spreads on all sides
with the breeze, and burns in the briefest time. 2. And just as
the same fire, put bit by bit into a pile of grass, burns a long time
after, so is not-advancing [karma]. This is the karma having [its
limit in] a single existence and causing the length-of-life, of two
kinds, the advancing and the not-advancing. As a result of
constraint upon this there is [intuitive] knowledge of the latter
end, of the decease. — tOr from the signs of death [there arises an
intuitive] knowledge of the latter end.> A sign-of-death 3 is of
three kinds, that pertaining to self and that pertaining to [other]
creatures and that pertaining to divine beings. Of these [three],
a sign-of-death 1. pertaining to one’s self [would occur when] one
with stopped 2 ears does not hear the sound [of the vital spirits]
within one’s own body ; or when one vith closed eyes does not see
the inner light. Likew ise 2. a sign pertaining to other creatures
[would occur when] one sees the Men of Yama, [or] when one sees
unexpectedly the Fathers, the Departed. Similarly 3. [a sign]
pertaining to divine beings [would occur when] one sees heaven or
the Siddhas unexpectedly, or when everything is reversed. By
this [sign] also he perceives that the latter end is near at hand.

33. Advanoing . . . or . . . And karma having its fruition in length-of-life
is of two kinds, the advanoing and the not-advanoing. Now that karma which
has [ita limit] id a single existence and which ia the source of birth and of
length-of-life and of kind-of-enjoyment has a fruition in lengtfi-of-life. 1. And

this it ready to afford the kind-of-enjoyment without the delay <ft even a very
»

* This word ocean here only in t^edShagra ' Compare MSrkandeya Pur. xl. 1 ff.

’ and i»> Vlaupati. \ Lifiga Par. xoi. 1-36.

' Umasrftti B TaUrldhigama-tOtra ii. 52, dlahsbhbata xii. 317 18 ff.


iii.22 — ] Bbok III. Supernoi'tnal Powers or Vibhuti [252

short tiifie. It has afforded much of the kind-of-enjoyment and only a little of
its fruit remains. Its fu notional -activity continues only because it is imnOssiblfe
for it to have its fruition suddenly in one body ; therefore it delays. This is
advancing [karma]. The advanoe is the functional-activity ; the [karma] is con-
nected with this [functional-activity], 2. The same karma, when it affords little
fruit and requires time for this, and when, engaged in affording fruit, its functional-
activity is intermittent and slow, is not-advancing. This same is made clear in
two similes with the words «Of these 1. just as,» t|n the same point for greater
clearness he gives another simile in the words <d2. Or just asfire.^ — The final-
end is the great mundane-dissolution. As compared with this, death is the latter
end. As a result of constraint upon the right-living and wrong-living in that
karma, [there follows intuitive] knowledge of the latter end. And as a result
of this the yogin, knowing his own karma which is advancing, and having
created many bodies for himself, experiences suddenly the fruit [of karma] and
dies when he wills. Incidentally [the author] says «Or [the intuitive knowledge
of the latter endj is the result of the signs of-doath.^ Signs-of-death {arista) are
things which terrify such as the enemy (an). The indications of death are of
three kinds — <&Or when everything is reversed^ [that is] even when there is no
jugglery, villages and cities he deems to bo heaven, and the world of only human
beings to be a world of divine beings.

23. [As a result of constraint] upon friendliness and other
[sentiments there arises] powers [of friendliness].

Friendliness 1 and compassion and joy are the three sentiments.
As to these [three], by feeling friendliness for living beings who
are in happiness he discovers the power of friendliness ; by feeling
compassion for those in pain he discovers the power of compassion ;
by feeling joy for those who are disposed to merit he discovers the
power of joy. As a result of the sentiments there arises the con-
straint which is concentration, and from it there arise powers of
unfailing energy. Indifference, however, for those disposed to evil
is not one [of these practised] sentiments. And therefore there is
no concentration upon it. For this reason, since it is impossible
to perform constraint upon it, there is no power Tesiilting from
indifference.

23. [As a of constraint] upon friendliness and other [sentiment}*

there arise] powers [of friendliness].

By constraint upon friendliness and other [sentiments] he gains powers of
friendliness and other powers. Of these three us a result of the sentiment

r See i 33.


263] Cultivation of sentiments [ — iii. 25

of friendliness there arises [in him] that kind of power by which fie makes
everybody happy. As a result of this lie is kindly to all. Similarly through
the power resulting from compassion ho delivers living beings from pain and
from the causes of pain. Likewise thro* gh the power of joy he imparts the
detached-attitude to everybody. He states what will be of assistance in what
will be said, namely, that sentiments cause concentration, as he says <CAs a result
of the sentiments there arises the constraint which is concentration. Although
constraint is the three, fixeff-attention and contemplation and concentration and
not concentration alone, still sinco constraint follows as an effect after concentia-
tion, and since concentration is the dominant of the three, concentration is
figuratively used for constraint.— Some manuscripts read ‘The sentiments are
concentration.* In this case we must suppose that the sentiments and concentra-
tion, as being parts ot the whole which is constraint, serve as causes of the
constraint. «Energy» is exertion. By its means a man who has the powers of
friendliness, &c , towards persons in happiness, &c., becomes unfailing in his
eaextion when things are to be done for others. Indifference is the detached
attitude. In this case there is no sentiment. Ncr is there anything that might
arise [out of it] as in the case of those who are in happiness.

24. [As a resjilt of constraint] upon powers [there arise]
powers like those of an elephant.

As a result of constraint upon the power of an elephant one has
the power of an elephant. As a result of constraint upon the
power of Vainateya [the Garuda bird] one has the power of
Vainateya. As a result of constrain- ipon the power of the wind
one has the power of the wind. And so forth in the same way.

24. [As a result of constraint] upon powers [there arise 1 ] powers like thoee
of an elephant. He gains the power of that upon whieh [he exercises]
constraint

25. As a result of casting the light of a sense-activity [there
arises the intuitive] knowledge of the subtile and the con-
cealed and the obscure.

The yogin Jt>y casting the light of that sense-activity of the central
oigan which is called luminous [i. 3G] upon an ofcgect whether
subtile 1 or concealed or obscure has access to that objeq£.

SB. . . . Sense-activity . . . intuitive knowledge. Casting [his mind] with
constraint upon a subtile or concealed or obscure iatanded-obiect he has access
to that intended-object.


1 Compare Simkhya-kurikS tit


iii. 26 — ] Book III. Supernormal Powers or Vibhuti [264

26. As a result of constraint upon the sun [there arises the
intuitive] knowledge of the oosmic-spaoes ( [bhuvana ] ).

The enumeration of these [cosmic-spaces] : there are seven worlds.
Among them, 1. starting from the Avici [nadir] and extending up
to the summit of Meru is the Earth-world ( bhu-lokd ) ; 2. beginning
from the summit of Meru and going as far as the Pole-star
( dhruva ), the world of Intermediate Space diversified by planets
and asterisms and stars. Beyond that is the five-fold Heaven-
world (svar-loka ) : 3. the world of Mahendra, the third world ;
4. the Mahar world of Prajapati, the fourth world ; the three-fold
world of Brahma, that is, 5. the Jana- world and 6. the Tapas-
world and 7. the Satya- world. 1

“The world-of- Brahma in its three stages,

Below it the worla-of-Prajapati, the Great [world].

And [below it] Mahendra’s [world] : [these five] are called
Heaven (svar).

in the sky [of Intermediate-Space] are the .stars ; on earth,
the creatures.”

Thus saith the Summary-Stanza. 8 Rising in a series above Avici
there are six regions ( bhumi ) of the Great-Hell (mahd-ncvraka), sup-
ported [respectively] by solid-matter, by water, by fire, by wind,
by air, and by darkness, namely, the Mah&kala, the Ambariga, the
Raurava, the Maharaurava, the K&lasiltra, and the Andhatimisra,
wherein living creatures, having been allotted a long and grievous
length-of-life, feeling the misery incurred as the result of their
own karma, are born. Next, the seven lower-worlds ( pdtdla ), with
the names Mahatala, Ras&tala, Atala, Sutala, Vitala, Tal&tala, and
Patala, and as the eighth this earth 3 with its seven lands (dvipa),
and in the midst of it, the golden King of Mountains, Sumeru.
Its peaks on the four sides are made of gems <?f silver, of lapis


( m (7. Satya
Brahma i A, Tapas
Sear (5. Jana

4. Mahar PrfijSpatya <
.3. Mahendra
2. AntarikhU
1. Bhfl


* Compare VP. ii. 4. 97.

* For a very valuable collection of parallel

material in the Epic tee Hopkins:
Mythological Aspect*, JAOS, 1910.


265] Intuitive knowledge of cosmic spaces * [ — iii. 26

lazuli, of crystal, and of gold. By reason [of the reflection] of
the brilliant colour of the lapis lazuli, the southern quarter
of the sky is the deep blue of the -petal of the blue-lotus ; the
eastern is white ; the western is translucent ; the northern is like
the golden amaranth. And on its southern slope is the Rose- Apple
tree, from which this land is called the Land of the Rose-Apple.
As the sun moves forward, day and night, 1 as it were fast bound to
him, 1 revolve 2 [about Sumeru]. North of this [Sumeru] are three
mountains, blue-and-white-peaked, two thousand yojanas in extent.
Between these, three zones {va r$a), nine thousand yojanas each,
called 1. Ramanaka, 2. Hiranmaya, and 3. the Northern 3 Kurus.
On the south, the [mountains] of Ni$adha, of the Goldhorn, and
c the Snow-crags, two thousand yojanas in extent. Between
these, three zones of nine thousand [yojanas] each, called 4. the
Harivarsha, 5. Kiitpuru^a, 6. Bharata. On the East of Sumeru,
[the countries of] 7. .Bhadrajva, bounded by the M&lyavat
[mountains] ; on.the West, [the countries of] 8. Ketumala, bounded
by the Gandhamadana [mountains]. In the middle, the zone of
9. Ilavrta. — This same [Land of the Rose-Apple], a hundred
thousand yojanas in extent, Btretches in each direction from
Sumeru for half this distance. Now the Land of the Rose- Apple,
a hundred thousand yojanas in extent. >s encompassed by a girdle-
shaped sea of salt the double thereof. And then [there are] the
lands of Qaka,Ku 9 a, Kr&ufica, Qalmala, Magadha, andPu?kara, each
double the preceding, fringed with marvellous hills, and the Seven
Seas, [flat] like a pile of mustard seeds, with their waters of Sugar-
cane-juice, of Spirits, of Butter, of Curds, of Cream, of Milk, and of
Treacle. [These lands] encompassed by the Seven Seas and girdle-
shaped and encircled by the Lok&loka Mountains [are] estimated
at five hundred millions of yojanas [in extent]. This whole well-
founded configuration stretches out in the midmost part of the
[World] Egg. And the Egg is a minute fragment of th% primary-
cause, like a firefly in the sky. 1. Here, in the lower world, in

1 SUdhlata KKnmodl on ?. 4. 77 (Nir. SSg. ri. 7. 1 ff. and discuised by Jacobi in
• ed., |KK, p. 208*). * the article on the Abode of tbe Blest

* Just so BaghaeaAfa vii. 24. (Hastings : Cyclopaedia of Rel. and

* Described in R&m. is. 41 aad Maht Bh. Ethics, II-fl98»). -


iii. 26 — ] Book III. Supernormal Powers or Vibhuti [256

the 'sea, in these mountains, groups of gods have their abode,
Asuras, Gandharvas, Kinnaras, Kimpuru^as, Yak?as, Haksasas,
Bhutas, Pretas, PifScas, Apasmarakas, Apsarases, BrahmarSk^asas,
Ku^mandas, Vinayakas. In all the lands meritorious gods and
human beings [have their abode]. Sumeru is the pleasure-ground
of the thirty-[three] [gods]. In it are tl\e pleasure-grounds, Mi^ra-
vana, Nandana , Caitraratha, and SumanaSa. Sudharma is the gods’
assembly-hall. Sudaryana is their castle. Yaijayanta is their palace.
2. The planets and asterisms and stars, fastened to the pole-star,
have their courses 1 regulated by the steady impulsion of the wind,
and arranged at different points above 2 Sumeru move round about
it. 3. They who dwell in [the world of] Mahendra are six groups
of gods, the Thirty-three, the Agnisvattas, the Yamyas, the Tugitas,
the Aparinirmita-va^a-vartins, and the Parinirmita-va^a-vartins.
All [these] fulfil their desires and are endowed with atomization and
the other powers. They live for a mundane period ; they are goodly
to behold and they delight in love. Their bodies are not caused
[by parents]. Their retinue is made of incomparable and not
prudish Apsarases.. 4. In the Great world of Prajapati there is
a five-fold group of gods, the Kumudas, the Rbhus, the Pratar-
danas, the Anjanabhas, and the Pracitabhas. These have the
mastery over the great elements ; their food is contemplation ;
their lives are for a thousand mundane periods. 5. In the first of
the worlds-of- Brahma, in the Jana 3 world, there is a four-fold
group of gods, the Brahmapurohitas, the Brahmakayikas, the
Brahmamahakayikas, and the Amaras. These have the mastery
over the elements and the organs. 6. In the second [of the
worlds-of-Brahma], in the Tapas-world, there is a three-fold group
of gods, the Abhasvaras, 4 the Mahabhasvaras, and the Satyama-
habhasvaras. These have the mastery over the .elements and the

1 They are driven by the wind, a* cows are 9 Compare Vifli. Pur. ii. 12 and TTm&svSti
driven*6y the ploughman in a circle TattvSdhig. Silt. iv. 14.

around the threshing-post. Fastened 8 VijflSna Bhikgu reads Janar.
by wind-ropes to the pole-star, accord- 8 Reading abhSs°. The name indicates
ing to MSitn Up jl 4. jM^the astro- that they are self-luminous. An in-

nomy see SQrya Siddh3nta ii 1 ; for the tractive article upon them by Pro-

simile, see £akuntal& iii. 6, and G. fewer Jacobi |s in Hastings;

Grierson : Beliar Peghant Life, § 889, Cycl. of BeL and t KM 1 *

with the illustration.


2671 Seven worlds of Brahma [ — in. 26

organs and evolving-matter. Each lives twice as long as* the
previous [group] ; their food is contemplation ; their lives are
chaste ( urdhvaretas ). Upwards there, is no impediment to their
thinking and in regions below there is no object obscure to their
thought. 7. In the third [world] of Brahma, in the Satya-world,
there are four groups of gods, the Acyutas, the Quddhaniv&sas, the
Satyftbhas, and the Samjnasarhjnins. By them no laying down
foundations for a dwelling is made ; they are grounded in them-
selves and placed one above the other ; they have the mastery over
the primary cause and live as long as there are creations. Of
these [four] the Acyutas delight in deliberative contemplation ;
the QuddhanivSsas delight in ref ective contemplation ; the Satya-
bhns delight in contemplation where there is nothing but joy;
and the Samj n&sarhj n ins delight in contemplation where there is
the feeling of personality and nothing more. These also remain in
the three worlds. 1 Thes4 seven worlds are all without exceptions
worlds of the Brahman. But the discarnate and those [whose
bodies] are resolved into primary matter exist in the state of
release and are not placed in the worlds. By performing constraint
upon the door of the sun * the yogin should directly perceive [all]
this. Then also upon other [objects upon the sun]. Thus to
this extent he should practise, until all his is seen.

36. As a result of constraint upon the sun [there arises the intuitive]
knowledge of the cosmic-spaces (bhuvana).

Up to the pole-star from the summit of Meru in this world. Thus in this way
from here up to the end of the Summary-Stanza (sarhgraha-^loka) the seven worlds '
are briefly described. He describes them in detail in the words dAmong them . . .
above Avlci.» The word «sol[d-matter» means earth. [The word] «region»
means a place [but not a hell]. These great hells must be understood to be
accompanied by several lesser hells. These same are brought together under
other names in the words, 4CMah&k&la.& As the sun moves forward, day and
night, revolve [flout* Sumeru], it were fast bound to him. The meaning is
that night is in that part of it which the sun leaves ; and day is in that part which

the^sun shines upon. He gives the extent of the whole Land of the Hbse- Apple

•

1 In the World-Egg. They are not released. 1 On thia whole subject see Jacobi's article
* This seems to be the entrance to the on the Abrtie of the Blest in Hastings :

•world «f ft tahma. Compare MSitft Up. Cyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics,

vi. 80 (ahuMse* dmJmm) and Moedska vol. If, p. 608*.

Up.i2.ll and Cbdadog. Up. v. 19. 2.

iM- f "1


iii. 26 — ] Book III. Supernormal Powers or VibhUti [258

€

in the words {This same [Land of the Rose-Apple], a hundred thousand yojaoas.*
What kind of a hundred thousand yojanas ? In reply he says tit stretches out
in eaoh direction from Sumeru fqr half this distanced {For half> would be
fifty thousand yojanas. 4Clt stretches out$ [amounts to] is comprehended, in-
asmuch as Sumeru occupies the middle of it. The Seven Seas, each like piles
of mustard seeds, are each double [the preceding]. This is the connexion [of
the sentence]. Just as a pile of mustard-seed is not heaped like a pile of rice-
grains, nor quite [flat] like the earth, so are tho&e seas. This is the meaning.
Islands are fringed with marvellous hills, so that one could say that they seem
to have fringes of marvellous hills. All this circuit of the earth, encompassed
by garlands of lands and forests and mountains and cities and oceans, and
encircled by the Lok&loka Mountains, extends, is comprehended, in the midst of
the Egg of Brahma. {This well-founded configuration means that it is that
whose arrangement [is well-founded]. He now tells who they are that dwell
there in the words {Here, in the lower-world.» He describes the arrangement
of Sumeru in the words, «Sumeru is» — 1 Thus having described the Earth-
world specifically, he describes specifically the world of Intermediate Space with
the words {The planets. » The «impulsion» is the functional activity. — Heshows
the Heaven-world in the words {They who dwell [in the world of] Mahendra.20
8. {Groups of gods)> are kinds of gods. He also describes the perfection of the
form of the six groups of gods by saying «A11 [these] fulfil their desires.» All
objects yield to them even at nothing more than a desire. «Goodly to beholds
[that is] to be worshipped. They delight in love [that is] are fond of sexual
pleasure. Their bodies are not caused by parents, [but] quite without cause,
without union of parents, they obtain a supernal body from atoms thoroughly
purified 1 by peculiar merit. 4. He describes the Mahar-world in the words, tin
the Greats These have the mastery over the great elements. Whatever they
like the great elements confer upon them. And the great elements remain in
this or that arrangement as they desire. {Their food is contemplation^ means
that they are sated with contemplation merely and are nourished [thereby]. 5. He
describes the Jana- world with the words tin the first. » In accordance with the
order of the worlds as described {they have the mastery over the elements and
the organ8.» Earth and the other elements, and the organ-of-hearing and
the other organs are employed just as they choose to employ them. 6. He
describes, in accordance with the order already described, the second [world] of
Brahma in the words tin the second. $ {These have the ihastery over the
elements an<f the organs and evolving-matter.$ Evolving-matter (prakptf) is the
flvafine elements. Over these they have the mastery . For at their wish the subtile

1 This is an allusion to the s^oty of Dadhici, India took his body and made it into

whose body .was the very essence of a thunderbolt (ri. 10. 12). The

knowledge and of courses of austerities Qnmdffibott becomes energised «wfth

(Bhfig. Pur. yi. 9. 51454). While tub- the sage's austerities (Dadhhn Sysri

sorbed in yoga he was unaware that UjUdh ti 11, 20).


260 ] Cosmical and physical correspondences [ — iii. 26

dements actually enter into mutations in the form of bodies. So say those who
have the tradition. ecTwice as long as the previous.* The M&habh&svar&s have
double as long a life as the Abh&svaras ; and the Satyam&h&bh&svaras have
double as long a life as these latter. ^Upwards.* Upwards in the Satya-world
there is no impediment to their thinking. But from Avici right up to the
Tapas-world they discern all subtile and concealed or other things. This is the
meaning. 7. He describes the third world of Brahma in the words «Cln the
third.* They are so described by whom the laying down of a dwelling or
house has not been made. Just because they have nothing to hold them, they
are grounded in themselves. They are such as are grounded in their own bodies.
They have the mastery over the primary cause ; at their wish the sattva and
rajas and tamas come into activity. «They live as long as the creation,* as
it is handed down in the Sacred Word, 1 “All these having perfected their
souls, together* with Brahma enter, when the revers&l-of-creation ( pratisafhcara )
ic cached at the end of the highest [world], into the highest state/ 9 Having
thus stated the common qualities of these four groups of gods, he describes
their special qualities by taking them up in detail with .the words, 6COf these
[four].* The gods called Anyuta take delight in contemplation upon coarse
objects. With this they am satisfied. The gods called ^uddhanivftsa take
delight in contemplation upon subtile objects. With this they are satisfied.
The gods called Saty&bhas take delight in contemplation upon the organs * as
objects. With this they are satisfied. The gods called Samjfiasamjnins take
delight in contemplation upon the feeling of personality and nothing more.
With this they are satisfied. All these have recourse to concentration conscious
[of objects]. And if it be asked why there k no mention here, among [these]
worlds, of those who have given themselves ti concentration not conscious [of
an object], those namely who are discarnate and those [whose bodies] are resolved
into primary matter, the reply is <KBut the discarnate and those [whose bodies]
are resolved into primary matter.* For those whose thinking-substance is in
fluctuation, and to whom objects are shown, carry on worldly affairs and remain
in the 'world. But the discarnate 4 and those [whose bodies] are resolved into
primary matter, although they have a task to perform, do not so remain.
This is the meaning. — All this, with the exception of the Satya-world and as
far [down] as to Avici, is directly perceptible to the yogin. «Upon the door
of the sun* means upon the tube called Susumna. And inasmuch as, even
with such an* extent [of constraint], direct perception of [all] this does not
occur, he says Then.* Then also upon other [objects], that is, also upon
objects other than the Susumna taught by the professor of yoga, \pitil all this
wbrld is seen. For the sattva of the thinking-substance is by its own nature
capable of illumining the whole [world]. But when covered by the defilement

1 Contrast with Viyu Puripa oi. 8§. anen&nanddnugatom i.41 ofVOcaspati't

1 Compare Bh. Git* viii. 16. common^ p. 66* (Calc. ed.).

• Compare Mikkarapom ivfipannam iti , tad 4 See i. 19.


iii. 26 — 1 Book III. Supernormal Powers or Vibhuti [260

of tainas it illumines only that portion which is laid bare by rajas. It illumines
the cosmic space laid bare by the constraint upon the door of the sun/ But
this does not apply similarly in other cases also. Since constraint upon this
[cosmic space] has poyer to lay only bo much bare. Thus all is cleared up.


27. [As a result of constraint] upon the moon [there arises
the intuitive] knowledge of the arrangement of the stars.

By performing constraint upon the moon he would discern the
arrangement of the stars.


28. [As a result of constraint] upon the pole-star [there arises
the intuitive] knowledge of their movements.

Then by performing constraint upon the pole-star he would know
the movements of the stars. By constraint upon heavenly cars,
[for example, the chariot of the sun], he would discern them.


29. [As a result of constraint] upon the wheel of the navel
[there arises the intuitive] knowledge of the arrangement of
the body.

By performing constraint upon the wheel 1 of the navel he would
discern the arrangement of the body. The humours are three,
wind and bile and phlegm. The [corporeal] elements * ( dh&tu )
are seven, skin and blood and flesh and sinew and bone and
marrow and semen. Here (esa) the mention is such that the pre-
ceding element is in each case exterior to that next preceding.


30. [As a result of constraint] upon the well of the throat
[there follows] the cessation of hunger and of thirst.

Below the tongue th ^re is a cord ; below that is the throat ; below
that the welt. As a result of concentration upon that, hunger and
thirst do^iot tormer ^


* Compare H Walter : Hathsyogapradl- ' Comj&re 1 80, p. 67* (Calc. ed.). By
pp xiii-xir. adding jtrina and Btman the list is in-


261] Specimens of applied power [ — in. 33

8L [As a result of constraint] upon the tortoise-tube [there
follows] motionlessness [of the mind-stuff]*

Below the well there is, within the phest, a tube in shape like
a tortoise. By performing constraint upon this, the yogin gains
a motionless state like that of a serpent or of a guana. 1

Whenever the yogin desires to know one thing or another, he should perform
constraint upon that. Thus constraint which leads to the cessation of hunger
and of thirst, and which leads to motionlessness, is taught by the words of the
Sotra and is explained by the Comment with an explanation which is a [mere
matter of] reading. So it is not explained [here].


32. [As a result of constraint] upon the radiance in the head
[there follows] the sight of the Siddhas.

Y. r !f.hin an aperture in the skull there is a resplendent radiance. 1 *
As a result of constraint upon this [radiance there follows] the
sight of the Siddhas roping in the spaces between the sky 3 and
the earth.

32. [As a result of constraint] upon the radianoe in the head [thera
follows] the sight of the Biddhas.

The words <in the head> imply the tube {n&dl) called SusumnA , — (constraint
upon> that, he means.


33. Or as a result of vividness (prdtJ>ha) [the yogin discerns]
all.

The so-called vividness is the deliverer 4 (taraka). This is the
preliminary form of the [intuitive] knowledge derived from
discrimination. Just as the light at dawn [precedes] the sun.
In this other way (tena vd) the yogin knows all * at the rise of the
vivid [intuitive] knowledge.

83. Or as a result of vividness (prOtibha) [the yogin discerns] all.

Vivid-light [that is] self-cogitation (6 ha). This develops into vividness. For in
the esse of one who practises a constraint which leads to the Elevation (pnuam •

* Asss two animals exemplify the rigidity, ' Compare Mah&n&rftyana Up. xl 10-12.

* and not as Vijitina Bhik$u says, the * PBq. iv. 2. 82.
convoluted state of the mind-stuff. 4 See ni 54. »

.The word godJti is mentioned in Cowell * See J H.Leuba: Hallucinations of Light
and Gouge's translation of the Sam- 'Revue Philoeophique, vol. 54, 1902,
darcanasa&ffiaha, p. 288. . 447). fad comnare Hi. 40.


iii. 33 — ] Book III. Supernormal Powers or VibhSti [262

Wiy&n afc there results, when he attains perfection therein, an [intuitive] know*
ledge due to that self-asserting which is the preliminary indication Qmga) of
the dawning of the Elevation. In this way the yogin discerns all. And this
[intuitive] knowledge, since it serves to bring the Elevation near, delivers from
the round-of-rebirth and so is called the ‘ deliverer '.


34. [As a result of constraint] upon ifye heart [there arises]
a consciousness of the mind-stuff.

In this citadel of Brahma 1 is the house [of the mind-stuff], a tiny
lotus [of the heart] — [there arises] a discernment of that. As
a result of constraint upon this [there arises] a consciousness of
the mind-stuff.

84. [As a result of oonatraint] upon the heart [there arises] a conscious-
ness of the mind-stuff.

The word dtheartib is explained in the words. «in the citadel of Brahma.>
Because it is great ( brhat ) the self is Brahma. His dteitadefr, [that is] retreat.
For with reference to this [citadel] he knows this,— ttyt it is his property. The
eave is a den. That same lotus with downward head is the dwelling of the central-
organ. He gives the reason for this consciousness of the mind-stuff by saying
4Ca discernment of that.^ By constraint upon this he discerns the mind-stuff
with its own peculiar fluctuations.


35. Experience is a presented-idea whioh fails to distinguish
the sattva and the Self, whioh are absolutely unoommingled
[in the presented-idea]. Since the sattva exists as objeot for
another, the [intuitive] knowledge of the Self arises as the
result of constraint upon that whioh axists for its own sake.
The sattva of the thinking-substance, with its disposition to
brightness, by mastering the rajas and tamos which are equally
dependent upon the sattva, enters into a mutation as a result of
the presented-idea of the difference between the sattva and the
Self. Therefore the Self, of which we can only Say that it is
Intellect (gitt), which is other [than the aspects {gundj], and which
is undefiled (puddha) [by objects], is absolutely contrary in quality
even to the sattva which is mutable. Experience is| a presented-
idea whioh failB to distinguish these two which are absolutely

* Ghiad. Up- vili. 1. 1.


268] The Self distinct hut unseparated [ — iii. 33

uncommingled. Because the Self has objects shown to it. # This
[same] presented-idea of experience is an object for sight, since
the sattva exists for the sake of another. But as a result of
constraint upon that presented-idea,* which is distinguished from
this [, sattva ], which is Intellect and nothing more; and which is
other [than the aspects ( guna)\ and which belongs to the Self, —
[as a result of this,] that insight whose object is the Self arises.
The Self is not seen by that presented-idea of the Self whose
essence is the sattva of the thinking-substance. It is the Self
which sees the presented-idea which depends upon its own self.
For in this sense it has 1 been said, “ Wherewith, pray, could
one discern the Discerner ? ”

85. . . . Sattva . . . [intuitive] knowledge. When, by reason of its being
altogether o\ erwhelmed by rajas and lamas, even the thinking-substance, bright
inform and exceedingly clear though it is, can in its mutation as a discriminative
discernment, be absolutely distinguished from intelligence, how much more so
then the rajas and tamas } which are inert (jada) by nature! With this in
mind the author of the SQtras uses the words, <the sattva and the Self.>
Taking up this same point the author of the Comment Also says «CThe sattva
of the thinking-substance, with its disposition to brightness.^ Not merely one
whose disposition is to brightness, but one whioh has entered into a mutation
in the form of discriminative discernment. Inasmuch as it is altogether
undefiled [by objects] and bright, it absolutely similar to intelligence
[c&itanya). So there is a commingling, as * implies in the words 4Cequal.^
^Dependent upon sattva » means a relation without which it cannot exist
The rajas and tama * which are equally dependent upon the sattva are so-called
[in the Comment]. Mastered means overwhelmed. He states that there is
no commingling in the words «Therefore . . . even» The word ca is here in
the sense of ‘even ’. [Contrary in quality] not merely to the rajas and tamos
[but even to the sattva ], This is the meaning. The word «Cmutable^ indicates
the quality contrary to the Self who is immutable. A presented idea which
fails to distinguish, because the thinking-substance, which is serene and cruel
and infatuated, takes the image of the intelligence (c&vtanya). And so the
serene and other forms are falsely attributed to the intelligence, just as the
trembling of the clear water which reflects the moon is fairly attributed to
the moon. He gives the reason for the experience in the words 4CBecause the
Self has objects shown to it.» This has been explained more thltn once. 1 If
it be objected that tne sattva of the thinking-su^™' might be different from

Bfhad-Araty. Up. ii. 4. 14 and sir. 5. 15. * For e&nuipu;, i. 4, p. 16 ; ii. 17, p. 141 ;

and also iv. 22. p. 306 (Calc. ed.l.


iii. 33 — ] Book III. Supernormal Powers or Vibh&ti [284

the Self, bat that experience oould not be different from the Self, he replies {This
[same].} This [same] presented-idea of experience is a presented-idea of a kjnd of
experience belonging to the sattva. Henoe as something for the sake of another
experience is an objeot-for-sight. Fqr the sattva is for the sake of another in that it
is a combination of parta. And beoaase experience is an external-aspect of this
[saWtw], it would also be for the sake of another. Furthermore, that other for
whose sake it is, would be the experienoer. His is the experience.— Or [another
explanation]. For experience (bhoga) is passing-through (anublmv) pleasure or
pain which are felt to be coactive or counteraotive. And this [experience]
cannot bo ooactive or counteraotive to itself. Because a fluctuation oannot be
opposed to itself. Therefore experience must be for the sake of something that
is to be made ooactive or counteraotive. This experienoer is the self. Experience
is an object-for-sight to him. {But . . . that preeented-idea, which is distinguished
from this} which is for the sake of another. These words [from the Comment]
are explained by supplying the other words in the ablative case ‘ for the sake of
another ’. An objeotor says, ‘ This ntay be true. But if the insight has the
Self for its object, then whew I Sir I the Self becomes the object-for-insight
by the insight ! There would surely be other insights, one after the other, and
we should fall into an infinite regress 1 * In reply to this he says {The Self
is not ... . by that preeented-idea of the Self.X The oonnexion-of-ideas is
this The Intellect (eiti) illumines that which is inert (jatfa ), and that which
is inert does not [illumine] the intellect. The idea presented to the Self has
os its essence that which is not intelligent. How can this [presented-idea]
illumine a being whoae essence is intelligence? On the other hand, how
can [the Self], whose essence is intelligence and whose brightness does not
depend upon another, be properly eaid to illumine that which is inert ? When
he says {whose essence is the sattva of the thinking-substance} he describes
the inertness in so far as there is identity with the non-intelligent form. [We
say that the saliva of the thinking-substance] depends upon the Self to the
extent that it depends on the image of the Self as entered into tb' sattva of
the thinking-substance, in the same sense that a person depends upon [his]
face reflected in a mirror [if he wish to see himself]. [And the sattva is said
to depend upon the Self.] But not [as the objeotor said], because the sattva
of the thinking-substance illumines the Self. It is the sattva of the thinking*
substance which reflects the Self united with this presented-idea, and whioh
depends upon the Intelligence (c&itanya) which has been mirrored (chayOpanna)
in it [as the intelligence] of the Self. Thus it exists for the sake of the 8elf.
On this same point he quotes the Sacred Word by saying {For in this sense
it has been^aid} by the I$vara {“ the Discerner.”} The meaning is that [He
is discerned] by no one.


265] Hyperaeathetic sensations [ — iii. 37

36. As a result of this [constraint upon that which exists
for its own sake], there arise vividness and the organ-of-
[supernall-hearing 1 * and the orgaji'Of-[supemal]-feellng and
the organ-of-[supernal]-sight and the organ*of-[supemal]-
taste and the organ*of-[Bupemal]-smell.

As a result of vividness, there arises an [intuitive] knowledge of
the subtile or concealed or remote, whether past or future. As
a result of the organ-of-[supernal]-hearing, one hears supernal
sounds ; as a result of the organ-of-[eupemal]-feeling, one has
access to supernal touch ; as a result of the organ-of-[supemal]-
sight, one has the consciousness 1 of supernal colour ; as a result of
the organ-of-[supemal]-taste, one has a consciousness of supernal
flavour ; as a result of the organ-of-[supernal] smell , 3 one has an
[intuitive] knowledge 4 of supernal fragrance. These unceasingly
arise.

This restraint. moreover, upon that which exists for its own Bake continue* until
the primary cause has fulfilled its peculiar task (karya) } the [intuitive] knowledge
of the Self. He describes all the supernormal powers which [the yogin] receives
before that [intuitive knowledge comes]. 36. As * result of thie . . . there
arise ... So then it has been asserted that the central-organ and the organ of
hearing and of feeling and of sight and of taste and of smell, which have been
helped by the external-aspects which arise yoga, are in each single case in
direct causal relation with the supernal sour* . and so forth and with the [in-
tuitive] knowledge of vividness (pratibha)* The five organs, of hearing and so
on, which sppevceive supernal sounds and forth have technical names such as
the organ-of-[supernal] -hearing and the rest. The Comment is easy.


37. In concentration these [supernal activities] are obstacles ;
in the emergent state they are perfections (■ siddhi ).

These, the vividness and so forth, arising in the yogin whose
mind-stuff is concentrated, are obstacles, in that they go counter
to the sight which belongs to this [concentrated _ mind-stuff].


1 This word f ravana is from th « causative
stem. The MapiprabhS (p. 64' 1 , Ben.
ed.) explains it os being 4 the organa of

knowi ug supernal sounds and so on ’

• (divy&nti r fa bdn . . . tidtnarh gruhakdni).

A sennit is a perception with little direct
34 [■«©-•- m]


relation to the object.

9 Compare Hopkins, Yoga-technique, .1 AOS,
(1901), v l. 22, p. 344*°.

* The word tijudna is loo>ely u^d. It
seems to indicate whatever comes to
consciousness.


iii. 37 — ] Book III. Supernormal Powers or V'bhuti [266

r

[But] arising [in the yogin] -whose mind-stuff is emergent, they
are perfections.

Occasionally a man, after beginning constraint upon the aelf as object, acquires
those perfections which are subsidiary to this, and thinks because of the power
(prabhava) of these [perfections] that he has effected his purpose, and so might
cease the constraint. So [the author] says, 87. In concentration these
[supernal activities] are obstacles ; in the emergent state they are perfec-
tions (siddhi). For a man whose mind-stuff is emergent thinks highly of these
perfections, just as a man bom in misery considers even a small bit of wealth
a pile of wealth. But a yogin whose mind-stuff is concentrated must avoid
these [perfections] even when brought near to him. One who longs for the
final goal of life, the absolute assuagement of the three-fold anguish, how could
he have any affection for those perfections which go counter to [the attainment]
of that [goal] ? This is the meaning both of the Satra and of the Comment


98. As a result of slackening the causes of bondage and as
a result of the consciousness of the procedure [of the mind-
stuff], the mind-stuff penetrates into the body of another.

By vii tue of the latent-deposit of karma in the body, the central-
organ which is changeable and unstable becomes established. This
is bondage. By virtue of concentration there is a slackening of
this karma which is the cause of bondage. And the consciousness
of the procedure [of the mind stuff] comes only from concentration.
As a result of the dwindling of the bondage of karma, and as
a result of the consciousness of the procedure of his mind-stuff,
the yogin by withdrawing mind-stuff from his own body deposits
it in other bodies. The organs stlso fly after [ii. 64] the mind-
stuff thus deposited. Just 1 as, for instance, when the king-bee
flies up, the bees fly up after him, so the organs follow after the
mind-stuff in its penetration into the body of another.

After thus stating that power, in the form of [intuitive] knowledge extending
as far as to the sight oi the Self, is the result of constraint, <he giVee, as another
result of const&int, power in the form of action. 88. . . . The oaueee of bond-
age . . . penetration. When he says CBy virtue of concentration> this means
under 1 the power of the constraint whose object is the causes of bondage. TVs
word Concentration^ is, used [instead of ‘constraint,'] because it is pre-
dominant [in constraint]. — A procedure is that by which something proceeds into


1 Compare Pra$na Up. ii. 4.


267] Externalizing of mind-stuff [ — iii. 39

another thing. It means the tubes (nddi) [that is] the paths for the coming and
going of mind-stuff. As a result 2. of constraint upon this passage there is a con-
sciousness of it. And as a result of this [as well as of 1. the constraint upon
the causes of bondage], since the causes of ‘bondage are slackened, it [the mind-
stuff] is not held back by this [yogin]. Although the mind-stuff is not held back
as it soars into the upward path, it cannot without impediment pass forth from
his body nor enter into the other’s body. Therefore the passage for this must
also be known. — The organs 1 * * moreover follow the mind-stuff and settle down in
their respective places in th*e other’s body.


30. As a result of subjugating the Udana , there is no adhesion
to water or mud or thorns or similar objects, and [at death]
the upward flight.

The fluctuation of the whole complex of organs which is dis-
tinguished by having the different vital-forces {prana) is vitality . 1
Its activity is five-fold, Prdna has its course through the mouth
and nose and its fluctuation extends as far as the heart. And
Samdna, since *it distributes equally, has its fluctuation from the
navel. Apana, since it leads down, has its fluctuation as far as
the sole of the foot. Udana, since it leads up, has its fluctuation
as far as the head. Vyana is pervading. Among these Prana is
predominant. As a result of sutjju< ting the Udana there is nc
adhesion to water or mud or thorns «.-r similar objects ; and at the
time of decease there is the upward flight. This [upward flight]
he attains by mastery [of the Udana).

89. Udana . . . and . . . the upward flight. The fluctuation of the whole
complex of organs is life. The words {distinguished by having the different
vital-forces (prana)* refer to that [fluctuation] of which the different vital-forces
are the distinction. The organs have two kinds [of fluctuations], an inner and
an outer. The outer is distinguished by the external-sense (atocana) of colour
and similar sensations. The inner is life. For this is a special kind of effort
and it leada to the differed activities of the winds (mdntfa) which the body
comprehends. This effort is common to all the organs. A^they say* “The
fluctuations common to the [inner] organs are the five winds (vdyu), vital-airs
\and so on.” Because they are the distinguishing-charaoteristic * f this [life].

1 Defined as a struggle for life by VKoa- 15, p. fl7*. It is mentioned in the list

spati jTirnmnkprina tfMrepqynsyetse- iii. 18, p. 280 4 (Calc. ed.).

Made 'muktUOaf ttoatpa ft s n w ji iii. • Sfcfckhya-kfcnkft 89.


iii. 39 — ] book III. Supernormal Pouters or VibhQti [268

The action for] function of this effort is of five kinds. 1. Prdna extends from
the tip of the nose to the heart. 2. Samara is one which evenly distributes as
required in different places the various juices which are mutations of food eaten
and drunk. And its locality extends from the heart and to the navel. 8. Apdna
is that which leads to the carrying off of urine, faeces, foetus, &o. And its
activity (vrtfi) is from the navel and to the sole of the foot. 4. Ud&na is so-called
because it leads up [that is] leads upwards such things as secretions. And its
activity is from the tip of the noee and to the head. 5. Vyana is one that
pervades [the whole body] — Of these thus described Prana is predominant, since
the Sacred Word 1 declares that when that goes forth all goes forth, •' Following
the Prana when it goes forth, all the vital-foroee (prana) go forth.” — Having thus
explained the differences between the vital-forces (prana) with respect to activity
and locality, he leads up to the meaning of the aOtra with the words €As a result
of subjugating the Uddna .* When constraint has been performed upon the
Vdina, [then] as a result of its subjugation, [the yogin] is not held back by
water or similar objects. And at the time of deoease his upward flight is by the
path' which commences with the Asms. As a result of this [constraint] he
attains by mastery to this upward flight. These supernormal powers that result
from constraint upon the vital-forces beginning witty Prana, if there be success in
it, should be understood according to the differences in the subjugations of
activities and of localities [in the body].

40. As a result of subjugating the Sam&na [there arises] a
radiance.

The yogin who has subjugated the Samdna by causing a pulsation
of the flames, becomes radiant. 3

40. . . . the Samdna ... a radiance. There ia «a pulsation,* a flaming forth
of the flame in the body.

41. As a result of constraint upon the relation between the
organ-of-hearing, and the air (dkifa), [there arises] the
supernal organ-of-hearing. 4

For all organs-of- hearing the air is the [physical] basis, and for all
sounds. In which sense it has been snid “All* those whose

> Compare Brbade&r. Up. ir. 4. 8. eluding the ptauM M8. instead of

* This is the fytaySno. See Brhad Ar. Up ,*iadffa-fruiitrarH. One ie tempted to

vi. 1. 8 and 18 and CbKnd. Up. iv. 15. snrmite that there might be anothqy

5-6 ; ChSnd. Up. v. 10. 1. reading tulya-dtfya or iA-

* Compare prabkd bhStkaraiya (iii. 18, stead of tufyadrfa, with a meaning

p. 248*, Calc. ed.). similar to Vlcaspati's gloujdttyo. This

* iii. 51, p. 267* (Calc. ed.). is Paficapikha’e twelfth ftagmeflt

* Beading ekitfruUtvam witty Hdx MS8. in- according to Garbe.


269] Supernormal audition [ — iii. 41

processes-of-hearing (pxtvana) are in the same place have the" same
kind-of-hearing {eka-grutitvam)" 1 And this [fact that the air is the
locus of sounds] is declared to be the* [first] characteristic mark of
air. And the second is that it is not covered 1 [by anything more
extensive]. Thus because a thing which is not-limited-in-extent
(cm&rta) is evidently pot covered [by anything], it is also
recognized that air is {all] pervasive. From the perception of
sounds it is inferred that the organ-of-hearing exists. For in the
case of a deaf man and of a man not deaf, the one perceives sound
and the other not. Hence it is the organ-of-hearing only which is
the field of operation for sound. — For the yogin who has performed
constraint upon the relation between the organ-of-hearing and the
rxir the supernal 3 ear begins.

It has already been Btated [iii. 86, p. 246 1-1 Calo. ed.] that as a result of
constraint upon that which exists for its own sake [this would be the mufthya],
there remains a subsidiary [perfection], the organ-of-[supernal]-hearing and other
[organs]. Now the organ-of>[<upernal]hearing and other [organs] result from
the constraint which has the organ-of-[supernal]-hearing and other [organs] as
its sole purpose. 41. . . . Organ-of-hearing . . . organ-of-hearing. He
says that the object of the constraint is the relation between organ-of-hearing
and the air in the relation of the contained to the container, in the words
CFor all.* All organs-of-hearing, although made of the personality-substanoe,
have the air which is [contained in] the ho- w-space of the auditory canal as
its [physical] basis. The organ-of-hearing has its seat (i iyatana) there. For if we
assist or injure this [auditory canal], w*- find that the organ-of-hearing has
been assisted or injured. [Air is] also [the physical basis] for sounds which are
causes co-operating with the organ-of-hearing. When a sound is to be heard
as coming from an earthen or other substance, the organ-of-hearing, which is
in the hollow of the auditory oanal, presupposes that there is a special
sound residing in the air 4 (nabhas) whioh is its own [that is, the organ's]
substance. [That this is bo is] clear {drftam) [from analogy]. Thus when,
for instanoe, one wishes to have an external sense (diocana) of smell, whioh
is contained in this oase in earth, by means of the organ-of-smell which is
a co-operating [ndn-material] cause for ’those things which have smell and
[taste] as their [specific] qualities, [we find similarly that the sense of smell

\ The YogavKrttika, p. 28T 1 , alto tuggeits silt* in a kind of hypemesthetic per-

* this reading. caption of minute toundt, Ac., which

* The word antivamnam in the tense of are like tubule elements (divyatwm

nSprlfOtt atuna. In the VSrttiku it it tanm<U)^ldinip<uikfm«fabdJdigrSha/cat-

taid to oe ‘free spaoe 4 (avakdfa). turn).

* BMarSma tayt that the supernality con- 4 That it to jay the SMf a.


iii. 41 — ] "Book III. Supernormal Powers or VibhUti [270

requires such a special kind of smell in so far as it is contained in the earthen
thing which contains it]. And it has already been said that the organs of smell
and of taste and of touch and of sight and of hearing, although made of the
personality-substance, do have the elements as their locus. For if we assist
or injure the elements, we find that we have assisted or injured the organ-of-
smell or some other of the organs. This same organ-of-hearing, which is
made of the personality -substance, moreover resembles a piece of iron in
that it is attracted by a magnet-like sound, in* the mouth, produced by the
mouth of the speaker, and, by a succession of its own functions (vrtti), has the
external sense ot the word which has come to the mouth of the speaker. Hence
there are sense-presentations of sounds functioning at different points of space.
[And this sense-presentation], common to all living-beings, cannot in the
absence of inhibition, be counted as an invalid-source-of-ideas. And in this
sense there is an utterance by Paflca^ikha, 4 1 All those whose-processes-of-hearing
({ravana) are in the same place have the same kinu-of-hearing.” Those persons
whose processes-of-hearing are in the same place are those persons, like Ch&itra,
whose organs-of-hearing are of that kind. Tho meaning is that the processes-
of-hearing of all are in the air (d/tdfa). The air, moreover, the locus of the
organs-of-hearing, because it is produced froig the fine-element (tanm&tra),
whose [specific] quality is sound, has sound as its specific quality. 1 By which
sound as a co-operating [non-material] cause it grasps the sounds from earthen
and other substances. Therefore there is for all one species of hearing (f raft)
with regard to sound. This is the meaning. Thus then it has been shown
that air is the locus of the organ-of-hearing and that it has sounds as its
[specific] quality. — And this fact that there is one kind of hearing (ekcqrulitvarh)
is the [first] characteristic mark of airf For this one kind of hearing is that
condition which phenomenalizes sound. This very thing which is its substrate
(&yraya) is the thing expressed by the word air. For in the absenco of such
a hearing there is no [individual] phenomenal sound [belonging to earthen
anfl other substances]. Moreover such a hearing cannot be a quality (ytiaa)
of the various [coarse substances] such as earth, because, if it be such, these cannot
be both the thing-to-be-phenoznenalized and the conditions-which-phenomenalize.
—And the [second] characteristic mark of air is that it is not covered
[by anything more extensive]. If there were no air, the things not-limited-
in-extent would be pressed together and could not be separated even by
needles. And so as a result everything would be covered Jby everything.
And it cannot be saic that the not being covered [by anything] is merely
because things-not-limited-in-extent are not present. For this negation implies
a positive Entity [for example, a thing-limited-in-extent]. And if this positive
entity do not exist, there can be no negation of it Nor can it be said that Vie

1 Compare Yai^ika-sfitra vii. 1. 22 to- p«61, 11. 19-21 (Viiian. ed.). See $lso
gather with the words of ^iidhara, Tarka-samgraha, § 14.


Levitation


271]


[— iii. 42


Energy of Intellect (citifakti) could be the substrate for this* [free s]>ace not
covered by anything]. For being immutable it cannot have [spatial] properties
that precisely determine. And again it cannot be said that space (dif) and time
•re substances ( dravya ) over and above earlh and the other [coarse elements].
Consequently that particular mutation [which is not covered by anything more
extensive] belongs to air only. Thus all is cleared up. — When it is proved that
the fact that nothing covers it is a characteristic mark of air,— so that wherever
there is anything that has nothing covering it, there always air is,— then [all-]
pervasiveness is also proved, as he says 3Thus because a thing which is not-
limited-in-extent.^ — He gives the source-of-the-valid-idea to prove the real exist
ence of the organ-of-hearing by saying «From the perception of Bounds.^ For
[every] action is to be effected by an instrument, just as the action of chopping
or the like is to be effected by the axe or something similar. So in this case &1bo
the act of perceiving Bound must be accomplished by an instrument. And that
which is the instrument is the organ-of-hearing. Now if it be asked why may
not the eye or some other organ be the instrument of this [act], he replies «in
the oase of a deaf man and of a man not deaf.» This is determined by positive
and negative arguments. And this is only an elliptical statement. For mutatis
mutandis we must say that'gs a result of constraint upon the relation betv-een
the organ-of-touch and wind (v&ta), between organ-of-sight and radiance, between
the organ-of-taste and water, and between the organ-of-smell and earth, supernal
touch and other [supernal sensations] would also arise.


42. Either as the result of. co: . train t upon the relation
between the body and the air {aka fa), or (ca) as the result of the
balanced-state of lightness, such as that of the cotton-fibre,
there follows the passing through air.

Wherever there is a body there is air, because it [air] gives space
to the body. The relation [of the body] with this [air] is that of
obtaining [pervasion]. By performing constraint upon this relation
the yogin subjugates the relation with this [air]. And gaining
the balanced-state of lightness such as that of the cotton-fibre,
even to [that gf] atoms [of cotton-fibre], he becomes light himself.
And by reason of this lightness he walks with l^pth feet upon
water. Next after this, however, he walks up$n nothing more
’than a spider’s thread, and then upon sunbeams Thereafter he
courses through the air at will.

1 Reading (with Poona text) tad-dfrayii.


Hi. 42 — ] Book III. Supernormal Powers or VibhCti [272

42 . . . . body . . . . passing through. By performing constraint upon .the
relation between the body and the air, or upon something light such as a ootton*
fibre, [that is] by gaining the balanced-state [that is] the state of the mind which
rests in the [thing] and in whioh it is tinged [i. 41] by it He describes the
sequence of the perfections by the words, {upon water.)


49. An outwardly un-adjusted fluctuation is the Great Dig*
oamate ; as a result of this the dwindling of the oorerlng to
the brightness.

The fluctuation assumed by the central-organ outside the body is
the fixed-attention (dhdrand) called Discarnate. If it is only an
outer 1 fluctuation of the central-organ which abides in the body, it
is called adjusted (kalpita). But if it is an outer fluctuation of the
central-organ, which is itself externalized, in that it [the fluctuation]
disregards the body, it is of course called unadjusted. [The yogins]
by means of the adjusted one among these two accomplish the
unadjusted Great Discarnate, by means of which yogins enter
the bodies of others. And as a result of this fixed-attention, the
covering of the sattva of the thinking-substance, whose essence
is brightness, which has the three-fold fruition from the hindrances
and the karma, and whose root is rajas and tcmas , dwindles away.

He describes yet another constraint whioh leads to the penetration of
another’s body and which leads to the dwindling of the hindrances and
karma and fruitions. 48. An outwardly .... dwindling. The disoamate he
describes in the words {The fluctuation assumed.) In order to show the means
to the Great Discarnate state whioh is unadjusted he first describes the disoamate
in the words {If it is.) The words {only a fluctuation) mean thinking only in
an imaginary way. He describes the Great Discarnate in the words {But If it
is.) He shows that the adjusted and the unadjusted have the relation of means
to end by saying {among these two.) Is it that one, ‘merely enters another's
body as a result of this? Not so, he says in the words {And as a result
of thia) {As£ result of this fixed attention) means when tke Great Discarnate
activity of the oentfal-organ has been perfected. It has iiw three-fold fruition,
from the hftdrancls and from karma, in birth and length-oMife and kind-of-

> The outer adjuitmehi would be in part outwardly unadjusted state there is
a voluntary act JtCompbre the ex* a renunciation of the self and of the

planation in< thedmmiprabhS ms msno sedte of individuality as limited by

bahtr aitv tUS Jcalpanayd^ But in the a body dih* 'hamlMvatySgah,


273] Constraint upon fee kinds of being ' [— -iii. 44

•xptrtaiM [ii. 18j. And it is this that has its root in rajas and tamos.'’ Sines
from mars sattva whan freed from rcy’cw and tamos then arises discriminative
disoemment only. Thus the three-fold fruition in so far as it is rooted! in rajas
and tamos, and because its essence is in them, obscures the sattva -of the
thinking-substance. And as soon as these have dwindled away, the mind-stuff
of the yogin freed from its covering [by them] roves and discerns at will.


44. As a result of constraint upon the ooarse ( sthula ) and the
essential-attribute (svarUpa) and the subtile sfffyma) and the
lnherenoe (anvaya) qnd the purposiveness (arthavattva), there
is a subjugation of the elements.

In this [system] i. the [five elements] beginning with earth [which
in essence are a generic form and a particular] have [as particulars]
sounds and other perceptible things ; [these] particulars, together
with their properties ( dharma ), shape and the rest [which are to
be described], are technically called <coarse.> This is the first
form of the elements.— *i. The second form is its generic-form.
For example, limitation-in -extent (murti) is the [generic-form] of
earth ; liquidity, of water ; heat, of fire ; wind [is] mobile, for air
goes everywhere. This second form is technically called <essential-
attribute.> This generic-form has sounds and other [concrete
perceptible things] as its partioula. And in this sense it has
been 1 said, "All these [perceptible things] that are inseparably
cohnected with one genus praedicabile are distinguished only by
their properties.” In this system a substance (dravya) is an aggre-
gate * (semuddya) of the generic-form and of the particular. For
a collection (samdha) is of two kinds, 1. that in which [the names
of] its different component parts have disappeared, as for instance,
a body, a tree, a herd, a forest 1 ; and 2. that collection in which
the different component parts are specified [each] by a term, as for
instanoe * of both kinds, gods-and-human-beings.’ * One part of the
collection is gods and the second part is human beinga Only by

means of these two is it termed a collection. Furthermore, either

•

1 VijfUta* Bhikfu mji prvMry<yathvddam dha.

• Compare PaUtytli MahKbhKfya L 217 ls ; I. 289“; 4. 877”'; III. 8«“ (Kielhorn).

• Campon Votive Hindu (Benfod.), p. ll u .

• Camper* QatopethabHUunoca ii. 2. 2.

25 [a.., it]


iii. 44 — ] Book III. Supernormal Powers or Vibh&ti [274

the distinction or the identity may be emphasized. We may say
‘ a grove of mango-trees ’ [or] * gathering of Brahmans * or we may
say ‘ a mango-grove ’ [or], ‘ a Brahman gathering.’ Again the
[collection] is two-fold, 1. that of which the parts exist separately ;
and 2. that of which the parts do not exist separately. 1 A grove
[or] a gathering is a collection from which the parts are separable.
A body or a tree or an atom is a whole 2 ( samghdta ) of which the
parts are not separable. Patafljali says that a substance is a
collection the different component parts of which do not exist
separately. Thus it has been explained what the essential-
attribute is. — iii. Now what is the subtile form, [of these elements] ?
[The answer is] it is subtile-substance, the cause of the elements.
Of [any] one of these [elements] an atom is one part. Its essence
is the generic-form and the particular and it is an aggregate
consisting of different parts which cannot exist separately.
Similarly with all the tanmdtras. This' is the third [form], — iv.
Now the fourth form of the elements. The aspects with dis-
positions to discernment and to activity and to inertia and
conforming to the nature of [their] effects are described by the
word inherence. — v. Now the fifth form of these [elements] is
purposiveness. The having of experience and of release as their
purpose is inherent in the aspects ( guna ). And the aspects are
[inseparably connected] with the elements and the products of the
elements. Thus all has a purpose. By constraint upon these five
elements of the present time in their five forms, the sight of the
essential-attribute of this or that form and the subjugation of it
come about. [The yogin] by mastering the five essential-attributes
of the elements, masters the elements, [and] as a result of their
subjugation, the evolving-causes of the [coarse] elements follow the
commands of his will just as the cows follow their own calves.

44. . . . coarse . . . subjugation .... [The compound Is to be analysed as]
the coarse affd the essentiabattribute and the subtile and the inherence and
the purpesivenees. As a result of constraint upon these, the coarse and the
essential-attribute and the subtile and the inherence and the purpoeireneso, titere


1 Compare NySya-sDtra ii. 1. 82.

’ Compare PateHjali Mah$bb6?ya I. 80* ; I. 81* ; 1. 82*; I. III. 824“ (Kielhorn)


275] Concretions and universale [ — iii. 44

r

is a subjugation of them. L He describes the cdarse 1 by saying Cln this
[system].* The sounds and touches and colours and tastes and Bmells, belonging
[respectively] to the earthen and watery and fiery and windy and airy [classes or
elements], have correspondingly the particulars, such as the first (fodja) or the
third notes, or heat or cold, or blue or yellow, or astringent or sweet, or fragrant
or other [particular instances]. For because these are different from each other
in name and form and use they %re the particulars. Of these particulars there are
five in earth, four (counting out smell) are in water, three (counting out smell
and taste) are in fire, two (counting out smell and taste and colour) are in wind
(nabhasvont), sound alone is in the air. Particulars such as these* together with
their properties (dharma), form and the rest, are technically called <coarse> in
[this] system. 1. And in this [system], to begin with, the properties belonging
to the earthen [element] are “ Shape, weight, roughness, resistance, and stability ;
sustenance (vrtti), divisibility, endurance, meagreness, hardness, and usefulness
to all/' 2. The properties of water, 44 Liquidity, subtilty, brilliance, whiteness,
sinuosity {m&rdava), weight, ooolnoss, protectiveness, purification, cohesion are the
qualities of water.” 3. The fiery properties, 44 Tending-upwards, purifier, burner,
cooker, without weight, resplendent, destructive, yielding strength, — this is fire
having characteristics different from the two previous [elements]/' 4. The
windy properties, 44 Horizontal movement, purification, felling, impulsion, power,
changeability, casting no shadow, aridity,— these are the various properties of
wind." 6. The airy properties, “Pervasiveness, interpenetration, unobstruetive-
ness are enumerated as three properties of air distinct in character from the
previous properties/’ These are those properties, the shape and the following ;
[the particulars were said to b*] together wit 1 these. And shape is a particular
instance of generic nature, such as cow-ness. u. He describes the second form
[of the elements] by saying «cThe second form is its generic-form * Limitation-
in-extent means natural * density. Liquidity is [the generic-form of] water and
it is the effective cause of cleanliness (mrja) and plumpness and vigour. Heat
is [the generic-form of] fire (oakni), since everywhere [heat], whether it be
abdominal or solar or earthly, is inherent in fire (tejo$). All this moreover
is intended to show the identity of property and substance. Wind is motor.
So he says 41 By the movement of grass and because it makes the body wander,
motivity is inferred to be the generic-form of wind which goes everywhere.
Ooing-everywhere is air, since it is clear that we apperceive sounds in all
directions. For it hps been previously [iii. 41] explained that one apperceives
earthen and other sounds by means of the sound which is a [specific] quality
of air the substance-in-which the organ -of-hearing inheres. This ;j is what is
1 Compare Bh&gavata Pur. xi. 24. 18. but the solidity of snow is not natural,

1 whatever is natural (i&mtiddhiha) is in that it is due to cause. On the other
distinct from the thing itself (tvabh&va) hand solidity is a natural property of
and yet is not generated by 0 cause ghee ; whereas liquidity is not, in that
outside the substance. For example, it is an gffect of something outside
liquidity is a natural property of water ; the substance. *


iii. 44 — ) 'Book III. Supernormal Powers or VibhUti [276

described by the word essential-attribute. One euoh generic-form euoh u
limitation-in-extent has the particular aounda and other peroeptible things,
such as the firat note, such aa heat, such as whiteness, suoh as astringenoy, such
as fragrance, these constituting the particular instances of the generic-forma suoh
as limitatlon-in-extent. That is to say, the generic-forms,* suoh as the limitations*
in-extent, such as [the shapes of] lemons or bread-fruit or myrobolans, are also
distinguished from each other by differences in taste and so on. So that these
tastes ahd other qualities are particulars of these [generio-forms]. CAnd in this
sense it has been said, “ All that are inseparably connected with one gmu
prtudicabile ”* would refer to each of [the elements] suoh aa earth. [Each of
these] is inseparably connected with some one genus praedicebile, limitation-
in-extent, for example, or liquidity. [Thene that are thus inseparably conneoted]
are distinguished only by their properties,* auch for example as the first note.
Thus the generic-form suoh as limitation-in-extent has been described, and
the particulars such aa the sounds have been described. — And to those* who
assert that substance (dravya) is a substrate (dpuya) for the generic-form and for
the particular — [to them] he says, 4tof the generio-form.* In this system
substance is an aggregate (samudOya) of the generic-form and of the particular.
Those who take the point of view that substanoe is a substrate of these [two] —
even they cannot deny that both are experienced as an aggregate. For if this
experience be denied, the two oannot have a oontainer-(adhdra)-whioh-underliea
them. Therefore let us suppose that this [aggregate] is itself the substance.
But we do not apperceive any substance underlying them different from both
and from the aggregate of the two [which might be supposed to contain-them-
by-underlying them], just as the mountain-peak is a distinct thing and other
than the stcnes or the aggregate of stfones, and underlies them. Thus we say
that substance is a collection [and not anything underlying]. From this point
of view, to prevent the [error that substance is any kind of a collection and]
to reaoh the position that substance is a special kind of collection, he describes
various kinds of collections in the words, «For ... of two kinds.* Since this
is so, substance is not any kind of a collection. «Of two kinds* is a thing
whibh exists in two ways. a. One of these kinds is given in the words 4Chas
Uisappeoed.* These aie so-called in whose case the difference between the
parte has disappeared. One which has parts in whose case the differences
have disappeared is of this kind. What he means to say is this. The idea
of the collection raised by words like body, tree, herd, or forest 4ocs not bring
into consciousness the difference between the several parts, since the words are
not used to express this [difference]. So the collective [sense] only is brought
to mind. *There are four cases given as illustrations: 1. the case in whish
the parts can exist separately, 2. the case in which they cannot exist separately,
3. an animate thing, 4. aa inanimate thing. That parts can exist separately or

’ Reading stimanydny api. * Tbit would be equivalent to the particular (viftyo).

* Tho V&ifefikaf


277) Kindi of units [ — iii- 44

oannot exist separately will be stated later.— b. The aeeond of the tfro kinds
is desoxibed in the words, <2. that oolleotion in which the different component
parte are specified [eaoh] by a term, as for instance ‘ of both kinds, gods-and-
human-beings.’* Now by the expression 4 Ig< 5 ds-and-human-beinga* the two parts
of the oolleotion which are expressed by the words «of both kinds* have been
specified as being separate. An objection is raised, * the expression «of both
kinds* does not bring the difference between the parts of that [collection]
into, consciousness. How then can we say that the [oolleotion] in which the
different component parts £ave been described has reoeived [names]?' The
reply is in the words «of these two.* And it is because of these very parts that
the term collection can be imposed. By the words «of both kinds* which
describe a thing as having two parts, the idea of the collection is expressed,
since a sentence cannot but express the object-intended by the sentence.
This is the point. Onoe more he describes a difference in qualities by saying
^Furthermore.* Both the identity and the distinction are emphasised. He
describes the emphasis laid upon the difference in the words, 4C‘a grove of
mango-trees ’ 03 gathering of Brahmans. 1 * Because the genitive case
Is prescribed 1 to express a distinction, as for instance, * a cow belonging to
the Gargas.' He describes the emphasis laid upon the identity in the words *
a mango-grove* [or] 'a brahman-gathering.’* [The compound is to be
analysed thus,] the mango-trees which themselves make up the grove.
Inasmuch as he wishes to emphasize the identity between the collection and
its parts, [the words] refer to the same subjeot. This is the meaning. He states
another kind of oolleotion by saying cAgain [the collection] is two-fold.*
A oolleotion of whioh the parts exist separately, is one the parts of which
have an independent existence, apart, With xtervals between ; for when the
word 1 herd* or ‘grove* is spoken, the trees and the cqws which are the
parts of these [oolleotions are thought to] have intervals between them.
A tree, a oow, or an atom is a oolleotion of whioh the parts do not exist
separately, since neither the generio-form and the particular, which are the
parts of these, have intervals between them, nor do the dewlap and the
other [characteristic parts] of the cow have intervals between them. From
among these same collections he seleots that collection which constitutes
a substance ( dravya), saying Cc&nnot be separated.* Having thus inciden-
tally explained what a substance is, he sums up the topic in hand in the words
CThus it has been explained what the essential-attribute is.* — iii. With the intent
to sHte the third fdrm he ask" 3Now?* He gives the answer in the words
«from whioh these [coarse elements] are made.* £0f [any one of] tfeese [coarse
elements]* one part, a single mutation, is an atom. The generic-form is the
limitation-in-extent or the like. The sounds and other [perceptible things]
are the particulars. [The atom] has its essence in these*[two parts]. A collection
corresponds to such instances [o^ things] as are in part a generic-form, and in
1 P&ijini ii A 50. 1 According to F&q. viii. 4. 5 the * tfhould he changed to ».


iii. 44 — ] Book III Supernormal Powers or Vibhuti [278

part a particular, wherein these parte cannot separately exist and yet have no
intervals between them. And just as the atom is a subtile (sftftfnui) form, so all
the fine elements ( tanmdtra ) are a subtile form. He brings this to a close in the
words «This is.»— «iv. Now the fourth form of the elements. The aspects with
dispositions to discernment and to activity and to inertia and conforming to the
nature of [their] effects^ means those whose disposition it is to be inseparably
connected with (ann-gantum), that is, to conform to ( anu-pat ) the nature of [their]
effects. Hence they are described by the term inference (anv-aya ). — Now
the fifth form of these [elements] is purposiveness. » He elaborates the word
purposiveness by saying «expenence.» An objector asks ‘Even if it be granted
that the aspects have a purpose, how can you still say that their effects are
purposive ? ' In reply to this he says «the aspects.» Products of the elements
are such things as cows or water-jars. — Having thus described the object of the
constraint he describes the constraint itself and its results in the words «upon
these. » «The evolving-causes of the [coarse] eleraents» are the elements
themselves.

45. As a result of this, atomization ( animan ) and the other
[perfections] come about; [there is] perfection of body; and
there is no obstruction by the properties of these [elements].

As to these 1 [eight perfections], 1. atomization occurs in case [the
yogin] becomes atomic ; 2. levitation occurs in case [the yogin]
becomes light ; 3, magnification ( ma/uman ) occurs in case [the
yogin] becon es magnified ; 4. extension ( prapti ) occurs in case
[the yogin] touches the moon with a mere finger’s tip ; 5. efficacy,
the non-obstruction of desire, occurs in case [the yogin] dives
into the earth underground [and] emerges again, as if in water ;
6. mastery (capitca) occurs in case [the yogin] masters elements and
products of elements and is not mastered by others ; 7, sovereignty
occurs in case [the yogin] is sovereign over the production, ab-
sorption, and arrangement of these [elements and products] ;
8 . the capacity of determining things according to desire ( yatra -
kamavasdyitva) is the capacity to will actual facts so that the
elements which are .he evolving-causes remain ‘as he wills. And
although having power, he does not cause reversal of things. Why
not ? Because at the will of another [the Ijvara], who determines
things according to desire, and who from the beginning is perfected',
the elements have been so willed. These are the eight powers. —
1 See Vifcaepati in Samkh. Tat. Kaum on Kar. xxiii.


279] Eight magic powers [ — iii. 43

Perfection of body is described later. And its external -aspects are
not obstructed. Earth with its limitation-in-extent [its essential-
attribute] does not restrict the action of the body and [organs]
of the yogin. For he penetrates even the lock. The water, liquid
as it is, wets him not. The fire, hot as it is, burns him not. The
wind, motor as it is, budges him not. And even in the air, whose
essence is that nothing *is covered [by it], his body is covered.
Nay more, not even the Siddhas may behold him.

Whon tho elements follow the commands of his will, what {>erfection is
attained by the yogin? Jn reply lie says 45. As a result of this . . . and . . .
no obstruction. From the mastery resulting from constraint upon the a. coaise
[elements], four pet fections follow, as lie says «As to these. ^ 1. Atomization
[that is J although great he becomes small. 2. Levitation [that is] although great,
he becomes light and stays in tho an like the tuft of a reed. 3. Magnification
[it *.t is] although small he becomes in dimension an elephant or a mountain
or a town. 4. Extension [that is J all things be< omu close at hand for the
yogin. For instance, even while standing on the earth he touches the moon
with the tip of his finger. Jle describes the peifection resulting fiom the
subjugation by constraint of b. tbe essential attiibutc in the words «5. efficacy,
the non-obstruction of desire.» Ilis own foim is not obstructed by the
limittttioiifr'in-extoiit and other essential-attributes of the elements. He dives
underground and emerges again as if in water, c. He now gi\es the perfection
resulting from tho subjugation by constraint of a subtile object by saying
mastery » The elements are eartl^ amj t J o other L coarse elements]. The
products-of the-elements are such things as co i and water- jars. He becomes
master of them, independent with regard to them, and not mastered hy them.
Since there i9 a mastery of tho atoms of eart) and of the other [coarse elements],
and of the subtile elements which are the causes of these [elements and
products], there follows a mastery of the effects of these. Therefore those
particular elements or products of elements when put into a certain state remain
in that state, d. He now gives the perfection which results from subjugation by
constraint upon inherence (anvaya) as its object by saying «7. sovereignty.^
Having subjugated the radical cause of these elements and products-of-elenients,
he becomes sovereign both over their growth [or] production, and over their
decay [or] destruction* and over their arrangement or proper arrangement, e. He
now describes the perfection which is the result of constraint uf>on purposive-
ness by saying 4C8. Fulfilment of whatever is desired is the volition which
bespmes effectives Whenever a yogin who has been successful with regard
to the purposiveness of the aspects wishes anything to serve a particular

puxpose, that thing serves him that purpose. Making others eat poison , 1

•

1 Cf. R&ghth anya viii. 46, arag iyam yadi , &c. ; the stanza aMnissinjj in some ed.’a.


iii.45 — ] Bool III . Supernormal Powers or Vibhuti [280

he wilier that it have the effect of nectar and makes them live. An objector
says ‘This may be so. But wh> does he not make an interchange of things
also, just as he makes a reversal of powers, so that he might make the moon
into the sun, or make Kuha into SinlvalT ? ’ The reply is <Si And although having
the power, he does not.» For assuredly these whose desires are fulfilled do
not venture to transgress the order of the Exalted Highest I$var&. But the
powers (qakti) of things are not limited in their nature, in so far as they
differ in species and place and time and intensity. So it is proper that these
[powers] should follow the commands of this [yogin]. These are the eight
powers (ai<;varita) — With regard to the words <and there is no obstruction
by the properties of these [elements].) By the very mentioning that atomiza-
tion and the other [perfections] come about, it is clear that there is no
obstiuction by the propeities of tb*se [elements]. But this is mentioned
again to make known the fruitions resulting from the constraints upon all
the objects mentioned in this sGtra. And the same holds good with reference
to perfections of body. The rest is easy.


46. Beauty and grace and power and the compactedness of
the thunderbolt, —[this is] perfection of body.

The perfect body is haiul&oine and alluring anti unexcelled in
power and compact ns the thunderbolt.

He describes the pei feet ion of the body. 48. Beauty . . . perfection ....
A compactness as of the thunderbolt. Of such a kind that the arrangement
of the partb is rim and solidr


47. As a result of constraint upon the process-of-knowing
and the essential-attribute and the feeling-of-personality and
the inherence and the purposiveness, [there follows] the
subjugation of the organs.

The object -to-be-known is the sounds and other [perceptible objects]
whose essence is both the generic-form and the particular. 1. The
process-of-knowing is a fluctuation of the organs with reference to
these [objects]. And this [process] has not the character (akara)
of being a pmcess-of '-nowing their generic-form only. How, if the
object a particular were not seen by the organ, could it be
determined by the central organ ? 2. But the essential-attribute 1

1 The self-luminous natuie <.? cognition is Siddhanta Muktavali (1898), pp. 131-
set forth with most subtle discrimina- lft.

tion by Mr. A Venib mahis note on the

• •


281 ]


Five subjugations of organs [ — iii. 47

is a collection, inherent in the different parts which- cannot exist
separately, [a collection] of the generic form [for example, the
audibility] and of the particular [for example, the sounds and bo
forth], [a collection] which belongs to the sattva of the thinking-
substance whose essence is brightness. The organ is [itself such]
a substance. 3. The third form of these [organs] is the perso-
nality-substance with • the feeling-of-personality (asmita) as its
distinguishing-characteristic. Organs are particulars of this
generic-form. 4. The fourth form is the aspects ( guna ) whose
essence is determination 1 (vyavasaya) and whose disposition is
to brightness and to activity and to inertia. Of which [aspects]
the organs together with the personality-substance are a mutation.
5. The fifth form inseparably connected with the aspects is the
purposiveness 2 of the Self. — Constraint is performed upon one
after another of these five forms of the organs. As a result of
the subjugation of the &ve forms of accomplishing the subjugation
in each several jo ne of them, there comes about for the yogin the
subjugation of the organs.

After the yogin has subjugated the elements his means for subjugating the organs is
described. 47. Process-of-knowing . . . subjugation. As a result of constraint
upon these, the process-of-knowing and the essential attribute and the feeling-
of-personality and the inherence and flie pur] « 9iveness. The process-of-know-
ing is an act-of-perception ( grhiti ). And this [process], for its description,
requires the object- to-be-known. So he describes the object- to-be-kn own by
saying «Cwhose essence is both the generic-form and the particular.^ Having
described the object- to-be-known, he describes the process-of-knowing in the
words 4Cwith reference to these.Jk The fluctuation is about the same as
an extemal-sense-process (ulocana), on act-of-mutating into the form of an
object. In reply to those who say that the fluctuation of an organ has as its object
only the generic-form he says «And this has not.» It is a process-of-knowing
because [something] is known. And the process-of-knowing has not 3 * * for
its object the,g4neric-form only. For the central-organ, which depends upon
the external organs, acts upcft *he external [and not upon the generic-form].
Otherwise we should have to admit that there are, for example, no blind or dumb
persons. So then if the organ were not to have a particular as its object, then

1 .In accordance with S&ihkhya-k&rakS xxiii 9 Compare if. 23, p. 1 58* (Calc. cd.) ; also

, it' is clear that this term demlles the Sfcihkhya-kiirika xv and Saihkliya-s&tra

punas in jo far as they function as i. 129. *

thinking-substance (hud tiki), 3 Reading ua tdfmunya nuttragocu ram.

3 <5 [b.04« it]


iii. 47 — ] lidok III. Supernormal Powers or Vibhuti [282

that particular would not be externally-sensed by that [organ]. How then could
particulars be determined by the central-organ ? Therefore the perception of the
organs has for its object both the generic-form and the particular. This then is
the process-of-knowing which is the first form of the organs. 2. Ho describes the
second form in the words «But the essential-attribute. » For the personality-
substance out of a portion of its own sattva generated the organs. Hence that
generic-form of the organs which belongs to all of them, and those particular
features which are limited to some such object as colon r, — both of these two kinds
also have brightness as their essence 3. By saying «CThe third form of these
[organs ]» he refers lo the personality-substance as the cause of the organs. So
wherever there aie organs, there this [personality -substance] must be. Thus since
it is common to all the organs, it is the generic-form of the organa This is the
meaning. 4. He speaks of «The fourth fornix because the aspects ( guna ) have a
double form, one whose essence is a determination, and another whose essence is
to be the object of the determination. Of these [two forms], with reference to the
fact that its essence is an object of determination [and] that it is an object of
knowledge, the five fine elements and the elements and the products of the ele-
ments form themselves ; but wit h reference to the fact that its essence is a determi-
nation and that it has the form of a process-of-kno^ing, the organs together with
thepersonality-substance[form thembelves]. This is the meaning. The rest is easy.


48. As a result of this f there follows] speed [great as tha t] of
the central-organ, action of the instruments of [knowledge]
disjunct [from the body], and the subjugation of the primary-
cause.

Speed of the mind means that the body acquires motion com-
parable [to that] of the mind. Action of the instruments 1 of
knowledge disjunct [from the body] is the acquisition by the
discarnate organs of the fluctuation required for the place and
time and object desired. Subjugation of the primary cause is the
mastery over all evolving causes and evolved effects. These three
perfections are called Honey-Faced ( madhupratika ). And they
are acquired as the result of the subjugation jn fore forms of
instruments (of perception],

Ha describes the perfections which result from the subjugation, in five fcimfa ,
of the organs. 48. As* result of this .... and the subjugation. The he t tSat
the organs are instruments [of perception] even for the discarnate is described
as being the action of the inatfiMnente [of perilfc>mm] disjunct [from the body].

*4jfunpare (fellkara on Brabma-s&tra ii. 1. 81.


283) Subjugation of the primary cause •[ — iii. 49

The place is Kashmir or some other [place]. The time is the past or some
other [time]. The object is subtile or other. As a result of the subjugation of
the organ and of the inherence, [there follows] mastery of all evolving-cauaes
and evolved-e fleets, a subjugation of the primary cause. These perfections are
called Honey-Faced by those persons who are expert in the yoga system. An
objector says ‘This may be true. By subjugation of the organs, the organs
together with their objects may be mastered. But what is gained [by
subjugation] of the primary cause and the other causes of these [organs] ? ’ In
reply to this he says «And they.» The instruments [of perception] are the
organs. The five forms are [the five] prooesses-of-knowing [iii. 47]. [The
result followsl from the subjugation of these. What he means to say is this :
These perfections are not a result of a subjugation of organs in general but
of the five forms [of the processes-of-knowing]. And included in these [five]
is the primary-cause and the rest.

49. He who has only the full discernment into the difference
between the sattva and the Self is one who has authority
over all states-of-exislence and is one who knows all.

He who is grounded in only the full discernment into the difference
between the sattva and the Self, and who is in the higher con-
sciousness 1 of being master in the higher clearness, and who has
the sattva of his thinking-substance cleansed from the defilement
of rajas and tamas is ono who has ithority over all states-of-
existence The aspects ( guna ) which ure the essence of all things,
which have both the determinations: and the ohjects-of-determina-
tions as their essence, present themselves as being the essence of
the object-for-sight in its totality to their Owner, the Soul
(kgetrajna). This is the meaning. — Being <one who knows alb
refers to the [intuitive J knowledge, produced by discrimination
and rising instantaneously [into consciousness], of the aspects
( guna ) which are the essence of all, whether they be [iii. 14]
quiescent or uprisen Indeterminable. This is the # meaning. It
is this perfection that is termed [i. 36] the ‘ undistyessed,’ by
^tabling to which the yogin who knows all, whose hindrances and
bondages have dwindled, takes his recreation as having mastery.
Tfceee same constraints, wht& %faether mediately or immediately lead to powers
in Hie form af knowledge and of activity, a m ror tjie sake of the discernment
into tho difference between the sattva and rae Self VjHray of the confidence
1 See«]so4!ft,pgg,41*aad48»; i.85,p.81‘; i.40, p. 84V; ii. 28, p. 164" (Calc. ed.).


iii. 4 g — ] . Booh III. Supernormal Powers or Vibhuti [284

produced by grasping the perfections in turn and binding then together*
The supernormal powers subsidiary ,to this [discernment] are shown [in the
antra]. 49. Sattva . . . and. There is clearness in so far as the defilement
by rajas and tamos has been washed away. As a result of this there is the
higher consciousness of being master. It was inevitable that the sattva of the
mind-stuff should be overwhelmed by the rajas qnd tamos. But when the
latter subside, it is this [sattva] that is to be mastered by the yogin its master.
When it is mastered, the yogin who is grounded in only the full discernment
of the difference between the sattva and the Self, is one who has authority over
all states-of-existence. This same he explains by the words ^essence of all
things.^ «Both the determination and the object-of-determination* mean both
the inert (jada) and bright kind. In this way the power of action has been
described. He describes the power of knowledge in the words Cone who
knows all.* With the intent to create passionlessness with regard even to
this two-fold perfection he gives the technical name current among yogins
in the words «that is termed the ‘ un distressed.^ One whose karmas,
both hindrances [ii. 3J and bonds [i. 24], have dwindled away. He is of
that kind. •

60 . As a result of passionlessness even with Regard to these
[perfections] there follows, alter the dwindling of the seeds
of the defects, Isolation.

When, after the dwindling of hindrances and of karma, [intuitive
knowledge] comes to him-thus, ‘ This presented-idea of discrimina-
tion is an external -aspect of the sattva . And sattva is to be
reckoned with those things that are to be escaped. The Self
moreover is immutable, undefiled (puddha) [by the aspects], and
other than the sattva,’— .when he is thus unaffected [by the
aspects], those seeds of the hindrances which, like burned 1 seeds of
rice, are incapable of generation, go together with the central-organ
to their rest, — and when, these being resolved into the primary
cause, the Self does not again have the experience of the three
pains (tdpa), — then these aspects, in that they are manifested in
the central-ofgan as >eing karma and hindrances and fruitions,
have fulfilled * their purpose, and invert-the-process-of-generatioiv
Then there is the absolute absence of correlation of the Self with

1 Compare trOktmfkjia dagSui-bTjakcdpa dariha-lcUprbija ii. 4, 18, pp. 109* and

i». 2, 10, 11, pp. 107' and 120-; dagdha • 12? and iii. 68, p. 278* (Calc. ed.> •

bffdndm aprarolfdn. 4, p. 4 10* ; dagdha- * Compare carita-adhikaia ii. 10, p. 120* ;
Mjabhdva ii. 4, 26, pp. 110 1 , 168* and ii. 24, p. l«2*; ii. 27, p. 166‘ ; iii. 55,

iii. 50, p. 264' and iv. 28, p. 812; 274.


285] The gods allure yogins (^— iii. 51

the aspects, [which is] Isolation. Then the Self is nought else
than the Energy of Intellect (citi) grounded in itself.

With the intent to show that constraint upon the discriminative discernment
is the purpose of the S p ]f, whereas other constraints result in what is a pseudo-
purpose of the Self, he describes the result of discriminative discernment by
means of the gain in the higher passionlessness. 00. As a result of passion-
lessness even with regard* to these . . . Isolation. When after the dwindling
of hindrances and karmas the yogin has [intuitive] knowledge thus, — of what
sort is this [knowledge] ? In reply he says «‘ This presented-idea of discrimi-
nation is an external-aspect of the salt ra.’» The rest has been explained in
various places and is accordingly easy.

51. In case of invitations from those-in-high-places, these
should arouse no attachment or pride, for undesired con-
fluences recur.

Now there are four kinds of yogins, 1 1. Pratharua-kaljnka, 2.
Madhubhiimika, 3. Prdjndjyolis, 4. Atikrantabhdvanlya. Of the.je
[four], 1. The first is the observant-of-practice ( abhydsin ) for whom
light is just beginning. 2. The second has the truth-bearing
insight [i. 48]. 3. The third is he who has subjugated the elements
and the organs, and who has provided means for keeping all that
has been cultivated [such as super-reflective states] and is yet to
be cultivated [such as the undistreSse perfection : see i. 36], and
who has the means-of-attainment and so forth for what has been
done and is yet to be done. 4. Brt the fourth, who has passed
beyond that which may he cultivated, has as his sole aim the
resolving (pratisarga) of the mind-stuff [into its primary cause].
His is the seven-fold [ii. 27] insight advancing in stages to the
highest [concentration]. — The purity of the satlva in that
Brahman among these [four] who has directly experienced the
[second] IJoneyed (madhumati) Stage is observed by those-in-
high-places, the gods. With their high-places the% invite * him.
‘ Sir, will you sit here ? Will you rest here ? This pleasure might
"prove attractive. This maiden might prove attractive. This
elixir checks old age and death. This chariot passes through air.
Yonder are the Wishing frees ; the Stream-of-heaven ( manddkinl )
confers blessedness ; the sages are perfected; %fce nymphs are
1 Compare SBE. sp< Ken, Saddharmapui^arika, p. 887. * Invite, seek to attract.


iii. 5 i_ ] Book III Supernormal Powers or Vibhuti [286

incomparable and not prudish. Eyes and ears [will become]
supernal ; the body like diamond. In consequence of your peculiar
virtues, Venerable Sir, all these things have been won by you.
Have entrance to this high-place which is unfading and ageless
and deathless and dear to the gods.’ Thus addressed let him
ponder upon the defects of pleasure. * fiaked upon the horrible
coals of the round-of-rebirths, and writhing 1 in the darkness
of birth and of death, I have hardly found the lamp of yoga
which makes an end to the obscurations of the hindrances.
And of this [lamp] the lust -born gusts of sensual things are
enemies. How then could it be that I who have seen its light
could be led astray by these things of sense, a mere mirage, and
piake of myself fuel for that same fire of the round-of-rebirths
as it flares up again? Fare ye well! Sensual things [deceitful]
as dreams and to be craved by \ ile fqjk ! ’ His purpose thus
determined, let him cultivate concentration. Gjving up attach-
ment [for things of sense] let him not even take pride in thinking
it is he that is thus ui gently desiied even by gods. Such a one,
if in his pride he deem himself secure, will not feel as if he were
one whom Death had gripped 2 by the hair. And so Heedlessness,
on the lool out for bis weak points and failures, and always
carefully to be watched, will have found an opening and will arouse
the hindrances As a result of this undesired consequences recur.
So then he who in this way does not become attached or take
pride will attain permanently the purpose which he has cultivated
within, and will find himself face to face with the purpose which
he has yet to cultivate.

Now obstructions to the vogin who has started to acquire Isolation are possible.
So he gives instruction as to the cause which leads to their dispulsion [in the
sUtra]. 61. Those-in-high-plaoes . . . undesired consequences reour.
Those-in-high-places are those who, like the Great Indra, have high-places
[in the He^en- world]. The invitation is from them. No, attachment to it
or pride m it should be ullowed to enter the mind, because <undesired conse-
quences recur .> In order to select [from, among the four classes] that
yogin only whom the gods invite with often if high-places, he mentions pll
possible kinds of yogin s hp saying Cfour kinds of yogins.$ From among these
[four] be describes the essential-attribute of the PrathamOrkatpika by Myihg
1 Writhing, or wandering. %

* Compare the stanza ajammaravai prSjHoh, See., Hitopadco, Int|pd., verae 3.


287] Sensual temptations [ — iii.52

^COf these [four], 1. . . . the observant-of-prnctice.» One for whom light is
just beginning, but is not yet mastered, one whose [ intuitive] knowledge has such
an object as the mind-stuff of another. 2/ He describes the second by saying
^truth-bearing insight.» In whose case this has boon said [i. 48] “ In this
[concentrated mind-stuff ] the insight is truth-bearing. 11 For he is one whose wish
is to subjugate the elements and the organs. 3. He describes the third class
by saying 4Che who has subjugated the elements and the organa. y> For by him
the elements and the rest and the organs have been subjugated by constraint upon
coarse elements and by constraint upon the process-of-knowing and the other [four
.constraints mentioned in iii. 47]. This same yogin is further described in the
words «all that.» He is one who has provided means for keeping all that has
been cultivated, [that is] acquired such as [intuitive] knowledge and so on of
another's mind-stuff and so on, as a result of the subjugation of the elements
and the organs. Consequently he does not lapse from them. One who has un-
perfected means-of-at tain men t for what is yet to be cultivated, [that is] acquired,
such as the undistressed [perfection], extending as far as to the higher passion-^
lessness. For human effort, only when it operates upon the instrument-of-
acquisition, leads to the acquisition of the end. 4, He describes the fourth
[kind of yogin] in the words «the fourth. » For this Exalted [yogin], Teleased
yet alive in the body, whose piesent body is his last, has as his sole aim the
resolving of the mind-stuff [into its primary cause]. So from among all these
yogins he determines that one to whom the invitation is directed by saying
«among these [four], the [second] Honeyed Stage.» As to the one in the
Prathama-JcalpiJca stage, there is not even a possibility of his receiving this [in-
vitation] from the Great India ' >d thef other 1 ods]. The third also cannot be
invited by them, since by mastery over the ements and the oigans he has
[already] obtained this [invitation] And as to the fourth, because he has attained
to the higher passionlessness, the possibility of an attachment is far-removed.
Thus all that remains is the second, the truth-bearing insight. Thus, by elimi-
nation, only the second, the [yogin ]-of-truth-bearing-insight, [remains J as a proper
recipient (visaya) of this invitation. — «Passes through air» means roving through
the air. 4CUnfading» is imperishable. «Unagmg» is always new. He describes
the defect due to the arousal of pride in the words «Such a one, if in his pride.»
One who in his pride counts himself secure will not feel the impermanence [of
things] and will npt reflect upon this. The other part is easy.

52 . As a result of constraint upon momenta and their
.sequence [there arises the intuitive] knowledge {Proceeding
faun discrimination.

Just as the atom is the minimal limit of matter, 1 so the moment is

the moment (samayTj in the an endless succession of these moment*

lain apttem, equivalent to the h§ana See Um&avati : TattvarthSdhigama.

<rf the yog*, it a dmvya . And time is sOtra, iv. 15 and v. 38-30.


iii. 52 — ] Book III. Supernormal Powers or Vibhuti [288

the minimal limit of time. Or, the time taken by an atom in
motion in order to leave one point and reach the next point is
a moment. But the continuous flow of these [moments] is a
sequence. Moments and the sequences of these [moments] cannot
be combined into a [perceptually] real (vastu). Ifours-of-eight-and-
forty-minutes, days-of-thirty such-hours a'ljd so on are combinations
by a mental-process ( huddhi ). Thus time, being of this nature, does
not correspond to anything [perceptually] real, but is a structure
by a mental-process and follows as a result of perceptions or of
words. [Thus] to the ordinary + hinking of the emergent mind it
might appear as if it were [perceptually] real. But the moment
does come within the [real] objects 1 and rests 2 upon the sequence
Furthermore the sequence has its essence in an uninterrupted
■Succession of moments. This [sequence] is called time by experts
in time. So the yogins use the term. For two moments cannot
occur simultaneously. Because it is impossible that there be a
sequence between two things that occur simultaneously When
a later moment succeeds an earlier without interruption, there is
a sequence. Thus in the present there is a single moment and
there are no earlier or later moments. Therefore there is no
combination of them. But those moments which are past and future
are to be explained as inherent in the mutations. Accordingly the
whole world passes through a mutation in any single moment. So
all those external-aspects of the world are relative to this present
moment. By constraint upon moments and their sequence both
are directly perceived. And as a result of this, the [intuitive]
knowledge proceeding from discrimination comes about.

It has been stated in one place and another that as a result of constraint upon
certain objects, knowledge of all follows. This [knowledge of alibis not a know-
ledge of everything whatsoever without remainder. But it ofily emphasizes what

1 A moment belongs to the real objects ; * V&caspatimfyra says the opposite.— The

but there is no time outside the sequence form avalambf is wrong and popular,

of moments. Thus the thpory of time See W. Kirfel, Beitrftge zur Oesch. d.

is midway between that uf the Bud- Nqpinalkomposition, Bonn, 19)8,

dhists and the Vai^efika school ; and pp. 78-79.
resembles the Jfun doctrine (Um&svfiti
v. 89).


289 ] Reality of the time-sequence [ — iii. 52

kind of knowledge it is, just as in the expression * Eaten with all the condi-
ments. 9 For in this [expression] the sense is that [the meal] was eaten with
as many kinds of condiments as were [served], but not all condiments whatsoever
without remainder. For all that, the word 4 all ' has in some cases the sense
of 4 without remainder/ in the sentence for instance, 4 The glutton has eaten
all the food that was brought to him. 9 For here it is understood as meaning
4 without remainder. 9 So now here he describes the constraint which leads
to [intuitive] knowledge proceeding from discrimination and characterized as
being a knowledge of everything without remainder. 62. Moments . . .
[intuitive] knowledge. He describes the meaning of the word «Cmoment*
by means of an analogy and in the words ust as.* When a clod of earth
is being broken up, that bit of it wherein the gradations of smallness reach
their minimal limit of smallness is the atom. So similarly the moment is
the minimal limit of time. In other words it is a particle of time which
ha*- no prior and subsequent [within itself]. This same moment is illustrated
in another way by the words «Or, the time taken.* The meaning is that
[the atom] would traverse the distance measured by an atom. — He now
describes the meaning of the*word resequences by saying <Cthe flow of these
[moments].* The word rcthese» refers to the moments. And the sequence
which is of this kind is not [perceptually] real ; but it is abstractly [real].
Because, when so combined, it cannot possibly be thought of as perceptually
real in the case of things which do not occur simultaneously. This has
been said in the words rcMoments and the sequences of these. » Since
a sequence consists of moments which do net arise simultaneously, and since
a combination of moments is not [perceptually real, therefore also a combina-
tion of moments and of their sequences is noi [perceptually] real. Ordinary
persons who have neither [natural] excellence of the thinking- substance nor
that resulting from disputation, 1 whose emergent way of thinking is every
moment new, and who deem such time a [perceptual] reality, are in error,
So then, is the moment [as contrasted with time perceptually ,] unreal ? Not
so, as he says in the words «But the moment.* €Does come within the
[perceptually] real* means that it is [perceptually] real. It is the basis
(avalambana) for the sequence. It is the basis for it. It is supported by
the sequence only in terms of predicate relations. This is the meaning. He
gives the reasbn why the sequence should be the basis for the moment by
saying ^Furthermore the sequence.* He gives the reason for the [perceptual]
unreality of the sequence in the words 4£For . . . not.* The woad *fbr (cap)
expresses the idea of reason. To him who might suppose that they occur
simultaneously since they belong to different classes he says impossible
between two things.* Whyeis this impossible? To this he replies Can
earlier.* U* brings the discussion to a close in the word 4CThus.* So then,

x Whips one contends without reasons for contending. See Ny&ya-tUtra i. S(~ 44)
67 [■#.* n]


iiu 62 — 1 Book III Supernormal Powers or Vibhuti [290

an the earlier and later moments merely hare’s horns? Not so, as he says
is the words «But .... which.» The words ^inherent in» mean inseparably
conne cted with the generic forth. He sums up the discussion by saying
^Accordingly.^ Since it is the present only which has the capacity to fulfil
the purposes proper to itself.


The particular that is the object of this [intuitive knowledge
proceeding from discrimination] is brought 1 forward.

58. As a result of this there arises the deeper-knowledge of
two equivalent things which cannot be distinctly qualified
in species or characteristic-mark or point-of-space.

If two equivalent things resemble each other in point-of-space and
in characteristic-mark, it is the difference in species which makes
[us] distinguish between them, for instance, * This is a cow ; that
is a mare.’ If the place and the specie^ be equivalent, it is the
characteristic-maik that makes [us] distinguish between them, for
instance, 'This cow has black eyes; that cow is lucky.’ 1 Since
two myrobolan-fruits resemble each other in species and in charac-
teristic-mark, it is the difference as to point-of-space that makes
[us] distinguish between them, for instance, * This one is in front ;
this [other] is behind.’ But when* the myrobolan which was in front
is put, while the attention of him who has the intuitive [knowledge]
is elsewhere occupied, in the place of the one behind, then, if the
places are equivalent so that one would think * That is the one in
front ; that is the one behind,’ a right classification ( pravibhdga )
is impossible. Since the right view of things (tattva-jnanci) must
be free from doubt, it was said <As a result of this there arises the
deeper-knowledge^ as a result [that is] of the [intuitive] know-
ledge proceeding from discrimination. How is this ? The point-
of-space coincident with the myrobolan in front *is distinct from
the point-of-space coincident with the myrobolan behind. And
the two myrobolans aie distinct in that they paan through thh
incidents peculiar to their own points-gf-space. But it is this
passing through the incident belonging to another point-of-spaee

1 See faihkar* on ii. 1. 37.

* The Rahasyam iayi that cows with white eyee an lucky.


291 ] Intuitive knowledge of coincidences [ — iii. 63

that is the cause of the distinction between the two. This ex-

*

ample illustrates how the supreme yogin has the presented-idea
( pratyaya ) of the difference between two atoms as a result of his
direct experience of the point-of-space coincident with the atom
in front, which atom is equivalent [to the other] in species and
characteristic-mark and point-of-space. The reason for this is
that the [only] distinction is between the coincidents [with the
points-of-space] ; inasmuch as it is impossible that an atom
which is behind can have the point-of-space of the one [in
front], the passing of the atom behind through its own point-of-
space is different [from the front atom’s passing through its point-
of-space]. Others [Vaiyesikas], however, describe [the same
matter thus] : “ These particulars (vife§a), which are ultimates,
produce the idea of the difference.” Even in th ; s [opinion of
theirs] the difference as to the point-of-space and as to the
characteristic-mark and >the difference as to limitation-in-extent
and as to the intervening-space and as to species [might be a
sufficient] cause of distinction. But it is the difference as to the
incident that is accessible to the thinking-substance of the yogin
only. Therefore it has been said, 1 “ Since there is no difference
as to limitation-in-extent or by reason of intervening-space or of
species there is no distinction in the rrimary] root [of things].’*
So says Varshaganya. 2

Although the knowledge proceeding from Mscrimination is to he described
later as having for its objects all things without remainder, still, since this
knowledge is exceedingly subtile, the particular that is the object of it is first
of all brought forward [in the words of the sQtra]. 63. Species . . . deeper-
knowledge. To ordinary persons a distinction in the species [intelligibilis]
is the means-of-knowing the difference between things. [But when] the species
[intelligibilis], the common-nature-of-the-cow, is equivalent, [and when] the
place, in front or elsewhere, is equivalent, the differentia ( param ) is the distinc-
tion in the characteristic-marks of the black-eyed and of the lucky [cows].

1 Vijh&nabhikfu interprets the passage as For there is no differentiating attribute

referring to the teaching of the V&ife- over and above the differences. in limi-

fikas. He asserts that there is some- tation or similar differences. The

thing such as limitation-in-extent which context alone can determine which

distinguishes permanent simances ; interpretation is right,

but that there is no such emity as * See SSihkhya Tattva KSunmdl xlrii for
a viftfa the property of the substances. another ^rotation from Virshagavya.


iij # 53 — ] Bool III Supernormal Powers or Vibhuti [202

In the case of two myrobolans, the coramon-nature-of-the-myrobolan, the species
[intelligibilis] is equivalent ; the characteristic-mark, such as roundness, is
equivalent. But the difference in point-of-space is the differentia. Wfien,
however, one wishes to test the yogin’s knowledge, and, while the yogm
who has the [intuitive] knowledge has his attention occupied elsewhere, puts
the myrobolan which was in front behind, and removes or hides the one that
was behind, then— inasmuch as the places are equivalent so that one would
think, 'That [myrobolan] is the one in front, and that is the one behind *-v
a right classification is impossible for an ordinary person, [however] wise,
who is conversant with the three sources-of-valid-ideas [only]. Whereas the
righfc-view-ofthings must be free from doubt. And in the case of the yogm
who has [intuitive] knowledge proceeding from discrimination there cannot
be the possibility of doubt. Bo the author of the sQtra says <As a result of
this there arises the deeper-knowledge.) [The Comment] explains the words <As
a result of this) by the words «as a result [that is] of the [intuitive] knowledge
proceeding from discrimination. » A question is asked ‘How can [intuitive]
knowledge proceeding from constraint upon moments and upon their sequences
discriminate one myrobolan from another having an equivalent species and
characteristic-mark and puint-of-space ? ’ This tie asks by the words «How
is this?» The reply is given in the words «CThe point-of-space coincident
with the myrobol m in front.» The point-of-space which characterizes the
myrobolan in front is limited to one moment of the myrobolan in front. Or
we may say that there is an incessant mutation [of the point-of-space as com-
pared] with it [the moment] And this is distinct from the incessant mutation
of the jnyiobolan which is behind, distinct, that is, «from the point-of-space
coincident with the myrobolan behirfd.» Very well then, let there be a
distinction as to points-of-space. How does this bear, upon the distinction
between the myrobolans themselves? The answer is in the words 4CAnd
the myrobolans are distinct in that they pass through the incidents peculiar
to their own points-of-space.^ The coincidence with its own point-of-space is
that digit of time belonging to the myrobolan which, with respect to its own
point-of-space, is characterized by a kind of mutation in terms of nearness or
furtherness. That is its incident peculiar to its point-of-space. Its ^passing
through/^ is either its getting [to a point-of-space] or it is knowledge. The two
myrobolans are diffeient in so far as there is this [passing through]. When the
two m} robolans had a moment of the mutation in terms of nearn^s and further-
ness, in so far a§ the two \ ints-of-space are in front or behind, then [the yogin]
performing-gonstraint (bamyamin) experiences the particularity of the incident
of the mutation belonging to the two, in terms of nearness and furtherneSs
with reference to another point-of-space. And he admits that they are quite
different Although at present [one of the mwobolans has such] a mutation
that it is in the point-of-space of this [myrobolan], [still] up to the present it lTad
the mutation with refeif flee to a different point-of-space. So it is the moment


293 ] Coincidence of the time and the space series [ — iii. 53

of the mutation of this point-of-space which distinguishes it [from th$ other
point-of-space]. And this moment it is which is directly perceived by constraint.
So it was this that was said «But it is this passing through the moments
belonging to another point-of-space that is the cause of the distinction between
the two.» With the help of this example and by dialogues 1 * between laymen
and experts and others one comes to believe that the distinction between even
such kinds of atoms is accessible to the thinking-substance of the yogin, as he
says «CThis.» «Othors [ Vilifesikas], however, described [that is] set forth [this]
description by saying which. $>> For the Va^esikas say that there are ultimate
particulars functioning in permanent substances. So they say. To explain.
Yogins, [when they consider] liberated beings who are equivalent in respect of
species and of point-of-space and of time and who are also free from [particular]
specifications, have a [deeper] knowledge of each person as he really is a9
different from other persons. Therefore, they say, there is some ultimate
particular. And if so, this same [distinction] is one that serves to distinguish
permanent substances such as atoms. This he controverts in the words «CEven
iu tins opinion of theirs.» Species and point-of-space and characteristic-mark
have been illustrated. Liinitation-in -extent is an arrangement-of-parts ( sam -
sthdm). In which case [of limrhtion-of-extent], after a thing whose arrangement
of parts is flawless has been reiAoved and after another thing whose combination
of parts is defective bus been put v its place, while the observer meanwhile is
elsewhere occupied, then there is a presented idea of the difference in so far
as there is a difference in the anangement of parts of this [thing]. Or
limitation-in-extent might be body. There is a distinction, between the
persons-in-the-roundvoi-rebirths, whose souls {utman) are bound to this or
that [body], and between those whose ^>uls.ai. liberated [from the round-of-
rebirth], based on the different relations with he elements of one kind or
another. So in all cases the presented idea of the difference is established on
other grounds [than the existence of ultimate particulars]. [Consequently]
there is no [need of an] assumption 1 of ultimate particulars.— Intervening-
space 3 (; ryauidhi ) makes a difference between things, as in the case of the
Lands 4 of Ku<;a and of Puskara, which are as such two points-of-space.
Because differences in species and in point-of-space and in other respects are
accessible by the ordinary thinking-substance, therefore it was said «But the
difference as to the incident is accessible to the yogin only.» The word
«cm» limits t^e words «difference as to the incident, » but not the words
«accessible to the thinking-substance of the yogin.» It follow^ then that the
distinction between liberated souls with respect to their relations.^ ith their


1 See (^loka-Varttika, p, 412 (Chaukambka atmCi and sa ca samathdna r i^esah pp.89*

S. Ser.), for aaw&dapravrtti. and 90 l (dale. ed.).

* The Vii^ika doctrine is aJso rejected in 8 See also V&caepati, p. 2T1 17 .

i. 43 in the phrases a n wpmcayavi jv.ya- 4 See iii. '26, p.*2£8 3 ^0a l £. ed.).


I

iii. 33 — ] Book III. Supernormal Powers or Vibhiiti [294

bodies that have been 1 is also accessible to the yogin. But in the case of one
who hits not «ot the above-mentioned grounds for distinction, there is no
division in the pi unary-cause. So the Master has thought. For this reason
it was said [ii. 112 1 '“Though it has ceased [to be seen] in the case of one whose
purpose is fulfilled, it has not ceased to be, since it is common to others beside
him.” This is expressed in the words «limitation-in -extent and intervening-
space.» This statement is to be understood as partial and is to be extended
to the different causes of difference already described [species, place, time, and
so on >. The meaning is that in the primary-cause which is the root of the
world there is no distinction, [that is] no difference.


54:. The [intuitive] knowledge proceeding from discrimina-
tion is a deliverer, has all things as its object, and has all
times for its object and is [an inclusive whole] without
sequence.

The word <deliverer 2 ( tarahifi means that it arises out of its own
vivid light without further suggestion. For it has all things for
its object. This means that there is nothjjig that is not its object,
'it has all times for its object. This means that it has intuitive
knowledge at all times of one whole ( marram ), past and future and
present, with [the sum of] its states. 5 <[An inclusive whole]
without sequence) means that it grasps one whole, striking upon
[the thinking substance J at one moment, with all its times. Such
in its complete form is the [intuitive] knowledge proceeding from
discrimination Of this same the lamp of yoga is a part, beginning
with the Honeyed 4 Stage until it reaches final perfection.

Having thus shown a part of the object of [intuitive] knowledge proceeding
from discrimination, he gives the distinguishing characteristic of the [intuitive]
knowledge itself which proceeds from discrimination. 64. Deliverer . . .
[intuitive] knowledge. He points out [intuitive] knowledge proceeding from
discrimination as the object of the statement ; the lest is the characteristic-
mark. It is called «the deliveier» because it delivers from the ocean of the
round-of-rebiiths. He distinguishes this from the Vividness w|iich was pre-
viously [iii. 331 mentioned by saying «has all times for its object.» «With
[the sum of] its states» means in all its subordinate particulars. Hence the
[intuitive] Knowledge proceeding from discrimination is complete. For thei?
is nothing, in any place or in any way or in any time, which is not in ds

1 The foxce of the suffix carenfr is explained * Defined by Umftsvati v. 43 as a group of
in Pfity. v. 8. 53 pc&nfima.

7 See iii. 33, p. 243*. 4 iii. 51, p. 266 4 (Calc ed.).


295]


Isolation follows discrimination [ — iii. 55

sphere. Why speak of (dstdm) of other kinds of knowledge? For even
[concentration] conscious [of objects] is a part of this [completed intuitive
knowledge]. So then there is nothing m6re complete than this as he says
4COf this same the lamp of yoga is a part.& The lamp of yoga is [concentration]
conscious [of an object]. How does that begin and how end? The reply
is <£the Honeyed.^ The truth-bearing insight [i. 48] is itself the honey,
because it gives a flavour, as has 1 been said [Comment on i. 47], 41 Having risen
to the undisturbed calm of insight/’ Beginning with that which has this, with
the Honeyed Stage, until it is finally perfected, [until] insight seven-fold in
advancing stages [ii. 29] has reached the highest. Hence [intuitive] knowledge
proceeding from discrimination becomes the Deliverer, since even a part of it,
the lamp of yoga, is a deliverer.

In either case, whether one has attained to [intuitive] knowledge
pi recoding from discrimination or has not attained to [intuitive]
knowledge proceeding from discrimination,

55. When the purity of the sattva and of the Self are equal
[there is] Isolation.

When the sattva of the thinking-substance is freed from the
defilement of the rajas and tamas , and when it has no task other
than with the presented-idea of the difference of [the sattva] from
the Self, and when the seeds of the hindrances within itself have
been burned, then the sattva enters itit< a state of purity equal to
that of the Self. When-this-is-so ( tada ), purity is the cessation of
the experience which is falsely attributed to the Self In this state
[of purity] Isolation follows for one-who-has-supremacy (if vara) or
for one-who-has-not-supremacy, for one who partakes of the [intui-
tive] knowledge proceeding from discrimination or for another.
For if there be [intuitive] knowledge in the case of one whose
hindrances have become burned seed, there is no further need
of any [supernormal power]. As being the means of purifying
the sattva, both the supremacy ( difvarya ) proceeding from con-
centration and the [intuitive] knowledge have been intjoduced-
into-the-discussion. But strictly speaking the [intuitive] know-
ledge represses not-sight (a dargana) When this is repressed
there are no more hindranops. Because there are no more hin-
drances the.e is no fruition of karma. In this stat^ the aspects,

1 See above, p. 98* (Calc- ed.).


iii. 35—] Bool III . Supernormal Powers or Vibhuti [296

their task clone, do not again submit themselves as objects-for-
sight to the Self. That is the Selfs Isolation. Then the Self
having its light within itself becomes undefiled and isolated.

Of the Exposition of the Comment on the P&tafijalan [Treatise],
the Book on Supernormal Powers, the Third.

Having thus described the [various] constraints together with their supernormal
powers, all of which indirectly prepare the way for Isolation, with the intent to
show that the [intuitive] knowledge of the difference between the sattva and the
Self leads directly to Isolation, he here introduces the sntra by the words
4Cwhether one has attained. S> Whether [intuitive] knowledge proceeding from
discrimination has been attained or not, nevertheless the insight into the differ*
ence between the sattva and the Self always brings Isolation to pass. This is the
meaning. 55. When the purity of the sattva and of the Self are equal [there
is] Isolation. [The last word] ih is meant to indicate the end of the sQtras
[of this Book].— 1. The words «one*who-has-supremacy»' refer to one who has
the powers of action and of [intuitive] knowledge by reason of the constraints
previously described. 2. The words «or for onecwho-has-not-supremacy^ refer to
one who partakes of the [intuitive] knowledge proceedipg from discrimination
by reason of the constraint described [ii. 62] immediately before. 8. The words
«or for another» refer to one in whom this [intuitive] knowledge has not risen
[into consciousness]. In these cases there ia no need at all for supernormal
powers. Therefore he says «For . . . no.» And if it should be objected that
there is no need of supernormal powers in connexion with Isolation, and that
therefore instruction in them is useless, the reply is «As being the means of
purifying the sattva .» The instrumental case is used to indicate such a kind
of a mark [Pftn. ii. 8. 21]. — For the attainment of Isolation the supernormal
powers are not absolutely useless, but they are not directly causes. This is the
meaning. But it is the [intuitive] knowledge proceeding from discrimination
that is the topic-under-discussion. And that which is a cause indirectly [the
powers] is only figuratively a cause, not a principal cause. Strictly speaking,
however, insight alone is the principal cause; [and not the discrimination].
This is the meaning. By the words C[intuitive] knowledge^ he means the
Elevation.

In this [Bo8k] the indirect aids and the aids and the mutations have been
treated 4ft length, and the attainment of supernormal powers, and among these
[powers] the [intuitive] knowledge proceeding from discrimination.

Such is the Btanza which summarizes the contents of [this] Book.

Of the Explanation of tie Comment on Pat^jali’s [Treatise, which Explanation
is entitled] the Clarification of the Entities; composed by the Venerabler Vaca*
spatimif ra, thfe Third ^Book, on Supernormal Powers, is finished.


BOOK FOURTH

ISOLATION


38 [not. it]


BOOK FOURTH


ISOLATION

1. Perfections proceed from birth or fro m drugs or from
spells or from self-castigation or from concentration.

1. The power of having another body is the perfection by birth.

2. [Perfection] by drugs is by an elixir-of-life 1 [got] in the mansions
of the demons, and by the like. 3. By spells, such as the acquisi-
tion of [the power of] passing through space and atomization [iii.
4oj. 4. [Perfection] by self-castigation is the perfection* of the
will, the faculty of taking on any form at will (k&marupin) [or] of
going anywhere at will, find so on. 5. Perfections proceeding from
concentration have been explained.

Thus, in the First and Second and Third Books, concentration and the means of
this [concentration] and the supernormal powers [produced] by it have been
especially discussed. And other [matter] incidental 9 or suggested-by-the-course-
of-the-discussion has been discussed. Now Isolation as resulting from this [con-
centration] istobe expounded. And thja Isoi-. ion cannot be expounded unless
one have analysed the mind-stuif which is condi nveto Isolation ; and the world
beyond ; and the self which is to be in the world beyond and which is over and
above the sum of mental-states (vijhdna) and which is the enjoyer, by means of
the mind-stuff which is its instrument, of the sounds and other [things] whose
essence is pleasure, [pain,] and so on ; and the higher limit of Elevation (pro*
samkhy&na). Bo all these things are to be expounded in this Book, as also other
matter incidental or suggested-by-the-course-of-the-discussion. Of these, with the
intent first to determine-the-nature-of mind-stuff which is conducive to Isolation,
in the case of persons whose mind-stuff is perfected, he states the five-fold per-
fections by the words [of the sQtra]. 1. Perfections proceed from birth or
from drugs or fron> spells or from self-oastigation or from concentration.
He explains [the sQtra J by Baying CL The power of having another body.>
When karma, conducive to the enjoyment of heaven and performed by one of

A

•

1 Treated at length in the RasSyana-tantxa, • Such aa the agglomeration of atoms or
the seventh of the eight subdivisions the doctrine of momentarineas. The
of the Ajyr-veda. * distinctions between the fluctuations

* Equivalent to Mm&uu&yitta, the eighth would be 'huiggesteg by the course of

Mdki f iii. 46, p. 259* (Calo. ed.). the diacuaaioa.”


Book IV. Isolation or Kdivalya


[300


iv. i — ]


the human species, obtains its fmition from some caus© or other, then a man,^
from the mere fact of being born into a certain group of gods, passes into another
body, to the perfection which ha3 atomization and other [supernormal powers].
2. He describes the perfection which proceeds from drugs. A human being
when for some cause or other he reaches the mansions of the demons (ewuru),
and when he makes use of elixirs-of-life brought to him by the lovely damsels
of the demons, attains to agelessness and to deathlpssness and to other perfec-
tions. Or [this perfection may be had] by the use of an elixir-of-life in this
very world. As for instance the sage M&ndavya, 1 who dwelt on the Vindhyas
and who made use of potions. 3. He describes the perfections by spells in the
words «by spells.» 4. He describes the perfection due to self-castigation in
the words «from self-castigation.» He describes the perfection of the will in the
words staking on any form at will.^ Whatever he desires, atomization for in-
stance, precisely that he attains on the spot. In case he wishes to hear or think of
anything, that very «thing he hears and thinks. The words Cand so on^ include
sight and the other senses. The perfections proceeding from concentration have
been described [iii. 16-19, 21-36, 39-42, 61] in the previous (adhastana) Book.


As to these [perfections], with regard to those bodies and organs
which enter into the mutation of another birth, —

2. The mutation into another birth is the result of the filling-
in of the evolving-cause.

When the previous mutation hp,s passed away, the rise of the
subsequent mutation follows, cilice [this body and] these [organs]
interpenetrate the new [arrangement] of parts. And the evolving-
causes of the bod} 7, and organs give aid to their own peculiar
evolved-effects by filling-in in dependence upon such instrumental-
causes 2 as merit.


Now in the case of those four perfections the means for which are the drugs and
the other [three] means, the same body and organs must enter into the mutation
of another birth. But this mutation does not follow from material-causes in


general. For the same quantity of
when he attains to a supernal or to a

1 See Marki^<jl e y a Pur. xvi. 27 and BhSga-
vata Pur. iii 5 20. Compare MahfiBh.
1. 107-8. He keeps himself alive after
lobbeifl, who have entei^d uia hermit-
age by mistake, have impaled him. He
was famous for curses, which were bo
mighty as to blight erSn Yam a. One
man was cursed to die before sunrise.


material-causes cannot belong to him
not-supernAl state -of-exialence which is

The wife of this person, however,
refused to let the sun rise. Accordingly
even Magdavya Muni was obliged? to
beat a retreat.

9 Coiqgare VScaspati on iii. 18, p. 280 9 .
See also i. 44, p. 94* And iv. 10, p. 288*
(Calc. ed.).


301] Action of the final end * [ — iv. 3

either more or less [than the present state]. For certainly a material cause
which is to bring forth something not different is not -sufficient to produce
an effect of a different kind altogether. And so with a view to exclude the
possibility of any accidental [difference between cause and effect] he supplies
the following words, «As to these [perfections], with regard to those bodies and
organs which enter into the mutation of another birth.2> And then recites the
sQtra 2. The mutation into another birth is the result of the filling-in of
the evolving-eause. ,

When the body and oigans, which have entered into the mutation of a human
birth, enter into a birth as god or animal, the mutation is the result of the
filling-in of the evolving-cause. Now the evolving-cause of the body is earth
and other [coarse] elements, and the evolving-cause of the organs is the
personality-substance. The interpenetration into the parts of these is the filling-
in. From this filling-in there results [this mutation],— as he says in the words
«When the previous mutation. & An objection might be madnlft the effect that
11.1:, aid is to follow from mere filling-in, why is it not eternally so? To
which the reply would be «such ... as merit.» So we have explained 1 how
the same body can attain to the different stages of childhood and boyhood and
young manhood and age and so on, or how a nyagrodha seed can become a
nyagrodha tree, or how a particle of fire when placed on a pile of grass can
envelop the region of* the sky by the flaring forth of thousands of flames.


3. The efficient cause gives no impulse to the evolving-
causes ; but [the mutation] follow* when the barrier [to the
evolving-causes] is cut, as happens < ith the peasant.

For an efficient cause such as merit gives no impulse to the
evolving-causes (praJcrti), since a cause is not set into activity by
an effect. In that case, how is this ? [The answer is,] but in
that case there is a cutting of the barrier, as happens with the
peasant. Just as a peasant wishing to overflow 2 one meadow-
plot, whether it be on the level or below or still lower, by filling-
in with water from another meadow-plot, does not remove the
waters with Jiis hand, but cuts [the rim-of-turf which is] the barrier
{avarana) of them. And after this is cut, the water itself overflows
the other meadow-plot. So similarly merit cuts demerit, tit le barrier
(mwrana) of the evolving-causes ; and after this is cut, the evolving-

1 By stating that a mutation, fi jjpn the removed* we have. the explanation.

mahat down, follows whenever parti- 1 See Sir Walter Lawrence : The Vale of
cles of the evolving-cause enter or are Kashmir, % 827.


[302


iv. 3 ] . Book j TV. Isolation or Kdivalya

causes themselves overflow each its own appropriate evolved-effect
(vikara). Or again, just as the same peasant, after the same [rim*'
of- turf] is cut, cannot force tt\e watery or earthen essences to inter-
penetrate the roots of the different kinds of grain. In that case,
what [can he do] ? He removes from among them the pulse or
maize or red rice or what not. And when they are thus removed,
the essences interpenetrate of themselves* the roots of the grain.
Similarly merit an efficient cause in the sense that it follows
upon nothing more than the mere cessation of demerit, by reason
of the absolute opposition between purity and impurity. But
merit is not the cause which sets the evolving-causes into activity.
Of this Nandifvara and others may be cited as examples. And
conversely demerit inhibits merit ; and as a result of this there is
a mutation of impurity. And of this Nahu^a 1 [the king who was
changed into] a serpent, and others may be cited as examples.

The statement was that this filling-in is by the evoIVing-causes. With regard to
this a doubt arises. ‘ Is the filling-in by the evolving-causes natural or is it due
to merit ? Which seems plausible | to the objector] ? It seems plausible that even
when the evolving-causes are there, the filling-in is accidental ; and since we are
traditionally taught that merit [and demerit] are causes, [ the filling-in] is due to
these causes.’ To this he replies [in the sQtra]. 8. The efficient cause gives no
impulse to the evolving-oauseB ; but [the mutation] follows when the
barrier [to the evolving-causes] is Out, as happens with the peasant
True — merit [and demerit] are efficient causes. But they are not impelling
causes, since even these causes are the effects of the evolving-causes. And an
effect does not impel a cause, forasmuch as this [effect], (in so far as its coming
into existence is dependent upon this [cause]) is dependent on a cause, and
[forasmuch as] the function of impelling belongs to what is independent. For
surely when the potter is not there, the clay and the rod aud wheel and the
water and so on are not impelled by the jar which is to be produced or which has
been produced. But they are impelled by a potter who is independent of tba m,
Nor again can it even be supposed that it is the purpose of the Self that sets all
in motion. But the I$vara [sets all in motion] as being the final-end of this
[purpose of the Self], For uie purpose of the Self is described as setting all in
motion only as being the final end 9 (uddega). While this purpose of the Self Is

I

1 By virtue of know] -dpt- .<.d asceticism a serpent (Bb8g. Pur. vi. 18. 16 ; ix. if.
and the power of yoga, Nahusa was 1 ; and ix. 18 . 1). Compare in this

equal to the task of ruling the Three boofc, ii. 12, p. 122* (Calo. ed.).

Heavens. But be became blinded by 1 In the sense of being the objeot of desire,
pride and was degraded^® the state of See NySya-Koya under Vddttatvam, %


303] Mind-stuff pervades many bodies [ — iv. 5

yet to be, it is right that the unphenomenalized matter should be the#’ cause of
the stability [of matter]. But it does not follow from this that merit [and
demerit] are not efficient causes at all. Since it is quite consistent that they,
like the peasant, should only remove obalrucUors. And in the case of the
Ipvara We must understand that his functional activity is limited to the removal
of obstructions with a view to securing a basis for merit. All this, stated by the
Comment, is clear upon a mere reading.

But [if it be asked], while the yogin creates many bodies for
himself, do these [bodies] then have a single central-organ, or
have they several central-organs ? The answer is,

4. Created mind-stuflfe may result from the sense-of-per-
sonality 1 and from this alone.

Assuming nothing more than the sense-of-personality as the cause
of mind-stuff, [the yogin] makes created mind-stuffs. As a result
of this, [the bodies] have [separate] mind-stuffs.

Having disposod-of-the-Bubjett of perfections as taking place by the filling*in of
evolving-causes, he now raises the question as to the oneness or the manyness
of the mind-stuff resident in the various bodies produced by the perfections, by
saying 43ut [if it be asked], whiles ‘ If this is so, there would be many
central-organs. And because the intention varies according to each mind-stuff
of the [various] bodies, there would be no conformity to one intention and »!«>
there would be no readjustment [of memory j. quite as in the case of distinct
persons. Therefore [there is] only ofie min , tuff, [whioh,] inasmuch as, like
s lamp, it has a diffusive nature, pervades even many created bodies.’ To fki«
view be replies, — 4. Created mind-stuffs may result from the sense-of-
personality and from this alone. Each body so long as it lives is evidently
inseparably connected with an individual mind-stuff, such a body, for inst anc e,
as that of Ch&itra or of Maitra. And the same holds good in the oase of bodies
[created by the yogin]. So it is established that each of these [bodies] has a
separate central-organ of its own. With this in mind he says <from the sense-
of-personality and from this alone.>


5. While (here, i® a variety of actions, the mind-stuff whioh
impels the many is one.

How can many mind-stuffs have their action provided with a
purpose by a single mind-stuff? [The answer is], the yogin makes
a single mind-stuff which impels all the raind-stuffs. From this
[iaind-stuff] the variety of actions is obtained.

1 Compare 8bhkliya-«atra vl M? »


iv. 5 — j Book IV. Isolation or Kaivalya [304

As to th# contention tnat, if there bo many mind-stufib, there cannot be con-
formity to one intention [of this yogin who has many bodies], nor can there be*
a readjustment of memoiy, the reply is in the next sQtra. 5. While there is
a variety of actions, the mind-stuff which impels the many is one. This
would be a weakness in the argument, if one mind-stuff which is to guide the
central-organ resident in the various bodies were not to be created. But when
suoh a [mind-stuff] is created, there is no weakness in the argument. And it
should not be said that [the yogin] having one [myid-stuff] needs no separate
central-organ proper to each body ; or that there is no need of the creation of
a guide, because the yogin’s own mind-stuff is the guide. Since what is estab-
lished by proofs is not rightly-subject to command 1 or to question. On this
paint there is a Purina passage * “ By virtue of his authoritative powor the
Ifvara, though one, becomes many. Then being many he becomes one. And
from him also proceed all these variations of the central-organ. The Yogl^vara
makes the bodies one-fold or two fold or three fold or manifolJ and again un-
makes them. With some he may partake of objects, with others he may practise
fieroe austerities. All these again he may draw in, as the sun draws in the
multitude of rays.” With this same intention he s^ys, «iiiany mind-atufTs.^


6 . Of these [five perfections] that which proceeds from con-
templation leaves no latent-deposit.

The created 3 mind-stuff is of five kinds. For the perfections
proceed from birth and from drugs and from spells and from self-
castigation and from concentration. Of these five kinds only that
mind-stuff which proceeds from contemplation leaves no latent-
deposit. It alone has no latent-deposit which comes into action
a a a result of passion or similar [states]. It has accordingly no
connexion with merit or evil, since the yogin’s hindrances have
dwindled away. For the others, however, there is a latent-deposit
of karma.

Now of these five [iv. 1] perfected mind-stuffs which have arisen thus he selects
that mind-stuff which is conducive to release. 6. Of these [five perfections]
that whioh proceeds from contemplation leaves no latentHdeposit. Latent-


Compare the uae#f these words by VScas-
pati on l 32, p. 73 w (Calc, ed. 1 ), p. 74*
(Calc, ed. 1 ^

With some omissions this passage in found
in the Vfcya Pur. lxvi. 143 and 152-3
[in the Calcutta edition ii. £ 139]. See
also Kftrma Pur. i. 4. 54-5. The phrase
tasm&c c < i manqso bhety jflyanle is


found in Vayu Pur. vi, 22. All this
illustrates how various the readings
of the Vayu are and how much need #
there is of a critical edition. *

Compare i. 25, p. 02 1 ; iv. 4, p.278 1 * ; and
the ^phrase buddhi-nirmSnah iii, 52.
p. 268« (Calc. ed.).


8 U5] Karma of the yogin [ — iv. 7

deposits are things that lie latent, subconscious-impressions of karlha an
Bubconsciou8-impre8sions of hindrances. That mind-stuff in which these [sub-
conscious-impressions] are not, is said to have no latent-deposit. In other
words it is conducive to the liberation. Since it does not act with reference
to passion or similar [states], it is therefore not connected with merit or evil.
But why is there no activity generated by passion or similar [states]? The
reply is in the words «since the yogin’s hindrances have dwindled away.^
With the intent to show that’the central-organ, which is produced in contempla-
tion, and in which there is no latent-deposit, is distinct from the others, he says
that the others have latent-deposits, in the words «For the others, however.)^


For —

7. The yogin’s karma is neither-white-nor-black; [the karma]
of others is of three kinds.

Karma as a class is, as every one knows, quadripartite ( catuspat ),
black and white-and-black and wlnte and neither-white-nor-black.
Of these [four], 1. the bl^c^ is found in villains. 2. The white-and-
black is attainable by outer means-of-attainment. The accumula-
tion of the latent-deposit of karma in this [division] is by means
of injury or of benefit to others. 3 The white belongs to those
who castigate themselves and recite the sacred texts and practise
contemplation. Because this kind cf karma is confined to the
central organ alone, it does not’depe 1 upon outer means and it
does not grow as a result of injury to others. 4. The neither-
white-nor-black 1 is found in the mendicant-saints ( sannyasin ),
whose hindrances have dwindled away, and whose [actual] bodies
are their last. Of these four, the yogin alone has the not-white
karma, since he has renounced ( sanvydsdt ) the fruition [even of
good], and has not-black, since he will have nought of it. But the
three kinds just mentioned are found in other living beings.

On this Bamq point also he introduces by the word «For29 a sOtra which gives
the reason. 7. The yogin’s krrma is neither- white-nor-blaok ; [the karma]
of others is of three kinds. A division (pada) is a topic. [The kanna as a
elass which is] contaired in four divisions is in-four-divisions j/eattupadd ). —
i. Whatever karma is attainable by outer means-of-attainment always contains
some injury to others. For even in an action in i^which rice-grains * or some-

1 See E. W. Hopkins : Great Epic of India (1901), p. 180.

* Compare $Sstr& Dipika (Ben. ed. i885/,p. 8, first lines.

89 [s*m. it]


iv. 7 — ] Book IV. Isolation or K&ivalya (306

thing sBnilar are the means-of-attainment, one cannot say that there is no
injury to others. Because one might possibly kill an ant while pounding [the
grains]. And after ?I! by killing the floods, one prevents the growth of stalks and
so forth. On the other hand tner » i > benefit in this action, in tnat the Brahmans
and others receive their gifts. The white belongs to those who castigate them-
selves and recite sacred texts and practise contemplation, 1 to those who are not
mendicant-saints. He gives the reason for the whiteness in the words ^Because
this.» 4. The neither-white-nor-black is found in thtf mendicant-saints. He refers
to the mendicant-saints when he says «have dwindled away.^ Because persons
who have renounced all karma, do not come into activity with reference to any
karma which can he attained by outer means-of-attainment. And accordingly
they have no latent-deposit of black ka^na. And because they have altogether
offered up to the Ivvara the fruition of the latent-deposit of karma, which is
attainable by the following up of yoga, they have no latent-deposit of white
karma. For that the fruit of which is indestructible, [that is, Isolation] is
called white [karma]. The moaning is, one who has no fruit at all, 2 — how
can he have that, the fruit of which is indestructible? Having thus described
the four fold kinds of karma, he determines which belongs to which by saying
«Of these four . . . the not white »

8. As a result of this there follows the manifestation of those
subconscious-impressions only which correspond to the
fruition of thoir f karma].

<As a result of tbi > means of the three kinds of karma. The
words <of those only which correspond to the fruition of their
[karma]> means that those subconscious-impressions which cor-
respond to the fruition of that karma which is comparate with
them, dwell upon the fruition of karma. The manifestation of
these only follows. For when karma of the gods is in fruition
it is not the efficient cause for the manifestation of hellish or of
brutish or of human subconscious-impressions. It does, however,
make manifest those subconscious-impressions only which corre-
spond to it. And the reasoning is the same with regard to
hellish or brutish or hu* 'an [subconseious-impressiofls].

Having discussed In detail the latent-deposit of karma, he tells what the outcome
of the latent-Aposit of the hindrances will be. 8. As a result of this there
follows the manifestation of those subconscious-impressions only which
correspond to the fruition yf their [karma], [The subconscious-impressions]

* Compare ii. I and notice that dhx/ina takes the place of IfvarapraHidMna.

* If they have nojrhite kfsma, how can they have the fruit of white karma ?


307]


Pre-natal tendencies


[ — iv. 9

correspond to a particular fruition of karma, whether supernal or hellish birth
or length-of-life or kind-of-experience, which belongs to a particular claBS, whether
it be the class of merit or the class of demerit. These same [subconscious-
impressions] are described in the words «subconscious-impressions which . . .
dwell upon the fruition of karma.» They dwell 1 upon [or] imitate. For the
subconscious-impressions which correspond to the fruition of supernal karina are
generated by supernal enjoyments. Therefore subconscious-impressions corre-
spond to their own fruition and are to be manifested by their own karma. This
is the meaning of the Comment.


9. There is an uninterrupted [causal] relation [of sub-con-
8Cious-impressions], although remote in species and point-of-
space and moment-of-time, by reason of the correspondence
between memory and subliminal-impressions.

Although a hundred species or a distance in points-of-space or a
hundred mundane periods intervene, if there is a manifestation of
the phenomenal [form] Ijy, the operation of the conditions-which-
phenomenalize ( yyaftjaka ) a given thing (. sva ), namely, that from
which the fruition [which results in a birth] as cat rises [into
consciousness], — and if again just that phenomenal [form] by the
operation of the conditions-which-phenomenalize that given thing
should arise [into consciousness], — it would in an instant be pheno-
menalized, in association with the su conscious-impressions, sub-
liminally existent, of the fruition, [which results in the birth as]
cat, and which had been experienced in former time. Why is
this ? Because, although those [subconscious-impressions] are re-
mote, the karma [which produces] the same [result] becomes their
manifester, [that is] efficient-cause; and so there is an uninterrupted
[causal] relation. And wherefore is this ? The answer is <by reason
of the correspondence between memory and subliminal-impressions.)
Because subliminal-impressions are like experiences, and the latter
correspond with the subconscious-impressions of 3 karma, and
because memory i6 like subconscious-impressions, .[therefore]
memory arises from subliminal-impressions, [although] species and
points-of-space and moments-of-time intervene, and again, sub-
liminal-impressions arise from memory. Thus it is that memory

1 Compare ii. 7.


jv. g — ] Book IV. Isolation or Kdivalya [308

and stiblirninai-impressions are phenomenalized by virtue of the
fact that the latent-deposit of karma assumes a fluctuation [of mirid-
stuflf]. And consequently .the uninterrupted-succession [of sub-
conscious-impressions], although there be interventions, is proved
from the fact that the relation of the ^termination to the
determined is not cut through.

«

An objector says , 1 This may be true. But in the case of a man who immediately
after his death passed into an existence as a cat, one would expect a manifesta-
tion of human subconscious-impressions, in that these came immediately before.
For it cannot be that one should not remember what was experienced on the day
immediately preceding, but should remember what was experienced in the days
before the intervention.' In reply to this he says, 0. There is an uninterrupted-
[oausal] relation [of subconscious-impressions], although remote in species
and point-of-sp&oe and mom ent-of- time, by reason of the correspondence
between memory and subliminal-impressions. Although the subconscious
impression of the cat pass through intervening births and so on, still there
is an uninterrupted-succession of this subconscious-impression with respect to
its fruit. For in consequence of the karma the fruition of which was [birth as]
a cat, that particular subconscious-impression which corresponds to its fruition
would become manifest, and the memory of that subconscious-impression would
be produced, as he says «Cthe rise [into consciousness] of the fruition [which
results in a birth] as cafc.» The rise [into consciousness] means that from which
something rises into consciousness, [that is] the latent-deposit of karma. Thewords,
€and if again just that phenomenal [form] by the operation of the conditions-
which-phenoinenalize that given thing vbftiild rise [into consciousness]^ would
mean that itwould be manifested[that is] it would be brought near to the beginning
of its fruition. This is the meaning. «Subliminally existent^ means activities
[of certain impressions]. «In association with2» : it would be phenomenalized
after having seized The meaning is that if it is to be phenomenalized, it would
be phenomenalized only after having seized the subliminal-impressions which
correspond to its own fruition. Having explained that the result is in imme-
diate succession with respect to the cause, he now explains the same with
respect to the effect [memory] in the word3 «And wherefore is this? . . . memory.*
There is similarity since both [memory and impression] cogrespo&d. This same
thing he says by the word €like.£ It is objected * If the subliminal-impressions
are of the $ature of experience, then in that case, since experiences are tran-
sitory, so also snould the subliminal-impressions be transitory. How (in
they be capable of producing an experience capable of lasting a long time?'
In reply to this he say* %And the latter correspond with the subconscious-
impressions of karma.» Just as the 'nvisible-infiuence (apurva) [of the sacri-
fice] is stable, although Paused by momentary sacrifice (karma), so a subliminal-


309] Priority of desire [ — iv. 10

impression js stable, although caused hy momentary experience. "Similarity
is based upon some kind of difference. Otherwise if there were an identity in
essence, similarity would he impossible. The rest is easy.

10. Furthermore these [subconscious-impressions] have no
beginning [that we can set in time], since desire is per-
manent.

These subconscious-impressions, because of the permanence of
desire, have no beginning. This well-known desire [ii. 9] for one’s
self, ‘ May I not cease to be ! May I be !’ which is found in every
one, is not self-caused. Why [not] ? [The answer is,] how could
the fear of death, determined by the recollection of hatred and of
pain, arise in an animal (jantu ) just brought into Mfe, in a condition
wherein death has never been experienced ? Furthermore a self-
caused thing does not need an efficient cause. It is for these
reasons that this mind-stuff, commingled with subconscious-
impressions which have no beginning, by the efficient-cause lays
hold of certain subconscious-impressions, and presents itself for the
experience of the Self. Others have come to the conclusion that,
like [the light of] a lamp which is contracted 1 [if in] a jar and
diffused [if in] a palace the mind-tit iff has such a form [as corre-
sponds to] the dimension of the bodj And thus [they say] there
is an intermediate state and there is ground for the round-of-re-
bi^ths. — It is only this all-pervasive [mind-stuff’s] fluctuation which
contracts and expands. So the Master says. This [mind-stuff]
furthermore requires such efficient-causes as right-living. Ajid this
efficient-cause is of two kinds, that which is external and that which
has to do with self. The external requires the body and other
means, such as praises and almsgiving and salutations. That which
like belief, for instance, has to do with self is'subject to the mind-
stuff only. And in this sense it has been said “ Ar for friendliness
and such [exalted states-of-mind], they are the diversions of con-
templative [yogins]; they are in their essence unaided by outer
means ; they bring right-living to perfection.” Of these two, [the
inner and the outer meads], that of the eentral-organ is the stronger.

1 Compare S&thkhya Praeacana Bbtya (Garbo), i. 68 (HOSi 84'*), V. 60 (132 M ), v. 91 (183 T ).


iv. io—] Book IV. Isolation or Kaivalya [310

How is this ? [The answer is, that intuitive] knowledge and
passionlessness are unsurpassed by any other [force]. Who by
bodily action and without the force of mind-stuff could empty 1 * * * * the
Dandaka Forest [of people], or like Agastya* drink up the sea?

An objector says, ‘This may be true. But subconscious-impressions sub*
liminally-impresHed in the previous or in a preceding birth might become
phenomenalized, provided there be any source-df- valid-ideas [to prove] the
existence of a prev.Vus or a preceding birth. But this is just what there is not.
And it should not be said that the mere experience of joy or of grief in an animal
just born is the source-of-the-valid-idea [to prove the existence of the previous
birth]. For this may be explained oy saying that it is self-caused like the
contraction and expansion of the lotus.’ In reply to this he says 10 . Further-
more these [subconscious-impressions] have no beginning [that we can
set in time], since desire is permanont The beginninglessness of these sub-
conscious-impressions furthermore, not their mere uninterrupted [cauBal] relation
is meant by the word «Furthormore.» This is because deBire is permanent,
since desire for ono’s self never loses its permanent«character, for the reason that
subconscious-impressions have no [assignable] beginning. And if it be objected
that the permanent character of desire is unproven, inasmuch as it could be
explained as being self-caused, the reply is «This well-known desin >
A heterodox person asks «Wliy [not]?2» The answer is «San animal just
brought into life» and therefore in a condition wherein death has not been
Experienced in this birth. In othor words, he is one who has not experienced the
condition which is death. How can therc^be in the child, fallen forward from its
mother’s lap and trembling in consequence, a fear of death due to the memory of
pain associated with aversion, as is inferred from the peculiar quivering of the
child as it clasps very tightly in its hand the thread 1 marked with the disk and
other auspicious objects, which hang around its mother’s neck? And if agrin it
is urged that this is self-caused, the reply is ^Furthermore not> Furthermore
a self-caused thing does not need [that is] take an efficient cause in order that it
itself should come into existence. What he means to say is this. The tremor
that is seen in the little child is grounded in fear. Because it is a tremor of
a particular kind just like our own. And the fear of the child is based on
the memory of pain and aversion because it is a fear like any onfc of our own
fears. And so the fear w.iich is characterized by an expectancy of something
disagreeable to cofne does not arise from the mere memory of pain. But having
inferred that tBe thing of which he is afraid is the cause of something disagreeable^ 9

1 Uganas by his curse burned the land to Rel. and Ethics, voL i, p. 180 b ).

ashes and covered it with a* shower of 8 Compare Bana: K&dambari, p. 152 14 (edL

dust (R&m&ya^a vii. 81. 8-10). M. if. Kale) and, p. 93 10 (ed. Petersorf,

1 See MahcBh. iii. 10^ (Bom b^mnd Jacobi’s BSS.).

article on Agastya (Hastings: Cycl. of


[ — iv. 10


311] Extent of the mind-stuff

[the child] now also is afraid of something disagreeable. So as a result of the
memory of that kind of pain accompanied by aversion foV that kind of oause of
foar which has been previously experienced, -r-when that kind of cause of fear is
now experienced, — he [the child] inferring that it would cause pain is afraid of it.
And the child has not come to the conclusion at any other time in this birth
that falling is the cause of pain. And he has not experienced that kind of pain.
So that the only alternative that remains is an experience relating to previous
birthft All this can be logically formulated thus. The memory belonging to a
child just bom is based on a previous experience. Because it is a memory. Just
like our own. Nor can it be said that the expansion and contraction of the
lotus is self-caused. For what is self-oauaed cannot stand in need of another
cause. Because if this were so, even the heat of fire would require another cause.
Therefore what leads to the expansion of the lotus is merely an accidental cause,
such as, for instance, contact with the rays of the early sun. And the cause of its
closing is the subliminal-impression 1 * * which leads it to recover its original
pc»*Mon. Similarly from laughter and other [physical acts] we must infer joy
[and grief] in some previous life to he the causes [of the acts of the child].
So now let the topic rest. IJe brings the discussion to a close by saying 4Clt is
for these reasons.^ — By the grords ^efficient caused ho means that karma haa
reached the time for jts fruition. ^Laying hold of» means manifestation. Inci-
dentally, with the intent to do away with the diversity of opinions concerning
the dimensions of the mind-stuff, he first of all describes the diversity in the
words, €a water-jar ... a palace.^ [The S&mkhya view.] 'Since we see worka
performed only when [the mind-stuffj functions within the limits of the body,*
there is no means-of-proving that mind-stuff exists outside the body. Nor is it of
the dimension * of an atom. For then il would ’allow that at the time of eating
and [handling] a long corn-cake, 4 the five-fold iensation by the organs simultar
neously could not be produced. And there iano means-of-proof for the assumption
of a sequence * [of sensations when] not actually in experience. Furthermore
one atomic central-organ cannot simultaneously 1 come in contact with organs
located in several regions [of the body]. The only remaining alternative
[for the S&mkhya] is that the mind-stuff is of the dimension of the body.
And in the body of an ant or of an elephant [as the case may be ] it is liable
to expansion or contraction, like a lamp placed in a [small] water-jar or in

1 The word s<n &ara is defined in Tarka- corn and ghee or oil with spices and

saihgraha, §V r >. * salt and is called in Maiathi IrodaMt.

* The S&thkhya school holds the theory of On the plains it is nftde of sugar and

madhyama pari nulna (Sut. v. 69). wheat with almonds, Huger, and bits of

* *This is directed against the argument in coconut in the middle and is boiled in

Ny&ya-sQtra iii. 2. 62. ghee. In Hindi it is called katxtNji,

This is a cake eaten at the Hindu New # Compare ty)&ya-sQtra iii. 2. 61.

.Year and on birthdays and on the feast * See Nyaya-sBtm iii. 2. 59.

of DewalL 111 the west it is made of


iv. 10 — ] Book IV. Isolation or Kdivalya [312

a [large] palace/ [So it is that] others have come to the conclusion that
the form [of the mind-stuff] is the dimension of the body itself; it is that of
which the dimension f is the body], . The [SamkhyaJ objector continues. ‘ If this
[atomic theory] were true (evam) f how can this [mind stuff] come into relation
with the womb (faetra) or the seed Y For surely without something-in- which-it-
resides [array a), this [mind-stuff ] cannot from the dead body enter the blood and
seed resident in the body of the mother and the father. Since [this mind-stuff]
is dependent. Tor certainly when posts and such tilings do not move, their
shadows do not move ; nor when the canvas is not moving does the picture
which rests upon (a^raya) it movo. And further avoiding to this theory
the round-of-rebirth would be impossible/ Therefore he says 4CAnd thus [they
say] there is an intermediate atato and there is ground for the round-of-
rebirths,^ The words «And thus» mean when [the mind-stuff] is of the
dimension of the body, there is, in order to get iuto another body, both the
leaving of the first body and the getting into the other body, by means of
a correlation, while on the way 1 (antarti) with a migratory body/ For of course
by this [correlation] he would pass 8 into anuthor body as the Put Ana passage 1 * 3 4
also says, u Yama by force drew forth a man the gize of a thumb.” This is wha*
is meant by saying that there is an intern Lvdiajf stat« and that consequently
there would be ground for the round-of-rebirths.' Not tolerating this opinion,
he gives his own by saying «the fluctuation.?^ It is only the all-pervasive
mind-stuff’s fluctuation which contracts ;md expands, io the Master, the Self-
born, 6 set forth. His point [in reusing the otinr tlieoiv] is this. If the
mind-stuff without something-in-whicli-it-rosidea w.not got into a body, how
does it [in the first place] find this something-in- wliich-it-reaides in the
migratory 8 body? And if we imagine another body in this case, that would
involve an infinite regress. Further, it is not possible that this migrates y body
be drawn forth from the body, since it is only when drawn forth that the
mind-shift can come into correlation with [the migratory body] Therefore let
there be 7 a subtile body from the moment of creation and up to the time of the
great [mundane] dissolution. It would be limited in its function to the six-
sheathed body, which would be the locus ut the mind stuffs. For so the mind-
stuff could pass about in one body after another up to the Truth-world and
down to Avici. And one could explain the drawing forth of this subtile
body from the six-sheathed body. For in this case there is [no difficulty as
to an] intermediate state of this [subtile body], because thi.»l [subtile body]
is always necessarily aere. Moreover there is no means- of-proof for the
existence pf this [subtile body] also, indeed it is not within the range of

1 Adverbially, accoiding to Panini ii. 3, 4. 9 The VSrttika says that the SvayambkS, is

* Compart ^ariikara on Vedfinta-sOtra iii. 1. Pataftjali.

1-G end on iv 2. 6-11. # 6 This is of course the Hu^ma^arlra. Com-

3 See Samkhya-sQ*rri v. 103. pare SSihkhya-stitra. v. 103.

4 Compare MBh. # >ii. 167(Jf* "So ^amkara on ui» 1# 1,


313] No migratory body [ — iv. 10

•

ocular [demonstration]. Nor can the round of rebirths be the me&ns-of-inference
for this [subtile body]. For [this round-of-rebirths] can be explained quite as
well by the theory of the Master. While (tu) as for the Tradition ( dgama ), it speaks
of drawing out a man (purusa). And a man is neither mind-stuff nor subtile body,
but the Energy of Intellect which unites not with objects. And since a drawing
out of this [Energy of Intellect] is impossible, we must understand [the
quotation] as being merely metaphorical. And so [the explanation of the
metaphor is] that the meaning of the drawing out is only the non-existence
of a fluctuation, belonging to both the Intellect and to the mind-stuff, with
reference to this [object] or that. As to what has been said in the Smrti or in
the Itih&sa or in Puranas with regard to [the mind-stuff] just after death getting
into the body of a Preta and that through the agency of commemorative-feasts
{sapindikarana ) 1 * * * * * * and so on [the mind-stuff] is liberated from this body —
all this we accede to. But what we cannot tolerate is that mind-stuff should
be migratory. And there is no Tradition to support your theory. For the
me^iig^rs of Yuma carry him bound with fetters only as having a body [in
general]. But it is not said that there is a migratory body. Hence since
mind is an effect of the personality-substance ; and since the personality-
substance like the sphere of khff atmosphere pervades the three worlds, the
central-organ is also, all-pervasive, 9 An objector says, ‘If this bo so, the
fluctuation of this [mind-stuff] would also be [all-]pervasivb, and there would
be a universal omniscience/ The reply to this is ^only this .... fluctuation.^
The objector replies, ‘ This may be true. But how has this fluctuation, which
depends on mind-stuff only, its contraction and expansion from time to time?'
In reply to this h© says «This [mind-ftuff] furthermore.)^ And this mind*
stuff for its fluctuation requires some such fflcient-cause] os right-living.'
He classifies [this efficient-cause] by saying <£And this efficient-cause. » By
the words ^Csuch . . . &s» we are to understand energy and wealth and the like.
By the words «like‘ belief, for instanced we are to understand energy and
mindfulness and such qualities [i, 20]. As to their being internal [menus) he
adduces the consensus of the Teachers by saying 4CAnd in this souse it has been
said.)8> «Diversion» is functional activity. ^Perfections means whiteness.
«Of these two» means among the inner and the outer. <C[Intuitive ] knowledge
and passionles8uess» mean the qualities engendered by them. By what quality
of outer means-of-attainmenb are these [outer means] surpassed [or] over-
whelmed? It # is the qualities resulting from [intuitive] knowledge and
passionlessness which overcome it, in that they remove it from the condition

1 Sf 6 Vi*hnu Pur. iii. 13.29. a middle dimension \inawiyu mu-part

1 Thfe MlmanBfi holds the atman is per- mfina). The VSiyefika (viii. 1. 2) and

manent and omnipresent (Qlokat-V&rt- the Nyfty* conceive the Xtmaii to l»e

tik& v. 18). The Siuhkhya-sfltme (v. atomic. The Yoga teaches that uiiiid-

09 - 71 ) deny that the central-organ is stuff is alU^prsuasive ; its fluctuations,

all-pervasive; Assert that it is of however, exjAnd amf contract.

40


iv. 10 — ] Book IV. Isolation or Kuivalya [314

of seed. This is the meaning. On this point he gives a well-known illustration
n the words Cthe Dandaka Forest. »

11. Sinoe [suboonsoious-impressions] are associated with
cause and motive and mental-substrate (dfrai/a) and stimulus,
if these cease to be, then those [subconscious-impressions]
oease to be.

1. As to caust- From right-living results pleasure; from wrong-
living, pain ; from pleasure, passion ; from pain, aversion ; and from
this, struggle. Quivering in central-organ or in vocal-organ or
in body with this [struggle], he either helps or injures another.
From this again result right-living and wrong-living, pleasure and
pain, passion and aversion. Thus revolves 1 the six-spoked wheel 11
of the round-of-rebirths. And as it ceaselessly revolves, un-
differentiated-consciousness (avid yd), the root of all the hindrances,
is its motive-power. Such is cause. %. JBut motive is that [human
purpose] with reference to which any condition (yasya ) such as
right-living becomes operative [in the present]. For it is not the
rise of anything new. 3 The central-organ, however, while its
task is yet unfulfilled, is the mental-substrate of subconscious-
impressions. For when the task of the central -organ is fulfilled,
the subconscious-impressions, now without mental-substrate, are
not able to persist. 4. When a thing confionted [with some
object] phenomenalizes any subconscious-impression [in itself], then
[that object] is the stimulus of that [subconscious-impression].
Thus all subconscious-impressions are associated with these causes
and motives and mental-substrates and stimuli. If they cease
to be, the subconscious-impressions cohering with them also
cease to be.

The question is raised, if these fluctuations of mind-stuff and the subconscious-
impressions are without, beginning, bow can they be destroyed ? For surely
the Energy of Intellect (citi) which is without beginning cannot bo destroyed.
In reply to this he says, 11. Since [subconscious-impressions] are asso-
oiated with cause and motive and mental-substrate (fyraya) and stimulus,

1 Coinpaic i 5, p 20 5 (Cali cd.). kam sumsuracakram. Piofessor Jacobi

* A six-spoked wheel occurs in the Ritf- "calls my attention to the passage in
\eda l 1C4'£, and ip*tbe Divyitvadina Smuamicca KahS p. U38 10 .

p. Jf0 : * and 28H we find paucuganda-


315] The principles of individuation [— iv. 12

•

If these oeese to be, then those [subconscious-impressions] oease to be.
Even » beginningless thing evidently perishes, for instance, the fact that a
thing is yet to be (anflgatatva). [This is prAg-alMvaJ] So it is not [a proper]
middle-term (s&dhana) because it. is too wide. As to the Energy of Intellect,
on the other hand, sinoe there is no cause which could make it perish, it does
not perish. But the reason for this is not that it has no beginning. And it has
been stated in the sQtra that there is a cause which brings about the destruction
of subconscious-impressions, although they are from time without beginning.
Helping and injuring are partial expressions for the efficient-cause of right-living
and wrong-living and so on. Under this expression the drinking of spirits and
similar acts are also included. The motive-power (netrl) is that which keeps
[the wheel] moving (ndyikd). He gives the reason for thu in the words 4the
root.* Becoming operative is presentness ; but it does not mean that right-
living as such is made to grow. Of this very point the reason is given in the
words CFor it is not.* That thing to Which one is confronted would be such
as contact with a maiden. So the meaning of the sQtra is that where the more
extensive is not, there the less extensive also is not.

Since there is no produetton of that which is non-existent nor
destruction of that which is existent, how will subconscious-
impressions, by reason of their existence as things, cease to exist ?

12. Fast and future as suoh exist ; [therefore subconscious-
impressions do not oease to be]. For the different time-
forms belong to the external-aspeots.

The future is that the phenomenalizatio of which is yet to come.
The past is that the [individual] phenomenalized [form] of which
has been experienced. The present is that which has entered into
its functional activity. And this three-fold thing is the object for
the [intuitive] knowledge [of the yogin]. And if they did not exist
as such, this [intuitive] knowledge, not having any object, would not
emerge 1 [in the mind-stuff]. Therefore past and future as such
exist. Moreover if the result of the karma, either that which is
conducive to .experience or that which is conducive to liberation,
when it is yet to emerge, were without-any-describabie-existence,
then the actions of the wise, directed towards this [o«3 for the
ptfcpose of this, would have no ground. And a cause is capable of
making an already existent result present, bpt not of producing *

1 With udapattyata (rare : Whitney, ftil), p. 201 . For theword upqjana eeeii. 19,
compare iMitmtoyato, above 279. p. 150 T ; iv«^ and lLpp. 276and 288*.

* For the word Kjxtfeeana compare iii. 11, For the verb see i. 88, p. 78‘ (Calc. ed.).


[316


iv. 12 ] Book IV. Isolation or Kaivalya

something [altogether] new. The efficient cause when fully
established gives aid to the particularized [form] of the effect, but
it does not cause anything [quite] new to come into existence. A
substance, moreover, consists of a number of external-aspects.
And by variation of this [substance's] time-forms the external-
aspects are in successive states. The past or the future does not,
like the present, exist as a material thing, in that it has been
changed into a particularized phenomenal form. How then is it ?
The future has its peculiar existence as a thing yet to be pheno-
me nalize d. The past has its peculiar existence as having an
[individual] phenomenalized [form] already experienced. The
[individual] phenomenalized [form] of the thing itself belongs to
the present time-form only. This cannot be for the past and the
future time-forms. And while one time-form L present, the two
[other] time-forms are of course inherent jn the substance. Hence
the three time-forms do not come into# a state-of-existence after
having-been-in-a-state-of-non-existenoe.

With the intent to introduce tho next sdtra he raises a doubt by saying
Cthere is no.^ The words «fof that which is non-existent^ have been intro-
duced either incidentally or by way of illustration. 12. Past and future as
such exist ; [therefore subconscious-impressions do not oease to be]. For
the different time-forms belong to the external-aspeots. There is no
production of things non-existent, nor destruction of things existent. But
emergence and remergence (udaya-vyayau) are nothing but a mutation of the
different time-forms of external-aspects which are existent. This is the mean-
ing of the sQtra. ^Experienced^ is that by which one gets to the [individual]
phenomenal [form]. The meaning is that at present its [individual] pheno-
menal [form] is not And so the external-aspect [is] existent in all three times, as
he says &And if.^ For what is non-existent does not become an object of
knowledge, because it is without-any-describable existence. For a mental act
ia nothing but a shining-forth of the object. Ahd it cannot occur where there
i® no object. Whereas the mental-act of yogins has thq three worlds for its
object. The mental -aot of such as we are also would not arise if them were
no object^ And this is [quite] consistent. Therefore the past and the fiituro
exist as connected-inseparably with their generio-forms. So the [intuitive] know-
ledge of one who has experience of this kind is called the cause of the
of the object Because the future exists aq^something stateable, it also exists
m an object, as he says in the words «Mored$er . . . conducive to expericrfoe>
<The wise* is* tie closer man. And as to any acts to be performed, when


317] Past and future exist { — iv. 13

on© thing ia th© cause of another, it can bring its particular function*nto play
only when the effect is [already] existing, for instance, the chapters of the
Veda referring to the [cutting of] sacrificial-reeds (kdndaldva). For certainly
these cuttings of reeds do not bring into existence what is not existing. But
they cause modifications 1 or they bring near a thing which is existing.
Similarly the potter and the [efficient causes] lead to the present existence
of a water-jar which already exists as he says «an already existent.)^ But if the
past and future are to be Supposed as being non-existent simply because they
are not in the present, then, whew ! Sii ! the present also would be non-
existent, because it is not in the past and future. But as to existence irrespective
of its relation to time-fox m or to substance, it equally holds for all three, as he
says «A substance, moreover,» The words «are in successive States^ mean
belonging to each state one by one. The expression «as a material thing»
means in a substance which is a material thing. The termination 4as is used
for all case-endings. If the past and the futuie are, only so far as they are past
Mur*, th ^ri at the present they are not, because at this time they are not
past or future, as he says «And while one.^ He brings the discussion to
a close in the words «state-of-existence after having- been-in-a-state-of-non-
existences


13. These [external-aspects with the three time-forms] are
phenomenalized [individuals] or subtile [generic forms and]
their essence is the aspects (gnnn).

<These> are of course tho^c external-a pects with the three time-
forms : those which are [phenomenalism >d] are the present ; those
which are subtile arc the past and the hiture, the six 2 non-particulars
Since this whole woild is nothing more than a particular colloca-
tion of aspects (gunn), it has in the strict sense the aspects as its
essence. And in this sense the Exposition 3 of the System has said,
“ The aspects from their utmost height
Come not within the range of sight.

But all within the range of sight
A phantom seems and empty quite."


i Fur the compound prnptivikanlu see
• Pan. ii, 2. 82.

* ii 19, p. 1477 (Calc . e j.).

8 The quotation is attributed to Vd^ganya
by Vaca^atimipra in his Blmmatl on
Ved&nta-utitra ii. 1. 2. 8 in the follow-


ing words ata eva yoga fist t*am vyutpd-
dat/iUbaha sma Bhagauin Vtirvayanyah
“ gunfintim (Nirnayaaagara, firs* edition,
p 3f>2i. # Compare Vyfuna Bhiksu m
his Vyfianamrta (Benares ed. 1901),

p 101.


iv. 13 —] Book TV. Isolation or Kdivalya {318

An objector says, ‘This may be true. But this manifold amplification
( prapanca ) of the varied forms of the universe (vijva), having as its essence
the kinds of mutation which are, the states of the substance and its external*
aspects, cannot properly come out of one primary substance. For from a cause
which has no diversity, diversities of effect cannot come to pass.’ In reply
to this he says 13. These [external-aspects with the three time-forms]
are phenomenalised [individuals] or subtile [generio forms and] their
essenoe is the aspeots (jjitna). These external-atpects with the three time-
forms, both the phenomenalised and the subtile, have the aspects as their
essence. For they have no other cause than the three-fold aspects. But as
to their diversity, it follows from the diversity attending upon the beginningless
subconscious-impressions from hindrances produced by these [aspects (yw»«)].
In which sense it has been said in the V&yu 1 * * * Purina, “Because the primary
cause has manifold forms, there is a marvellous mutation.” Of the earth and
the other phenomenalized [individuals], and of the eleven organs, which are
present forms, there are past and future [forms], which are the six non-
particularized [forms; and these] arise according to their capacity. — Making
now a distinction between the permanent and the impermanent forms of the
universe, he gives first its permanent form irk t$e words «this whole worlds
4CThis» [that is] the visible [world], CCA collocation^ means a mutation with
a particular arrangement of parts. On this point there is a specific mention
of the Shastitantra 9 text. It is like a phantom (mdya), but not quite a phantom.
SCEmpty quite» means perishable. For just as a phantom in no time assumes
different shapes, so those evolved-effects whose external-aspects become visible
and invisible, change from moment to moment. Whereas primary-matter is
permanent, and thus not homogeneous with a phantom, and is accordingly an
ultimate reality.


But if all things are aspects (gy.na), how is it that there is a
single sound and a single organ [of sense] 1

14. The that-ness of a thing is due to a singleness of muta-
tion.

When the aspects disposed to vividness and to activity and to
inertia have as their essence processes-of-knowing, in sp far as they
are instruments [of perception], there is a single mutation, for
instance, the organ-of-hearing. When their essence is objects-for-

1 xlix. 182, AnandSframa ed r p. 158, and 1 See Garbe : Mondichein der SSdurhya

liii. 20, AnandSframa ed., p. 175. See \^hrheit,> 111, note 8 ; and Garbe’a

also SSihkhya Tattva KSumudi xlil Translation of the Slthkbya Pravacana

[Garbe’s translation, p»$6] . BhS^ya, vi. 8, p. 147.


319] Each thing a complex of relations ( — iv. 14

knowledge, in so far as they are sounds, there is a single nfutation,
a sound, an object of sense. The sounds and other [perceptible
objects], belonging to the general *class of limitation-in-extent, 1
have a single mutation, an atom of earth, a part of a fine-substance
(tanmatrci). And these [atoms] have a single mutation, the earth,
a cow, a tree, a mountain, for examples. By adding [to each of]
the other [coarse] elements [successively] liquidity and heat and
motivity and the making of a space, a generic-form, the beginning
of a single evolved-effect, would be formed* — They who from the
following point of view deny the existence of a thing as such by
saying, ‘ There is no intended-object dissociated from a mental act,
but percepts are dissociated from intended-objects and imagined
as in dreams and similar states,’ and they who say ‘ a thing is only
a readjustment of percepts, like the objects of a dream, and not
a thing in the full sense of the word,’ — these, when the thing is
presented by its own authority as it is (tathd) [according as it is
seen] to be thejre ( idam ), since they throw overboard the thing
as such by an abstract (vikalpa) thinking without force of proof, —
how in the very act of prattling it away can their own words be
worthy of belief?

It may be granted that the three-fold asp*?'’'- (guna) have such a diversity of
mutation. But whence comes a single mu* ion, so that one says ‘This is
earth* or ‘This is water’? By raising this objection, since there is a con-
tradiction between the three essences and the singleness, he introduces the
sotra. 14. The that-ness of a thing is due to a singleness of mutation.
We see a single mutation belonging to many, for instance, when a cow or
a horse or a buffalo or an elephant is huddled together in a brackish * [land],
each has a single mutation characterized by the common nature of salt. And
[similarly] a wick and oil and fire form a lamp. In the same way the aspects
(puna), though many, have a single mutation. As a result of this, each of the
fine elements ( tanm&tra ) and of the elements and of the produots-of-the-elements
has a that-aess, Jhat is a singleness. [When their] essonce is objects-for-
knowledge, in so far as aattva »s predominant, their essence ig vividness. And

1 Compare iii. 44, p. 254' (Calc. ed.). have the brackish flavour attaching to

* The ManiprabhS says rumfothalt. And their bodies.’ Colonel Jacob adduces

the P&tafijala Rahasy&m says, ‘ If cows evidence to show that rumi is the

and other animals are huddled together name S>f a particular salt-lake or mine

in that brackish spot (ru&Mavana- (Second Handful of Popular Maxims,

ikOmi), then all of them together will 2nd edition, 190g, p. 69;.


Book IV • Isolation or Kaivalya


[320


iv. 14—]

being subsidiary-products of the personality-substance they have a single
mutation in the form of instruments [of perception], [for instance], the organ-
of-hearing. In so far as the tamqs of these same [aspects] is predominant,
inasmuch as they are insensate (jada) and thus have objects-for-knowledge as
their essence, there is a single mutation as being the fine element sound,
an object of sense. By the words «a sound* he indicates the fine element
sound ; by the words ^object of sense» he indicates that it is insensate. But
the fine element cannot possibly be the object ofthe organ-ofihearing. The
rest is easy. — He now raises up a Destructionist (v&inapka), who holds the
Theory of Ideas (ujnanavddin), by saying «‘ There is no intended-object dis-
sociated from a mental-act. '» ‘ For if there be elements and products of

elements distinct from mental-acts, then we might suppose a productive cause
of them such as the primary cause. But in the strict sense they are not anything
different from ideas. How is it then that a primary cause is presupposed?
And how is it that processos-of-knowing, the organs-of-sense, which are evolved-
effects of the personality-substance, are presupposed ? To explain. Since an
Insensate intended-object cannot be vivid of itself, there is no intended -object
dissociated from some mental -act. [Association isj coexistence [that is] a rela-
tion. The absence of this is dissociation. The prefix in- is used in the sense of
absence. The meaning is that there is nothing unrelated to sqme idea ; [in other
words] something which might properly be described as non-existing. On the
other band mental-acts do exist dissociated from intended-objects. For in so far
as this mental -act is vivid in itself, it does not require an insensate intended-
object in order to make a statement as to its own existence.* So then the
holder of the Theory of Ideas {vijnanavadm) has indicated two requisites, 1. the
fact 1 that it is perceived ( vedyotm ), and 2. the fact that it is apperceived
along with something else (sahopdlavnbha). * These two points can further
be brought out in a syllogism thus. Whatever is perceived by whatever
process-of-perception, that [intended-object] is not distinct from that [process-
of-perception]. Just as the soul in the case of knowledge. And the elements
and the products-of-the-elements are perceived. So this apperception [of
elements] is pervaded by the contrary pioposition, [that is, it refutes the
absence of distinction between the process and the object J. So the fact-that-
it-ifl-perceived, which is less-extensive as compared with what-is-the- opposite
of the distinction which-we-wish-to-deny, [as soon as this fact] is known, posits
the absence-of-distinction, which is more extensive with regard *to itself [the
perception]. An€ when we see this, [the fact that they are seen as different],
which is jusMhe contrary of this, is denied. Accordingly, when any thing
is invariably seen with another thing, then the one is not different from
other, just as the second moon which is always perceived with the [actual]
moon. And it is the case*tbat tba object is alycpys invariably perceived with

1 Similar discussion by faihkara on ii. 2. 28. See also Sarva-darfana-taihgraha (Anand.
ed.), pp. MO add 13. *


821] Criticism of Buddhist idealism [ — iv. 14

the thought. Thus this perception contradicts the more extensive [term] ; the
invariable relation contradicts the variable relation which is more extensive
than the distinction, which we must deny. Removing thus the variable relation,
it rejects the distinction, which is less extensive than this [relation]. 1 Let this
be assumed. And if the intended -object is not different from the thought,
then how is it that they seem to be different V In reply to this [the VijfiRnavftdin]
says '^Cimagined.^ As the Destructionists* say “Because there is invariably
an apperoeption of [the oBject] blue and of the percept of this [blue] at the
same time, there is no difference [between them]. And the difference that
may be seen between them results from illusions of mental-acts just as a pair
• of moons may be seen when there is one only without a second.” [The
Vijft&n&v&din] makes clear the imaginary [difference] in the words «only a
readjustment of percepts. ’» [The author of the Comment] refutes this by
saying ^Cthese.^ The construction of the sentence is, how can their own words
be worthy of credence? — «Presented» means brought befbiwihem at the time
of each perception. How [is it presented]? He replies «as it is.^ In
the different ways that [a thing] shines forth as being [the thing] that is
pointed to as this and thi% in that very way eo ipso (svayam) it is presented ;
but not as being reduced to^* object of a mental-act [or] as being a figment
of tho imagination The worc^ «by its own authority» point out that the
intended -object acts as cause with reference to the mental-act, because the
intended-object has given rise to the mental-act by virtue of its own power
as an object-for-knowledge. It is on account of this that the mental-act is the
perceiver of the intended-object. Now how could a thing, which is of such
a kind, [be thrown away] by reason of an r empty] abstract thinking having
no force of proving? For since an *f empty conception is no means-of-proof,
therefore what is based upon it and what is in essence that [empty abstraction]
is no means-of-proof. In this way throwi 'g overboard the thing as such, [that
is] setting it afloat.— An occasional reading is ‘ holding it under.’ In this oase
too the meaning is the same. Prattling away this object in this way, [how]
can their own words be worthy of belief ? This is what is iutended. The two
middle terms given, the invariable apperception at one time and the fact of
being perceived, are non-conclusive. Because the negative statement is open to
doubt. To explain. The coarseness and externality appear [in consciousness]
in the case of elements and products of elements which [as you say] have the
form of thought {only], but these two [qualities] are not possible in the oase
of thought [only]. To explain. Coarseness meAiis pervading several points-of-
space. Externality means related to separated points-of-space. 4 And it is im-
jpossible that a single mental-act should pervade several points-of-space and also

1 If there is bheda, there is a-nyatoiahopa* * Quoted Sanra Dar$. Saihg. p. 16 (AnandSf.
famftfo * but there is nolle of this ed .)* and de la Valine Poussin's note in

latter ; therefore there is no bheda* Le Boa^dhitme^Muslon, 1902), p. 84.

41 fs.o.s. nl


iv. i4—] Book IV \ Isolation or Kdivalya [322

[occupy] separated points-of-space. For it ia impossible to have in a single thing
the confusion of contrary qualities such as occupying this point-of-space and not
occupying this point-of-space. Else if this were possible, one would have to
admit that all three worlds are a single thing. If it be said that for this very
reason we should admit that there is a difference in the mental-acts [as to
coarseness and externality, in that there are as many thoughts as there are forms
of the thing], then the reply would be, Then 1 Sir ! in the case of the ideas
which can grasp even the extremely subtile objects? [finer than coarseness and
externality],- and which take no notice of each other’s behaviour, and which are
awake only to tha* [one atomic object] which comes within their range — how
could there be the appearance of coarseness ? And you cannot talk [of what
is perceived by the later-distinct-impression (vikalpa) in language] which refers
to t|ie later-distinct-impression. Because there is no confusion of [the content of
this Impression with anything else], and [on the other hand] there is a clear
appearance [of coarseness]. Nor can it be said that coarseness is externally
sensed ( alocitam ) [by the first-indistinct-impression], and so the clearness of the
knowledge ( savikalpa ) which follows this, and which is conditioned by this
[avikalpa] could be explained. Further this later-distinct-impression is not, like
the first-indistinct-impression, limited to its forjp fakQra) and to nothing else.
For since this [later-indistinct-impression] is not itself a coarse [thing], it
cannot make the coarse [manifest] as its object. Therefore if an idea is to
be outer, since, as we have shown it, it cannot be coarse or outer, then these
coarse and outer [impressions] may be counted, if you will, as altogether false.
And you cannot say that such a false impression is just the same as a mental-
act. For then you would haye to admit that the mental-act is as empty as
this [false impression].— So to resume T;he argument ( tathd ca). In so far
as the fact of being perceived is not less extensive than the absence of difference
between [the idea and the object], how can the fact of its being perceived
refute the fact of the difference ? — And as to being invariably together. Just
as in the cose of the mental -act and of the coarseness, the one existent and
the other non-existent, so likewise in the case of two existing things [the being
perceived invariably together] may be explained on the ground of the nature
of things or on the ground of some kind of an obstruction [in the thinking
apparatus]. Accordingly those two fallacious middle terms [put forth by the
opponent], because they are non- conclusive, only give rise to an [empty]
Abstraction (vikalpa), if there be no external [thing]. And the authority of
a perception is no^to be grinsaid by a mere [empty] abstraction. So the point
was well taken when he said «by an abstract ( vikalpa ) thinking without
force of proof& By this [discussion we must understand that also the
view which attempts to prove that objects] are ideas, urged as a ground that*
ideas have no external-basis, as illustrated by the ideas of a dream, is also
overthrown. And the alternatives (vikalpa) regarding the object-of-the-illation
have been offered-in-rebuttal bv stating that the relation is that between whole


328] Criticism of Buddhist idealism [ — iv. 15

and [part]. For details the Ny&ya Kanikll 1 is to be consulted. So there is
no need of details here.

Why is this incorrect ?

15. Because, while the [physical] thing remains the same, the
mind-stuffs are different, [therefore the two are upon] dis-
tinct levela-of-existence.

A single [physical] thing is the common [physical] basis for many
mind-stuffs. It is not, of course, figured forth by a single mind-
stuff, nor yet is it figured forth by many mind-stuffs. It is
rather grounded in itself. Why is this? Because, while the
[physical] thing remains the same, the mind-stuffs are different.
When the mind-stuff is in relation with right-conduct, the rnind-
e*nff has thoughts of pleasure, the [physical] thing remaining the
same. When in relation with wrong-living, from the same
[physical thing] it has thoughts of pain. When in relation with
undifferentiated-consciyueness, from the same [physical thing] it has
thoughts of infatuation. When in relation with complete insight,
from the 6ame thing it has thoughts of detachment. 2 If this is so,
by whose mind-stuff would this thing be formed ? Nor would it be
sound to say that one person’s mind-stuff is affected when brought
into relation with an object formed by the mind-stuff of another
person. Consequently the [physical] . ling and the thought distinct
because of dissimilarity, in that^the thing is the object-for-know-
ledge and the thought is the prooess-of-knowing, [are upon] distinct
levels-of-existence. There is not even a trace 3 of a blending of the
two. But from the point-of-view of the Samkhya, since a thing has
three aspects (fjuna) and since the changes of the aspects * are
unstable, it comes into relation with the mind-stuffs [of men],
dependent [for its existence in this case or the other] upon such
determinants as right-living [or wrong living or undifferentiated
consciousness or complete insight], it becomes the q^use, in one form

Reference is made to this work by Vaca*- the Bh&mat! on Vld&nta-sOtra ii. 2.

patiraifra at i. 32, p. 75 1 (Calc, ed.), 25 (Nirnaya-sitgara ed.), p. 462.

and aUo in theTattva Hindu (Benares, 1 Compare ii. 28.

1892), p. 28'*. — The NirGlambanutada * Compete Pa?, i. 2. 15.

is die U8«ed in the C&Rtra-dipika, p. 32 ; ‘ Compare ii. 15, p. 135"; iii. 9 and lit,

in the Ny&ya kaniki, p. 261 ; and in pp- l^P and 2^4* (Calc. ed.).


iv. is — ] Book IV. Isolation or Kdivalya [324

or another, of presented-ideas, as they rise [into consciousness],
corresponding [in quality] to the [determining] efficient-cause.

So having in this manner, independently of the stltra, given the reason for
setting up [the physical thing] as something over and above the mental-act, the
author of the Comment introduces the reason as given in the sntra itself by the
words «cWhy is this ?» 15. Because, while the [physical] thing remains the
same, the mind-stuffs are different, [therefore the two are upon] distinct
levels-of-existenoe. Whatever units are in the manifold these differ absolutely
from the manifold, For instance, a single thought in Chaitra or in Maitra is
distinct from the presented-ideas in Devadatta and in Vish^umitra, which are
dissimilar. And since the intended-object is not different, even when the thoughts
about it are manifold, it is other than the mental-acts, And further the iden-
tity of the intended-object, although the thoughts of those who know it validly
are different, is determined by the connexion of one [thought] with another [in
memory]. For in the case of a single woman who is presented-to-the-minds of
several persons, enamoured or ill-disposed or infatuated or detached, we see a
reciprocal connexion so that one thinks ‘ She who is seen by you is seen by me
also.' Consequently while the [physical] thing remains the same, because the
mind-stuffs are different, because there is a difflrChce of thoughts, [therefore]
the two, the intended-object and the thought, [are upon] distinct levels-of-exist-
enco [that is] [distinct] means of distinguishing the essential attributes. In
the lover, a thought of pleasure with reference to the woman loved ; in rival
mistresses, a thought of pain ; but in Chaitra who has not obtained her, a thought
of infatuation, a depression. ‘This may be so/ the objector says, 1 but that
intended-object with the distinguishfog characteristic of being loved is figured
forth by a mind-stuff of o$e person. And this same [intended-object] affects
the mind-stuff of the others alto. fto r [£$dft mind-stuff] might be supposed to be
common.’ In reply to this he says &nor would it be . . . another.» For if that
were so, when one person has the thought of blue, all would have the thought
of blue. A further objection would be this * Even according to the view which
maintains the distinct existence of objects (arthavftda), how can one and the
same object be the cause of mental-acts differing according to the difference
in pleasure and the other [experiences]? For from a 'cause which is not differ-^
ent in its distinguishing characteristics there should be no difference in effects.'
In reply to this he says«from the point-of-view of the Sfimkhya.» It is quite
consistent to say that the same external thing which is a mutation* of the three
aspects (guna) has*three forms. The objector says * Even if it be so, then all
without distinction would have a mental-act of pleasure and of pain and of f
infatuation.’ In reply to this Ae says ^dependent [for its existence] upon such*
determinants as right-living.^ The sattva accompanied by the rajas and deter-
mined by right-living produces the sensation of h^piness. But this same sattvq
when determined by knowledge (vidyd), after the rajas has been removed, gives
rise to a sensation of dotacllment. And n.qht-living and the other [experiences]


325] One real object common to all Selves > [ — iv. is

are not all in all persona. Some of it is in some persons. So this arrangement
[of pleasures and of pains] is quite consistent.

There are some who say that a thing is coextensive with its
thought, in so far as like pleasure and the other [experiences]
it is experienced. In this way when they thus reject the quality
of being common [to several mind-stuffe], they deny the existence
of the thing in both its earlier and its later momenta
16. And a thing is not dependent upon a single mind-stuff,
.[for then in certain cases] it could not be proved [by that
mind-stuff], [and] then what would it be ?

If a thing were dependent 1 upon a single mind-Btuff, then if the
mind-stuff be distracted or restricted, it itself would be un-
touched by that mind-stuff. And not coming within the range
of that [mind-stuff], and not being proved [by that mind-stuff],
and unperceived in its nature by any one, would it then be at all? 1
And how could it be pryd^iced again in relation to the mind-stuff?
It would not possess those parts of it which are not apparent. So
that if one says the back does not exist, neither could the belly be
known. Consequently an intended-object is independent [of mind-
stuff] and common to all the Selves. And again independent
mind-stuffs function differently for *ach Self. As a result of
a relation between these two [the l®s nded-object and the mind-
stuff] there follows an apperception experience of the Self.

On this point there are some disputatious persons who say that the object is
coexistential with the idea. Because it is the object of experience, like pleasure.
What he means to say is this. The intended-object might be admitted to be
distinct from knowledge, still since it is insensate ( jcttja ), it cannot be perceived
in the absence of knowledge, but must be illumined by the knowledge.
Accordingly [the object] is only at the time of the idea, and not at other times.
Since there is no evidence that it exists at other times. This the author of the
Comment confutes independently of the sQtra in the words «In this way when
they.2> For* a [physical] thing ( vastu ) is experienced by ordinary observers* as
common to all mind-Btuffs and as persisting* in the succession of various
_ moments and as consisting of a mutation. Now if the thing 1 b coexistential
With the mental-act, then it would be of this sort [that its appearance and

1 As the Vijh&navbda maintains. * This wo^ld be the point of view of the

* Compare de la Valine Poussin ^La N4ga- Sarvastivfidin.

tion d< l’Ame (Journal Asiatique, 9* * Compare NySya-sQtra i. 1. 40.

aerie, tome xx, 1902, pp. 248 and 254).


iv. is—] Book IV. Isolation or Kdivalya [326

disappearance would be coexistential with the appearance and disappearance of
the idea]. If so, how can one act up to ( anurodha ) this objective-factor (idamafiga)
so that one shall not at the same time deny it ? This is the meaning. Or we
may suppose that there is not a denial of this objective-factor. Let the intended*
object be coexistential with the knowledge. To this also the reply is in the
antra. 16. And a thing is not dependent upon a single mind-stuff, [for
then in certain oases] it could not be proved [by that mind-stuff], [and] then
what would it be ? For the Bame mind-stuff which^perceives a water-jar, when
distracted by anotner substance such as a piece of cloth, does not remain upon
the water jar; or when the mind-stuff which has discrimination as its object,
attains at that very time to restriction at these times, since there is no know-
ledge of the water-jar or of the discrimination, the water-jar and the discrimina-
tion, being dependent for their existence upon one particular knowledge only,
v/ould surely cease when this [knowledge] ceases. This he says in the words
^dependent upon a single mind-stuff.^ The words «how could it be» mean that
it could not be. How does it happen that the mind-stuff is in relation to this
thing whether it be a water-jar or discrimination ? For the effects invariably
are where the cause is, and invariably are not where the cause is not. Without
regard to their own peculiar cause they cannotjbe* produced by another cause.
And if they are supposed to be causeless, then one would have to deny [such] an
inconsistency as the accidental existence of them [the effects]. And there is no
ground for saying that whatever causes the knowledge of the thing also causes
the thing. For then it would follow that the taste and the sensifio power and
the digestion and so on woujd be the same whether one makes use of an actual
sweetmeat or of a sweetmeat 1 of hope. Therefore the point is well taken when
he says «And how could it be produced 1 again in relation to the mind-stuff ?&
Furthermore the front part of anything is implied by the middle and hind part
But if the existence [of the thing] were to depend upon the knowledge, then
the upper and middle parts would not exist, since this [idea of them] is not in
experience. And accordingly since the pervader [the upper and middle parts]
are not, the lower part, which is pervaded, would also not be. And thps if the
whole object be absent, how could it be urged that the intended-object is coexis-
tential with the knowledge, as he says «It would not possess those parish The
words «are not apparent^ mean are not perceived. He brings the discussion
to a close by saying ^Consequently.^ The rest is easy.

1 This is an allusion to the stanza in prihar* Sanskrit Series, fascicle I, p. 66.} This

as Khaj)<JanAban<jakh5dja stanza is given as a quotation in^rihar-

14 Agamodakairptd ye, ye cop&rjitamo - §a’s work also. There is another book

dak&h I of the same title on astronomy. 8%f

Basavlryavipak&d i tulyam tefSm pra • also de la Vall4e Poussin, Le Boud-

&«'' * dhisme (Mustan, 1902), p. 85, and

(Lazarus and Co’s edition, Medical Hall Hownle's translation of the Suerata,

Press, Benares, p. 37; Chaukhamba p, 12.


327] Objects now kno>vn now not known [ — iv. 17

17. A thing is known or not known by virtue of its affecting
[or not affeoting] the mind-stuff.

Objects-of-sense like magnets, bind to themselves the mind-stuff,
as if it had qualities of iron, and affect it. The object whereby
the mind-stuff is affected is known. But [the Self], who is other,
than this, is not known. The mind-stuff enters into mutations
because the nature ofthe thing is now known 1 * and now not
known.

This might 8 be conceded. ‘But/ as the objector says, 1 if the object is to be
independent, in that it is insensate, it can never throw out light, or if it does
throw out light, then its insensate character would vanish. And so (Hi) it
would cease also to be. For surely a thing cannot exist after casting off its
own nature. Moreover it cannot be urged that throwing out light is a pro-
perty of the intended-object which is really insensate by nature, and that this
[property] is put into it by the organs. For if throwing out light were to be
a property of the intended-object, it would be, like blueness, common to all
persons. Thus if a single pSrsjn knows the meaning of the [philosophical]
system*, then all would be scholar and there would be no incompetent persons.
Nor is it correct to fcay that a present external-aspect should exist in the past
or in the future. Therefore that an intended-object exists independently as an
object of apperception is nothing but a wish.* In reply to this he recites the
BOtra 17. A thing is known or not known by virtue of its affeoting [or
not affecting] the mind-stuff.

Although the infonded-object is by nature ids*. •< sate, still by the channel of the
organs it affects the mind-stuff. The Energy of Intellect {citirfakti), whose
reflection enters into the mirror of the mind-stuff which is in such a state [of
being affected] as has been just desorbed, enlivening (cetayam&nti) the mind-stuff
which is affected by the intended-object, experiences the intended-object. But
it does not impart to the object anything like visibility. Neither [is the
Energy of Intellect] out of relation with the mind-stuff. For we have said
that its reflection unites with the mind. And although both the mind-stuff,
because it is omnipresent, and the organ which is made of the personality sub-
stance, are not in relation 8 with the object-of-sense, still that mind-stuff which
has its fluctuation ig any parti < nlar body is in relation with objects-of-sense.
Thus it is that objects are said to be like a magnet. Since the mind-stuff is
like the iron in its properties, the objects, having by the channel *f the organs
brought it into relation, affect it. And hence mind-stuff is capable of muta-
tions, as he says €Of the thing.*

1 it. 20, p. 12 (Calc.). 9 The purpose of this sfUr^ia to dgmolish idealism.

1 Reading ttffepe nMu


tv. is — ] Book IV. Isolation or K&ivalya [328

But as for [the Self] for whom this same mind-stuff is an object-
of-sense —

18. TJnintermittently the Master of that [mind-stuff] knows
the fluctuations of mind-stuff [and thus] the Self undergoes-
no-mutations.

If, like the mind-stuff, the Master also, that is, the Self, should un-
dergo mutation, then fluctuations of mind-stuff which are its objects
would be, like objects-of-sense, the sounds and other [perceptible
things], sometimes known and sometimes not known. The fact,
however, that the central organ is un intermittently known by its
Master, the Self, leads us to infer that [the Self] is an entity that
undergoes-no-mutations.

Thus then he has established the existence of the intended-object as distinct from
mind-stuffs. Now with the intent of showing that the Self is distinct from
these [mind-stuffs] whose nature is to enter into mutation, he asserts its [the
Selfs] immutability, the quality which differentiate* it from these [mind-stuffs].
This he does by supplying some words and by Getting the sUtra. «But as for
[the Self] for whom this same mind-stuff is an object-of-»nse.» 19. Unin-
termittently the Master of that [mind-stuff] knows the fluctuations of
mind-stuff [and thus] the Self undergoes-no-mutations. The mind-stuff,
whether it be restless or infatuated or distracted or in a state of focuBedness,
is always, up to the time of restriction, experienced by the Self as in mutation.
Why is this so ? Because the Self does cot undergo mutation. If he entered
into mutations, then the Self also, like the mind-stuffs, would sometimes know
objeots-of-sense and sometimes not. Whereas objects-of-sense are only known
[and never unknown] to him. Therefore he does not undergo mutation. And
as a result he is something distinct from things that are in mutation. The
same he says in the words <Clf like the mind-stuff.^ It is the central-organ,
when in fluctuation, that he unintermittently knows. Of this he is the Master
[and] Owner, in other words, the Experiencer. Of this Master, the Self, [the
above fact] leads us to infer the immutability. To explain: The point is that
this Self which does not enter into mutation is distinct from the mind-stuff
which enters into mutation.

Should th# doubt arise whether the mind-stuff like fire illumines
itself and at the same time illumines objects —

10. It does not illumine itself, since it is an objeot-for-sight.
Just as the oigans-of-sense and the sotihds and other perceptible
[things] donotfllumihb themselves, since they are objects for Bight,


829] Things distinct from thoughts [ — iv. 19

bo the central-organ is also to be represented. And accordingly, fire as
an example could not apply to it. For fire does not throw light upon
its own self which [before was something] without light. And here
light is thrown [only] when there is a relation of the light-giver
with something [which is yet] to be lighted. Furthermore such a
relation [of a thing] does not occur with the thing itself. Besides,
the meaning of the words <the mind-stuff illumines itself> is that
it is not an object-for-knowledge for any one. Just as the words
‘Air is grounded in itself’ mean that it is not grounded in
something else. For the reason that creatures are conscious-by-
reflection of the processes of their own thinking-substances, when
they say ‘ I am angry, I am afraid, I feel a passion for that person,
1 am angry with that person,’ there is purposive action. This is
impossible unless there be a knowledge of one’s own thinking-
substance.

With the words « Should the doubt arisen he sets up a Destruotionist (v&inifika)
as an opponent, who argues as follows : ' All this may be so, provided mind-stuff
be the object of the Self. But this it is not. On the oontrary, this [mind-
stuff] throws light upon itself [and] illumines the objects [and] originates
in-dependence-upon previous mind-stuff. How then can the Self always have the
objects perceived ? And still more hew can t be distinct from the mind-stuff
which enters-into-mutation ? ’ 10. It does net illumine itself, since it is an
objeot-for-sight. It might be so [self-illumining], providing mind-stuff had
consciousness of itself. This, however, it does not have. It is, like the oolour
blue, [an object] capable of being included in experience in so far as it undergoes
mutation. And whatever is capable of being included in experience cannot throw
light upon itself. For it cannot be a fluctuation with regard to itself [and not
to mind-stuff]. Since the same thing cannot be the act, the object of the act,
and [one of] the relations 1 of the act. For the act of cooking is not cooked ;
nor is the act of chopping chopped. On the other hand, the Self docs not
undergo mutation and is not an object of experience. Therefore with reference
to him self-efllightenment is not inexplicable. For his self-qplightenment is
nothing but an enlightenment* which is not dependent on any ottyer ; and it is
not his being an object of experience. Therefore because it is an objeot-for-
sight, the mind-stuff which is the object of the seeing does not illumine in
itself. The objeots of the fluctuations of that minf-stuff only which has the
reflections of the light of the self (<Mman) throw light. This is the point. An
objector s#$e, ‘But don’t you see that Are is an olqpct-for-gight and yet has

1 These relations are those e xpr essed by the cases other than the nominative and

* Beading prsMpM kg tuya . . . n&nnbhavakarmati.
gg [ale. »t]


iv. 19 — ] Book TV. Isolation or Kdivalya [830

enlightenment in itself. It is not with a fire as it is with water-jars and so on,
which may be made manifest by [the light of a] fire ; for a fire is not [made
manifest] by another fire.' In reply to this he says CAnd so, fire as an ex-
ample.^ Why ? «For fire does not.* The meaning is that fire does not
requite any other fire to throw light upon it, but has light thrown upon it by
a mental-act. So it does not throw light upon itself. Thus [fire] is not an
exoeption-to-general-principle [stated in the sutr*]. jFhis is the meaning. The
word 4Chere* in the expression 3And here light is thrown* distinguishes [fire]
from the light which is the nature of the Self, in other words, the light whioh
is of an active kind. What he means to say is this x Wherever there is an
action, it is in all cases seen to exist as related to an agent and to an inatru-
ment-of action and to an object. Just as we see the act of cooking as related
to Chaitra and to the fire and to the rice. Similarly throwing-light is an
action. And this [action] too must be in the same [threefold] relation. Now
a relation must be based upon a difference. It is impossible where there is no
difference. This is the meaning. When it is said ^Besides, the meaning of
the words <the mind-stuff illumines itself^ is that it is not an objeot-for-know-
ledge for any one,* the objector grants, ‘ This may he so. But let it not be said
that the mind-stuff is an objeot-for-knowledge. * Bor when the proceas-of-know-
ing, which is neither the cause nor the pervader [of the mind-stuff] is repressed,
it does not follow that the mind -stuff must be repressed/ To this he replies,
Cof their own thinking-substance.* The ^thinking substance* means the mind-
stuff. 1 ^Movements* mean functional -activities. dCBeings* mean living beings.
The different fluctuations of mind-stuff, anger or greed for instance, are, together
with their basis the mind-stuff and with their objects, experienced by each in-
dividual ; and refute that statement that the mind-stuff is not an object-for-know-
ledge. He makes dear this same perception of the movements of one's own
thinking-substance by the words Cl am angry.*

20. And there cannot be a cognition of both [thinking-
substance and thing] at the same time.

And it is impossible in a single moment to cognize one's own
form and another’s as well. It is a supposition 8 of the Momen-
tarists that whatever exists is both action and the means-related-
to-an-action.

80. And there cannot oe a cognition of both [thizUdng^subetenoe and
thing] at t fie same time. He who says that mind-stuff illumines itself and
illumines objects-of-sense ofumoi at least say that mind-stuff cognises itself by
the same fimctional -activity as that by which it cognises objects. For a

1 That the buddhi is equivalent to eitta ; tomana these are indications ef a

that in 1. 2, p» 6 ia , it ye equivalent to wide divergence from the ttUtthya.

antahkaranam ; and that at the end of 1 Compare 9&xhkara on ii. 2. 80b
iv. 19 Vftcaspati uses it as equivalent


[ — iv. 2i


331] Criticism of Momentamsts

functional-activity which has not a different distinguishing-characteristic is not
adequate to producing a difference in effect. Therefore a'difference in functional-
activity has to be presupposed. In the opinion of the Destructionists there is no
functional-activity over and above the various originations. And from the
same act of origination which is without different distinguishing-character-
istics, there cannot possibly come effects which have distinguishing-character-
istics. For then this difference would be quite accidental. Neither [as in the
last alternative] can it to urged that one and the same thing can have two
originations. Therefore at one moment of time ( samaya ) the mind-stuff cannot
determine the objects and also its own kind of thought ; [it cannot illumine
itself]. The Comment states this in the words <CAnd it is impossible in a single
moment.* And in this sense it has been said 1 by the Destructionists, “ What-
ever is the being of a thing that is itself the action and the means-related-to-
action.” Therefore this fact that mind-stuff is an object-for-sight, which is
eternal, takes from it its character of illumining itself and points to a seer, and
the fact that the seer does-not-enter-into-mutations.

If there be the opinion that a mind-stuff naturally 2 restricted is
[yet] known by another, mind-stuff immediately contiguous to it,
[the answer isj

21. If [one mind-stuff] were the object-for-sight for another,
there would be an infinite regress from one thinking-
substance to another thinking-substance, as well as confusion
of memory.

If one mind-stuff were perceived" b; another mind-stuff, by whom
would the thinking-substance of the thinking-substance be per-
ceived? Because this would be perceived by still another, and
that by yet one more, there would be an infinite regress. And
there would be a <confusion of memory.) As many memories would
obtain as there would be, on the part of the thinking-substances,
experiences. And as a result of the confusion of these [memories]
there would be no limit to the memory of one [thinking-substance].
Thus everything is put into disorder by the Destructionists’
prattling* away of the Self who is conscious reflecting the
thinking-substance. But those who assume that the experiencer
as such [experiences] anywhere soever do not conform to the rules
[of logic]. There are some who assume,, existence as such, and
that it is this existence which casts off' those five divisions-of-
existfnro ( skandha ) of theirs and^mts others together again. But

* OottKpare Vficupntiimpn’t Bbimati on ii. 2. 4. 20. ^fir. Sftg. ed., p. 456, lait line.)

, ' Oompnre ii. Q.


iv. «n — ] Booh IV. Isolation or Kdivalya [332

these are afraid of this very [existence]* Thus in the very act of
saying, ‘ Tfiat I may feel the passionlessness of the Great Disgust
for the divisions-of-existence and that they may arise no more and"
altogether cease, I will lead the student s life 1 in the presence of
my spiritual guide/ they deny after all the existence of the
existence. But the systems with the S&mkhya and Yoga at their
head denote 2 by the word ‘self* the Self, the Owner, the
experiencer of the mind-stuff.

Again he sets up a Destructionist as opponent with the words ^Clf there be the
opinion.^ 4 It may be granted that because [mind-stuff is] an object-for-sight
it is not conscious of itself. But this does not necessitate the existence of a self
(Atman). For any later moment of mind-stuff belonging to the same continuous-
series (santana) can perceive the moment of the mind-stuff which gave it birth
and which became naturally restricted.’ This is the meaning. [This latter
moment of mind-stuff is called] immediately contiguous ( samanantara ) because
it is alike (sama) in point of knowledge, and immediate ( anantara ) in point of
not being separated. 21. If [one mind-stuff] were the object- for-sight for
another, there would be an infinite regress from r one thinking-substance
to another thinking-substanoe, as well as conffisicn of memory. The
word «thinking-substance» means mind-stuff. When the succeeding thinking-
substance is not itself known, it is not able to know the pievious thinking-
substance. And a previous thinking-substance as long as it is unrelated with
the thinking-substance cannot be supposed to be perceived. For certainly a man
who does not know what a staff is cannot know what it means to speak of
a man with a staff. Therefore there would be an infinite regress. The [divisions
of existence are the five] groups* ( sfcandha ), consciousness and sensations and
perceptions and forms and predispositions. When he says «But the systems
with the Samkhya and Yoga at their head» he means to say that the Samkhya
and Yoga are at the head of such systems as the V&^esika. The rest is easy.

How [is this] ?

22. The Intellect (citi) whioh unites not [with objects] is
coonscious of its own thinking-substance when [the mind-
stuff] takes the form of that [thinking-substance by
reflecting it].

" For, the Energy of experiencer, 4 which is immutable and

* Similar discusai^i in Caraka-Saihhita, See H. C. Warren’s Buddhism in

fifth adhydya. Translations, Appendix, p. 487.

* The word «ra as ajjplied to the n.'i' 1-stufF 4 This is Pancafikha’s ninth fragment

implies a conti ast to the ™vner ( sia - (according to Garbe), quoted a second

min). The reference is to the bc^in- time (ssg ii. 20}, and misprinted both

ning of the Comm -nr on iv. 1<J times (pratisanikrdteva).

9 I he Older varies fiom the IhidiMfl-t order.


333] The Self does not unite with objects [ — iv. 22

which unites not with objects, seeming to unite with dbmething
mutable [the thinking-substance], takes the form of the fluctuations
which that [thinking-substance] undergoes. And [this Energy]
being identified with a fluctuation of the thinking-substance in so
far as it is nothing but an imitation of a fluctuation of the thinking-
substance that has come under the influence of the intelligence
(cditanya), it is termed a fluctuation of the thinking-substance.”
And in this sense it has been said “That hiding-place in which the
everlasting Brahman lies concealed is not an under-world nor
mountain-chasm nor the darkness nor caverns of the sea, but is the
working of the mind (when not distinguished [from Himself]- So
the sages tell.”

The objector says, ‘ This might be conceded. But if mind-stuff does not illu-
mine itself and is not knowable by another mind-stuff, how then will even the
self (dtoion) experience the mind-stuff? For surely the Self, even if it have
light in itself, cannot have any activity, and in the absence of any activity he
cannot be an agent. And Wl!ile the self is unrelated with the mind-stuff, the
object-of-the-action) it oannot be the experiencer of this [mind-stuff]. For this
would prove too muoh.’ With this in view he asks 4CHow [is this]?* The
reply is given in the sctra. 22. The Intellect (rift) whioh unites not [with
objeots] is oonsoious of its own thinking-substanoe when [the mind-stuff]
takes the form [by reflecting it]. What was said before [i. 4] of that
[thinking-substance] " At other timewit take' the same form as the fluctuations
[of mind-stuff]” is baaed on this. The Ii> .ellect's consciousness of its own
thinking-substance takes plaoe when the thinking-substance, in so far as it is
a receptacle. for the reflection of the Intellect, passes into the form of that
[Intellect], [that is], p a s ses into a resemblance (rtipdta) of the Intellect (rifi).
For just as even without aotivity of the moon the dear water, into which the
reflection of the moon has passed over, makes the moon seem to be quivering,
although the moon itself is not quivering, so similarly, even in the absence of
any operation of the Intellect, the mind-stuff with which the reflection of the
Intellect has become united, makes by its own aotivity the Energy of Intellect
seem to have activity, makes it seem to have attachment even when it is
without attaohmedt The transforming of itself into an object of experience
makes this [Energy of Intellect] an experiencer. This is the meaning of the
t sOtra. This is also the meaning of the Comment. And sinA it baa been
explained more than once in various places, it is not explained here. — To show
that the fluctuation of thought (jftOna) is not distinguished from the fluctuation
of the thinking-substance, he«quotes the Sacred Word (tyam a\ saying CAnd
in this sen it has been said “ . . . not an under-world. Just the mental
aotivity of th* eternal Qiva, [that is] Brahman, whose nature is undefiled,


iv. 22 — ] Book IV. Isolation or Kdivalya [334

which changes into an image of Intellect, [and which,] inasmuch as it changes
into an image of Intellect, is not distinguished from Intellect even, [the sages]
explain as a “hiding-place ” (t)uMm). In that same hiding-place is that hidden
Brahman; but when that hiding'-place is done away with (apanaye), [then]
Brahman, self-illumined, unobscured, unobstructed, flashes forth for the Exalted
[yogin] who has reached his last bodily existence.

And for this reason we reach this result :

23. Mind-stuff affected by the Seer and by the objeot-for-
sight [leads to the perception of] all intended-obj ects.

For the central-organ is affected by the object- for-meditation, and
is itself on account of its objectivity connected by one of its
own fluctuations with the subject, with the Self also. Thus the
same mind-sniff is affected by the Seer and by the object-for-sight
and is beemingly both object and subject. Assuming a form both
intelligent and unintelligent, appearing (although really an object)
as that which is ruff object, while unistglligent it appears to be
intelligent [and] like a crystal, is described as. [perceiving] all
intended-objects. Accordingly there are some, deceived by this
resemblance to mind-stuff, who say that [mind-stuff 1 ] itself is
intelligent. There are others who say that this whole universe
Is nothing more than mind-stuff, and that this world of things,
cows and watei-jars and other things, together with their causes,
does not exist. They are to be pitied. Why so? Because their
mind-stuff, shining forth [in consciousness] in all kinds of forms
is the sou’’ e of error. — Consequently in concentrated insight the
object-for-the-insight when once reflected is other than [the mind-
r.tuit] becnu'.o this [Self] is that upon which [the insight] rests,
ii this < b;ecr w,- re <Ao mind-stuff and nothing more than that,
how could the insight by itself ascertain its form as being insight ?
Accordingly when in the insight an object is reflected it is the
Self who determines ['die object]. Thus, by dividing mind-stuff
as such int# knower and process-of-knowing and object-for-know-
ledge, they classify it according to its kinds [i. 41] as a triad also."
These arc men of complete insight. By them the Self has bpen
reached.

So then sirce mint! -stuff fi* an object-for-sight and enters-into-inutation, the Self
who has the property of immutability hac been proved to be over and above the


335] The mind-stuff not itself intelligent * [ — iv. 23

mind-stuff. Now he makes even ordinary perception a means of validating this
[transcendence of the Self] in the words «And for this reason we reach this
result.^ He means to say [we] necessarijy [reach] this [result]. 23. Mind-
stuff affeoted, by the Seer and by the objeot-for-sight [leads to the percep-
tion of ] all intended- objects. For just as when affected by blue or other
[colour], the mind-stuff makes a blue or other object stand before us by direct
perception, eo the mind-stuff affected by the Seer, in that it has changed into an
image of the Seer, makes the Seer also stand before us, by direct perception.
For knowledge has two 1 kinds of forms *1 am aware of — the blue.' So
although the knower also, like the object known, can be established by direct
perception, still special pains were not taken to give a distinct proof of it.
Just as the statement * the image of the moon is in the water ’ does not mean
that the image cannot be directly perceived. And further if you say that
this [image] which has entered the water does-not-validate (apramdna) this
[moon], you have no right to say that the [actual] form also of the moon is-not-
vaiidated. Consequently the fluctuation of the mind-stuff, in so far as the
mind-stuff reflects the [Intelligence], has Intelligence as an object. Still we are
able to say that [the fluctuation of the mind-stuff ] does not contain Intelligence
as an object. This is whaj i# meant by saying that mind-stuff [leads to the
perception] of all objects. This same is expressed by the words «<For the central-
organ.} The central-organ is affected not only by the [external] object-for-
meditation, by assuming the form of the intended-object, but as he says ^itself
, . . also.} The word «also} comes in the wrong place and should be after
Cthe Self.} The fluctuation of the Self is [this] change so that it is reflected
in this [mind-stuff]. And this identity * 0 / he mind-stuff with the reflection
of the Intelligence must have been assumed oy the Destructionists ( vdindfika ).
How otherwise could these have attributed Intelligence to mind-stuff — as he says
^Accordingly}? The word «some» refers to those Destructionists who hold
the theory that there are external things. The word Mothers} refers to those
who hold the theory that there are mental-acts (vijnftna) and nothing more.
An objector says * If the mind-stuff only is experienced as having the form of
the Seer and the form of the object-for-aiglit, then surely the Seer and the
object-for-aight must be not different from the mind-stuff, as they say, “ For
although the soul (atman) is not different from the thinking-substance, [still]
by wrong-headed persons it is characterized as if it were possessing-a-difference
[brought about by.] the recognition (samvitti) of the object-for-knowledge and the
knower (, grdhaka ] ).” So then how is it that these Destructionists deserve our
pity ? p In reply to this he says «in concentrated insight.} Because in accord-
ance with the arguments already Btated they should be led to assume that the
Self is something different from the mind-stuff. And by instruction in yoga with

The Bikftner MS. and other t^xts read (Calc.*ed.). The double form would

try&k&rc This would refer to grahltr t apparently bg the vhpya and visayin.

grahaqa, and gvahya. Possibly the re- The cittern is theecommon medium,
ference would be to iii. 18, p. 231 u


iv.23 ] ♦ Book IV. Isolation or Kdivalya [88 £

its eight aids which would introduce them to concentrated insight the object
of whioh is the self they should be awakened. To explain : In the concentrated
insight the object-for-the-insight, the self, is other [than the mind-stuff] when
[the self] is reflected. Why so ? Because the self becomes that upon which that
[mind-stuff] rests. And if, although instructed by this argument, the opponent
perversely should say, 1 Why should not that upon which it rests be the mind*
•tuff itself,' he replies «If this object.* If this object, which is the self (Atman),
be merely the mind-stuff and not something over ahd above this [mind-stuff],
then how oould the insight by itself ascertain its form as being insight? For
there cannot be a fluctuation of a thing with reference to itself. He brings the
discussion to a close by saying ^Accordingly.* One shows them pity by giving,
them the proper instruction, as he says «Thus.* ^According to its kinds*
means according to its nature.


And for what reason is this ?

24. This [mind-stuff]; although diversified by countless sub*
oonsoious-impressions, exists for thejs£ke of another, because
Its nature is to produoe [things as] combinations.

Although diversified by absolutely countless subconscious-impres-
sions, this same mind-stuff exists for the' sake of another, for the
sake of the experience and the release of another ; not for its own
sake. Because like a house 1 its nature is to work as a combination.
The mind-stuff must act as a combiner [for the Self] and not for its
own sake. Pleasurable mind-stuff is not for the pleasure [of the
mind-stuff]. The mind-stuff of thought is not for the thought [of
the mind-stuff]. But both of these two kinds exist for the sake
of another. And that very Self which has its purpose in the two
purposes of experience and liberation is this <other>, not any other
in general. Any indefinite other as such which the Destructionists
set forth in general terms, would all still exist for the sake of some
other, since [after all] they [too] act [only] to produce things to
be combined. # But tl at particular other which fs the Self does
not act as % combination.

He introduces another reason for the existence of the self (atman) over and above
the mind-stuff by asking, «And for what reason is this ?*24. This [mind-staff],
although diversified by oohntless suboonsoio^s-impressions, exists for the
sake of another, because its nature is to produoe [things as] combinations.


1 See SSifakhya kar. xvii.


3 » 7 ]


Mind-stuff exists for the Self [ — iv. 23

Although countless subconscious-impressions of karma and subconscioufiwimpres-
sions of hindrances remain attached to (adhigerate) the mind-stuff only, but not to the
Sel( — And although, accordingly, the fruitions which depend upon subconscious-
impresaions, in so far as they are contained in the mind-stuff, would lead one to
suppose that mind-stuff is the experience^ — and although, because all objects-of-
experience are for the experience^ everything would be Supposed to be for the
mind-stuff, ^--still the mind-etuff diversified as it is by countless subconscious-
impressions must be supposed to exist for the sake of another. Why ? Because
it acts as a combination. This is the meaning of the antra. He explains [the
aQtra] by saying Cthis same.» An objector asks, ‘ This may be true. But
what contradiction is there in supposing that the mind-stuff acts in combination
and yet still for its own sake ? ’ If some one were to urge this, he replies Csince
it acts in combination.^ The words «Pleasurable mind-stuff^ are a partial
expression for experience [in general]. Painful mind-stuff also is to be under-
stood as expressed by these [words]. And when he says <Klliought» he means
release. What he means to say is this. Pleasure and pain may be in essence
noth counteractive and coactive with reference to the mind-stuff, but cannot be
so with reference to themselves. For there cannot be a fluctuation with refer-
ence to itself. Neither is there any other thing acting as a combination and itself
giving rise, directly or indirect)y,*to pain and pleasure, for which the pain and
the pleasure can be counteractive or coactive. Therefore he who is in no wise
concerned either directly or indirectly with pleasure or pain, can be brought
into a state of counteraction to them or of coactivity with them ; and that one
js the permanently detached Self. Similarly that thought (j&dna) which leads
to liberation, in so far as it also depends upon objects-of-knowledge, and because
a fluctuation cannot exist with reference to itself is not for thought itself. And
it cannot be that release would arise when this thought has reference to another.
For this would make release impossible in the case of the discarnate and of those
whose [bodies] are resolved into primary matter. Therefore [intuitive] thought
also is for the sake of the Self only ; and it is not for its own sake ; neither for
any other whatsoever. And if it were for the sake of any other who acted as
a combination, the result would be an infinite regress. So it is settled that
thought is for another who does not act as a combination.

20. For him who sees the distinction, the pondering upon
his own states-of-being ceases.

Because a blade of grass sprouts during the rains we jpfer the ex-
istence of seed. Just so in the case of him who betrays thrills of joy
and falling tears in hearing of the way of release, we may likewise
infer that there is in him [good] karma rooted in the knowledge of
the difference [between the sqfitva and the Self], conducive to libera-
tion, and bright to completion [in the past]. Ir^him, tjie pondering

43 [h.o.s. 17 ]


iv. 25 — ] Booh TV. Isolation or Kaivalya [338

upon fils own states-of-being which is natural 1 to him comes into
activity.— When there is none of this (yasya) [good karma], this
has been said “ For [those] who, after having renounced their own
nature [of pondering upon themselves], thero is by reason of laok [of
good karma], a liking ( ruci ) for the opposing view and no liking for
the ascertainment of truth — , [for them there is no sight of the
distinction and no cessation of the pondering].” — Now-as-to-this-
point (i tatra) y the pondering upon his own states-of-being [ii. 39] is
in this fashion, * Who was I ? How was I ? What is this [birth] ?
How is this [birth] ? What shall we become ? or how shall we
become ? 9 But this pondering ceases for one who sees the distinc-
tion [between the sattva and the Self]. For what reason is this ?
Since it is this mind-stuff 2 which undergoes this diversified muta-
tion. But when there is no longer undifferentiated-consciousness
(< vbvidya ), the Self is purified and untouched by the conditions of
the mind-stuff. For this reason this slylftil person ceases pondering
upon his own states-of-being.

Having thus enunciated the doctrine about the Self, as based upon reasonings,
which is the primary source of Isolation, he discriminates the man who is com*
petent for this teaching from the other man who is not competent. 25. For
him who sees the distinction, the pondering upon his own states-of-being
ceases. For one who ponders upon Jthe existence of the Self,— for him, after
his instruction in the eight aids to yoga, if he follow [the instruction] up [and]
practise yoga, as a result of that [following and practice and] after he sees the
difference between the Self and the sattva of the mind-stuff, there comes a cessa-
tion of pondering upon the being of the self. For one who does not ponder at
all upon the existence of the self, the heretic, — for him, incompetent [to reoeive]
the instruction, and failing to make out the existence of the self in this or the
other world, [there is] no instruction, no seeing of the distinction, no cessation
of pondering upon the existence of the self. Such is the meaning of the sUtra.
An objector asks * How may we conclude that there is in the mind-stuff a ponder-
ing upon the states of the self? * In reply to this he says &in the rains . . . just
so.» It is inferred that there has been performed in a. previous existence a
karma which Was the fo lowing up of the eight aids to yoga, or of a part uf them,
which is the seed of the sight of the thing-as-it-is (tattva) and which is conducive
to release. In such a person, unavoidably, the pondering upon tho states of Jbhe
self naturally goes on, even when there is no practice 8 [in concentration] upon
the thing. He shows wh* these persons are who 9 according to the statements of

1 Compare the expressions at iv. 10, p. 283 B > 7 . 9 Heading cittatyaivtiifa?

* Compare the Bhagyff on iii. 51, p. 2&5* (Calc. ed.).


839] The Self becomes isolated [ — iv. 27

the traditionalists, are not -competent, by saying «When there is none of this
fgosya) [good karma], thia.& The opposing view is that there is no fruition of
harma because there is no one in any other wprld, since no other world exietB.
There are those who have a liking for this [doctrine] and no liking for the demon-
strated truth of the five-and-twenty entities. The pondering upon one’s own states-
of-being has already [ii. 89] been explained. He refers to the man who sees the
distinction by saying tfsincp it is this mind-etuff.^ For him who is skilful in
the sight of the distinction, pondering upon his own states-of-being ceases.

96. Then the mind-stuff is borne down to discrimination,
onward towards Isolation.

That mind-stuff of his which formerly was borne onward towards
objects-of-sense, down to non-thinking, becomes changed for him.
It is borne onward towards Isolation, down to the thinking which
c^mes from discrimination . 1

Now to the question ‘What kind of mind-stuff has the man who sees the distinc-
tion?’ he replies: 26. Then the mind-stuff is borne down to discrimination,
onward towards Isolation. jTJhis is] explained by merely reading.

27. In the intervals of this [mind-stuff] there are other
presented-ideas [coming] from subliminal-impressions.

The mind-stuff which is [borne] down towards discrimination of
the presented-idea and the flow of which is towards nothing but
discernment of the difference bdtwee r the sattva and the Self,
has in its intervals other presented-ideas, either ‘It is I ’ or ‘It
is mine’ or ‘I think’ or ‘I do not think.’ From what source?
From the dwindling seeds, from previous subliminal-impressions.

Ajd objector says ‘This may be so. But if the sight of the distinction has as its
final goal (nifthi) the discrimination, then the min d-stuff would at no time be
emergent. Whereas we see that [the mind-etuff] of one who goes the rounds for
alms is emergent* To which the reply is this. 27. In the intervals of this
[mind-stuff] there are other presented-ideas [coming] from subliminal-
Impressions. # A presented-idea is that by which a thing is presented [to the
Self]. It is the aatfva of the mind-stuff. From this [softfw] the Intelligence is
discriminated. By this it is [borne] down to [discrimination]. By the words
•I think' liberation is plainly indicated ae distinct [from infatuaticm]. By the
wbrds ‘I do not think ’ infatuation is [plainly shown]. By the words * It is I *
or the words ‘It is mine', the sense-of-personality [ahamkara) and the eense-
of-property (mamdkOra), which are the sources of infatuation, are indicated. —

1 Compare i- 12.


iv. 27 — 1


Book IV. Isolation or Kdivalya [340

The compound (krtyam&nablja) is to be analysed [as meaning] seeds which are
dwindling. The words <Cfrom previous sublimizml-impresaiyis^ means from
subliminal-impressions of emergence.

28. The escape from these [subliminal-impressions] is de-
scribed as being like [the escape from] r the hindrances. 1

The hindrances when in the condition of burned seed are unfit *
for generation. J ust so a previous subliminal-impression, when in
the condition of seed burned by the fire of [intuitive] thinking,
does not generate presented-ideas. But because the subliminal-
impressions of [intuitive] knowledge are dormant 8 until the task
of the mind-stuff is completed, they are not considered here.

1 This might be granted,’ the objector says ; ‘ but even if there be discriminative
thinking, supposing the subliminal-impressions of emergence generate other
presented-ideas, — what means is there then for escaping them to the end that
they in turn shall not generate other presented-ideas ? ’ In reply to this he says
28. The escape from these [subliminal-impressions] is desoribed as being
like [the escape from] the hindrances. In the case cf one whose discrimi-
native thinking is not thoroughly mature, the subliminal-impressions of emer-
gence not having dwindled away generate other presented-ideas. Whereas in
the case of one in whom discriminative thinking is mature, the subliminal-
impressions have dwindled and are not capable of generating other presented-
ideas, just as the hindrances, although arising in the intervals of the discrimi-
nation, do not generate other subliminal-impressions. Why is this so? Because
in that case these hindrances are in the condition of seeds burned by the fire of
discriminative thinking. Similarly also the subliminal-impressions of emergence.
— Now these subliminal-impressions of emergence must be restricted by the
subliminal-impressions of discriminative thinking, and the subliminal-impree-
sfons of discrimination by the subliminal-impressions of restriction. But as for the
subliminal-impressions of restriction, we have Bhown that they are outwardly
objectless. The means of restriction must in all cases be considered, [but not the
subliminal-impressions 4 of intuitive knowledge], as he says Cof intuitive know-
ledge. > He refers to the subliminal-impressions of the higher passionlessness.

28. For one who is not usurious even In respeot of Elevation,
there folfows in every case, as a result of discriminative
discernment, the concentration [called] Rain-oloud of [knotr-
able] things.

This Brahman even in respect of EleVhtion, is not usurious, [that

»Seeii 10-1» *Seeii. 7.

1 Compare ii 4 and 18. 4 Because these cease of themselves.


Ml] Supreme detachment of the Self [ — iv. 30

is to say] is not looking for anything [as a reward] even from that
(tato 'pi ) ; [and] if, even in respect of that, he be passionless, in every
case nothing-less-th^n-the discriminative discernment becomes his
In this way, when, because the seeds of the subliminal-impressions
have perished, there do not spring up for him any more presented-
ideas, — then the concentration called Rain-cloud 1 of [knowable]
things becomes his.

So the author of the sotras, after describing the Elevation (prasaihkhydna) as
the means for the restriction of emergence, gives the means for the restriction
of the Elevation itself. 80. For one who is not usurious even in reepeot of
Elevation, there follows in every oase, as a result of discriminative discern-
ment, the oonoentration [called] Rain-cloud of [knowable] things. [This
Brahman] looks for nothing, for example, dominion over all things. €Even from
means even from Elevation. [When] on the contrary, he is hindered even
in respect of that, and is disaffected towards it, because he sees the defects of
mutability, in every case nothingless than discriminative discernment becomes his.
This same he explains in thj jvords dCeven in respeot of that.& Whenever
presented-ideas of emergence may arise, then this Brahman has not attained to
discriminative discernment at all times. After he has no other presented-ideas,
he has at all times attained to discriminative discernment Then the con-
centration called the Bain-cloud of [knowable] things becomes his. What he
means to pay is this : When he beoomes disaffected towards Elevation and longs
for its restriction, he should devote himseh* to the concentration [called] the
Bain-cloud of [knowable] things. And by us devoting himself to the Rain-
eloud of [knowable] things he attains to discriminative discernment at all
times. And thus he is capable of making *t restricted.

80 . Then follows the oessation of the hindrances and of karma.

After the attainment of this [Rain-cloud of knowable things],
undifferentiated-consciousness (avidyd) and the other hindrances
are extirpated root and [branch]. And the latent-deposits of
karma, good and bad, are destroyed with their roots. Upon the
cessation of* the. hindrances and of karma, the wise man, even
while yet alive, is released. Why is this ? Because Misconception
the cause of the world (bhavasya). For surely no one h£s ever seen
the birth of any one whose misconceptions have dwindled away.

And he tells what the purpose of this is. 30. Then follows the oessation of
th* hindrances and of karma.* But why does he become liberated even while
living? The answer is in the word € Because. $ Fof verily «the latent-deposit
1 See i. 2, p. 11, and ir. 32, p. 815 (Calc. ed.).


iv. 30 — ■] ' Book IV. Isolation or Kaivalya [342

of karma kindled by subconscious-impressions of hindrances and of karma is the
source of birth and of other [fruitions]. And when there is no source, there
can be nothing following from the source, as on this point the Exalted Aksapftda 1
says "Because we see that persons free from passion have no birth. M


31. Then, because of the endlessness of knowledge from
whioh all obscuring defilements have passed away, what
is yet to be known amounts to little.

The knowledge which is freed from all obscurations by hindrances
and by karma becomes endless. The sattva of the obscured know-
ledge overwhelmed by the tamas which obscures it, and kept in
motion here and there only by the rajas, is set free [from the
tamas ] and becomes fit for the process-of-knowing. In this case
when it has become rid of defilement by any of the defilements of
the covering, it becomes endless. In consequence of the endless-
ness of knowledge what is yet to be knowrramounts to little, to no
more than a firefly in the sky. On which jfoint this has been said 3
“ A blind man pierced a jewel ; one without fingers strung it on a
cord ; one without a neck put it on ; a dumb man paid honour to it.”

Now what kind of mind-stuff is there, when thus there is the Bain-cloud of
[knowable] things ? The reply is this. 31. Then, beoause of the endlessness
of knowledge from which all obscuring defilements have passed away, what
is yet to be known amounts to littl§. The obscurations are those thingB by
which the sattva of the mind-stuff is obscured. The defilements are the hindrances
and the karma. The compound is to be analysed into <all> and <obscuring-
defilements.) All these obscuring defilements have passed away from the sattva
of the paind-stuff. Knowledge is that by which we know — this is the derivation.
Because of the endlessness, by reason of its immeasurability, what is yet to 1 m
known amounts to very little. For just as in the autumn when the rays of tlu
moon are freed from a dense veil [of cloud], and when they are brilliant in
all directions, the light is' so endless that water-jars and other things whicl
are to be lightened up [amount to very] little,— similarly owing to th<
endlessness of light from the sattva of the mind-stufF from Which* all rajas ant
tamas have passed away, the things to be lightened up [amount to] little. Thii
same he says fn the words €from all.$ He makes this clear from the negative
side by the words, ^overwhelmed by the tamas whioh obscures it> Kept ii
motion by the rajas, whose disposition is to activity, and hence Bet free, [because
the tamas is removed from tire spot. This is the meaning. Hence because by jjbi

1 Ny&ya-qQtraa iii.«l. 25,, * Tfiitt. Arspyaka i. 11*.


%43] Subsidence of aspects [ — iv. 33

light it rains [that is] pours down all kinds of knowable^ things, it is tailed the
Bain-cloud of [knowable] things. The objector says *' We may admit the existence
of this Bain-cloud of [knowable] things, the concentration, which is the cause of
the subsidence of the hindrances with their subconscious-impressions and of the
latent-deposit of karma. But even when this [concentration] exists, why should
a creature not be a reborn ? ’ In reply to this he says «On which point this has
been said.* If an effect is, to take place even when the cause is totally uprooted,
then whewl Sir I piercing of jewels by blind men and similar performances
would take place before our eyes. And so this proverb popular with reference
to any inexplicable thing would be explicable. A blind man pierced a jewel, lie
strung it, that is, put it on a thread. He put it on, that is, fastened it on. He
paid honour to it, that is, spoke in praise of it.

82. When as a result of this the aspects (guiyi\ have fulfilled
their purpose, they attain to the limit of the sequence of
rotations.

As a result of the rise [into consciousness] of the Rain-cloud of
[knowable] things, wheif tjie aspects have fulfilled their purpose,
they end the sequence of their mutations. For [the aspects]
having completed their experience and their liberation, and having
attained the limit of their sequence, are incapable of lingering
even for a moment.

The objector says ‘ The last limit of the Rain-cloud (jf [knowable] things,
the undisturbed calm of thought, tfie higi< r passionlessness, may remove
to their very roots the subliminal-impressioi. of emergent concentration, the
latent-deposits of hindrances and of karma Still since the aspects of them-
selves are disposed to form evolved-effeots, why do they not, even in case of such
a Self, produce a body and organs and the rest ? ’ The reply is this. 82. When
as a result of this the aspeots (yunu) have fulfilled their purpose, they attain
to the limit of the sequenoe of mutations. The disposition of the aspects is
such that when they have fulfilled their purpose with reference to any [Self]
they do not continue active with reference to that [Self]. This is the point.

What now is this so-called sequence 1

88. The positive correlate to the moment, recognized as suoh
at the final limit of the mutation, is a sequenoe.

% sequence has as its essence a continuous series of moments and
is cognized as such at the final limit [or] termination of the
mutation. For when a new garment has come to the end [of its
newness^- there is no oldness, unless [the oldnetB] has passed through


iv. 33 — ] Book IV. Isolation or Kdivalya [344

the moments of the sequence. In permanent things also it is evident
that there is a sequence. There are moreover two kinds of perma-
nences, the absolutely unchanging permanence and the permanence
in mutation. Of these two the Self’s permanence is the absolutely
unchanging, and the aspects’ permanence is in mutation. A thing
is permanent when its essence is not destroyed while it is passing
through mutations. Both .of these two kinds have a [certain]
permanence, because the essential nature of them is not destroyed.
Of these two : with regard to the external-aspects of the aspects
{guna), the thinking-substance and the others for example, the
sequence, having reached its end, is recognizable at the final limit
of the mutation ; with regard to permanent substances [that is]
the aspects {guna ), the end has not been reached ; with regard to
the absolutely unchanging permanent, the liberated Selves grounded
in themselves and in nothing else, the being in themselves is
experienced, to be sure, as a sequence* yet it has not reached its
end [and is not recognizable at the final limit]. [The sequence is]
abstracted from the act of existence and is based upon words
[only]. — Now has this round-of-rebirths as it exists in the aspects
{guna), either in [actual] motion or in [potential] equilibrium, a
final consummation of .the sequence or not ? This is incapable of
answer. How then ? A question capable of answer is this, ‘ Will
every one who is born die ? ’ * Yes, sir.’ There is [however] a

question capable of alternative answers, ‘Will every one after
he has died be born again ? ’ The skilful man upon whom dis-
cernment has dawned 1 and whose craving has dwindled will
not be born again ; but any other will be born again. Likewise
in case this question should be raised ' Will the human race be
more fortunate or not ? ’ A partial answer to this question is
this * It will be more fortunate in comparison with .animals ; it
will not be chore fortunate in comparison with gods and sages.'
On the other hand a question incapable of answer is this * Will
this round-of-rebirths have an end or will it be endless ! ' [But]
in case there be a limitation [of the question] in either one of
two ways, so that there be a consummation of the series of the
• * Comj&n i 16, p. 4t* ; ii. 27, p. 106* (Oslo. ed.).


[ — iv. 33


345] Final condition of the serial order

round-of-rebirth for the good man, but not for any other, then
there is no defect [in the question]. Consequently the only [way]
is that this question be analysed.

Meanwhile he asks what a sequence of mutations is by saying dCWhat now is
this ?T> 33. The positive correlate to the moment, recognised as such

at the final limit of the mutation, is a sequenoe. The sequence of the muta-
tion is that which has the moment as its positive correlate ; it is that to which
the moments are related. It is that in which the accumulation of moments
inheres. This is the meaning. And a sequence can never be explained
unless there be that which the sequence contains. Neither can there be
a sequence of only a single moment. Therefore the remaining alternative
is that in which the accumulation of moments inheres. As he says in the
words, <C& continuous series of moments.)* He gives the source-of-the-valid-
idea for the sequence of the mutation by saying «of the mutation.)* The
fu a! limit or termination of the mutation is the observed fact that even a new
garment, although kept with care, after a time looks old. So then there is
a sequence of the mutation. %And before this point is reached the successive
stages of oldness, the slightest,»v8ry slight, slight, noticeable, more noticeable,
most noticeable, are inferred [already to exist J. This same he sets forth by
a negative argument in the words «For when.» The words CCunless . . . has
passed through)* refers to [an oldness] in which a [particular] moment in the
• sequence has not been reached. The objector says ‘Such a sequence is impos-
sible in the case of primary matter since that is permanent.’ In reply to this
he says «In permanent things also.» By the *se of the plural he asserts that
the sequence is to be found among all permar it things. As to this he shows
first what the different kinds of permanent things are, and then explains how
the sequence is found among permanent things in the words «two kinds.» The
objector says ‘The absolutely unchanging, because it does not swerve from its
own nature, may be conceded to be permanent. But how can that which is
in mutation, which unceasingly swerves from its own nature, be permanent ? ’
In reply to this he says «When.» External aspects and time-variations and
intensities, of these it is the nature to rise and fall. But for a substance there is
no dislodging it from its essential nature. And to the question whether all the
sequences are cognizable at the final limit of mutation, he says No. «Of these
two : with regard to the external-aspects of the aspects (guna ^ the thinking-
substance and the others for example.)* Since it has reached the gnd because
ofrthe destruction of the properties, [therefore the sequence is cognizable at the
end of the mutation]. In the case of the primary cause, however, the sequence
of mutations does not reach an end. — The objector # says ‘Since the original
substance undergoes mutation irf^the form of external aspects, it may have
a sequence^ Jpjtutation. But how can the Self who does • not enter into
mutation have a sequence of mutation ? ’ In reply he says ecwith regard to
44 ♦ [«.o.a it]


[346


iv. 33 — ] Book IV. Isolation or Kaivalya

the absolutely unchanging permanent.* Persons who are in bondage, because
they assume that they are not over and above mind-stuff, have the mutations
of this [mind-stuff] attributed to them. And in the case of the liberated
a mutation based upon the [mere] act of existence and having no material
existence is wrongly predicated. Since it is a word only, [if we say that the
liberated exist,] which comes first, the predicate-relation which follows is based
on the act of existence [only and on nothing more |, # when he says <3Cfrom the act
of existence. ^ As to the aspects (guna) it has been said that their sequence
of mutation reaches no end. — Not enduring this some one asks «CNow?3» The
words «in equilibrium^ mean in the condition of a great mundane dissolution ;
«in motion» means at the time of creation. What he means to say is this':

‘ If owing to endlessness, there is no end of the mutations of the round-of-
existence, why, then! Sir! how at the time of a great mundane dissolution
could it suddenly, for all selves, cease ? And how at the time of the beginning
of a creation, could the round-of-exisfcenc© suddenly be produced? Accordingly
in a sequence of liberations of the selves, one by one, because all of them would
be set free, in a sequence of rounds-of-rebirths all [of these rounds-of-rebirths]
would be destroyed, [that is] would reach a final consummation of the mutations
of the primary cause. And if this be so, the # prtmary fcau^e itself would prove
to be impermanent. Inasmuch also as you are not willing [to admit] that
quite a new pi inripl^ should come forth, you cannot say that [the mutations] are
endless. For if that be so, beginninglessness would be contradicted and one
would be involved in a breaking of all the statements of the books (rastra). 9 «
This is the point. He gives the reply in the words «This is incapable of
answer.» This contention does not deserve a reply. In order to show that
it is absolutely incapable of answer, he show's that there is a question absolutely
capable of answer by saying «A question . . . is.» The question is «C 1 Will every
one who is born die ? He gives the answer by saying «‘ Yes, sir/» In other
words, ‘ Assuredly, sir.’ Having asked a question which admits of only one
answer, he asks a question which admits of alternative answers in the words
«* Will every one ? ^ He shows how it is that this admits of several answers
in tho words <Calternative answers. » He gives another question which also
admits of alternative answers and which makes the meaning clear in the words
«Likewise . . . tho human race.» But this is incapable of an absolute answer.
For it is not possible to say absolutely and in general whether the round-
of-rebirth of (prtunate and unfortunate persons has an end or not. Just
as we canqpt ascertain absolutely the blissfulness or the lack of blissfulness
in the case of all living beings. [This cannot be asserted] with the some
absolute certainty as the certainty that all who are born will die. But the
question is capable of anfwer in alternative ways as he says €for the fortunate
being.» What he intends is this. The inferface is that when there is a series
of liberations, ail would be liberated and the round-of-rebirths would be out,
short. Now this [inference] is based on the liberation established by the Sacred


347] Self-sufficiency of Isolation J — iv. 3J

Tradition (ugama). So how can the fact of the validity of the Sacred Tradition
that establishes the liberation which we assume, invalidate the samo Sacred
Tradition with reference to the permanence of the evolved-effects of the primary
cause? Therefore this inference the object of which runs counter to tho
Sacred Tradition is not tho source-of-a-valid idea. For it is taught in tho
Sacred Word and the Tradition and the Legends and the Puranas that
the succession of creation.*! . and resolutions ( pratisarga ) is without beginning
and without end. And so of all in the case of all the selves ( atman ) a
simultaneous destruction of ti*e round-oi-rebirths is not possible. For even
learned men are not giounded in discriminative discernment, although it is
to be acquired by the *oils of study in a succession of many births. How much
less, then, all living crea ures in general, both animate and inanimate and so on
on, suddenly at one time I For if causes are not simultaneous, effects should
not be simultaneous. But discriminative discernment occurs in a sequence,
and when numberless beings are liberated in a sequence, there is no destruction
oi sno round-ui-rebirth. For living beings are endless [in number], because they
are countless. Thus all is cleared up.


iboktion is said *to follow after the sequence of the task of the
aspects (guna) has been completed. The nature of this is defined.

34. Isolation is the inVerse generation of the aspeots, no
longer provided with a purpose by the Self, or it is tho
Energy of Intellect grounded fn itt-'lf.

When the aspects (guna), whose essei. ;e is causes and effects, arc
inversely generated, — now that experience and liberation have
been accomplished [for the Self] and now that a purpose is no
longer provided by the Self, — this is Isolation. The Selfs Energy
of Thought becomes isolated, since it is grounded in itself and is
not again related to the sattva of the thinking-substance. Its
continuance thus for evermore is Isolation.

In the P&tafijalan authoritative book on yoga, the Exposition of
the Sfiihkhya, th& Book on Isolation, the Fourth.

The subordinate connexions of the SQtra, whose purpose is to determine the
nature of Isolation, [with other topics] he gives in the words 4task of the
aspects.* 84 Isolation is the inverse generation of the aspeots, no longer
provided with a purpose by the Self, or it is the Energy of Intellect
grounded in itself, In so far*as their work is done, the aspects, no longer
provided wit* a purpose by the Self, are inversely geruftated. They are resolved
into their cause which is the primary-cause (pradhana). Of the aspects, whose


iv. 34] Book IV. Isolation or Kdivalya (348

essence is causes and effects, the subliminal-impressions of the restriction of
emergent concentration are resolved into the central-organ ; and the central-
organ into the personality-substance ; and the personality-substance into
resoluble [primary matter] ; and resoluble [primary matter] into unresoluble
[primary matter]. This resolution (pratisarga) of the aspects (pupa), whose
essence is causes and effects, is Isolation, the release of some Self from the
primary causes— Or release is the Self grounded in itself, as he says {grounded
in itself.» For the Energy of Thought even in a great mundane dissolution
is grounded in itself. But that is not release. So he says {again.& The
word id in the sQtra signifies the completion of the [authoritative] work.


In this Book he has described first the mind-stuff fit for release, then the per-
fections of the other world, and of the external objects and of the knower (jna),
the Cloud of [knowable] things, concentration and the two kinds of release, and
incidentally other things. There has also been a description of the source of
anguishes, and anguishes [themselves] have been recounted. Here also the two
kinds of yoga with the eight aids to yoga tytv( been set forth. The path of
release, the distinction between the aspects and the Self, has also been made
more clear. Isolation has been discriminated and the Intellect (cttf) has been
made free from the anguishes.


In the Explanation of the Comment on Patanjali’s [Yoga-treatise], [which*
Explanation is entitled] Clarification, of the Entities (Tattw-vAifaradt), and
which was composed by the Venerable V&oaspatimifra, the Book on Isolation,
the Fourth, is finished.


APPENDIXES


APPENDIX 1

BIBLIOGRAPHY OF* WORKS REFERRED TO IN THIS VOLUME

1884-89. Mah&bharata. 4 vols. and index, Calcutta.

1887. Tumour, t George. The Mah&wanso in Roman characters, with the
translation subjoined, and an introductory essay, Cotta, Church Mission
Press, Ceylon.

1866. Hall, Pits-Edward. Sftnkhya-Pravacana-Bhftshya with the editor’s
Preface, Bibliotheca Indica, Calcutta.

1869. 9 & tapatha Br&hmana. Edited by* Albrecht Weber, Berlin.

1861. Q&ndilya. Aphorisms with the commentary by SwapneAwara, edited by
J. R. Ballantyne, Bibliotheca Indica, new series, Calcutta.

1864. Cowell, E. B. The Kusum&njali, Calcutta.

1869. Rig-Veda-Pr&tig&khyV Edited with a German translation by Max
Mailer, Leipzig.

1869-74. T&94ya-Mah&br&hmana or Faficavifiga-Br&hmapa. Bibliotheca
Indica, vol. 62.

1873-87. J&imini. The Aphorisms of the Mlm&AsA with the Commentary of
fWara-ST&min, edited by MaheAachandra NyAyaratna, Bibliotheca
Indies, Calcutta. '

1874. Aryabhata. Aryabhatlya, edited witl commentary by H. Kern, Leyden.

1876. Jacobi, Hermann, Ueber tejas, v&yu, ftk&fa, speciell in der Vftijesika-

Philosophie, ZDMG., Bd. 29, p. 241.

IF 77-89. Mah&bh&rata, oblong fulio, Ganapata-Krsnftjl Press, Bombay.

1877. THhd&sa. Qakuntala, the Bengali recension; with critical notes,

edited by Richard Pischel, Kiel.

1878-88. 1 6, u-Purana, edited by R&jendral&la Mitra, Bibliotheca Indica,
vol. 86. Calcutta.

1878. 9&p4ilya. Aphorisms with the Commentary of SwapneAwara, or, the

Hindu Dor trine of Faith, edited by E. B. Cowell, M.A., Asiatic Society
of Bengal, Cal utta, ,

1880-1906. Patafljali. The V yftkarana-Mahftbh Ashyn, edited by F. Kielhom,
Ph.D., three volumes, Bombay Sanskrit Series, lix-xxii, xxvi,
xxviii-xxx.

1880. Ultra, Btjeudral&la. Catalogue of the §anskrit Manuscripts in the
’ Library of His Highftess the Mah&r&ja of Bikaner, Calcutta.

1880-86. Vtyu-Furftpa. Edited by Rajendral&latMitra. Bibliotheca Indica.
Calcutta.


Appendix 1 [352

1888. B&na. Kadambarl, edited by Peter Peterson, Bombay Sanskri t Series,
xxiv.

1888. Igvarakrjna. Samkhya-Kariks, with an Exposition ealled Chandrika,
by Narayana Tlrtha, and G&udap&d&ch&rya’s Commentary, Benares
Sanskrit Series, No. 9.

1888. BhojarfijS. Rajamarttanda, edited by Rajendralala Mitra. [See Pataii-
jali : Yoga Aphorisms.]

1888. Patafljali. Yoga Aphorisms with the commentary of Bhoja Raja and
an English translation by Rajendralala Mitra, Asiatic Society of Bengal,
Calcutta.

1884. Morris, Richard. Notes and Queries, Journal of the Pali Text Society,
London.

1884. Vijfi&nabhiksu. Yoga-varttika, edited by Ramakrsna Shastrl and
Keshava ShastrT, Medical Hall Press, Benares.

1888. Telang, K. T. A Note on B&darftyana, the Author of the Brahma SOtras,
Journal of the Bombay Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, vol. xvi,
p. 190.

1888. Sutta-Nip&ta. Edited by V. Fausboll, and published for the Pali Text
Society, London. *

1886. Dhammasangani, edited by Edward Mflller, Pali Te<t Society, London.
1886. Pftrthas&rathimiiyra. Castra-Dlpika, reprinted from the Pandit^ Benares.
1886. Orierson, George A. Behftr Peasant life, Calcutta.

1886. Bh&ravi. Kiratarjunrya, edited with Mallinatha’s comment, Nirnaya-

Sftgara Press, Bombay.

1888. Divy&vad&na, A Collection of* Early Buddhist Legends, edited by

E. B. Cowell and R. A. Neil, Cambridge University Press.

1887. Apastambiya-Grhya-Sutra. Edited by M. Winternitz, Vienna.

1867. P&pini. Grammatik, herausgegeben, Obersetzt, erlftutert von Otto
Bohtlingk, Leipzig.

1887. Wax&yapa. Hitopadefa : edited by P. Peterson, Bombay Sanskrit Series,
xxxiii.

1887-. Bhartrihari. Vakyapadlya, A Treatise on the Philosophy of Sanskrit
Grammar, with a commentary by Pupyarftja, Benares Sanskrit Series,
Nos. 11, 19, and 24 [uncompleted].

1688. Lanman, Charles Rockwell. A Sanskrit Reader, with vocabulary and
Notes, Boston.

1889. GarbesRiohard. SBrhkhys-Pravacana-Bhashya, V^jfi&nabhikfu’s Com-

mentar zu den S&mkhyasQtras, Abhandlungen flttr die Kunde dee*
Morgenlandes, IX. Band, No. 8, Leipzig.

1889. Vishpn-Purtpa. With tlka, Oriental Preil, Bombay.

1889-1911. Dlgh Nik&ya. VoL i (1889) and* vol. ii (1908) edited byT. W.
Rhys Dafids and*J. Estlin Carpenter, vol. iii (1911) edited by J. Estlin
Carpenter, Pali Text Society, London.


353] Bibliogra/phy of Work a referred to in this Volume

m

1880. Jaeobi, Hermann. On Bh&ravi and Magha, Vienna Oriental Journal,
vol. iii, No. 2, p. 121.

1880. V&oaepatimigra. Samkhya-Tattv&*Kaumudi, edited by Oribharati, the
pupil of Bodh&yana, Jainaprabhakara Press, Benares.

1880. Dharmottar&oh&rya. Nyaya-Bindu-tika, to whieb is added the Nyfcya-
Bindu. Edited by Peter Peterson, published in the Bibliotheca
Indica, Calcutta

1880. Varftha Mihira. Paficasiddhantika, edited by G. Thibaut and L. Dvi-
vedT, Benares.

1880. Whitney, W. D. A Sanskrit Grammar, Bibliothek Indogermanischer
Grammatiken, Band ii, Leipzig.

1800. Yoga-dar$an&. Bhagavan-Mahamuni-Patanjali-pranltam, with the

Bhasya, and the Tattva-Vai^aradi of Vacaspatimi$ra, and a tippana
by Balarama, Calcutta, Samvat 1947 [reprinted with unchanged
pagination at Benares in 1908 a. d.].

1801. Kftlid&sa. Abhijhftna-^akuntala, edited by Godabole and Parab, Third

revised edition, Nirnaya-Sagara Press, Bombay.

1801. Anandavardhan&cfcrya. Dhvany&loka with the Commentary of Abhi-
navagupta, edited by Pandit Durgaprasad and K. P. Parab, Nirnaya-
Sagara Press, Bombay.

1801. Garbe, Richard. Mondschein der Sftihkhya-Wahrheit, aus den Abhand-
lungen der k. bayer. Akademie der Wiss., I Cl., xix Bd., iii Abth.,
Mtlnchen.

1801. Fathak, K. B. Dharmakirti and Shankaracarya, Journal of the Bombay
Branch of the Royal Asiatic Soc; v .y, vol. xxviii, No. 48.

1808. V&oaspatimiqra, Tattvabindu, edit i by <?rl Gangadhara Shastn Tailanga,

reprinted from the Pandit, Benares.

1809. Yajfiavalkya-Smrti. With the Mitaksara, edited by Bapu Shastri

Moghe, third edition, published by Jan&rdan Mah&dev Gurjar, Ram-
wadi, Bombay.

1809. FfttafVala-s&tr&gi. With the Scholium of Vyasa and the Commentary of
Vfloaspati, edited by R&jaram Shastri Bodas, Bombay Sanskrit Series xlvi.
1808. Garbe, Btohard. Paficafikha und seine Fragments, in Festgruss an
Roth, Stuttgart, p. 75.

1808. Barth, A. Bulletin des Religions de llnde, Paris.

1808. AqvaghOfa. Buddhacarita, edited by E. B. Cowell (Anecdota Oxoniensia,
Aryan Series, i. 1\ Oxford.

1808. Bhlmlotoya Jhafakikar. Nyftyakoia, Second edition, Bombay Sanskrit
Series, No. xlix.

t 1808. Svltm&rima. Bf^ayogapradipika, aus*dem Sanskrit Ubersetzt und als
Inaugural-dissertation der philosophischen Fakult&t, Section I, der
UniversitAt Munchen, vorgelegt von fiermanti Walter, F. Straub.
MUnehen.

48 [b.o.«. it]


Appendix 1 (354

1893. Ruyyaka. Alamkftraaarvasva (K&vymala 35), edited by Durg&pras&d and

Parab, Nirnaya-Sagara Press, Bombay.

1894. Stem, M. A. Catalogue of tile Sanskrit Manuscripts in the RaghunAtha

Temple Library of His Highness the Maharaja of Jammu and Kashmir,
Bombay.

1894. Sadananda. Vedantas&ra, edited by Colonel George A. Jacob, Nirnaya-
Sagara Press, Bombay.

1894. Garbe, Richard. Die S&mkhya-Philosophie, Leipzig.

1895. V&i$esika*sutras with the Bh&sya of Pra 9 astap&da together with the

Nyayak&ndall of (Jlrldhara, edited by Vindhyeshv&rT-pr&s&da Dvivedin,
Vizianagaram Sanskrit Series, voL iv, Benares.

1895. Lawrence, Walter R., The Vale of Kashmir, London.

1896. Thirty two Upanishads. With Dipikas, edited by Pandits at the

Ananda^rama. Ananda^rama Sanskrit Series, No. 29, Poona.

1895. Fatadjalioanta. Edited by Pandit Siv&d&tt R&m&bh&dr&dlksita and
K. P. Parab, Kavyamala, vol. li, Bombay.

Irj90. G&utama. Nyaya-sfltras with Vatsyayana’s Bh&sya, edited by Qrl
Gafigadhara ShastrT Tailanga, VizianagpAm Sanskrit Series, vol. ix,
Benares.

1890. Warren, Henry C. Buddhism in Translations, Harvard Oriental Series,
vol. iii, Cambridge.

1890. B&na. Kadambarl, edited with full Sanskrit commentary and copious
notes in English by M. R. Kale, Bombay.

1890. Yog&v&siffha. Maharamayapam with tlka, published by Gopalanarayana,
Bombay.

1897. Kalidasa. Rtusamhara with notes and English translation by Sitaram

Ayangar, Bombay.

1897-8. T&ittiriya-Aranyaka. Edited by Pandit Baba Shastri Phadke,
Ananda^rama Sanskrit Series, No. 36, in two parts, Poona.

1897. Annambhat$&. Tarka-Sangraha, edited by Ya6avanta V&sudev Athalye
and Mahadev R&j&r&m Bodas, Bombay Sanskrit Series, No. 55.

'897. SuQruta*Samhit&. Translated by A. F. R. Hoernle, Bibliotheca Indica,
new* series, 911, Calcutta.

897. Caraka-Saxhhitft. Edited by K. Debendra Nath Sen and K. Upendra
Nath Sen, Caloutta.

1897. KAlidAsa. <laghuvafi$a, edited by G. R. N&ndargikar, third edition,

published by R. A. Sagoon, Kalkadevi, Bombay*

1898. V ftcaspa timigra. Nyayavarttika-tatparya^lka, edited by Qrl Gafigadhara

Sh&strl Tailanga, Vizianagaram Sanskrit Series, vol. xiii, Benares.
1898. PrakAfenanda. Siddhtota-Muktavall, vgih English translation and
notes by Arthur Venis, Benares.

1898. Kum&rila-bftatfa, (lokav&rttilra, edited by Rama S&stil Tailanga,
Chowkamba Sanskrit Series, Benares.


355] Bibliography of Works referred to in thib Volume

1898* La Vallde PoAssin, L. de. Le Bouddhisme, fitudes et Materia ux,
London, Luzac & Co.

1000, Maodonell, A. A. A History of Sanskrit Literature, London.

1901. Vijfi&nabhikgu. Vijftan&mrtam, a Commentary on Badarftyana’s Brahma-
sQtras, Chowkamba Sanskrit Series, No. 40, Benares.

1001. Jolly, Julius. Medicin, in Grundriss der Indo-Arischen Philologie und

Alterthumskunde, iii Band, 10 Heft, Strassburg.

1001. Hopkins, E. W. The Great Epic of India, New York.

1901. Hopkins, E. W. Yoga-technique in the Great Epic, in Journal of the

American Oriental Society, vol. xxii, part 2, p. 833.

1001. Mammafa, K&vyaprakasa. Edited, with his own Commentary, the

B&labodhinl, by Bhatta Vam&n&c&rya, Second edition, Nirnaya-Sagara
Press, Bombay.

1902. Leuba, J. H. Hallucinations of Light, Revue Philosophique, vol. liv,

p. 447, Paris.

xtf02. V&lmiki. Ramayana with the Commentary of Rama, edited by K. P.
Parab, Second edition, Nirnaya-S&gara Press, Bombay.

1902. £udraka. Mrcchakatika, with the commentary of Prithvidhara, Nirnaya-

Sagara Press, BonfbiQr.

1002. Manusmptii Edited by Vasudeva (JJarman, with the commentary of

Kullaka, Nirnaya-Sagara Press, Bombay.

1002. La Valine Poussin, L. de. La Negation de Yk me, Journal Asiatique,

9 e sCrie, tome xx, p. 248, Paris.

1903. B&m&nanda Yati. Maniprabha, Benares Sanskrit Series, No. 75.

1003. Radhak&nta Deva. Qabdakdpadru *ia, third edition, edited by Krsna-

gopala Bhakta, Calcutta.

1003. BhAskarodayA A Commentary on Nllakanthabhatta’s Tarka-sangraha-

dlpika-prak&sha, edited by Kukunda Jha, Nirnaya-Sagara Press,
Bombay.

1908- . N&g&rjuna. MQl&madhy&m&ka-karikas, avec la Prssannapada, Commen*
taire de Candraklrti, public par Louis de la Vallee Poussin, Bibliotheca
Buddhica, iv.

1903. TJm&sv&ti. TattvftrthftdhigamasOtram, Bibliotheca Indies, Calcutta.
190a Appayadikfita. Kuvalayananda with the Candraloka, Nirnaya-Sagara
Prpss, Bombay.

1904' Bhaftoji Dikfita. Siddh&nta Kftumudi, edited by Dhtk&r Ke&ava Shastri
G&dgil and Yasudev Lakshman Sb&strl Papsikar, Nirnaya-Sagara Press,
Bombay.

1904' grlharya. Khandanakhandakh&dya, fascicles 1-9 (1909), Medical Hall
Press, Benares.

1004. Takakusu, Junjiro. 4 La S&ihkhya-K&rika 6tudi6e 4 la lumifcre de sa

ersion chinoise, Bulletin de l’l&cole Franpaise d’Extrdme-Orient,
tome iv, p. 1, Hanoi.


Appendix 1 [358

1004. Haraprae&d sh&stri. N otices of Sanskrit MSS. , Second Series, volume ii,
Calcutta. [The introduction is bound with volume ii, part ii.]

1904. F&tafijala-yoga-sutr&ni. With Vacaspatimfyra’s tlkfi and Vyftsa’s Bh&sya
together with Bhojadeva’s Vrtti and with Indices, AnandBcrama San-
skrit Series No. 47, Poona.

1004. B&m&nuja. VedAnta-Stitraa with the Commentary, translated by George
Thibaut, Sacred Books of the East, vol. xlviii, London.

1004. Brahmasutra-Shankarabhkgyam. With the commentaries Batnaprabhft,
Bh&matt, and Ny&yanirpaya of Shrigovind&nanda, V&caspatimicra, and
Anandagiri, Nirnaya-Sagara Press, Bombay.

1006. Kurma-Pur&oa. Published at the Shrl-Venkateshwar Steam Press,
Bombay.

1006. Subh&fitaratna-bh&pd&garam. Selected and arranged by K. P. Parab,
fourth edition, Nirnaya-Sagara Press, Bombay.

1006. V&yu-Pur&na. Anandaprama Sanskrit Series No. 49, Poona.

1906. Bh&gavata-Furapfc. Edited by Vasudevaparman, Nirpaya-Sftgara Press,
Bombay.

1006. Nftradiya-Mah&pur§pa. Shrl- Venkateahwaa Press, Bombay.

1906. M&gha. Sisup&lavadha, edited by Durg&(ras&d and Sivadatta, Fourth
edition, Nirnaya-Sagara Press, Bombay. •

1000. Eielhorn, Franz. Epigraphic Notes. Nachrichten von der Koniglichen
Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Gottingen, Philologisch-historische
Klasse, Heft 2, S. 143, Berlin.

1906. Apodeva. Mimflhsfi-nyaya-praka^a, reprinted from the Pandit, Benaree.
1900. G&rmja-Pura^a. With tlka, Shrl-Venkateshwar Steam Press, Bombay.
1900. Madhavgo&rya. Sarva-Dar$ana-Sangraha with the Prasthftnabheda,
edited by H. N. Apte, Anand&frama Sanskrit Series No. 61, Poona.

1906. Caland, W., and Henry, V. . L’Agnistoma, 2 vole., Paris.

1006. Jacobi, Hermann. Eine J aina-Dogmatik, Um&svftti’s Tattvftrthft dhigama -
sutra (lbersetzt und erl&utert (Sonderabdruck aus Band LX der Zeitsohrift
der Deutschen Morgenl&ndischen Gesellschaft), Leipzig.

1006. Lifiga-Pur&ga. With tlka, published by Khemraj Sbrikrishnadas at th«

Shn-Yenkateshwar Steam Press, Bombay.

1007. TJdayana. Atma-Tattva-Viveka, edited by Vindhye^varapras&da-dvivedin,

Bibliotheca Indies, new series, No. 1165, Calcutta.

1907. Vdyotak&n^ Nyaya-v&rttika together with Vacaspatimigra’s Ny&yasuol

nibandha, Bibliotheca Indies, Calcutta.

1907. Igvarakpi^a. Sarhkhya-karika, with the S&mkhya-Tattva-Kaumudl anc
a {ippaija by BalarSmodSsina, published by Jye^^lUMmamukunda,
Bombay.

1907. Jacob, George A. A [*first] Handful of Popular Maxims, Second editioff
Nirnaya-Sagara Press, Bombay.


357] Bibliography of Works referred to in this 'Volume

1907. Chakravarti, Nilmani. Chronology of India, Journal of the Asiatic
Society of Bengal, vol. iii, Calcutta.

1907. Maijdanamigra. Vidhiviveka together with the Nyftyakanikft by V&cas
patimi$ra, reprinted from the Pandit, Benares.

1907. Kaye, G. B. Notes on Indian Mathematics, J ournal of the Asiatic Society
of Bengal, vol. iii, No. 7, p. 474, Calcutta.

1907. Asafiga. Mahttyftna-SQtralamkara, Expose de la Doctrine du Grand

Vehicule, par Sylvain L6vi, tome i, Texte, Champion, Paris.

1908. MahftvariiBa. Edited by Wilhelm Geiger, Pali Text Society, London.

1908. Pathak, K. B. Bhamaha's Attacks on the Buddhist Grammarian Jinen*

drabuddhi, Journal of the Bombay Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society,
vol. xxiii, No. 63, p. 18.

1908. Deussen, PauL Allgemeine Geschichte der Philosophic, Erster Band,
Dritte Abtheilung, Die Nachvedische Philosophic, pp. 507-578, Leipzig.
1908. K&lid&sa. Kumarasambhava with the Commentary of Mallinatha (1-8)
and of Sit&r&m (8-17), edited by V&sudev Lakshmrn Sh&stri Pansikar,
Fifth edition, Nirnaya-Sagara Press, Bombay
1908. Kirfel, Willibald. I^eitr&ge zur Geschichte der Nominalkomposition in
den Upanishads uniim Epos, Bonn.

1908. Wogihara, ynrai. Asanga’s BodhisattvabhQmi, Ein dogmatischer Text

der Nordbuddhisten, Kreysing, Leipzig.

1909. Jaoob, George A. A Second Handful of Popular Maxims, Second edition,

Nirnaya-Sagara Press, Bombay.

1909. Kane, P. V. Bhftmaha, the Nyasa and Magha, Journal of the Bombay

Branch of the Royal Asiatic Societ% . vol. xxiii, No. 64, p. 91.

1910. Jacobi, Hermann. Agastya, Eney. paedia of Religion and Ethics,

edited by James Hastings, vol. i, p. i81.

1910. Jacobi, Hermann. Abhasvaras, Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics,
vol. i, p. 202.

1910. Jacobi, Hermann. Atomic Theory (Indian), Encyclopaedia of Religion
and Ethics, vol. ii, p. 199 a .

1910. Jacobi, Hermann. Abode of the Blest, Encyclopaedia of Religion and
Ethics, vol. ii, p. 698.

1910. Jacobi, Hermann. The Date of the Philosophical SQtras of the Brah-
mans, Journal of the American Oriental Society, thirty-first volume,
PaA I, p(>. 1-29.

1910. Hopkins, X. W. Mythological Aspects of Trees and Mountains in the
Great Epic, Journal of the American Oriental Society, tlurtieth volume,
Part IV, p. 847.

1910. Kaye, G. B. The Sources of Hindu Mathematics, Journal of the Royal
• Asiatic Society, July,«p. 749.

1910. ▲n.lersen, Dinas. A Pali Reader, Part I, Second edition : Part II, First
edition (1907), Copenhagen.


Appendix 1 [358

1910. Sixfenddhist Ny&ya Tracts, edited by Mah&mahopadhyaya Harapms&d

Shastri, Bibliotheca Indica (New Series), No. 1226, Calcutta.

1611. Dharmakirti. Ny&yabindu and Nyayabindutikft, edited byTh. I. Stcher-
batskoi, Bibliotheca Buddhica, vol. vii. [This book is in the press ; but
the proofs have been in my hands.]

1611. Jacobi, Hermann. Zur Frtihgeschichte der indisohen Philosophic,
Sitzungsbericht der kOniglich Preussischen Akademie der Wissen-
schaften, 22 Juli, Berlin.

1911. Asanga. Mah&y&na-SQtr&lamkftra, Expose de la Doctrine du Grand

Vehicule selon le Systeme Yog&c&ra, Odite at traduit par Sylvain L6vi,
tome ii, Paris.

1911. Jaoobi, Hermann. Kultur-, Sprach- und Literarbistorisches aus dem
Kftutillya, Sitzungsbericht der kOniglich Preussischeu Akademie der
Wissenschaften, Phil.-hist. Klasse, 2 November, Berlin.

1911. Shastri, Haraprasad. Notes on the newly-found Manuscript Catuhiataka

by Aryadeva, from the Journal and Procoedings, Asiatic Society of
Bengal (New Series), vol. vii, No. 7, p. 431.
li/11. Pert, NoOl. X Propos de la Date de Vasjibandhu, Bulletin de l’lScole
Franfaise d’ExtrOme-Orient, tome xi, f. §89, Hanoi.

1912. Shiiwo, Benkyo. Doctor Takukusu and Monsieur Peri on the date of

Vasubandhu, Tetsugaku Zasshi, vol. xxvii, November-December,
Tokyo.


APPENDIX 2


INDEX OF* .QUOTATIONS IN THE COMMENT


Following the order in which they are cited in the text of the Bhasya or
Comment, and with indication of their sources.

Synopsis of the sources, with indication of Abbreviations used.


Anadhikarina Agaminah
Agama.

Amn&ya.

'’’hand. Up. •= Chftndogya Upanisad.
Taitt. Ar. = Taittirlya Aranyaka.
Pafica?ikha. a

Brh. = Brhad&ranyakaJJpanisad.

MBii. = Mah&bhftrata.


VatsyRyana Bhasya.
Va P. = Vayu Purfina.

Varsaganya.

VP. = Visnu Purflna.

VaiyasikT Gatha.
Qravana.

Qruti.

Samgraha Karika.


The numbers on the left refer to the page and line of the Calcutta edition of
1890 reprinted in 1908 in Benares without change of pagination, but with slight
differences in the lines. Quotations which are not verbally accurate are marked
with an asterisk. An interrogation-point, placed after the sign of equality,
means that the source of the quotation cone » led has not been discovered.


16 4 = P&fioafikha 2.

62* = Pafioagikha 1.

65* = VP. vi. 7. 38 f ; vi. 7. 86-87 ;
Brhan Naradiya P. xlvi.
12-14.

88' = Paficafikha 4.

98* = MBh xii. 17. 20 ; 161. 11 ;

compare Dhammapada 28.
99* = Qravana.

118* = Vaiyaaiki Gatha.

114* = Paficajikha 6.

116* = Paflcapikha 6.

•128* = Amnaya.

129 1 = Paficapkha 8.

182* = Samgrahafloka ?

1 * 8 ' = ?

186* * Paficafikha 11.


140 = Pancajikha 7.

145 4 = Pancafikha 8.

168* = PancafikhaO.

166* = Agama-
159' = Pancafikha ?

169* = Qruti.

168* = Samgrahakarikft ?

172* = ?

176 7 = ?

179* = Vatsyayana Bhasya.

188' = VaP. xciii.*101 ; VP. iv. 10-
12 ; LP. lxvif! 28.

190* — Agama.

198* as ?

199* = Paficafikha ? See pp. 186',
217”.

204* = PAca$ikhft ?


Appendix 2 I860


207’ s Pa&cafikha 11.

218* = ?

217* = Samgrahakarikl.

386* as Samgrahafloka.

248* = Ch&nd. Up. viii. 1. 1.
246* as Brh. ii. 4. 14 j iv. 6. 16.
249* = Paficagikha 12
266’ = Pdrv&c&rya.


272* as Vlxsaganya.

287' = Porrftoarya.

291' as Varsaganya.

806* as Paficapkha 9.

806’ as A gam a.

811* = Anadhikaripa Agaminah.
815’ as Ttyttirlya Arapyaka, L 11*.


APPENDIX 3


INDEX OF QUOTATIONS IN THE COMMENT, GROUPED
ACCORDING TO THEIR SOURCES


The explanations prefixed to Appendix 2 apply to this Appendix also.


Anadhikuipa Agaminah.
= 811*.

Ag&ma.

= 166*.

= HHK
= 806*.

Amnftya.

^ 128*.

T&ittiziya Aeapykka.

i. 11. 5 = 816*.
Ch&ndogya Upanisad.

viii. 1. 1 = 248*.
Purvftcarya.

= 289'.

Brhad&ranyaka Upanisad.

ii. 4. 14 and = 246*.
iv. 6. 16.

Mah&bhlrata.

xii. 680 = 98*.
V&tsyftyana Bhlsya.
as 179*.


Vttyu Pur&na.

xeix. 101 = 188*.

V&rsagapya.

= 272*.

= 291*.

Visnu Purftna,

vL 7. 80 f. and a= 66\
vi. 7. 86-87.

VaiyBsikl Gfttha.

= 118*.

Qravapa.
as 99*.

pruti
= 169*.

Samgraha-kfirika.

= 182.

= 168*.

= 217*.

= 286*.


46 [a-o.*. »]


APPENDIX 4


INDEX OF QUOTATIONS IN THE TATTVA-VAIQARADl

Following the order in which they are cited in the text of Vacaspatimipr&’s
Vyftkhya, entitled Tattva-Vai^aradi, and with indication of their sources.
Synopsis of the sources, with indication of the Abbreviations used.


Katyayana.

Tand.

= Tandya Mababrahmana.


Nyaya-Kanika.

NS.

= Nyaya-SQtra.

Pat. MBh&s. — Patahjali Mahabhasya.

Pan.

= Panini.


Purana.

Brh.

= Brhadaranyaka Upanisad.


Brahma Tattva Saralks&.

Bhag.

= Bhagavad-Glta.


Manu.

Mand.

= Mandokya Upanisad.


Moksa Dharma.


Yogiyftj. = Yogiyftjhavalkya Smrti.

YaP. ss Yayu Purana.

VP. =s Visnu Purana.

Vaina^ika.

Vaiyakarana.

Qiksa.

(JJnhar. = <?rlharsa Khandana-
khandakhadya.

<2 vet. = ^veta^vatara Upanisad.

Samgraha Qloka.

Samkh. Kar. = Samkhya Karika.
Smrti.


The numbers on the left refer to the page and to the line of Vacaspati’s text
in the Calcutta edition. The pages in the Benares reprint agree with those
of the Calcutta edition ; the lines vary a little. Quotations which are not
verbally accurate are marked with an asterisk. An interrogation-point placed
after the sign of equality, means that the source of the quotation concerned has


not been discovered.

3 4 = Tand, xix. 2. 1.

3° = Brh. iv. 4.23.

4 1 = Yogrfiaj.

20 5 = Pin. v. 2. 42.

20 7 = Pan. ii. 2. 29.

27 1 = *Pat. MBhas. i. 2. 45.
27 s = ?

27- = Manu ii. 7.

81 fi == Samklf. Kar. jflviii.


33" = Mand. 5 and II
44 10 == Sariikh. JLar. klv.

50 8 = V&P.?

51 4 = VaP.?

75* = Nyayakanika?

75 s = Brahma-Tattva-Samlksa ?

102% = ?

104 14 = Samgraha Qloka.

106 1 = VP. vi. 7. 88.


3 ] Index of Quotations in the Tcittva- Vciigarttcli


191" = VP. vL 7. 48.
192’ = VP. yi. 7. 44.


106" = Smrti ?

106» = Bhag. ii. 47.

112* = Samgraha <?loka.
126* = Pan. ii. 1. 49.
129* = ?

182 ,# = ?

132’* = Manu iii. 68.

133 5 = Bhag. xviii. 38.
134* = VP. iv. 10. 9.
187" = ?

142’ a= <pvet. iv. 6.

143* = Pan. i. 4. 22.

166' = £vet. iv. 5.

169" = Manu iv. 37.

162" = VaP. lxix. 2.

!?«• = VP vi. 7. 36-37.
180’ = Pan. ii. 4. 9.

183 s = VP. iv. 10. 12.
186 1 ' = VP vi. 7. 39.

19P ! = Pan. iii. 4. 68.
190" = Manu vi. 75.

190" = VP. vi. 7. 40-41.


194’“ - VP. vi. 7. 46.

196 Tl = VP. vi. 7. 89.

196* = VP. vi. 7. 90.

196“ = VP. vi. 7. 92.

197* = VP. vi. 7. 86-88.
210’ = MBh. xii. 318. 102.
218* = giksa 13.

226’ = Vaiyakarana.

227* = Katyayana.

240" = VaP. ci. 85.

248* = Sariikh. Kar. xxix.
248'“ = Brh. iv. 4. 3.

254’ = ?

279* = VaP. Ixvi. 143.

285" = Purana ?

294 s = ?

299* = Qrihar.

304* = Vaina9ika ?

308 s = ?

I 314* s= NS. iii. 1. 25.


APPENDIX 5


INDEX OF QUOTATIONS IN THE TATTVA-VAIQARAD1
GROUPED ACCORDING TO THfelR SOURCES


The explanations prefixed to Appendix 4 apply to this Appendix


Kftty&yana.

= 227 s .

Tandya Mahabr&hmana.

xiv. 2. 1 = 8 s .
Nyayakanika.

? = 76*.

Nyaya-Sotra.

iii. 1. 26 = 314*.
Panini.

i 4. 22 = 143'.

ii. 1. 49 = 126‘.

ii. 2. 29 = 20 1 .

*ii. 4. 9 = 180‘.

iii. 4. 68 = 190 s .
v. 2. 42 = 20 s .

Patanjali Mahabhasya.

*1. 2. 46 = 27 7 .
Parana.

? = 286".

Brhadaranyaka Upanisad.

iv. 4. 3 = 248“.

iv. 4. 23 = 3*.

Brahma Tattva Samlksfi.

? = 76*.

Bhagavad Gita.*

ii 47 = *l06”.
xviii. 88 s= 188*.

Man u.

ii. 7 = 27 s .

iii. 68 = 182‘i


iv. 87 = 159‘\
vi 72 = 190”.

Mahabharata.
xii 818. 102 =5 210\

Mandokya Upanisad.

6 and 11 = 83”.

Yogi Y$jfiavalkya Smrti

? r= f 4 s .

Vayu Parana
? = 60*.

? = 61 s .
lxix. 2 = 162”.
lxvi. 148 = 279*.

- oi 86 = 240”.

Visnu Purapa.
iv. 10. 9 = 184 s .
iv. 10. 12 = 188*.
vi 7. 88 = 108 1 .
vi 7. 86-87 = 176».
vi. 7. 89 = 186*°.
vi 7. 40-41 = 190”.
vi 7. 48 = 191”.
vi. 7. 46 = 194”.
vi. 7. 77-86 = 194”
vi 7. 89 as 19b”.
vi. 7. 90 = 196 s .
vi 7. 92 s: 196*.
vi 7. 86-88 a* 197*.

Vainftfika.

? sS 294*.

? sa 804*.


365) Index of Quotations in the Tattva- Vdifdradt


V&iy&karapa.

? = 286 ’.

go*.

18 = 218*.

Qrlharpa Khanfcnakhapdahh&dya.
= 299*.

Qvetlfyat&ra Upanimd.
iv. 6 = 142'.
iv. 6 = 168*.


Samgraha ^lok*
104 1 *.

, 112 *.

Samkhya Kftrika.
xxix = 248*.
xlv = 44 w .
xlviii = 81*.

Smrtd.

? = 106".


APPENDIX 6

QUOTATIONS IN THE TATTVA-VAIQARADI NOT YET TRACED

TO THEIR SOURCES


Cbityaih vandet svargak&mah = 27*.

NirupadravabhutarthasvabMvasya = 102 1 .
KOmato ’tomato vdpi yo' toromi = 106".
Na hvhsydt sarvCt bhutdm L 7edic] = 129*.
Sabhitafaf ca sarhkalpah = 182”.

Prachpasyeva nirv&nam vimdkfah = 187*.
Akaro gOuravaih rOukfyam = 254 1 .

SahopalambhantyamOd abhtdak — 294*.
BhtUir yttdm hrij/a saiva ttorakam = 804*.
Abhinno ’pi hi buddhgdtma = 808*.


APPENDIX 7

INDEX OF WORDS IN THE SUTRAS


An alphabetic index of the Sutras themselves is given in the edition of the
Bombay Sanskrit Series, and in that of the Anandftframa Series of Poona. — This
t tidex is designed to include all the words of the text of the Sutras, and no
others. The text is that of the Calcutta edition of Samvat 1947 (Baptist Mission
Press, a.d. 1891) ; and accordingly panca, for example, is included. The numbers
refer to pada and sQtra.

The Sutras contain almost no finite verb-forms (i astt, sy&t, ksiyate, jdya/nte), and
I have therefore put the participles, not under the verbal roots, but in their
proper alphabetic place : so atita, apeta , udita , vita under a-, u v not under root t ;
similarly abhijata , asanm , utpanna , ukta (not undfr %ac\ aAdbdha (under ab) ; and
so the other negatives beginning with an - or a-. On tho other hand, the
pronominal forms are assembled in the usual way : tab tasya , tdA, sa , under tad ;
asya> esdm under idam ; Mem under etad.


akarana, sanga-smayA w akaranam iii.
51.

akalpita, bainr-akalpita iii 13.
akusida, prnsamkhyane ’pi akusldasya
iv. 29.

&kr§na, a^ukla^akrsnam iv. 7.
akrama, akramam ceti iii. 64.
aklifta, klista^aklistah i. 6.
anga, yoga^anga ii. 28 ; astav angani
ii. 29 ; angamejayatva i. 31 ; sva w an-
ga ii. 40.

ajllata, vastu jnata w ajnatam iv. 17.
ajfiana, duhkha^ajfiana ii. 84.
afijanatA, tad-afijfc&tft 41.
animan, aninft^adi iii. 45.
atadrupa, atadrupa-pratistham i. 8.
atita, atita w an&gata-jn&nara iii. 16;
atlta^an&gatan&m svaropato ’sty
adhvabhedAt iv. 12.
atyanta, atyanta^feamklrrfayoh iii. 8b.


at ha, atha yoga^anuySsanam i. 1.
adr^ta, drste w adrsta ii. 12.
adhigama, pratyak-cetanft^adhigamah

i. 29.

adhimatra, mrdu- madhya^ad him&t ra

ii. 84.

adhim&tratva, mrdu-madhy&^adhima-
tr&tv&t i. 22.

adhisfh&trtvam, sarva-bh&va w adhi-
sthfttrtvam iii. 49.

adhy&tman, adhyfttma-prasfldah i. 47.
adhy&sa, itara^adhyfts&t iii. 17.
adhvan, adhva-bhedftt iv. 12.

Ananta, AnanU-sam&pattibhy&m ii. 47.
ananta, ananta-phala ii. 84.
anabhigh&ta, dvandva^anabhighatah*
ii 48 ; tad-dharma^anabhigh&ta^ ca

iii. 41L

anavaoohinna, samaya^anavacchin-
afth ii 81.


367]


Index of Words in the Sutras


anavaocheda, anyatB^anavacchedat

iii. 53 ; kalena^anavacchedat i. 26.
anavadh&ra^a, ubhaya w anavadhftra-

namiv. 20.
anavasthitatva, i. 30.
anagtam, nastam apy anastam ii. 22.
an&gata, duhkham an&gtftam ii. 16 ;
an&gataih jnanam iii 16 ; anagatam
svarQpatah iv. 12.
an&tman, duhkha^anatmasu ii. 5.
anaditva, tBsam anaditvam ca iv. 10
an&gaya 9 dhyana-jam ana9ayam iv. 6.
anitya, anitya^a^uci-dulikha ii. 5.
am§ta, anisU-prasangat iii. 51.
anukara, svarQpa^anukara ii. 54.
anugama, rQpa w anugamat i. 17.
anuguna, vipaka^anugunBnBm iv. 8.
anuttama, santosad anuttama-sukha-
labhah ii. 42.

anupagya, pratyay^^anupa^y ih ii. 20.
anupatin, pabda-jnana^anupBti i. 9 ;

dharma anupatl iii. 14.
anubhuta, anubhata-visaya i. 11.
anumana, pratyaksa w anumBna i. 7 ;

^ruta^anumana i. 49. *

anumodita, krta-karita^anumodita,

ii. 34.

anuqayin, sukha^anucayi ii. 7 ;

duhkha^m^ayl ii. 8.
anugasana, yoga^anu^asana i. 1.
anupth&na, yoga^anga^anusthBnBt ii.
28.

aneka, cittam ekam anekesam iv. 5.
anta, paramamahattva^antah i. 40.
antara, jaty-antara iv. 2 ; citta w antara

iv. 21 ; pr&tyaya^antarBpi iv> 27.
antaranga, trayam antarangam iii. 7.

( antaraya, te antarfty&h i. 30 ; anta-
• rayabhava^ ca i. 29.
antardh&nam 9 iii, 21.
anya 9 samskfira^o ’nyah i. 1$ ; anya-
visayft : . 49 ; anya-aamsk&ra i. 50 ;
tad'anya-sadharanatvflt ii. 22.


anyata, anyata-kbyftti iii. 49 ,
anyata w anavacched&t iii. 58.
anyatva, krama^anyatva iii. 15 ;

parinama^anyatv© iii. 15.
anvaya, soksma w anvaya iii. 44 ;
asmita^anvaya iii. 47 ; citta^anvaya

iii. 9.

aparanta, aparBnta-jnanam iii. 22 ;

parinama w aparanta-nirgrahya, iv. 33.
aparamrsta, acayair aparBrnrateh i.
24.

aparigraha, brahmacarya w aparigr jdiah
ii. 30 ; aparigraha-sthairye ii. 89.
aparinamitva, purusasya^aparinBmi-
fcvat iv. 18.

apavarga 9 bhoga^apa varga ii. 18.
api 9 tato v pi i. 22 ; pQrvesam api i. 26 ;
adhigamo ’pi i. 29 ; ta9ya w api i. 51 ;
viduso ’pi ii. 9 ; ^uddho ’pi ii. 20 ;
nastam api ii. 22 ; tad api iii. 8 ;
vairagyad api iii. 60 ; vyavahitanBm
api iv. 9 ; cittam api parBrtham iv.
24 ; prasamkhyBne ’pi iv. 29.
apui^ya, i. 33 ; ii. 14.

.aprk^itva, tad-uparBga^apeksifcvat iv.

' i .

apeta, Bvarana-mala^apetasya iv. 31.
apratisamkrama, citer apratisamkra-
mayah iv. 22.

apratisanga, buddher apratisangah iv.

21 .

apram&naka, iv. 16.

aprayojaka, nimittam aprayojakam

iv. 8.

abh&va, abh&va-pratyaya L 10 ;
antaraya^abhftva i. 29 ; tad-abhavftt
s&myogabhava ii. *26 ; es&m abhave
tadabhavah iv. 11. 1

abhigh&te, an-abhigbata ii. 48, iii. 15.
abhijata, abhijatasya maneh i. 41.
abhiniveja, raga-dvesa^abhinive^a
ii. B ; svaraaavahi viduso ’pi tatha
rQdho ’bflinive^aft ii. f


[308


Appendix 7


abhibhava, abhibhayaprftdurbbav&u

iii. 9.

abhimata, yathabhimatam L 38. ,

abhivyakti, abhivyaktir vasan&nAm

iv. 8.

abhyantara, ii. 60, 61.
abhyftea, tatra sthitau yatno Tbhyft-
sah i. 13; abhyAsa-vair&gy&bhy&m
i. 12 ; ekatattya^abhyftsa, L 82 ;
vir&ma-pratyaya^abhy&sa i. 18.
arista, aristebhyo v& iii. 22.
artha, gabda^artha-jnana i. 42 ;
5 abda w artha-pratyaya iii. 17; cittam
sarvn w artham iv. 28 ; sva^artha iii.
35 ; cittam api par&^artham iv. 24 ;
purusa^artha iv. 84 ; tad-artha eva
dr 9 yasya w &tm& ii. 21 ; artha-matra
i. 43 and iii. 3 ; krta^artha ii. 22
and iv. 32; tad-artha-bhavanam i. 28;
bhSvana^artha, ii. 2 ; tanQkar&na^
artha ii. 2 ; apavarga^artham ii. 18 ;
tat-pratisedha w artham i. 32.
arthata, sarva^arthata iii. 11.
arthatva, vigesa^arthatva i. 49 ;

para^ arthatva, iii. 35.
arthavattva, anvaya w arthavattva * iii.

44 ; arthavattva-aamyamat iii. 47,
alabdha, alabdha-bhQmikatva i. 30.
alinga, lingamatra w alingani ii. 19 ;

al i nga- pary avas&n am i. 45.
alp a, jneyam alpam iv. 31.
avadh&rana, an-avadh&ranam, iv. 20.
avasthg, dharma-laksana^avastha iii.
18.

avasth&na, drastuh svarQpe ’vastha-
nam i. 3.

avidya, avidya s Jhmita* ii 8 ; anitya^
aguci-duhkfca^anatmasu nitya-guci-
8ukha w atma-khyatir avidya iL 6;
avidya ksetram nttaresam ii. 4 ;
tasya hetur avidya ii. 24. •
aviplava, viveka-khyatir aviplava ii.
26.


avirati, alasya^avirati, i 80.
avigega, 1. unparticularised, vipesa^
avigssa iL 19. 3. failing to distin-
guish , pratyaya^avigego bbogah iiL
86 .

ayigayibhdtatva, iii 20.
avyapadegyu, ganta^udita^avyapa-
degya iii. 14.

agukla, agukla w akrsna iv. 7.
aguoi, anitya-aguci ii. 5.
aguddhi, aguddhi-ksayat ii. 48.
aft&u, astav angani ii. 29.
asamkirna, atyanta^asamklrnayoh

iii. 85.

asaihkhyeya, asamkh yey a- vasanabhih

iv. 24.

asaiiga, kanUka w adisu asanga iiL 89r
asampragiofa, anubhata-visaya^a-
sampramosah i. 11.

asamprayoga, cgksuh prakfiga^a-
samprayoge iii. 2 ; visaya^asampra-
yogs ii. 64.

asamsarga, parair asamsargah ii. 40.
asti, svarUpato ’sty adhvabhedat iv.
• 12 ; tada kim syat iv. 16.
aateya, satya w asteya ii. 80; asteya-
pratisthftyftm ii. 37.
asmitft, avidya^asmita- iL 8; drg-
dargana - gaktyor - ekatmata^va^as-
mita iL 6 ; vitarka-vic&ra^Jknanda^
asmita L 17 ; asmita^anvaya^artha-
vattva iiL 47 ; nirmftna-cittany aami-
tamatrat iv. 4.
asya, asya vagikftrah L 40.
ahinsfi, ahiiua-satya- ii. 80; ahinsa-
pratisthayam ii. 85.

a, a vivekakbyateh iL 28.

&k&ga, grotra^akagayoh aaxhbandha
iii. 41 ; kaya^akagayoh saihbandba
. . . fl^aga-gamanam iiL 42.
ikgepin, visaya^ltsepi iL 51.
agama, aauxnana^^miAh i. 7


369 ]


Index of Words in the Sutras •


Atmaka, indriya^atmaka ii. 18.
AtmatA, eka^atmata^eva ii. 6.

&tm an, l t the soul, Atma-dar^ana, ii.
41 ; atma-khyati ii. 6 ; atma-bhava
bhavana iv. 26 ; 2. the essence,
drsyasya^atma ii. 21 ; guna w atma
nah iv. 18. ,

Adar$a 9 vedana-adar^a- iii. 36.

Adi, ariima^j&di iii. 46 ; bala w adini iii
24 ; maitrl w adisu iii. 23 ; kantaka w
adiau iii. 39.

Anantarya, vyavahitanara apy anan-
taryam iv. 9.

Anantya, jfianasya^anantyat iv. 81.

Ananda, vitarka-vicara^ananda i. 17.

Anugravika, drete w anu$ravika i. 16.

Apatti, tad-Akara^Apatti iv. 22.

Apura, prakrti^EpQrat iv. 2.

Abhasa, sva^abhasam iv. J9%

ayns, jaty-ayur^hogah ii. 18.

Alambana, jnana^alambana i. 38 ;
abhava-pratyaya^alambana i. 10 ;
hetu-phala^a^raya^alambanaih iv.
11 .

Alasya, pramAda^alasya- i. 30.

aloka, prajfta-aloka iii. 6 • pravrtty-
aloka-nyAsat iii. 25.

Avarana, avarana-mala iv. 31 ; pra-
ka$a w avarana ii. 62 ; prakafa^av*-
rana-ksaya iii. 43.

Ave$a, para-$arira^ave$ah iii. 38.

A^aya, vipAka^a$ayaih i. 24 ; karma,,
Ayayaih ii. 12.

Agis, a^iflo nityatvat iv. 10.

A$raya, hetu-phala w a$raya iv. 11.

Agrayatvat kriya-phala^a^rayatvam ii.

86 .

Asana, asana-pranayama ii. 29 ; sthira-
sukham Asanam ii. 46.

Aaanna, tivrasamveganAm Asannah i. 21 .

isevlta, satkara^Aaevitah i. # 14.

*AsvAda, Adarpa^asvada-vArtta iii. 86.


itara, itaretara^adhyasat* iii. 17 ; tri
vidham itaresAm iv. 7 ; prajfia-pQr-
vaka itaresAm L 20.
itaratra, vrtti-sArQpyam itaratra i. 4
iti, ii. 34, iii. 54, 65, iv. 84.
idam, asya va^lkArah i. 40 ; hanam
esam iv. 28 ; esam abhave iv. 11.
indriya, kaya^indriya ii. 48; bhota w
indriya ii. 18, iii. 18 ; indriya-jaya
ii. 41 ; iii. 47 ; va^yata^indriyanftm
ii. 55 ; indriyanAm pratyAhara ii. 54.
iva, svarQpa^Onyam iva i. 43, iii. 3 ;
arukara iva ii. 54 ; abhijAtasya^iva
i. 41.

ifta* ista-devat& ii. 44.

igvara, kle^-karma-vipAka^Agayaih
aparamrsUh pufusa-vigesa Igvarah

i. 24 ; Igvara-pranidhana i. 23, ii. 1,

ii. 82, ii. 45.

ukta 9 klegsvad uktam iv. 28.
utkrAnti, asanga utkranti? ca iii. 39.
nttara, avidyA ksetram uttaresAm ii. 4.
utpanna, visayavati vA pravrttir ut*
panna i. 35.

Udaya, ksaya w udayAu iii. 11.
adAna, udAna-jayat iii. 39.
udAra, prasupta-tAnu-vicchinna w ud&-
ranam ii. 4.

udita, $anta w iidita iii. 12 and 14.
upanimantrana, sthany-upaniman-
trane iiL 51.

uparakta, uparaktam cittam iv. 28.
uparAga, tad^uparAga^apeksitvAt iv.
17.

upalabdhi, svarQpa^upalabdhi ii. 28.
upasarga, samadbav upasargah iii.
87.

upasthAna! sarva-ratna w upasthanam

ii. 87.

upAya, JiAna^upAyah ii. 26.
upekfA, maitn-karuna-mudita^upek-
sAnam*. 88. •


47


[e.o.a. n]


Appendix 7


ubhaya, ufehaya^anavadhilranam iv.

20 .

ptambhara, rtaiiibharn tatra prajiia

i. 48.

eka, prayojakam cittam ekam iv. 5 ;
eka-citta-tantram iv. 16; eka^atmata

ii. 6; eka-rnpatvai iv. 9; eka-tattva^
abhyasah i. 3- ; eka-samaye iv. 20.

ekat&nat&, pratyaya^ekatanata iii. 2.
ekatra, trayam ekatra samyamah iii.
ekatva, parinama^ekatvfit iv. 14.
ek&grata, cittasya^ekagnUfi iii. 12;

sarvftrthat&^ekagrata iii. 11.
ek&grya, saumanasya w ekagrya^ind ri-
ya-jaya ii. 41,

*»tad, etay&iva savicara i. 44 ; etena
bhQtendriyesu iii. 13.
eva, i. 44, i. 46, ii. 6. ii. 15, ii. 21,

iii. 3, iv. 8.


o?adhi, janma^osadhi-manti a iv. 1.


ka, tada kim syat iv. 16.
kantaka, jala-pahka-kantaka iii. 39.
kantha, kantha-kQpe iii. 30.
kathamta, janma-kathamtR-saiiibodlia

ii. 39.

karana, saksat-karanftt iii. 18.
karun&,maitr]-karunfl-mudita^iipeksn
i. 33.

karman, kle^a-karma-vipaka i 24 :
kle 9 a-karma-nivrttih iv. 30 ; karmn^
&9aya ii. 12 ; nirupakramam ca
karma iii. 22 ; karma^a<;*ukla^
akrsnam iv. 7. *
kalpita, bahir%kalpita iii. 43.
kfiya, kaya^indriya-siddhih ii. 43 ;
kaya-iQpa-samyamfit iii. 21 ; kaya-
vyQha-jnanam iii. 29 ; kaya-sampat

iii. 46, 46; kaya w akft 9 ayoh sem-
bandha iii. 42.


[870

k&raaa, bandhn-kflrann- 9 aithil} f fit iii.
38.*

k&rita, krta-k.irita^anmnodita ii. 34.
kSritva, iv. 24.

k&la, de 9 a kala ii- 31, ii. 60, iv. 9 ;
dlrgha-kala nairantarya i. 14 ; ka-
le na^anavacchedat i. 26.
kim, tada kirn syat iv. 16.
kiipa, kantha-kflpe iii. 30.
kurma, karma-nadyam iii. 31.
krta, krta w artha ii. 22, iv. 32.
kaivalya, saiiiyogfibhrivv hanaiii tad-
di* 9 eh kaivalyam ii. 25 ; sattva-
purusayoli ^uddhi-samye kaivalyam
iii. 55 ; dosa-blja-ksaye kaivalyam
iii. 50; gunanam pratiprpsavah kai-
valyam iv. 34 ; kaivalya-pragbhararii
cittam yr. 26.

kramaf k^ana-pratiyogT parinftma ^apa-
ranta-nirgrahyah^rkramah iv. 33 ;
parinama-krama iv. 32 ; ksana-tat-
kramayohiii. 52; krama w anyatvam

iii. 45.

kriyft, kriyft-yogali ii. I ; kriya-phala
• ii. 86 ; prakuva-kriyS ii. 18.
krodha, lobha-krodha-moha ii. 34.
klista, vrttayah pancatayyali klis-
ta^aklistah i. 5.

klega, panca kle 9 Sh ii. 3 ; kleya-mfila-
karma^aya iii. 12 ; kle^a-karma-
vipaka i. 24 ; kle^a-kanna-nivrttih

iv. 30 ; kle 9 a-taiiQkaran;i ii. 2 :
hanam esarii kle^a-vad uktam iv. 28.

k$&na, ksana-pratiyogl . . . kramab

iv. 33; ksana-tat-kramayoh samya-
mat iii. 52; nirocfta-ksana iii. 9.
ksaya, ksaya-udayau iii. 11 ; praka-
9a w fivarana-ksava iii. 43 ; dosa-brja-
ksaya iii. 50 ; a 9 uddhi-ksa} r & ii. 28*
43.

k$i, tatah ksTyate praktya^Rvaranajn
ii. 52 ; ksTna-vrtteh i. 41.
kfudh, ksut-pipftsa iii. 30.


371J


Index of Words m the Siitvas


kfetra, avidya ksetram ii. 4.
kfetrika, varana-bhedas tu tatah ksetri-
ka-vat iv. 8.

khyati, purusa-khyater guna-vaitrsn-
yam i. 16; atma-khyati ii. 15;
viveka-khyftii ii. 26, ii. 28. iv. 29 :
anyata-khyati iii. 49. *

gati, gati-vicchedah ii. 19 ; dhruve tad-
gati-jnanam iii. 28.
gamana, Akaya-gamanam iii. 42.
guna, guna-vrtti ii. 15 ; guna-vAitrsn-
yam i. 16 ; guna-parvani ii. 19 ; te
vyakta-sGksma guna^atrnAnah iv.
13 ; gunanAiii pratiprasavah iv. 34 ;
bamapar gunAnAm iv. 32.
guru, pUrvesAm api guruh i. 26.
grahana, grahana-grahyesuHatstha-tad-
anjanatA samApattih i. 4 P; grahana -
svarUpa w asmit&- iii. 47.
grahitr, grahitr-grahana-grRhyesu i. 41.
grahya, grahltr-grahana-grAhyesu i.41 ;
tad-grahya-yakti-stambhe iii. 21.

ca, abhAvay ca i. 29 ; nirvicAracai. 44; j
visayatvarh ca i. 45 ; ailluiy ca ii. 2’; 1
virodhftc ca ii. 15 ; yogyatvftni ca

ii. 41 ; dharAna.su ca ii. 53 ; nacatad
sAlambanam iii. 20 ; iurupakramam
caiii. 22 ; sariivedanAc ca iii. 38 ; ut
krantiy ca iii. 39 ; samApattey ca iii.
42 ; anabhighatay ca iii. 45 ; pradha-
na-jayay ca iii. 48 ; sarva-jfiatrtvarii

ca ii»\ 49 ; akrainaiii ca ,iti iii. 54 ;

anftditvam ca iv. 10 ; na ca ekacitta-
tantram hr. 16 4 ekasamaye ca iv. 20 ;
sariikaray ca iv. 21.
cakra, nRbhi-cakre iii. 29.
cak^ufi, caksuh-pr&kiya iii. 21.
oaturtha, visaya^aksepi caturthah ii.
51.

fcaadra, candre t&ra-vyaha-jfi&nam iii.

* 7 .


citi, citer apratisamkrainayah iv. JJ
svarapa-pratisthA vA citiyaktih iv. \A
ottta, yogay citta-vrtti-nirodhdi 1 .
citta-vrttayah iv. 18 ; cittmn .ip-
parftrtham iv. 23 ; deya-Landi^
cittasya iii. 1 ; uparaktaiii nMam
iv. 23; uparAga^apeksitvac cittji<;\ rl
iv. 17 ; visayam vA cittam i. 37 ; <*k.t
citta- tantram iv. 16; vastu-samy*
citta-bhedat iv. 15 ; usamprayoga
cittasya ii. 54 ; citta-viksepa i. 50 ,
citta-prasadanam i. 53 ; cittasya^ek.i-
grata iii. 12; nirmlha-ksana-citta^An
vayo nirodhaparinAmah iii. 9 ,
pravrttibhed e prayojakarii citt am
ekam aneke^Am iv. 5 ; citta^antara*
dryye iv. 21 ; para-citta-jiiAnam iii.
19 ; citta-suriivit iii. 34 ; cittasya
para-yarlra^Aveyah iii. 38 ; nirmAna-
cittAni iv. 4 ; ksaya^udayAu cittasya

iii. 11.

cetana, pratyak-cetanA i. 29.

cmdra, tac-chidresu pratyava^autarani

iv. 27.

a, taj-jah samskarali i. 50 ; viveka-jain
jMnam iii. 52, iii. 54 ; Mim&dhi-jah
siddhayah iv. 1 ; dhyAna-jam anay*
yam iv. 6.

jan, virtta jayante iii. 36.

janma, janma-kathariitA-sambodha ii.

39 ; adrsU-janma ii. 12 ; janma^osa-
dhi-mantra iv. 1.

japa,taj-japas tad-artha-bhAvanam i. 28.
jaya, taj-jayAt pngnA^ftlokah iii. 5 ;
udAna-jayRt iii. 30 ; samAna-jayAt iii.

40 ; iodrjya-jaya ii, 44. iii. 47 ; bhQta-
jayah iii. 44 ; pradhAna-jaya iii. 48.

jala, jala-panka-kaptaka iii. 39.
javitva,»mano-javitvam iii. 48.
jftti, pUrva-jati iii. 18 ; jaty-antara-
paripAdbiv. 2 j^iti-deya-kala-samaya


Appendix 7


u. 31 ; jaty-ftyur-bhogfth ii. 13 ; jftti*
laksana-defiir anyata iii. 52 ; jftti*
defa-k&la-vyavahita iv. 9.
jugupsft, sva^anga-jugupsft ii. 40.
jfla, nirati$ayam sarvajfiabljam i 25.
j&ita, sadft jnfttft? citta-vrttayah iv. 18 ;

vastu-jnftta^ajnfttam iv. 17.
jfi&trtva, sarva-jnatrtvam iii 49.
jfi&na, mithyfijnftnam i. 8 ; $abda-
jfiftna^anupfttl i. 9; svapna-nidrft-
jfiana^alambanam v& i. 88 ; $ab-
da^artharjnlna i. 42 ; anagata-jn&nam
iii 16; sarva-bhQta-ruta-jnftnam iii,
17 ; pOrva-jftti-jfianam iii. 18 ; para*
citta-jn&nam iii. 19 ; aparinta-jfiftnam
iii. 22 ; viprakrsta-jn&nam iii. 25 ;
bhuvana-jnftnam iii. 26 ; t&rJvyUha-
jnftnam iii. 27 ; tad-gati-jnAnam iii.
28; k&ya-vyQha-jn&nam iii. 35 ;
viveka-jam jn&nam iii. 52, iii. 54 ;
mala^apetasya jfi&nasya iv. 81 ;
jfiana-dlptir a viveka-khy&teh iL 28.
jfieya, jneyam alpam iv. 31.
jyotifmant, vi$okft vft jyotismatl i. 86.
jyotis, murdha-jyotisi iiL 82. .
jvalana, sam&na-jayaj jvalanam iii.' 40.

tad, 1. tan-nirodah i. 12 ; tat param i.
16 ; tad-artha i. 28 ; taj-japa i 28 ; tat*
pratisedha^artham i. 82 ; tat-stha i.
41 ; tad-afijana i 41 ; taj-jah i. 50 ;
tad-vrtUyah ii. 11 ; tad-vipftka ii. 18 ;
tad-artha ii. 21 ; tad-anya-eftdhftrana

ii. 22 ; Ud-dr$eh ii 25 ; tad-abh&vftt

ii 25 ; Ut-sannidhftu ii 85 ; tad eva

iii. 8 ; Uj-jayftt iii 5 ; tad api iii 8 ;
tatpravibh&ga iii«I7 ; tat <Alambanara

iii 20; tadgsfthy a iii 21 ; Ut-samya-
m&t iii 22; tad-gati iii 28; tad-
dharma iii. 45 ; tad-v&irftgy&t iii 50 ;
tabkramayoh iii. 52; tad-vip^ka iv. 8 ;
tad-abhftvah iv.ll ; tad apramftpakam

iv. 16 ; tad-uparaga iv. 1% tat-pra-


[372

bhoh iv. 18 ; na tat sv&bh&sam iv.19 ;
Ud-ftkftra^ftpatt&u iv. 22 ; tad aaam*
khyeya- iv. 24 ; tao-chidresu iv. 27.

2. tasya hptuh ii. 24 ; tasya vftcakah

i. 27 ; tasya^avisayl iii. 20 ; tasya
bhomisu iii 6 ; tasya praf&nta- iii. 10 ;
tasya sapU&hft ii. 27 ; tasya w api
nirodhe i 51.

3. tasmin sati ii. 49.

4. tayor vibhaktah panth&h iv. 15.

5. teantarftyfthi.80; tepratiprasava-
heyfthii. 10; tehlftdapariUpaphal&h

ii. 14 ; te samftdhftv upasargah iii
87 ; te vyakta-soksm&h iv. 18.

6. tft eva sabjjah samftdhih i. 46.

7. t&sftm an&ditvam iv. 10.

8. From the stem aa, sa tu dlrgha*
kala- i. 1£.

tadft, tai\ drastuh i. 3 ; tada viveka-
ninmam iv. 26 ; tajj.l, sarva^Jtvarapa

iv. 81 ; tadft kim syftt iv. 16.
tana, prasupU-tanu-vicohinna^udftrft*
pftm ii. 4.

tantra, eka-citta-tantram iv. 16.

Ujpas, mantra-Upah-sam&dhi iv. 1 ;
tapah -svftdhy&ya- tyvarapranidh&a&ni
ii 1 ; samtosa-Upah-sv&dhy&ya ii. 32 ;
a^uddhi-ksayftt tapaaah ii 43.
tftpa, paripftma-tftpa ii 15.
tftraka, tftrakam sarva-visayam iii. 54.
tftrft r tftrft-vyoba iii. 27.
tivra, tl vra-sam veg&nam i. 21.
tataa, tato 'pi i. 22 ; Utah pratyak-
oetanft i. 29 ; tato dvandva^anabhi-
ghfttah ii. 48 ; Utah kslyate ii 62 ;
UUh paramft va^yatft ii# 55 ; tatah
punah fftntoditaa iii 12 ; Utah prft-
tibha iii. 36 ; Utah prakftfa iii 48 ;
tato 'pimftdi iii 45 ; tato manojavi*
tvam iii 48 ; Utah pratipattikiii 58 ;
Utah Iwetrikavat iv. 8.
tattva, paripftmftikatvftd vastu^Uttvant
iv. 14 ; eka-Uttva^abhyftsah i 82.


373 ]


Index of Words in the Sutras


tatra, tatra stkit&u i. 13 ; tatra nirati*
$ayam i. 25; tatra cabda^artha-
jfiAna-vikalp&ih i 42 ; rtambhara
tatra prajift i. 48 ; tatra pratyay^eka-
tanata iii. 2 ; tatra dhyftna-jam anft-
9 ayam iv. 6.
tathft, tatha rodho i. 9.
tu, sa tu dlrghakftla i. 14 ; varana-
bhedas tu iv. 3.

t ulya, tulyayos tatahpratipattih iii. 53 ;
tulya-pratyayfiu iii. 12.

^iila f laghu-tula iii. 42.

Vtaffa* vaira-tyagah ii. 35.
traya, trayam ekatra iii. 4 ; parin&ma*
traya iii. 16; trayam antarangam iii.
7,

trividha, trividham itaresam iv. 7.

d&ryana, fttma-daryana ii. dig-

daryaua ii. 6 ; si<Mha-daryana iii 32 ;
viycaa-daryana iv. 25; bhrAnfci-dai-
$ana i. 80.

divya, divyam yrotram iii. 41.
dlpti, jnftna-dipti ii. 28.
dfrgha, dlrgha-aaksma ii. 50 ; dirghaj
k&la i. 14.

du^ikha, heyarii duhkham ii. 16 ; duh-
kham eva sarvam ii. 15 ; duhkha^a-
jnflna^ananta-phaiah ii. 34; ayuci-
duhkha^an&taiMU ii. 5 ; sukha-duh-
kha-pimya^apuijyaviflayanam i. 33 ;
duhkha^&nuyayl dveeah ii. 8 ; duh-
kha-dAurmanaaya i. 81 ; samakora-
duhkhAih ii. 15. .
drk, drg-darysna ii 6.
dpjha, d^ha-bhOQtih i 14.
dpgi, tad dryeh k&ivalyain ii. "> ; dryi-
mfttraii. 20.

' dnffr-dryya ii. IV, iv. 23 ; tad-

artha sva dryyasya^Atma ii. 21 ;
apavarga^artham dryyam ii. 18;
*oitta^antara-d{-yy« iv. 21.
df 97 «tya, ibhlsam dfyyatvat iv. 19.


drffa, drsta^adrsta ii. 12 ; drata^anu-
yravika i. 15.
devatft, ista-devata ii. 44.
deya, deya-bandhay cittasya iii. 1 ; deya-
k&la-sarhk hyabhih ii. 50 ; jati-laksana-
deyAihiii. 63 ; jAti-deya-kala-vyavahi
t?nam iv. 9 ; jAti-deya-kala-samaya
ii. 31.

doya, dosa-bija-ksaye iii. 60.
d&nrmanasya, i. 81.
draffr, drastr-dryyayoh ii. 17, iv. 23 ;
drastft dryimatrali ii. 20 ; tadft dra-
stuh svarQpe ‘vasth&nam i. 3.
dvaudva, dvandva^anabbighatah ii.
48.

dveea, raga-dve&a^abhiniveya ii. 3 ;
duhkha^anuyayl dvesah ii. 8.

dharma, 1. external aspect , dhai
ma^anup&tl dharm' iii. 14 ; dharma-
laksana^avastba iii. 13 ; kaya-sampat
tad-dharma^anabhigh&tay ca iii. 45 ;
adhva-bhed&d dharm&nam iv. 12.

2. [knowable] thing, dharaia-meghah
samAdhih iv. 29.

dc rmin, dharma^anupAtl dbarmi ni.

. t.

dhtraga, aeya-bandhay cittasya dhai -
apA iii. 1 ; dhAtanA-dhyAna-samAdhi
ii. 29 ; dh&rapSsu ca yogyatA niana-
sah ii. 58.

dhy&na, tatra pratyaya^ekatAnatA
dhyAnam iii. 2 ; -dbyAna-samAdhayo
ii 29 ; dhyAna-heyAs tad-vrttayah
ii 11 ; yathA^abhimata-dhyAoAd va
i. 38 ; dby&najam anAyayam iv. 6.
dhruva, dh ruve tad-gati ii i 28.

na, na ca tat sAlambanata iii 20 ; nu
ca^eka-oitta-tantram ii 16 ; na tat
svAbhAsam iv. 19 .
nafta, na^am spy anaa$am ii 22.
nidi, konna-nlgyam iii 81.
n&bhi, nAhfci-eakretii. 29 .


Appendix 7 [374


nitya, nitya- 9 uci-sukha w atma-khyati

ii. 6.

nityatva, a^iso nityatvat iv. 10. •

nidr&, abhava-pratyaya^alambana vrt-
tir nidra i. 10 ; nidra-smrtayah i 6 ;
svapna-nidra-jn&na w alambanami.38.
nibandhanin, sthlti-nibandlia®! i. 35.
nimitta, nimittam aprayojakam iv. 3/
ninma, viveka-nimnam iv. 26.
niyama, yama-myama- ii. 29 ; 9 auca*
samtosa - tapah - svftdhyfiya -tyvarapra-
nidhankni niyamfih ii. 32.
niratigaya, niratigayam aarvajnabljam
i. 25.

nirupakrama, sopakramam nirupakra-
mam ca karma iii. 22.
nirodha, vogagcitta-vrtti-nirodhah i. 2 ;
abhyasa-v&ir&gyftbhyaih tan^niro-
dhah i. 12 ; tasya^api nirodhe sarva-
nirodhftn nlrbljah samadhih i. 61 ;
vyutthftna-nirodha-samskarayorabhi-
bhava-pradurbhftvau nirodha-ksana-
citta^anvayo nirodhaparinfimah iii. 9.
nirgrahy&, aparanta-nirgrahyah kra-
mah iv. 88.

nirbija, aarya-nirodhan nirbljah sama-
dhih i. 51 ; tad api bahirahgam nir-
bijasya iii. 8.

nirbh&aa, artha-mati-a-nirbhasam i. 43,

iii. 3.

nirm&pa, nirmana-citt&ni iv. 4.
nirvic&ra, savicara nirvic&rft ca sOksma-
visayft i. 44 ; nirvic&ra- vaig&r&dye
’dhy&tmapras&dah i. 47.
nirvitarka ) smrti-pari 9 uddhau svarQpa-
^Qnya^ivft^^&rthamatra-nirbhasanir-
vitarka i. 48. #

nivrtti, pipfisa-nivrtti iii. 30 ; klega-
karma-nivrttih iv. 80; atma-bhava-
bh&vanA-nivrttih iv. 25.
n&irantarya, dlrghakalamairantarya-
i. 14.

ny&aa, aloka-ny&at iii §6.


paflka, jala-panka-kantaka iii. 39.
palioa, panca klegah ii. 3.
pafloataya, vrttayah pancatayyah i. 5.
panthan, vibhaktah panth&h iv. 15.
para, 1. other, cittam api para^artham

iv. 24 ; bhogah para w arthatv&t iii.
35 ; parj^rlra^aveyah iii. 38 ; para-
citta-jnanam iii. 19 ; par&ir asamsar-
gahii 40;

2. higher, tat param [v&ir&gyam] i. 16.
parama, parama va^yatfl ii. 55 ; paramo-
mahattva^anta i. 40.
param&nu, paramanu-pai’&mamaha^va
i. 40.

parinama, dharma-laksana w avasth&-
parinama iii. 13 ; parinftma-traya

iii. 16 ; parinama-krama iv. 32 ;
kram | ^anyatvam parinama^any-
at\te Jtietuh iii. 15 ; parinama^apa-
ranta iv. 33 ; p£#inama-t&pa-samska-
raih ii. 15 ; jaty-antara-parinama

iv. 2 ; parinama^ekatvad vastu-
tattvam iv. 14 ; cittasya w ek&grat&-
parin&mah iii. 12 ; nirodha-parin&ma
iii. 9 ; samadhi-parin&ma iii. 11.

parit&pa, hl&da-parit&pa ii. 14.
paridre$a» samkhyabhih paridrsta ii.
50.

parignddhi, smrti-pariguddhi i. 43.
paryavaaana, alinga-paryavasanam i,
45.

parvan, guna-parv&ni ii. 19.
pip&8&, ksut-pipasa iii. 30.
pupya, pupya^apunya i. 38, ii. 14.
punar, tatah punah gantodit&u iii. 12 ;

punar anis^aprasangat iii. 51.
puruga, sattva-puru^ayor atyanta-
samkirnayoh iii. 85 ; tat-prabhoh
purusasya iv. 18 ; sattva-purusa^if-
yata-khyatimatra iii. 49 ; purusa-
khjater guna-vaitrspyam i 16 ;
sva^artha-saihyamftt purasa-jfilnam
iii. 85 ; purufa^itha-gQnyam iv. 84 ;


375 ]


Index of Word*

sattva-purusayoh fuddhi-samye kai*
valyam iii. 55 ; purusa-v^esa Tyvarah

i. 24.

purva, abhyfiaa-pQrvah L 18 ; antaran '
gam pQrvebhyah iii, 7 ; ptirva-jati
iii. 18;. pQrvesam api guruh i.
26.

purvaka, prajna-parvaka i. 20 ; moha-
purvakah ii. 34.

pr&k&Qa, praka^a-kriya-sthiti ii. 18 ;
caksuh-prak& 9 & iii. 21 ; praka 9 a w ava-
rana-ksaya ii. 52, iii. 43.
prakrti, prakrty-apQrat iv. 2 ; prakrti-
nam varana-bhedas iv. 3.

Frakftilaya, bhavapratyayo Videlia-
Prakrt^ayanam i. 19.
praoara, prac&ra-samvedanac ca iii. 38.
pracchardana, i. 34.
prajite, samadhi-prajfia ^ 3P ; pranta-
bhQmihpraf^a ii. 27 ; prajfia^alokah
iii. 6 ; rtambhara tatra praj&a i. 48 ;
^ruta^anumana-prajnabhyam i. 49.
pranava, vacakah pranavah i. 27.
pra$idh&na, i 9 vara-pranidhana i. 28,

ii. 1, ii. 32, ii. 46. #

prati, krta w artham prati Ii. 22.
pratipakga, pratipakaa-bh&vanam ii.

38, 34.

pratipatti, anavacchedat tulyayos ta-
tah pratipattih iii. 53.
pratipras&va, gunauam pratiprasavah
iy. 84 ; pratiprasavaheyfth ii. 10.
pratibandhin, anya-sariiskara-prati-
bandlii i. 50.

pratiyogin, ksana-pratiyogT iv. 83.
prati^edha, tat-pratisedha w artham i.
32.

prati^thft, a-tadrQpa-pratistham i. 8 ;
ahihsft-pr 0 ii. 35 ; flatya*pr° ii. 36 ;
asteya-pr 0 ii. 87 ; brahma-carya*pr c
ii. 88 ; kftiv&lyam svavQpa pratistha
va citifaktih iv. 84.
jgratgak y pratyak-cet&na i. 29.


; iv the Sutras •

pratyakfa, pratyaksa^num&na i. 7
pratyaya, 9 abda^artha-pratyayanam
iii. 17; pratyaya^avi^esa iii. 35 ;
bhava-pratyaya i. 19 ; puddho pi
pratyaya^anupa 9 yah ii. 20 ; pratyu-
ya^antarftni samskftrebhyah iv. 27 ;
pratyayasya para-citta-jiiftnam m
19 ; 9 &ntoditftu tulyapratyayau oil
tasya iii. 12 ; virama-pratyaya i. J-S ,
abhava- pratyaya i. 10 ; pratyaya
^katanata iii. 2.

praty&h&ra, pratyahara-dharana ii,
29 ; svavisaya^asamprayoge cittasyn
svarUpa^anukara iva^indriy.inAiii
praty&hurah ii. 64.
pradhfcna, pradh&na-jayag ca iii. 48.
pr&mana, pramana-viparyaya- i. 6 .
pratyaksa^anumana^agamah pra-
man&ni i. 7.

pram&da, sam 9 aya-pram&da w akb\ a
i. 30.

prayatna, prayatna^aithilya ii. 47.
prayojaka, prayojakaiii cittam ekain
iv. 5.

pravibh&ga, tat-pravibhaga-saiiiyanidt
iii. 17.

pravrtti, visayavati pravrttih iv. 5 ;
pravrtty-aloka-nyflsat iii. 25 ; pra-
vrtti-bhede prayojakaiii cittam ekam
anekesftm iv. 5.

praganta, pra 9 &nta-vabita iii. 10.
pragv&sa, 9 vasa-pra 9 vasa i. 31, n.
49.

pr&aamkhyana, prasamkhyan*
akusldasya iv. 29.
praaanga, auista-prosangat iii. 51.
prasada, adhyftma-pras&da i. 47
prasupta, prasuf>ta-tanu-vicc
udftrftnam ii. 4.

prftgbh&ra, kaivalya-prJlgbhiUam iv.

2k

prfrpa, pracchardana- v idh&r an&bhy a m
prft^asya i.^4.


Appendix 7 [376


pr&Q&yiima, pr&n&y&ma-praty&h&ra- ii.
29.

pr&tibha, pratibhad va sarvam iii. 83 ;

pratibha-^ravana- iii. 36.
pradus, pradur-bhavah iii. 3, 45,
pr&nta, pranta-bhnmih prajnft ii. 27.

phala, duhkha^ajnana^ananta-phalfili

ii. 34 ; hlada-paritapa-phalah ii. 14 ;

kriya-phala^aprayatvam ii. 3G ; hetn 1
phala^a$raya w alambanaih iv. 11. ,

bandha, de<;a*bandha? cittasya iii. 1 :

bandha-karana-c&ithilyat iii. 38.
bala, ropadavanyft-bala-vajrasamhana*
natvani in. 46 ; mftitrl-adisu bal&ni
ui. 23 ; balesu hasti-bala^ftdlni iii.
24.

bahir-akalpita, bahirakalpita vrttih

iii. 43.

bahiranga,bahirahgam nirbljnsya iii. 8.
badhana, vitarka-budhan© pratipaksa
bhavanam u. 33.

bahya, bahya^abhyantara ii. 60, 61.
bija, dona bija-ksaye iii. 60 ; sarvajna*
bijain i. 25.

buddhi, buddhibuddher atipraaangah

iv. 21 ; sva-buddhi-saiiivedanam iv.

22 .

brahmacarya, asteya-brahmacarya- ii.
80; brahmacarya-pratisthayam vli*
ya-labhah ii. 38.

bhava, bhava-pratyaya i. 19.
bh&va, atraa-bhava-bhavana iv. 25 ;
sarva-bhav%^ad’Msthatrtvam iii. 49;
vikarant-bhavah iii. 48 ; pradur-
bhavah iii. 45.

bhavana, pratipaksa-bhavanam ii. 88-
34 ; tad-artha-bhavanam i. 28.
bh&van&, bhavan&ta^ citta-praaadfinam

i. 33 ; atmapbh&va-jph&vana iv. 26 ;
samadhi-bhiivana^arthah ii. 2 .
bhuvana, bhuvana-jnfinam iii. 26.


bhttta, 1. element, bhota^ndriya ii.
18^ iii . 18 ; bhflkta-jayah iii. 44.

2. creatitre, aarva-bhata-ruta iii. 17.
8. participle in aviaayibhutatv&t iii.
20 . .

bhumi, drdha-bhQmih i. 14 ; pr&nta-
bhQmih ii. 27 ; tasya bhomiau vini-
yogah iii. 6; alabdhabhumikatva

i. 80.’

bheda, adhva-bhedftt iv. 12 ; pravrcti-
bhede iv. 6 ; citta-bhedat iv. *5 ;
prakrtlnaiii Y&rana-bhedah iv. 8.
bhoga, jaty-ayur-bhogah ii. 13 ; bho-
ga^apa varga ii. 18 ; pratyaya^avi-
9680 bhogah iii. 35.

bh&uma, sarva-bhauma mahavratam

ii. 3*1.

bhfafiti, bhranti-darcana l 80.


mani, abhijatasya^iva maneh i. 41,
m&dhya, mrdu-madhya^adhimfitra

i. 22, ii. 84. '

manas, mano-javitvam iii. 48 ; mana-
sah sthiti i. 85 ; yogyatfl manasali ii.
6S!

mantra, osadhi-mantra-tapah iv. 1.
mala, avarana-mala iv. 81.
mahant, maha-videha iii. 43; maha-
vratam ii. 81.

m&tra, artha-matra i. 43, iii. 3 ; dryi-
matra ii. 20 ; anyata-khyati-mfltra

iii. 49 ; asmita-matra iv. 4 ; linga-
matra ii. 19.

mithyft, mithya-j&anam i. 8.
mudita, maitrf-karuna-mudita^upek-
sanam i. 88.

murdhan, mllrdha-jyotiai iii. 32. «
mula, kle9amQ}ah karma9aya ii. 4 12 ;

sati male tad-vipakah ii. 18.
mrftu, mrdu-madhya w adhimatr* i. 22.

ii. 84. i

megha, dharma-mogb^h samadhili iv.
29. v


317] Index of Words in the Suttas


mftitpi, m&itrl-karuna-mudita^upek-
s&p&m i. 88; mRitrl^&disu balfini

iii. 28.

moha, lobha-krodha-mohah ii. 34.

yatna, tatra stbitau yatno ’bbyawh

i. 18.

yathft, yath&^abhimatadhyan&d v& i.

89.

yama, yami-uij^!?®- “• 29 ; ahinsa-
satya^teya - brahmacarya^ap«^~
Vgrahft yamfih ii. 30.

yoga^anugftsanam i. 1 ; yoga?
Salta-vrtti-nirodbah i. 2 ; kriyft.
yoga h ii. 1 ; yoga^anga^anusthfir
nat ii. 28.

p?ukla^ akrsnam yoginas iv. 7.
yogyatfi, yog^atft manasah ii. 53.
yogyatva, fttma-dargarfa-yogyatv&ni ca

ii. 41.

ratna, sarva-ratna^upasthabam ii. 87.
rasa, sva-rasa-v&hi ii. 9.
raga, sukha^anugayi rfigah ii. 7 ; rftga-
dvesa^bhiniveg&h panca klcgah ii.
3 ; vlta-raga-vipayam i. 37.
rup&, kRya-rflpa-samyam&fc iii. 21 :
rtlpa-lavanya-bala iiL 46 ; sva-mpa-
pratisthft iv. 34 ; 8va-rQpa-?anyam
iVa iii. 8 ; sva-rdpa^anukara iva ii.
54 ; sva-rapa^upalabdhi-samyogah
ii. 23 ; a-tadrQpa-pratistham i. 8 ;
vitarka- vicara^ananda^asmita - rGpa
i. 17.

rupatva, eka-r a pat vat iv. 9.


lak$ana, dharma-laksana^avastha iii.
13 ; j&ti-laksana-deg&ih iii. 53.


laghu, laghu-tnla iii. 42.
l&bha, vlrya-labha li88 ; suklia-labhah
ii^ 42.

l&vanya, rojv i-lavapya-bala iii. 46.


linga, linga-m&tr&m ii. 19.
lobha, lobha-krodha-mohah ii. 84.


vajra, vaj ra-samhananatva iii. 46.
vat, ksetrika-vat iv. 8 ; klega-vat iv.
28.

varana, prakrtlnam varana-bhedah iv.

8 .

vagikara, paramamahattva^anto ’sya
vagikarah i. 40 ; vaglkara-sarii|na i.
15.

vastu, vastu jnfiti^ajfiatam iv. 17 ;
vastu-gQnyo vikalpah i. 9 ; vastu -
sftmye cittabhedat iv. 15; parinRma^,
ekatvad vastu-tattvam iv. 14 ; eka-
citta-tantram vastu iv. 16.

V&, Igvara-pranidhinad va i. 28 ; vidha-
ranabhyam va i. 34 ; visa^avatl va
r. 35 ; vigoka va i. 36 ; vLsayam va
i. 37 ; alambanam va i. 38 ; dhyanad
va i. 39 ; aristebhyo va iii. 33 ; pra*
tibhad va iii. 33 ; sva-rQpa-pratistha
va iv. 84.

vacaka, tasya vacakah pranavah i. 27.
v&rtt^ -asvada-varita iii. 36. >

v&aaxi abhivyaktir vasananam iv. 8 ;

asamkhyeya-vasanabhi? iv. 24.
v&b*t&, pra?anta-vahita iii. 10.
v&hin, sva-rasa-vahi ii. 9.
vikarana, vikarana-bhRvah iii. 48.
vikalpa, pramana-viparyaya-vikalpa-
nidra-smrtayah i. 6 ; gabda-jn&na^
anupatl vastu-gQnyo vikalpah i. 9 ;
gabda^artha-juRna-vikalpaih sam-
klrna savitarka sam&pattih i. 42.
vikgepa, citta-viksepa i. 30 ; viksepa-
s&habhuvah i. 31.

vie&ra, vitarka-vicara^n Ada^asmita
i. 17.

vioohinna, prasupta-tanu-vicchinna ii.
4.

viooheda, gati-viccheda ii. 49.


Appendix 7


vitarka, 1. deliberation [upon coarse ob-
jects ], vitarka- vicara w ftnanda- i. 17.

2. perverse consideration , vitafka
hinsadayah krta-karita^anumoditah
ii. 84 ; vitarka-badhane pratipaksa-
bhavanam ii. 38.
vit^a, visaya-vitrsniasya i. 16.

Videha, Videha-Prakrtilayanam i. 19 ;
bahir-akalpiia vrtlir mah^videha iii.
48.

vidvans, viduso 'pi ii. 9.
vidh&rana, pracchardana-vidharana-

bhvatii i. 34.

vimyoga, bhQmisu viniyogah iii. 6.
vmivrtti, bhavana-vinivrttih iv. 26.
viparyaya, pramana - viparyaya - vikal-
pa- i. 6; viparyayo mithyajnanam
atadrQpapratistham i. 8.
vipaka, klefa - karma - vipaka w apa-
ramrstah i. 24 ; satimQle tad-vipako
jaty-ayur-bho^ah ii. 18 ; vipaka^
anuguninam . t . vusananSm iv. 8.
viprakffta, viprakrsta-jnftnam iii.
25 .

vibhakta, vibhaktah panthah iv. 16. “
virama, virama - pratyaya^abhyasa-
pQrvah i. 18.

virodha, guna-vrtti-virodhac ca ii. 16.
viveka, viveka-nimnam kaivalya-prag-
bharam cittam iv. 26 ; viveka-khyati

ii. 26, ii. 28, iv. 29 ; viveka-jam
jnanam iii. 54 ; viveka-jam dhyanam

iii. 52.

vivekin, duhkham eva sarvam vive-
kinah ii. 15.

vigeea, 1. the^partv vlar, purusa-vi^esa

1. 24; eri9esa w arthatvat L 49; vi-
fesa^avifesa ii. 19.

2 . the distinction , tato *pi vifesah i.
2fc; vi^sa-da^inah iv. 25.

▼iQoka, vi9oka va jyotismati i. 86.
vifaya, anubhata-vis^ya i. 11 ; vfoaya-
vitranaflya L 15 ; sva-visaya^aaam-


[378

prayoge cittasya ii. 64 ; tarakam
sarva - visayam sarvathft-vijsayam
akramam ceti vivekajam jftanam iii.
54 ; prajfiabbyam anya-visaya i. 49 ;
sa vicar* nirvieftra ca soksma-visaya
i. 44 ; apunya-vteayanam i. 83 ;
b&hya^abnyantara-visaya ii. 51 ;
vitarftga-visayam i. 37.
vifayatva, BQksma-visayatvam c
alinga-paryavas&nam i. 45.
vifayavant, visayavatl vft pravrttih i.
85.

vita, vltar&ga-visayam i. 87.
virya, ^raddha-vlrya-smrti-samadhi-
prajria i. 20 ; brahmacarya-pratistha-
yam virya-labhah ii. 88.
vrtti, yogaf citta-vrtti-nirodhah i. 2 ;
vrtt&yah paficatayyahklista^aklistah
i. *6 {the list forms the next sutra] ;
vrttir nidra i. * 0 ; sada jnata9 citta-
vrttayas tat-prabhoh purusasya w apa-
rinamitvat iv. 18 f vrtti-sarQpyam
.1. 4 ; guna-vrtti-virodhftc ca ii. 15 ;
babya^abhyantara-stambha-vrttih ii.
50 ; dhyana-heyas tad-vrttayah ii. 11;
ksina-vrtteh i. 41 ; bahir-akalpita
vrttih iii. 48.

vedana, vedana^adar^a^Rsvftda- iii. 86.
vedaniya, janma-vedaniyah ii. 12.
v&itrfnya, guna-vaitrsnyair , 16.
v&ira, vaira-tyagah ii. 85.
vair&gya, drsta w anu9ravika-visaya-
vitrsnasya va^karaeamjna vairagyam
i. 15; abhyasa-vairag) abhyam i. 12;
tad-vairagyad api dosa-blja-ksaye
kaivalyam iii.* 60.

v&iQ&radya, n i rvicara- vai 9a rad ye i. 47.
vyakta, vyakta-sQksmah iv. 18.
vyapadeQya, a-vyapad?9ya iii. 14.*
vyavahita, kala-yyfrahita iv. 9 ; atxka-
rta-vyavahita m. 26.
vy&khyita, p&ripama vyakhyaCah iii

13 * Iramn. viaavll vvftfck vttfrJI 1 . Ii.


*379] Index of Words in the Sutras


v/&dhi, vyadhi-styAna i. 30.
▼yutth&na, vyutthana-nirodha iiL 9 ;

vyutthane siddhayah iii. 37.

▼yuha, tarA-vyQha iii. 27 ; kAya-vytlha

iii. 29.

▼rata, maha-vratam iL 81.

gakti, svarQpa-pratistha va citigaktih

iv. 34 ; sva-svami-gaktyoh ii. 23 ;
tad-grAhya-g&kti iii. 21 ; drg-dargana-
yakti ii. 6.

gabda, gabda^artha-jnBna i. 42 ; gab-
da^artha-pratyayanam iii. 17 ; gabda*
jnEna^anupatl i. 9.

$arir&, para-ganra w avegah iii. 88.
g&nta, ganta^udita iii. 12 and 14.
gila, prakiiga-kriyA-sthiti-gilam ii. 18.
guoi,nitya-guci-sukha w Atma-khyAtiiL5.
guddha, drasta drgimAtrah guddho ’pi

ii. 20. m

guddhi, guddhj^ksaye iL ^8 ; sattva*
guddhiji. 41 ; guddhi-sAmye kaival-
yam iii , 85.

gunya, svarapa-ganyA^iva i. 48, iii. 8 ;
vastu-gtlBtyai.9; purusa w artha*ganya
iv. 34.

gega, samskAra-gesa i. 18.
g&ithilya, bandha-karana-c&ithilyAt iii.

38 g prayatna-gAithilya ii. 47.
gauoa, g&uca-samtosa* ii. 3^; gaucat
sva w anga-jugupsa ii. 40.
graddha, graddhA-vlrya-smrti-samAdhi-
praina i. 20.

gr&vana, pratibha-grAvana-vedana- iiL
86 . ’

grata, grut&^anumana i. 49.
grotra, grotra^^k Agay oh iii . 4 1 ; divyam
grotram iii. 41.

gy&aa, gvAsa-pragvAsa i. 31 iL 49.

ia, sa tu dttghakAla- L 14.
aaih 7 am%V|x«^^ ekatra aaifayamah
iiL 4 ; pariftAgra-traya whyamlt iiL
Hi ; t~pravibhiga-tiThyamat iiL 17 ;


*

kaya-rOpa-samyamAt iii. 21 ; karma
tat-sarayamBt iii. 22 f sttrye sam-
yamat iii. 26; sva^arlha-samyamat
m iii. 35 ; sambandha-samyamAt iii. 41,

iii. 42 ; arthavattva-samyamAt iii. 44,

iii. 47 ; ksapa-tat-kramayoh sam-
yam&t iii. 52.

samyoga, samyogo heya-hetuh ii. 17 ;
upalabdhi-hetu-samyogah ii. 23 ;
samyoga^abh&va ii. 25; ista-devatA-
samprayoga ii. 44.
samvid, citta-samvit iii. 34.
samvega, tivra-samveganam L 21.
samvedana, pracara-samvedanBc ca iiL
38 ; sva-buddhi-samvedanam iv. 22.
Bamgaya, sty&na-samgaya-prainAda L
30.

samskara, paripama-tApA-samskAra-
duhkhaih ii. 15 ; pratyaya^antar&ni
samskArebhyah iv. 27 ; taj-jah sam-
skaro ’nyasamskAra-pratibandhl i.
50 ; smrti-sfphakAraydr fekarQpatvAt

iv. 9 ; nirddha-samskarkyor abhi-
bhava-prAdurbhavAu iii. 9 ; pragAnta-
vahitA samskarat iii. 10 ; samskAra-
gesa L 18 ; saihskAra-sAksAt iiL 18.

t > dxhaty&kAritva, parArtham aamhat-
yakaritvat iv. 24.

samhananatva, vaj ra-samhananat vani

iii. 46.

samkara, adhyAsAt s&mkarah iii. 17 ;

smrti-samkarag ca iv. 21.
samkirpa, vikalp&ih samkirpa i. 42 ;

atyanta^a-samkirna iii. 85.
samkhyA, dega-kaJa-samkhyabhih iL
60.

sanga, sanga-smaya^akarapam iii. 51 ;
a-sanga iiL 89.'

aamgrhitatva, hetu-phala-igraya-Alam •
banAih samgrhTtatvaiiy. 11.
saihjfia, vagskAra-samjfiA yaiiftgyam
L 16.

sati, taamin aati iL 49; aati mole ii. 13.


Appendix 7 [380


satk&ra, nBUantarya-satkBra^Bsevita

i. 14.

sattva, sattva-$uddhi ii. 41 ; sattva-
purusayoh 9uddhi-s&raye k&ivalyam*
iii. 55 ; sattva-purusa-anyatB-khyBti-
m&tra iii. 49 ; sattva-purusayor
atyanta-samklrnayoh iii. 35.
satya, ahinsB-satya ii. 30 ; 8 at y a- prat i*
sthBy&m ii. 36.

sada, sad a jnata9 i itta-vrttayah iv. 18.
sant, aati : see sati.

samtoea, 9auca-samtosa-tapah- ii. 32 ;
samtoaad anuttamah sukhalabhah

ii. 42.

samnidhi, tt-samnidhau vaira-tyBgah

ii. 35.

sap tad ha, tasyasaptadha prBntabhamih
prajna ii. 27.

sabija, sabijah samadhih i. 46.
samaya, jati-de^a-kala-samaya ii. 31 ;
eka-samaye ca^ubhaya^navadhar-
anam iv. 20.

samadhi, tad eva^arthamatranir-
bhasam svat*Qpa9Qnyam iva samadhih

iii, 8 ; sabTjah samadhih i, 46 ; nir-
bljah samadhih i. 51 ; dharana-
dhy&na-samadhayah ii. 29 ; fraddha-
vlrya-smrti-samadhi-prajfia i. 20 ;
samadhi-siddhi ii. 45, iv. 1 ;* samadhi-
parinama iii. 11 ; samBdhi-bhava-
na w arthah ii. 2 ; te samadhav upa-
sargah iii. 37 ; dharma-meghah sama-
dhih iv. 29.

r samana, samana-jayat iii, 40.
samapatti, tatstha-tadanj anata s&ma-
pattih i. 41 ; laghu-tula-samapatteh
iii. 42 ; savitarka samapattih, i. 42 )
Ananta-s&mapattlbhyam ii. 47. *
samapti, parinafha-krama-samaptih iv.
32.

sampad, kaya-sampat iii. 45, 46.
samprajil&ta, vitarka . . . saipprajna*
tah i. 17.


Bathbandha, sambandh a-s&myamat iii,

41, 42.

sambodha, janma-katliamta-sambod&a

ii. 89i

sarva, sarva-jna i. 25 ; sarva- jiiatrtvam

iii. 49 ; sarva-viaayam iii. 54 ; cittam
sarva.^tham iv. 18 ; sarva w arthata

iii. 11 ; sarva-bhava iii 49 ; duhkham

* •

eva sarvam ii 15 ; sarva^avarana-
mala iv. 31 ; sarva-nirodhat i. 51 ;
pratibhad va sarvam iii. 38 ; sarva-
ratna^upasthftnam ii. 87 ; sarva-
bhQta-ruta iii. 17.

sarvatha, sarva^visayam sarvatha
visayam akramam iii. 54 ; sarvatha ^
viveka-khyateh iv. 29.
savio&ra, savic&ra . . . saksmavisaya
i. 44.

savitarka, savitarka samapattih i. 42.
sahabhUf v^csepa-sahabhuvah i. 31.
s&k$&t, samskara-s 0 iy * 18.
s&dli&ranatva, t&d-anya-sadh 0 ii. 22.
s&mya, 9uddhi-samye kftivalyam iii. 55;

vastu-samye iv. 15.
s&rhpya, vrtti-sarupyam i 4,
sfcavabhauma, sarvabhauma m&havra-
tam ii. 31.

s&lambana, tat aalambanam iii. 20.
siddha, siddha-darganam iii. 82. ^
siddW^kaya^ipdriya-a^ibih ii. 43 ;
vyutthane siddhih iitpu^samadhi-
siddhih ii. 45 ; samfidhij&h siddhayah

iv. 1.

sukha, sukha^anu^ayi rftgah ii. 7;
nitya-juci-sukha-atma-khy&tih iL 6 ;
athira-sukham asanam iL 46 ; sukha*
'duhkha-punya-apunya-vislyanam i.
38 ; anuttamah sukha-labhah iL

42.

■oksma, vyakta-sttkarj^ gupatmanah
iv. 13; BUksma-^V&g* iii. 26;
dlrgha-qpksmab ii S^Tpratiprastiva-
heyah sOkamah ii. 10 ; sak,mavisay&


381]


Index of Words in the Sutras


i. 44 ; BOkpaa-visayatvam ea L 45;
BvarQpa-sQksma-anvaya- iii. 44.
aurya, aoiye s&myam&t iii. 26.
aopakratpa, sopakramam mrupakra-
mam ca karma iii. 22.
B&umanaayp*&cuddhi-saQ°-ekagrya ii.

41. "

atambha, fakti-stambhe iii. 21 ; abhy-
antara*Bt°-vrttih ii. 60.
sty&na, vyftdhi-st°-sam$aya- i. 30.
atha, tat-etha-tadanjanats i. 41.
ath&mn, 9th°-upanimantrane iii. 61.
athiti, praktya-kriya-sthiti ii. 18 ; tatra
sthit&u yatno 'bhyfisah i. 13 ; man*
asahathiti-nibandbanl i. 36.
sthira. Bth°*sukham Asanam ii. 46.
athula, Bth e *8var0pa-s0k|ma- iii. 44.
Bthairya, aparigraha-stl^iiye ii. 89 ;

kurma-nftd^m atbftiryam iii. 31.
amaya, aahga-sm°-akaranam iii. 61.
amrti, aaubhQta-visaya^asampramo-
sah sa^ib i. 11 ; -vikalpa-nidra
am"


sai

rayoM
fuddhiji
Jtr.

ava, s

ga ii
prapidbU&oi ihfSS
devat& ii 44 ;
iii. 36; ava-buddhjt


6; $raddhft-vlrya-smrti-
120; smrti-V*up9ka-

1 48; aparti-samkara? ca


22; na tat sva^abhisam dr^yatvAt
iy. 19 ; ava-rasa-vahl ii 9 ; sva rOpa
see by itself ; sva-viaaya^aaampra
yoge ii. 64.

svapna, 8v 0 -nidra-jnana^ftlambm.am
i. 38.

syarupa, sthQla-svarOpa-sOksma- m.
44 ; svarQpa^upalabdhi-hetuh ^am
yogah ii. 23 ; svarQpa-pratistba va it
34 ; citta-svarGpa^anuk&ra lva n 64 ,
svarQpa-cOnyft^iva i. 43 ; svai Qpa
f Qnyatu iva iii. 3 ; tada svarQpa a va
Bthanam i. 3 ; svaropato ’sty adbva
bbedat iv. 12 ; grahana-svarQpa ab
mita iii. 47.

sy&min, sva-svOmi-faktyoh ii 23.


h&na, Bamyoga^abh&vo b&nam ii. 25 ,
viveka-khyatir aviplavS hfina^upi
yah ii. 26 ; h&nam es&rii kle^avat
iv. 28.

hinB&i vitarks hinsa^adayah u. 34
hfdaya, hrdaye citta-aamyok ui 84.
beta, hetu phala^B^raya ; kra-

ma^anyatvam parin&ma^Pbyatve
hetuh iii. 16; upalabdhi-hetu-sam-
yogah ii. 28; tasya'hetur avidyft
ii. 24 ; samyogo heya-hetuh ii. 17.
hetutva, apunya-hetutvAt ii. 14.
iy«^ aarnyogo heya-hetuh ii. 17 ; pra-
tiprasava-bey&h ii 10; dhy&na-hey&h
[ ; heyam duhkham ii. 16.
hl&da-parit&pa-phal&h ii. 14.
