The Upanishads (F. Max Müller translation, SBE Vols. 1 and 15)
==============================================================
F. Max Müller’s public-domain translation of the twelve principal Upanishads (Sacred Books of the East, Vols. 1 and 15, 1879/1884): Khandogya, Talavakara/Kena, Aitareya, Kaushitaki, Vagasaneyi, Katha, Mundaka, Taittiriyaka, Brihadaranyaka, Svetasvatara, Prasna, and Maitrayana. Source: Internet Archive/Wikisource.

# KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD

KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD 
THE TALAVAKARA-UPANISHAD 
THE AITAREYA-ARANVYAKA 
THE KAUSHITAKI-BRAHMAWA-UPANISHAD 

AND 
THE VAGASANEYI-SA.VHITA-UPANISHAD 

Orford 

AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 

1879 

[ All rights reserved | 

HARVARD 
UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 

TO 

THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE MARQUIS OF SALISBURY, K.G. 

CHANCELLOR OF THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD, 

LATELY SECRETARY OF STATE FOR INDIA, 

SIR HENRY J. 8. MAINE, K.0.8.1. 

MEMBER OF THE COUNCIL OF INDIA, 

AND 

THE VERY REV. H. G. LIDDELL, D.D. 

DEAN OF CHRIST CHURCH, 
TO WHOSE KIND INTEREST AND EXERTIONS 
THIS ATTEMPT TO MAKE KNOWN TQ THE ENGLISH PEOPLE 
THE SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST 
IS SO LARGELY INDEBTED, 

I NOW DEDICATE THESE VOLUMES 

WITH SINCERE RESPECT AND GRATITUDE, 

F. MAX MULLER. 

[3] a 3 
http:// www.holybooks.com/the-sacred-books-of-the-east-all-50-volumes/ 

‘The general inclinations which are naturally implanted in my 
soul to some religion, it ts impossible for me to shift off: but there 
being such a multiplicity of religions in the world, I desire now 
seriously to consider with my self which of them all to restrain these 
my general inclinations to. And the reason of this my enquiry is 
not, that I am in the least dissatisfied with that religion I have 
already embraced; but because ’tis natural for all men to have an 
overbearing opinion and esteem for that particular religion they are 
born and bred-up in. That, therefore, I may not seem biassed by the 
prejudice of education, I am resolved to prove and examine them all; 

‘Indeed there was never any religion so barbarous and diabolical, 
but it was preferred before all other religions whatsoever, by them that 
did profess it; otherwise they would not have professed 1 AEE 

‘And why, say they, may not you be mistaken as well as we? Espe- 
cially when there ts, at least, six to one against your Christian religion; 
all of which think they serve God aright; and expect happiness thereby 
as well as you..... And hence tt is that in my looking out for the 
truest religion, being conscious to my self how great an ascendant 
Christianity holds over me beyond the rest, as being that religion 
whereinto I was born and baptized, that which the supreme authority 
has enjoined and my parents educated me in; that which every one 
I meet withal highly approves of, and which I my self have, by a long 
continued profession, made almost natural to me: I am resolved to be 
more jealous and suspicious of this religion, than of the rest, and be 
sure not to entertain it any longer without being convinced by solid and 
substantial arguments, of the truth and certainty of tt. That, therefore, 
I may make diligent and impartial enquiry into all religions and so be 
sure to find out the best, I shall for a time, look upon my self as one not 
at all interested in any particular religion whatsoever, much less in the 
Christian religion; but only as one who desires, in general, to serve and 
obey Him that made me,in a right manner, and thereby to be made 
partaker of that happiness my nature ts capable of? 

BISHOP BEVERIDGE (1636-1707). 
Private Thoughts on Religion, Part I, Article 2. 

CONTENTS. 

PAGE 
PREFACE TO THE SacrED Books oF THE EAST . i : ix 

Program of a Translation of the Sacred Books of the 
East . ; ; : : : : . XXXIX 

Transliteration of Oriental Alphabets . ; . © xlviii 

Approximate Pronunciation of the Roman Letters as 
representing the Sanskrit Alphabet ; ; ; lv 

INTRODUCTION TO THE UPANISHADS , . Wii 

Khandogya-upanishad . : j : Ixxxvi 

Talavak4ra-upanishad . $ ; ; ; s lxxxix 
Aitareya-aranyaka . ; ; ; ' i . xci 
Kaushitaki-brahmaza-upanishad . : ‘ . xcviii 
Vagasaneyi-samhita-upanishad . i : : i c 
TRANSLATION OF THE RHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD e . ; j I 
TRANSLATION OF THE TALAVAKARA-UPANISHAD . ; . 149 
TRANSLATION OF THE AITAREYA-ARAVYAKA . 157 

TRANSLATION OF THE KausH{TAKI-BRAHMANA-UPANISHAD . 271 

TRANSLATION OF THE VAGASANEYI-SAMHITA-UPANISHAD . . 311 

ee = e eee ee, 

PREFACE 

TO 

THE SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST. 

I must begin this series of translations of the 
Sacred Books of the East with three cautions :— 
the first, referring to the character of the original 
texts here translated; the second, with regard to the 
difficulties in making a proper use of translations ; 
the third, showing what is possible and what is im- 
possible in rendering ancient thought into modern 
speech. 

Readers who have been led to believe that the 
Vedas of the ancient Brahmans, the Avesta of the 
Zoroastrians, the Tripifaka of the Buddhists, the 
Kings of Confucius, or the Koran of Mohammed 
are books full of primeval wisdom and religious 
enthusiasm, or at least of sound and simple moral 
teaching, will be disappointed on consulting these 
volumes. Looking at many of the books that have 
lately been published on the religions of the ancient 
world, I do not wonder that such a belief should 
have been raised; but I have long felt that it was 
high time to dispel such illusions, and to place the 
study of the ancient religions of the world on a 
more real and sound, on a more truly historical 
basis. It is but natural that those who write on 

X PREFACE TO THE 

ancient religions, and who have studied them from 
translations only, not from original documents, 
should have had eyes for their bright rather than 
for their dark sides. The former absorb all the 
attention of the student, the latter, as they teach 
nothing, seem hardly to deserve any notice. Scholars 
also who have devoted their life either to the 
editing of the original texts or to the careful in- 
terpretation of some of the sacred books, are more 
inclined, after they have disinterred from a heap of 
rubbish some solitary fragments of pure gold, to 
exhibit these treasures only than to display all the 
refuse from which they had to extract them. I do 
not blame them for this, perhaps I should feel that I 
was open to the same blame myself, for it is but 
natural that scholars in their joy at finding one or 
two fragrant fruits or flowers should gladly forget 
the brambles and thorns that had to be thrown aside 
in the course of their search. 

But whether I am myself one of the guilty or not, 
I cannot help calling attention to the real mischief 
that has been done and is still being done by the 
enthusiasm of those pioneers who have opened the 
first avenues through the bewildering forest of the 
sacred literature of the East. They have raised 
expectations that cannot be fulfilled, fears also that, 
as will be easily seen, are unfounded. Anyhow they 
have removed the study of religion from that whole- 
some and matter-of-fact atmosphere in which alone 
it can produce valuable and permanent results. 

_ The time has come when the study of the ancient 
religions of mankind must be approached in a dif- 
ferent, in a less enthusiastic, and more discrimi- 
nating, in fact, in a more scholarlike spirit. Not 

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST. xi 

that I object to dilettanti, if they only are what by 
their name they profess to be, devoted lovers, and not 
mere amateurs. The religions of antiquity, must 
always be approached in a loving spirit, and the dry 
and cold-blooded scholar is likely to do here as 
much mischief as the enthusiastic sciolist. But true 
love does not ignore all faults and failings: on the 
contrary, it scans them keenly, though only in order 
to be able to understand, to explain, and thus to 
excuse them. To watch in the Sacred Books of 
the East the dawn of the religious consciousness 
of man, must always remain one of the most 
inspiring and hallowing sights in the whole history 
of the world; and he whose heart cannot quiver 
with the first quivering rays of human thought 
and human faith, as revealed in those ancient docu- 
ments, is, in his own way, as unfit for these studies 
as, from another side, the man who shrinks from 
copying and collating ancient MSS., or toiling 
through volumes of tedious commentary. What we 
want here, as everywhere else, is the truth, and the 
whole truth: and if the whole truth must be told, 
it is that, however radiant the dawn of religious 
thought, it is not without its dark clouds, its chilling 
colds, its noxious vapours. Whoever does not 
know these, or would hide them from his own sight 
and from the sight of others, does not know and 
can never understand the real toil and travail of the 
human heart in its first religious aspirations; and 
not knowing its toil and travail, can never know the 
intensity of its triumphs and its joys. 

In order to have a solid foundation for a com- 
parative study of the religions of the East, we must 
have before all things complete and thoroughly 

Xii PREFACE TO THE 

faithful translations of their sacred books. Extracts 
will no longer suffice. We do not know Germany, 
if we know the Rhine; nor Rome, when we have 
admired St. Peters. No one who collects and pub- 
lishes such extracts can resist, no one at all events, 
so far as I know, has ever resisted, the temptation 
of giving what is beautiful, or it may be what is 
strange and startling, and leaving out what is com- 
monplace, tedious, or it may be repulsive, or, lastly, 
what is difficult to construe and to understand. We 
must face the problem in its completeness, and I 
confess it has been for many years a problem to 
me, aye, and to a great extent is so still, how the 
Sacred Books of the East should, by the side of so 
much that is fresh, natural, simple, beautiful, and 
true, contain so much that is not only unmeaning, 
artificial, and silly, but even hideous and repellent. 
This is a fact, and must be accounted for in some 
way or other. 

To some minds this problem may seem to be no 
problem at all. To those (and I do not speak of 
Christians only) who look upon the sacred books of 
all religions except their own as necessarily the out- 
come of human or superhuman ignorance and de- 
pravity, the mixed nature of their contents may 
seem to be exactly what it ought to be, what they 
expected it would be. But there are other and 
more reverent minds who can feel a divine afflatus 
in the sacred books, not only of their own, but of 
other religions also, and to them the mixed character 
of some of the ancient sacred canons must always 
be extremely perplexing. 

I can account for it to a certain extent, though 
not entirely to my own satisfaction. Most of the 

http:/ /www.holybooks.com/the-sacred-books-of-the-east-all-50-volumes/ 

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST. xiii 

ancient sacred books have been handed down by 
oral tradition for many generations before they were 
consigned to writing. In an age when there was 
nothing corresponding to what we call literature, 
every saying, every proverb, every story handed 
down from father to son, received very soon a kind 
of hallowed character. They became sacred heir- 
looms, sacred, because they came from an unknown 
source, from a distant age. There was a stage in 
the development of human thought, when the dis- 
tance that separated the living generation from their 
grandfathers or great-grandfathers was as yet the 
nearest approach to a conception of eternity, and 
when the name of grandfather and great-grandfather 
seemed the nearest expression of God?}. Hence, 
what had been said by these half-human, half-divine 
ancestors, if it was preserved at all, was soon looked 
upon as a more than human utterance. It was 
received with reverence, it was never questioned 
and criticised. 

Some of these ancient sayings were preserved 
because they were so true and so striking that they 
could not be forgotten. They contained eternal 
truths, expressed for the first time in human lan- 
guage. Of such oracles of truth it was said in India 
that they had been heard, sruta, and from it arose 
the word sruti, the recognised term for divine 
revelation in Sanskrit. 

But besides those utterances which had a vitality 
of their own, strong enough to defy the power of 

1 Bishop Callaway, Unkulunkulu, or the Tradition of Creation, 
as existing among the Amazulu and other tribes of South Africa, 

P. 7. 

X1V PREFACE TO THE 

time, there were others which might have struck 
the minds of the listeners with great force under 
the peculiar circumstances that evoked them, but 
which, when these circumstances were forgotten, be- 
came trivial and almost unintelligible. A few verses 
sung by warriors on the eve of a great battle would, 
if that battle ended in victory, assume a charm 
quite independent of their poetic merit. They — 
would be repeated in memory of the heroes 
who conquered, and of the gods who granted 
victory. But when the heroes, and the gods, and 
the victory were all forgotten, the song of victory 
and thanksgiving would often survive as a relic 
of the past, though almost unintelligible to later 
generations. 

Even a single ceremonial act, performed at the 
time of a famine or an inundation, and apparently 
attended with a sudden and almost miraculous 
success, might often be preserved in the liturgical 
code of a family or a tribe with a superstitious awe 
entirely beyond our understanding. It might be 
repeated for some time on similar emergencies, till 
when it had failed again and again it survived only 
as a superstitious custom in the memory of priests 
and poets. 

Further, it should be remembered that in ancient 
as in modern times, the utterances of men who had 
once gained a certain prestige, would often receive 
attention far beyond their merits, so that in many 
a family or tribe the sayings and teachings of one 
man, who had once in his youth or manhood uttered 
words of inspired wisdom, would all be handed 
down together, without any attempt to separate 
the grain from the chaff. 

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST. XV | 

Nor must we forget that though oral tradition, 
when once brought under proper discipline, is a 
most faithful guardian, it is not without its dangers 
in its incipient stages. Many a word may have been 
misunderstood, many a sentence confused, as it was 
told by father to son, before it became fixed in the 
tradition of a village community, and then resisted 
by its very sacredness all attempts at emendation. 

Lastly, we must remember that those who handed 
down the ancestral treasures of ancient wisdom, 
would often feel inclined to add what seemed useful 
to themselves, and what they knew could be pre- 
served in one way only, namely, if it was allowed to 
form part of the tradition that had to be handed 
down, as a sacred trust, from generation to genera- 
tion. The priestly influence was at work, even 
before there were priests by profession, and when 
the priesthood had once become professional, its 
influence may account for much that would other- 
wise seem inexplicable in the sacred codes of the 
ancient world. 

These are some of the considerations which may 
help to explain how, mixed up with real treasures of 
thought, we meet in the sacred books with so many 
passages and whole chapters which either never had 
any life or meaning at all, or if they had, have, in the 
form in which they have come down to us, com- 
pletely lost it. We must try to imagine what the Old 
Testament would have been, if it had not been kept 
distinct from the Talmud; or the New Testament, 
if it had been mixed up not only with the spurious 
gospels, but with the records of the wranglings of 
the early Councils, if we wish to understand; to some 
extent at least, the wild confusion of sublime truth 

xvi PREFACE TO THE 

with vulgar stupidity that meets us in the pages of 
the Veda, the Avesta, and the Tripizaka. The idea 
of keeping the original and genuine tradition separate 
from apocryphal accretions was an idea of later 
growth, that could spring up only after the earlier 
tendency of preserving whatever could be preserved 
of sacred or half-sacred lore, had done its work, and 
wrought its own destruction. 

In using, what may seem to some of my fellow- 
workers, this very strong and almost irreverent lan- 
guage with regard to the ancient Sacred Books of 
the East, I have not neglected to make full allow- 
ance for that very important intellectual parallax 
which, no doubt, renders it most difficult for a 
Western observer to see things and thoughts under 
exactly the same angle and in the same light as they 
would appear to an Eastern eye. There are Western 
expressions which offend Eastern taste as much as 
Eastern expressions are apt to offend Western taste. 
A symphony of Beethoven’s would be mere noise to 
an Indian ear, an Indian Sangtta seems to us with- 
out melody, harmony, or rhythm. All this I fully 
admit, yet after making every allowance for national 
taste and traditions, I still confidently appeal to the 
best Oriental scholars, who have not entirely for- 
gotten that there is a world outside the four walls 
of their study, whether they think that my con- 
demnation is too severe, or that Eastern nations 
themselves would tolerate, in any of their classical 
literary compositions, such violations of the simplest 
rules of taste as they have accustomed themselves to 
tolerate, if not to admire, in their sacred books. 

But then it might no doubt be objected that books 
of such a character hardly deserve the honour of 

J ~ EE BEEE N 

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST. XVil 

being translated into English, and that the sooner 
they are forgotten, the better. Such opinions have 
of late been freely expressed by some eminent 
writers, and supported by arguments worthy of the 
Khalif Omar himself. In these days of anthropo- 
logical research, when no custom is too disgusting 
to be recorded, no rules of intermarriage too com- 
plicated to be disentangled, it may seem strange 
that the few genuine relics of ancient religion which, 
as by a miracle, have been preserved to us, should thus 
have been judged from a purely esthetic, and not from 
an historical point of view. There was some excuse for 
this in the days of Sir William Jones and Colebrooke. 
The latter, as is well known, considered ‘the Vedas 
as too voluminous for a complete translation of the 
whole,’ adding that ‘what they contain would hardly 
reward the labour of the reader; much less that of 
the translator!’ The former went still further in 
the condemnation which he pronounced on Anquetil 
Duperron’s translation of the Zend-avesta. Sir W. 
Jones, we must remember, was not only a scholar, 
but also a man of taste, and the man of taste some- 
times gained a victory over the scholar. His con- 
troversy with Anquetil Duperron, the discoverer of 
the Zend-avesta, is well known. It was carried on 
by Sir W. Jones apparently with great success, and 
yet in the end the victor has proved to be the 
vanquished. It was easy, no doubt, to pick out from 
Anquetil Duperron’s translation of the sacred writings 
of Zoroaster hundreds of passages which were or 
seemed to be utterly unmeaning or absurd. This 
arose partly, but partly only, from the imperfections 

* Colebrooke’s Migcellaneous Essays, 1873, vol. ii, p. 102. 
[3] b 

xviii PREFACE TO THE 

of the translation. Much, however, of what Sir W. 
Jones represented as ridiculous, and therefore un- 
worthy of Zoroaster, and therefore unworthy of being 
translated, forms an integral part of the sacred code 
of the Zoroastrians. Sir W. Jones smiles at those who 
‘think obscurity sublime and venerable, like that of 
ancient cloisters and temples, shedding, as Milton 
expresses it, ‘a dim religious light!’ ‘On posse- 
dait deja, he writes in his letter addressed to 
Anquetil Duperron, 'and composed in very good 
and sparkling French, ‘plusieurs traites attribues a 
Zardusht ou Zeratusht, traduits en Persan moderne ; 
de pretendues conferences de ce legislateur avec 
Ormuzd, des prieres, des dogmes, des lois religieuses. 
Quelques savans, qui ont lu ces traductions, nous ont 
assure que les originaux etaient de la plus haute 
antiquite, parce qu ils renfermaient beaucoup de plati- 
tudes, de bevues, et de contradictions: mais nous 
avons conclu par les memes raisons, quils etaient 
tres-modernes, ou bien qu'ils n’etaient pas d'un 
homme d'esprit, et d'un philosophe, tel que Zoroastre 
est peint par nos historiens. Votre nouvelle tra- 
duction, Monsieur, nous confirme dans ce juge- 
ment: tout le college des Guebres aurait beau 
nous l'assurer; nous ne croirons jamais que le 
charlatan le moins habile ait pu ecrire les fadaises 
dont vos deux derniers volumes sont remplis 2. 
He at last sums up his argument in the following 
words: ‘Ou Zoroastre navait pas le sens commun, 
ou il n’ecrivit pas le livre que vous lui attribuez: 
sil navait pas le sens commun, il fallait le laisser 
dans la foule, et dans Yobscurite; s'il n’ecrivit pas 

1 Sir W. Jones’s Works, vol. iv, p. 113. 3 Ib., vol. x, p. 408. 

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST. XiX 

ce livre, il etait impudent de le publier sous son 
nom. Ainsi, ou vous avez insulte le gout du public 
en lui presentant des sottises, ou vous l'avez trompe 
en lui donnant des faussetes: et de chaque cote vous 
meritez son mepris !.’ 
= This alternative holds good no longer. The 
sacred code of Zoroaster or of any other of the 
founders of religions may appear to us to be full of 
absurdities, or may in fact really be so, and it may 
yet be the duty of the scholar to publish, to translate, 
and carefully to examine those codes as memorials 
of the past, as the only trustworthy documents in 
which to study the growth and decay of religion. 
It does not answer to say that if Zoroaster was what 
we believe him to have been, a wise man, in our 
sense of the word, he could not have written the 
rubbish which we find in the Avesta. If we are 
once satisfied that the text of the Avesta, or the 
Veda, or the Tripi¢aka is old and genuine, and 
that this text formed the foundation -on which, 
during many centuries, the religious belief of millions 
of human beings was based, it becomes our duty, 
both as historians and philosophers, to study these 
books, to try to understand how they could have 
arisen, and how they could have exercised for ages 
an influence over human beings who in all other 
respects were not inferior to ourselves, nay, whom 
we are accustomed to look up to on many points as 
patterns of wisdom, of virtue, and of taste. 

The facts, such as they are, must be faced, if the 
study of the ancient religions of the world is ever 
to assume a really historical character; and having 

1 Works, vol. x, p. 437. 

XX PREFACE TO THE 

myself grudged no praise to what to my mind is really 
beautiful or sublime in the early revelations of reli- 
gious truth, I feel the less hesitation in fulfilling the 
duty of the true scholar, and placing before historians 
and philosophers accurate, complete, and unembel- 
lished versions of some of the sacred books of the 
East. Such versions alone will enable them to form 
a true and just estimate of the real development of 
early religious thought, so far as we can still gaina 
sight of it in literary records to which the highest 
human or even divine authority has been ascribed 
by the followers of the great religions of antiquity. 
It often requires an effort to spoil a beautiful sen- 
tence by a few words which might so easily be 
suppressed, but which are there in the original, 
and must be taken into account quite as much 
as the pointed ears in the beautiful Faun of the 
Capitol. We want to know the ancient religions 
such as they really were, not such as we wish they 
should have been. We want to know, not their 
wisdom only, but their folly also; and while we must 
learn to look up to their highest points where they 
seem to rise nearer to heaven than anything we were 
acquainted with before, we must not shrink from 
looking down into their stony tracts, their dark 
abysses, their muddy moraines, in order to compre- 
hend both the heighth and the depth of the human 
mind in its searchings after the Infinite. 

I can answer for myself and for those who have 
worked with me, that our translations are truthful, 
that we have suppressed nothing, that we have 
varnished nothing, however hard it seemed some- 
times even to write it down. 

There is only one exception. There are in ancient 

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST. XX} 

books, and particularly in religious books, frequent 
allusions to the sexual aspects of nature, which, 
though perfectly harmless and innocent in them- 
selves, cannot be rendered in modern language with- 
out the appearance of coarseness. We may regret 
that it should be so, but tradition is too strong on 
this point, and I have therefore felt obliged to leave 
certain passages untranslated, and to give the ori- 
ginal, when necessary, in a note. But this has been 
done in extreme cases only, and many things which 
we should feel inclined to suppress have been left in 
all their outspoken simplicity, because those who 
want to study ancient man, must learn to study him 
as he really was, an animal, with all the strength 
and weaknesses of an animal, though an animal that 
was to rise above himself, and in the end discover his 
true self, after many struggles and many defeats. 

After this first caution, which I thought was due 
to those who might expect to find in these volumes 
nothing but gems, I feel I owe another to those 
who may approach these translations under the 
impression that they have only to read them in 
order to gain an insight into the nature and character 
of the religions of mankind. There are philosophers 
who have accustomed themselves to look upon reli- 
gions as things that can be studied as they study the 
manners and customs of savage tribes, by glancing 
at the entertaining accounts of travellers or mis- 
sionaries, and then classing each religion under such 
wide categories as fetishism, polytheism, monotheism, 
and the rest. That is not the case. Translations 
can do much, but they can never take the place of the 
originals, and if the originals require not only to be 

XXil PREFACE TO THE 

read, but to be read again and again, translations of 
sacred books require to be studied with much greater 
care, before we can hope to gain a real under- 
standing of the intentions of their authors or venture 
on general assertions. 

Such general assertions, if once made, are difficult 
to extirpate. It has been stated, for instance, that 
the religious notion of sin is wanting altogether in 
the hymns of the Rig-veda, and some important con- 
clusions have been based on this supposed fact. Yet 
the gradual growth of the concept of guilt is one of 
the most interesting lessons which certain passages 
of these ancient hymns can teach us'. It has been 
asserted that in the Rig-veda Agni, fire, was adored 
essentially as earthly sacrificial fire, and not as an 
elemental force. How greatly such an assertion has 
to be qualified, may be seen from a more careful 
examination of the translations of the Vedic hymns 
now accessible? In many parts of the Avesta 
fre is no doubt spoken of with great rever- 
ence, but those who speak of the Zoroastrians 
as fire-worshippers, should know that the true fol- 
lowers of Zoroaster abhor that very name. Again, 
there are certainly many passages in the Vedic 
writings which prohibit the promiscuous communi- 
cation of the Veda, but those who maintain that 
the Brahmans, like Roman Catholic priests, keep 
their sacred books from the people, must have for- 

1 M. M., History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, second edition, 
1859, P- 540 seq. 

2 Ludwig, Rig-veda, ubersetzt, vol. iii, p. 331 seq. Muir, Sanskrit 
Texts, vol v, p. 199 seq. On the later growth of Agni, see a 
very useful essay by Holtzmann, ‘Agni, nach den Vorstellungen des 
Mahabharata,’ 1878. 

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST. xxiil 

gotten the many passages in the Brahmazas, the 
Sitras, and even in the Laws of Manu, where the 
duty of learning the Veda by heart is inculcated for 
every Braehmaza, Kshatriya, Vaisya, that is, for every 
man except a Sidra. 

These are a few specimens only to show how 
dangerous it is to generalise even where there exist 
complete translations of certain sacred books. It is 
far easier to misapprehend, or even totally to mis- 
understand, a translation than the original; and it 
should not be supposed, because a sentence or a 
whole chapter seems at first sight unintelligible in — 
a translation, that therefore they are indeed devoid 
of all meaning. ! 

What can be more perplexing than the beginning 
of the A#andogya-upanishad? ‘Let a man medi- 
tate, we read, or, as others translate it, ‘Let a man 
worship the syllable Om.’ It may seem impossible 
at first sight to elicit any definite meaning from 
these words and from much that follows after. 
But it would be a mistake, nevertheless, to con- 
clude that we have here vox et preterea nihil. 
Meditation on the syllable Om consisted in a long- 
continued repetition of that syllable with a view 
of drawing the thoughts away from all other sub- 
jects, and thus concentrating them on some higher 
object of thought of which that syllable was made to 
be the symbol. This concentration of thought, ek4- 
grat or one-pointedness, as the Hindus called it, is 
something to us almost unknown. Our minds are 
like kaleidoscopes of thoughts in constant motion; 
and to shut our mental eyes to everything else, while 
dwelling on one thought only, has become to most 
of us almost as impossible as to apprehend one 

XXIV PREFACE TO THE 

musical note without harmonics. With the life we 
are leading now, with telegrams, letters, newspapers, 
reviews, pamphlets, and books ever breaking in upon 
us, it has become impossible, or almost impossible, 
ever to arrive at that intensity of thought which the 
Hindus meant by ekAgrat4, and the attainment of 
which was to them the indispensable condition of all 
philosophical and religious speculation. The loss may 
not be altogether on our side, yet a loss it is, and if we 
see the Hindus, even- in their comparatively mono- 
tonous life, adopting all kinds of contrivances in 
order to assist them in drawing away their thoughts 
from all disturbing impressions and to fix them on 
one subject only, we must not be satisfied with 
smiling at their simplicity, but try to appreciate the 
object they had in view. 

When by means of repeating the syllable Om, 
which originally seems to have meant ‘that,’ or ‘ yes,’ 
they had arrived at a certain degree of mental tran- 
quillity, the question arose what was meant by this 
Om, and to this question the most various answers 
were given, according as the mind was to be led 
up to higher and higher objects. Thus in one 
passage we are told at first that Om is the beginning 
of the Veda, or, as we have to deal with an U panishad 
of the Sama-veda, the beginning of the SAma-veda, 
so that he who meditates on Om, may be supposed 
to be meditating on the whole of the Sama-veda. 
But that is not enough. Om is said to be the essence 
of the Sama-veda, which, being almost entirely taken 
from the Rig-veda, may itself be called the essence 
of the Rig-veda. And more than that. The Rig-veda 
stands for all speech, the S4ma-veda for all breath 
or life, so that Om may be conceived again as the 

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST. XXV 

symbol of all speech and all life. Om thus becomes 
the name, not only of all our physical and mental 
powers, but especially of the living principle, the 
Prama or spirit. This is explained by the parable 
in the second chapter, while in the third chapter, 
that spirit within us is identified with the spirit in 
the sun. He therefore who meditates on Om, medi- 
tates on the spirit in man as identical with the spirit . 
in nature, or in the sun; and thus the lesson that 
is meant to be taught in the beginning of the 
A handogya-upanishad is really this, that none of the 
Vedas with their sacrifices and ceremonies could 
ever secure the salvation of the worshipper, i.e. 
that sacred works, performed according to the rules 
of the Vedas, are of no avail in the end, but that 
meditation on Om alone, or that knowledge of 
what is meant by Om alone, can procure true salva- 
tion, or true immortality. Thus the pupil is led on 
step by step to what is the highest object of the 
Upanishads, viz. the recognition of the self in man 
as identical with the Highest Self or Brahman. 
The lessons which are to lead up to that highest 
conception of the universe, both subjective and 
objective, are no doubt mixed up with much that 
is superstitious and absurd; still the main object is _ 
never lost sight of. Thus, when we come to the 
eighth chapter, the discussion, though it begins with 
Om or the Udgitha, ends with the question of the 
origin of the world; and though the final answer, 
namely, that Om means ether (akasa), and that 
ether is the origin of all things, may still sound to 
us more physical than metaphysical, still the descrip- 
tion given of ether or akasa, shows that more is 
meant by it than the physical ether, and that ether 

XXVI PREFACE TO THE 

is in fact one of the earlier and less perfect names 
of the Infinite, of Brahman, the universal Self. 
This, at least, is the lesson which the Brahmans 
themselves read in this chapter!; and if we look 
at the ancient language of the Upanishads as re- 
presenting mere attempts at finding expression for 
what their language could hardly express as yet, 
_we shall, I think, be less inclined to disagree with 
the interpretation put on those ancient oracles by 
the later Ved4nta philosophers *, or, at all events, 
we shall hesitate before we reject what is difficult to 
interpret, as altogether devoid of meaning. 

This is but one instance to show that even behind 
the fantastic and whimsical phraseology of the sacred 
writings of the Hindus and other Eastern nations, 
there may be sometimes aspirations after truth 
which deserve careful consideration from the student 
of the psychological development and the historical 
growth of early religious thought, and that after 
careful sifting, treasures may be found in what at 
first we may feel inclined to throw away as utterly 
worthless. 

And now I come to the third caution. Let it 
not be supposed that a text, three thousand 
years old, or, even if of more modern date, still 
widely distant from our own sphere of thought, 
can be translated in the same manner as a book 

1 The Upanishad itself says: ‘The Brahman is the same as the 
ether which is around us; and the ether which is around us, is the 
same as the ether which is within us. And the ether which is 
within, that is the ether within the heart. That ether in the heart j 
is omnipresent and unchanging. He who knows this obtains 
omnipresent and unchangeable happiness.’ AA. Up. III, 12, 7-9. 

3 Cf. Vedanta-sfitras I, 1, 22. ; : 

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST. XXVII 

written a few years ago in French or German. 
Those who know French and German well enough, 
know how difficult, nay, how impossible it is, to 
render justice to certain touches of genius which 
the true artist knows how to give to a sen- 
tence. Many poets have translated Heine into 
English or Tennyson into German, many painters 
have copied the Madonna di San Sisto or the so- 
called portrait of Beatrice Cenci. But the greater 
the excellence of these translators, the more frank 
has been their avowal, that the original is beyond 
their reach. And what is a translation of modern 
German into modern English compared with a trans- 
lation of ancient Sanskrit or Zend or Chinese into 
any modern language? It is an undertaking which, 
from its very nature, admits of the most partial 
success only, and a more intimate knowledge of the 
ancient language, so far from facilitating the task 
of the translator, renders it only more hopeless. 
Modern words are round, ancient words are square, 
and we may as well hope to solve the quadrature of 
the circle, as to express adequately the ancient 
thoughts of the Veda in modern English. 

We must not expect therefore that a translation 
of the sacred books of the ancients can ever be more 
than an approximation of our language to theirs, 
of our thoughts to theirs. The translator, however, 
‘if he has once gained the conviction that it is 
impossible to translate old thought into modern 
speech, without doing some violence either to the 
one or to the other, will hardly hesitate in his choice 
between two evils. He will prefer to do some 
violence to language rather than to misrepresent 
old thoughts by clothing them in words which do 

xxviii PREFACE TO THE 

not fit them. If therefore the reader finds some 
of these translations rather rugged, if he meets with 
expressions which sound foreign, with combinations 
of nouns and adjectives such as he has never seen 
before, with sentences that seem too long or too 
abrupt, let him feel sure that the translator has had 
to deal with a choice of evils, and that when the 
choice lay between sacrificing idiom or truth, he has 
chosen the smaller evil of the two. I do not claim, 
of course, either for myself or for my fellow-workers, 
that we have always sacrificed as little as was 
possible of truth or idiom, and that here and there 
a happier rendering of certain passages may not be 
suggested by those who come after us. I only wish 
to warn the reader once more not to expect too 
much from a translation, and to bear in mind that, 
easy as it might be to render word by word, it is 
difficult, aye, sometimes impossible, to render thought 
by thought. 

I shall give one instance only from my own 
translation of the Upanishads. One of the most 
important words in the ancient philosophy of the 
Brahmans is Atman, nom. sing. Atma, It is 
rendered in our dictionaries by ‘breath, soul, the 
principle of life and sensation, the individual soul, 
the self, the abstract individual, self, one’s self, the 
reflexive pronoun, the natural temperament or dis- 
position, essence, nature, character, peculiarity, the 
person or the whole body, the body, the understand- 
ing, intellect, the mind, the faculty of thought and 
reason, the thinking faculty, the highest principle 
of life, Brahma, the supreme deity or soul of the 
universe, care, effort, pains, firmness, the sun, fire, 
wind, air, a son.’ 

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST. XXIX 

This will give classical scholars an idea of the 
chaotic state from which, thanks to the excellent 
work done by Boehtlingk, Roth, and others, Sanskrit 
lexicology is only just emerging, Some of the mean- 
ings here mentioned ought certainly not to be 
ascribed to 4tman. It never means, for instance, 
the understanding, nor could it ever by itself be 
translated by sun, fire, wind, air, pains or firmness. 
But after deducting such surplusage, there still 
remains a large variety of meanings which may, 
under certain circumstances, be ascribed to Atman. 

When 4tman occurs in philosophical treatises, 
such as the Upanishads and the Vedanta system 
which is based on them, it has generally been trans- 
lated by soul, mind, or spirit. I tried myself to use 
one or other of these words, but the oftener I 
employed them, the more I felt their inadequacy, 
and was driven at last to adopt self and Self as 
the least liable to misunderstanding. 

No doubt in many passages it sounds strange in 
English to use self, and in the plural selfs instead 
of selves; but that very strangeness is useful, for 
while such words as soul and mind and spirit pass 
over us unrealised, self and selfs will always ruffle 
the surface of the mind, and stir up some reflection 
in the reader. In English to speak even of the 
I and the Non-I, was till lately considered harsh ; 
it may still be called a foreign philosophical idiom. 
In German the Ich and Nicht-ich have, since the 
time of Fichte, become recognised and almost 
familiar, not only as philosophical terms, but as 
legitimate expressions in the literary language of 
the day. But while the Ich with Fichte expressed 
the highest abstraction of personal existence, the 

http:/ /www.holybooks.com/the-sacred-books-of-the-east-all-50-volumes/ 

XXX PREFACE TO THE 

corresponding word in Sanskrit, the Aham or 
Ahankdra, was always looked upon as a secondary 
development only, and as by no means free from all 
purely phenomenal ingredients. Beyond the Aham 
or Ego, with all its accidents and limitations, such 
as sex, sense, language, country, and religion, the 
ancient sages of India perceived, from a very early 
time, the Atman or the self, independent of all such 
accidents. 

The individual 4tman or self, however, was with 
the Brahmans a phase or phenomenal modification 
only of the Highest Self, and that Highest Self 
was to them the last point which could be reached 
by philosophical speculation. It was to them what 
in other systems of philosophy has been called by 
various names, ro o, the Divine, the Absolute. The 
highest aim of all thought and study with the 
Brahman of the Upanishads was to recognise his 
own self as a mere limited reflection of the Highest 
Self, to know his self in the Highest Self, and 
through that knowledge to return to it, and regain 
his identity with it. Here to know was to be, to 
know the Atman was to be the Atman, and the 
reward of that highest knowledge after death was 
freedom from new births, or immortality. 

That Highest Self which had become to the 
ancient Brahmans the goal of all their mental ef- 
forts, was looked upon at the same time as the 
starting-point of all phenomenal existence, the root 
of the world, the only thing that could truly be said 
to be, to be real and true. As the root of all that 
exists, the Atman was identified with the Brah man, 
which in Sanskrit is both masculine and neuter, and 
with the Sat, which is neuter only, that which is, 

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST. XXXI 

or Satya, the true, the real. It alone exists in the. 
beginning and for ever; it has no second. What- 
ever else is said to exist, derives its real being from 
the Sat. How the one Sat became many, how 
what we call the creation, what they call emanation 
(xpeodos), constantly proceeds and returns to it, has 
been explained in various more or less fanciful ways 
by ancient prophets and poets. But what they 
all agree in is this, that the whole creation, the 
visible and invisible world, all plants, all animals, 
all men are due to the one Sat, are upheld by it, 
and will return to it. 

If we translate Atman by soul, mind, or spirit, 
we commit, first of all, that fundamental mistake 
of using words which may be predicated, in place of 
a word which is a subject only, and can never be- 
come a predicate. We may say in English that 
man possesses a soul, that a man is out of his mind, 
that man has or even that man is a spirit, but we 
could never predicate 4tman, or self, of anything 
else. Spirit, if it means breath or life; mind, if it 
means the organ of perception and conception ; 
soul, if, like Aaitanya, it means intelligence in 
general, all these may be predicated of the Atman, 
as manifested in the phenomenal world. But 
they are never subjects in the sense in which the 
Atman is; they have no independent being, apart 
from Atman. Thus to translate the beginning of the 
Aitareya-upanishad, AtmA va idam eka evd4gra 
sit, by ‘ This (world) verily was before (the creation 
of the world) soul alone’ (Reer); or, ‘Originally 
this (universe) was indeed soul only’ (Colebrooke), 
would give us a totally false idea. M. Regnaud 
in his ‘ Materiaux pour servir 4 l'histoire de la philo- 

xxxii PREFACE TO THE 

sophie de Inde’ (vol. ii, p. 24) has evidently felt 
this, and has kept the word atman untranslated, 
‘Au commencement cet univers n’etait que l'atman.’ 
But while in French it would seem impossible to 
find any equivalent for 4tman, I have ventured to 
translate in English, as I should have done in 
German, ‘Verily, in the beginning all this was 
Self, one only.’ 

Thus again when we read in Sanskrit, ‘ Know the 
Self by the self, 4tm4anam Atman4 pasya, tempt- 
ing as it may seem, it would be entirely wrong to 
render it by the Greek yvaO ceavrev. The Brahman 
called upon his young pupil to know not himself, 
but his Self, that is, to know his individual self as 
a merely temporary reflex of the Eternal Self. 
Were we to translate this so-called 4tmavidye, 
this self-knowledge, by knowledge of the soul, we 
should not be altogether wrong, but we should never- 
theless lose all that distinguishes Indian from Greek 
thought. It may not be good English to say to know 
his self, still less to know our selfs, but it would be 
bad Sanskrit to say to know himself, to know our- 
selves; or, at all events, such a rendering would 
deprive us of the greatest advantage in the study 
of Indian philosophy, the opportunity of seeing in 
how many different ways man has tried to solve the 
riddles of the world and of his soul. 

I have thought it best therefore to keep as close 
as possible to the Sanskrit original, and where I 
could not find an adequate term in English, I have 
often retained the Sanskrit word rather than use a 
misleading substitute in English, It is impossible, for 
instance, to find an English equivalent for so simple 
a word as Sat,ro cv, We cannot render the Greek ro 

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST. xxxiii 

ev and ro uy ðv by Being or Not-being, for both are 
abstract nouns; nor by ‘the Being, for this would 
almost always convey a wrong impression. In Ger- 
man it is easy to distinguish between das Sein, 
i.e. being, in the abstract, and das Seiende, ro ðv. 
In the same way the Sanskrit sat can easily be ren- 
dered in Greek by ro ðr, in German by das Seiende, 
but in English, unless we say ‘that which is, we are 
driven to retain the original Sat. 

From this Sat was derived in Sanskrit Sat-ya, 
meaning originally ‘endowed with being,’ then ‘true.’ 
This is an adjective ; but the same word, as a neuter, 
is also used in the sense of truth, as an abstract; 
and in translating it is very necessary always to dis- 
tinguish between Satyam, the true, frequently the 
same as Sat, ro dy, and Satyam, truth, veracity, 
One example will suffice to show how much the 
clearness of a translation depends on the right ren- 
dering of such words as 4tman, sat, and satyam. 

In a dialogue between Uddalaka and his son 
Svetaketu, in which the father tries to open his son’s 
mind, and to make him see man’s, true relation to 
the Highest Self (A/Z4ndogya-upanishad VI), the 
father first explains how the Sat produced what we 
should call the three elements’, viz. fire, water, and 
earth, which he calls heat, water, and food. Having 
produced them (VI, 2, 4), the Sat entered into them, 
but not with its real nature, but only with its ‘living 
self’ (VI, 3, 3), which is a reflection (Abhasamatram) 
of the real Sat, as the sun in the water is a reflection 

1 Devatas, literally deities, but frequently to be translated by 
powers or beings. Mahadeva Moreshvar Kunte, the learned editor 
of the Vedanta-sutras, ought not (p. 70) to have rendered devata, 
in KA. Up. I, 11, 5, by goddess. 

(3] This book was download from www. holybooks.com : 

XXXIV PREFACE TO THE 

of the real sun. By this apparent union of the Sat 
with the three elements, every form (rapa) and 
every name (ndman) in the world was produced ; 
and therefore he who knows the three elements is 
supposed to know everything in this world, nearly 
in the same manner in which the Greeks imagined 
that through a knowledge of the elements, every- 
thing else became known (VI, 4, 7). The same 
three elements are shown to be also the constituent 
elements of man (VI, 5) Food or the earthy ele- 
ment is supposed to produce not only flesh, but 
also mind; water, not only blood, but also breath ; 
heat, not only bone, but also speech. This is more 
or less fanciful; the important point, however, is 
this, that, from the Brahmanic point of view, breath, 
speech, and mind are purely elemental, or external 
instruments, and require the support of the living 
self, the givatman, before they can act. 

Having explained how the Sat produces pro- 
gressively heat, how heat leads to water, water to 
earth, and how, by a peculiar mixture of the three, 
speech, breath, and mind are produced, the teacher 
afterwards shows how in death, speech returns to 
mind, mind to breath, breath to heat, and heat to 
the Sat (VI, 8, 6). This Sat, the root of every- 
thing, is called para devatd, the highest deity, not 
in the ordinary sense of the word deity, but as 
expressing the highest abstraction of the human 
mind. We must therefore translate it by the 
Highest Being, in the same manner as we translate 
de vata, when applied to heat, water, and earth, not 
by deity, but by substance or element. 

The same Sat, as the root or highest essence 
of all material existence, is called aziman, from 

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST. XXXV 

anu, small, subtile, infinitesimal, atom. It is an 
abstract word, and I have translated it by subtile 
essence. 

The father then goes on explaining in various 
ways that this Sat is underlying all existence, 
and that we must learn to recognise it as the root, 
not only of all the objective, but likewise of our 
own subjective existence. ‘Bring the fruit of a 
Nyagrodha tree, he says, ‘break it, and what do 
you find?’ ‘The seeds,’ the son replies, ‘almost 
infinitesimal.’ ‘Break one of them, and tell me 
what you see. ‘Nothing,’ the son replies. Then 
the father continues: ‘My son, that subtile essence 
which you do not see there, of that very essence 
this great Nyagrodha tree exists.’ 

After that follows this sentence: ‘ Etad4tmyam 
idam sarvam, tat satyam, sa Atm4, tat tvam asi 
Svetaketo.’ 

This sentence has been rendered by Rajendralal 
Mitra in the following way: ‘ All this universe has 
the (Supreme) Deity for its life. That Deity is 
Truth. He is the Universal Soul. Thou art He, 
O Svetaketu !.’ 

This translation is quite correct, as far as the 
words go, but I doubt whether we can connect any 
definite thoughts with these words. In spite of the 
division adopted in the text, I believe it will be 
necessary to join this sentence with the last words 
of the preceding paragraph. This is clear from 
the commentary, and from later paragraphs, where 
this sentence is repeated, VI, 9, 4,&c. The division 

* Anquetil Duperron translates: ‘Ipso hoc modo (ens) illud est 
subtile: et hoc omne, unus 4tma est: et id verum ct rectum est, 
O Sopatkit, tatoumes, id est, ille 4tma tu as.’ 

C 2 

XXXVI PREFACE TO THE 

in the printed text (VI, 8, 6) is wrong, and VI, 8, 7 
should begin with sa ya esho ’ime, i.e. that which 
is the subtile essence. 

The question then is, what is further to be said 
about this subtile essence. I have ventured to 
translate the passage in the following way: 

‘That which is the subtile essence (the Sat, the 
root of everything), in it all that exists has its self, 
or more literally, its self-hood. It is the True (not 
the Truth in the abstract, but that which truly and 
really exists). It is the Self, i.e. the Sat is what is 
called the Self of everything.’ Lastly, he sums up, 
and tells Svetaketu that, not only the whole world, 
but he too himself is that Self, that Satya, that 
Sat. 

No doubt this translation sounds strange to 
English ears, but as the thoughts contained in the 
Upanishads are strange, it would be wrong to 
smoothe down their strangeness by clothing them 
in language familiar to us, which, because it is 
familiar, will fail to startle us, and because it fails 
to startle us, will fail also to set us thinking. 

To know oneself to be the Sat, to know that all 
that is real and eternal in us is the Sat, that all came 
from it and will, through knowledge, return to it, 
requires an independent effort of speculative thought. 
We must realise, as well as we can, the thoughts of 
the ancient Azshis, before we can hope to translate 
them. It is not enough simply to read the half-reli- 
gious, half-philosophical utterances which we find in 

‘ The change of gender in sa for tad is idiomatic. One could 
not say in Sanskrit tad &tmea, it is the Self, but sa 4tm4. By sa, 
he, the Sat, that which is, is meant. The commentary explains 
sa 4tma by tat sat, and continues tat sat tat tvam asi (p. 443). 

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST. XXXVII 

the Sacred Books of the East, and to say that they 
are strange, or obscure, or mystic. Plato is strange, 
till we know him; Berkeley is mystic, till for a time 
we have identified ourselves with him. So it is with 
these ancient sages, who have become the founders 
of the great religions of antiquity. They can never 
be judged from without, they must be judged from 
within. We need not become Brahmans or Bud- 
dhists or Taosze altogether, but we must for a time, 
if we wish to understand, and still more, if we are 
bold enough to undertake to translate their doc- 
trines. Whoever shrinks from that effort, will see 
hardly anything in these sacred books or their 
translations but matter to wonder at or to laugh at ; 
possibly something to make him thankful that he is 
not as other men. But to the patient reader these 
same books will, in spite of many drawbacks, open a 
new view of the history of the human race, of that 
one race to which we all belong, with all the fibres 
of our flesh, with all the fears and hopes of our soul. 
We cannot separate ourselves from those who be- 
lieved in these sacred books. There is no specific 
difference between ourselves and the Brahmans, the 
Buddhists, the Zoroastrians, or the Taosze. Our 
powers of perceiving, of reasoning, and of believing 
may be more highly developed, but we cannot claim 
the possession of any verifying power or of any 
power of belief which they did not possess as well. 
Shall we say then that they were forsaken of God, 
while we are His chosen people? God forbid! 
There is much, no doubt, in their sacred books 
which we should tolerate no longer, though we must 
not forget that there are portions in our own sacred 
books, too, which many of us would wish to be absent, 

xxxviii PREFACE TO THE 

which, from the earliest ages of Christianity, have 
been regretted by theologians of undoubted piety, 
and which often prove a stumblingblock to those 
who have been won over by our missionaries to the 
simple faith of Christ. But that is not the question. 
The question is, whether there is or whether there is 
not, hidden in every one of the sacred books, some- 
thing that could lift up the human heart from this 
earth to a higher world, something that could make 
man feel the omnipresence of a higher Power, some- 
thing that could make him shrink from evil and in- 
cline to good, something to sustain him in the short 
journey through life, with its bright moments of 
happiness, and its long hours of terrible distress. 

If some of those who read and mark these trans- 
lations learn how to discover some such precious 
grains in the sacred books of other nations, though 
hidden under heaps of rubbish, our labour will not 
have been in vain, for there is no lesson which at 
the present time seems more important than to learn 
that in every religion there are such precious grains ; 
that we must draw in every religion a broad distinction 
between what is essential and what is not, between 
the eternal and the temporary, between the divine 
and the human; and that though the non-essential 
may fill many volumes, the essential can often be 
comprehended in a few words, but words on which 
‘hang all the law and the prophets. 

http:/ /www.holybooks.com/ the-sacred-books-of-the-east-all-50-volumes/ 

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST. XXXI1X 

PROGRAM OF A TRANSLATION 

OF 

THE SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST. 

I here subjoin the program in which I first put 
forward the idea of a translation of the Sacred 
Books of the East, and through which I invited the 
co-operation of Oriental scholars in this undertaking. 
The difficulty of finding translators, both willing 
and competent to take a part in it, proved far 
greater than I had anticipated. Even when I had 
secured the assistance of a number of excellent 
scholars, and had received their promises of prompt 
co-operation, illness, domestic affliction, and even 
death asserted their control over all human affairs. 
Professor Childers, who had shown the warmest 
interest in our work, and on whom I chiefly de- 
pended for the Pali literature of the Buddhists, was 
taken from us, an irreparable loss to Oriental scholar- 
ship in general, and to our undertaking in particular. 
Among native scholars, whose co-operation I had 
been particularly desired to secure, Rajendralal Mitra, 
who had promised a translation of the Vayu-puraza, 
was prevented by serious illness from fulfilling his 
engagement. In other cases sorrow and sickness have 
caused, at all events, serious delay in the translation 
of the very books which were to have inaugurated 
this Series. However, new offers of assistance have 
come, and I hope that more may still come from 
Oriental scholars both in India and England, so 
that the limit of time which had been originally 

"  http:/ /www.holybooks.com/the-sacred-books-of-the-east-all-50-volumes/ 

xl PREFACE TO THE 

assigned to the publication of twenty-four volumes 
may not, I hope, be much exceeded. 

Tue Sacrep Books or THE East, TRANSLATED, WITH INTRODUC- 
TIONS AND NOTES, BY VARIOUS ORIENTAL SCHOLARS, AND EDITED 
BY F. Max MULLER. 

Apart from the interest which the Sacred Books of all religions 
possess in the eyes of the theologian, and, more particularly, of the 
missionary, to whom an accurate knowledge of them is as indispen- 
sable asa knowledge of the enemy’s country is to a general, these 
works have of late assumed a new importance, as viewed in the 
character of ancient historical documents, In every country where 
Sacred Books have been preserved, whether by oral tradition or by 
writing, they are the oldest records, and mark the beginning of 
what may be called documentary, in opposition to purely tradi- 
tional, history. 

There is nothing more ancient in India than the Vedas; and, if 
we except the Vedas and the literature connected with them, there 
is again no literary work in India which, so far as we know at 
present, can with certainty be referred to an earlier date than that 
of the Sacred Canon of the Buddhists. Whatever age we may 
assign to the various portions of the Avesta and to their final 
arrangement, there is no book in the Persian language of greater 
antiquity than the Sacred Books of the followers of Zarathustra, 
nay, even than their translation in Pehlevi. There may have been 
an extensive ancient literature in China long before Khung-fa-jze 
and Lao-3ze, but among all that was rescued and preserved of it, 
the five King and the four Shfi claim again the highest antiquity. 
As to the Koran, it is known to be the fountain-head both of the 
religion and of the literature of the Arabs. 

This being the case, it was but natural that the attention of the 
historian should of late have been more strongly attracted by these 
Sacred Books, as likely to afford most valuable information, not 
only on the religion, but also on the moral sentiments, the social 
institutions, the legal maxims of some of the most important nations 
of antiquity. There are not many nations that have preserved 
sacred writings, and many of those that have been preserved have 
but lately become accessible to us in their original form, through 
the rapid advance of Oriental scholarship in Europe. Neither 
Greeks, nor Romans, nor Germans, nor Celts, nor Slaves have 
left us anything that deserves the name of Sacred Books. The 

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST. xlt 

Homeric Poems are national Epics, like the R&am4yava, and the 
Nibelunge, and the Homeric Hymns have never received that 
general recognition or sanction which alone can impart to the 
poetical effusions of personal piety the sacred or canonical cha- 
racter which is the distinguishing feature of the Vedic Hymns. 
The sacred literature of the early inhabitants of Italy seems to have 
been of a liturgical rather than of a purely religious kind, and 
whatever the Celts, the Germans, the Slaves may have possessed 
of sacred traditions about their gods and heroes, having been 
handed down by oral tradition chiefiy, has perished beyond all 
hope of recovery. Some portions of the Eddas alone give us an 
idea of what the religious and heroic poetry of the Scandinavians 
may have been. The Egyptians possessed Sacred Books, and 
some of them, such as the Book of the Dead, have come down to 
us in various forms. There is a translation of the Book of the 
Dead by Dr. Birch, published in the fifth volume of Bunsen’s 
Egypt, and a new edition and translation of this important work 
may be expected from the combined labours of Birch, Chabas, 
Lepsius, and Naville. In Babylon and Assyria, too, important 
fragments of what may be called a Sacred Literature have lately 
come to light. The interpretation, however, of these Hieroglyphic 
and Cuneiform texts is as yet so difficult that, for the present, they 
are of interest to the scholar only, and hardly available for histo- 
rical purposes, 

Leaving out of consideration the Jewish and Christian Scriptures, 
it appears that the only great and original religions which profess 
to be founded on Sacred Books’, and have preserved them in 
manuscript, are :— 

1. The religion of the Brahmans. 

2. The religion of the followers of Buddha. 

3. The religion of the followers of Zarathustra. 
4. The religion of the followers of Khung-f(-3ze. 
5. The religion of the followers of LAo-3ze. 

6. The religion of the followers of Mohammed. 

A desire for a trustworthy translation of the Sacred Books of 
these six Eastern religions has often been expressed. Several have 
been translated into English, French, German, or Latin, but in 
some cases these translations are difficult to procure, in others they 
are loaded with notes and commentaries, which are intended for 

1 Introduction to the Science of Religion, by F. Max Muller 
(Longmans, 1873), p. 104. 

xlii PREFACE TO THE 

rg e e a 

students by profession only. Oriental scholars have been blamed 
for not having as yet supplied a want so generally felt, and so fre- 
quently expressed, as a complete, trustworthy, and readable transla- 
tion of the principal Sacred Books of the Eastern Religions. The 
reasons, however, why hitherto they have shrunk from such an 
undertaking are clear enough. The difficulties in many cases of 
giving complete translations, and not selections only, are very great. 
There is still much work to be done in a critical restoration of the 
original texts, in an examination of their grammar and metres, and 
in determining the exact meaning of many words and passages. 
That kind of work is naturally far more attractive to scholars than 
a mere translation, particularly when they cannot but feel that, 
with the progress of our knowledge, many a passage which now 
seems clear and easy, may, on being re-examined, assume a new 
import. Thus while scholars who are most competent to under- 
take a translation, prefer to devote their time to more special 
researches, the work of a complete translation is deferred to the 
future, and historians are left under the impression that Oriental 
scholarship is still in so unsatisfactory a state as to make any 
reliance on translations of the Veda, the Avesta, or the Tao-te 
King extremely hazardous. 

It is clear, therefore, that a translation of the principal Sacred 
Books of the East can be carried out only at a certain sacrifice. 
Scholars must leave for a time their own special researches in 
order to render the general results already obtained accessible to 
the public at large. And even then, really useful results can be 
achieved viribus unitis only. If four of the best Egyptologists 
have to combine in order to produce a satisfactory edition and 
translation of one of the Sacred Books of ancient Egypt, a much 
larger number of Oriental scholars will be required for translating 
the Sacred Books of the Brahmans, the Buddhists, the Zoroastrians, 
the followers of Khung-f(-3ze, Lao-}ze, and Mohammed. 

Lastly, there was the most serious difficulty of all, a difficulty 
which no scholar could remove, viz. the difficulty of finding the 
funds necessary for carrying out so large an undertaking. No 
doubt there exists at present a very keen interest in questions 
connected with the origin, the growth, and decay of religion. But 
much of that interest is theoretic rather than historical. How 
people might or could or should have elaborated religious ideas, is 
a topic most warmly discussed among psychologists and theolo- 
gians, but a study of the documents, in which alone the actual 
growth of religious thought can be traced, is much neglected. 

http:/ /www.holybooks.com/the-sacred-books-of-the-east-all-50-volumes/ 

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST. xliii 

A faithful, unvarnished prose translation of the Sacred Books of 
India, Persia, China, and Arabia, though it may interest careful 
students, will never, I fear, excite a widespread interest, or com- 
mand a circulation large enough to make it a matter of private 
enterprise and commercial speculation. 

No doubt there is much in these old books that is startling by 

its very simplicity and truth, much that is elevated and elevating, 
much that is beautiful and sublime; but people who have vague 
ideas of primeval wisdom and the splendour of Eastern poetry will 
soon find themselves grievously disappointed. It cannot be too 
strongly stated, that the chief, and, in many cases, the only interest 
of the Sacred Books of the East is historical; that much in them is 
extremely childish, tedious, if not repulsive; and that no one but 
the historian will be able to understand the important lessons which 
they teach. It would have been impossible to undertake a trans- 
lation even of the most important only of the Sacred Books of the 
East, without the support of an Academy or a University which 
recognises the necessity of rendering these works more generally 
accessible, on the same grounds on which it recognises the duty of 
collecting and exhibiting in Museums the petrifactions of bygone 
ages, little concerned whether the public admires the beauty of 
fossilised plants and broken skeletons, as long as hard-working 
students find there some light for reading once more the darker 
pages in the history of the earth. 
' Having been so fortunate as to secure that support, having also 
received promises of assistance from some of the best Oriental 
scholars in England and India, I hope I shall be able, after the 
necessary preparations are completed, to publish about three 
volumes of translations every year, selecting from the stores of the 
six so-called ‘Book-religions’ those works which at present can be 
translated, and which are most likely to prove useful. All trans- 
lations will be made from the original texts, and where good 
translations exist already, they will be carefully revised by compe- 
tent scholars. Such is the bulk of the religious literature of the 
Brahmans and the Buddhists, that to attempt a complete translation 
would be far beyond the powers of one generation of scholars. 
Still, if the interest in the work itself should continue, there is no 
reason why this series of translations should not be carried on, 
even after those who commenced it shall have ceased from their 
labours. 

What I contemplate at present, and I am afraid at my time of 
life even this may seem too sanguine, is no more than a Series 

xliv PREFACE TO THE 

of twenty-four volumes, the publication of which will probably 
extend over eight years. In this Series I hope to comprehend the 
following books, though I do not pledge myself to adhere strictly 
to this outline :— 

1, From among the Sacred Books of the Brahmans I hope to 
give a translation of the Hymns of the Rig-veda. While I shall 
continue my translation of selected hymns of that Veda, a traduc- 
tion raisonnee which is intended for Sanskrit scholars only, on 
the same principles which I have followed in the first volume’, 
explaining every word and sentence that seems to require elucida- 
tion, and carefully examining the opinions of previous commen- 
tators, both native and European, I intend to contribute a freer 
translation of the hymns to this Series, with a few explanatory 
notes only, such as are absolutely necessary to enable readers who 
are unacquainted with Sanskrit to understand the thoughts of the 
Vedic poets. The translation of perhaps another Samhita, one or 
two of the Brahmaaas, or portions of them, will have to be included 
in our Series, as well as the principal Upanishads, theosophic trea- 
tises of great interest and beauty. There is every prospect of an 
early appearance of a translation of the Bhagavad-git4, of the most 
important among the sacred Law-books, and of one at least of the 
Pura#as. I should have wished to include a translation of some of 
the Gain books, of the Granth of the Sikhs, and of similar works 
illustrative of the later developments of religion in India, but there 
is hardly room for them at present. 

2. The Sacred Books of the Buddhists will be translated chiefly 
from the two original collections, the Southern in Pali, the 
Northern in Sanskrit. Here the selection will, no doubt, be most 
difficult. Among the first books to be published will be, I hope, 
Sfitras from the Digha Nikaya, a part of the Vinaya-pifaka, the 
Dhammapada, the Divy4vaddna, the Lalita-vistara, or legendary 
life of Buddha. 

3. The Sacred Books of the Zoroastrians lie within a smaller 
compass, but they will require fuller notes and commentaries in 
order to make a translation intelligible and useful. 

4. The books which enjoy the highest authority with the fol- 
lowers of Khung-fd-3ze are the King and the Shi. Of the former 
the Sh King or Book of History; the Odes of the Temple and 

1 Rig-veda-sanhita, The Sacred Hymns of the Brahmans, trans- 
lated and explained by F. Max Muller. Vol. i. Hymns to the 
Maruts or the Storm-Gods. London, 1869. 

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST. xlv 

the Altar, and other pieces illustrating the ancient religious views 
and practices of the Chinese, in the Shih King or Book of Poetry; 
the Yi King; the Lt Af; and the Hsigo King or Classic of Filial 
Piety, will all be given, it is hoped, entire. ‘Of the latter, the Series 
will contain the Xung Yung or Doctrine of the Mean; the Ta Hsio 
or Great Learning; all Confucius’ utterances in the Lun Yu or Con- 
fucian Analects, which are of a religious nature, and refer to the 
principles of his moral system; and Mang-jze’s Doctrine of the 
Goodness of Human Nature. 

5. For the system of L&o-3ze we require only a translation of 
the Tao-teh King with some of its commentaries, and, it may be, 
an authoritative work to illustrate the actual operation of its 
principles. 

6. For Islam, all that is essential is a trustworthy translation of 
the Koran. 

It will be my endeavour to divide the twenty-four volumes which 
are contemplated in this Series as equally as possible among the 
six religions. But much must depend on the assistance which I 
receive from Oriental scholars, and also on the interest and the 

wishes of the public. s 
F. MAX MULLER. 
Oxrorp, October, 1876. 

The following distinguished scholars, all of them 
occupying the foremost rank in their own special 
departments of Oriental literature, are at present 
engaged in preparing translations of some of the 
Sacred Books of the East: S. Beal, R. G. Bhan-: 
darkar, G. Buhler, A. Burnell, E. B. Cowell, J. 
Darmesteter, T, W. Rhys Davids, J. Eggeling, 
V. Fausbdll, H. Jacobi, J. Jolly, H. Kern, F. Kiel- 
horn, J. Legge, H. Oldenberg, E. H. Palmer, R. 
Pischel, K. T. Telang, E. W. West. 

The works which for the present have been 
selected for translation are the following: 

I. ANCIENT VEDIC RELIGION. 

Hymns of the Azg-veda. 
The Satapatha-brahmaza. 

xlvi PREFACE TO THE 

The Upanishads. 
The G7rzhya-sutras of Hirazyakesin and others. 

II. LAW-BOOKS IN PROSE. 

The Sutras of Apastamba, Gautama, Baudhayana, 
Vasish¢ha, Vishau, &c. 

TI, LAW-BOOKS IN VERSE. 
The Laws of Manu, Y4giiavalkya, &c. 

IV. Later BRAHMANISM. 

The Bhagavad-gita. 
The Vayu-puraza. 

V. BuppDuHIsM. 
1. Pali Documents. 

The Mahaparinibbana Sutta, the Tevigga Sutta, 
the Mahasudassana Sutta, the Dhammakakkappa- 
vattana Sutta; the Suttanipata; the Mahdvagga, 
the Xullavagga, and the Patimokkha. 

2. Sanskrit Documents. 
The Divyavadana and Saddharmapuzdartka. 
3. Chinese Documents. 
The Phd-yao King, or life of Buddha. 
4. Prakrit Gaina Documents. 

The Agaranga Sutra, Dasavaikdlika Sdtra, Sutra- 
kyztanga, and Uttaradhyayana Satra. 

VI. Parsi RELIGION. 

1. Zend Documents. 
The Vendidad. 

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST. xl vit 

2. Pehlevi and Parsi Documents. 

The Bundahis, Bahman Yasht, Sh4yast-l4-shayast, 
Dadistani Dint, Mainyei Khard. 

VII. MoHAMMEDANISM. 
The Koran. 

VIII. Curinese RELIGION. 
1. Confucianism. 

The Sha King, Shih King, Hsiao King, Yt King, 
Li At, Lun Yu, and Mang-yze. 

2. TAoism. 

The T4eo-teh King, Awang-3ze, and Kan Ying 
Phien. 

xIviil PREFACE TO THE 

- TRANSLITERATION OF ORIENTAL 
ALPHABETS. 

The system of transcribing Oriental words with 
Roman types, adopted by the translators of the 
Sacred Books of the East, is, on the whole, the 
same which I first laid down in my Proposals for 
a Missionary Alphabet, 1854, and which afterwards 
I shortly described in my Lectures on the Science 
of Language, Second Series, p. 169 (ninth edition). 
That system allows of great freedom in its appli- 
cation to different languages, and has, therefore, 
recommended itself to many scholars, even if they 
had long been accustomed to use their own system 
of transliteration. 

It rests in fact on a few principles only, which 
may be applied to individual languages according to 
the views which each student has formed for him- 
self of the character and the pronunciation of the 
vowels and consonants of any given alphabet. 

It does not differ essentially from the Standard 
Alphabet proposed by Professor Lepsius. It only 
endeavours to realise, by means of the ordinary 
types which are found in every printing office, what 
my learned friend has been enabled to achieve, it 
may be in a more perfect manner, by means of a 
number of new types with diacritical marks, cast 
expressly for him by the Berlin Academy. 

The general principles of what, on account of its 
easy application to all languages, I have called the 
Missionary Alphabet, are these : 

I. No letters are to be used which do not exist 
in ordinary founts, 

-http:/ /www.holybooks.com/the-sacred-books-of-the-east-all-50-volumes/ 

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST. xlix 

2. The same Roman type is always to represent 
the same foreign letter, and the same foreign letter 
is always to be represented by the same Roman 
type. 

3. Simple letters are, as a rule, to be represented 
by simple, compound by compound types. 

4. Itis not attempted to indicate the pronuncia- 
tion of foreign languages, but only to represent 
foreign letters by Roman types, leaving the pro- 
nunciation to be learnt, as it is now, from gram- 
mars or from conversation with natives, 

5. The foundation of every system of translitera- 
tion must consist of a classification of the typical 
sounds of human speech. Such classification may 
be more or less perfect, more or less minute, accord- 
ing to the objects in view. For ordinary purposes 
the classification in vowels and consonants, and of 
consonants again in gutturals, dentals, and labials 
suffices. In these three classes we distinguish hard 
(not-voiced) and sonant (voiced) consonants, each 
being liable to aspiration; nasals, sibilants, and 
semivowels, sonie of these also, being either voiced 
or not-voiced. 

6. After having settled the typical sounds, we 
assign to them, as much as possible, the ordinary 
Roman types of the first class. 

7. We then arrange in every language which 
possesses a richer alphabet, all remaining letters, 
according to their affinities, as modifications of the 
nearest typical letters, or as letters of the second 
and third class. Thus linguals in Sanskrit are treated 
as nearest to dentals, palatals to gutturals. 

8. The manner of expressing such modifications 
is uniform throughout. While all typical letters of 

d 

(3] 

l PREFACE TO THE 

the first class are expressed by Roman types, modi- 
fied letters of the second class are expressed by 
italics, modified letters of the third class by small 
capitals. Only in extreme cases, where another class 
of modified types is wanted, are we compelled to 
have recourse either to diacritical marks, or to a 
different fount of types. 

9. Which letters in each language are to be 
considered as primary, secondary, or tertiary may, 
to a certain extent, be left to the discretion of 
individual scholars. 

10. As it has been found quite impossible to 
devise any practical alphabet that should accurately 
represent the pronunciation of words, the Missionary 
Alphabet, by not attempting to indicate minute 
shades of pronunciation, has at all events the 
advantage of not misleading readers in their pro- 
nunciation of foreign words. An italic ¢, for instance, 
or a small capital T, serves simply as a warning that 
this is not the ordinary t, though it has some affinity 
with it. How it is to be pronounced must be learnt 
for each language, as it now is, from a grammar 
or otherwise. Thus ¢ in Sanskrit is the lingual Z. 
How that ts to be pronounced, we must learn from 
the Pratisikhyas, or from the mouth of a highly 
educated Srotriya. We shall then learn that its 
pronunciation is really that of what we call the 
ordinary dental t, as in town, while the ordinary 
dental t in Sanskrit has a pronunciation of its own, 
extremely difficult to acquire for Europeans. 

11. Words or sentences which used to be printed 
in italics are spaced, 

li 

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST. 

. K “ee o> ee o y AURE E SR E COREY Ep Bal 
a eee 2 2 ee ee y le ee] yf lee else ee + eependse “ of 
eee | eee 2 p) T) r je e.o b co ejececoceoeoooe SPR SI 
yy | eee] ee eses a leere yy joc elrttsese eyendse ““ pI 

y cooler e | 2| A b |e y ee el eee eee eee ee + SMUT, SI 

(‘029 ‘soregered) 
SBJBVOYIPOU soem mo 

ee es ek seso . a gy a E a Siasa i ZI 
ae u 2 P. aejk g poe e e aED a a * Il 
e| K 2 2 eeej esee [eee le ee ele ee] q, [ees © sipeoney sua + OTF 
eee] y 2 > My eee eee ee eee eee eee q, |° °° ° suong dse “ 6 
eee N \ \ oe eo | ee ae oc elo ec we ol eo ew o’ : E E $s g 
qq e foa | a | mw aD a peee q eee ' + sadsw snyndg 1 
epee pee fee RA g eefe [lage] eee eee 
eee d O © ee ee ee eas ae Wl Se We eh ke eee blerrere-r * SITVIqel-ornqyny) g 
eve c sa o| a z 2 R re, Wa a 43 oe Je, 0 6 (e & * eyeardse 66 p 
see lg as c 2 w ce c,d BIPIW £ 
4J c coe ls ee] œ 9 "S E ss] ap [oe ecees eyeridse “ zg 
y e @ @ € C w ee | yg fJereeeeree ' + smuay, I 
"STEMI MH 

“SSV1O III | “S88ID I | 'SS%D I 
m SLINVNOSNOD 
“LHGVHdTV AUVNOISSIN 

“LSVFT AHL dO SHOOG GaAAYDVS AHL AO 
SNOILVISNVU J AHL XOA AaALdOdV SLAEVHdATY IVLINGIYG Ao NOILVUALIISNVA JT 

d 2 

PREFACE TO THE 

of a ee e.» o eee (E) Z oe ele o el eee Z snwutodse e Ze 
oO eee s. © © o oe o (%) Z oe o . 8 e ov @e I snulliedse ce 9g 
¢) C Ss oe o o. o o oe o yA eer o o o o e stud] “ ce 

K 
{ 

nes > Oe ea a R se a ee T 
a cee ele o 8 e.e... T zodee sngquidg ee 

2 
° . . e cee o oe 6 Gi ee ete ee] E E a 66 Ze 
eej ee eee eee eee eee] e ee 1 sesje ee gsnow e Ig 
I d f f Kai A aaa 2 oe we el woe I ces eee ee 6 BITBDOATHIEG OF 
u c A A ( i b SS cee u reese ee eee + + SISSBN EZ 
os er c c esej re es rr Ha ee CG a? 

> R e oso o|o o u up ee © © © o o ° eyeridse c 2z 
¢ 6 d e >o o «lee o . P e e o 6 o ooo oo oo SIPIN 92 
ee HL see le eel ess ee + + gaenatsee cs cz 
° ese 9 h e e o o|o o o 4} e o o ooo o o vyendse Ti $2 
0) p e o o o|o oo 4 eee oo eceee eee smua p, ez 

‘sougudd 
oe e o ee o o 2 eee oe SNZVTIQISsy stua ce ZZ 
Cre R |°!) & fee ef] °° snqepqusse rodse “ Ig 
° eee “eee ee o eee o (4) ee o >o © e © © o o o stud] ce oz 
Ld eee e o o ee o o e e o oe o o (4) eee e ee e o o eee Jadse snyudg 6I 

£| lAl] ¢ e f re [teteje] £ [occ tc ss + © soam gt 

ERATA - js | eee A  OC oO E | 

*(pann1yzu02) 

SIUI | “421Q9H | qy | mesg | Pd -puz wWysues |) |1 SINVNOSNO2 

“LUGVHdATV AMVNOISSIKN 

lii 

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST. 

J 
A 
u 

4 
eee 
eee 
e o o 

AA Fri rr 

a | 
AJA 

ne AS, 

ees 
d 

ee 6 

eo o e 

e» ee ee © BAIBSIA EC 

e. o o o o * eIgaAsnuy 89 
«ee ° sua] (73 49 

. + © gadse snyudg 9¢ 

* egeadse  “ gS 

t t SIBooAruaS p 
eee e SUN EG 
+++ e + QUNESMUOI, ZG 
e eyendse “Ig 
seere es SPIN og 

ee o vyendse ce 6f 

e o eo o ou o @ smur, SP 
"SOTBIQe'T 

e. > o o stua €¢ LP 
++ + xadse snyd 9p 

sonuwærp T SP 

® SIVOLI «6 PP 
e +e sTwooATUIEg E$ 

e.e- oee SIBEBN SP 
°° * ajendse (23 IP 

e... oree SIPIW OF 

ee s}eridse ce 6€ 
"see ee e SMUL 8E 

(023 ‘sorenSun) 

OBIVOGIpou soreruoqd 

PREFACE TO THE 

liv 

n 

ny 

eee A 
o ak 

Ig ‘ta 

L4: . oe 
? oo 
ə a= 
Q k 
n a 
r 
1 = 
3 B 
@ Rit 
g 2 

"asuy | “mauqaH 

‘quy 

r eseje sosjes’ o °° > * BBA SIBIQB[-OAN}NL) LZ 
o ; Mo so 7. ee BPR; ELIGE 9g 
s 5 1 e o > o e o 9 -** eqoely SI[e}Sleq GZ 
eee ce ee ea ee ee ° © BROBIZ senmo FZ 
f ctl ee eel ee © I(noyno = £6 
coe of eee se [oretoe e+ (ng) na i j GG 
=< (no) 3| We |---| (na) | ny | smeqeromyn3 snduogiqdiq 18 
re ( a ua fos] (0) (ne)g| * °° + eduoy es oz 
e e.. q cee eee et eee | O |° >> * STASI siquy 6I 
feces fore lece eles I(ng)t0 “ g gI 
. os ae ‘ 2+ + | (R) s "s LI 
N |e ores} a leer] Ww) ] sijeyeed-omnjgn3 snZuoy4qdiq 91 
Cel © 1R ad] a lees | @ [Gels ++ suo s ST 
ee (OP LO) nanan +++] o j° staa smeered-omymo pI 
“al ( e © ne ee (n) QV cre see es BRUT ‘6 €I 
= . o < £ oe eel eee n os <°. oet STAN BITBIQCVT ZI 
ee . bh ie See TE E e3uo] 66 II 
Be a h staaaq syendury OT 
W ‘ i e o e eevee o suoj 6c 6 
Des ia Bilecesefoes] g [ocr creecs SlAdIq BIVJUIAG g 
-A c e 5 ore. oS (3) p [occteees suoj “ L 
2 j a jee e Ts are a sraaaq sreeed 9 
7 e we ua P a (2) Sf a & sere suoj (13 fe 
— |ue . a ooo] g [ose eeee STAI SUNMA $ 
° "uy ( D e eee ee Q e o o o o o o STTVIqey r ce € 
ees er . y hermas steyeyed-ofudaey Z 
_ — o |eeeeeeeeees STUN T 
T aes meen) aa “sse(D Ul “S519 IT “ST 
esad | Pd *puəz IASULS |  a— — ~ ‘STHMOA 

“LHEUVHAIIV AUVNOISSIN 

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST. lv 

APPROXIMATE PRONUNCIATION OF THE ROMAN LETTERS 
AS REPRESENTING THE SANSKRIT ALPHABET. 

VowesgLs. n ST as in new 
a` W asin sam y U p yet 
a wT , psalm 8 W , sharp 
i = ,, knit Dentals. 
i E ,, neat t R as in tin (ie onea ine tect) 
ri WT =, fiery th N ,, lanthorn 
re Qi» d € » din 
li @ , friendly dh W@W ,, landholder 
if ey» — n A =, nay 
u 3 ,, full l S , „ let 
a J ,, fool l Sn — 
-e Z ,, date 8 a 4 grass 
ai e » aisle Linguals. 
o TH ,, note t Z as in town (fp wnccke region) 
au ®t, proud th Z ,, outhouse 
d 3 ,, done 
CONSONANTS. i dh @ ,„ rodhook 
Gutturals. n w , no 
k W as in kite r T „ red 
kh W , inkhorn sh © , shun 
g T 5, gate Labials. 
gh @ 4 springhead p @as in pan 
h(ng) F » sing ph TW ,, topheavy 
h © » hear b W 4, bed 
Palatals. bh XW , clubhouse 
k @ as in church m a , mill 
kh %& , church-history v J 4, live 
g W ,„ jolly m wt ,, Anusvara (nasai) 
gh ® 4, bridge-house h WH: ,, Visarga (breathing) 

Proper names have frequently been left in their ordinary spelling, e. g. 
Rajendra, instead of Ragendra. In words which have almost become 
English, the diacritical marks have often been omitted, e.g. Rig-veda, 
instead of Rig-veda; Brahman, instead of Brahmana; Confucius, 
Zoroaster, Koran, &c. 

INTRODUCTION 

TO 

THE UPANISHADS. 

FIRST TRANSLATION OF THE UPANISHADS. 
DARA SHUKOH, ANQUETIL DUPERRON, SCHOPENHAUER. 

THE ancient Vedic literature, the foundation of the 
whole literature of India, which has been handed down 
in that country in an unbroken succession from the earliest 
times within the recollection of man to the present day, 
became known for the first time beyond the frontiers of 
India through the Upanishads. The Upanishads were 
_ translated from Sanskrit into Persian by, or, it may be, for 
Dara Shukoh, the eldest son of Shah Jeh4n, an enlightened 
prince, who openly professed the liberal religious tenets of 
the great Emperor Akbar, and even wrote a book intended 
to reconcile the religious doctrines of Hindus and Moham- 
medans. He seems first to have heard of the Upanishads 
during his stay in Kashmir in 1640. He afterwards in- 
vited several Pandits from Benares to Delhi, who were to 
assist him in the work of translation. The translation 
was finished in 1657. Three years after the accomplish- 
ment of this work, in 1659, the prince was put to death by 
his brother Aurangzib’, in reality, no doubt, because he 
was the eldest son and legitimate successor of Shah Jehan, 
but under the pretext that he was an infidel, and dangerous 
to the established religion of the empire. 

When the Upanishads had once been translated from 
Sanskrit into Persian, at that time the most widely read 
language of the East and understood likewise by many 
European scholars, they became generally accessible to 

1 Elphinstone, History of India, ed. Cowfll, p. 610, 

lviii UPANISHADS. 

all who took an interest in the religious literature of 
India. It is true that under Akbars reign (1556-1586) 
similar translations had been prepared, but neither those 
nor the translations of Dara Shukoh attracted the attention 
of European scholars till the year 1775. In that year 
Anquetil Duperron, the famous traveller and discoverer 
of the Zend-avesta, received one MS. of the Persian trans- 
lation of the Upanishads, sent to him by M. Gentil, the 
French resident at the court of Shuja ud daula, and brought 
to France by M. Bernier. After receiving another MS., 
Anquetil Duperron collated the two, and translated the 
Persian translation ? into French (not published), and into 
Latin. That Latin translation was published in 1801 and 
1802, under the title of ‘Oupnek’hat, id est, Secretum tegen- 
dum: opus ipsa in India rarissimum, continens antiquam et 
arcanam, seu theologicam et philosophicam doctrinam, e 
quatuor sacris Indorum libris Rak baid, Djedjer baid, Sam 
baid, Athrban baid excerptam; ad verbum, e Persico 
idiomate, Samkreticis vocabulis intermixto, in Latinum 
conversum: Dissertationibus et Annotationibus diffici- 
liora explanantibus, illustratum: studio et opera Anquetil 
Duperron, Indicopleustæ. Argentorati, typis et impensis 
fratrum Levrault, vol. i, 1801; vol. ii, 1802 3. 

This translation, though it attracted considerable interest 
among scholars, was written in so utterly unintelligible a 
style, that it required the lynxlike perspicacity of an intre- 

1 M. M., Introduction to the Science of Religion, p. 79. 

* Several other MSS. of this translation have since come to light; one at 
Oxford, Codices Wilsoniani, 399 and 400. Anquetil Duperron gives the following 
title of the Persian translation: ‘ Hanc interpretationem rv Oupnekhathai quo- 
rumvis quatuor librorum Beid, quod, designatum cum secreto magno (per 
secretum magnum) est, et integram cognitionem luminis luminum, hic Fakir 
sine tristitia (Sultan) Mohammed Dara Schakoh ipse, cum significatione recta, 
cum sinceritate, in tempore sex mensium (postremo die, secundo rou Schonbeh, 
vigesimo) sexto mensis roo Ramazzan, anno 1067 ro’ Hedjri (Christi, 1657) in 
urbe Delhi, in mansione nakhe noudeh, cum absolutione ad finem fecit pervenire. 
The MS. was copied by Atma Ram in the year 1767 a.p. Anquetil Duperron 
adds: ‘Absolutum est hoc Apographum versionis Latins vay quinquaginta 
Oupnekhatha, ad verbum, e Persico idiomate, Samskreticis vocabulis inter- 
mixto, factz, die g Octobris, 1796, 18 Brumaire, anni 4, Reipublic. Gall. 
Parisiis.’ 2 

3 M.M., History of Abcient Sanskrit Literature, second edition, p. 325. 

INTRODUCTION. lix 

pid philosopher, such as Schopenhauer, to discover a thread 
through such a labyrinth. Schopenhauer, however, not only 
found and followed such a thread, but he had the courage to 
proclaim to an incredulous age the vast treasures of thought 
which were lying buried beneath that fearful jargon. 

As Anquetil Duperron’s volumes have become scarce, I 
shall here give a short specimen of his translation, which 
corresponds to the first sentences of my translation of the 
K handogya-upanishad (p. 1):—‘Oum hoc verbum (esse) 
adkit ut sciveris, sic ro maschghouli fac (de eo medi- 
tare), quod ipsum hoc verbum aodkit est; propter illud 
quod hoc (verbum) oum, in Sam Beid, cum voce alta, 
cum harmonia pronunciatum fiat. 

‘Adkiteh porro cremor (optimum, selectissimum) 
est: quemadmodum ex (præ) omni quieto (non moto), 
et moto, pulvis (terra) cremor (optimum) est; et e (præ) 
terra aqua cremor est; et ex aqua, comedendum (victus) 
cremor est; (et) e comedendo, comedens cremor est; et e 
comedente, loquela (id quod dicitur) cremor est; et e 
loquela, airet roo Beid, et ex aiet, ro siam, id est, cum har- 
monia (pronunciatum); et e Sam, 16 adkit, cremor est ; 
id est, oum, voce alta, cum harmonia pronunciare, aokit, 
cremor cremorum (optimum optimorum) est. Major, ex 
(præ) adkit, cremor alter non est.’ 

Schopenhauer not only read this translation carefully, 
but he makes no secret of it, that his own philosophy is 
powerfully impregnated by the fundamental doctrines of 
the Upanishads. He dwells on it again and again, and it 
seems both fair to Schopenhauers memory and highly 
important for a true appreciation of the philosophical value 
of the Upanishads, to put together what that vigorous 
thinker has written on those ancient rhapsodies of truth. 

In his ‘Welt als Wille und Vorstellung, he writes, 
in the preface to the first edition, p. xiii: 

“If the reader has also received the benefit of the Vedas, the 
access to which by means of the Upanishads is in my eyes 
the greatest privilege which this still young century (1818) 
may claim before all previous centuries, (for I anticipate 
that the influence of Sanskrit literature will not be less pro- 

lx UPANISHADS. 

found than the revival of Greek in the fourteenth century, )—if 
then the reader, I say, has received his initiation in primeval 
Indian wisdom, and received it with an open heart, he will 
be prepared in the very best way for hearing what I have 
to tell him. It will not sound to him strange, as to many 
others, much less disagreeable ; for I might, if it did not 
sound conceited, contend that every one of the detached 
statements which constitute the Upanishads, may be de- 
duced as a necessary result from the fundamental thoughts 
which I have to enunciate, though those deductions them- 
selves are by no means to be found there.’ 

And again!: 

‘If I consider how difficult it is, even with the assistance 
of the best and carefully educated teachers, and with all 
the excellent philological appliances collected in the course 
of this century, to arrive at a really correct, accurate, and 
living understanding of Greek and Roman authors, whose 
language was after all the language of our own predecessors 
in Europe, and the mother of our own, while Sanskrit, on 
the contrary, was spoken thousands of years ago in distant 
India, and can be learnt only with appliances which are as 
yet very imperfect ;—if I add to this the impression which 
the translations of Sanskrit works by European scholars, 
with very few exceptions, produce on my mind, I cannot 
resist a certain suspicion that our Sanskrit scholars do not 
understand their texts much better than the higher class of 
schoolboys their Greek. Of course, as they are not boys, 
but men of knowledge and understanding, they put together, 
out of what they do understand, something like what the 
general meaning may have been, but much probably creeps 
in ex ingenio. It is still worse with the Chinese of our 
European Sinologues. 

‘If then I consider, on the other hand, that Sultan 
Mohammed Dara Shukoh, the brother of Aurangzib, was 
born and bred in India, was a learned, thoughtful, and 
enquiring man, and therefore probably understood his 
Sanskrit about as well as we our Latin, that moreover 

1 Schopenhauer, Parerga, third edition, II, p. 426. 

INTRODUCTION. lxi 

he was assisted by a number. of the most learned Pandits, 
all this together gives me at once a very high opinion of 
his translation of the Vedic Upanishads into Persian. If, 
besides this, I see with what profound and quite appro- 
priate reverence Anquetil Duperron has treated that 
Persian translation, rendering it in Latin word by word, 
retaining, in spite of Latin grammar, the Persian syntax, 
and all the Sanskrit words which the Sultan himself had 
left untranslated, though explaining them in a glossary, 
I feel the most perfect confidence in reading that transla- 
tion, and that confidence’ soon receives its most perfect 
justification. For how entirely does the Oupnekhat breathe 
throughout the holy spirit of the Vedas! How is every 
one who by a diligent study of its Persian Latin has 
become familiar with that incomparable book, stirred by 
that spirit to the very depth of his soul! How does every 
line display its firm, definite, and throughout harmonious 
meaning! From every sentence deep, original, and sublime 
thoughts arise, and the whole is pervaded by a high and 
holy and earnest spirit. Indian air surrounds us, and 
original thoughts of kindred spirits. And oh, how thoroughly 
is the mind here washed clean of all early engrafted Jewish 
superstitions, and of all philosophy that cringes before a 
superstitions! In the whole world there is no study, except 
that of the originals, so beneficial and so elevating as that 
of the Oupnekhat. It has been the solace of my life, it 
will be the solace of my death! Le 

‘Though ? I feel the highest regard for the religious and 
philosophical works of Sanskrit literature, I have not been 
able to derive much pleasure from their poetical composi- 
tions. Nay, they seem to me sometimes as tasteless and 
monstrous as the sculpture of India. ` 

‘In? most of the pagan philosophical writers of the first 
Christian centuries we see the Jewish theism, which, as 
Christianity, was soon to become the faith of the people, 
shining through, much as at present we may perceive 
shining through in the writings of the learned, the native 

1 Loc. cit. II, pp. 425. 3 Loc. cit. I, p. 59. 

lxit UPANISHADS. ° 

pantheism of India, which is destined sooner or later to 
become the faith of the people. Ex oriente lux, 

This may seem strong language, and, in some respects, 
too strong. But I thought it right to quote it here, be- 
cause, whatever may be urged against Schopenhauer, he 
was a thoroughly honest thinker and honest speaker, and 
no one would suspect him of any predilection for what has 
been so readily called Indian mysticism. That Schelling 
and his school should use rapturous language about the 
Upanishads, might carry little weight with that large class 
of philosophers by whom everything beyond the clouds 
of their own horizon is labelled mysticism. But that 
Schopenhauer should have spoken of the Upanishads as 
‘products of the highest wisdom’ (Ausgeburt der hechsten 
Weisheit)}, that he should have placed the pantheism 
there taught high above the pantheism of Bruno, Male- 
branche, Spinoza, and Scotus Erigena, as brought to light 
again at Oxford in 16812, may perhaps secure a more con- 
siderate reception for these relics of ancient wisdom than 
anything that I could say in their favour. 

RAMMOHUN Roy. 

Greater, however, than the influence exercised on the 
philosophical thought of modern Europe, has been the 
impulse which these same Upanishads have imparted to 
the religious life of modern India. In about the same year 
(1774 or 1775) when the first MS. of the Persian translation 
of the Upanishads was received by Anquetil Duperron, 
Rammohun Roy? was born in India, the reformer and 
reviver of the ancient religion of the Brahmans. A man 
who in his youth could write a book ‘Against the Idolatry 
of all Religions, and who afterwards expressed in so many 
exact words his ‘belief in the divine authority of Christ 4,’ 
was not likely to retain anything of the sacred literature of 
his own religion, unless he had perceived in it the same 

1 Loc. cit. II, p. 428. 

* Loc. cit. I, p.6. These passages were pointed out to me by Professor Noire. 
® Born 1774, died at 3.304.m., on Friday, 28th September, 1833. 

$ Last Days of Rammohun Roy, by Mary Carpenter, 1866, p. 135. 

INTRODUCTION. xiii 

divine authority which he recognised in the teaching of 
Christ. He rejected the Purdzas, he would not have been 
swayed in his convictions by the authority of the Laws of 
Manu, or even by the sacredness of the Vedas. He was 
above all that. But he discovered in the Upanishads and 
in the so-called Vedanta something different from all the 
rest, something that ought not to be thrown away, some- 
thing that, if rightly understood, might supply the right 
native soil in which alone the seeds of true religion, aye, of 
true Christianity, might spring up again and prosper in India, 
as they had once sprung up and prospered from out the 
philosophies of Origen or Synesius. European scholars 
have often wondered that Rammohun Roy, in his defence 
of the Veda, should have put aside the Samhit4s and the 
Brahmazas, and laid his finger on the Upanishads only, as 
the true kernel of the whole Veda. Historically, no doubt, 
he was wrong, for the Upanishads presuppose both the 
hymns and the liturgical books of the Veda. But as the 
ancient philosophers distinguished in the Veda between the 
Karma-kaada and the Gnana-kasda, between works and 
knowledge; as they themselves pointed to the learning of 
the sacred hymns and the performance of sacrifices as a 
preparation only for that enlightenment which was re- 
served as the highest reward for the faithful performance 
of all previous duties!, Rammohun Roy, like Buddha and 
other enlightened men before him, perceived that the time 
for insisting on all that previous discipline with its minute 
prescriptions and superstitious observances was gone, while 
the knowledge conveyed in the Upanishads or the Vedanta, 
enveloped though it may be in strange coverings, should 
henceforth form the foundation of a new religious life *. 
He would tolerate nothing idolatrous, not even in his 
mother, poor woman, who after joining his most bitter 
opponents, confessed to her son, before she set out on her 

t M. M, History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 319. 

3 ‘The adoration of the invisible Supreme Being is exclusively prescribed 
by the Upanishads or the principal parts of the Vedas and also by the Vedant.’ 
Rammohun Roy, Translation of the Kena-upanishad, Calcutta, 1816, p. 6. 
M. M., History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 320. 

nmm 

lxiv UPANISHADS. 

last pilgrimage to Juggernaut, where she died, that ‘he was 
right, but that she was a weak woman, and grown too old 
to give up the observances which were a comfort to her.’ It 
was not therefore from any regard of their antiquity or 
their sacred character that Rammohun Roy clung to the 
Upanishads, that he translated them into Bengali, Hindi, 
and English, and published them at his own expense. It 
was because he recognised in them seeds of eternal truth, 
and was bold enough to distinguish between what was 
essential in them and what was not, —a distinction, as he 
often remarked with great perplexity, which Christian 
teachers seemed either unable or unwilling to make’. 
The death of that really great and good man during his 
stay in England in 1833, was one of the severest blows that 
have fallen on the prospects of India. But his work has not 
been in vain. Like a tree whose first shoot has been killed 
by one winter frost, it has broken out again in a number of 
new and more vigorous shoots, for whatever the outward 
differences may be between the Adi Brahmo Sam§j of De- 
bendranath Tagore, or the Brahmo Samaj of India of 
Keshub Chunder Sen, or the Sadharan Brahmo Samaj, 
the common root of them all is the work done, once for all, 
by Rammohun Roy, That work may have disappeared 
from sight for a time, and its present manifestations may 
seem to many observers who are too near, not very 
promising. But in one form or another, under one name 
or another, I feel convinced that work will live. ‘In India,’ 
Schopenhauer writes, ‘ our religion will now and never strike 
root: the primitive wisdom of the human race will never be 
pushed aside there by the events of Galilee. On the con- 
trary, Indian wisdom will flow back upon Europe, and 
produce a thorough change in our knowing and thinking.’ 
Here, again, the great philosopher seems to me to have 
allowed himself to be carried away too far by his enthu- 
siasm for the less known. He is blind for the dark sides 
of the Upanishads, and he wilfully shuts his eyes against 
the bright rays of eternal truth in the Gospels, which even 

1 Last Days, p. 11. 

~ http: / /www.holybooks.com/the-sacred-books-of-the-east-all-50-volumes/ 

INTRODUCTION. lxv 

Rammohun Roy was quick enough to perceive behind the 
mists and clouds of tradition that gather so quickly round 
the sunrise of every religion. 

POSITION OF THE UPANISHADS IN VEDIC LITERATURE. 

If now we ask what has been thought of the Upanishads 
by Sanskrit scholars or by Oriental scholars in general, it 
must be confessed that hitherto they have not received at 
their hands that treatment which in the eyes of philo- 
sophers and theologians they seem so fully to deserve. 
When the first enthusiasm for such works as Sakuntala 
and Gita-Govinda had somewhat subsided, and Sanskrit 
scholars had recognised that a truly scholarlike study of 
Indian literature must begin with the beginning, the exclu- 
sively historical interest prevailed to so large an extent 
that the hymns of the Veda, the Brahmavas, and the 
Sutras absorbed all interest, while the Upanishads were 
put aside for a time as of doubtful antiquity, and there- 
fore of minor importance. 

My real love for Sanskrit literature was first kindled by 
the Upanishads. It was in the year 1844, when attending 
Schelling’s lectures at Berlin, that my attention was drawn 
to those ancient theosophic treatises, and I still possess my 
collations of the Sanskrit MSS. which had then just arrived 
at Berlin, the Chambers collection, and my copies of com- 
mentaries, and commentaries on commentaries, which I 
made at that time. Some of my translations which I 
left with Schelling, I have never been able to recover, 
though to judge from others which I still possess, the 
loss of them is of small consequence. Soon after leaving 
Berlin, when continuing my Sanskrit studies at Paris under 
Burnouf, I put aside the Upanishads, convinced that for a 
true appreciation of them it was necessary to study, first of 
all, the earlier periods of Vedic literature, as represented by 
the hymns and the Brahmaaas of the Vedas. 

In returning, after more than thirty years, to these 
favourite studies, I find that my interest in them, though 
it has changed in character, has by no means diminished. 

c 

lxvi UPANISHADS. 

It is true, no doubt, that the stratum of literature 
which contains the Upanishads is later than the Sam- 
hitas, and later than the Brahmamzas, but the first germs 
of Upanishad doctrines go back at least as far as the 
Mantra period, which provisionally has been fixed between 
1000 and 800 B.C. Conceptions corresponding to the 
general teaching of the Upanishads occur in certain hymns 
of the Rig-veda-samhite, they must have existed there- 
fore before that collection was finally closed. One hymn 
in the Samhita of the Rig-veda (I, 191) was designated 
by K4tydyana, the author of the Sarvanukramamika, as 
an Upanishad. Here, however, upanishad means rather 
a secret charm than a philosophical doctrine. Verses 
of the hymns have often been incorporated in the Upa- 
nishads, and among the Oupnekhats translated into Persian 
by Dara Shukoh we actually find the Purusha-sdkta, 
the goth hymn of the tenth book of the Rig-veda', 
forming the greater portion of the Bark’heh Soukt. In the 
Samhita of the Yagur-veda, however, in the Vagasaneyi- 
sekha, we meet with a real Upanishad, the famous Isa or 
{sAv4sya-upanishad, while the Sivasamkalpa, too, forms part 
of its thirty-fourth book ?. In the Brahmamas several U pani- 
shads occur, even in portions which are not classed as 
Aranyakas, as, for instance, the well-known Kena or Tala- 
vakara-upanishad. The recognised place, however, for the 
ancient Upanishads is in the Arazyakas, or forest-books, 
which, as a rule, form an appendix to the Brahmazas, but 
are sometimes included also under the general name of 
Brahmamza. Brahmaza, in fact, meaning originally the 
sayings of Brahmans, whether in the general sense of 
priests, or in the more special of Brahman-priest, is a name 
applicable not only to the books, properly so called, 
but to all old prose traditions, whether contained in the 
Samhitds, such as the Taittiriya-saszhit4, the Brahmamas, 
the Aranyakas, the Upanishads, and even, in certain cases, 
in the Sutras. We shall see in the introduction to the 
Aitareya-4razyaka, that that Aramyaka is in the beginning 

1 See Weber, Indische Studien, IX, p. 1 seq. 
2 See M. M., History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 317. 

INTRODUCTION. Ixvii 

a Brahmavza, a mere continuation of the Aitareya-brah- 
maza, explaining the Mahavrata ceremony, while its last 
book contains the Sutras or short technical rules explain- 
ing the same ceremony which in the first book had been 
treated in the style peculiar to the Brahmazas. In the same 
Aitareya-aranyaka, III, 2, 6, 6, a passage of the Upanishad 
is spoken of as a Brahmava, possibly as something like a 
Brahmamza, while something very like an Upanishad occurs 
in the Apastamba-sitras, and might be quoted therefore 
as a Sfitra', At all events the Upanishads, like the 
Aranyakas, belong to what Hindu theologians call Sruti, 
or revealed literature, in opposition to Smriti, or traditional 
literature, which is supposed to be founded on the former, 
and allowed to claim a secondary authority only ; and the 
earliest of these philosophical treatises will always, I be- 
lieve, maintain a place in the literature of the world, among 
the most astounding productions of the human mind in any 
age and in any country. 

DIFFERENT CLASSES OF UPANISHADS. 

The ancient Upanishads, i.e. those which occupy a 
place in the Samhitas, Brahmazas, and Aranyakas, must 
be, if we follow the chronology which at present is com- 
monly, though, it may be, provisionally only, received 
by Sanskrit scholars, older than 600 B.C., i.e. anterior 
to the rise of Buddhism. As to other. Upanishads, and 
their number is very large, which either stand by them- 
selves, or which are ascribed to the Atharva-veda, it is 
extremely difficult to fix their age. Some of them are, 
no doubt, quite modern, for mention is made even of 
an Allah-upanishad; but others may claim a far higher 
_antiquity than is generally assigned to them on internal 
evidence. I shall only mention that the name of Atharva- 
siras, an Upanishad generally assigned to a very. modern 
date, is quoted in the Sutras of Gautama and Baudhayana?; 

1 Apastamba, translated by Biihler, Sacred Books of the East, vol. ii, p. 75. 
3 Gautama, translated by Buhler, Sacred Books of the East, vol. ii, p. 27% 
and Introduction, p. lvi. 

This book was downloaded rom www.holybooks.com : 

Ixviii UPANISHADS. 

that the Sveta4svatara-upanishad, or the Svetasvatarazam 
Mantropanishad, though bearing many notes of later periods 
of thought, is quoted by Sankara in his commentary on 
the Ved4nta-sitras!; while the Nvzsimhottaratapaniya- 
upanishad forms part of the twelve Upanishads explained 
by Vidy4razya in his Sarvopanishad-arthanubhiti-prakasa. 
The Upanishads comprehended in that work are: | 
1. Aitareya-upanishad. 
2. Taittiriya-upanishad. 
3. Khandogya-upanishad. 
. Muzdaka-upanishad. 
Prasna-upanishad. 
Kaushitaki-upanishad. 
Maitrayamtya-upanishad. 
Kavhavalli-upanishad. 
g. Svetasvatara-upanishad. 
10. Brthad-dravyaka-upanishad. 
11, Talavakara (Kena)-upanishad. 
12. Nrisimhottaratapaniya-upanishad 3. 
The number of Upanishads translated by Dara Shukoh 
amounts to 50; their number, as given in the Mahavakya- 
mukt4vali and in the Muktika-upanishad, is 108%. Pro- 
fessor Weber thinks that their number, so far as we know 
at present, may be reckoned at 235%. In order, however, 
to arrive at so high a number, every title of an Upanishad 
would have to be counted separately, while in several cases 
it is clearly the same Upanishad which is quoted under dif- 
ferent names. In an alphabetical list which I published in 
1865 (Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenliandischen Gesell- 
schaft XIX, 137-158), the number of real Upanishads 
reached 149. To that number Dr. Burnell’ in his Catalogue 

DONT ANB 

1 Vedanta-siitras I, 1,11. 

2 One misses the {s or tsivasya-upanishad in this list. The Upanishads 
chiefly studied in Bengal are the Brihad-Aranyaka, Aitareya, Khandogya, Taitti- 
rtya, fsa, Kena, Katha, Prasna, Mundaka, and Mandikya, to which should be 
added the Svetasvatara. M.M., History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 325. 

* Dr. Burnell thinks that this is an artificial computation, 108 being a sacred 
number in Southern India. See Kielhom in Gough's Papers on Ancient Sanskrit 
Literature, p. 193. 

- * Weber, History of Sanskrit Literature, p. 155 note. 

§ Indian Antiquary, II, 267. 

INTRODUCTION. Ixix 

(p. 59) added 5, Professor Haug (Brahma und die Brah- 
manen) 16, making a sum total of 170. New names, however, 
are constantly being added in the catalogues of MSS. pub- 
lished by Biihler, Kielhorn, Burnell, Rajendralal Mitra, and 
others, and I shall reserve therefore a more complete list of 
Upanishads for a later volume. 

Though it is easy to see that these Upanishads belong to 
very different periods of Indian thought, any attempt to fix 
their relative age seems to me for the present almost hopeless. 
No one can doubt that the Upanishads which have had 
a place assigned to them in the Samhitas, Brahmazas, and 

ranzyakas are the oldest. Next to these we can draw a 
line to include the Upanishads clearly referred to in the 
Vedanta-sitras, or explained and quoted by Sankara, by 
Sayaza, and other more modern commentators. We can 
distinguish Upanishads in prose from Upanishads in mixed 
prose and verse, and again Upanishads in archaic verse from 
Upanishads in regular and continuous Anushtubh Slokas. 
We can also class them according to their subjects, and, at 
last, according to the sects to which they belong. But 
beyond this it is hardly safe to venture at present. Attempts 
have been made by Professor Weber and M. Regnaud to 
_ fix in each class the relative age of certain Upanishads, and 
I do not deny to their arguments, even where they conflict 
with each other, considerable weight in forming a preliminary 
judgment. But I know of hardly any argument which is 
really convincing, or which could not be met by counter 
arguments equally strong. Simplicity may be a sign of 
antiquity, but it is not so always, for what seems simple, 
may be the result of abbreviation. One Upanishad may 
give the correct, another an evidently corrupt reading, 
yet it does not follow that the correct reading may not be 
the result of an emendation. It is quite clear that a large 
mass of traditional Upanishads must have existed before 
they assumed their present form. Where two or three or 
four Upanishads contain the same story, told almost in the 
same words, they are not always copied from one another, 
but they have been settled independently, in different locali- 
ties, by different teachers, it may be, for different purposes. 

Ixx UPANISHADS. 

Lastly, the influence of S&kh4s or schools may have told 
more or less on certain Upanishads. Thus the Maitrayantya- 
upanishad, as we now possess it, shows a number of irregular 
forms which even the commentator can account for only as 
peculiarities of the Maitrayamtya-sakha1. That Upanishad, 
as it has come down to us, is full of what we should call 
clear indications of a modern and corrupt age. It contains 
in VI, 37, a sloka from the Manava-dharma-sdstra, which 
startled even the commentator, but is explained away by 
him as possibly found in another Sakha, and borrowed from 
there by Manu. It contains corruptions of easy words which 
one would have thought must have been familiar to every 
student. Thus instead of the passage as found in the XA4n- 
dogya-upanishad VIII, 7, 1, ya 4tmapahatapapma vigaro 
vimrityur visoko ’vigighatso ’pip4saz, &c., the text of the 
Maitrayaziya-upanishad (VII, 7) reads, Atmapahatapapma 
vigaro vimretyur visoko ’vikikitso 'vipasak. But here again 
the commentator explains that another Sakh4 reads ’vigi- 
ghatsa, and that avipdsa is to be explained by means of 
a change of letters as apipdsa. Corruptions, therefore, or 
modern elements which are found in one Upanishad, as 
handed down in one Sakha, do not prove that the same 
existed in other Sakhds, or that they were found in the 
original text. 

All these questions have to be taken into account before 
we can venture to give a final judgment on the relative age 
of Upanishads which belong to one and the same class, 
I know of no problem which offers so many similarities 
with the one before us as that of the relative age of the 
four Gospels. All the difficulties which occur in the Upa- 
nishads occur here, and no critical student who knows the 
difficulties that have to be encountered in determining the 
relative age of the four Gospels, will feel inclined, in the 
present state of Vedic scholarship, to speak with confidence 
on the relative age of the ancient Upanishads. 

1 They are generally explained as khkandasa, but in one place (Maitr. Up. 
II, 4) the commentator treats such irregularities as etakkA&khasanhketapashak, a 
reading peculiar to the Maitrayantya school. Some learned remarks on this point 
may be seen in an article by Dr. L. Schroeder, Uber die Maitrayant Samhita. 

INTRODUCTION. {xxi 

CRITICAL TREATMENT OF THE TEXT OF THE 
UPANISHADS. 

With regard to a critical restoration of the text of the Upa- 
nishads, I have but seldom relied on the authority of new 
MSS., but have endeavoured throughout to follow that text 
which is presupposed by the commentaries, whether they are 
the work of the old SankaraZ#arya, or of the more modern 
Sankarananda, or Sayama, or others. Though there still 
prevails some uncertainty as to the date of Sankara#arya, 
commonly assigned to the eighth century A.D., yet I doubt 
whether any MSS. of the Upanishads could now be found 
prior to 1000 A.D. The text, therefore, which Sankara 
had before his eyes, or, it may be, his ears, commands, I 
think, a higher authority than that of any MSS. likely to 
be recovered at present. 

It may be objected that Sankara’s text belonged to one 
locality only, and that different readings and different 
recensions may have existed in other parts of India. 
That is perfectly true. We possess various recensions of 
several Upanishads, as handed down in different Sakh4s of 
different Vedas, and we know of various readings recorded 
by the commentators. These, where they are of import- 
ance for our purposes, have been carefully taken into 
account. 

It has also been supposed that Sankara, who, in writing 
his commentaries on the Upanishad, was chiefly guided by 
philosophical considerations, his chief object being to use 
the Upanishads as a sacred foundation for the Vedanta 
philosophy, may now and then have taken liberties with 
the text. That may be so, but no stringent proof of 
it has as yet been brought forward, and I therefore 
hold that when we succeed in establishing throughout 
that text which served as the basis of Sankara’s com- 
mentaries, we have done enough for the present, and have 
fulfilled at all events the first and indispensable task in a 
critical treatment of the text of the Upanishads. 

But in.the same manner as it is easy to see that the text 

lxxii UPANISHADS. 

of the Rig-veda, which is presupposed by Sdyana’s com- 
mentary and even by earlier works, is in many places 
palpably corrupt, we cannot resist the same conviction with 
regard to the text of the Upanishads. In some cases the 
metre, in others grammar, in others again the collation of 
analogous passages enable us to detect errors, and pro- 
bably very ancient errors, that had crept into the text 
long before Sankara composed his commentaries. 

Some questions connected with the metres of the Upanti- 
shads have been very learnedly treated by Professor Gilde- 
meister in his essay, ‘Zur Theorie des Sloka? The lesson 
to be derived from that essay, and from a study of the 
Upanishads, is certainly to abstain for the present from 
conjectural emendations. In the old Upanishads the same 
metrical freedom prevails as in the hymns; in the later 
Upanishads, much may be tolerated as the result of con- 
scious or unconscious imitation. The metrical emendations 
that suggest themselves are generally so easy and so 
obvious that, for that very reason, we should hesitate before 
correcting what native scholars would have corrected long 
ago, if they had thought that there was any real necessity 
for correction. 

It is easy to suggest, for instance, that in the Vagasaneyi- 
samhita-upanishad, verse 5, instead of tad antar asya sar- 
vasya tadu sarvasydsya bahyatad, the original text may have 
been tad antar asya sarvasya tadu sarvasya bahyatak; yet 
Sankara evidently read sarvasydsya, and as the same 
reading is found in the text of the V4gasaneyi-sazmhita, 
who would venture to correct so old a mistake? 

Again, if in verse 8, we left out y4thatathyatak, we 
should get a much more regular metre, 

Kavir manish? paribhO svyambhiz 

arthan vyadadhak &AAsvatibhyak samAbhyas. 
Here vyada forms one syllable by what I have proposed 
to call synizesis 1, which is allowed in the Upanishads as 
well as in the hymns. All would then seem right, except 

1 Rig-veda, translated by M. M., vol. i, Preface, p. cxliii. 

ay? | 
INTRODUCTION. Ixxill 

that it is difficult to explain how so rare a word as yatha- 
tathyata% could have been introduced into the text. 

In verse 10 one feels tempted to propose the omission of 
eva in anyad 4hur avidyaya, while in verse 11, an eva inserted 
after vidya ka would certainly improve the metre. 

In verse 15 the expression satyadharmaya drzshZaye is 
archaic, but perfectly legitimate in the sense of ‘that we 
may see the nature of the True,’ or ‘that we see him whose 
nature is true. When this verse is repeated in the Maitr. 
Up. VI, 35, we find instead, satyadharmaya vishzave, ‘for 
the true Vishzu.’ But here, again, no sound critic would 
venture to correct a mistake, intentional or unintentional, 
which is sanctioned both by the MSS. of the text and by 
the commentary. 

Such instances, where every reader feels tempted at once 
to correct the textus receptus, occur again and again, 
and when they seem of any interest they have been men- 
tioned in the notes. It may happen, however, that the 
correction, though at first sight plausible, has to be sur- 
rendered on more mature consideration. Thus in the 
Vagasaneyi-samhit4-upanishad, verse 2, one feels certainly 
inclined to write evam tve nanyatheto ’sti, instead of evam 
tvayi nanyatheto’sti. But tve, if it were used here, would 
probably itself have to be pronounced dissyllabically, while 
tvayi, though it never occurs in the Rig-veda, may well 
keep its place here, in the last book of the Vagasaneyi- 
samhita, provided we pronounce it by synizesis, i. e. as one 
syllable. 

Attempts have been made sometimes to go beyond 
Sankara, and to restore the text, as it ought to have been 
originally, but as it was no longer in Sankara’s time. It is 
one thing to decline to follow Sankara in every one of his 
interpretations, it is quite another to decline to accept the 
text which he interprets. The former is inevitable, the 
latter is always very precarious. 

Thus I see, for instance, that M. Regnaud, in the Errata 
to the second volume of his excellent work on the Upani- 
shads (Materiaux pour servir a Phistoire de la philosophie 
de l'Inde, 1878) proposes to read in the Brihad-arazyaka- 

xxiv UPANISHADS. 

upanishad IV, 3, 1-8, sam anena vadishya iti, instead of sa 
mene na vadishya iti. Sankara adopted the latter reading, 
and explained accordingly, that Yagfiavalkya went to king 
Ganaka, but made up his mind not to speak. M. Regnaud, 
reading sam anena vadishya iti, takes the very opposite | 
view, namely, that Y4gnavalkya went to king Ganaka, 
having made up his mind to have a conversation with him. 
As M. Regnaud does not rest this emendation on the author- 
ity of any new MSS., we may examine it as an ingenious 
conjecture; but in that case it seems to me clear that, if 
we adopted it, we should have at the same time to omit 
the whole sentence which follows. Sankara saw clearly 
that what had to be accounted or explained was why the 
king should address the Brahman first, samrad eva pirvam 
paprakkha; whereas if YAgfiavalkya had come with the 
intention of having a conversation with the king, he, the 
Brahman, should have spoken first. This irregularity is 
explained by the intervening sentence, in which we are re- 
minded that on a former occasion, when Ganaka and Yagiia- 
valkya had a disputation on the Agnihotra, Yagnavalkya 
granted Ganaka a boon to choose, and he chose as his boon 
the right of asking questions according to his pleasure. 
Having received that boon, Ganaka was at liberty to 
question Yagfiavalkya, even though he did not like it, 
and hence Ganaka is introduced here as the first to ask a 
question. 

All this hangs well together, while if we assume that 
Yagtiavalkya came for the purpose of having a conversation 
with Ganaka, the whole sentence from ‘atha ha yag ganakas 
ka’ to ‘pirvam paprakkha’ would be useless, nor would there 
be any excuse for Ganaka beginning the conversation, when 
Yagnavalkya came himself on purpose to question him. 

It is necessary, even when we feel obliged to reject an 
interpretation of Sankara’s, without at the same time 
altering the text, to remember that Sankara, where he is 
not blinded by philosophical predilections, commands the 
highest respect as an interpreter. I cannot help thinking 
therefore that M. Regnaud (vol. i, p. 59) was right in trans- 
lating the passage in the A and. Up. V, 3, 7, tasmad u 

INTRODUCTION. Ixxv’ 

sarveshu lokeshu kshattrasyaiva prasdsanam abhot, by ‘que 
le kshatriya seul l’a enseignee dans tous les mondes’ For 
when he proposes in the ‘ Errata’ to translate instead, ‘c’est 
pourquoi l’empire dans tous les mondes fut attribue au 
kshatriya seulement,’ he forgets that such an idea is foreign 
to the ordinary atmosphere in which the Upanishads move. 
It is not on account of the philosophical knowledge possessed 
by a few Kshatriyas, such as Ganaka or Pravahaaa, that the 
privilege of government belongs everywhere to the second 
class. That rests on a totally different basis. Such excep- 
tional knowledge, as is displayed by a few kings, might be 
an excuse for their claiming the privileges belonging to the 
Brahmans, but it would never, in the eyes of the ancient 
Indian Aryas, be considered as an argument for their claim- 
ing kingly power. Therefore, although I am well aware that 
prasds is most frequently used in the sense of ruling, I have 
no doubt that Sankara likewise was fully aware of that, 
and that if he nevertheless explained prasdsana here in the 
sense of prasdstritvam sishyanam, he did so because this 
meaning too was admissible, particularly here, where we 
may actually translate it by proclaiming, while the other 
meaning, that of ruling, would simply be impossible in the 
concatenation of ideas, which is placed before us in the 
Upanishad. 

It seems, no doubt, extremely strange that neither the 
last redactors of the text of the Upanishads, nor the com- 
mentators, who probably knew the principal Upanishads by 
heart, should have perceived how certain passages in one 
Upanishad represented the same or nearly the same text 
which is found in another Upanishad, only occasionally 
with the most palpable corruptions. 

Thus when the ceremony of offering a mantha or mash 
is described, we read in the KAandogya-upanishad V, 2, 6, 
that it is to be accompanied by certain words which on the 
whole are intelligible. But when the same passage occurs 
again in the Brvzhad-arazyaka, those words have been 
changed to such a degree, and in two different ways in the 
two Sakhas of the Madhyandinas and K4zvas, that, though 
the commentator explains them, they are almost unintel- 

Ikxvi UPANISHADS. ` 

ligible. I shall place the three passages together in three 
parallel lines: 

I. KAandogya-upanishad V, 2, 6 

II. Brthad-4ramyaka, MAdhyandina-sakh4, XIV, 9, 3, 10: 
III. Brzhad-drazyaka-upanishad, K4a#va-sakha, VI, 3, 5 

I. Amo namasy ama hi te sarvam idam sa hi gyeshthah 

II. Amo ’sy ama hi te mayi sa hi 
III. amamsy amamhi te mahi sa hi ` 
I. sreshtho ragadhipatiz sa ma gyaishtkyam srai- 
II. ragesdno ‘dhipatiZ sa ma ragesdno 
III. ragesano 
I. shthyam ragyam adhipatyam gamayatv aham evedam 
II. *dhipatim  karotv iti. 
III. ’dhipati  karotv iti. 
I. sarvam asanfti. 
II. 
III. 

The text in the AAAandogya-upanishad yields a certain 
sense, viz. ‘Thou art Ama by name, for all this together 
exists in thee. He is the oldest and best, the king, the 
sovereign. May he make me the oldest, the best, the king, 
the sovereign. May I be all this.’ This, according to the 
commentator, is addressed to Praza, and Ama, though a 
purely artificial word, is used in the sense of Praza, or 
breath, in another passage also, viz. Brzhad-aramyaka-up. I, 
3,22. If therefore we accept this meaning of Ama, the 
rest is easy and intelligible. 

But if we proceed to the Brthad-d4ramzyaka, in the Madhyan- 
dina-sakha, we find the commentator proposing the fol- 
lowing interpretation : ‘O Mantha, thou art a full knower, 
complete knowledge of me belongs to thee.’ This meaning 
is obtained by deriving ama% from 4+ man, in the sense of 
knower, and then taking 4mam, as a neuter, in the sense of 
knowledge, derivations which are simply impossible. 

Lastly, if we come to the text of the Kazva-sakha, the 
grammatical interpretation becomes bolder still. Sankara 
does not explain the passage at all, which is strange, but 
Anandagiri interprets A4mamsi tvam by ‘Thou knowest 

INTRODUCTION. Ixxvii 

(all) and A4mamhi te mahi, by ‘we know thy great 
(shape), which are again impossible forms, 

But although there can be little doubt here that the 
reading of the AAandogya-upanishad gives us the original 
text, or a text nearest to the original, no sound critic 
would venture to correct the readings of the Brzhad- 
dranyaka. They are corruptions, but even as corrup- 
tions they possess authority, at all events up to a certain 
point, and it is the fixing of those certain points or chrono- 
logical limits, which alone can impart a scientific character 
to our criticism of ancient texts. 

In the Kaushitaki-brahmaza-upanishad Professor Cowell 
has pointed out a passage to me, where we must go beyond 
the text as it stood when commented on by the Sankara- 
nanda. In the beginning of the fourth adhy4ya all MSS. 
of the text read savasan, and this is the reading which 
the commentator seems anxious to explain, though not 
very successfully. I thought that possibly the commentator 
might have had before him the reading sa vasan, or so ’va- 
san, but both would be very unusual. Professor Cowell in 
his Various Readings, p. xii, conjectured saszvasan, which 
would be liable to the same objection. He now, however, 
informs me that, as B. has samtvan, and C. satvan, he 
believes the original text to have been Satvan-Matsyeshu. 
This seems to me quite convincing, and is borne out by the 
reading of the Berlin MS., so far as it can be made out 
from Professor Weber's essay on the Upanishads, Indische 
Studien I, p. 419. I see that Boehtlingk and Roth in 
their Sanskrit Dictionary, s.v. satvat, suggest the same 
emendation. 

The more we study the nature of Sanskrit MSS., the 
more, I believe, we shall feel convinced that their proper 
arrangement is one by locality rather than by time. I have 
frequently dwelt on this subject in the introductions to the 
successive volumes of my edition of the Rig-veda and its 
commentary by Sayanakarya, and my convictions on this 
point have become stronger ever since. A MS., however 
modern, from the south of India or from the north, is 
more important as a check on the textus receptus of 

lxxviii ` UPANISHADS. 

any Sanskrit work, as prevalent in Bengal or Bombay, 
than ever so many MSS., even if of greater antiquity, 
from the same locality. When therefore I was informed 
by my friend Dr. Buhler that he had discovered in 
Kashmir a MS. of the Aitareya-upanishad, I certainly ex- 
pected some real help from such a treasure. The MS. is 
described by its discoverer in the last number of the Journal 
of the Bombay Asiatic Society, p. 341, and has since been 
sent to me by the Indian Government. It is written on 
birch bark (bhurga), and in the alphabet commonly called 
Sarada. The leaves are very much injured on the margin, 
and it is almost impossible to handle them without some 
injury. In many places the bark has shrunk, probably on 
being moistened, and the letters have become illegible. 
Apart from these drawbacks, there remain the difficulties 
inherent in the Sarada alphabet which, owing to its nu- 
merous combinations, is extremely difficult to read, and 
very trying to eyes which are growing weak. However, 
I collated the Upanishad from the Aitareya-4ramyaka, 
which turned out to be the last portion only, viz. the 
Samhit4-upanishad (Ait. Ar. III, 1-2), or, as it is called 
here, Samhitarazya, and I am sorry to say my expectations 
have been disappointed. The MS. shows certain graphic 
peculiarities which Dr. Buhler has pointed out. It is particu- 
larly careful in the use of the sibilants, replacing the Visarga 
by sibilants, writing s+s and s+'s instead of +s and 
+s; distinguishing also the Gihvimiliya and Upadhma- 
niya. If therefore the MS. writes antastha, we may be 
sure that it really meant to write so, and not antaAstha, or, 
as it would have written, antasstha. It shows equal care in 
the use of the nasals, and generally carries on the sandhi 
between different paragraphs. Here and there I met with 
better readings than those given in Rajendralal Mitra’s 
edition, but in most cases the commentary would have been 
sufficient to restore the right reading. A few various read- 
ings, which seemed to deserve being mentioned, will be found 

1 Journal of the Bombay Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, 1877. Extra 
Number, containing the Detailed Report of a Tour in search of Sanskrit MSS., 
made in Kasmir, Rajputana, and Central India, by G. Buhler. 

INTRODUCTION. lxxix 

in the notes. The MS., though carefully written, is not 
free from the ordinary blunders. At first one feels inclined 
to attribute some importance to every peculiarity of a new 
MS., but very soon one finds out that what seems peculiar, 
is in reality carelessness. Thus Ait. Ar. III, 1, 5, 2, the 
Kashmir MS. has purvam aksharam rupam, instead of 
what alone can be right, pirvaripam. Instead of pragaya 
pasubhi#Z it writes repeatedly pragaya pasubhif, which 
is impossible. In IIF, 2, 2, it leaves out again and again 
manomaya between £Aandomaya and vaenmaya; but that 
this is a mere accident we learn later on, where in the same 
sentence manomayo is found in its right place. Such cases 
reduce this MS. to its*proper level, and make us look with 
Suspicion on any accidental variations, such as I have 
noticed in my translation. 

The additional paragraph, noticed by Dr, Biihler, is very 
indistinct, and contains, so far as I am able to find out, 
santi verses only. 

I have no doubt that the discovery of new MSS. of the 
Upanishads and their commentaries will throw new light 
on the very numerous difficulties with which a translator 
of the Upanishads, particularly in attempting a complete 
and faithful translation, has at present to grapple. Some of 
the difficulties, which existed thirty years ago, have been 
removed since by the general progress of Vedic scholar- 
ship, and by the editions of texts and commentaries and 
translations of Upanishads, many of which were known at 
that time in manuscript only. But I fully agree with M. 
Regnaud as to the difficultes considerables que les 
meilleures traductions laissent subsister, and which 
can be solved only by a continued study of the Upanishads, 
the Aranyakas, the Brahmazas, and the Ved4nta-sitras. 

MEANING OF THE WORD UPANISHAD. 

How Upanishad became the recognised name of the 
philosophical treatises contained in the Veda is difficult to 
explain. Most European scholars are agreed in deriving 

lxxx UPANISHADS. 

upa-ni-shad from the root sad, to sit down, preceded by 
the two prepositions ni, down, and upa, near, so that it 
would express the idea of session, or assembly of pupils 
sitting down near their teacher to listen to his instruction. 
In the Trikaa#dasesha, upanishad is explained by samipasa- 
dana, sitting down near a person}. 

Such a word, however, would have been applicable, it 
would seem, to any other portion of the Veda as well as to 
the chapters called Upanishad, and it has never been ex- 
plained how its meaning came thus to be restricted. It is 
still more strange that upanishad, in the sense of session or 
assembly, has never, so far as I am aware, been met with. 
Whenever the word occurs, it has the meaning of doctrine, 
secret doctrine, or is simply used as the title of the philo- 
sophic treatises which constitute the gnanakazda, the know- 
ledge portion, as opposed to the karmakazda, the work or 
ceremonial portion, of the Veda. £ 

Native philosophers seem never to have thought of deriv- 
ing upanishad from sad, to sit down. They derive it either 
from the root sad, in the sense of destruction, supposing 
these ancient treatises to have received their name because 
they were intended to destroy passion and ignorance by 
means of divine revelation ?, or from the root sad, in the 
sense of approaching, because a knowledge of Brahman 
comes near to us by means of the Upanishads, or because 
we approach Brahman by their help. Another explanation 
proposed by Sankara in his commentary on the Taittirtya- 
upanishad II, 9, is that the highest bliss is contained in the 
Upanishad (param sreyo ’syam nishaznam). 

These explanations seem so wilfully perverse that it is 
difficult to understand the unanimity of native scholars. 
We ought to take into account, however, that very 
general tendency among half-educated people, to ac- 
quiesce in any etymology which accounts for the most 
prevalent meaning of a word. The Aranyakas abound in 

1 Panini I, 4, 79, has upanishatkritya. 

* M. M., History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 318; Colebrooke, Essays, 
I, 92; Regnaud, Materiaux, p. 7. 

INTRODUCTION. lxxxi 

such etymologies, which probably were never intended as 
real etymologies, in our sense of the word, but simply as 
plays on words, helping to account somehow for their 
meaning. The Upanishads, no doubt, were meant to 
destroy ignorance and passion, and nothing seemed more 
natural therefore than that their etymological meaning 
should be that of destroyers’. 

The history and the genius of the Sanskrit language 
leave little doubt that upanishad meant originally session, 
particularly a session consisting of pupils, assembled at a 
respectful distance round their teacher. 

With upa alone, sad occurs as early as the hymns of the 
Rig-veda, in the sense of approaching respectfully ? :— 

Rig-veda IX, 11, 6. Namasa it upa sidata, ‘approach 
him with praise. See also Rig-veda X, 73, 11; I, 65, 1. 

In the AXZandogya-upanishad VI, 13, 1, a teacher says 
to his pupil, atha ma pr4tar upasidathaZ, ‘come to me (for 
advice) to-morrow morning.’ 

In the same Upanishad VII, 8, 1, a distinction is made 
between those who serve their teachers (parifarita), and 
those who are admitted to their more intimate society 
(upasatta, comm. samipaga/, antarangas, priya). 

Again, in the AAandogya-upanishad VII, 1, we read of 
a pupil approaching his teacher (updsasdda or upasasada), 
and of the teacher telling him to approach with what he 
knows, i.e. to tell him first what he has learnt already 
(yad vettha tena mopasida 3). | 

In the Sutras (Gobhiliya Grzhya-sitra II, 10, 38) upasad 
is the recognised term for the position assumed by a pupil 
with his hands folded and his eyes looking up to the 
teacher who is to instruct him. 

It should be stated, however, that no passage has yet 
been met with in which upa-ni-sad is used in the sense of 
pupils approaching and listening to their teacher. In the 

1 The distinction between possible and real etymologies is as modern as 
that between legend and history. 

? See M. M?s History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 318. 

3 See also Khand. Up. VI, 7, 2. 

IXxXil UPANISHADS. 

only passage in which upanishasAda occurs (Ait. Ar. II, 2, 
1), it is used of Indra sitting down by the side of Visva- 
mitra, and it is curious to observe that both MSS. and 
commentaries give here upanishasasdda, an entirely irre- 
gular form. 

The same is the case with two other roots which are 
used almost synonymously with sad, viz. 4s and vis. We 
find upa+4s used to express the position which the pupil 
occupies when listening to his teacher, e.g. Paz. III, 4, 72, 
up4sito gurum bhavd4n, ‘thou hast approached the Guru,’ or 
upasito gurur bhavata, ‘the Guru has been approached by 
thee.’ We find pari + upa + 4s used with regard to relations 
assembled round the bed of a dying friend, A/and. Up. 
VI, 15; or of hungry children sitting round their mother, 
and likened to people performing the Agnihotra sacrifice 
(KAand. Up. V, 24, 5). But I have never met with upa-ni-as 
in that sense. 

We likewise find upa-vis used in the sense of sitting 
down to a discussion (KAand. Up. I, 8, 2), but T have never 
found upa+ni+vis as applied to a pupil listening to his 
teacher. 

The two prepositions upa and ni occur, however, with 
pat, to fly, in the sense of flying down and settling near a 
person, KAand. Up. IV, 7,2; FV, 8,2. And the same pre- 
positions joined to the verb sri, impart to it the meaning of 
sitting down beneath a person, so as to show him respect : 
Brih. Ar. I, 4,11. ‘ Although a king is exalted, he sits 
down at the end of the sacrifice below the Brahman,’ 
brahmaivantata upanisrayati. 

Sad, with upa and ni, occurs in upanish4din only, and 
has there the meaning of subject, e.g. Satap. Brahm. IX, 4, 
3, 3, kshatraya tad visam adhastad upanishadinim karoti, 
‘he thus makes the Vis (citizen) below, subject to the 
Kshatriya.’ 

Sometimes nishad is used by the side of upanishad, and so 
far as we can judge, without any difference of meaning 1. 

All we can say therefore, for the present, is that upani- 

1 Mahabharata, Santiparva, 1613. 

INTRODUCTION. Ixxxili 

shad, besides being the recognised title of certain philo- 
sophical treatises, occurs also in the sense of doctrine and 
of secret doctrine, and that it seems to have assumed this 
meaning from having been used originally in the sense of 
Session or assembly in which one or more pupils receive 
instruction from a teacher. 

Thus we find the word upanishad used in the Upanishads 
themselves in the following meanings: 

1, Secret or esoteric explanation, whether true or false. 

2. Knowledge derived from such explanation. 

3. Special rules or observances incumbent on those who 
have received such knowledge. 

4. Title of the books containing such knowledge. 

I. Ait. Ar, HI, 1, 6, 3. ‘For this Upanishad, i.e. in order 
to obtain the information about the true meaning of Sam- 
hita, Tarukshya served as a cowherd for a whole year.’ 

Taitt. Up. I, 3. ‘We shall now explain the Upanishad of 
the Samhita.’ 

Ait. Ar. III, 2, 5, 1. ‘Next follows this Upanishad of the 
whole speech. True, all these are Upanishads of the whole 
speech, but this they declare especially.’ 

Talav. Up. IV, 7.°‘As you have asked me to tell you the 
Upanishad, the Upanishad has now been told you. We 
have told you the Brahmi Upanishad, i.e. the true meaning 
of Brahman. 

In the AAand. Up. III, 11, 3, after the meaning of 
Brahman has been explained, the text says: ‘To him who 
thus knows this Brahma upanishad (the secret doctrine of 
Brahman) the sun does not rise and does not set.’ In the 
next paragraph brahma itself is used, meaning either 
Brahman as the object taught in the Upanishad, or, by a 
slight change of meaning, the Upanishad itself. 

Khand. Up. I, 13, 4. ‘Speech yields its milk to htm who 
knows this Upanishad (secret doctrine) of the Samans in 
this wise.’ 

Khand. Up. VIII, 8, 4. When Indra and Virofana had 
both misunderstood the teaching of Pragapati, he says: 
‘They both go away without having perceived and without 
having known the Self, and whoever of these two, whether 

This book was downloade’ from www.holybooks.com : 

Ixxxiv UPANISHADS. 

Devas or Asuras, will follow this doctrine (upanishad), will 
perish.’ 

II. In the AAAnd. Up. I, 1, after the deeper meaning of 
the Udgitha or Om has been described, the advantage of 
knowing that deeper meaning is put forward, and it is said 
that the sacrifice which a man performs with knowledge, 
with faith, and with the Upanishad, i.e. with an under- 
standing of its deeper meaning, is more powerful. 

III. In the Taittiriya-upanishad, at the end of the second 
chapter, called the Brahm4nandavalli, and again at the end 
of the tenth chapter, the text itself says: Ity upanishad, 
‘this is the Upanishad, the true doctrine.’ 

IV. In the Kaushitaki-upanishad II, 1; 2, we read: ‘Let 
him not beg, this is the Upanishad for him who knows this.’ 
Here upanishad stands for vrata or rahasya-vrata, rule. 

WORKS ON THE UPANISHADS. 

Anquetil Duperron, Oupnek’hat, 1801, 1802. See page 
clii. 

Rammohun Roy, Translation of Several Principal Books, 
Passages, and Texts of the Veds. Second edition. London, 
1832. 

Translation of the Moonduk-Oopunishud of the Uthurvu Ved, p. 23. 
Translation of the Cena Upanishad, one of the Chapters of the Sema Veda, 
P Translation of the Kut’h-Oopunishud of the Ujoor-Ved, p. 55. 

Translation of the Ishopanishad, one of the Chapters of the Yajur Veda, p. 81. 

H. T. Colebrooke, Miscellaneous Essays, in three volumes, 
1873. 

K. J. H. Windischmann, Die Philosophie im Fortgange 
der Weltgeschichte, 1827-34. 

F, W. Windischmann, Sancara, seu de theologumenis 
Vedanticorum, 1833. 

E. Roer, The Taittirtya, Aitareya, Svetasvatara, Kena 
fsa, Karka, Prasna, Mundaka, and MAnddkya Upanishads 
translated ; Bibliotheca Indica. Calcutta, 1853. 

Rajendralal Mitra, The AAandogya Upanishad, with 
extracts from the commentary of Sankara; Bibliotheca 
Indica. Calcutta, 1862. 

Bilo J” 
INTRODUCTION. Ixxxv 

E. B. Cowell, The Kaushitaki - brahmana - upanishad, 
edited with an English translation; Bibliotheca Indica. : 
Calcutta, 1861. Tli ty kitty, in Le Madeon 

E. B. Cowell, The Maitri Upanishad, edited with an 47 257 
English translation ; Bibliotheca Indica. Calcutta, 1870. 

A. Weber, Die Vagrasukt des Asvaghosha. Berlin, 1860. 

A. Weber, Die R4ma-tapanitya Upanishad. Berlin, 1864. 

A. Weber, Analyse der in Anquetil du Perron’s Uber- 
setzung enthalten Upanishad; Indische Studien, vol. i, 

p. 247 et seq. 

A. E. Gough, The Philosophy of the Upanishads ; Cal- 
cutta Review, CXXXI. 4 

P. Regnaud, Materiaux pour servir a l'histoire de la Phi- 
losophie de l’Inde. Paris, 1876. 

Editions of the Upanishads, their commentaries and 
glosses have been published in the Tattvabodhini patrika, 
and by Poley (who has also translated several Upani- 
shads into French), by Roer, Cowell, Rajendralal Mitra, 
Harakandra Vidyabhushava, Visvanatha SAastri, Rama- 
maya Tarkaratna, and others. For fuller titles see Gilde- 
meister, Bibliotheca Sanscrita, and E. Haas, Catalogue of \ 
Sanskrit and Pali Books in the British Museum, s. v. Upa- | 
nishads. 

(XXXVI UPANISHADS. 

I. 

THE KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

THE KA&ndogya-upanishad belongs to the Sama-veda. 
Together with the Brzhad-arazyaka, which belongs to the 
Yagur-veda, it has contributed the most important ma- 
terials to what may be called the orthodox philosophy of 
India, the Vedanta ', i.e. the end, the purpose, the highest 
object of the Veda. It consists of eight adhydyas or lec- 
tures, and formed part of a Kkandogya-brahmaxa, in which 
it was preceded by two other adhydyas. While MSS. of 
the A/&ndogya-upanishad and its commentary are fre- 
quent, no MSS. of the whole Brahmaza has been met with 
in Europe. Several scholars had actually doubted its ex- 
istence, but Rajendralal Mitra’, in the Introduction to his 
translation of the A/andogya-upanishad, states that in 
India ‘MSS. of the work are easily available, though as 
yet he has seen no commentary attached to the Brahmaza 
portion of any one of them.’ ‘According to general accep- 

1 Vedanta, as a technical term, did not mean originally the last portions of 
the Veda, or chapters placed, as it were, at the end of a volume of Vedic 
literature, but the end, i.e. the object, the highest purpose of the Veda. 
There are, of course, passages, like the one in the Taittirfya-Granyaka (ed. 
Rajendralal Mitra, p. 820), which have been misunderstood both by native and 
European scholars, and where vedanta means simply the end of the Veda :—yo 
vedadau svara prokto vedante ka pratishthitah, ‘the Om which is pronounced 
at the beginning of the Veda, and has its place also at the end of the Veda.’ 
Here vedanta stands simply in opposition to vedadau, and it is impossible to 
translate it, as Sayana does, by Vedanta or Upanishad. Vedanta, in the sense of 
philosophy, occurs in the Taittirfya-4razyaka (p. 817), ina verse of the Nareyantya- 
upanishad, repeated in the Mundaka-upanishad III, 2, 6, and elsewhere, 
vedantavigfidnasuniskitarthas, ‘ those who have well understood the object of the 
knowledge arising from the Vedanta,’ not ‘from the last books of the Veda ;’ 
and Svetasvatara-up. VI, 22, vedante paramam guhyam, ‘the highest mystery in 
the Vedanta.’ Afterwards it is used in the plural also, e. g. Kshurikopanishad, 
10 (Bibl. Ind. p. 210), puxdartketi vedanteshu nigadyate, ‘it is called pundartka 
in the Vedantas, i.e. in the KAandogya and other Upanishads, as the com- 
mentator says, but not in the last books of each Veda. A curious passage is 
found in the Gautama-s(itras XIX, 12, where a distinction seems to be made 
between Upanishad and Vedanta. Sacred Books, vol. ii, p. 272. 

* Khandogya-upanishad, translated by Rajendralal Mitra, Calcutta, 1862, 
Introduction, p. 17. 

INTRODUCTION. Ixxxvii 

tation,’ he adds, ‘the work embraces ten chapters, of which 
the first two are reckoned to be the Brahmaza, and the rest 
is known under the name of K/#andogya-upanishad. In 
their arrangement and style the two portions differ greatly, 
and judged by them they appear to be productions of very 
different ages, though both are evidently relics of pretty 
remote antiquity. Of the two chapters of the A #andogya- 
brahmaza !, the first includes eight sQktas (hymns) on the 
ceremony of marriage, and the rites necessary to be ob- 
served at the birth of a child. The first sikta is intended 
to be recited when offering an oblation to Agni on the 
occasion of a marriage, and its object is to pray for pros- 
perity in behalf of the married couple. The second prays 
for long life, kind relatives, and a numerous progeny. The 
third is the marriage pledge by which the contracting 
parties bind themselves to each other. Its spirit may be 
guessed from a single verse. In talking of the unanimity 
with which they will dwell, the bridegroom addresses his 
bride, “ That heart of thine shall be mine, and this heart of 
mine shall be thine?” The fourth and the fifth invoke 
Agni, Vayu, Xandramas, and Surya to bless the couple and 
ensure healthful progeny. The sixth is a mantra for 
offering an oblation on the birth of a child; and the seventh 
and the eighth are prayers for its being healthy, wealthy, 
and powerful, not weak, poor, or mute, and to ensure a 
profusion of wealth and milch-cows. The first sukta of the 
second chapter is addressed to the Earth, Agni, and Indra, 
with a prayer for wealth, health, and prosperity; the 
second, third, fourth, fifth, and sixth are mantras for offer- 
ing oblations to cattle, the manes, Sdrya, and divers minor 
deities. The seventh is a curse upon worms, insects, flies, 
and other nuisances, and the last, the concluding mantra of 
the marriage ceremony, in which a general blessing is 
invoked for all concerned.’ 

After this statement there can be but little doubt that 

1 It begins, Om, deva savitak, pra suva yagham pra suva yagiapatim 
bhagaya. The second begins, yak prakyam disi sarparaga esha te baliA. 

2 Yad etad dhridayam tava tad astu hridayam mama, Yad idam hridayam 
mama tad astu hridayam tava. 

http:/ / www.holybooks.com/the-sacred-books-of-the-east-all-50-volumes/ 

Ixxxvili UPANISHADS. 

this Upanishad originally formed part of a Brahmaza. 
This may have been called either by a general name, 
the Brahmava of the KAandogas, the followers of the 
Sama-veda, or, on account of the prominent place occupied 
in it by the Upanishad, the Upanishad-brahmaza’. In 
that case it would be one of the eight Brahmaaas of the 
Sama-veda, enumerated by Kumarila Bha¢‘a and others?, 
and called simply Upanishad, scil. Brahmaza. 

The text of the Upanishad with the commentary of 
Sankara and the gloss of Anandagiri has been published in 
the Bibliotheca Indica. The edition can only claim the 
character of a manuscript, and of a manuscript not always 
very correctly read. 

A translation of the Upanishad was published, likewise 
in the Bibliotheca Indica, by Rajendralal Mitra. 

It is one of the Upanishads that was translated into 
Persian under the auspices of Dara Shukoh?, and from 
Persian into French by Anquetil Duperron, in his Oup- 
nekhat, i.e. Secretum Tegendum. Portions of it were 
translated into English by Colebrooke in his Mis- 
cellaneous Essays, into Latin and German by F. W. 
Windischmann, in his Sankara, seu de theologumenis 
Vedanticorum (Bonn, 1833), and in a work published 
by his father, K. J. H. Windischmann, Die Philosophie 
im Fortgang der Weltgeschichte (Bonn, 1827-34). 
Professor A. Weber has treated of this Upanishad in his 
Indische Studien I, 254; likewise M. P. Regnaud in his 
Materiaux pour servir a l’histoire de la philosophie de 
l’Inde (Paris, 1876) and Mr. Gough in several articles on 
‘the Philosophy of the Upanishads,’ in the Calcutta 
Review, No. CXXXI. 

I have consulted my predecessors whenever there was a 
serious difficulty to solve in the translation of these ancient 
texts. These difficulties are very numerous, as those know 

1 The same name seems, however, to be given to the adhyaya of the Talava- 
kara-brihmana, which contains the Kena-upanishad. 

* M. M., History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 348. Most valuable 
information on the literature of the SAma-veda may be found in Dr. Burnell’s 

editions of the smaller Brahmanas of that Veda. 
* M. M., History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 325. 

INTRODUCTION. Ixxxix 

best who have attempted to give complete translations of 
these ancient texts. It will be seen that my translation 
differs sometimes very considerably from those of my pre- 
decessors. Though I have but seldom entered into any 
controversy with them, they may rest assured that I have 
not deviated from them without careful reflection. 

IT. 

THE


# TALAVAKARA (KENA) UPANISHAD

TALAVAKARA-UPANISHAD. 

THIS Upanishad is best known by the name of Kena- 
upanishad, from its first word. The name of brahmi- 
upanishad (IV, 7) can hardly be considered as a title. It 
means ‘the teaching of Brahman,’ and is used with reference 
to other Upanishads also’. Sankara, in his commentary, 
tells us that this Upanishad forms the ninth adhy4ya of 
a Brahmaaa, or, if we take his words quite literally, he says, 
‘the beginning of the ninth adhydya is “the Upanishad 
beginning with the words Keneshitam, and treating of the 
Highest Brahman has to be taught.”’ In the eight pre- 
ceeding adhydyas, he tells us, all the sacred rites or 
sacrifices had been fully explained, and likewise the medi- 
tations (upasana) on the praza (vital breath) which belongs 
to all these sacrifices, and those meditations also which 
have reference to the fivefold and sevenfold Sdmans. 
After that followed Gayatra-siman and the Vamsa, the 
genealogical list. All this would naturally form the subject 
of a Sama-veda-brahmaza, and we find portions corres- 
ponding to the description given by Sankara in the K44an- 
dogya-upanishad, e.g. the fivefold Saman, II, 2; the seven- 
fold SAman, II, 8; the Gayatra-sdman, ITI, 12, 1. 

Anandagfidna tells us that our Upanishad belonged to 
the Sakha of the Talavakaras. 

All this had formerly to be taken on trust, because 
no Brahmavza was known containing the Upanishad. Dr. 
Burnell, however, has lately discovered a Brahmaza of the 
SAma-veda which comes very near the description given by 
Sankara. In a letter dated Tanjore, 8th Dec. 1878, he 

1 See before, p. lxxxiii. 

XC UPANISHADS. 

writes: ‘It appears to me that you would be glad to know 
the following about the Kena-upanishad, as it occurs in my 
MS. of the Talavakera-brahmaza. 

‘The last book but one of this Brahmavza is termed 
Upanishad-brahmaza. It consists of 145 khavdas treating 
of the Gayatra-siman, and the 134th is a Vamsa. The 
Kena-upanishad comprises the 135-145 khavdas, or the 
tenth anuvaka of a chapter. The 139th section begins: asa 
va idam agra sit, &c. 

‘My MS. of the Talavakera-brahmama agrees, as regards 
the contents, exactly with what Sankara says, but not in 
the divisions. He says that the Kena-upanishad begins the 
ninth adhydya, but that is not so in my MS. Neither 
the beginning nor the end of this Upanishad is noticed 
particularly. 

‘The last book of this Brahmaza is the Arsheya-brah- 
maza, which I printed last February. 

‘Among the teachers quoted in the Brahmaza I have 
noticed both Tazdya and Satydayani. I should not be 
surprised to find in it the difficult quotations which are 
incorrectly given in the MSS. of Sayaza’s commentary on 
the Rig-veda. The story of Apala, quoted by Sayama in 
his commentary on the Rig-veda, VIII, 80, as from the 
Satyayanaka, is found word for word, except some trivial 
var. lectiones, in sections 220-221 of the Agnish¢oma book 
of the Talavakara-brahmava. The SAtydyanins seem to 
be closely connected with the Talavak4ra-sakha.’ 

From a communication made by Dr. Burnell to the 
Academy (1 Feb. 79), I gather that this Talavakdra-brah- 
maxa is called by those who study it ‘ Gaimintya-brahmaaa,’ 
after the Sakha of the SAma-veda which they follow. The 
account given in the Academy differs on some particulars 
slightly from that given in Dr. Burnell’s letter to me. He 
writes: ‘The largest part of the Brahmama treats of the 
sacrifices and the Samans used at them. The first chapter 
is on the Agnihotra, and the Agnisheoma and other rites 
follow at great length, Then comes a book termed 
Upanishad-brahmaza. This contains 145 sections in four 
chapters. It begins with speculations on the Gdyatra- 

INTRODUCTION. xcl 

saman, followed by a Vamsa; next, some similar matter 
and another Vamsa. Then (§§ 135-138) comes the Kena- 
upanishad (Talavak4ra). The last book is the Arsheya. 
The Upanishad forms the tenth anuvaka of the fourth 
chapter, not the beginning of a ninth chapter, as Sankara 
remarks,’ 

The Kena-upanishad has been frequently published and 
translated. It forms part of Dara Shukoh’s Persian, and 
Anquetil Duperron’s Latin translations. It was several times 
published in English by Rammohun Roy (Translations of 
Several Principal Books, Passages, and Texts of the Veda, 
London, 1832, p. 41), in German by Windischmann, Poley, 
and others. It has been more or less fully discussed by 
Colebrooke, Windischmann, Poley, Weber, Reer, Gough, 
and Regnaud in the books mentioned before. 

Besides the text of this Upanishad contained in the 
Brahmaza of the SAma-veda, there is another text, slightly 
differing, belonging to the Atharva-veda, and there are 
commentaries on both texts (Colebrooke, Misc. Essays, 
1873, II, p. 80). 

III. 
THE AITAREYA-ARANYAKA. 

IN giving a translation of the Aitareya-upanishad, I found 
it necessary to give at the same time a translation of that 
portion of the Aitareya-drazyaka which precedes the Upani- 
shad. The Arazyakas seem to have been from the begin- 
ning the proper repositories of the ancient Upanishads, 
though it is difficult at first sight to find out in what relation 
the Upanishads stood to the Arazyakas. The Arazyakas 
are to be read and studied, not in the village (grame), but 
in the forest, and so are the Upanishads. But the subjects 
treated in the Upanishads belong to a very different order 
from those treated in the other portions of the Arasyakas, 
the former being philosophical, the latter liturgical. 

The liturgical chapters of the Arazyakas might quite as 
well have formed part of the Brahmamas, and but for the 
restriction that they are to be read in the forest, it is diff- 
cult to distinguish between them and the Brahmazas. The 

xcii UPANISHADS. 

first chapter of the Aitareya-ara#yaka is a mere continua- 
tion of the Aitareya-brahmaaa, and gives the description 
of the Mahavrata, the last day but one of the Gavama- 
yana, a sattra or sacrifice which is supposed to last a whole 
year. The duties which are to be performed by the Hoty: 
priests are described in the Aitareya-adrazyaka ; not all, 
however, but those only which are peculiar to the Maha- 
vrata day. The general rules for the performance of the 
MahAvrata are to be taken over from other sacrifices, such 
as the Visvagit, Katurvimsa, &c., which form the type 
(prakriti) of the Mah4vrata. Thus the two sastras or recita- 
tions, called 4gya-praiiga, are taken over from the Visvagit, 
the sastras of the Hotrakas from the Xaturvimsa. The 
MahAvrata is treated here as belonging to the Gavamayana 
sattra, which is described in a different S4kha, see Tait- 
tiriya Samhit4 VII, 5, 8, and partly in other Vedas. It is 
the day preceding the udayaniya, the last day of the sattra. 
It can be celebrated, however, by itself also, as an ekAha or 
ahina sacrifice, and in the latter case it is the tenth day of 
the Ekadasaratra (eleven nights sacrifice) called Pusdaritka. 

Sayaza does not hesitate to speak of the Aitareya- 
dranyaka as a part of the Brahmaza’; and a still earlier 
authority, Sankara, by calling the Aitareya-upanishad by 
the name of Bahvrika-brfhmaza-upanishad ?, seems to 
imply that both the Upanishad and the Arazyaka may be 
classed as Brahmama. 

The Aitareya-drazyaka appears at first sight a miscella- 
neous work, consisting of liturgical treatises in the first, 
fourth, and fifth Arazyakas, and of three Upanishads, in 
the second and third Aranyakas. This, however, is not 
the case. The first Arazyaka is purely liturgical, giving 
a description of the Mahavrata, so far as it concerns the 

- Hotz? priest. It is written in the ordinary Brahmaaa style. 
Then follows the first Upanishad, Arazyaka II, 1-3, showing 

1 Aitareyabrahmane ’sti kandam franyakabhidham (introduction), a remark 
which he repeats in the fifth Aranyaka. He also speaks of the Arasyaka- 
vrataripam brahmasam ; see p. cxiv, l. 24. 

2 In the same manner the Kaushitaki-upanishad is properly called Kaushitaki- 
brahmaza-upanishad, though occurring in the Aranyaka ; see Kaushftaki-brah- 
mana-upanishad, ed. Cowell, p. 30. 

INTRODUCTION. XClil 

how certain portions of the Mahavrata, as described in the 
first Aranyaka, can be made to suggest a deeper meaning, 
and ought to lead the mind of the sacrificer away from the 
purely outward ceremonial to meditation on higher subjects. 
Without a knowledge of the first Arazyaka therefore the 
first Upanishad would be almost unintelligible, and though 
its translation was extremely tedious, it could not well 
have been omitted. 

The second and third Upanishads are not connected 
with the ceremonial of the Mahdavrata, but in the fourth 
and fifth Arazyakas the Mah4vrata forms again the prin- 
cipal subject, treated, however, not as before in the style 
of the Brahmazas, but in the style of Sdtras. The fourth 
Aranyaka contains nothing but a list of the Mahandmni 
hymns}, but the fifth describes the Mah4vrata again, so 
that if the first Arazyaka may be looked upon as a portion 
of the Aitareya-brahmamas, the fifth could best be classed 
with the Satras of Asvaldyana. 

To a certain extent this fact, the composite character of 
the Aitareya-dramyaka, is recognised even by native scholars, 
who generally do not trouble themselves much on such 
questions. They look both on the Aitareya-brahmava 
and on the greater portion of Aitareya-4raxyaka as the 
works of an inspired Rishi, Mahidasa Aitareya ?, but they 
consider the fourth and fifth books of the Aramyaka as 
contributed by purely human authors, such as Asvalayana 
and Saunaka, who, like other Sftrak4ras, took in verses 
belonging to other Sakhas, and did not confine their rules 
to their own S4kha only. 

There are many legends about Mahid4sa, the reputed 
author of the Aitareya-brahmama and Aranyaka. He is 

1 See Boehtlingk and Roth, s.v. ‘Neun Vedische Verse die in ihrem voll- 
standigen Wortlaut aber noch nicht nachgewiesen sind.’ Weber, Indische Studien 
VIII, 68. How these hymns are to be employed we learn from the Asvalfyana- 
sitras VII, 12, 10, where we are told that if the Udgatris sing the Sakvara 
Saman as the Prishskastotra, the nine verses beginning with Vidi maghavan, 
and known by the name of Mahanamnt, are to be joined in a peculiar manner. 
The only excuse given, why these Mahanfmnis are mentioned here, and not in 
the Brahmaza, is that they are to be studied in the forest. 

2 M. M., History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, pp. 177, 335. 

XC1V UPANISHADS. 

quoted several times as MahidAsa Aitareya in the Arazyaka 
itself, though not in the Brahmavza. We also meet his 
name in the A/Aandogya-upanishad (III, 16, 7), where we 
are told that he lived to an age of 116 years’. All this, 
however, would only prove that, at the time of the compo- 
sition or collection of these Arazyakas and Upanishads, 
a sage was known of the name of Mahiddsa Aitareya, 
descended possibly from Itara or Itar4, and that one text 
of the Brahmamas and the Arazyakas of the Bahvrikas was 
handed down in the family of the Aitareyins. 

Not content with this apparently very obvious explana- 
tion, later theologians tried to discover their own reasons for 
the name of Aitareya. Thus S4yama, in his introduction 
to the Aitareya-brahmama °, tells us that there was once 
a Rishi who had many wives. One of them was called 
Itara, and she had a son called Mahiddsa. His father 
preferred the sons of his other wives to Mahidasa, and once 
he insulted him in the sacrificial hall, by placing his other 
sons on his lap, but not Mahidasa. Mahid4sa’s mother, 
seeing her son with tears in his eyes, prayed to her tutelary 
goddess, the Earth (sviyakuladevata Bhdmiz), and the 
goddess in her heavenly form appeared in the midst of 
the assembly, placed Mahid4sa on a throne, and on account 
of his learning, gave him the gift of knowing the Brahmaaza, 
consisting of forty adhy4yas, and, as Seyaza calls it, another 
Brahmaza, ‘treating of the Aranyaka duties’ (Aranyakavra- 
taripam brahmazam). 

Without attaching much value to the legend of Itard, 
we see at all events that Saya#na considered what we call 
the Aitareydrazyaka as a kind of Brahmaza, not however 
the whole of it, but only the first, second, and third Ara- 
nyakas (atha mah4vratam ityadikam akarya 4k4ry4 ityan- 
tam). How easy it was for Hindu theologians to invent 
such legends we see from another account of MahidAsa, 
given by Anandatirtha in his notes on the Aitareya-upani- 

1 Not 1600 years, as I printed by mistake; for 24 +44 +48 make 116 years. 
Rajendralal Mitra should not have corrected his right rendering 116 into 1600. 
Ait. Ar. Introduction, p. 3. 

? M. M., History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 336. 

INTRODUCTION. XCV 

shad. He, as Colebrooke was the first to point out, takes 
Mahidasa ‘to be an incarnation of Narayava, proceeding 
from Visala, son of Abga,’ and he adds, that on the sudden 
appearance of this-deity at a solemn celebration, the whole 
assembly of gods and priests (suraviprasangha) fainted, but 
at the intercession of Brahma, they were revived, and after 
making their obeisance, they were instructed in holy science. 
This avatara was called Mahiddsa, because those venerable 
personages (mahin) declared themselves to be his slaves 
(dasa) 1. | 

In order properly to understand this legend, we must 
remember that Anandatirtha, or rather Visvesvaratirtha, 
whose commentary he explains, treated the whole of the 
Mahaitareya-upanishad from a Vaishzava point of view, and 
that his object was to identify Mahidasa with Narayaza. 
He therefore represents Narayava or Hari as the avatara 
of Visala, the son of Brahman (abgasuta), who appeared 
at a sacrifice, as described before, who received then and 
there the name of Mahidasa (or Mahidasa), and who taught 
this Upanishad. Any other person besides Mahid4sa would 
have been identified with the same ease by Visvesvara- 
tirtha with Vishzu or Bhagavat. 

A third legend has been made up out of these two by 
European scholars who represent Mahidasa as the son of 
Visala and Itara, two persons who probably never met 
before, for even the Vaishzava commentator does not 
attempt to take liberties with the name of Aitareya, but 
simply states that the Upanishad was called Aitareyi, from 
Aitareya. 

Leaving these legends for what they are worth, we may 
at all events retain the fact that, whoever was the author of 
the Aitareya-brahmamwa and the first three books of the 
Aitareya-drazyaka, was not the author of the two con- 
cluding Aramyakas. And this is confirmed in different 
ways. Sdyanva, when quoting in his commentary on the 
Rig-veda from the last books, constantly calls it a Sdtra of 
Saunaka, while the fourth Arazyaka is specially ascribed 

1 Colebrooke, Miscellaneous Essays, 1873, JI, p. 42. 

xcvi UPANISHADS. 

to Asvalayana, the pupil and successor of Saunaka!. These 
two names of Saunaka and Asvalayana are frequently in- 
termixed. If, however, in certain MSS. the whole of the 
Aitareya-dranyaka is sometimes ascribed either to Asvala- 
yana or Saunaka, this is more probably due to the colophon 
of the fourth and fifth Arazyakas having been mistaken for 
the title of the whole work than to the fact that such MSS. 

represent the text of the Aranyaka, as adopted by the 
school of Asvalayana. 

The Aitareya-aranyaka consists of the following five 
Aranyakas: 

The first Arazyaka has five Adhy4yas: 

1. First Adhy4ya, Atha mah&vratam, has four Khasdas, 1-4. 

a. Second Adhyfya, A tva ratham, has four Khandas, 5-8. 

3. Third Adhyaya, Hiukaresa, has eight? Khaadas, 9-16. 

4. Fourth Adhy4ya, Atha sudadohak, has three Khandas, 17-19. 
5. Fifth Adhyaya, Vasam samsati, has three Khandas, ‘20-22. 

The second Arazyaka has seven Adhydyas: 

6. First Adhyfya, Esha panthah, has eight Khandas, 1-8. 
| 7. Second Adhyaya, Esha imam lokam, has four Khandas, 9-12. 
8. Third Adhyfya, Yo ha va &tm&nam, has eight (not three) 
Khandas, 13-20. 

g. Fourth Adhyaya, Atm va idam, has three Khandas, 21-23. 
fao Fifth Adhyaya, Purushe ha va, has one Khanda, 24. 

11, Sixth Adhyaya, Ko ’yam 4tmeti, has one Khanda, 25. 

1a. Seventh Adhy4ya, Vai me manasi, has one Khanda, 26. 

The third Arazyaka has two Adhy4yas : 
13. First Adhyaya, Athatak samhitaya upanishat, has six Khandas, 
1-6 

14. Second Adhyaya, Prano vamsa iti sthavirah Sakalyak, has six 
Khandas, 7-12. 

The fourth Arazyaka has one Adhydya: 
. First Adhyfya, Vida maghavan, has one Khanda (the Mahe- 
namnf’s). 
The fifth Arazyaka has three Adhydyas: 

16. First Adhy&ya, Mah&vratasya pankavimsatim, has six Khandas, 
1-6. 

17. Second Adhyaya, (Grivas) Yasyedam, has five Khandas, 7-11. 

18. Third Adhydya, (Or) Indragni, has four Khandas, 11-14. 

Bahvrika-upanishad 

-—_ —— 

Aitareya-upanishad 

baa 
en 

2 M. M., History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 235. 
2 Not six, as in Rajecdralal Mitra’s edition. 

INTRODUCTION, xcvii 

With regard to the Upanishad, we must distinguish 
between the Aitareya-upanishad, properly so-called, which 
fills the fourth, fifth, and sixth adhydyas of the second 
Aranyaka, and the Mahaitareya-upanishad !, also called by 
a more general name Bahvrika-upanishad, which comprises 
the whole of the second and third Arazyakas. 

The Persian translator seems to have confined himself to 
the second Aranyaka?, to which he gives various titles, 
Sarbsar, Asarbeh, Antrteheh. That Antrteheh 15,25) is a 
misreading of ssl was pointed out long ago by Burnouf, 
and the same explanation applies probably to w,~l, asar- 
beh, and if to that, then to Sarbsar also, No explanation 
has ever been given why the Aitareya-upanishad should 
haye been called Sarvasdra, which Professor Weber thinks 
was corrupted into Sarbsar. At all events the Aitareya- 
upanishad is not the Sarvas4ra-upanishad, the Oupnek’hat 
Sarb, more correctly called Sarvopanishatsara, and ascribed 
either to the Taittirlyaka or to the Atharva-veda e. 

The Aitareya-upanishad, properly so called, has been 
edited and translated in the Bibliotheca Indica by Dr. 
Reer, The whole of the Aitareya-d4razyaka with Sayaza’s 
commentary was published in the same series by Rajen- 
dralal Mitra. 

Though I have had several MSS. of the text and com- 
mentary at my disposal, I have derived little aid from 
them, but have throughout endeavoured to restore that 
text which Sankara (the pupil of Govinda) and Sayana 
had before them. Sdyaza, for the Upanishad portion, fol- 
lows Sankara’s commentary, of which we have a gloss by 
Anandagfidna. 

Colebrooke in his Essays (vol. ii, p. 42) says that he 

1 This may have been the origin of a Rishi Mahaitareya, by the side of the 
Rishi Aitareya, mentioned in the Asvalayana Grihya-sitras III, 4 (ed. Stenzler). 
Professor Weber takes Aitareya and Mahaitareya here as names of works, but 
he admits that in the Satkhayana Grihya-s(tras they are clearly names of 
Rishis (Ind. Stud. I, p. 389). 

3 He translates II, 1-II, 3, 4, leaving out the rest of the third adbyaya ; 
afterwards II, 4-II, 7. 

® Bibliotheca Indica, the Atharvana-upanishads, p. 394. 

xcviii UPANISHADS. 

possessed one gloss by Narayazendra on Sankara’s com- 
mentary, and another by Anandatirtha on a different gloss 
for the entire Upanishad. The gloss by Narayazendra !, 
however, is, so Dr. Rost informs me, the same as that of 
Anandagnana, while, so far as I can see, the gloss contained 
in MS. E. I. H. 2386 (also MS. Wilson 401), to which Cole- 
brooke refers, is not a gloss by Anandatirtha at all, but a 
gloss by Visvesvaratirtha on a commentary by Anandatir- 
thabhagavatpadafarya, also called Parzapragiiakarya, who 
explained the whole of the Mahaitareya-upanishad from a 
Vaishvzava point of view. 

IV. 

THE KAUSHITAKI-BRAHMANA-UPANISHAD. 

THE Kaushitaki-upanishad, or, as it is more properly 
called, the Kaushitaki-brahmaza-upanishad, belongs, like 
the Aitareya-upanishad, to the followers of the Rig-veda. It 
was translated into Persian under the title of Kokhenk, and 
has been published in the Bibliotheca Indica with Sanka- 
rdnanda’s commentary and an excellent translation by 
Professor Cowell. | 

Though it is called the Kaushitaki-brahmavza-upanishad, 
it does not form part of the Kaushitaki-brahmaza in 30 
adhy4dyas which we possess, and we must therefore account 
for its name by admitting that the Aranyaka, of which it 
formed a portion, could be reckoned as part of the Brah- 
maza literature of the Rig-veda (see Aitareya-dranyaka, 
Introduction, p. xcii), and that hence the Upanishad might 
be called the Upanishad of the Brahmawa of the Kaushi- 
takins ?. pt 

From a commentary discovered by Professor Cowell 
it appears that the four adhy4yas of this Upanishad 

1 A MS. in the Notices of Sanskrit MSS., vol. ii, p. 133, ascribed to Abhi- 
navanardyanendra, called Atmashatkabhashyastka, begins like the gloss edited 
by Dr. Roer, and ends like S&yana’s commentary on the seventh adhyfya, as 
edited by Rajendralal Mitra. The same name is given in MS. Wilson 94, 

SrimatkaivalyerdrasarasvatipigyapAdasishya- srimadabhinavanaraeyanendrasara- 
svati. 

3 A Mahe-kaushitaki-brahmana is quoted, but has not yet been met with. 

INTRODUCTION. XC1X 

were followed by five other adhyayas, answering, so far as 
we can judge from a few extracts, to some of the adhydyas 
of the Aitareya-4razyaka, while an imperfect MS. of an 
Aranyaka in the Royal Library at Berlin (Weber, Catalogue, 
p. 20) begins, like the Aitareya-drazyaka, with a descrip- 
tion of the Mahavrata, followed by discussions on the uktha 
in the second adhy4dya; and then proceeds in the third 
adhyaya to give the story of Xitra Gangydyani in the same 
words as the Kaushitaki-upanishad in the first adhy4ya. 
Other MSS. again adopt different divisions. In one MS. 
of the commentary (MS. A), the four adhydyas of the 
Upanishad are counted as sixth, seventh, eighth, and ninth 
(ending with ity4razyake navamo ’dhydya%); in another 
(MS. P) the third and fourth adhyAyas of the Upanishad 
are quoted as the fifth and sixth of the Kaushitaky4erazyaka, 
possibly agreeing therefore, to a certain extent, with the 
Berlin MS. In a MS. of the Sankhd4yana Aranyaka in 
the Royal Library at Berlin, there are 15 adhy4yas, 1 and 2 
corresponding to Ait. Ar. 1 and 5; 3-6 containing the Kau- 
shitaki-upanishad; 7 and 8 corresponding to Ait. Ar. 31. 
Poley seems to have known a MS. in which the four 
adhyayas of the Upanishad formed the first, seventh, 
eighth, and ninth adhydyas of a Kaushitaki-brahmama. 

As there were various recensions of the Kaushitaki-brah- 
maya (the S4nkhayana, Kauthuma, &c.), the Upanishad 
also exists in at least two texts. The commentator, in 
some of its MSS., refers to the various readings of the 
Sakhas, explaining them, whenever there seems to be 
occasion for it. I have generally followed the text which is 
presupposed by Sankardnanda’s Dipika, and contained in 
MSS. F, G (Cowell, Preface, p. v), so far as regards the 
third and fourth adhydyas. According to Professor Cowell, 
Vidyarazya in his Sarvopanishadarthanubhitiprakasa fol- 
lowed the text of the commentary, while Saukarakarya, 
if we may trust to extracts in his commentary on the 
VedAanta-sitras, followed the other text, contained in MS. 
A (Cowell, Preface, p. v). 

1 See Weber, History of Sanskrit Literature, p. 50. 

2 
This book was dewhicwea from www.holybooks.com : 

c UPANISHADS. 

The style of the commentator differs in so marked a 
manner from that of Sankarakarya, that even without the 
fact that the author of the commentary on the Kaushitaki- 
upanishad is called Sankardnanda, it would have been 
difficult to ascribe it, as has been done by some scholars, 
to the famous Sankara#arya. Sankardnanda is called the 
teacher of Madhavafarya (Hall, Index, p. 98), and the dis- 
ciple of Anandatma Muni (Hall, Index, p. 116). 

I have had the great advantage of being able to consult 
for the Kaushitaki-upanishad, not only the text and com- 
mentary as edited by Professor Cowell, but also his excellent 
translation. If I differ from him in some points, this is but 
natural, considering the character of the text and the many 
difficulties that have still to be solved, before we can hope 
to arrive at a full understanding of these ancient philoso- 
phical treatises. 

V. 

THE VAGASANEYI-SAMHITA-UPANISHAD. 

THE Vagasaneyi-samhite-upanishad, commonly called ` 
from its beginning, fs4 or Isavasya, forms the fortieth and 
concluding chapter of the Samhita of the White Yagur-veda. 
If the Samhites are presupposed by the Brahmanas, at 
least in that form in which we possess them, then this 
Upanishad, being the only one that forms part of a 
Samhita, might claim a very early age. The Samhitd of 
the White Yagur-veda, however, is acknowledged to be of 
modern origin, as compared with the SamhitA of the Black 
Yagur-veda, and it would not be safe therefore to ascribe 
to this Upanishad a much higher antiquity than to those 
which have found a place in the older Brahmavas and 
Aranyakas. 

There are differences between the text, as contained in 
the Yagur-veda-samhita, and the text of the Upanishad by 
itself. Those which are of some interest have been men- 
tioned in the notes. 

In some notes appended to the translation of this 
Upanishad I have called attention to what seems to me 

INTRODUCTION. ci 

its peculiar character, namely, the recognition of the 
necessity of works as a preparation for the reception of 
the highest knowledge. This agrees well with the position 
occupied by this Upanishad at the end of the Samhita, in 
which the sacrificial works and the hymns that are to 
accompany them are contained. The doctrine that the 
moment a man is enlightened, he becomes free, as taught 
in other Upanishads, led to a rejection of all discipline 
and a condemnatian of all sacrifices, which could hardly 
have been tolerated in the last chapter of the Yagur-veda- 
samhita, the liturgical Veda par excellence. 

Other peculiarities of this Upanishad are the name fs, 
lord, a far more personal name for the highest Being than 
Brahman; the asurya (demoniacal) or asurya (sunless) 
worlds to which all go who have lost their self; MAtarisvan, 
used in the sense of praza or spirit; asn4viram, without 
muscles, in the sense of incorporeal; and the distinction 
between sambhiti and asambhiati in verses 12-14. 

The editions of the text, commentaries, and glosses, and 
the earlier translations may be seen in the works quoted 
before, p. 1xxxiv. | 

KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

A Z oo es 

sa. 

KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

FIRST PRAPAZTAHAKA. 

First KHANDAL:. 

I. LET a man meditate on the syllable? Om, 
called the udgttha; for the udgtitha (a portion of the 
Sama-veda) is sung, beginning with Om. 

The full account, however, of Om is this:— 

2. The essence? of all beings is the earth, the 
essence of the earth is water, the essence of water 

1 The XAAndogya-upanishad begins with recommending medi- 
tation on the syllable Om, a sacred syllable that had to be pro- 
nounced at the beginning of each Veda and of every recitation of 
Vedic hymns. As connected with the SAma-veda, that syllable Om 
is called udgitha. Its more usual name is prazava. The object 
of the Upanishad is to explain the various meanings which the 
syllable Om may assume in the mind of a devotee, some of them 
being extremely artificial and senseless, till at last the highest 
meaning of Om is reached, viz. Brahman, the intelligent cause of 
the universe. 

* Akshara means both syllable and the imperishable, i.e. Brahman. 

3 Essence, rasa, is explained in different ways, as origin, sup- 
port, end, cause, and effect. Rasa means originally the sap of 
trees. That sap may be conceived either as the essence extracted 
from the tree, or as what gives vigour and life to a tree. In the 
former case it might be transferred to the conception of effect, in 
the latter to that of cause. In our sentence it has sometimes the 
one, sometimes the other meaning. Earth is the support of all 
beings, water pervades the earth, plants arise from water, man lives 
by plants, speech is the best part of man, the Rig-veda the best 
part of speech, the Sama-veda the best extract from the zk, 
udgitha, or the syllable Om, the crown of the Sama-veda. 

[3] B 
z his book was downloaded from www.holybooks.com : 


2 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

the plants, the essence of plants man, the essence 
of man speech, the essence of speech the Rig-veda, 
the essence of the Rig-veda the Sama-veda !, the 
essence of the Sama-veda the udgitha (which is 
Om). 

3. That udgitha (Om) is the best of all essences, 
the highest, deserving the highest place ?, the 
eighth. 

4. What then is the Az4? What is the SAman? 
What is the udgitha ? This is the question. 

5. The Az&e indeed is speech, Saman is breath, 
the udgitha is the syllable Om. Now speech and 
breath, or Az& and Saman, form one couple. 

6. And that couple is joined together in the 
syllable Om. When two people come together, 
they fulfil each other’s desire. 

7. Thus he who knowing this, meditates on the 
syllable (Om), the udgttha, becomes indeed a ful- 
filler of desires. 

8. That syllable is a syllable of permission, for 
whenever we permit anything, we say Om, yes. 
Now permission is gratification. He who knowing 
this meditates on the syllable (Om), the udgttha, 
becomes indeed a gratifier of desires. 

9. By that syllable does the threefold know- 
ledge (the sacrifice, more particularly the Soma- 
sacrifice, as founded on the three Vedas) proceed. 
When the Adhvaryu priest gives an order, he 
says Om. When the Hotz priest recites, he says 
Om. When the Udgatzz priest sings, he says Om, 

1 Because most of the hymns of the Sama-veda are taken from 
the Rig-veda. 

2 Parfrdhya is here derived from para, highest, and ardha, place. 
The eighth means the eighth or last in the series of essences. 

I PRAPATHAKA, I KHANDA, IO. ` 3 

—all for the glory of that syllable. The threefold 
knowledge (the sacrifice) proceeds by the greatness 
of that syllable (the vital breaths), and by its essence 
(the oblations) }. 

10. Now therefore it would seem to follow, that 
both he who knows this (the true meaning of the 
syllable Om), and he who does not, perform the 
same sacrifice?, But this is not so, for knowledge 
and ignorance are different. The sacrifice which 
a man performs with knowledge, faith, and the 
Upanishad? is more powerful. This is the full 
account of the syllable Om. 

1 These are allusions to sacrificial technicalities, all intended to 
show the importance of the syllable Om, partly as a mere word, 
used at the sacrifices, partly as the mysterious name of the Highest 
Self. As every priest at the Soma-sacrifices, in which three classes 
of priests are always engaged, has to begin his part of the cere- 
monial with Om, therefore the whole sacrifice is said to be de- 
pendent on the syllable Om, and to be for the glory of that syllable, 
as an emblem of the Highest Self, a knowledge of whom is the 
indirect result of all sacrifices. The greatness of the syllable Om 
is explained by the vital breaths of the priest, the sacrificer, and his 
wife; its essence by rice, corn, &c., which constitute the oblations. 
Why breath and food are due to the syllable Om is explained by the 
sacrifice, which is dependent on that syllable, ascending to the sun, 
the sun sending rain, rain producing food, and food producing 
breath and life. 

® He who simply pronounces the syllable Om as part of his ` 
recitation at a sacrifice, and he who knows the hidden meaning of 
that syllable, both may perform the same sacrifice. But that per- 
formed by the latter is more powerful, because knowledge is better 
than ignorance. This is, as usual, explained by some comparisons. 
It is true that both he who knows the quality of the harftakt and he 
who does not, are purged alike if they take it. But on the other hand, 
if a jeweller and a mere clod sell a precious stone, the knowledge of 
the former bears better fruit than the ignorance of the latter. 

* Upanishad is here explained by yoga, and yoga by devatadi- 
vishayam upasanam, meditation directed to certain deities. More 

This book was downloaded fo www.holybooks.com : 

4 : KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

SECOND KHawpA}, 

1. Whent he Devas and Asuras? struggled toge- 
ther, both of the race of Pragdpati, the Devas took 
the udgitha® (Om), thinking they would vanquish 
the Asuras with it. 

2. They meditated on the udgttha® (Om) as 
the breath (scent) in the nose‘, but the Asuras 
pierced it (the breath) with evil. Therefore we smell 
by the breath in the nose both what is good- 
smelling and what is bad-smelling. For the breath 
was pierced by evil. 

3. Then they meditated on the udgttha (Om) as 
speech, but the Asuras pierced it with evil. There- 
fore we speak both truth and falsehood. For 
speech is pierced by evil. 

4. Then they meditated on the udgitha (Om) as 
the eye, but the Asuras pierced it with evil. There- 

likely, however, it refers to this very upanishad, i.e. to the udgftha- 
vidya, the doctrine of the secret meaning of Om, as here explained. 

1 A very similar story is told in the Brihad-aramyaka I, 1, 3, I. 
But though the coincidences between the two are considerable, 
amounting sometimes to verbal identity, the purport of the two 
seems to be different. See Vedanta-sftra III, 3, 6. 

2 Devas and Asuras, gods and demons, are here explained by 

the commentator as the good and evil inclinations of man; Pra- 
' g&pati as man in general. 
* Udgitha stands, according to the commentator, for the sacri- 
‘ficial act to be performed by the Udg4trz, the Sama-veda priest, 
with the udgitha hymns ; and as these sacrificial acts always form 
part of the Gyotishfoma &c., these great Soma-sacrifices are really 
intended. In the second place, however, the commentator takes 
udgitha in the sense of Udg4trz, the performer of the udgitha, 
which is or was by the Devas thought to be the breath in the 
nose. I have preferred to take udgitha in the sense of Om, and 
all that is implied by it. 

* They asked that breath should recite the udgitha. Comm. 

I PRAPATHAKA, 2 KHANDA, 9. 5 

fore we see both what is sightly and unsightly. For 
the eye is pierced by evil. 

5. Then they meditated on the udgitha (Om) as 
the ear, but the Asuras pierced it with evil. There- 
fore we hear both what should be heard and what 
should not be heard. For the ear is pierced by 
evil. 

6. Then they meditated on the udgttha (Om) as 
the mind, but the Asuras pierced it with evil. 
Therefore we conceive both what should be con- 
ceived and what should not be conceived. For 
the mind is pierced by evil. 

7. Then comes this breath (of life) in the mouth’. 
They meditated on the udgitha (Om) as that breath. 
When the Asuras came to it, they were scattered, 
as (a ball of earth) would be scattered when hitting 
a solid stone. 

8. Thus, as a ball of earth is scattered when hit- 
ting on a solid stone, will he be scattered who wishes 
evil to one who knows this, or who persecutes him; 
for he is a solid stone. 

9. By it (the breath in the mouth) he distinguishes 
neither what is good nor what is bad-smelling, for 
that breath is free from evil. What we eat and 
drink with it supports the other vital breaths (i. e. 
the senses, such as smell, &c.) When at the time 
of death he? does not find that breath (in the 

1 Muokhya praza is used in two senses, the principal or vital 
breath, also called sresh/Aa, and the breath in the mouth, also called 
dsanya. 

* According to the commentator, the assemblage of the other 
vital breaths or senses is here meant. They depart when the 
breath of the mouth, sometimes called sarvambhari, all-supporting, 
does no longer, by eating and drinking, support them. 

e 

6 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

mouth, through which he eats and drinks and lives), 
then he departs. He opens the mouth at the time 
of death (as if wishing to eat). 

10. Angiras! meditated on the udgttha (Om) as 
that breath, and people hold it to be Angiras, i.e. 
the essence of the members (ang4n4m rasa) ; 

11. Therefore Brzhaspati meditated on udgitha 
(Om) as that breath, and people hold it to be Brz- 
haspati, for speech is byzhati, and he (that breath) is 
the lord (pati) of speech ; 

12. Therefore Ayasya meditated on the udgitha 
(Om) as that breath, and people hold it to be 
Aydsya, because it comes (ayati) from the mouth 
(Asya) ; 

13. Therefore Vaka Dalbhya knew it. He was 
the Udgatvz (singer) of the Naimishtya-sacrificers, 
and by singing he obtained for them their wishes. 

14. He who knows this, and meditates on the 
syllable Om (the imperishable udgitha) as the breath 
of life in the mouth, he obtains all wishes by singing. 
So much for the udgittha (Om) as meditated on with 
reference to the body ?. 

1 The paragraphs from ro to 14 are differently explained 
by Indian commentators. By treating the nominatives angirds, 
brzhaspatis, and ayasyas (here the printed text reads ay 4syam) 
as accusatives, or by admitting the omission of an iti after them, 
they connect paragraphs 9g, ro, and rr with paragraph 12, and thus 
gain the meaning that Vaka D4lbhya meditated on the breath in the 
mouth as Angiras, Brihaspati, and Ay4sya, instead of those saints 
having themselves thus meditated; and that he, knowing the secret 
names and qualities of the breath, obtained, when acting as Udgatr? 
priest, the wishes of those for whom he sacrificed. Tena is diffi- 
cult to explain, unless we take it in the sense of tendnusish/d, 
taught by him. 

3 Adhyatma means with reference to the body, not with refer- 
ence to the self or the soul. Having explained the symbolical 

I PRAPATHAKA, 3 KHANDA, 4. 7 

THIRD KHANDA. 

1. Now follows the meditation on the udgitha 
with reference to the gods. Let a man meditate 
on the udgttha (Om) as he who sends warmth (the 
sun in the sky). When the sun rises it sings as 
Udgatrz for the sake of all creatures. When it rises 
it destroys the fear of darkness. He who knows this, 
is able to destroy the fear of darkness (ignorance). 

2. This (the breath in the mouth) and that (the 
sun) are the same. This is hot and that is hot. 
This they call svara (sound), and that they call pra- 
tyAsvara! (reflected sound). Therefore let a man 
meditate on the udgftha (Om) as this and that (as 
breath and as sun). 

3. Then let a man meditate on the udgitha 
(Om) as vy4na indeed. If we breathe up, that is 
praza, the up-breathing. If we breathe down, that 
is apana, the down-breathing. The combination of 
praza and ap4na is vyana, back-breathing or holding 
in of the breath. This vyana is speech. Therefore 
when we utter speech, we neither breathe up nor 
down. 

4. Speech is z, and therefore when a man utters 
a Rik verse he neither breathes up nor down. 

meaning of Om as applied to the body and its organs of sense, he 
now explains its symbolical meaning adhidaivatam, i.e. as applied 
to divine beings, 

1 As applied to breath, svara is explained by the commentator 
in the sense of moving, going out; pratyasvara, as applied to the 
sun, is explained as returning every day. More likely, however, 
svara as applied to breath means sound, Om itself being called 
svara (Kh. Up. I, 4, 3), and prasvara in the Rig-veda-pratisakhya, 
882. As applied to the sun, svara and pratyasvara were probably 
taken in the sense of light and reflected light. 

8 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

Rik is Saman, and therefore when a man utters a 
Saman verse he neither breathes up nor down. 

Saman is udgitha, and therefore when a man 
sings (the udgitha, Om) he neither breathes up 
nor down. 

5. And other works also which require strength, 
such as the production of fire by rubbing, running 
a race, stringing a strong bow, are performed with- 
out breathing up or down. Therefore let a man 
meditate on the udgttha (Om) as vydna. 

6. Let a man meditate on the syllables of the 
udgitha, i.e. of the word udgitha. Ut is breath 
(praza), for by means of breath a man rises (ut- 
tish¢#ati). Gi is speech, for speeches are called 
girak. Tha is food, for by means of food all 
subsists (sthita). 

7. Ut is heaven, gt the sky, tha the earth. Ut 
is the sun, gf the air, tha the fre. Ut is the 
Sama-veda, gt the Yagur-veda, tha the Rig-veda!. 

1 The commentator supplies explanations to all these fanciful 
etymologies. The heaven is ut, because it is high; the sky is gf, 
because it gives out all the worlds (giram4t); earth is tha, because it 
is the place (sthana) of living beings. The sun is ut, because it is 
high. The wind is gi, because it gives out fire, &c. (giranat); fire 
is tha, because it is the place (sthana) of the sacrifice. The Sama- 
veda is ut, because it is praised as svarga; the Yagur-veda is 
gi, because the gods take the oblation offered with a Yagus; the 
Rig-veda is tha, because the Sma verses stand in it. All this is 
very childish, and worse than childish, but it is interesting as 
a phase of human folly which is not restricted to the Brahmans 
of India. I take the following passage from an interesting article, 
‘On the Ogam Beithluisnin and on Scythian Letters,’ by Dr. Charles 
Graves, Bishop of Limerick. ‘An Irish antiquary,’ he says, ‘ writing 
several hundred years ago, proposes to give an account of the 
origin of ‘the names of the notes in the musical scale. 

‘“Tt is asked here, according to Saint Augustine, What is chant- - 

ing, or why is it so called? Answer. From this word cantalena; 

I PRAPATHAKA, 3 KHANDA, 7. 9 

Speech yields the milk, which is the milk of speech 
itself !, to him who thus knowing meditates on those 

and canialena is the same thing as lenis cantus, i.e. a soft, sweet 
chant to God, and to the Virgin Mary, and to all the Saints, 
And the reason why the word puince (puncta) is so called is be 
cause the points (or musical notes) ue, re, mi, fa, sol, la, hurt the 
devil and puncture him. And it is thus that these points are to be 
understood: viz. When Moses the son of Amram with his people 
in their Exodus was crossing the Red Sea, and Pharaoh and his 
host were following him, this was the chant which Moses had to 
protect him from Pharaoh and his host—these six points in praise 
of the Lord :— 

‘“The first point of these, i.e. uf: and w/ in the Greek is the 
same as /tberaf in the Latin; and that is the same as saer in 
the Gaelic; i.e. O God, said Moses, deliver us from the harm 
of the devil. 

‘The second point of them, i.e. re: and re is the same as saer ,; 
i.e. O God, deliver us from everything hurtful and malignant. 

‘“The third point, i.e. mz’: and mz in the Greek is the same as 
militum in the Latin; and that is the same as ridere (a knight) in 
the Gaelic; i.e. O God, said Moses, deliver us from those knights 
who are pursuing us. 

‘The fourth point, i.e. fa: and fa in the Greek is the same as 
Jamulus in the Latin; and that is the same as mug (slave) in the 
Gaelic; i.e. O God, said Moses, deliver us from those slaves who 
are pursuing us. 

«The fifth point, i.e. sol: and sol is the same as grian (sun); 
and that is the same as righteousness; because righteousness and 
Christ are not different ; i.e. O Christ, said Moses, deliver us. 

‘« The sixth point, i.e. /a, is the same as /av,; and that is the 
same as ndail (wash); i.e. O God, said Moses, wash away our 
sins from us. 

‘« And on the singing of that laud Pharaoh and his host were 
drowned. 

“Understand, O man, that in whatever place this laud, i.e. this 
chant, is sung, the devil is bound by it, and his power is extirpated 
thence, and the power of God is called in.” 

‘We have been taught that the names of the first six notes 

1 The milk of speech consists in rewards to be obtained by the 
Rig-veda, &c. Or we may translate, Speech yields its milk to him 
who is able to milk speech. 

IO KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

syllables of the name of udgitha, he becomes rich 
in food and able to eat food. 

8. Next follows the fulfilment of prayers. Let 
a man thus meditate on the Upasaramas, i.e. the 
objects which have to be approached by meditation: 
Let him (the Udgatzz) quickly reflect on the SAman 
with which he is going to praise; 

9. Let him quickly reflect on the Aze in which 
that Saman occurs; on the Azshi (poet) by whom 
it was seen or composed; on the Devata (object) 
which he is going to praise; 

10. On the metre in which he is going to praise; on 
the tune with which he is going to sing for himself; 

11. On the quarter of the world which he is going 
to praise. Lastly, having approached himself (his 
name, family, &c.) by meditation, let him sing the 
hymn of praise, reflecting on his desire, and avoiding 
all mistakes in pronunciation, &c. Quickly! will the 
desire be then fulfilled to him, for the sake of which he 
may have offered his hymn of praise, yea, for which 
he may have offered his hymn of praise? 

in the gamut were suggested by the initial syllables of the first 
six hemistichs in one of the stanzas of a hymn to St. John: 

Ut queant laxis 

Resonare fibris 

Mira gestorum 

Famuli tuorum, 

Solve polluti 

Labii reatum, 

Sancte Joannes. 

1 Abhyaso ha yat, lit. depend on it that it will be fulfilled, but 
always explained by quickly. See Ah. Up. II, 1, 4; II, 19, 4; 
V,10, 7. Frequently, but wrongly, written with a dental s. 

2 The repetition of the last sentence is always an indication 
that a chapter is finished. This old division into chapters is of 
great importance for a proper study of the Upanishads. 

I PRAPATHAKA, 4 KHANDA, 5. II 

FourtH KHANDA. 

I. Let a man meditate on the syllable Om, for 
the udgitha is sung beginning with Om. And this 
is the full account of the syllable Om :— 

2. The Devas, being afraid of death, entered 
upon (the performance of the sacrifice prescribed 
in) the threefold knowledge (the three Vedas). They 
covered themselves with the metrical hymns. Be- 
cause they covered (kad) themselves with the 
hymns, therefore the hymns are called zandas.. 

3. Then, as a fisherman might observe a fish in 
the water, Death observed the Devas in the 2&, 
Yagus, and Saman-(sacrifices), And the Devas seeing 
this, rose from the Azk, Yagus, and SAman-sacrifices, 
and entered the Svara !, i.e. the Om (they meditated 
on the Om). 

4. When a man has mastered the Rig-veda, he 
says quite loud Om; the same, when he has mas- 
tered the Sdman and the Yagus. This Svara is the 
imperishable (syllable), the immortal, free from fear. 
Because the Devas entered it, therefore they be- 
came immortal, and free from fear. 

5. He who knowing this loudly pronounces (pra- 
nauti)? that syllable, enters the same (imperish- 
able) syllable, the Svara, the immortal, free from 
fear, and hating entered it, becomes immortal, as 
the Devas are immortal. 

1 Cf. I, 3, 2. 
2? Prazauti, he lauds, i.e. he meditates on. Comm, 

12 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

FirtrH KHANDA. 

1. The udgitha is the prazava', the prazava is 
the udgttha. And as the udgttha is the sun ?, so is 
the prazava, for he (the sun) goes sounding Om. 

2. ‘Him I sang praises to, therefore art thou my 
only one,’ thus said Kaushitaki to his son. ‘Do thou 
revolve his rays, then thou wilt have many sons.’ 
So much in reference to the Devas. 

3. Now with reference to the body. Let a man 
meditate on the udgttha as the breath (in the mouth), 
for he goes sounding Om. 

4. ‘Him I sang praises to, therefore art thou my 
only son,’ thus said Kaushttaki to his son. ‘Do thou 
therefore sing praises to the breath as manifold, if 
thou wishest to have many sons.’ 

5. He who knows that the udgitha is the pra- 
nava, and the praava the udgttha, rectifies from 
the seat of the Hotz priest any mistake committed 
by the Udg4tzz priest in performing the udgitha, 
yea, in performing the udgttha. 

SixtH KHANDA. 

1. The Az& (veda) is this earth, the Saman (veda) 
is fire. This SAman (fire) rests on that z% (earth) +. 
Therefore the SAman is sung as resting on the Rik. 

1 Pranava is the name used chiefly by the followers of the Rig- 
veda, udgitha the name used by the followers of the Sama-veda. 
Both words are intended for the syllable Om. 

? Cf. Xh. Up. I, 3, 1. 

* The breath in the mouth, or the chief breath, says Om, i.e. 
gives permission to the five senses to act, just as the sun, by 
saying Om, gives permission to all living beings to move about. 

+ The Sama verses are mostly taken from the Rig-veda. 

I PRAPATHAKA, 6 KHANDA, 8. 13 

SA is this earth, ama is fire, and that makes 

Sama. | 

2. The Rz is the sky, the Saman air. This 
Saman (air) rests on that Æze (sky). Therefore the 
Saman is sung as resting on the Aze. Sa is the sky, 
ama the air, and that makes S4ma. 

3. Rık is heaven, SAman the sun. This Saman 
(sun) rests on that Az&e (heaven). Therefore the 
S4man is sung as resting on the Az&, Sa is heaven, 
ama the sun, and that makes S4ma. 

4. Rik is the stars, SAman the moon. This 
S4man (moon) rests on that Aze (stars). Therefore 
the Saman is sung as resting on the Az& Sa is the 
stars, ama the moon, and that makes S4ma. 

5. Rrk is the white light of the sun, Sdman the 
blue exceeding darkness! (in the sun). This Saman 
(darkness) rests on that ze (brightness), There- 
fore the Saman is sung as resting on the &zz. 

6. Sa is the white light of the sun, ama the blue 
exceeding darkness, and that makes Sama. 

Now that golden? person, who is seen within the 
sun, with golden beard and golden hair, golden 
altogether to the very tips of his nails, 

7. Whose eyes are like blue lotus’s*, his name is 
ut, for he has risen (udita) above all evil. He also 
who knows this, rises above all evil. 

8. Rik and Sdman are his joints, and therefore 
he is udgitha. And therefore he who praises him 

1 The darkness which is seen by those who can concentrate 
their sight on the sun. 

2 Bright as gold. 

3 The colour of the lotus is described by a comparison with the 
Kapyasa, the seat of the monkey (kapiprish/Aanto yena upavisati). 
It was probably a botanical name. 



sf ve 

Ke 

14 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

(the ut) is called the Ud-gAtvz! (the out-singer). He 
(the golden person, called ut) is lord of the worlds 
beyond that (sun), and of all the wishes of the Devas 
(inhabiting those worlds). So much with reference 
to the Devas. 

SEVENTH KHANDA. 

1. Now with reference to the body. Rz is speech, 
Saman breath ? This SAman (breath) rests on that 
Rik (speech). Therefore the SAman is sung as 
resting on the Æ. Sa is speech, ama is breath, 
and that makes S4ma. 

2. zk is the eye, SAman the self. This Saman 
(shadow) rests on that Aze (eye). Therefore the 
Saman is sung as resting on the Az&. Sa is the 
eye, ama the self,and that makes S4m a. 

3. Rik is the ear, SAman the mind. This SAman 
(mind) rests on that Æi (ear). Therefore the 
Saman is sung as resting on the Az& Sa is the 
ear, ama the mind, and that makes SA4ma. 

4. Rik is the white light of the eye, Saman the 
blue exceeding darkness. This Saman (darkness) 
rests on the Aze (brightness). Therefore the Saman 
is sung as resting on the z. Sa is the white light 
of the eye, ama the blue exceeding darkness, and 
that makes S4ma. 

5. Now the person who is seen in the eye, he is 
Rik, he is SAman, Uktha‘, Yagus, Brahman. The 
form of that person (in the eye) is the same® as the 

1 Name of the principal priest of the SAma-veda. 

2 Breath in the nose, sense of smelling. Comm. 

® The shadow-self, the likeness or image thrown upon the eye; 
see Kh. Up. VIII, 9, 1. 

* A set of hymns to be recited, whereas the Saman is sung, and 
the Yagus muttered. 

5 Cf. Kh. Up. I, 6, 6. 

I PRAPATHAKA, 8 KHANDA, 2. 15 

form of the other person (in the sun), the joints of the 
one (Rrk and Seman) are the joints of the other, the 
name of the one (ut) is the name of the other. 

6. He is lord of the worlds beneath that (the 
self in the eye), and of all the wishes of men. 
Therefore all who sing to the viv (lyre), sing him, 
and from him also they obtain wealth. 

7. He who knowing this sings a SAman, sings to 
both (the adhidaivata and adhyatma self, the person 
in the sun and the person in the eye, as one and 
the same person). He obtains through the one, 
yea, he obtains the worlds beyond that, and the 
wishes of the Devas; 

8. And he obtains through the other the worlds 
beneath that, and the wishes of men. 

Therefore an Udgatzz priest who knows this, may 
say (to the sacrificer for whom he officiates) ; 

9. ‘What wish shall I obtain for you by my 
songs?” For he who knowing this sings a Saman 
is able to obtain wishes through his song, yea, 
through his song. 

EIGHTH KHANDA. 

I. There were once three men, well-versed in 
udgitha!, Silaka Salavatya, AKaikitayana Dalbhya, 
and Pravahavza Gaivali. They said: ‘We are well- 
versed in udgitha. Let us have a discussion on 
udgttha.’ 

2. They all agreed and sat down. Then Prava- 
haxa Gaivali? said: ‘Sirs, do you both speak first, 

~ 1 Cognisant of the deeper meanings of udgitha, i.e. Om. 

2 He, though not being a Brahmaaa, turns out to be the only 
one who knows the true meaning of udgitha, i.e. the Highest 
Brahman. 

16 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

for I wish to hear what two Brahmavzas! have to 
say. 

A Then Silaka SalAvatya said to Aaikitayana 
Dalbhya : ‘Let me ask you.’ 

‘ Ask,’ he replied. 

4. ‘What is the origin of the Saman ? ‘Tone 
(svara),’ he replied. 

‘What is the origin of tone?’ ‘Breath, he 
replied. 

‘What is the origin of breath?’ ‘Food, he 
replied. 

‘What is the origin of food?’ ‘Water,’ he 
replied. 

5. ‘What is the origin of water?’ ‘ That world 
(heaven), he replied. 

‘And what is the origin of that world ?’— 

He replied: ‘Let no man carry the Saman 
beyond the world of svarga (heaven). We place 
(recognise) the Sdman in the world of svarga, for 
the S4man is extolled as svarga (heaven). 

6. Then said Silaka Salavatya to Aaikitayana 
Dalbhya: ‘O Dalbhya, thy Saman is not firmly 
established. And if any one were to say, Your 
head shall fall off (if you be wrong), surely your 
head would now fall.’ 

7. ‘Well then, let me know this from you, Sir, 
said Dalbhya. 

‘Know it, replied Silaka SalAvatya. 

‘What is the origin of that world (heaven) ?’ 
‘This world,’ he replied. 

‘And what is the origin of this world ?’— 

He. replied: ‘Let no man carry the SAman be- 
yond this world as its rest. We place the SAman 

1 In V, 3,5, Pravahana Gaivali is distinctly called a raganyabandhu. 



I PRAPATHAKA, 9 KHANDA, 4. 17 

in this world as its rest, for the SAman is extolled 
as rest.’ 

8. Then said Pravahaza Gaivali to Silaka Sala- 
vatya: ‘Your Saman (the earth), O Salavatya, has 
an end. And if any one were to say, Your head 
shall fall off (if you be wrong), surely your head 
would now fall.’ 

‘Well then, let me know this from you, Sir,’ said 
Salavatya. 

‘ Know it, replied Gaivali. 

NintH KHANDA. 

1. ‘What is the origin of this world?’ ‘Ether’, 
he replied. For all these beings take their rise 
from the ether, and return into the ether. Ether 
is older than these, ether is their rest. 

2. He is indeed the udgttha (Om= Brahman), 
greater than great (parovartyas), he is without end. 

He who knowing this meditates on the udgttha, 
the greater than great, obtains what is greater than 
great, he conquers the worlds which are greater 
than great. 

3. Atidhanvan Saunaka, having taught this udgt- 
tha to Udara-sdzdilya, said: ‘As long as they will 
know in your family this udgttha, their life in this 
world will be greater than great. 

4. ‘And thus also will be their state in the other 
world? He who thus knows the udgitha, and 
meditates on it thus, his life in this world will be 
greater than great, and also his state in the other 
world, yea, in the other world. 

1 Ether, or we might translate it by space, both being intended, 
however, as names or symbols of the Highest Brahman. See 
Vedanta-sfittra I, 1, 22. 

[3] This book was downloaded from www.holybooks.com : 

18 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

Tentu KHANDA. 

1. When the Kurus had been destroyed by (hail) 
stones !, Ushasti Xakrayaza lived as a beggar with 
his virgin? wife at Ibhyagrama. 

2. Seeing a chief eating beans, he begged of 
him. The chief said: ‘I have no more, except 
those which are put away for me here.’ 

3. Ushasti said: ‘Give me to eat of them.’ He 
gave him the beans, and said: ‘ There is something 
to drink also. Then said Ushasti: ‘If I drank of 
it, I should have drunk what was left by another, 
and is therefore unclean.’ 

4. The chief said: ‘Were not those beans also 
left over and therefore unclean ?’ 

‘No,’ he replied; ‘for I should not have lived, 
if I had not eaten them, but the drinking of water 
would be mere pleasure 3.’ 

5. Having eaten himself, Ushasti gave the re- 
maining beans to his wife. But she, having eaten 
before, took them and put them away. 

6. Rising the next morning, Ushasti said to 
her: ‘Alas, if we could only get some food, we 
might gain a little wealth. The king here is going 
to offer a sacrifice, he should oe me for all the 
priestly offices.’ 

1 When they had been killed either by stone weapons, or by a 
shower of stones, which produced a famine in the land. Comm. 

2 Ask? is not the name of the wife of Ushasti, nor does it mean 
strong enough to travel. Sankara explains it as anupagatapayo- 
dharAdistrivyaiigan4, and Anandagiri adds, Svairasamefre ‘pi na 
vyabhikarasanketi darsayitum AAkyeti viseshazam. She was so 
young that she was allowed to run about freely, without exciting 
any suspicion. Another commentator says, Grihad bahirgantu- 
marha anupagatapayodhara. 

3 Or, according to the commentator, ‘ water I can get whenever 
I like.’ 



I PRAPATHAKA, 1I KHANDA, 2. 19 

7. His wife said to him: ‘ Look, here are those 
beans of yours.’ Having eaten them, he went to . 
the sacrifice which was being performed. 

8. He went and sat down on the orchestra near 
the Udgatvzs, who were going to sing their hymns of 
praise. And he said to the Prastotrz (the leader) : 

9. ‘ Prastotvz, if you, without knowing! the deity 
which belongs to the prast4va (the hymns &c. of 
the Prastotrz), are going to sing it, your head will 
-fall off.’ 

10. In the same manner he addressed the Udgatzz : 
‘ Udgatvz, if you, without knowing the deity which 
belongs to the udgitha (the hymns of the Udgatzz), 
are going to sing it, your head will fall off.’ 

11. In the same manner he addressed the Pra- 
tihartvz: ‘ Pratihartsz, if you, without knowing the 
deity which belongs to the pratihara (the hymns of 
the Pratihart7z), are going to sing it, your head will 
fall off.’ 

They stopped, and sat down in silence. 

ELEVENTH KHANDA, 

1. Then the sacrificer said to him: ‘I should 
like to know who you are, Sir.’ He replied: ‘I am 
Ushasti AAkrdyaaa.’ 

2. He said: ‘I looked for you, Sir, for all these 
sacrificial offices, but not finding you’, I chose 
others.’ I 

! The commentator is at great pains to show that a priest may 
officiate without knowing the secret meanings here assigned to 
certain parts of the sacrifice, and without running any risk of 
punishment. Only, if another priest is present, who is initiated, 
then the uninitiated, taking his place, is in danger of losing his 
head. 

2 Should it be avittva, as in I, 2, 9? 

This book was dowiidaded from www.holybooks.com : 

20 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

3. ‘But now, Sir, take all the sacrificial offices. 

Ushasti said: ‘Very well; but let those, with my 
permission, perform the hymns of praise. Only as 
much wealth as you give to them, so much give 
to me also.’ 

The sacrificer assented. 

4. Then the Prastotxz approached him, saying: 
‘Sir, you said to me, “ Prastotrz, if you, without 
knowing the deity which belongs to the prastava, 
are going to sing it, your head will fall off, —which 
then is that deity ?’ | 

5. He said: ‘Breath (praza), For all these beings 
merge into breath alone, and from breath they arise. 
This is the deity belonging to the prastava. If, 
without knowing that deity, you had sung forth 
your hymns, your head would have fallen off, after 
you had been warned by me.’ 

6. Then the Udgatzz approached him, saying: 
‘Sir, you said to me, “ Udgatsz, if you, without 
knowing the deity which belongs to the udgttha, 
are going to sing it, your head will fall off,’— 
which then is that deity ?’ 

7. He said: ‘The sun (Aditya). For all these 
beings praise the sun when it stands on high. This 
is the deity belonging to the udgttha. If, without 
knowing that deity, you had sung out your hymns, 
your head would have fallen off, after you had been 
warned by me.’ 

8. Then the Pratiharty¢ approached him, saying : 
‘Sir, you said to me, “ Pratihartvz, if you, without 
knowing the deity belonging to the pratihdra, are 
going to sing it, your head will fall off,’—which 
then is that deity ?’ 

9. He said: ‘Food (anna). For all these beings 

I PRAPATHAKA, 12 KHANDA, 5. 21 

live when they partake of food. This is the deity 
belonging to the pratihara. If, without knowing 
that deity, you had sung your hymns, your head 
would have fallen off, after you had been warned 
by me?,’ 

TWELFTH KHANDA. 

1. Now follows the udgitha of the dogs. Vaka 
Dalbhya, or, as he was also called, Glava Maitreya, 
went out to repeat the Veda (in a quiet place). 

2. A white (dog) appeared before him, and other 
dogs gathering round him, said to him: ‘Sir, sing 
and get us food, we are hungry.’ 

3. The white dog said to them: ‘Come to me 
to-morrow morning.’ Vaka Dalbhya, or, as he was 
also called, Glava Maitreya, watched. 

4. The dogs came on, holding together, each dog 
keeping the tail of the preceding dog in his mouth, 
as the priests do when they are going to sing praises 
with the Vahishpavamana hymn* After they had 
settled down, they began to say Hin. 

5. ‘Om, let us eat! Om, let us drink! Om, may 
the divine Varuza, Prag4pati, Savitvz® bring us food! 
Lord of food, bring hither food, bring it, Om!’ 

1 There are certain etymological fancies for assigning each 
deity to a certain portion of the Sama-veda ceremonial. Thus 
praza is assigned to the prastava, because both words begin 
with pra. Aditya is assigned to the udgitha, because the sun 
is ut. Anna, food, is assigned to the pratihara, because food 
is taken, pratihrzyate, &c. 

2 This alludes to a ceremony where the priests have to walk 
in procession, each priest holding the gown of the preceding 
priest. . 

* The commentator explains Varuna and Pragdpati as epithets 
of Savitrz, or the sun, meaning rain-giver and man-protector. 

22 KEHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

THIRTEENTH KHANDA.. 

t. The syllable Hau? is this world (the earth), 
the syllable H4i® the air, the syllable Atha the 
moon, the syllable Iha the self, the syllable [4 is 
Agni, fire. 

2. The syllable U is the sun, the syllable E is the 
Nihava or invocation, the syllable Auhoi® is the 
Visve Devas, the syllable Hin is Pragapati, Svara ° 
(tone) is breath (praza), the syllable YA is food, the 
syllable Vag? is Virag. 

3. The thirteenth stobha syllable, viz. the indis- 
tinct syllable Hun, is the Undefinable (the Highest 
Brahman). 

4. Speech yields the milk, which is the milk of 
speech itself to him who knows this Upanishad 
(secret doctrine) of the Samans in this wise. He 
becomes rich in food, and able to eat food *,—yea, 
able to eat food. 

1 The syllables here mentioned are the so-called stobh&ksha- 
ras, sounds used in the musical recitation of the Saman hymns, 
probably to fill out the intervals in the music for which there were 
no words in the hymns, These syllables are marked in the MSS. 
of the Sama-veda, but their exact character and purpose are not 
quite clear. 

* A stobha syllable used in the Rathantara Saman. 

* Used in the Vamadevya Saaman. 

‘ The S&man addressed to Agni takes the syllable f as nidhana. 

® The stobha syllables used in the Saman addressed to the 
Visve Devas. 

° See Kh. Up. I, 4, 4. 

™ The commentator takes vag as a stobha, as a syllable 
occurring in hymns addressed to Virag, and as implying either 
the deity Vir&g or food. 

* Ie. wealthy and healthy. 

II PRAPATHAKA, 2 KHANDA, 2. 23 

SECOND PRAPA7AHAKA. 

First KHANDA. 

1. Meditation on the whole! of the Saman is 
good, and people, when anything is good, say it is 
S4man ; when it is not good, it is not SAman. 

2. Thus they also say, he approached him with 
Saman, i.e. becomingly; and he approached him 
without S4man, i. e. unbecomingly. 

3. And they also say, truly this is Saman for us, 
i.e. it is good for us, when it is good; and truly 
that is not Saman for us, i.e. it is not good for 
us, when it is not good. 

4. If any one knowing this meditates on the 
Saman as good, depend upon it all good qualities 
will approach quickly, aye, they will become his 
own ?. 

SECOND KHANDA. 

1. Let a man meditate on the fivefold Saman ? 
as the five worlds. The hinkdra is the earth, the 
prastava the fire, the udgttha the sky, the pratihara 
the sun, the nidhana heaven; so in an ascending 
line. 

2. In a descending line, the hinkara is heaven, 

1 Hitherto meditation on certain portions only of the Sama- 
veda and the Sima-sacrifice had been enjoined, and their deeper 
meaning explained. Now the same is done for the whole of the 
S4man. 

3 Cf. Kk. Up. III, 19, 4. 

* The five forms in which the Saman is used for sacrificial 
purposes. The Saman is always to be understood as the Good, 
as Dharma, and as Brahman. 

24 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

the prastava the sun, the udgitha the sky, the 
pratihara the fire, the nidhana the earth. 

3. The worlds in an ascending and in a descend- 
ing line belong to him who knowing this meditates 
on the fivefold SAman as the worlds !. 

Tuirp KHANDA. 

I. Let a man meditate on the fivefold Saman 
as rain. The hinkara is wind (that brings the 
rain); the prast4va is, ‘the cloud is come;’ the_ 
udgitha is, ‘it rains;’ the pratihara, ‘it flashes, it 
thunders ;’ 

2. The nidhana is, ‘it stops.’ There is rain for 
him, and he brings rain for others who thus knowing 
meditates on the fivefold Sdman as rain. 

FourtH KHANDA. 

1. Let a man meditate on the fivefold SAman 
in all waters. When the clouds gather, that is the 
hinkaera; when it rains, that is the prastava; that 
which flows in the east ?, that is the udgitha; that 
which flows in the west’, that is the pratihara; the 
sea is the nidhana. 

2. He does not die in water‘, nay, he is rich in 

1 The commentator supplies some fanciful reasons why each of 
the five Sdmans is identified with certain objects. Earth is said to 
be the hink4ra, because both always come first. Agni is prastava, 
because sacrifices are praised in the fire (prastfiyante). The sky is 
udgitha, because it is also called gagana, and both words have the 
letter g in common. The sun is pratihara, because everybody 
wishes the sun to come towards him (prati). Heaven is nidhana, 
because those who depart from here are placed there (nidhi- 
yante), &c. 

2 The Ganges, &c. Comm. 

3 The Narmada, &c. Comm. 

t The commentator adds, ‘unless he wishes to die in the 
Ganges,’ 

II PRAPATHAKA, 7 KHANDA, 2. 25 

water who knowing this meditates on the fivefold 
Saman as all waters. 

FirtH KHANDA. 

I. Let a man meditate on the fivefold SAman as 
the seasons. The hinkdra is spring, the prastava — 
summer (harvest of yava, &c.), the udgitha the 
rainy season, the pratihdra autumn, the nidhana 
winter. 

2. The seasons belong to him, nay, he is always 
in season (successful) who knowing this meditates 
on the fivefold SAman as the seasons. 

SixtH KHANDA. 

1. Let a man meditate on the fivefold SAman in 
animals, The hinkdra is goats, the prastava sheep, 
the udgttha cows, the pratihara horses, the nidhana 
man. 

2. Animals belong to him, nay, he is rich in 
animals who knowing this meditates on the fivefold 
Saman as animals. 

SEVENTH KHANDA. 

1. Let a man meditate on the fivefold Saman, 
which is greater than great,'as the prazas (senses). 
The hink4ra is smell? (nose), the prastava speech 
(tongue), the udgttha sight (eye), the pratihdra 
hearing (ear), the nidhana mind. These are one 
greater than the other. 

2. What is greater than great belongs to him, 
nay, he conquers the worlds which are greater than 

1 Prana is explained by ghrama, smell; possibly ghraza may 
have been the original reading. Anyhow, it cannot be the mukhya 
prana here, because it is distinctly represented as the lowest sense. 

26 KEHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

great, who knowing this meditates on the fivefold 
Saman, which is greater than great, as the praxas 
(senses). 

EIGHTH KHANDA. 

1. Next for the sevenfold Saman. Let a man 
meditate on the sevenfold Saman in speech. 
Whenever there is in speech the syllable hun}, 
that is hinkdra, pra is the prast4va, 4 is the adi, 
the first, i.e. Om, 

2. Ud is the udgitha, pra the rn upa the 
upadrava, ni the nidhana. 

3. Speech yields the milk, which is the milk of 
speech itself, to him who knowing this meditates on 
the sevenfold Saman in speech. He becomes rich in 
food, and able to eat food. 

NiIntTH KHANDA. 

I. Let a man meditate on the sevenfold Saman 
as the sun. The sun is Sdman, because he is 
always the same (sama); he is Sdman because he 
is the same, everybody thinking he looks towards 
me, he looks towards me, 

2. Let him know that all beings are dependent 
on him (the sun). What he is before his rising, 
that is the hinkdra. On it animals are dependent. 
Therefore animals say hin (before sunrise), for they 
share the hinkara of that SAman (the sun). 

3. What he is when first risen, that is the pra- 
stdva. On it men are dependent. Therefore men 
love praise (prastuti) and celebrity, for they share 
the prastava of that Saman. 

1 These are again the stobhaksharas, or musical syllables used 
in the performance of the Saman hymns ; see p. 22. 
> Cf. Kh. Up. II, 2, 2. Comm. 

II PRAPATHAKA, 9 KHANDA, 8. 27 

4. What he is at the time of the sangava', that 
is the Adi, the first, the Om. On it birds are de- 
pendent. Therefore birds fly about in the sky 
without support, holding themselves, for they share 
the adi ? (the Om) of that Saman. 

5. What he is just at noon, that is the udgitha. 
On it the Devas are dependent (because they are 
brilliant). Therefore they are the best of all the 
descendants of Pragdpati, for they share the udgt- 
tha of that Saman. | 

6. What he is after midday and before afternoon, 
that is the pratihara. On it all germs are depend- 
ent. Therefore these, having been conceived (pra- 
tihyzta), do not fall, for they share the pratihara of 
that Saman. 

7. What he is after the afternoon and before 
sunset, that is the upadrava. On it the animals 
of the forest are dependent. Therefore, when they 
see a man, they run (upadravanti) to the forest as 
a safe hiding-place, for they share the upadrava of 
that Saman. 

8. What he is when he first sets, that is the 
nidhana. On it the fathers are dependent. There- 
fore they put them? down (nidadhati), for they 
share the nidhana of that Saman. Thus a man 
meditates on the sevenfold Saman as the sun. 

1 When the sun puts forth his rays, and when the cows are 
together with their calves, i.e. as Rajendralal Mitra says, after 
the cows have been milked and are allowed by the cowherds to 
suckle their young. 

3 The tertium comparationis is here the 4 of Adi and the 
4 of adaya, i.e. holding. The d might have been added. 

3 The cakes for the ancestral spirits, or the spirits themselves. 

28 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

TENTH KHANDA. 

1. Next let a man meditate on the sevenfold 
Saman which is uniform in itself! and leads beyond 
death. The word hinkara has three syllables, the word 
prastava has three syllables: that is equal (sama). 

2. The word 4di (first, Om) has two syllables, 
the word pratihara has four syllables. Taking one 
syllable from that over, that is equal (sama). 

3. The word udgttha has three syllables, the 
word upadrava has four syllables. With three and 
three syllables it should be equal. One syllable being 
left over, it becomes trisyllabic. Hence it is equal. 

4. The word nidhana has three syllables, there- 
fore it is equal. These make twenty-two syllables. 

5. With twenty-one syllables a man reaches the 
sun (and death), for the sun is the twenty-first? from 
here; with the twenty-second he conquers what is 
beyond the sun: that is blessedness, that is freedom 
from grief. 

6. He obtains here the victory over the sun 
(death), and there is a higher victory than the 
victory over the sun for him, who knowing this 
meditates on the sevenfold Saman as uniform in 
itself, which leads beyond death, yea, which leads 
beyond death. 

ELEVENTH Kuanpa*. 
1. The hink4ra is mind, the prastava speech, the 
udgitha sight, the pratihdra hearing, the nidhana 

1 Atmasammita is explained by the commentator either as 
having the same number of syllables in the names of the different 
Samans, or as equal to the Highest Self. 

2 There are twelve months, five seasons, three worlds, then 
follows the sun as the twenty-first. Comm. 

° After having explained the secret meaning of the whole Sama- 

II PRAPATHAKA, 13 KHANDA, 2. 29 

breath. That is the Gdyatra SAman, as interwoven 
in the (five) prazas !. 

2. He who thus knows this GAyatra interwoven 
in the prazas, keeps his senses, reaches the full life, 
he lives long?, becomes great with children and 
cattle, great by fame. The rule of him who thus 
meditates on the GAyatra is, ‘Be not high-minded.’ 

TWELFTH KHANDA. 

1. The hinkara is, he rubs (the fire-stick); the 
prastava, smoke rises; the udgttha, it burns; the 
pratihara, there are glowing coals; the nidhana, it 
goes down; the nidhana, it is gone out. This is 
the Rathantara Saman as interwoven in fire °. 

2. He who thus knows this Rathantara inter- 
woven in fire, becomes radiant‘ and strong. He 
reaches the full life, he lives long, becomes great 
with children and cattle, great by fame. The rule 
is, ‘Do not rinse the mouth or spit before the fire.’ 

THIRTEENTH KHANDA. 

1, 2. Next follows the Vamadevya as interwoven 
in generation 5. 

veda ceremonial, as it is to be understood by meditation only 
(dhyana), he proceeds to explain the secret meaning of the same 
ceremonial, giving to each its proper name in proper succession 
(gayatra, rathantara, &c.), and showing the hidden purport of 
those names. 

1 Cf. Kh. Up. II, 7, 1, where praza is explained differently. 
The GAyatrt itself is sometimes called praza. 

2 The commentator generally takes gyok in the sense of bright. 

>` The Rathantara is used for the ceremony of producing fire. 

t Brahmavarkasa is the ‘glory of countenance’ produced by 
higher knowledge, an inspired look. Annada, lit. able to eat, 
healthy, strong. 

° Upamantrayate sa hink4ro, gfiapayate sa prastavaf, striy saha 

30 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

FOURTEENTH KHANDA. 

1. Rising, the sun is the hink4ra, risen, he is the 
prast4va, at noon he is the udgttha, in the afternoon 
he is the pratih4ra, setting, he is the nidhana. That 
is the Brhat SAman as interwoven in the sun 1. 

2. He who thus knows the Brhat as interwoven 
in the sun, becomes refulgent*? and strong, he 
reaches the full life, he lives long, becomes great 
with children and cattle, great by fame. His rule 
is, ‘ Never complain of the heat of the sun.’ 

FIFTEENTH KHANDA. 

1. The mists gather, that is the hinkara; the 
cloud has risen, that is the prast4va; it rains, that 
is the udgttha; it flashes and thunders, that is the 
pratihara; it stops, that is the nidhana. That is 
the Vairipa Seman, as interwoven in Parganya, the 
god of rain. 

2. He who thus knows the Vairfipa as interwoven 
in Parganya, obtains all kinds of cattle (virupa), he 
reaches the full life, he lives long, becomes great 
with children and cattle, great by fame. His rule 
is, ‘Never complain of the rain.’ 

SIXTEENTH KHANDA. 

1. The hinkara is spring, the prastava summer, 
the udgttha the rainy season, the pratihara autumn, 

sete sa udgitha4, pratistri saha sete sa pratiharak, kalam gatkhati 
tan nidhanam, param gakshati tan nidhanam. Etad vimadevyam 
mithune protam. 2. Sa ya evam etad vamadevyam mithune pro- 
tam veda, mithunf bhavati, mithunan mithun4t pragdyate, sarvam 
ayur eti, gycg givati, mahan pragay& pasubhir bhavati, mah4n 
kirttya. Na kameana pariharet tad vratam. 

* The sun is brzhat. The Brhat Saman is to be looked upon 
as the sun, or the Brshat has Aditya for its deity. 

3 The same as brahmavareasin. 

II PRAPATHAKA, 18 KHANDA, 2. 31 

the nidhana winter. That is the Vairaga Saman, 
as interwoven in the seasons. 

2. He who thus knows the Vair4ga, as interwoven 
in the seasons, shines (virdgati) through children, 
cattle, and glory of countenance. He reaches the 
full life, he lives long, becomes great with children 
and cattle, great by fame. His rule is, ‘ Never 
complain of the seasons.’ 

SEVENTEENTH KHANDA. 

1. The hinkara is the earth, the prastAva the sky, 
the udgttha heaven, the pratihara the regions, the 
nidhana the sea. These are the Sakvart Samans, 
as interwoven in the worlds? 

2. He who thus knows the Sakvarts, as inter- 
woven in the worlds, becomes possessed, of the 
worlds, he reaches the full life, he lives long, .be- 
comes great with children and cattle, great by fame. 
His rule is, ‘ Never complain of the worlds.’ 

EIGHTEENTH KHANDA. 

1. The hinkara is goats, the prastava sheep, 
the udgitha cows, the pratihara horses, the nidhana 
man. These are the Revatt Samans, as interwoven 
in animals, 

2. He who thus knows these Revatts, as inter- 
woven in animals, becomes rich in animals*, he 
reaches the full life, he lives long, becomes great 
with children and cattle, great by fame. His rule 
is, ‘Never complain of animals.’ 

1 The Sakvaris are sung with the Mahanamnts. These are said 
to be water, and the worlds are said to rest on water. 
23 Revat means rich. 

32 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

NINETEENTH KHANDA. 

1. The hinkara is hair, the prastava skin, the 
udgitha flesh, the pratihdra bone, the nidhana 
marrow. That is the Yagfidyagfitya Saman, as 
interwoven in the members of the body. 

2. He who thus knows the Yagiidyagfitya, as 
interwoven in the members of the body, becomes 
possessed of strong limbs, he is not crippled in any 
limb, he reaches the full life, he lives long, becomes 
great with children and cattle, great by fame. His 
rule is, ‘Do not eat marrow for a year,’ or ‘Do 
not eat marrow at all.’ 

TWENTIETH KHANDA. 

1. The hinkdara ts fire, the prast4va air, the ud- 
githa the sun, the pratihara the stars, the nidhana 
the moon. That is the Ragana SAman, as inter- 
woven in the deities, 

2. He who thus knows the R4gana, as inter- 
woven in the deities, obtains the same world, the 
same happiness, the same company as the gods, he 
reaches the full life, he lives long, becomes great 
with children and cattle, great by fame. His rule 
is, ‘Do not speak evil of the Brahmazas.’ 

TWENTY-FIRST KHANDA. 

. The hinkara is the threefold knowledge, the 
Ma these three worlds, the udgitha Agni (fire), 
VAyu (air), and Aditya (sun), the pratihdra the stars, 
the birds, and the rays, the nidhana the serpents, 
Gandharvas, and fathers. That is the Saman, as 
interwoven in everything. 

2. Hewho thus knows this S4man, as interwoven 
in everything, he becomes everything. 

II PRAPATHAKA, 22 KHANDA, 2. 33 

3. And thus it is said in the following verse: 
‘There are the. fivefold three (the three kinds of 
sacrificial knowledge, the three worlds &c. in their 
fivefold form, i.e. as identified with the hink4dra, the 
prastava, &c.), and the other forms of the Saman. 
Greater than these there is nothing else besides.’ 

4. He who knows this, knows everything. All 
regions offer him gifts. His rule is, ‘Let him 
meditate (on the Saman), knowing that he is 
everything, yea, that he is everything?’ 

TWENTY-SECOND KHANDA. 

1. The udgitha, of which a poet said, I choose 
the deep sounding note of the SAman as good for 
cattle, belongs to Agni; the indefinite note belongs 
to Pragdpati, the definite note to Soma, the soft and 
smooth note to Vayu, the smooth and strong note to 
Indra, the heron-like note to Brzhaspati, the dull 
note to Varuza. Let a man cultivate all of these, 
avoiding, however, that of Varuza. 

2. Let a man sing’, wishing to obtain by his 
song immortality for the Devas. ‘May I obtain by 
my song oblations (svadha) for the fathers, hope 
for men, fodder and water for animals, heaven for 
the sacrificer, food for myself, thus reflecting on 
these in his mind, let a man (Udgatvz priest) sing 
praises, without making mistakes in pronuncia- 
tion, &c. 

? Here ends the Samopasana. 

* These are lucubrations on the different tones employed in 
singing the Saman hymns, and their names, such as vinardi, ani- 
rukta, nirukta, mridu slakshvza, slakshva balavad, kraufiea, apa- 
dhv4nta. 

* It would be better if the first ity agayet could be left out. 
The commentator ignores these words. 

[3] This book was download from www.holybooks.com : 


+ 

34 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

3. All vowels (svara) belong to Indra, all sibilants 
(Ashman) to Pragapati, all consonants (sparsa) to 
Mrityu (death). If somebody should reprove him 
for his vowels, let him say, ‘I went to Indra as 
my refuge (when pronouncing my vowels): he will 
answer thee.’ 

4. And if somebody should reprove him for his 
sibilants, let him say, ‘I went to Pragdpati as my 
refuge: he will smash thee.’ And if somebody 
should reprove him for his consonants, let him say, 
‘I went to Mvztyu as my refuge: he will reduce 
thee to ashes.’ 

5. All vowels are to be pronounced with voice 
(ghosha) and strength (bala), so that the Udgatrz 
may give strength to Indra. All sibilants are to be 
pronounced, neither as if swallowed (agrasta)'!, nor 
as if thrown out (nirasta)?, but well opened? (vivz‘ta), 
so that the Udgatrz may give himself to Pragda- 
pati. All consonants are to be pronounced slowly, 
and without crowding them together‘, so that the 
Udgatzz may withdraw himself from Mzztyu. 

1 Grasa, according to the Rig-veda-pratisakhya 766, is the 
stiffening of the root of the tongue in pronunciation. 

3 Nirasa, according to the Rig-veda-pratisikhya 760, is the with- 
drawing of the active from the passive organ in pronunciation. 

* The opening, vivrita, may mean two things, either the opening 
of the vocal chords (kha), which imparts to the fishmans their 
surd character (Rig. Prat. 709), or the opening of the organs 
of pronunciation (karaa), which for the ushmans is aspr:sh/am 
sthitam (Rig. Prat. 719), or vivrita (Ath. Prat. I, 31; Taitt. Prat. 
II, 5). 

* Anabhinihita, for thus the commentaries give the reading, is 
explained by anabhinikshipta. On the real abbinidhana, see Rig. 
Prat. 393. The translation does not follow the commentary. The 
genitive pragapate’ is governed by paridadani. 

II PRAPATHAKA, 24 KHANDA, I. 35 

TWENTY-THIRD KHANDA. 

1. There are three branches of the law. Sacrifice, 
study, and charity are the first’, 

2. Austerity the second, and to dwell as a Brah- 
maarin in the house of a tutor, always mortifying 
the body in the house of a tutor, is the third. All 
these obtain the worlds of the blessed; but the 
Brahmasamstha alone (he who is firmly grounded 
in Brahman) obtains immortality. 

3. PragApati brooded on the worlds. From them, 
thus brooded on, the threefold knowledge (sacrifice) 
issued forth. He brooded on it, and from it, thus 
brooded on, issued the three syllables, Bho, Bhuvaz, 
Svak. 

4. He brooded on them, and from them, thus 
brooded on, issued the Om. As all leaves are 
attached to a stalk, so is all speech (all words) 
attached to the Om (Brahman). Om is all this, 
yea, Om is all this. 

TWENTY-FOURTH KHANDA. 

1, The teachers of Brahman (Veda) declare, as 
the Prataz-savana (morning-oblation) belongs to the 
Vasus, the Madhyandina-savana (noon-libation) to 

1 Not the first in rank or succession, but only in enumerating 
the three branches of the law. This first branch corresponds to the 
second stage, the 4srama of the householder. Austerity is meant 
for the Vanaprastha, the third asrama, while the third is intended 
for the Brahmafrin, the student, only that the naish/Aika or per- 
petual Brahmaf4rin here takes the place of the ordinary student. 
The Brahmasamstha would represent the fourth A4srama, that of 
the Sannydsin or parivrag, who has ceased to perform any works, 
even the tapas or austerities of the Vanaprastha. 

D 2 

36 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

the Rudras, the third Savana (evening-libation) to 
the Adityas and the Visve Devas, 

2. Where then is the world of the sacrificer? He 
who does not know this, how can he perform the - 
sacrifice? He only who knows, should perform it’. 

3. Before the beginning of the Prdtaranuvaka 
(matin-chant), the sacrificer, sitting down behind the 
household altar (garhapatya), and looking towards 
the north, sings the Sdman, addressed to the 
Vasus: 

4. ‘Open the door of the world (the earth), let 
us see thee, that we may rule (on earth).’ 

5. Then he sacrifices, saying: ‘Adoration to 
Agni, who dwells on the earth, who dwells in the 
world! Obtain that world for me, the sacrificer! 
That is the world for the sacrificer !’ 

6. ‘I (the sacrificer) shall go thither, when this life 
is over. Take this! (he says, in offering the liba- 
tion.) Cast back the bolt!’ Having said this, 
he rises. For him the Vasus fulfil the morning- 
oblation. 

7. Before the beginning of the Mdadhyandina- 
savana, the noon-oblation, the sacrificer, sitting down 
behind the Agnidhrtya altar, and looking towards 
the north, sings the Saman, addressed to the 
Rudras : 

8. ‘Open the door of the world (the sky), let us 
see thee, that we may rule wide (in the sky).’ | 

9. Then he sacrifices, saying: ‘Adoration to 

1 The commentator is always very anxious to explain that 
though it is better that a priest should know the hidden meaning 
of the sacrificial acts which he has to perform, yet there is nothing 
to prevent a priest, who has not yet arrived at this stage of know- 
ledge, from performing his duties. 

II PRAPATHAKA, 24 KHANDA, 16. 37 

Vayu (air), who dwells in the sky, who dwells in 
the world. Obtain that world for me, the sacri- 
ficer! That is the world for the sacrificer !’ 

10. ‘I (the sacrificer) shall go thither, when this 
life is over. Take this! Cast back the bolt!’ 
Having said this, he rises. For him the Rudras 
fulfil the noon-oblation. | 

“11. Before the beginning of the third oblation, 

the sacrificer, sitting down behind the Ahavantya 
altar, and looking towards the north, sings the. 
Saman, addressed to the Adityas and Visve 
Devas: 

12. ‘Open the door of the world (the heaven), 
let us see thee, that we may rule supreme (in 
heaven).’ This is addressed to the Adityas. 

13. Next the Saman addressed to the Visve 
Devas: ‘Open the door of the world (heaven), 
let us see thee, that we may rule supreme (in 
heaven).’ 

14. Then he sacrifices, saying: ‘Adoration to 
the Adityas and to the Visve Devas, who dwell in 
heaven, who dwell in the world. Obtain that world 
for me, the sacrificer !’ 

15. ‘That is the world for the sacrificer! I 
(the sacrificer) shall go thither, when this life. is 
over. Take this! Cast back the bolt!’ Having 
said this, he rises. | 

16. For him the Adityas and the Visve Devas 
fulfil the third oblation. He who knows this, 
knows the full measure of the sacrifice, yea, he 
knows it. 

38 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD, 

THIRD PRAPA7Z#HAKA. 

First KHANDAL. 

1. “The sun is indeed the honey? of the Devas. 
The heaven is the cross-beam (from which) the sky 
(hangs as) a hive, and the bright vapours are the 
eggs of the bees *. 

2. The eastern rays of the sun are the honey- 
cells in front. The Az& verses are the bees, the 
Rig-veda (sacrifice) is the flower, the water (of the 
sacrificial libations) is the nectar (of the flower). 

3. Those very Rrk verses then (as bees) brooded 
over the Rig-veda sacrifice (the flower); and from it, 
thus brooded on, sprang as its (nectar) essence, fame, 
glory of countenance, vigour, strength, and health‘. 

4. That (essence) flowed forth and went towards 
the sun®, And that forms what we call the red 
(rohita) light of the rising sun. 

1 After the various meditations on the SAma-veda sacrifice, the 
sun is next to be meditated on, as essential t othe performance of 
all sacrifices. 

3 Everybody delights in the sun, as the highest reward of all 
sacrifices. 

* I am not certain whether this passage is rightly translated. 
Rajendralal Mitra speaks of an arched bamboo, whence the atmo- 
sphere hangs pendant like a hive, in which the vapours are the 
eggs. Apfipa means a cake, and may mean a hive. In order to 
understand the simile, we ought to have a clearer idea of the con- 
struction of the ancient bee-hive. 

* Annadya, explained as food, but more likely meaning power 
to eat, appetite, health. See III, 13, 1. 

5 The commentator explains: The Az verses, on becoming 
part of the ceremonial, perform the sacrifice. The sacrifice (the 
flower), when surrounded by the zk verses (bees), yields its essence, 
the nectar. That essence consists in all the rewards to be obtained 
through sacrifice, and as these rewards are to be enjoyed in the 

III PRAPATHAKA, 4 KHANDA, I. 39 

SECOND KHANDA. 

1. The southern rays of the sun are the honey- 
cells on the right. The Yagus verses are the bees, 
the Yagur-veda sacrifice is the flower, the water (of 
the sacrificial libations) is the nectar (of the flower). 

2. Those very Yagus verses (as bees) brooded 
over the Yagur-veda sacrifice (the flower) ; and from it, 
thus brooded on, sprang as its (nectar) essence, fame, 
glory of countenance, vigour, strength, and health. 

3. That flowed forth and went towards the sun. 
And that forms what we call the white (sukla) light 
of the sun. 

THIRD KHANDA. 

1. The western rays of the sun are the honey- 
cells behind. The Saman verses are the bees, the 
SAma-veda sacrifice is the flower, the water is the 
nectar. 

2. Those very SAman verses (as bees) brooded 
over the SAma-veda sacrifice; and from it, thus 
brooded on, sprang as its (nectar) essence, fame, 
glory of countenance, vigour, strength, and health. 

3. That flowed forth and went towards the sun. 
And that forms what we call the dark (kvzshza) 
light of the sun. 

FourTH KHANDA. 

1. The northern rays of the sun are the honey- 
cells on the left. The (hymns of the) Atharvangiras 
are the bees, the Itihasa-puraxa ! (the reading of the 
old stories) is the flower, the water is the nectar. 

next world and in the sun, therefore that essence or nectar is said 
to ascend to the sun. 

1 As there is no Atharva-veda sacrifice, properly so called, we 
have corresponding to the Atharva-veda hymns the so-called fifth 

40 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

2. Those very hymns of the Atharvangiras (as 
bees) brooded over the Itihasa-puraza; and from it, 
thus brooded on, sprang as its (nectar) essence, fame, 
glory of countenance, vigour, strength, and health. 

3. That flowed forth, and went towards the sun. 
And that forms what we call the extreme dark 
(parak kvishvam) light of the sun. 

FirtH KHANDA. 

1. The upward rays of the sun are the honey- 
cells above. The secret doctrines are the bees, 
Brahman (the Om) is the flower, the water is the 
nectar. -~ 

2. Those secret doctrines (as bees) brooded over 
Brahman (the Om); and from it, thus brooded on, 
sprang as its (nectar) essence, fame, glory of coun- 
tenance, brightness, vigour, strength, and health. 

3. That flowed forth, and went towards the sun. 
And that forms what seems to stir in the centre of 
` the sun. 

4. These (the different colours in the sun) are 
the essences of the essences. For the Vedas are 
essences (the best things in the world); and of them 
(after they have assumed the form of sacrifice) 
these (the colours rising to the sun) are again the 
essences. They are the nectar of the nectar. For 
the Vedas are nectar (immortal), and of them these 
are the nectar. 

Veda, the Itih4sa-pureza. This may mean the collection of legends 
and traditions, or the old book of traditions. At all events it is 
taken as one Puraza, not as many. These ancient stories were 
repeated at the Asvamedha sacrifice during the so-called Pariplava 
nights. Many of them have been preserved in the Brahmanas; 
others, in a more modern form, in the Mahabharata. See Weber, 
Indische Studien, I, p. 258, note. 

III PRAPATHAKA, 7 KHANDA, 3. 4! 

SixtTH KHANDA. 

1. On the first of these nectars (the red light, 
which represents fame, glory of countenance, vigour, 
strength, health) the Vasus live, with Agni at their 
head. True, the Devas do not eat or drink, but 
they enjoy by seeing the nectar. 

2. They enter into that (red) colour, and they 
rise from that colour}. 

3. He who thus knows this nectar, becomes one 
of the Vasus, with Agni at their head, he sees the 
nectar and rejoices. And he, too, having entered 
that colour, rises again from that colour. 

4. So long as the sun rises in the east and sets 
in the west’, so long does he follow the sovereign 
supremacy of the Vasus. 

SEVENTH KHANDA. 

1. On the second of these nectars the Rudras live, 
with Indra at their head. True, the Devas do not 
eat or drink, but they enjoy by seeing the nectar. 

2. They enter into that white colour, and they rise 
from that colour. 

3. He who thus knows this nectar, becomes one 
of the Rudras, with Indra at their head, he sees the 

1 This is differently explained by the commentator. He takes 
it to mean that, when the Vasus have gone to the sun, and see 
that there is no opportunity for enjoying that colour, they rest; 
but when they see that there is an opportunity for enjoying it, 
they exert themselves for it. I think the colour is here taken 
for the colour of. the morning, which the Vasus enter, and from 
which they go forth again. 

3 x. East: Vasus: red: Agni. 3. South: Rudras: white: 
Indra. 3. West: Aditya: dark: Varuna. 4. North: Marut: very 
dark: Soma. 5. Upward: Sadhya: centre: Brahman, 

42 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

nectar and rejoices. And he, having entered that 
colour, rises again from that colour. 

4. So long as the sun rises in the east and sets 
in the west, twice as long does it rise in the south 
and set in the north; and so long does he follow 
the sovereign supremacy of the Rudras. 

EIGHTH KHANDA. 

1, On the third of these nectars the Adityas 
live, with Varuza at their head. True, the Devas 
do not eat or drink, but they enjoy by seeing the 
nectar. 

2. They enter into that (dark) colour, and they 
rise from that colour. 

3. He who thus knows this nectar, becomes one 
of the Adityas, with Varuza at their head, he sees 
the nectar and rejoices. And he, having entered 
that colour, rises again from that colour. 

4. So long as the sun rises in the south and sets 
in the north, twice as long does it rise in the west 
and set in the east; and so long does he follow the 
sovereign supremacy of the Adityas, 

NintH KHANDA. 

1. On the fourth of these nectars the Maruts live, 
with Soma at their head. True, the Devas do not 
eat or drink, but they enjoy by seeing the nectar. 

2. They enter in that (very dark) colour, and they 
rise from that colour. | 

3. He who thus knows this nectar, becomes one 
of the Maruts, with Soma at their head, he sees the 
nectar and rejoices. And he, having entered that 
colour, rises again from that colour. 

4. So long as the sun rises in the west and sets 

III PRAPATHAKA, IO KHANDA, 4. 43 

in the east, twice as long does it rise in the north 
and set in the south; and so long does he follow the 
sovereign supremacy of the Maruts. 

TENTH KHANDA. 

1. On the fifth of these nectars the Sadhyas live, 
with Brahman at their head. True, the Devas do 
not eat or drink, but they enjoy by seeing the 
nectar. 

2. They enter into that colour, and they rise from 
that colour. 

3. He who thus knows this nectar, becomes one 
of the Sadhyas, with Brahman at their head; he sees 
the nectar and rejoices. And he, having entered 
that colour, rises again from that colour. 

4. So long as the sun rises in the north and sets 
in the south, twice as long does it rise above, and 
set below; and so long does he follow the sovereign 
power of the Sadhyas’. 

1 The meaning of the five Khazdas from 6 to 10 is clear, in so 
far as they are intended to show that he who knows or meditates 
on the sacrifices as described before, enjoys his reward in different 
worlds with the Vasus, Rudras, &c. for certain periods of time, till at ` 
last he reaches the true Brahman. Of these periods each succeed- 
ing one is supposed to be double the length of the preceding one. 
This is expressed by imagining a migration of the sun from east 
to south, west, north, and zenith. Each change of the sun marks 
a new world, and the duration of each successive world is com- 
puted as double the duration of the preceding world. Similar ideas 
have been more fully developed in the Purazas, and the commen- 
tator is at great pains to remove apparent contradictions between 
the Pauraik and Vaidik accounts, following, as Anandagfanagiri 
remarks, the Dravidakarya (p. 173, l. 13). 

44 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

ELEVENTH KHANDA. 

1. When from thence he has risen upwards, he 
neither rises nor sets. He is alone, standing in the 
centre. And on this there is this verse: 

2. ‘Yonder he neither rises nor sets at any time. 
If this is not true, ye gods, may I lose Brahman.’ 

3. And indeed to him who thus knows this Brah- 
ma-upanishad (the secret doctrine of the Veda) the 
sun does not rise and does not set. For him there 
is day, once and for all 1. 

4. This doctrine (beginning with III, 1, 1) Brah- 
man (m. Hirazyagarbha) told to Pragdapati (Virag), 
Pragapati to Manu, Manu to his offspring (Iksh- 
vaku, &c.) And the father told that (doctrine of) 
Brahman (n.) to Uddalaka Aruzi. 

5. A father may therefore tell that doctrine of 
Brahman to his eldest son ?, or to a worthy pupil. 

But no one should tell it to anybody else, even if 
he gave him the whole sea-girt earth, full of treasure, 
for this doctrine is worth more than that, yea, 
it is worth more. 

TWELFTH KHANDA. 

1. The Gayatri’ (verse) is everything whatsoever 
here exists. Gayatri indeed is speech, for speech 

1 Cf. Kh. Up. VIII, 4, 2. . 

This was the old, not the present custom, says Anandagiri. 
Not the father, but an akarya, has now to teach his pupils. 

3 The Gayatri is one of the sacred metres, and is here to be 
meditated on as Brahman. It is used in the sense of verse, and 
as the name of a famous hymn. The GAyatrf is often praised as 
the most powerful metre, and whatever can be obtained by means 
of the recitation of Gayatri verses is described as the achievement 
of the Gayatri. The etymology of gayatrf from gai and tra is, of 
course, fanciful. 

III PRAPATHAKA, I2 KHANDA, 6. 45 

sings forth (gaya-ti) and protects (traya-te) every- 
thing that here exists. 

2. That G4yatrt is also the earth, for everything 
that here exists rests on the earth, and does not go 
beyond. 

3. That earth again is the body in man, for in 
it the vital airs (prazas', which are everything) 
rest, and do not go beyond. 

4. That body again in man is the heart within 
man, for in it the prazas (which are everything) 
rest, and do not go beyond. 

5. That Gayatrt has four feet? and is sixfold ?. 
And this is also declared by a Rrk verse (Rig-veda 
X, 90, 3):— 

6. ‘Such is the greatness of it (of Brahman, 
under the disguise of Gayatri‘); greater than it is 
the Person® (purusha). His feet are all things. 
The immortal with three feet is in heaven (i.e. in 
himself). 

1 The pranas may be meant for the five senses, as explained in 
Kh. I, 2, 1; II, 7, 1; or for the five breathings, as explained im- 
mediately afterwards in III, 13, 1. The commentator sees in 
them everything that here exists (A. Up. III, 15, 4), and thus 
establishes the likeness between the body and the Gayatri. As 
Gayatri is the earth, and the earth the body, and the body the 
heart, Gayatri is in the end to be considered as the heart. 

2 The four feet are explained as the four quarters of the Gayatri 
metre, of six syllables each. The Gayatri really consists of three 
feet of eight syllables each. 

? The Gayatrf has been identified with all beings, with speech, 
earth, body, heart, and the vital airs, and is therefore called sixfold. 
This, at least, is the way in which the commentator accounts for 
the epithet ‘ sixfold.’ 

‘ Of Brahman modified as G4yatrf, having four feet, and being 

sixfold. 

5 The real Brahman, unmodified by form and name. 

hp. 

46 EHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

7. The Brahman which has been thus described 

(as immortal with three feet in heaven, and as Gaya- 
tri) is the same as the ether which is around us; 

8. And the ether which is around us, is the same 
as the ether which is within us. And the ether 
which is within us, 

9. That is the ether within the heart. That ether 
in the heart (as Brahman) is omnipresent and un- 
changing. He who knows this obtains omnipresent 
and unchangeable happiness. 

THIRTEENTH KHANDA}, 

1. For that heart there are five gates belonging 
to the Devas (the senses). The eastern gate is the 
Praxa (up-breathing), that is the eye, that is Aditya 
(the sun). Let a man meditate on that as brightness 
(glory of countenance) and health. He who knows, 
this, becomes bright and healthy. 

2. The southern gate is the Vy4na (back- 
breathing), that is the ear, that is the moon. Let 
a man meditate on that as happiness and fame. 
He who knows this, becomes happy and famous. 

3. The western gate is the Apana (down- 
breathing), that is speech, that is Agni (fire). Let 
a man meditate on that as glory of countenance 
and health. He who knows this, becomes glorious 
and healthy. 

4. The northern gate is the Samana (on- 
breathing), that is mind, that is Parganya (rain). 
Let.a man meditate on that as celebrity and beauty. 

1 The meditation on the five gates and the five gate-keepers 
of the heart is meant to be subservient to the meditation on 

Brahman, as the ether in the heart, which, as it is said at the end, 
is actually seen and heard by the senses as being within the heart. 

III PRAPATHAKA, 13 KHANDA, 8. 47 

He who knows this, becomes celebrated and beau- 
tiful. . 

5. The upper gate is the Udana (out-breathing), 
that is air, that is ether. Let a man meditate on 
that as strength and greatness. He who knows 
this, becomes strong and great. 

6. These are the five men of Brahman, the door- 
keepers of the Svarga (heaven) world. He who 
knows these five men of Brahman, the door-keepers 
of the Svarga world, in his family a strong son is 
born. He who thus knows these five men of 
Brahman, as the door-keepers of the Svarga world, 
enters himself the Svarga world. 

7. Now that light which shines above this 
heaven, higher than all, higher than everything, 
in the highest world, beyond which there are no 
other worlds, that is the same light which is 

within man. And of this we have this visible 

proof ?: 

8. Namely, when we thus perceive by touch the 
warmth here in the body? And of it we have this 
audible proof: Namely, when we thus, after stopping 
our ears, listen to what is like the rolling of a car- 
riage, or the bellowing of an ox, or the sound of a 
burning fire e? (within the ears). Let a man meditate 
on this as the (Brahman) which is seen and heard. 

1 The presence of Brahman in the heart of man is not to rest 
on the testimony of revelation only, but is here to be established 
by the evidence of the senses. Childish as the argument may 
seem to us, it shows at all events how intently the old Brahmans 
thought on the problem of the evidence of the invisible. 

3 That warmth must come from something, just as smoke comes 
from fire, and this something is supposed to be Brahman in 
the heart. 

Cf. Ait. Ar. III, 2, 4, 11-13. 

48 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

He who knows this, becomes conspicuous and cele- 
brated, yea, he becomes celebrated. 

FOURTEENTH KHANDA. 

All this is Brahman (n.) Let a man medi- 
tate on that (visible world) as beginning, ending, 
and breathing? in it (the Brahman). 

Now man is a creature of will. According to 
what his will is in this world, so will he be when he 
has departed this life. Let him therefore have this 
will and belief : 

2. The intelligent, whose body is spirit, whose 
form is light, whose thoughts are true, whose nature 
is like ether (omnipresent and invisible), from whom 
all works, all desires, all sweet odours and tastes 
proceed; he who embraces all this, who never 
speaks, and is never surprised, 

3. He is my self within the heart, smaller than a 
corn of rice, smaller than a corn of barley, smaller 
than a mustard seed, smaller than a canary seed or the 

_ kernel of a canary seed. Healso.is my self within the 
heart, greater than the earth, greater than the sky, 
greater than heaven, greater than all these worlds. 

4. He from whom all works, all desires, all sweet 
odours and tastes proceed, who embraces all this, 
who never speaks and who is never surprised, he, 
my self within the heart, is that Brahman (n.) When 
I shall have departed from hence, I shall obtain him 
(that Self). He who has this faith? has no doubt ; 
thus said Sazdilya*, yea, thus he said. 

1 Galan is explained by ga, born, la, absorbed, and an, breathing. 
It is an artificial term, but fully recognised by the Vedanta school, 
and always explained in this manner. 

2 Or he who has faith and no doubt, will obtain this. 

* This chapter is frequently quoted as the Sandilya-vidy4, 
Ved4ntasfra, init; Vedanta-sfitra III, 3, 31. 

III PRAPATHAKA, I5 KHANDA, 5. 49 

FIFTEENTH KHANDA.. 

1, The chest which has the sky for its circum- 
ference and the earth for its bottom, does not 
decay, for the quarters are its sides, and heaven 
its lid above. That chest is a treasury, and all 
‘things are within it. 

2. Its eastern quarter is called Guhd, its southern 
Saham4ne4, its western RAgii, its northern Subhita?. 
The child of those quarters is Vayu, the air, and 
he who knows that the air is indeed the child of 
the quarters, never weeps for his sons. ‘I know the 
wind to be the child of the quarters, may I never 
weep for my sons.’ 

3. ‘I turn to the imperishable chest with such 
and such and such??? ‘I turn to the Pr&ma (life) 
with such and such and such.’ ‘I turn to Bhas 
with such and such and such.’ ‘I turn to Bhuva% 
with such and such and such.’ ‘I turn to Sva% 
with such and such and such.’ 

4. ‘When I said, I turn to Praza, then Praza 
means all whatever exists here—to that I turn,’ 

5. ‘When I said, I turn to Bhd&4, what I said 
is, I turn to the earth, the sky, and heaven.’ 

1 The object of this section, the Kosavigiiana, is to show how 
the promise made in III, 13, 6, ‘that a strong son should be born 
in a man’s family,’ is to be fulfilled. : 

* These names are explained by the commentator as follows: 
` Because people offer libations (gubvati), turning to the east, therefore 
it is called Guhf. Because evil doers suffer (sahante) in the town 
of Yama, which is in the south, therefore it is called Saham4n4. 
The western quarter is called Ragfif, either because it is sacred 
to king Varuaa (rfgan), or on account of the red colour (raga) 
of the twilight. The north is called Subhfta, because wealthy 
beings (bhfitimat), like Kuvera &c., reside there. 

® Here the names of the sons are to be pronounced, 

E 

50 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

6. ‘When I said, I turn to Bhuvad, what I said 
is, I turn to Agni (fire), Vayu (air), Aditya (sun). 
7. ‘When I said, I turn to Svah, what I said is, 
I turn to the Azg-veda, Yagur-veda, and Sama-veda. 
_ That is what I said, yea, that is what I said’ 

SIXTEENTH KHANDA }, 

1. Man is sacrifice. His (first) twenty-four years 
are the morning-libation. The Gayatrt has twenty- 
four syllables, the morning-libation is offered with 
Gayatrt hymns. The Vasus are connected with 
that part of the sacrifice. The Pravzas (the five 
senses) are the Vasus, for they make all this to 
abide (vAsayanti). 

2. If anything ails him in that (early) age, let him 
say: ‘Ye Pramas, ye Vasus, extend this my morning- 
libation unto the midday-libation, that I, the sacrificer, 
may not perish in the midst of the Prazas or Vasus.’ 
Thus he recovers from his illness, and becomes whole. 

3. The next forty-four years are the midday- 
libation. The Trisheubh has forty-four syllables, 
the midday-libation is offered with Trish¢ubh hymns. 
The Rudras are connected with that part of it. 
The Prezas are the Rudras, for they make all 
this to cry (rodayanti). 

4. If anything ails him in that (second) age, let 
him say: ‘Ye Prazas, ye Rudras, extend this my 
midday-libation unto the third libation, that I, the 
sacrificer, may not perish in the midst of the 
Prazas or Rudras.’ Thus he recovers from his ill- 
ness, and becomes whole. 

5. The next forty-eight years are the third 

1 The object of this Khasda is to show how to obtain long | 
life, as promised before. 

III PRAPATHAKA, 17 KHANDA, 5. 51 

libation. The Gagatt has forty-eight syllables, the 
third libation is offered with Gagatt hymns. The 
Adityas are connected with that part of it. The 
Prazas are the Adityas, for they take up all this 
(Adadate). 

6. If anything ails him in that (third) age, let him 
say: ‘Ye PrAvas, ye Adityas, extend this my third 
libation unto the full age, that I, the sacrificer, may 
not perish in the midst of the Prazas or Adityas.’ 
Thus he recovers from his illness, and becomes whole. 

7. Mahid4sa Aitareya (the son of Itar4), who 
knew this, said (addressing a disease): ‘ Why dost 
thou afflict me, as I shall not die by it?’ He lived 
a hundred and sixteen years (i.e. 24+44+48). He, 
too, who knows this lives on to a hundred and six- 
teen years. 

SEVENTEENTH KHANDA}. 

1. When a man (who is the sacrificer) hungers, 
thirsts, and abstains from pleasures, that is the 
Diksha (initiatory rite). 

2. When a man eats, drinks, and enjoys pleasures, 
he does it with the Upasadas (the sacrificial days on 
which the sacrificer is allowed to partake of food). 

3. When a man laughs, eats, and delights him- 
self, he does it with the Stuta-sastras (hymns sung 
and recited at the sacrifices). 

4. Penance, liberality, righteousness, kindness, 
truthfulness, these form his Dakshizds (gifts be- 
stowed on priests, &c.) 

5. Therefore when they say, ‘There will be a 

1 Here we have a representation of the sacrifice as performed 
without any ceremonial, and as it is often represented when 
performed in thought only by a man living in the forest. 

E 2 

52 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

birth, and ‘there has been a birth’ (words used at 
the Soma-sacrifice, and really meaning, ‘He will 
pour out the Soma-juice, and ‘he has poured out 
the Soma-juice’), that is his new birth. His death 
is the Avabhvztha ceremony (when the sacrificial 
vessels are carried away to be cleansed). 

6. Ghora Angirasa, after having communicated 
this (view of the sacrifice) to Kzzshaa, the son of 
Devakt '—and he never thirsted again (after other 
knowledge)—said: ‘Let a man, when his end ap- 

1 The curious coincidence between Krishna Devakiputra, here 
mentioned as a pupil of Ghora Angirasa, and the famous Krishaa, 
the son of Devaki, was first pointed out by Colebrooke, Miscell. 
Essays, II, 177. Whether it is more than a coincidence, is difficult 
to say. Certainly we can build no other conclusions on it than 
those indicated by Colebrooke, that new fables may have been 
constructed elevating this personage to the rank of a god. We 
know absolutely nothing of the old Krishza Devakfputra except 
his having been a pupil of Ghora Angirasa, nor does there seem 
to have been any attempt made by later Brahmans to connect 
their divine Krishna, the son of Vasudeva, with the Krishaza 
Devakiputra of our Upanishad. This is all the more remarkable 
because the author of the Sandilya-sutras, for instance, who is 
very anxious to find a srauta authority for the worship of Krishna 
Vasudeva as the supreme deity, had to be satisfied with quoting 
such modern compilations as the Narfyaopanishad, Atharvasiras, 
VI, 9, brahmazyo devakiputro brahmaszyo madhusfidanas (see 
Sandilya-s(tras, ed. Ballantyne, p. 36, translated by Cowell, p. 51), 
without venturing to refer to the Krisha Devakiputra of the 
Khandogya-upanishad. The occurrence of such names as Krishaa, 
Vasudeva, Madhusfidana stamps Upanishads, like the Atmabodha- 
upanishad, as modern (Colebrooke, Essays, I, ror), and the same 
remark applies, as Weber has shown, to the Gop4latapanf-upani- 
shad (Bibliotheca Indica, No. 183), where we actually find such 
names as Srikrishza Govinda, Gopfganavallabha, Devaky4m gatahk 
(p. 38), &c. Professor Weber has treated these questions very 
fully, but it is not quite clear to me whether he wishes to go 
beyond Colebrooke and to admit more than a similarity of name 
between the pupil of Ghora Angirasa and the friend of the Gopts, 

III PRAPATHAKA, 18 KHANDA, 2. 53 

proaches, take refuge with this Triad}; “Thou art 
the imperishable,” “Thou art the unchangeable,” 
“Thou art the edge of Prawa.”’ On this subject 
there are two Rrk verses (Rig-veda VIII, 6, 30) :— 
7. ‘Then they see (within themselves) the ever- 
present light of the old seed (of the world, the Sat), 
the highest, which is lighted in the brilliant (Brah- 
man)? Rig-veda I, 50, 10 :— 

‘Perceiving above the darkness (of ignorance) 
the higher light (in the sun), as the higher light 
within the heart, the bright source (of light and 
life) among the gods, we have reached the highest 
light, yea, the highest light? 

EIGHTEENTH KHANDA.. 

I. Let a man meditate on mind as Brahman (n.), 
this is said with reference to the body. Let a 
man meditate on the ether as Brahman (n.), this is 

said with reference to the Devas. Thus both the 

meditation which has reference to the body, and the 
meditation which has reference to the Devas, has 
been taught. 

2. That Brahman (mind) has four feet (quarters). 

1 Let him recite these three verses. 

* Both these verses had to be translated here according to their 
scholastic interpretation, but they had originally a totally different 
meaning. Even the text was altered, diva being changed to divi, 
svah to sve. The first is taken from a hymn addressed to Indra, 
who after conquering the dark clouds brings back the light of 
the sun. When he does that, then the people see again, as 
the poet says, the daily light of the old seed (from which the sun 
rises) which is lighted in heaven. The other verse belongs to 
a hymn addressed to the sun. Its simple meaning is: ‘Seeing 
above the darkness (of the night) the rising light, the Sun, bright 

among the bright, we came towards the highest light.’ 

3 This is a further elucidation of AA. Up. III, 14, 2. 

54 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

Speech is one foot, breath is one foot, the eye is one 
foot, the ear is one foot—so much with reference to 
the body. Then with reference to the gods, Agni 
(fire) is one foot, Vayu (air) is one foot, Aditya (sun) 
is one foot, the quarters are one foot. Thus both 
the worship which has reference to the body, and 
the worship which has reference to the Devas, has 
been taught. 

3. Speech is indeed the fourth foot of Brahman. 
That foot shines with Agni (fire) as its light, and 
warms. He who knows this, shines and warms through 
his celebrity, fame, and glory of countenance. 

4. Breath is indeed the fourth foot of Brahman. 
That foot shines with V4yu (air) as its light, and 
warms. He who knows this, shines and warms through 
his celebrity, fame, and glory of countenance. 

5. The eye is indeed the fourth foot of Brahman. 
That foot shines with Aditya (sun) as its light, and 
warms. He who knows this, shines and warms through 
his celebrity, fame, and glory of countenance. 

6. The ear is indeed the fourth foot of Brahman. 
That foot shines with the quarters as its light, and 
warms. He who knows this, shines and warms through 
his celebrity, fame, and glory of countenance. 

NINETEENTH KHANDA. 

1, Aditya (the sun?) is Brahman, this is the doc- 
trine, and this is the fuller account of it :— 
In the beginning this was non-existent?. It be- 

Aditya, or the sun, had before been represented as one of 
the four feet of Brahman. He is now represented as Brahman, 
or as to be meditated on as such. 

* Not yet existing, not yet developed in form and name, and 
therefore as if not existing. 

IV PRAPATHAKA, I KHANDA, I. 55 

came existent, it grew. It turned into an egg: 
The egg lay for the time of a year. The egg 
broke open. The two halves were one of silver, 
the other of gold. 

2. The silver one became this earth, the golden 
one the sky, the thick membrane (of the white) the 
mountains, the thin membrane (of the yoke) the 
mist with the clouds, the small veins the rivers, the 
fluid the sea. 

3. And what was born from it that was Aditya, 
the sun. When he was born shouts of hurrah arose, 
and all beings arose, and all things which they de- 
sired. Therefore whenever the sun rises and sets, 
shouts of hurrah arise, and all beings arise, and all 
things which they desire. 

4. If any one knowing this meditates on the sun 
as Brahman, pleasant shouts will approach him and 
will continue, yea, they will continue. 

FOURTH PRAPAZAAKA. 

First KHANDA 2, 

1, There lived once upon a time Ganasruti Pau- 
trdyaza (the great-grandson of Ganasruta), who was 
a pious giver, bestowing much wealth upon the 

1 Anda instead of anda is explained as a Vedic irregularity. 
A similar cosmogony is given in Manu’s Law Book, I, 12 seq. 
See Kellgren, Mythus de ovo mundano, Helsingfors, 1849. 

3 Vayu (air) and Prasa (breath) had before been represented 
as feet of Brahman, as the second pair. Now they are repre- 
sented as Brahman, and as to be meditated on as such. This 
is the teaching of Raikva. The language of this chapter is very 
‘obscure, and I am not satisfied with the translation. 



56 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

people, and always keeping open house. He built 
places of refuge everywhere, wishing that people 
should everywhere eat of his food. 

2. Once in the night some Hamsas (flamingoes) 
flew over his house, and one flamingo said to an- 
other: ‘Hey, Bhallaksha, Bhallaksha (short-sighted 
friend). The light (glory) of GAnasruti Pautrayaza 
has spread like the sky. Do not go near, that it 
may not burn thee.’ 

3. The other answered him: ‘How can you speak 
of him, being what he is (a r4ganya, noble), as if he 
were like Raikva with the car?! ?’ 

4. The first replied : ‘ How is it with this Raikva 
with the car of whom thou speakest ?’ j 

The other answered: ‘As (in a game of dice) all 
the lower casts? belong to him who has conquered 
with the Kyvzta cast, so whatever good deeds other 
people perform, belong to that Raikva. He who 
knows what he knows, he is thus spoken of by me.’ 

5. Ganasruti Pautrayaza overheard this conversa- 
tion, and as soon as he had risen in the morning, he 
said to his door-keeper (kshattvz): ‘Friend, dost thou 
speak of (me, as if I were) Raikva with the car?’ 

He replied: ‘ How is it with this Raikva with the 
car ?’ 

6. The king said: ‘As (in a game of dice), all the 
lower casts belong to him who has conquered with 
the Kvzta cast, so whatever good deeds other people 
perform, belong to that Raikva. He who knows 
what he knows, he is thus spoken of by me.’ 

1 Sayugvan is explained as possessed of a car with yoked 
horses or oxen. Could it have meant originally, ‘yoke-fellow, 1 
equal,’ as in Rig-veda X, 130,4? Anquetil renders it by ‘semper 
cum se ipso camelum solutum habens.’ 

3? Instea 1 of adharey4#, we must read adhare ’y&h. 

IV PRAPATHAKA, 2 KHANDA, 5. 57 

7. The door-keeper went to look for Raikva, but 
returned saying, ‘I found him not.’ Then the king 
said: ‘Alas! where a Brahmaza should be searched 
for (in the solitude of the forest), there go for him.’ 

8. The door-keeper came to a man who was 
lying beneath a car and scratching his sores! He 
addressed him, and said: ‘ Sir, are you Raikva with 
the car ?’ 

He answered: ‘ Here I am.’ 

Then the door-keeper returned, and said: ‘I have 
found him.’ 

SECOND KHANDA. 

1. Then Ganasruti Pautrayaza took six hundred 
cows, a necklace, and a carriage with mules, went 
to Raikva and said : 

2. ‘Raikva, here are six hundred cows, a neck- 
lace, and a carriage with mules; teach me the deity 
which you worship.’ 

3. The other replied: ‘Fie, necklace and carriage 
be thine, O Sudra, together with the cows.’ 

Then Ganasruti Pautrayaza took again a thou- 
sand cows, a necklace, a carriage with mules, and his 
own daughter, and went to him. 

4. He said to him: ‘ Raikva, there are a thou- 
sand cows, a necklace, a carriage with mules, this 
wife, and this village in which thou dwellest. Sir, 
teach me!’ | 

5. He, opening her mouth’, said: ‘You have 

1 It is curious that in a hymn of the Atharva-veda (V, 22, 5, 8) 
takman, apparently a disease of the skin, is relegated to the Maha- 
vrishas, where Raikva dwelt. Roth, Zur Literatur des Veda, p. 36. 

2 To find out her age. The commentator translates, ‘ Raikva, 
knowing her mouth to be the door of knowledge, i.e. knowing 
that for her he might impart his knowledge to Ganasruti, and that 

58 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

brought these (cows and other presents), O Sidra, 
but only by that mouth did you make me speak.’ 

These are the Raikva-parza villages in the country 
of the Mah4vvzshas (mahdpuszyas) where Raikva 
dwelt under him !. And he said to him: 

THIRD KHANDA. 

1. ‘Air (vayu) is indeed the end of all*% For 
when fire goes out, it goes into air. When the sun 
goes down, it goes into air. When the moon goes 
down, it goes into air. 

2. ‘When water dries up, it goes into air. Air 
indeed consumes them all. So much with reference 
to the Devas. 

3. ‘Now with reference to the body. Breath 
(praza) is indeed the end of all. When a man sleeps, 
speech goes into breath, so do sight, hearing, and 
mind. Breath indeed consumes them all. 

4. ‘These are the two ends, air among the Devas, 
breath among the senses (pra74%).’ 

5. Once while Saunaka KApeya and Abhipra- 
terin Kakshaseni were being waited on at their 
meal, a religious student begged of them. They 
gave him nothing. 

6. He said; ‘One god—who is he ?—swallowed 
the four great ones?, he, the guardian of the world. 

Ganasruti by bringing such rich gifts had become a proper receiver 
of knowledge, consented to do what he had before refused.’ 

1 The commentator supplies adat, the king gave the villages 
to him, 

3? Samvarga, absorption, whence samvargavidy4, not samsarga. 
It is explained by samvargana, samgrahaza, and samgrasana, in 
the text itself by adana, eating. 

® This must refer to Vayu and Praaa swallowing the four, as 
explained in IV, 3, 2, and IV, 3, 3. The commentator explains 

IV PRAPATHAKA, 3 KHANDA, 8. 59 

O Kapeya, mortals see him not, O Abhipratarin, 
though he dwells in many places. He to whom this 
food belongs, to him it has not been given € 

7. Saunaka K4peya, pondering on that speech, 
went to the student and said: ‘ He is the self of the 
Devas, the creator of all beings, with golden tusks, 
the eater, not without intelligence. His greatness 
is said to be great indeed, because, without being 
eaten, he eats even what is not food?. Thus do we, 
O Brahmae4arin, meditate on that Being.’ Then he 
said: ‘Give him food.’ 

8. They gave him food. Now these five (the 
eater VAyu (air), and his food, Agni (fire), Aditya 
(sun), Kandramas (moon), Ap (water)) and the 
other five (the eater Pr4za (breath), and his food, 
speech, sight, hearing, mind) make ten, and that 
is the Kvzta (the highest?) cast (representing the 
ten, the eaters and the food). Therefore in all 
quarters those ten are food (and) Kvzta (the highest 
cast), These are again the Virdg‘ (of ten syllables) 

it by Pragapati, who is sometimes called Ka. In one sense 
it would be Brahman, as represented by Vayu and Prama. 

1 The food which you have refused to me, you have really 
refused to Brahman. 

2 Saunaka wishes the student to understand that though ‘ mortals 
see him not,’ he sees and knows him, viz. the god who, as 
Vayu, swallows all the gods, but produces them again, and who, 
as prfza, swallows during sleep all senses, but produces them 
again at the time of waking. 

? The words are obscure, and the commentator does not throw 
much light on them. He explains, however, the four casts of 
the dice, the Krita=4, the Tretd=3, the Dvapara=2, the Kali=1, 
making together 10, the Krita cast absorbing the other casts, 
and thus counting ten. 

t Virg, name of a metre of ten syllables, and also a name 
of food. One expects, ‘which is the food and eats the food.’ 

60 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD., 

which eats the food. Through this all this becomes 
seen. He who knows this sees all this and becomes an 
eater of food, yea, he becomes an eater of food. 

FourtH Kuawpal, 

I. Satyakama, the son of Gabala, addressed his 
mother and said: ‘I wish to become a Brahmaarin 
(religious student), mother. Of what family am I?’ 

2. She said to him: ‘I do not know, my child, 
of what family thou art. In my youth when I had 
to move about much as a servant (waiting on the 
guests in my father’s house), I conceived thee. I do 
not know of what family thou art. I am Gabala by 
name, thou art Satyakama (Philalethes). Say that 
thou art Satyaka4ma G4bela.’ 

3. He going to Gautama Hearidrumata said to 
him, ‘I wish to become a Brahmaeerin with you, 
Sir. May I come to you, Sir ?’ 

4. He said to him: ‘Of what family are you, my 
friend?’ He replied: ‘I do not know, Sir, of what 
family I am. I asked my mother, and she answered: 
“In my youth when I had to move about much as 
a servant, I conceived thee. I do not know of what 
family thou art. I am GGGabala by name, thou art 
Satyakama,” I am therefore Satyakama GAbala, Sir.’ 

5. He said to him: ‘No one but a true Brah- 
maza would thus speak out. Go and fetch fuel, 
friend, I shall initiate you. You have not swerved 
from the truth.’ 

Having initiated him, he chose four hundred 
lean and weak cows, and said: ‘Tend these, friend.’ 

1 This carries on the explanation of the four feet of Brahman, 
as first mentioned in III, 18, 1. Each foot or quarter of Brahman 

is represented as fourfold, and the knowledge of these sixteen parts 
is called the Shodasakal4vidy4. 

IV PRAPATHAKA, 6 KHANDA, I. 61 

He drove them out and said to himself, ‘I shall not 
return unless I bring back a thousand.’ He dwelt a 
number of years (in the forest), and when the cows 
had become a thousand, e 

FirtTH KHANDA. 

1. The bull of the herd (meant for Vayu) said to 
him: ‘Satyakama!’ He replied: ‘Sir!’ The bull 
said: ‘We have become a thousand, lead us to the 
house of the teacher ; 

2. ‘And I will declare to you one foot of Brahman.’ 

‘Declare it, Sir,’ he replied. 

He said to him; ‘ The eastern region is one quar- 
ter, the western region is one quarter, the southern 
region is one quarter, the northern region is one 
quarter. This is a foot of Brahman, consisting of 
the four quarters, and called Prak4savat (endowed 
with splendour). 

3. ‘He who knows this and meditates on the foot 
of Brahman, consisting of four quarters, by the name 
of Prakasavat, becomes endowed with splendour in 
this world. He conquers the resplendent worlds, 
whoever knows this and meditates on the foot of 
Brahman, consisting of the four quarters, by the: 
name of Prakdsavat. 

SIXTH KHANDA. 

1. ‘Agni will declare to you another foot of 
Brahman.’ 

(After these words of the bull), Satyakama, on 
the morrow, drove the cows (toward the house of 
the teacher), And when they came towards the 
evening, he lighted a fire, penned the cows, laid 
wood on the fire, and sat down behind the fire, 
looking to the east. 

62 KNANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

2. Then Agni (the fire) said to him: ‘SatyakAma!’ 
He replied: ‘Sir.’ 

3. Agni said: ‘Friend, 1 will declare unto you 
oge foot of Brahman. 

‘Declare it, Sir,’ he replied. 

He said to him: ‘The earth is one quarter, the 
sky is one quarter, the heaven is one quarter, the 
ocean is one quarter. This is a foot of Brahman, 
consisting of four quarters, and called Anantavat 
(endless). 

4. ‘He who knows this and meditates on the foot 
of Brahman, consisting of four quarters, by the name 
of Anantavat, becomes endless in this world. He 
conquers the endless worlds, whoever knows this 
and meditates on the foot of Brahman, consisting of 
four quarters, by the name of Anantavat. 

SEVENTH KHANDA. 

1. ‘A Hamsa (flamingo, meant for the sun) will 
declare to you another foot of Brahman.’ 

(After these words of Agni), Satyakdma, on the 
morrow, drove the cows onward. And when they 
came towards the evening, he lighted a fire, penned 
the cows, laid wood on the fire, and sat down behind 
the fire, looking toward the east. | 

2. Then a Hamsa flew near and said to him: 
‘Satyakama.’ He replied: ‘Sir.’ 

3. The Hamsa said: ‘ Friend, I will declare unto 
you one foot of Brahman.’ 

‘Declare it, Sir,’ he replied. 

He said to him: ‘Fire is one quarter, the sun 
is one quarter, the moon is one quarter, lightning is 
one quarter. This is a foot of Brahman, consisting 
of four quarters, and called Gyotishmat (full of light). 

IV PRAPATHAKA, 8 KHANDA, 3. 63 

4. ‘He who knows this and meditates on the 
foot of Brahman, consisting of four quarters, by the 
name of Gyotishmat, becomes full of light in this 
world. He conquers the worlds which are full of 
light, whoever knows this and meditates on the 
foot of Brahman, consisting of four quarters, by the 
name of Gyotishmat. 

_EicHtH KHANDA. 

1. ‘A diver-bird (Madgu, meant for Praxa) will 
declare to you another foot of Brahman.’ 

(After these words of the Hamsa), Satyak4ma, on 
the morrow, drove the cows onward. And when they 
came towards the evening, he lighted a fire, penned 
the cows, laid wood on the fire, and sat down be- 
hind the fire, looking toward the east. 

2. Then a diver flew near and said to him: 
‘Satyakama.’ He replied: ‘Sir. 

3. The diver said: ‘ Friend, I will declare unto 
you one foot of Brahman.’ ) 

‘Declare it, Sir,’ he replied. 

He said to him: ‘ Breath is one quarter, the eye 
is one quarter, the ear is one quarter, the mind is 
one quarter. This is a foot of Brahman, consisting 
of four quarters, and called Ayatanavat (having a 
home). 

‘He who knows this and meditates on the foot 
of Brahman, consisting of four quarters, by the 
name of Ayatanavat, becomes possessed of a home 
in this world. He conquers the worlds which offer 
a home, whoever knows this and meditates on the 
foot of Brahman, consisting of four quarters, by the 
name of Ayatanavat.’ 

64 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

NintH KHANDA. 

1. Thus he reached the house of his teacher. 
The teacher said to him: ‘Satyakama.’ He re- 
plied: ‘ Sir.’ 

2. The teacher said: ‘Friend, you shine like 
one who knows Brahman. Who then has taught 
you!?’ He replied: ‘Not men, But you only, 
Sir, I wish, should teach me?; 

3. ‘For I have heard from men like you, Sir, 
that only knowledge which is learnt from a teacher 
(Azarya), leads to real good.’ Then he taught him 
the same knowledge. Nothing was left out, yea, 
nothing was left out. 

TENTH KHANDA?. 

1. Upakosala Kamalayana dwelt as a Brahma- 
karin (religious student) in the house of Satyakama 
Gabala. He tended his fires for twelve years. But 
the teacher, though he allowed other pupils (after 
they had learnt the sacred books) to depart to their 
own homes, did not allow Upakosala to depart. 

2. Then his wife said to him: ‘ This student, who 
is quite exhausted (with austerities), has carefully 
tended your fires. Let not the fires themselves blame 
you, but teach him.’ The teacher, however, went 
away on a journey without having taught him. 

3. The student from sorrow was not able to eat. 

1 It would have been a great offence if Satyakima had accepted 
instruction from any man, except his recognised teacher. 

* The text should be, bhagavams tv eva me kame bruyat (me 
kame= mameefhayfm). 

* The Upakosala-vidya teaches first Brahman as the cause, and 
then in its various forms, and is therefore called 4tmavidy4 and 
agnividya. 

IV PRAPATHAKA, II KHANDA, I. 65 

— 

Then the wife of the teacher said to him: ‘ Student, 
eat! Why do you not eat?’ He said: ‘There are 
many desires in this man here, which lose themselves 
in different directions. I am full of sorrows, and 
shall take no food.’ 

4. Thereupon the fires said among themselves : 
‘This student, who is quite exhausted, has carefully’ 
tended us. Well, let us teach him.’ They said to 
him: 

5. ‘ Breath is Brahman, Ka (pleasure) is Brahman, 
Kha (ether) is Brahman.’ 

He said: ‘I understand that breath is Brahman, 
but I do not understand Ka or Kha?’ 

They said: ‘What is Ka is Kha, what is Kha is 
Ka??? They therefore taught him Brahman as 
breath, and as the ether (in the heart)®*. 

ELEVENTH KHANDA. 

1. After that the Garhapatya fire‘ taught him: 
‘ Earth, fire, food, and the sun (these are my forms, or 

1 I do not understand, he means, how Ka, which means pleasure, 
and is non-eternal, and how Kha, which means ether, and is not 
intelligent, can be Brahman. 

2 The commentator explains as follows :—Ka is pleasure, and 
Kha is ether, but these two words are to determine each other 
mutually, and thus to form one idea. Ka therefore does not 
mean ordinary pleasures, but pleasures such as belong to Kha, 
the ether. And Kha does not signify the ordinary outward ether, 
but the ether in the heart, which alone is capable of pleasure. 
What is meant by Ka and Kha is therefore the sentient ether 
in the heart, and that is Brahman, while Prama, breath, is Brahman, 
in so far as it is united with the ether in the heart. 

3 And as its ether, i.e. as the ether in the heart, the Brahman, 
with which praza is connected. Comm. 

* The household altar. 

(3 F 

66 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

forms of Brahman). The person that is seen in 
the sun, I am he, I am he indeed 1. 

2. ‘He who knowing this meditates on him, 
destroys sin, obtains the world (of Agni Garha- 
patya), reaches his full age, and lives long; his 
descendants do not perish. We guard him in this 
“world and in the other, whosoever knowing this 
meditates on him.’ 

TWELFTH KHANDA. 

1. Then the Anvaharya fire? taught him: 
‘Water, the quarters, the stars, the moon (these 
are my forms). The person that is seen in the 
moon, I am he, I am he indeed. 

2. ‘He who knowing this meditates on him, 
destroys sin, obtains the world (of Agni Anva- 
harya), reaches his full age, and lives long; his 
descendants do not perish. We guard him in this 
world and in the other, whosoever knowing this 
meditates on him.’ 

THIRTEENTH KHANDA. 

1. Then the Ahavantya® fire taught him: ‘ Breath, 
ether, heaven, and lightning (these are my forms). 

The person that 1s seen in the lightning, I am he, 
I am he indeed. 

1 Fanciful similarities and relations between the fires of the three 
altars and their various forms and manifestations are pointed out 
by the commentator. Thus earth and food are. represented as 
warmed and boiled by the fire. The sun is said to give warmth 
and light like the fire of the altar. The chief point, however, is 
that in all of them Brahman is manifested. 

2 The altar on the right. Anvaharya is a sacrificial oblation, 
chiefly one intended for the manes. 

* The Ahavanfya altar is the altar on the eastern side of the 
sacrificial ground. 

IV PRAPATHAKA, I5 KHANDA, I. 67 

2. ‘He who knowing this meditates on him, 
destroys sin, obtains the world (of Agni Ahava- 
ntya), reaches his full age, and lives long; his 
descendants do not perish. We guard him in this 
world and in the other, whosoever knowing this 
meditates on him.’ 

FOURTEENTH KHANDA. 

1. Then they all said: ‘ Upakosala, this is our 
knowledge, our friend, and the knowledge of the 
Self, but the teacher will tell you the way (to 
. another life), 

2. In time his teacher came back, and said to 
him: ‘Upakosala” He answered: ‘Sir. The 
teacher said: ‘ Friend, your face shines like that of 
one who knows Brahman. Who has taught you ?’ 

‘Who should teach me, Sir ?’ he said. He denies, 
as it were. And he said (pointing) to the fires: 
‘Are these fires other than fires ?’ 

The teacher said: ‘What, my friend, have these 
fires told you?’ 

3. He answered: ‘ This’ (repeating some of what 
they had told him). 

The teacher said: ‘ My friend, they have taught 
you about the worlds, but I shall tell you this; and 
as water does not cling to a lotus leaf, so no evil 
deed clings to one who knows it.’ He said: ‘Sir, 
tell it me.’ 

FIFTEENTH KHANDA. 

1. He said: ‘The person that is seen in the eye, 
that is the Self. This is the immortal, the fearless, 
this is Brahman’. Even though they drop melted 

1 This is also the teaching of Pragpati in VIII, 7, 4. 

F 2 

68 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

butter or water on him, it runs away on both 
sides 1. 

2. ‘They call him Sasyadvama, for all blessings 
(vama) go towards him (samyanti). All blessings 
go towards him who knows this. 

3. ‘He is also Vamant, for he leads (nayati) all 
blessings (vama). He leads all blessings who 
knows this. 

4. ‘He is also Bhamant, for he shines (bhati) 
in all worlds. He who knows this, shines in all 
worlds. 

5. ‘Now (if one who knows this, dies), whether 
people perform obsequies for him or no, he goes 
to light (aris) ?, from light to day, from day to 
the light half of the moon, from the light half of 
the moon to the six months during which the sun 
goes to the north, from the months to the year, 
from the year to the sun, from the sun to the moon, 
from the moon to the lightning. There is a person 
not human, 

6. ‘He leads them to Brahman. This is the path 
of the Devas, the path that leads to Brahman. 
Those who proceed on that path, do not return 
to the life of man, yea, they do not return. 

SIXTEENTH KHANDA 3. 

1. Verily, he who purifies (Vayu) is the sacrifice, 
for he (the air) moving along, purifies everything. 

It does so in the eye, and likewise with the person in the eye, 
who is not affected by anything. Cf. KA. Up. IV, 14, 3. 

* The commentator takes light, day, &c. as persons, or devatas. 
Cf. Kh. Up. V, ro, 1. 

> If any mistakes happen during the performance of a sacri- 
fice, as described before, they are remedied by certain interjectiona] 

IV PRAPATHAKA, 16 KHANDA, 5. 69 

Because moving along he purifies everything, there- 
fore he is the sacrifice. Of that sacrifice there are 
two ways, by mind and by speech. 

2. The Brahman priest performs one of them 
in his mind}, the Hotz, Adhvaryu, and Udgats7 
priests perform the other by words. When the 
Brahman priest, after the Prataranuvaka ceremony 
has begun, but before the recitation of the Paridha- 
ntya hymn, has (to break his silence and) to speak, 

3. He performs perfectly the one way only (that 
by words), but the other is injured. As a man 
walking on one foot, or a carriage going on one 
wheel, is injured, his sacrifice is injured, and with 
the injured sacrifice the sacrificer is injured; yes, 
having sacrificed, he becomes worse. 

4. But when after the Prataranuvaka ceremony 
has begun; and before the recitation of the Paridha- 
niyA hymn, the Brahman priest has not (to break 
his silence and) to speak, they perform both ways 
perfectly, and neither of them is injured. 

5. Asaman walking on two legs and a carriage 
going on two wheels gets on, so his sacrifice gets on, 
and with the successful sacrifice the sacrificer gets 
on; yes, having sacrificed, he becomes better. 

syllables (vyahrvti), the nature of which is next described. All this 
is supposed to take place in the forest. 

1 While the other priests perform the sacrifice, the Brahman 
priest has to remain silent, following the whole sacrifice in his 
mind, and watching.that no mistake be committed. If a mistake 
is committed, he has to correct it, and for that purpose certain 
corrective penances (prfyaseitta) are enjoined. The performance 
of the Brahman priest resembles the meditations of the sages in 
the forest, and therefore this chapter is here inserted. 

70 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

SEVENTEENTH KHANDA. 

1. PragApati brooded over the worlds, and from 
them thus brooded on he squeezed out the essences, 
Agni (fire) from the earth, Vayu (air) from the sky, 
Aditya (the sun) from heaven. 

2. He brooded over these three deities, and 
from them thus brooded on he squeezed out the 
essences, the Rik verses from Agni, the Yagus 
verses from VAyu, the SAman verses from Aditya. 

3. He brooded over the threefold knowledge 
(the three Vedas), and from it thus brooded on he 
squeezed out the essences, the sacred interjection 
Bhis from the Aze& verses, the sacred interjection 
Bhuvas from the Yagus verses, the sacred inter- 
jection Svar from the Saman verses. 

4. If the sacrifice is injured from the Azg-veda o 
side, let him offer a libation in the Garhapatya fire, 
saying, Bhds, Svaha! Thus does he bind together 
and heal, by means of the essence and the power 
of the Aze verses themselves, whatever break the 
Rik sacrifice may have suffered. 

5. If the sacrifice is injured from the Yagur-veda 
side, let him offer a libation in the Dakshiza fire, 
saying, Bhuvad/, Svaha! Thus does he bind together 
and heal, by means of the essence and the power 
of the Yagus verses themselves, whatever break the 
Yagus sacrifice may have suffered. 

6. If the sacrifice is injured by the Sama-veda 
side, let him offer a libation in the Ahavantya fire, 
saying, Sva#, Svaha! Thus does he bind together 
and heal, by means of the essence and the power 
of the SAman verses themselves, whatever break the 
Saman sacrifice may have suffered. | 

l 

IV PRAPATHAKA, 17 KHANDA, 9. 71 

J7. As one binds (softens) gold by means of 
lavaza! (borax), and silver by means of gold, and 
tin by means of silver, and lead by means of tin, 
and iron (loha) by means of lead, and wood by 
means of iron, or also by means of leather, 

8. Thus does one bind together and heal any 
break in the sacrifice by means of (the Vyahzztis or 
sacrificial interjections which are) the essence and 
strength of the three worlds, of the deities, and of 
the threefold knowledge. That sacrifice is healed ? 
in which there is a Brahman priest who knows this. 

9. That sacrifice is inclined towards the north 
(in the right way) in which there is a Brahman priest 
who knows this. And with regard to such a Brah- 
man priest there is the following Gath4*: ‘Where- 
ever it falls back, thither the man t goes, —viz. the 
Brahman only, as one of the AXztvig priests. ‘He saves 
the Kurus as a mare’ (viz. a Brahman priest who 

1 Lavazza, a kind of salt, explained by kshara and /anka or 
fankana. It is evidently borax, which is still imported from the 
East Indies under the name of tincal, and used as a flux in chemi- 
cal processes. 

2 Bheshagakrita, explained by bheshagena ’iva kritah samskritah, 
and also by 4ikitsakena susikshitena ‘esha yagiio bhavati,’ which 
looks as if the commentator had taken it as a genitive of 
bheshagakvit. 

° This G4tha (or, according to Sankara, Anugatha) is probably 
a Gayatri, though Anandagiri says that it is not in the Geyatrt 
or any other definite metre. It may have been originally ‘yato 
yata 4vartate, tattad gakkhati manavah, kurfin asvabhirakshati.’ 
This might be taken from an old epic ballad, ‘ Wherever the army 
fell back, thither the man went; the mare (mares being preferred 
to stallions in war) saves the Kurus.’ That verse was applied to the 
Brahman priest succouring the sacrifice, whenever it seemed to waver, 
and protecting the Kurus, i. e. the performers of the sacrifice. 

+ Manava, explained from mauna, or manana, but possibly ori- 
ginally, a descendant of Manu. 

72 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

knows this, saves the sacrifice, the sacrificer, and all 
the other priests). Therefore let a man make him 
who knows this his Brahman priest, not one who 
does not know it, who does not know it. 

FIFTH PRAPA7HAKA1 

First KHANDA. 

1. He who knows the oldest and the best be- 
comes himself the oldest and the best. Breath 
indeed is the oldest and the best. 

2. He who knows the richest, becomes himself 
the richest. Speech indeed is the richest. 

3. He who knows the firm rest, becomes himself 
firm in this world and in the next. The eye indeed 
is the firm rest. 

4. He who knows success, his wishes succeed, 
both his divine and human wishes. The ear indeed 
is success. | 

5. He who knows the home, becomes a home 
of his people. The mind indeed is the home. 

6. The five senses quarrelled together *, who was 
the best, saying, I am better, I am better. 

1 The chief object is to show the different ways on which people 
proceed after death. One of these ways, the Devapatha that leads 
to Brahman and from which there is no return, has been described, 
IV, 15. The other ways for those who on earth know the 
conditioned Brahman only, have to be discussed now. 

* The same fable, the prazasamvada or pramavidyda, is told in 
the Brzhadaranyaka VI, 1, 1-14, the Aitareya Ar. II, 4, the Kaush. 
Up. III, 3, and the Prasna Up. II, 3. The last is the simplest 
version of all, but it does not follow therefore that it is the oldest. 
It would be difficult to find two fables apparently more alike, yet 
in reality differing from each other more characteristically than this 
fable and the fable told to the plebeians by Menenius Agrippa. 

V PRAPATHAKA, I KHANDA, I1. 73 

7. They went to their father Pragapati and said : 
‘Sir, who is the best of us?’ He replied: ‘He by 
whose departure the body seems worse than worst, 
he is the best of you.’ 

8. The tongue (speech) departed, and having 
been absent for a year, it came round and said: 
‘How have you been able to live without me ?’ 
They replied: ‘Like mute people, not speaking, but 
breathing with the breath, seeing’ with the eye, 
hearing with the ear, thinking with the mind. Thus 
we lived’ Then speech went back. 

9. The eye (sight) departed, and having been 
absent for a year, it came round and said: ‘ How 
have you been able to live without me?’ They 
replied : ‘ Like blind people, not seeing, but breath- 
ing with the breath, speaking with the tongue, 
hearing with the ear, thinking with the mind. Thus 
we lived’ Then the eye went back. 

10. The ear (hearing) departed, and having been 
absent for a year, it came round and said: ‘ How 
have you been able to live without me?’ They 
replied: ‘ Like deaf people, not hearing, but breath- 
ing with the breath, speaking with the tongue, 
thinking with the mind. Thus we lived? Then 
the ear went back. 

11. The mind departed, and having been absent 
for a year, it came round and said: ‘How have 
you been able to live-without me?’ They replied: 
‘Like children whose mind is not yet formed, but 
breathing with the breath, speaking with the tongue, 
seeing with the eye, hearing with the ear. Thus we 
lived.’ Then the mind went back. 

12. The breath, when on the point of departing, 
tore up the other senses, as a horse, going to start, 

74 EHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

might tear up the pegs to which he is tethered’. 
They came to him and said: ‘Sir, be thou (our lord); 
thou art the best among us. Do not depart from us!’ 

13. Then the tongue said to him: ‘If I am the 
richest, thou art the richest.) The eye said to him: 
‘If I am the firm rest, thou art the firm rest 2.’ 

14. The ear said to him: ‘If I am success, thou 
art success. The mind said to him: ‘If I am the 
home, thou art the home.’ 

15. And people do not call them, the tongues, 
the eyes, the ears, the minds, but the breaths 
(pravza, the senses), For breath are all these. 

SECOND KHANDA. 

1. Breath said: ‘What shall be my food?’ 
They answered: ‘Whatever there is, even unto 
dogs and birds.’ Therefore this is food for Ana 
(the breather). His name is clearly Ana*. To 
him who knows this there is nothing that is not 
(proper) food. 

2. He said: ‘What shall be my dress?’ They 
answered: ‘Water. Therefore wise people, when 
they are going to eat food, surround their food be- 
fore and after with water +’ He (praza) thus gains 
a dress, and is no longer naked °, 

1 Padvisa, fetter, medn, pedica, a word now well known, but 
which Burnouf (Commentaire sur le Yacna, Notes, CLXXIV) 
tried in vain to decipher. 

2 Burnouf rightly preferred pratish/hasi to pratish/ho’si, though 
the commentary on the corresponding passage of the Brzhad&ra- 
nyaka seems to favour tatpratish/ho ’si. 

3 Ana, breather, more general than pra-ana=prama, forth- 
breather, and the other more specified names of breath. 

* They rinse the mouth before and after every meal. 

s We expect, ‘He who knows this’ instead of praza, but as 

V PRAPATHAKA, 2 KHANDA, 8. 75 

3. Satyakama Gabala, after he had communi- 
cated this to Gosruti Vaiy4ghrapadya, said to him : 
‘If you were to tell this to a dry stick, branches 
would grow, and leaves spring from it.’ 

4. If! a man wishes to reach greatness, let him 
perform the Diksh4? (preparatory rite) on the day of 
the new moon, and then, on the night of the full 
moon, let him stir a mash of all kinds of herbs 
with curds and honey, and let him pour ghee on the 
fire (A4vasathya laukika), saying, ‘Sv4ha to the oldest 
and the best.’ After that let him throw all that 
remains (of the ghee)? into the mash. 

5. In the same manner let him pour ghee on 
the fire, saying, ‘Sv4ha to the richest.’ After that 
let him throw all that remains together into the 
mash. 

In the same manner let him pour ghee on the frre, 
saying, ‘Sv4h4 to the firm rest.’ After that let him 
throw all that remains together into the mash. 

In the same manner let him pour ghee on the 
fire, saying, ‘Svah4 to success.’ After that let him 
throw all that remains together into the mash. 

6. Then going forward and placing the mash 

prana may apply to every individual praza, the usual finishing 
sentence was possibly dropt on purpose. 

1 The oblation here described is called mantha, a mortar, or 
what is pounded in a mortar, i.e. barley stirred in some kind of 
gravy. See Gaim. N. M. V. p. 406. 

2 Not the real diksha, which is a preparatory rite for great 
sacrifices, but penance, truthfulness, abstinence, which take the 
place of diksha with those who live in the forest and devote 
themselves to upAsana, meditative worship. 

® What is here called samp4tam avanayati is the same as 
samsravam avanayati in the Brth. Ar. VI,3, 2. The commentator 
says: Sruvavalepanam 4gyam mantham samsravayati, 

76 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

in his hands, he recites: ‘Thou (Praza) art Ama? 
by name, for all this together exists in thee. He 
is the oldest and best, the king, the sovereign. 
May he make me the oldest, the best, the king, 
the sovereign. May I be all this.’ 

7. Then he eats with the following Aze verse at 
every foot : ‘We choose’ that food’—here he swal- 
lows—‘ Of the divine Savitrz (praeza)’—here he 
swallows—‘ The best and all-supporting food ’—here 
he swallows—‘ We meditate on the speed of Bhaga 
(Savitz, praza)’—here he drinks all. 

8. Having cleansed the vessel, whether it be a 
kamsa or a amasa, he sits down behind the fire on 
a skin or on the bare ground, without speaking or 
making any other effort. If in his dream he sees a 
woman, let him know this to be a sign that his 
sacrifice has succeeded. 

9. On this there is a Sloka: ‘If during sacri- 
fices which are to fulfil certain wishes he sees in 
his dreams a woman, let him know success from 
this vision in a dream, yea, from this vision in 
a dream.’ 

THIRD KHANDA. 

1. Svetaketu Aruzeya went to an assembly ® of 
the Paf#dlas. Pravdhaza Gaivali‘ said to him: 
‘Boy, has your father instructed you?’ ‘Yes, Sir, 
he replied. 

2. ‘Do you know to what place men go from 
here ?’ ‘No, Sir,’ he replied. 

1 Cf. Brih. Ar. I, 1, 3, 22. 

3 This story is more fully told in the Brhadaramyaka VI, 2, 
Satapatha-brahmana XIV, 8, 16. 

3? Samiti, or parishad, as in the Brh. Ar. 

* He is the same Kshatriya sage who appeared in I, 8, 1, silencing 
the Brahmans. 

V PRAPATHAKA, 3 KHANDA, 6. 77 

‘Do you know how they return again?’ ‘No 
Sir, he replied. 

‘Do you know where the path of Devas and the 
path of the fathers diverge?’ ‘No, Sir,’ he replied. 

3. ‘Do you know why that world! never becomes 
full?’ ‘No, Sir,’ he replied. 

‘Do you know why in the fifth libation water is 
called Man???’ ‘No, Sir, he replied. 

4. ‘Then why did you say (you had been) in- 
structed? How could anybody who did not know 
these things say that he had been instructed ?’ 
Then the boy went back sorrowful to the place of his 
father, and said: ‘Though you had not instructed 
me, Sir, you said you had instructed me. 

5. ‘That fellow of a Raganya asked me five 
questions, and I could not answer one of them.’ 
The father said: ‘As you have told me these 
questions of his, I do not know any one of them °. 
If I knew these questions, how should I not have 
told yout?’ 

6. Then Gautama went to the king’s place, and 
when he had come to him, the king offered him 
proper respect. In the morning the king went out 
on his way to the assembly®. The king said to him: 

1 That of the fathers. Comm. 

* Or, according to others, why the water has a human voice; 
purushavaza% in Brh. Ar. XIV, 9, 3. 

* I doubt whether the elliptical construction of these sentences 
is properly filled out by the commentator. In the Brshadaranyaka 
the construction is much easier. ‘You know me well enough to 
know that whatever I know, I told you.’ 

t I read avedishyam, though both the text and commentary 
give avadishyam. Still viditavin asmi points to an original 
avedishyam, and a parallel passage, VI, 1, 7, confirms this 
emendation. 

* Cf. X}. Up. V, 11, 5. 

78 EHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

‘Sir, Gautama, ask a boon of such things as men 
possess. He replied: ‘Such things as men possess 
may remain with you. Tell me the speech which 
you addressed to the boy.’ 

7. The king was perplexed, and commanded 
him, saying: ‘Stay with me some time.’ Then he 
said: ‘As (to what) you have said to me, Gautama, 
this knowledge did not go to any Brahmaza before 
you, and therefore this teaching belonged in all 
the worlds to the Kshatra class alone. Then he 
began : 

FourtH KHANDA.. 

1. ‘The altar (on which the sacrifice is supposed 
to be offered) is that world (heaven), O Gautama ; 
its fuel is the sun itself, the smoke his rays, the 
light the day, the coals the moon, the sparks the 
Stars. 

2. ‘On that altar the Devas (or praxas, repre- 
sented by Agni, &c.) offer the sraddh4 libation 
(consisting of water). From that oblation rises 
Soma, the king? (the moon). 

FirtH KHANDA. 

1. ‘The altar is Parganya (the god of rain), O 
Gautama; its fuel is the air itself, the smoke 
the cloud, the light the lightning, the coals the 
thunderbolt, the sparks the thunderings °. 

1 He answers the last question, why water in the fifth libation 
is called Man, first. 

2 The sacrificers themselves rise through their oblations to 
heaven, and attain as their reward a Soma-like nature. 

> Hraduni, generally explained by hail, but here by stanayitnu- 
sabd&A, rumblings. 

V PRAPATHAKA, 9 KHANDA, 2. 79 

2. ‘On that altar the Devas offer Soma, the king 
(the moon). From that oblation rises rain}. 

SrixtH KHANDA. 

1. ‘The altar is the earth, O Gautama; its fuel 
is the year itself, the smoke the ether, the light 
the night, the coals the quarters, the sparks the 
intermediate quarters. 

2. ‘On that altar the Devas (prdzas) offer rain. 
From that oblation rises food (corn, &c.) 

SEVENTH KHANDA. 

1. ‘The altar is man, O Gautama; its fuel 
speech itself, the smoke the breath, the light the 
tongue, the coals the eye, the sparks the ear. 

2. ‘On that altar the Devas (prazas) offer food. 
From that oblation rises seed. 

EIGHTH KHANDA. 

1. ‘The altar is woman, O Gautama’. 
2. ‘On that altar the Devas (prazas) offer seed. 
From that oblation rises the germ. 

NINTH KHANDA. 

1. ‘For this reason is water in the fifth oblation 
called Man. This germ, covered in the womb, having 
dwelt there ten months, or more or less, is born. 

2. ‘When born, he lives whatever the length of 
his life may be. When he has departed, his friends 
carry him, as appointed, to the fire (of the funeral 
pile) from whence he came, from whence he sprang. 

1 The water, which had assumed the nature of Soma, now 
becomes rain. 

2 Tasya upastha eva samid, yad upamantrayate sa dhumo, 
yonir arkir, yad anta% karoti te ’ng4r4 abhinanda vishphuling&4. 

80 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

TENTH KHANDA. 

1. ‘Those who know this! (even though they 
still be gvzhasthas, householders) and those who in 
the forest follow faith and austerities (the vana- 
prasthas, and of the parivragakas those who do not 
yet know the Highest Brahman) go ? to light (areis), 
from light to day, from day to the light half of the 
moon, from the light half of the moon to the six 
months when the sun goes to the north, from the 
six months when the sun goes to the north to the 
year, from the year to the sun, from the sun to the 
moon, from the moon to the lightning. There is 
a person not human §,— 

2. ‘He leads them to Brahman (the conditioned 
Brahman). This is the path of the Devas. 

3. ‘But they who living in a village practise (a life 
of) sacrifices, works of public utility, and alms, they 
go to the smoke, from smoke to night, from night 
to the dark half of the moon, from the dark half of 
the moon to the six months when the sun goes to 
the south. But they do not reach the year. 

4. ‘From the months they go to the world of the 
fathers, from the world of the fathers to the ether, 
from the ether to the moon. That is Soma, the 
king. Here they are loved (eaten) by the Devas, 
yes, the Devas love (eat) them *. 

1 The doctrine of the five fires, and our being born in them, 
i.e. in heaven, rain, earth, man, and woman. 

* Cf. KR. Up. IV, 15, 5. 

3 Instead of manava, human, or am&nava, not human, the Brth. 
Ar. reads m4nasa, mental, or created by manas, mind. 

+ This passage has been translated, ‘They are the food of the 
gods. The gods do eat it.’ And this is indeed the literal meaning 
of the words. But bhag (to enjoy) and bhaksh (to eat) are often 

V PRAPATHAKA, IO KHANDA, 6. SI 

5. ‘Having dwelt there, till their (good) works 
are consumed, they return again that way as they 
came}, to the ether, from the ether to the air. Then 
the sacrificer, having become air, becomes smoke, 
having become smoke, he becomes mist, 

6. ‘Having become mist, he becomes a cloud, 
having become a cloud, he rains down. Then he 
is born as rice and corn, herbs and trees, sesamum 
and beans. From thence the escape is beset with 
most difficulties. For whoever the persons may be 
that eat the food, and beget offspring, he hence- 
forth becomes like unto them. 

used by theosophical writers in India, in the more general sense of 
cherishing or loving, and anna in the sense of an object of desire, 
love, and protection. The commentators, however, as the use of 
bhaksh in this sense is exceptional, or as it has no support in 
the use of the ancients, warn us here against a possible mis- 
understanding. If those, they say, who have performed sacrifices 
enter at last into the essence of Soma, the moon, and are eaten by 
the Devas, by Indra, &c., what is the use of their good works? 
No, they reply, they are not really eaten. Food (anna) means 
only what is helpful and delightful; it is not meant that they 
are eaten by morsels, but that they form the delight of the Devas. 
Thus we hear it said that men, women, and cattle are food for 
kings. And if it is said that women are loved by men, they are, in 
being loved, themselves loving. Thus these men also, being loved 
by the Devas, are happy and rejoice with the Devas. Their body, 
in order to be able to rejoice in the moon, becomes of a watery 
substance, as it was said before, that the water, called the Sraddha 
libation, when offered in heaven, as in the fire of the altar, becomes 
Soma, the king (X4. Up. V, 4, 1). That water becomes, after 
various changes, the body of those who have performed good 
works, and when a man is dead and his body burnt (£4. Up. V, 
9, 2), the water rises from the body upwards with the smoke, and 
carries him to the moon, where, in that body, he enjoys the fruits 
of his good works, as long as they last. When they are consumed, 
like the oil in a lamp, he has to return to a new round of 
existences. 
1 But only to a certain point. 

[3] This book was download from www.holybooks.com : 

82 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

7. ‘Those whose conduct has been good, will 
quickly attain some good birth, the birth of a Brah- 
maza, or a Kshatriya, or a Vaisya. But those whose 
conduct has been evil, will quickly attain an evil 
birth, the birth of a dog, or a hog, or a Kandla. 

8. ‘On neither of these two ways those small crea- 
tures (flies, worms, &c.) are continually returning of 
whom it may be said, Live and die. Theirs is a 
third place. 

‘Therefore that world never becomes full’ (cf. 
V, 3, 2). 

? In this manner all the five questions have been answered. 
First, why in the fifth oblation water is called man; secondly, to 
what place men go after death, some by the path of the Devas, 
others by the path of the fathers, others again by neither of these 
paths; thirdly, how they return, some returning to Brahman, others 
returning to the earth; fourthly, where the paths of the Devas and 
the fathers diverge, viz. when from the half-year the path of the 
Devas goes on to the year, while that of the fathers branches off 
to the world of the fathers; fifthly, why that world, the other 
world, does never become full, viz. because men either go on to 
Brahman or return again to this world. 

Many questions are raised among Indian philosophers on the 
exact meaning of certain passages occurring in the preceding para- 
graphs. First, as to who is admitted to the path of the Devas? 
Householders, who know the secret doctrine of the five fires 
or the five libations of the Agnihotra, as described above, while 
other householders, who only perform the ordinary sacrifices, with- 
out a knowledge of their secret meaning, go by the path of the 
fathers. Secondly, those who have retired to the forest, and whose 
worship there consists in faith and austerities, i.e. Vanaprasthas 
and Parivragakas, before they arrive at a knowledge of the true 
Brahman. The question then arises, whether religious students 
also enter the path of the Devas? This is affirmed, because 
Purazas and Smritis assert it, or because our text, if properly 
understood, does not exclude it. Those, on the contrary, who 
know not only a conditioned, but the highest unconditioned Brah- 
man, do not proceed on the path of the Devas, but obtain Brahman 
immediately. 

Again, there is much difference of opinion whether, after a man 

V PRAPATHAKA, IO KHANDA, 9. 83 

‘Hence let a man take care to himself!! And thus 
it is said in the following Sloka ? :— 
9g. ‘A man who steals gold, who drinks spirits, 

has been in the moon, consuming his works, he can be born again. 
Birth is the result of former works, and if former works are alto- 
gether consumed, there can be no new birth. This, however, is 
shown to be an erroneous view, because, besides the good sacrificial 
works, the fruits of which are consumed in the moon, there are 
other works which have to be enjoyed or expiated, as the case 
may be, in a new existence. 

The great difficulty or danger in the round of transmigration 
arises when the rain has fructified the earth, and passes into herbs 
and trees, rice, corn, and beans. For, first of all, some of the rain 
does not fructify at once, but falls into rivers andinto the sea, to be . 
swallowed up by fishes and sea monsters, Then, only after these 
have been dissolved in the sea, and after the sea water has been 
attracted by the clouds, the rain falls down again, it may be on 
desert or stony land. Here it may be swallowed by snakes or 
deer, and these may be swallowed by other animals, so that the 
round of existence seems endless. Nor is this all. Some rain 
may dry up, or be absorbed by bodies that cannot be eaten. 
Then, if the rain is absorbed by rice, corn, &c., and this be 
eaten, it may be eaten by children or by men who have renounced 
marriage, and thus again lose the chance of a new birth. Lastly, 
there is the danger arising from the nature of the being in whom 
the food, such as rice and corn, becomes a new seed, and likewise 
from the nature of the mother. All these chances have to be met 
before a new birth as a Brahmana, Kshatriya, or Vaisya can be 
secured. 

Another curious distinction is here made by Sankara in his 
commentary. ‘There are some, he says, who assume the form of 
rice, corn, &c., not in their descent from a higher world, as described 
in the Upanishad, but as a definite punishment for certain evil 
deeds they have committed. These remain in that state till the 
results of their evil deeds are over, and assume then a new body, 
according to their work, like caterpillars. With them there is also 
a consciousness of these states, and the acts which caused them to 

1 Let him despise it. Comm. | 
* Evidently an old Trishfubh verse, but irregular in the third 
line. See Manu NI, 54. 

This book was downloaGed2rom www.holybooks.com : 

84 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

who dishonours his Guru’s bed, who kills a Brah- 
man; these four fall, and as a fifth he who associates 
with them. 

10. ‘But he who thus knows the five fires is not 
defiled by sin even though he associates with them. 
He who knows this, is pure, clean, and obtains the 
world of the blessed, yea, he obtains the world 
of the blessed.’ 

ELEVENTH KHANDA!. 

1. Pra&tnas4la Aupamanyava, Satyayagfia Paulu- 
shi, Indradyumna Bhallaveya, Gana Sarkarakshya, 
and Budila Asvatarasvi, these five great house- 
holders and great theologians came once together 
and held a discussion as to What is our Self, and 
what is Brahman ?. 

2. They reflected and said: ‘Sirs, there is that 
Udd4laka Aruzi, who knows at present that Self, 

assume this or that body, leave impressions behind, like dreams. 
This is not the case with those who in their descent from the 
moon, pass, as we saw, through an existence as rice, corn, &c. 
They have no consciousness of such existences, at least not in their 
descent. In their ascent to the moon, they have consciousness, as 
a man who climbs up a tree knows what he is about. But in their 
descent, that consciousness is gone, as it is when a man falls down 
from a tree. Otherwise a man, who by his good works had de- 
served rewards in the moon, would, while corn is being ground, suffer 
tortures, as if he were in hell, and the very object of good works, 
as taught by the Veda, would be defeated. As we see that a man 
struck by a hammer can be carried away unconscious, so it is in 
the descent of souls, till they are born again as men, and gain 
a new start for the attainment of the Highest Brahman. 

1 The same story is found in the Satapatha-brahmama X, 6, 1, 1. 
* Atman and Brahman are to be taken as predicate and subject. 

V PRAPATHAKA, II KHANDA, 7. 85 

called Vaisvanara. Well, let us go to him.’ They 
went to him. 

3. But he reflected: ‘Those great householders 
and great theologians will examine me, and I shall 
not be able to tell them all; therefore I shall 
recommend another teacher to them,’ 

4. He said to them: ‘Sirs, Asvapati Kaikeya 
knows at present that Self, called Vaisvanara. Well, 
let us go to him.’ They went to him. 

5. When they arrived (the king) ordered proper 
presents to be made separately to each of them. 
And rising the next morning?! he said: ‘In my 
kingdom there is no thief, no miser, no drunkard, 
no man without an altar in his house, no ignorant 
person, no adulterer, much less an adulteress. I? 
am going to perform a sacrifice, Sirs, and as much 
wealth as I give to each Æztvig priest, I shall give 
to you, Sirs. Please to stay here.’ 

6. They replied: ‘Every man ought to say for 
what purpose he comes. You know at present that 
Vaisvanara Self, tell us that.’ 

7. He said: ‘To-morrow I shall give you an 
answer. Therefore on the next morning they ap- 
proached him, carrying fuel in their hands (like 
students), and he, without first demanding any pre- 
paratory rites %, said to them: 

1 The commentator explains that the king, seeing that they would 
not accept his presents, and thinking that they did not consider him 
worthy of bestowing presents on them, made these remarks. 

2 When they still refused his presents, he thought the presents 
he had offered were too small, and therefore invited them to a 
sacrifice. 

3 He was satisfied with the humility of the Brahmans, who, being 
Brahmans, came to him, who was not a Brahman, as pupils. Gene- 

86 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

TWELFTH KHANDA. 

I. ‘Aupamanyava, whom do you meditate on as 
the Self?’ He replied: ‘Heaven only, venerable 
king.’ He said: ‘The Self which you meditate on 
is the Vaisvanara Self, called Sutegas (having good 
light). Therefore every kind of Soma libation is 
seen in your house!. 

2. ‘You eat food, and see your desire (a son, &c.), 
and whoever thus meditates on that Vaisvanara Self, 
eats food, sees his desire, and has Vedic glory (arising 
from study and sacrifice) in his house. That, how- 
ever, is but the head of the Self, and thus your 
head would have fallen (in a discussion), if you had 
not come to me. 

THIRTEENTH KHANDA. 

1. Then he said to Satyayagiia Paulushi: ‘O Pra- 
Atnayogya, whom do you meditate on as the Self?’ 
He replied: ‘The sun only, venerable king.’ He 
said: ‘The Self which you meditate on is the Vaisva- 
nara Self, called VisvarOpa (multiform). Therefore 
much and manifold wealth is seen in your house. 

2. ‘There is a car with mules, full of slaves and 
jewels. You eat food and see your desire, and who- 
ever thus meditates on that Vaisvanara Self, eats 
food and sees his desire, and has Vedic glory in 
his house. 

‘That, however, is but the eye of the Self, and 
you would have become blind, if you had not come 
to me.’ 

rally a pupil has first to pass through several initiatory rites before 
he is admitted to the benefit of his master’s teaching. 

1 Soma is said to be suta in the Ek4ha, prasuta in the Ahina, ' 
4suta in the Sattra-sacrifices. 

V PRAPATHAKA, 16 KHANDA, I. 87 

FOURTEENTH KHANDA. 

1. Then he said to Indradyumna BhAllaveya : ‘O 
Vaiyaghrapadya, whom do you meditate on as the 
Self?’ He replied: ‘Air only, venerable king.’ He 
said: ‘The Self which you meditate on is the Vai- 
svanara Self, called Przthagvartman (having various 
courses). Therefore offerings come to you in various 
ways, and rows of cars follow you in various ways. 

2. ‘You eat food and see your desire, and who- 
ever thus meditates on that Vaisvanara Self, eats 
food and sees his desire, and has Vedic glory in 
his house. 

‘That, however, is but the breath of the Self, and 
your breath would have left you, if you had not 
come to me. 

FIFTEENTH KHANDA. 

1. Then he said to Gana Sarkaraekshya: ‘Whom 
do you meditate on as the Self?’ He replied: ‘ Ether 
only, venerable king.’ He said: ‘The Self which 
you meditate on is the Vaisvanara Self, called Bahula 
(full), Therefore you are full of offspring and wealth. 

2. ‘You eat food and see your desire, and who- 
ever thus meditates on that Vaisvanara Self, eats 
food and sees his desire, and has Vedic glory in 
his house. 

‘That, however, is but the trunk of the Self, and 
your trunk would have perished, if you had not 
come to me.’ 

SIXTEENTH KHANDA. 
1, Then he said to Budila Asvatarasvi, ‘O Vaiye- 
ghrapadya, whom do you meditate on as the Self?’ 
He replied: ‘ Water only, venerable king.’ He said: 

88 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

‘The Self which you meditate on is the Vaisvanara 
Self, called Rayi (wealth). Therefore are you 
wealthy and flourishing. 

2. ‘You eat food and see your desire, and who- 
ever thus meditates on that Vaisvanara Self, eats 
food and sees his desire, and has Vedic glory in 
his house. 

‘ That, however, is but the bladder of the Self, and 
your bladder would have burst, if you had not come 
to me.’ 

SEVENTEENTH KHANDA. 

"1, Then he said to Audddlaka Aruni: ‘ʻO Gau- 
tama, whom do you meditate on as the Self?’ He 
replied: ‘The earth only, venerable king.’ He said: 
‘The Self which you meditate on is the Vaisvanara 
Self, called Pratish¢44 (firm rest). Therefore you 
stand firm with offspring and cattle. 

2. ‘ You eat food and see your desire, and who- 
ever thus meditates on that Vaisvanara Self, eats 
food and sees his desire, and has Vedic glory in his 
house. : 

‘That, however, are but the feet of the Self, and 
your feet would have given way, if you had not 
come to me.’ 

EIGHTEENTH KHANDA. 

1. Then he said to them all: ‘You eat your 
food, knowing that Vaisvanara Self as if it were 
many. But he who worships the Vaisvanara Self 
as a span long, and as? identical with himself, he eats 
food in all worlds, in all beings, in all Selfs. 

1 The two words pradesamatra and abhivim4na are doubtful. 
The commentator explains the first in different ways, which are all 
more or less fanciful. He is measured or known (meftra) as Self, 

V PRAPATHAKA, 19 KHANDA, 2. 89 

2. ‘Of that Vaisvanara Self the head is Sutegas 
(having good light), the eye Visvardpa (multiform), 
the breath Pvzthagvartman (having various courses), 
the trunk Bahula (full), the bladder Rayi (wealth), 
the feet the earth, the chest the altar, the hairs the 
grass on the altar, the heart the Garhapatya fire, 
the mind the Anv4hfrya fire, the mouth the Ahava- 
ntya fire. 

NINETEENTH KHANDA. 

1. ‘ Therefore’ the first food which a man may 
take, is in the place of Homa. And he who offers 
that first oblation, should offer it to Praza (up- 
breathing), saying Sv4h4. Then Praxza (up-breath- 
ing) is satisfied, 

2. ‘If Praza is satisfied, the eye is satisfied, if the 
eye is satisfied, the sun is satisfied, if the sun is 
satisfied, heaven is satisfied, if heaven is satisfied, 
whatever is under heaven and under the sun is satis- 
hed. And through their satisfaction he (the sacri- 
ficer or eater) himself is satisfied with offspring, 
cattle, health, brightness, and Vedic splendour. 

by means of heaven as his head and the earth as his feet, these being 
the pradesas; or, in the mouth and the rest, which are instruments, 
he is known as without action himself; or, he has the length from 
heaven to earth, heaven and earth being called pradesa, because 
they are taught. The interpretation, supported by the G&b4la- 
sruti, that pradesa is the measure from the forehead to the chin, 
he rejects. Abhivim4na is taken in the same meaning as abhimana 
in the Vedanta, seeing everything in oneself. Vaisvanara is taken 
as the real Self of all beings, and, in the end, of all Selfs, and as 
thus to be known and worshipped. 

1 The object now is to show that to him who knows the Vaisva- 
nara Self, the act of feeding himself is like feeding Vaisvanara, and 
that feeding Vaisvanara is the true Agnihotra. 

90 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

TWENTIETH KHANDA. 

1. ‘And he who offers the second oblation, should 
offer it to Vydna (back-breathing), saying Svaha. 
Then Vy4na is satisfied, 

2. ‘If Vy4na is satisfied, the ear is satisfied, if the 
ear is satisfied, the moon is satisfied, if the moon is 
satisfied, the quarters are satisfied, if the quarters 
are satisfied, whatever is under the quarters and 
under the moon is satisfied. And through their 
satisfaction he (the sacrificer or eater) himself is 
satisfied with offspring, cattle, health, brightness, 
and Vedic splendour. 

TWENTY-FIRST KHANDA. 

1. ‘And he who offers the third oblation, should 
offer it to Apana (down-breathing), saying Svaha. 
Then Apana is satisfied. If Apana is satisfied, the 
tongue is satisfied, if the tongue is satisfied, Agni 
(fire) is satisfied, if Agni is satisfied, the earth is 
satisfied, if the earth is satisfied, whatever is under 
the earth and under fire is satisfied. 

2. ‘And through their satisfaction he (the sacri- 
ficer or eater) himself is satisfied with offspring, 
cattle, health, brightness, and Vedic splendour. 

TWENTY-SECOND KHANDA. 

1. ‘And he who offers the fourth oblation, should 
offer it to Samana (on-breathing), saying Svaha. 
Then Samana is satisfied, 

2. ‘If Sam4na is satisfied, the mind is satisfied, 
if the mind is satisfied, Parganya (god of rain) is 
satisfied, if Parganya is satisfied, lightning is satisfied, 
if lightning is satished, whatever is under Parganya 
and under lightning is satisfied. And through their 

V PRAPATHAKA, 24 KHANDA, 4. QI 

satisfaction he (the sacrificer or eater) himself is 
satisfied with offspring, cattle, health, brightness, 
and Vedic splendour. 

TWENTY-THIRD KHANDA. 

I. ‘And he who offers the fifth oblation, should 
offer it to Udana (out-breathing), saying Svaha. 
Then Udana is satisfied, 

2. ‘If Udana is satisfied, Vayu (air) is satisfied, if 
V4yu is satisfied, ether is satisfied, if ether is satis- 
fied, whatever is under Vayu and under the ether 
is satisfied. And through their satisfaction he (the 
sacrificer or eater) himself is satisfied with offspring, 
cattle, health, brightness, and Vedic splendour. 

TWENTY-FOURTH KHANDA. 

I. ‘If, without knowing this, one offers an Agni- 
hotra, it would be as if a man were to remove the 
live coals and pour his libation on dead ashes. 

2. ‘But he who offers this Agnihotra with a full 
knowledge of its true purport, he offers it (i.e. he 
eats food)? in all worlds, in all beings, in all Selfs. 

3. ‘As the soft fibres of the Ishtk4 reed, when 
thrown into the fire, are burnt, thus all his sins 
are burnt whoever offers this Agnihotra with a full 
knowledge of its true purport. 

4. ‘Even if he gives what is left of his food toa 
KandAla, it would be offered in his (the Kazd4la’s) 
Vaisvanara Self. And so it is said in this Sloka :— 

‘As hungry children here on earth sit (expect- 
antly) round their mother, so do all beings sit round 
the Agnihotra, yea, round the Agnihotra. 

1 Cf. V, 18, 1. 

92 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

SIXTH PRAPA7HAKA. 

First KHANDA. 

1. Harik, Om. There lived once Svetaketu 
Aruneya (the grandson of Arum). To him his 
father (Uddalaka, the son of Aruzg) said: ‘ Sveta- 
ketu, go to school; for there is none belonging to 
our race, darling, who, not having studied (the 
Veda), is, as it were, a Brahmama by birth only.’ 

2. Having begun his apprenticeship (with a 
teacher) when he was twelve years of age, Sveta- 
ketu returned to his father, when he was twenty- 
four, having then studied all the Vedas,—conceited, 
considering himself well-read, and stern. 

3. His father said to him: ‘ Svetaketu, as you 
are so conceited, considering yourself so well-read, 
and so stern, my dear, have you ever asked for 
that instruction by which we hear what cannot be 
heard, by which we perceive what cannot be per- 
ceived, by which we know what cannot be known ?’ 

4. ‘What is that instruction, Sir?’ he asked. 

The father replied: ‘My dear, as by one clod of 
clay all that is made of clay is known, the dif- 
ference? being only a name, arising from speech, 
but the truth being that all is clay; 

5. ‘And as, my dear, by one nugget of gold: 

1 This was rather late, for the son of a Brahman might have 
begun his studies when he was seven years old. Apastamba-s(ttras 
I, 1,18. Twelve years was considered the right time for mastering 
one of the Vedas. 

? Vik4ra, difference, variety, change, by form and name, develop- 
ment, cf. VI, 3, 3. 

* The commentator takes lohamami here as suvarmapinda. 

VI PRAPATHAKA, 2 KHANDA, 3. 93 

all that is made of gold is known, the difference 
‘being only a name, arising from speech, but the 
truth being that all is gold? 

6. ‘And as, my dear, by one pair of nail-scissors 
all that is made of iron (karshz4yasam) is known, 
the difference being only a name, arising from 
speech, but the truth being that all is iron,—thus, 
my dear, is that instruction.’ 

7. The son said: ‘Surely those venerable men 
(my teachers) did not know that. For if they had 
known it, why should they not have told it me? 
Do you, Sir, therefore tell me that.’ ‘Be it so,’ 
said the father. 

SECOND KHANDA}, 

I. ‘In the beginning,’ my dear, ‘there was that 
only which is (ro ð), one only, without a second. 
Others say, in the beginning there was that only 
which is not (ro uu dv), one only, without a second; 
and from that which is not, that which is was 
born. 

a. ‘But how could it be thus, my dear?’ the 
father continued. ‘How could that which is, be 
born of that which is not? No, my dear, only that 
which is, was in the beginning, one only, without a 
second. 

3s lt thought 2) may I be many, may I grow 
forth. It sent forth fire. 

* Cf. Taitt. Up. II, 6. 

(?)Literally, it saw. This verb is explained as showing that the 
Sat is conscious, not unconscious (bewusst, nicht unbewusst). 

* In other Upanishads the Sat produces first 4k4sa, ether, then 
vayu, air, and then only tegas, fire. Fire is a better rendering 
for tegas than light or heat. See Jacobi, Zeitschrift der Deutschen 
Morgenl. Gesellschaft, XXIX, p. 242. The difficulties, however, of 

94 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

‘That fire' thought, may I be many, may I grow 
forth. It sent forth water ?. | 

‘And therefore whenever anybody anywhere is 
hot and perspires, water is produced on him from 
fire alone. 

4. ‘Water thought, may I be many, may I grow 
forth. It sent forth earth * (food). 

‘Therefore whenever it rains anywhere, most 
food is then produced. From water alone is eatable 
food produced. 

THIRD KHANDA. 

1. ‘Of all living things there are indeed three 
origins only‘, that which springs from an egg 
(oviparous), that which springs from a living being 
(viviparous), and that which springs from a germ. 

2. ‘That Being® (i.e. that which had produced 
fire, water, and earth) thought, let me now enter those 
three beings® (fire, water, earth) with this living 

accurately translating tegas are not removed by rendering it by 
fire, as may be seen immediately afterward in VI, 4, 1, where 
tegas is said to supply the red colour of agni, the burning fire, 
not the god of fire. See also VI, 8,6. In later philosophical 
treatises the meaning of tegas is more carefully determined than 
in the Upanishads. 

1 Really the Sat, in the form of fire. Fire is whatever burns, 
cooks, shines, and is red. 

* By water is meant all that is fluid, and bright in colour. 

* By anna, food, is here meant the earth, and all that is heavy, 
firm, dark in colour. 

4 In the Ait. Up. four are mentioned, andaga, here Andaga, giruga 

(i.e. garayuga), here givaga, svedaga, and udbhigga, svedaga, born 
from heat, being additional. Cf. Atharva-veda I, 12, 1. 

° The text has devata, deity; here used in a very general sense. 
The Sat, though it has produced fire, water, and earth, has not yet 
obiained its wish of becoming many. 



VI PRAPATHAKA, 4 KHANDA, 4. 95 

Self (giva 4tm4)?, and let me then reveal (develop) 
names and forms. 

3. ‘Then that Being having said, Let me make 
each of these three tripartite (so that fire, water, 
and earth should each have itself for its principal 
ingredient, besides an admixture of the other two) 
entered into those three beings (devata) with this 
a self only, and revealed names and forms. 

. ‘He made each of these tripartite; and how 
ine three beings become each of them tripartite, 
that learn from me now, my friend! 

FourtoH KHANDA.. 

1. ‘The red colour of burning fire (agni) is the 
colour of fire, the white colour of fire is the colour 
of water, the black colour of fire the colour of earth. 
Thus vanishes what we call fire, as a mere variety, 
being a name, arising from speech. What is true 
(satya) are the three colours (or forms). 

2. ‘The red colour of the sun (Aditya) is the 
colour of fire, the white of water, the black of earth. 
Thus vanishes what we call the sun, as a mere 
variety, being a name, arising from speech. What 
is true are the three colours. 

3. ‘The red colour of the moon is the colour 
of fire, the white of water, the black of earth. Thus 
vanishes what we call the moon, as a mere variety, 
being a name, arising from speech. What is true 
are the three colours. 

4. ‘The red colour of the lightning is the colour 
of fire, the white of water, the black of earth. Thus 

1! This living self is only a shadow, as it were, of the Highest Self; 
and as the sun, reflected in the water, does not suffer from the 
movement of the water, the real Self does not suffer pleasure or 
pain on earth, but the living self only. 

96 = _KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

vanishes what we call the lightning, as a mere variety, 
being a name, arising from speech. What is true 
are the three colours. 

5. ‘Great householders and great theologians of 
olden times who knew this, have declared the same, 
saying, “ No one can henceforth mention to us any- 
thing which we have not heard, perceived, or known?.” 
Out of these (three colours or forms) they knew all. 

6. ‘Whatever they thought looked red, they knew 
was the colour of fire. Whatever they thought 
looked white, they knew was the colour of water. 
Whatever they thought looked black, they knew 
was the colour of earth. 

7. ‘Whatever they thought was altogether un- 
known, they knew was some combination of those 
three beings (devata). 

‘Now learn from me, my friend, how those three 
beings, when they reach man, become each of them 
tripartite. 

FirtH KHANDA. 

1. ‘The earth (food) when eaten becomes three- 
fold; its grossest portion becomes feces, its middle 
portion flesh, its subtilest portion mind. 

2. ‘Water when drunk becomes threefold; its 
grossest portion becomes water, its middle portion 
blood, its subtilest portion breath. 

3. ‘Fire (i.e. in oil, butter, &c.) when eaten be- 
comes threefold; its grossest portion becomes bone, 
its middle portion marrow, its subtilest portion 
speech 2. 

1 This reminds one of the Aristotelian 8:4 yap ratra kal er rovrov 
rddXa yrwpiferas, GAN’ ob ravra bid rey brroKetperoy. 

3 Food, water, and fire are each to be taken as tripartite; hence 

animals which live on one of the three elements only, still share in 
some measure the qualities of the other elements also. 

VI PRAPATHAKA, 7 KHANDA, 3. 97 

4. ‘For truly, my child, mind comes of earth, 
breath of water, speech of fire.’ 

‘Please, Sir, inform me still more,’ said the son. 

‘Be it so, my child,’ the father replied. 

SIXTH KHANDA. 

1. ‘That which is the subtile portion of curds, 
when churned, rises upwards, and becomes butter. 

2. ‘In the same manner, my child, the subtile 
portion of earth (food), when eaten, rises upwards, 
and becomes mind. | 

3. ‘That which is the subtile portion of water, 
when drunk, rises upwards, and becomes breath. 

4. ‘That which is the subtile portion of fire, when 
consumed, rises upwards, and becomes speech. 

5. ‘For mind, my child, comes of earth, breath 
of water, speech of fire.’ 

‘Please, Sir, inform me still more,’ said the son. 

‘Be it so, my child,’ the father replied. 

SEVENTH KHANDA. 

1. ‘Man (purusha), my son, consists of sixteen 
parts. Abstain from food for fifteen days, but 
drink as much water as you like, for breath comes 
from water, and will not be cut off, if you drink 
water.’ 

2. Svetaketu abstained from food for fifteen days. 
Then he came to his father and said: ‘ What shall I 
say?’ The father said: ‘Repeat the Rz, Yagus, 
and Saman verses.’ He replied: ‘ They do not occur 
to me, Sir.’ 

3. The father said to him: ‘As of a great lighted 
fire one coal only of the size of a firefly may be left, 
which would not burn much more than this (i.e. very 

[3drnis book was downloaded'from www.holybooks.com : 

98 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

little), thus, my dear son, one part only of the sixteen 
parts (of you) is left, and therefore with that one part 
+ do not remember the Vedas. Go and eat! 
‘Then wilt thou understand me.’ Then Sve- 
ine ate, and afterwards approached his father. 
-4 And whatever his father asked him, he knew it all 
by heart. Then his father said to him: 

5. ‘As of a great lighted fire one -coal of the 
size of a firefly, if left, may be made to blaze up 
again by putting grass upon it, and will thus burn 
more than this, 

6, ‘Thus, my dear son, there was one part of the 
sixteen parts left to you, and that, lighted up with 
food, burnt up, and by it you remember now 
the Vedas.’ After that, he understood what his 
father meant when he said: ‘ Mind, my son, comes 
from food, breath from water, speech from fire. He 
understood what he said, yea, he understood it!. 

EIGHTH KHANDA. 

1. Udddlaka Arumi said to his son Svetaketu: 
‘Learn from me the true nature of sleep (svapna). 
When a man sleeps here, then, my dear son, he 
becomes united with the True’, he is gone to his 

1 The repetition shows that the teaching of the Trivr:tkaraaa, 
the tripartite nature of things, is ended. 

2 The deep sushupta sleep is meant, in which personal con. 
sciousness is lost, and the self for a time absorbed in the Highest 
Self. Sleep is produced by fatigue. Speech, mind, and the senses 
rest, breath only remains awake, and the giva, the living soul, in 
order to recover from his fatigue, returns for a while to his true 
Self (Atma). The Sat must be taken as a substance, nay, as the 
highest substance or subject, the Brahman. The whole purpose 
of the Upanishad is obscured if we translate sat or satyam by truth, 
instead of the True, the true one, ro rros dp. 

VI PRAPATHAKA, 8 KHANDA, 4. 99 

own (Self). Therefore they say, svapiti, he sleeps, 
because he is gone (apita) to his own (sva)}. 

2. ‘As a bird when tied by a string flies first 
in every direction, and finding no rest anywhere, 
settles down at last on the very place where it is 
fastened, exactly in the same manner, my son, that 
mind (the giva, or living Self in the mind, see VI, 
3, 2), after flying in every direction, and finding no 
rest anywhere, settles down on breath?; for indeed, 
my son, mind is fastened to breath. 

3. ‘Learn from me, my son, what are hunger 
and thirst. When a man is thus said to be 
hungry, water is carrying away (digests) what has 
been eaten by him. Therefore as they speak of 
a cow-leader (go-ndya), a horse-leader (asva-naya), a 
man-leader (purusha-ndya), so they call water (which 
digests food and causes hunger) food-leader (asa- 
naya). Thus (by food digested &c.), my son, know 
this offshoot (the body) to be brought forth, for 
this (body) could not be without a root (cause). 

4. ‘And where could its root be except in food 
(earth)*? And in the same manner, my son, as 

1 This is one of the many recognised plays on words in the 
Upanishads and the Vedanta philosophy. Svapiti, he sleeps, stands 
for sva (his own), i.e. the self, and apfta, gone to. 

2 The commentator takes preza here in the sense of Sat, which 
it often has elsewhere. If so, this illustration would have the same 
object as the preceding one. If we took prana in the sense of 
breath, breath being the result of water, this paragraph might be 
taken to explain the resignation of the living Self to its bondage to 
breath, while on earth. 

3 That food is the root of the body is shown by the commen- 
tator in the following way: Food when softened by water and 
digested becomes a fluid, blood (sonita). From it comes flesh, 
from flesh fat, from fat bones, from bones marrow, from marrow 
seed. Food eaten by a woman becomes equally blood (lohita), 

This book was dewalonded from www.holybooks.com : 

100 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

food (earth) too is an offshoot, seek after its root, 
viz. water. And as water too is an offshoot, seek 
after its root, viz. fire. And as fire too is an off- 
shoot, seek after its root, viz. the True. Yes, all 
these creatures, my son, have their root in the True, 
they dwell in the True, they rest in the True. 

5. ‘When a man is thus said to be thirsty, fire 
carries away what has been drunk by him. There- 
fore as they speak of a cow-leader (go-naya), of a 
horse-leader (asva-naya), of a man-leader (purusha- 
naya), so they call fire udany4, thirst, i.e. water- 
leader. Thus (by water digested &c.), my son, 
know this offshoot (the body) to be brought forth : 
this (body) could not be without a root (cause). 

6. ‘And where could its root be except in 
water? As water is an offshoot, seek after its 
root, viz. fre. As fire is an offshoot, seek after its 
root, viz. the True. Yes, all these creatures, O son, 
have their root in the True, they dwell in the True, 
they rest in the True. 

‘And how these three beings (devata), fire, water, 
earth, O son, when they reach man, become each of 
them tripartite, has been said before (VI, 4, 7). When 
a man departs from hence, his speech! is merged 

and from seed and blood combined the new body is produced. 
We must always have before us the genealogical table :— 
Sat, rd dy, 

| 
Tegas (fire) = Vak (speech). 
Ap (water) =Prama (breath). 

Anna (earth) = Manas (mind). 
1 If a man dies, the first thing which his friends say is, He 
speaks no more. Then, he understands no more. Then, he 
moves no more. Then, he is cold. 

VI PRAPATHAKA, 9 KHANDA, 4. IOI 

in his mind, his mind in his breath, his breath in 
heat (fire), heat in the Highest Being. 

7. ‘Now that which is that subtile essence (the 
root of all), in it all that exists has its self. It is the 
True. It is the Self, and thou, O Svetaketu, art it.’ 

‘Please, Sir, inform me still more,’ said the son. 

‘ Be it so, my child,’ the father replied. 

NintH KHANDA. 

I. ‘As the bees', my son, make honey by col- 
lecting the juices of distant trees, and reduce the 
juice into one form, 

2. ‘And as these juices have no discrimination, 
so that they might say, I am the juice of this tree 
or that, in the same manner, my son, all these crea- 
tures, when they have become merged in the True 
(either in deep sleep or in death), know not that 
they are merged in the True. 

3. ‘ Whatever these creatures are here, whether 
a lion, or a wolf, or a boar, or a worm, or a midge, 
or a gnat, or a musquito, that they become again 
and again. 

4. ‘Now that which is that subtile essence, in it 
all that exists has its self. It is the True. It is 
the Self, and thou, O Svetaketu, art it.’ 

‘Please, Sir, inform me still more,’ said the son. 

‘Be it so, my child,’ the father replied. 

1 At the beginning of each chapter the commentator supplies 
the question which the son is supposed to have asked his father. 
The first is: All creatures falling every day into deep sleep (su- 
shupti) obtain thereby the Sat, the true being. How is it then 
that they do not know that they obtain the Sat every day? 

102 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

TentH Kuawnopa}, 

1. ‘These rivers, my son, run, the eastern (like the 
Ganga) toward the east, the western (like the Sindhu) 
toward the west. They go from sea to sea (i.e. the 
clouds lift up the water from the sea to the sky, and 
send it back as rain to the sea). They become indeed 
sea. And as those rivers, when they are in the sea, 
do not know, I am this or that river, 

2. ‘In the same manner, my son, all these crea- 
tures, when they have come back from the True, 
know not that they have come back from the True. 
Whatever these creatures are here, whether a lion, 
or a wolf, or a boar, or a worm, or a midge, or a 
gnat, or_a musquito, that they become again and 
again. 

3. ‘That which is that subtile essence, in it all 
that exists has its self. It is the True. It is the 
Self, and thou, O Svetaketu, art it.’ 

‘Please, Sir, inform me still more,’ said the son. 

‘ Be it so, my child,’ the father replied. 

ELEVENTH KHAwpa~ 2, 

1. ‘If some one were to strike at the root of this 
large tree here, it would bleed, but live. If he were 
to strike at its stem, it would bleed, but live. If he 
were to strike at its top, it would bleed, but live. 

1 The next question which the son is supposed to have asked is: 
If a man who has slept in his own house, rises and goes to another 
village, he knows that he has come from his own house. Why 
then do people not know that they have come from the Sat? 

* The next question is: Waves, foam, and bubbles arise from the 
water, and when they merge again in the water, they are gone. 
How is it that living beings, when in sleep or death they are 
merged again in the Sat, are not destroyed? 

VI PRAPATHAKA, II KHANDA, 3. 103 

Pervaded by the living Self that tree stands firm, 
drinking in its nourishment and rejoicing ; 

2. ‘ But if the life (the living Self) leaves one of 
its branches, that branch withers; if it leaves a 
second, that branch withers; if it leaves a third, that 
branch withers. If it leaves the whole tree, the 
whole tree withers! In exactly the same manner, 
my son, know this.’ Thus he spoke: 

3. ‘This (body) indeed withers and dies when the 
living Self has left it; the living Self dies not. 

‘That which is that subtile essence, in it all that 
exists has its self. It is the True. It is the Self, 
and thou, Svetaketu, art it.’ 

‘Please, Sir, inform me still more,’ said the son. 

‘Be it so, my child, the father replied. 

1 The commentator remarks that according to the Veda, trees 
are conscious, while Buddhists and followers of Kay4da hold them 
to be unconscious. They live, because one sees how their sap 
runs and how it dries up, just as one sees the sap in a living body, 
which, as we saw, was produced by food and water. Therefore 
the simile holds good. ‘The life, or, more correctly, the liver, the 
living Self, pervades the tree, as it pervades man, when it has 
entered the organism which produces breath, mind, and speech. 
If any accident happens to a branch, the living Self draws himself 
away from that branch, and then the branch withers. The sap 
which caused the living Self to remain, goes, and the living Self goes 
away with it. The same applies to the whole tree. The tree dies 
when the living Self leaves it, but the living Self does not die; it 
only leaves an abode which it had before occupied. Some other 
illustrations, to show that the living Self remains, are added by the 
commentator: First, with regard to the living Self being the same 
when it awakes from deep sleep (sushupti), he remarks that we 
remember quite well that we have left something unfinished before 
we fell asleep. And then with regard to the living Self being the 
same when it awakes from death to a new life, he shows that crea- 
tures, as soon as they are born take the breast, and exhibit terror, 
which can only be explained, as he supposes, by their possessing a 
recollection of a former state of existence. 

104 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

TWELFTH KHANDA.:. 

1. ‘Fetch me from thence a fruit of the Nyagrodha 
tree.’ 

‘Here is one, Sir.’ 

‘ Break it.’ 

‘It is broken, Sir.’ 

‘What do you see there ?’ 

‘These seeds, almost infinitesimal.’ 

‘Break one of them,’ 

‘It is broken, Sir. 

‘What do you see there?’ 

‘Not anything, Sir.’ 

2. The father said : ‘ My son, that subtile essence 
which you do not perceive there, of that very 
essence this great Nyagrodha tree exists. 

3. ‘Believe it, my son. That which is the subtile 
essence, in it all that exists has its self. It is the 
True. It is the Self, and thou, O Svetaketu, art it.’ 

‘Please, Sir, inform me still more,’ said the son. 

‘Be it so, my child,’ the father replied. 

THIRTEENTH KHANDA?, 

1. ‘Place this salt in water, and then wait on 
me in the morning.’ 

The son did as he was commanded. 

The father said to him: ‘Bring me the salt, which 
you placed in the water last night.’ 

1 The question which the son is supposed to have asked is: 
How can this universe which has the form and name of earth &c. 
be produced from the Sat which is subtile, and has neither form 
nor name ? 

2 The question here is supposed to have been: If the Sat is the 
root of all that exists, why is it not perceived? 

VI PRAPATHAKA, I4 KHANDA, I. 105 

The son having looked for it, found it not, for, 
of course, it was melted. : 

2. The father said: ‘Taste it from the surface 
of the water. How is it?’ 

The son replied: ‘It is salt.’ 

‘Taste it from the middle. How is it ?’ 

The son replied: ‘It is salt? 

‘Taste it from the bottom. How is it?’ 

The son replied: ‘It is salt.’ 

The father said: ‘Throw it away! and then wait 
on me.’ 

He did so; but salt exists for ever. 

Then the father said: ‘ Here also, in this body, 
forsooth, you do not perceive the True (Sat), my 
son; but there indeed it is. 

3. ‘ That which is the subtile essence, in it all that 
exists has its self, It is the True. It is the Self, 
and thou, O Svetaketu, art it. 

‘Please, Sir, inform me still more,’ said the son. 

‘ Be it so, my child,’ the father replied. 

FOURTEENTH KHANDA?. 

1. ‘As one might lead a person with his eyes 
covered away from the Gandharas?, and leave him 

1 Read abhiprasya, which is evidently intended by the com- 
mentary: abhiprayasya parityagya. See B. R. Sanskrit Dic- 
tionary, s$. v. 

2 The question here asked is: The salt, though no longer per- 
ceptible by means of sight or touch, could be discovered by taste. 
Then how can the Sat be discovered, although it is imperceptible 
by all the senses ? 

* The Gandharas, but rarely mentioned in the Rig-veda and 
the Ait. Brahmaza, have left their name in Kav8apos and Candahar. 
The fact of their name being evidently quite familiar to the author 
of the Upanishad might be used to prove either its antiquity or its 
Northern origin. 

a t? 
arly eo 
+4 

106 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

then in a place where there are no human beings; 
and as that person would turn towards the east, or 
the north, or the west, and shout, “I have been 
brought here with my eyes covered, I have been 
left here with my eyes covered,” 

2. ‘And as thereupon some one might loose his 
bandage and say to him, “Go in that direction, it 
is Gandhara, go in that direction;” and as there- 
upon, having been informed and being able to judge 
for himself, he would by asking his way from village 
to village arrive at last at Gandhara,—in exactly the 
same manner does a man, who meets with a teacher 
to inform him, obtain the true knowledge !. For him 

* Tedious as the commentator is in general, he is sometimes almost 
eloquent in bringing out all that is implied or supposed to be implied 
in the sacred text. He explains the last simile as follows: A man 
was carried away by robbers from his own country. After his eyes 
had been covered, he was taken to a forest full of terrors and dangers 
arising from tigers, robbers, &c. Not knowing where he was, and 
suffering from hunger and thirst, he began to cry, wishing to be de- 
livered from his bonds. Then a man took pity on him and removed 
his bonds, and when he had returned to his home, he was happy. 
Next follows the application. Our real home is the True (Sat), the 
Self of the world. The forest into which we are driven is the 
body, made of the three elements, fire, water, earth, consisting of 
blood, flesh, bones, &c., and liable to cold, heat, and many other 
evils. The bands with which our eyes are covered are our desires 
for many things, real or unreal, such as wife, children, cattle, &c., 
while the robbers by whom we are driven into the forest are our 
good and evil deeds. Then we cry and say: ‘I am the son of so 
and so, these are my relatives, I am happy, I am miserable, I am 
foolish, I am wise, I am just, I am born, I am dead, I am old, 
I am wretched, my son is dead, my fortune is gone, J am undone, 
how shall I live, where shall I go, who will save me?’ These and 
hundreds and thousands of other evils are the bands which blind 
us. Then, owing to some supererogatory good works we may 
have done, we suddenly meet a man who knows the Self of 
Brahman, whose own bonds have been ‘broken, who takes pity 
on us and shows us the way to see the evil which attaches to all 



VI PRAPATHAKA, I5 KHANDA, I. 107 

there is only delay so long as he is not delivered 
(from the body); then he will be perfect. 

3. ‘That which is the subtile essence, in it all 
that exists has its self. It is the True. It is the 
Self, and thou, O Svetaketu, art it.’ 

‘Please, Sir, inform me still more,’ said the son. 

‘Be it so, my child,’ the father replied. 

FIFTEENTH KHANDA 2, 

1. ‘If a man is ill, his relatives assemble round 
him and ask: “ Dost thou know me? Dost thou 
know me?” Now as long as his speech is not 

that we love in this world. We then withdraw ourselves from all 
worldly pleasures. We learn that we are not mere creatures of 
the world, the son of so and so, &c., but that we are that which is 
the True (Sat). The bands of our ignorance and blindness are 
removed, and, like the man of Gandh4ra, we arrive at our own 
home, the Self, or the True. Then we are happy and blessed. 

1 The last words are really— for him there is only delay so long 
as I shall not be delivered ; then I shall be perfect.’ This requires 
some explanation. First of all, the change from the third to the 
first person, is best explained by assuming that at the point where 
all individuality vanishes, the father, as teacher, identifies himself 
with the person of whom he is speaking. 

The delay (the Aira or kshepa) of which he speaks is the time 
which passes between the attainment of true knowledge and death, 
or freedom from the effects of actions performed before the at- 
tainment of knowledge. The actions which led to our present 
embodiment must be altogether consumed, before the body can 
perish, and then only are we free. As to any actions performed 
after the attainment of knowledge, they do not count; otherwise 
there would be a new embodiment, and the attainment of even true 
knowledge would never lead to final deliverance. 

2 The question supposed to be asked is: By what degrees a man, 
who has been properly instructed in the knowledge of Brahman, 
obtains the Sat, or returns to the True. To judge from the text 
both he who knows the True and he who does not, reach, when they 
die, the Sat, passing from speech to mind and breath and heat (fire). 
But whereas he who knows, remains in the Sat, they who do not 

108 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

merged in his mind, his mind in breath, breath in 
heat (fire), heat in the Highest Being (devata), he 
knows them. 

2. ‘But when his speech is merged in his mind, 
his mind in breath, breath in heat (fire), heat in the 
Highest Being, then he knows them not. 

‘That which is the subtile essence, in it all that 
exists has its self. It is the True. It is the Self, 
and thou, O Svetaketu, art it.’ 

‘Please, Sir, inform me still more,’ said the son. 

‘ Be it so, my child, the father replied. 

SIXTEENTH KHANDA }, 

1. ‘My child, they bring a man hither whom they 
have taken by the hand, and they say: “ He has 
taken something, he has committed a theft.” (When 

know, return again to a new form of existence. It is important to 
observe that the commentator denies that he who knows, passes at 
his death through the artery of the head to the sun, and then to the 
Sat. He holds that with him who knows there is no further cause 
for delay, and that as soon as he dies, he returns to the Sat. 

1 The next question is: Why does he who knows, on obtaining 
the Sat, not return, while he who does not know, though obtaining 
the Sat in death, returns? An illustration is chosen which is 
intended to show how knowledge produces a material effect. The 
belief in the efficacy of ordeals must have existed at the time, and 
appealing to that belief, the teacher says that the man who knows 
himself guilty, is really burnt by the heated iron, while the man 
who knows himself innocent, is not. In the same manner the man 
who knows his Self to be the true Self, on approaching after death 
the true Self, is not repelled and sent back into a new existence, 
while he who does not know, is sent back into a new round of 
births and deaths. The man who tells a falsehood about himself, 
loses his true Self and is burnt; the man who has a false concep- 
tion about his Self, loses likewise his true Self, and not knowing 
the true Self, even though approaching it in death, he has to suffer 
till he acquires some day the true knowledge. 

aa 

VII PRAPATHAKA, I KHANDA, 2. 109 

he denies, they say), “ Heat the hatchet for him.” 
If he committed the theft, then he makes himself to 
be what he is not. Then the false-minded, having 
covered his true Self by a falsehood, grasps the 
heated hatchet—he is burnt, and he is killed. 

2. ‘But if he did not commit the theft, then he 
makes himself to be what he is. Then the true- 
minded, having covered his true Self by truth, 
grasps the heated hatchet—he is not burnt, and he 
_is delivered. 

‘As that (truthful) man is not burnt, thus has all 
that exists its self in That. It is the True. It is 
the Self, and thou, O Svetaketu, art it? He under- 
stood what he said, yea, he understood it. 

SEVENTH PRAPA7ZAAKA. 

First KHANDA. 

1, Narada approached Sanatkumara and said, 
‘Teach me, Sir!’ Sanatkum4ra said to him: ‘Please 
to tell me what you know; afterward I shall tell you 
what is beyond.’ 

2. Narada said: ‘I know the Azg-veda, Sir, the 
Yagur-veda, the SAma-veda, as the fourth the Athar- 
vaza, as the fifth the Itihasa-puraza (the Bharata) ; 
the Veda of the Vedas (grammar); the Pitrya (the 
fules for the sacrifices for the ancestors); the Rasi 
(the science of numbers); the Daiva (the science of 
portents); the Nidhi (the science of time); the 
Vakovakya (logic); the Ekayana (ethics); the Deva- 
vidya (etymology) ; the Brahma-vidy4 (pronunciation, 
siksha, ceremonial, kalpa, prosody, ##andas); the 
Bhita-vidya (the science of demons); the Kshatra- 



110 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

vidya (the science of weapons) ; the Nakshatra-vidya 
(astronomy); the Sarpa and Devagana-vidya (the 
science of serpents or poisons, and the sciences of 
the genii, such as the making of perfumes, dancing, 
singing, playing, and other fine arts)’. All this 
I know, Sir. 

3. ‘But, Sir, with all this I know the Mantras only, 
the sacred books, I do not know the Self. I have 
heard from men like you, that he who knows the 
Self overcomes grief. I am in grief. Do, Sir, help 
me over this grief of mine.’ 

Sanatkumara said to him: ‘Whatever you have 
read, is only a name. 

4. ‘A name is the Azg-veda, Yagur-veda, Sama- 
veda, and as the fourth the Atharvama, as the fifth 
the Itih4sa-purdza, the Veda of the Vedas, the 
Pitrya, the Rasi, the Daiva, the Nidhi, the Vako- 
vakya, the Ekayana, the Deva-vidya, the Brahma- 
vidy4, the Bhita-vidya, the Kshatra-vidya, the Na- 
kshatra-vidyA, the Sarpa and Devagana-vidyd. All 
these are a name only. Meditate on the name. 

5. ‘He who meditates on the name as Brahman 2, 

1 This passage, exhibiting the sacred literature as known at the 
time, should be compared with the Brihadaranyaka, II, 4,10. The 
explanation of the old titles rests on the authority of Sankara, 
and he is not always consistent. See Colebrooke, Miscellaneous 
Essays, 1873, II, p. 10. 

2 Why a man who knows the Veda should not know the Self, 
while in other places it is said that the Veda teaches the Self, is 
well illustrated by the commentary. If a royal procession ap- 
proaches, he says, then, though we do not see the king, because 
he is hidden by flags, parasols, &c., yet we say, there is the king. 
And if we ask who is the king, then again, though we cannot see 
him and point him out, we can say, at least, that he is different 
from all that is seen. The Self is hidden in the Veda as a king 
is hidden in a royal procession. 

VII PRAPATHAKA, 2 KHANDA, 2. III 

is, aS it were, lord and master as far as the name 
reaches—he who meditates on the name as Brah- 
man.’ 
‘Sir, is there something better than a name ?’ ` 
‘Yes, there is something better than a name.’ 

‘ Sir, tell it me.’ 

SECOND KHANDA. 

1. ‘Speech is better than a name. Speech makes 
us understand the Azg-veda, Yagur-veda, Sama-veda, 
and as the fourth the Atharvama, as the fifth the 
Itihd4sa-puraza, the Veda of the Vedas, the Pitrya, 
the Rasi, the Daiva, the Nidhi, the Vakovakya, the 
Ekayana, the Deva-vidya, the Brahma-vidy4, the 
Kshatra-vidya, the Nakshatra-vidyd, the Sarpa and 
Devagana-vidy4; heaven, earth, air, ether, water, 
fire, gods, men, cattle, birds, herbs, trees, all 
beasts down to worms, midges, and ants; what is 
right and what is wrong; what is true and what 
is false; what is good and what is bad; what is 
pleasing and what is not pleasing. For if there 
were no speech, neither right nor wrong would be 
known :, neither the true nor the false, neither the 
good nor the bad, neither the pleasant nor the 
unpleasant. Speech makes us understand all this. 
Meditate on speech. 

2. ‘He who meditates on speech as Brahman, is, 
as it were, lord and master as far as speech reaches— 
he who meditates on speech as Brahman.’ 

‘Sir, is there something better than speech ?’ 

‘Yes, there is something better than speech.’ 

‘Sir, tell it me.’ 

1 The commentator explains vyagi4payishyat by avigilatam 
abhavishyat. Possibly hrzdayagiio stands for hrdayagiiam. 

112 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. d 

THIRD KHANDA. 

1. ‘Mind (manas) is better than speech. For as 
the closed fist holds two amalaka or two kola or two 
aksha fruits, thus does mind hold speech and name. 
For if a man is minded in his mind to read the 
sacred hymns, he reads them ; if he is minded in 
his mind to perform any actions, he performs them ; 
if he is minded to wish for sons and cattle, he 
wishes for them; if he is minded to wish for this 
world and the other, he wishes for them. For mind 
is indeed the self}, mind is the world, mind is Brah- 
man. Meditate on the mind. 

2. ‘He who meditates on the mind as Brahman, 
is, as it were, lord and master as far as the mind 
reaches—he who meditates on the mind as Brahman’ 

‘Sir, is there something better than mind ?’ 

‘Yes, there is something better than mind.’ 

‘Sir, tell it me.’ 

FourtH KHANDA. 

1. ‘Will? (sankalpa) is better than mind. For 
when a man wills, then he thinks in his mind, then 
he sends forth speech, and he sends it forth in a 
name. In a name the sacred hymns are contained, 
in the sacred hymns all sacrifices. 

2. ‘All these therefore (beginning with mind and 

1 The commentator explains this by saying that, without the 
instrument of the mind, the Self cannot act or enjoy. 

* Sankalpa is elsewhere defined as a modification of manas. 
The commentator says that, like thinking, it is an activity of the 
inner organ. It is difficult to find any English term exactly corres- 
ponding to sankalpa. Rajendralal Mitra translates it by will, but it 
implies not only will, but at the same time conception, determina- 
tion, and desire. 

VII PRAPATHAKA, 5 KHANDA, I. I13 

ending in sacrifice) centre in will, consist of will, 
abide in will. Heaven and earth willed, air and 
ether willed, water and fire willed. Through the 
will of heaven and earth &c. rain wills; through 
the will of rain food wills; through the will of food 
the vital airs will; through the will of the vital airs 
the sacred hymns will; through the will of the sacred 
hymns the sacrifices will; through the will of the 
sacrifices the world (as their reward) wills; through 
the will of the world everything wills !. This is will. 
Meditate on will. 

3. ‘He who meditates on will as Brahman he, 
being himself safe, firm, and undistressed, obtains 
the safe, firm, and undistressed worlds which he has 
willed; he is, as it were, lord and master as far as 
will reaches—he who meditates on will as Brahman.’ 

‘Sir, is there something better than will?’ 

‘Yes, there is something better than will.’ 

‘ Sir, tell it-me.’ 

FirTH KHANDA. 

1. ‘Consideration (Aitta)? is better than will. For 
when a man considers, then he wills, then he thinks 
in his mind, then he sends forth speech, and he 

1 This paragraph is obscure. The text seems doubtful, for 
instance, in samak/:patam, samakalpetim, and samakalpatam. 
Then the question is the exact meaning of samk/:ptyai, which 
must be taken as an instrumental case. What is intended is that, 
without rain, food is impossible &c. or inconceivable ; but the text 
says, ‘ By the will of rain food wills,’ &c. Will seems almost to be 
taken here in the sense in which modern philosophers use it, as a 
kind of creative will. By the will of rain food wills, would mean, 
that first rain wills and exists, and afterwards the vital airs will 
and exist, &c. 

* Kitta, thought, implies here consideration and reflection. 

[3] This book was dowabadd from www.holybooks.com : 

114 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

sends it forth in a name. In a name the sacred 
hymns are contained, in the sacred hymns all 
sacrifices. 

2. ‘All these (beginning with mind and ending 
in sacrifice) centre in consideration, consist of con- 
sideration, abide in consideration. Therefore if a 
man is inconsiderate, even if he possesses much 
learning, people say of him, he is nothing, whatever 
he may know; for, if he were learned, he would not be 
so inconsiderate. But if a man is considerate, even 
though he knows but little, to him indeed do people 
listen gladly. Consideration is the centre, considera- 
tion is the self, consideration is the support of all 
these. Meditate on consideration. 

3. ‘He who meditates on consideration as Brah- 
man, he, being himself safe, firm, and undistressed, 
obtains the safe, firm, and undistressed worlds which 
he has considered; he is, as it were, lord and master 
as far as consideration reaches—he who meditates 
on consideration as Brahman.’ 

‘Sir, is there something better than consideration ?’ 

‘Yes, there is something better than considera- 
tion.’ 

‘Sir, tell it me.’ 

SixtH KHANDA. 

1, ‘Reflection (dhydna)! is better than considera- 
tion. The earth reflects, as it were, and thus does 
the sky, the heaven, the water, the mountains, gods 
and men. Therefore those who among men obtain 

4 Reflection is concentration of all our thoughts on one object, 
ek&grata. And as a man who reflects and meditates on the highest 
objects acquires thereby repose, becomes firm and immovable, so 
the earth is supposed to be in repose and immovable, as it were, by 
reflection and meditation. 

VII PRAPATHAKA, 7 KHANDA, 2. 115 

greatness here on earth, seem to have obtained a 
part of the object of reflection (because they show 
a certain repose of manner). Thus while small and 
vulgar people are always quarrelling, abusive, and 
slandering, great men seem to have obtained a part 
of the reward of reflection. Meditate on reflection. 
2. ‘He who meditates on reflection as Brahman, 
is lord and master, as it were, as far as reflec- 
tion reaches—he who meditates on reflection as 
Brahman.’ 
‘Sir, is there something better than reflection ?’ 
‘Yes, there is something better than reflection.’ 
‘Sir, tell it me.’ 

SEVENTH KHANDA. 

1. ‘ Understanding (vigfiana) is better than reflec- 
tion. Through understanding we understand the 
Rig-veda, the Yagur-veda, the Sama-veda, and as 
the fourth the Atharvaza, as the fifth the Itihdsa- 
purdza!, the Veda of the Vedas, the Pitrya, the 
RAsi, the Daiva, the Nidhi, the VAkovdkya, the 
Ekayana, the Deva-vidy4, the Brahma-vidya, the 
Bhita-vidy4, the Kshatra-vidy4, the Nakshatra-vidyd, 
the Sarpa and Devagana-vidy4, heaven, earth, air, 
ether, water, fire, gods, men, cattle, birds, herbs, trees, 
all beasts down to worms, midges, and ants; what is 
right and what is wrong; what is true and what is 
false; what is good and what is bad; what is pleas- 
ing and what is not pleasing; food and savour, this 
world and that, all this we understand through under- 
standing. Meditate on understanding. 

2. ‘He who meditates on understanding as Brah- 
man, reaches the worlds where there is understanding 

1 See before, p. rog. 

This book was aewnloaded oa www.holybooks.com : 

116 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

and knowledge !; he is, as it were, lord and master 
as far as understanding reaches—he who meditates 
on understanding as Brahman.’ 
‘Sir, is there something better than understanding ?’ 
‘Yes, there is something better than understanding.’ 
‘Sir, tell it me.’ 

EIGHTH KHANDA. 

1. ‘Power (bala) is better than understanding. 
One powerful man shakes a hundred men of under- 
standing. Ifa mari is powerful, he becomes a rising 
man. If he rises, he becomes a man who visits 
wise people. If he visits, he becomes a follower of 
wise people. If he follows them, he becomes a 
seeing, a hearing, a perceiving, a knowing, a doing, 
an understanding man. By power the earth stands 
firm, and the sky, and the heaven, and the moun- 
tains, gods and men, cattle, birds, herbs, trees, all 
beasts down to worms, midges, and ants; by power 
the world stands firm. Meditate on power. 

2. ‘He who meditates on power as Brahman, 
is, as it were, lord and master as far as power 
reaches—he who meditates on power as Brahman.’ 

‘Sir, is there something better than power ?’ 

‘Yes, there is something better than power.’ 

‘Sir, tell it me.’ 

NintH KHANDA. 

1. ‘Food (anna) is better than power. Therefore 
if a man abstain from food for ten days, though he 
live, he would be unable to see, hear, perceive, 
think, act, and understand. But when he obtains 

t! The commentator takes vignana here as understanding of 
sacred books, gfiana as cleverness with regard to other subjects. 

VII PRAPATHAKA, II KHANDA, 9. 117 

food, he is able to see, hear, perceive, think, act, 
` and understand. Meditate on food. 

2. ‘He who meditates on food as Brahman, 
obtains the worlds rich in food and drink; he is, 
as it were, lord and master as far as food reaches— 
he who meditates on food as Brahman.’ 

‘Sir, is there something better than food ?’ 

‘Yes, there is something better than food.’ 

‘Sir, tell it me.’ 

TENTH KHANDA. 

1. ‘Water (ap) is better than food. Therefore if 
there is not sufficient rain, the vital spirits fail from 
fear that there will be less food. But if there is 
sufficient rain, the vital spirits rejoice, because there 
will be much food. This water, on assuming dif- 
ferent forms, becomes this earth, this sky, this 
heaven, the mountains, gods and men, cattle, birds, 
herbs and trees, all beasts down to worms, midges, 
and ants. Water indeed assumes all these forms. 
Meditate on water. 

2. ‘He who meditates on water as Brahman, 
obtains all wishes, he becomes satisfied; he is, as 
it were, lord and master as far as water reaches— 
he who meditates on water as Brahman.’ 

‘Sir, is there something better than water ?’ 

‘Yes, there is something better than water.’ 

‘ Sir, tell it me.’ 

ELEVENTH KHANDA. 

1. ‘Fire (tegas) is better than water. For fire 
united with air, warms the ether. Then people say, 
It is hot, it burns, it will rain. Thus does fire, after 
showing this sign (itself) first, create water. And 

118 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

thus again thunderclaps come with lightnings, flash- 
ing upwards and across the sky. Then people say, 
There is lightning and thunder, it will rain. Then 
also does fire, after showing this sign first, create 
water. Meditate on fire. 

2. ‘He who meditates on fire as Brahman, 
obtains, resplendent himself, resplendent worlds, 
full of light and free of darkness; he is, as it were, 
lord and master as far as fire reaches—he who 
meditates on fire as Brahman.’ 

‘Sir, is there something better than fire ?’ 

‘Yes, there is something better than fire.’ 

‘Sir, tell it me.’ 

TWELFTH KHANDA. 

1. ‘Ether (or space) is better than fire. For in 
the ether exist both sun and moon, the lightning, 
stars, and fire (agni). Through the ether we call, 
through the ether we hear, through the ether we 
answer!. In the ether or space we rejoice (when 
we are together), and rejoice not (when we are 
separated). In the ether everything is born, and 
towards the ether everything tends when it is born’. 
Meditate on ether. 

2. ‘He who meditates on ether as Brahman, 
obtains the worlds of ether and of light, which are 
free from pressure and pain, wide and spacious’; 
he is, as it were, lord and master as far as ether 
reaches—he who meditates on ether as Brahman.’ 

‘Sir, is there something better than ether ?’ 

1 Cf. Kh. Up. IV, 5, 1. 
2 The seed grows upwards towards the ether; not downwards. 

3 Cf. Kash. Up. II, rr. 

VIL PRAPATHAKA, 14 KHANDA, 2. 119 

‘Yes, there is something better than ether.’ 
‘Sir, tell it me.’ 

THIRTEENTH KHANDA. 

1. ‘Memory! (smara) is better than ether. There- 
fore where many are assembled together, if they 
have no memory, they would hear no one, they 
would not perceive, they would not understand. 
Through memory we know our sons, through 
memory our cattle. Meditate on memory. 

2. ‘He who meditates on memory as Brahman, 
is, as it were, lord and master as far as memory 
reaches—he who ‘meditates on memory as Brahman.’ 
' ‘Sir, is there something better than memory ?’ 

‘Yes, there is something better than memory.’ 

‘Sir, tell it me.’ 

FOURTEENTH KHANDA. 

1. ‘Hope (asa) is better than memory. Fired 
by hope does memory read the sacred hymns, per- 
form sacrifices, desire sons and cattle, desire this 
world and the other. Meditate on hope. 

2. ‘He who meditates on hope as Brahman, all 
his desires are fulfilled by hope, his prayers are 
not in vain; he is, as it were, lord and master 
as far as hope reaches—he who meditates on hope 
as Brahman.’ 

‘Sir, is there something better than hope ?’ 

‘Yes, there is something better than hope.’ 

‘Sir, tell it me.’ 

1 The apparent distance between ether and memory is bridged 
over by the commentator pointing out that without memory every- 
thing would be as if it were not, so far as we are concerned. 



120 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

FIFTEENTH KHANDA. 

I. ‘Spirit! (praza) is better than hope. As the 
spokes of a wheel hold to the nave’, so does all 
this (beginning with names and ending in hope) hold 
to spirit. That spirit moves by the spirit, it gives 
spirit to the spirit. Father means spirit, mother 
is spirit, brother is spirit, sister is spirit, tutor is 
spirit, Brahmaza is spirit. 

2. ‘For if one says anything unbecoming to a 
father, mother, brother, sister, tutor or Brahmaza, 
then people say, Shame on thee! thou hast offended 
thy father, mother, brother, sister, tutor, or a 
Brahmaza. 

3. ‘But, if after the spirit has departed from 
them, one shoves them together with a poker, and 
burns them to pieces, no one would say, Thou of- 
fendest thy father, mother, brother, sister, tutor or 
a Brahmama. 

4. ‘Spirit then is all this. He who sees this, 
perceives this, and understands this, becomes an 
ativadin®. If people say to such a man, Thou 

1 Prana is used here in a technical sense. It does not mean 
simply breath, but the spirit, the conscious self (pragfiatman) 
which, as we saw, enters the body in order to reveal the whole 
variety of forms and names. It is in one sense the mukhya prama. 

* The commentary carries the simile still further. The felloe, 
he says, holds to the spokes, the spokes to the nave. So do the 
bhutamatras hold to the pragfiamatras, and these to the praaa. 

> One who declares something that goes beyond all the declara- 
tions made before, beginning with the declaration that names are 
Brahman, and ending with the declaration that hope is Brahman ;— 
one who knows that prama, spirit, the conscious self, is Brahman. 
This declaration represents the highest point reached by ordinary 
people, but Narada wishes to go beyond. In the Mundaka, III, 
I, 4, an ativadin is contrasted with one who really knows the 
highest truth. 

VII PRAPATHAKA, 18 KHANDA, I. 121 

art an ativadin, he may say, I am an ativadin; he 
need not deny it.’ 

SIXTEENTH KHawpA}. 

1. ‘But in reality he is an atividin who declares 
the Highest Being to be the True (Satya, ro ovrws 
ov). 

‘Sir, may I become an ativadin by the True ?’ 

‘But we must desire to know the True.’ 

‘Sir, I desire to know the True.’ 

SEVENTEENTH KHANDA. 

1. ‘When one understands the True, then one 
declares the True. One who does not understand 
it, does not declare the True*% Only he who under- 
stands it, declares the True. This understanding, 
however, we must desire to understand,’ 

‘Sir, I desire to understand it.’ 

EIGHTEENTH KHANDA. 

I. ‘When one perceives, then one understands. 
One who does not perceive, does not understand. 
Only he who perceives, understands. This percep- 
tion, however, we must desire to understand.’ 

‘Sir, I desire to understand it.’ 

1 As Narada asks no further, whether there is anything better, 
higher, truer than praza, he is supposed to be satisfied with his 
belief that praza is the Highest Being. Sanatkumara, however, 
wishes to lead him on to a still higher view; hence the paragraphs 
which follow from 16 to 26. 

23 He would, for instance, call fire real, not knowing that fire is 
only a mixture of the three elements (cf. VI, 4), the rfpatraya, a 
mere variety (vikara), and name (naman). 

122 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

NINETEENTH KHANDA. 

1. ‘When one believes, then one perceives. One 
who does not believe, does not perceive. Only he 
who believes, perceives. This belief, however, we 
must desire to understand.’ 

‘Sir, I desire to understand it.’ 

TWENTIETH KHANDA. 

1. ‘When one attends on a tutor (spiritual guide), 
then one believes. One who does not attend on 
a tutor, does not believe. Only he who attends, 
believes. This attention on a tutor, however, we 
must desire to understand.’ 

‘Sir, I desire to understand it.’ 

TWENTY-FIRST KHANDA. 

1. ‘When one performs all sacred duties !, then 
one attends really on a tutor. One who does not 
perform his duties, does not really attend on a tutor. 
Only he who performs his duties, attends on his 
tutor. This performance of duties, however, we 
must desire to understand.’ 

‘Sir, I desire to understand it.’ 

TWENTY-SECOND KHANDA. 

1. ‘When one obtains bliss (in oneself), then one 
performs duties. One who does not obtain bliss, 
does not perform duties. Only he who obtains bliss, 
performs duties. This bliss, however, we must 
desire to understand.’ 

‘Sir, I desire to understand it.’ 

1 The duties of a student, such as restraint of the senses, concen- 
tration of the mind, &c. 

Pr q —_ 

"VIL PRAPATHAKA, 25 KHANDA, I. 123 

TWENTY-THIRD KHANDA. 

1. ‘The Infinite (bhOman)? is bliss. There is no 
bliss in anything finite. Infinity only is bliss. This 
Infinity, however, we must desire to understand.’ 

‘Sir, I desire to understand it.’ 

T WENTY-FOURTH KHANDA. 

1. ‘Where one sees nothing else, hears nothing 
else, understands nothing else, that is the Infinite. 
Where one sees something else, hears something 
else, understands something else, that is the finite. 
The Infinite is immortal, the finite is mortal.’ 

‘Sir, in what does the Infinite rest ?’ 

‘In its own greatness—or not even in greatness?,’ 

2. ‘In the world they call cows and horses, 
elephants and gold, slaves, wives, fields and houses 
greatness. I do not mean this,’ thus he spoke; 
‘for in that case one being (the possessor) rests 
in something else, (but the Infinite cannot rest in 
something different from itself.) 

TWENTY-FIFTH KHANDA. 

1. ‘The Infinite indeed is below, above, behind, 
before, right and left—it is indeed all this. 
‘Now follows the explanation of the Infinite as 

1 Bhuman is sometimes translated by grandeur, the superlative, 
the akme. It is the highest point that can be reached, the infinite 
and the true. 

* This phrase reminds one of the last verse in the No sad 4sid 
hymn, where, likewise, the expression of the highest certainty is 
followed by a misgiving that after all it may be otherwise. The 
commentator takes yadi va in the sense of, If you ask in the 
highest sense, then I say no; for the Infinite cannot rest in any- 
thing, not even in greatness. 

124 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

the I: I am below, I am above, I am behind, before, 
right and left—I am all this. 

2. ‘Next follows the explanation of the Infinite 
as the Self: Self is below, above, behind, before, 
right and left—Self is all this. 

‘He who sees, perceives, and understands this, 
loves the Self, delights in the Self, revels in the 
Self, rejoices in the Self—he becomes a Svarag, 
(an autocrat or self-ruler); he is lord and master 
in all the worlds. 

‘But those who think differently from this, live 
in perishable worlds, and have other beings for their 
rulers. 

TWENTY-SIXTH KHANDA. 

1. ‘To him who sees, perceives, and understands 
this !, the spirit (praza) springs from the Self, hope 
springs from the Self, memory springs from the 
Self; so do ether, fire, water, appearance and dis- 
appearance ?, food, power, understanding, reflection, 
consideration, will, mind, speech, names, sacred 
hymns, and sacrifices—aye, all this springs from 
the Self. 

2. ‘There is this verse, “He who: sees this, 
does not see death, nor illness, nor pain; he who 
sees this, sees everything, and obtains everything 
everywhere. 

‘“ He is one (before creation), he becomes three 

1 Before the acquirement of true knowledge, all that has been 
mentioned before, spirit, hope, memory, &c., on to names, was 
supposed to spring from the Sat, as something different from one- 
self.. Now he is to know that the Sat is the Self. . 

2 In the preceding paragraphs appearance and disappearance 
(birth and death) are not mentioned. This shows how easy it was 
in these treatises either to omit or to add anything that seemed 
important. 

VIII PRAPATHAKA, I KHANDA, I. 125 

(fire, water, earth), he becomes five, he becomes 
seven, he becomes nine; then again he is called the 
eleventh, and hundred and ten and one thousand 
and twenty 1.” 

‘When the intellectual aliment has been purified, 
the whole nature becomes purified. When the 
whole nature has been purified, the memory becomes 
firm. And when the memory (of the Highest Self) 
remains firm, then all the ties (which bind us to 
a belief in anything but the Self) are loosened. 

‘The venerable Sanatkum4ra showed to Narada, 
after his faults had been rubbed out, the other side 
of darkness. They call Sanatkumara Skanda, yea, 
Skanda they call him,’ 

EIGHTH PRAPA7ZAAKA. 

First KHANDA?. 

1. Harik, Om. There is this city of Brahman 
(the body), and in it the palace, the small lotus (of 

1 This too is meant as a verse. The commentary says that the 
various numbers are intended to show the endless variety of form 
on the Self after creation. Cf. Mait. Up. V, 2. 

2 The eighth Prapa/haka seems to form a kind of appendix to 
the Upanishad. The highest point that can be reached by specu- 
lation had been reached in the seventh Prap&/haka, the identity 
of our self and of everything else with the Highest Self. This 
speculative effort, however, is too much for ordinary people. They 
cannot conceive the Sat or Brahman as out of space and time, as 
free from all qualities, and in order to help them, they are taught 
to adore the Brahman, as it appears in space and time, an object 
endowed with certain qualities, living in nature and in the human 
heart. The Highest Brahman, besides which there is nothing, and 
which can neither be reached as an object, nor be considered as 

126 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD,. 

the heart), and in it that small ether. Now what 
exists within that small ether, that is to be sought 
for, that is to be understood. 

2. And if they should say to him: ‘Now with 
regard to that city of Brahman, and the palace in it, 
i. e. the small lotus of the heart, and the small ether 
within the heart, what is there within it that deserves 
to be sought for, or that is to be understood ?’ 

3. Then he should say: ‘As large as this ether 
(all space) is, so large is that ether within the heart. 
Both heaven and earth are contained within it, both 
fire and air, both sun and moon, both lightning and 
stars; and whatever there is of him (the Self) here 
in the world, and whatever is not (i. e. whatever has 
been or will be), all that is contained within it 1 

4. And if they should say to him: ‘If everything 
that exists is contained in that city of Brahman, all 
beings and all desires (whatever can be imagined 
or desired), then what is left of it, when old age 
reaches it and scatters it, or when it falls to pieces ?’ 

5. Then he should say: ‘ By the old age of the 
body, that (the ether, or Brahman within it) does 
not age; by the death of the body, that (the ether, 
or Brahman within it) is not killed. That (the Brah- 

an effect, seems to ordinary minds like a thing which is not. 
Therefore while the true philosopher, after acquiring the know- 
ledge of the Highest Sat, becomes identified with it suddenly, like 
lightning, the ordinary mortal must reach it by slow degrees, and 
as a preparation for that higher knowledge which is to follow, the 
eighth Prap&eAaka, particularly the first portion of it, has been 
added to the teaching contained in the earlier books. 

1 The ether in the heart is really a name of Brahman. He is 
there, and therefore all that comes of him when he assumes bodily 
shapes, both what is and what is not, i.e. what is no longer or not 
yet; for the absolute nothing is not intended here. 



VIII PRAPATHAKA, 2 KHANDA, 2. 127 

man) is the true Brahma-city (not the body?) In 
it all desires are contained. It is the Self, free from 
sin, free from old age, from death and grief, from 
hunger and thirst, which desires nothing but what 
it ought to desire, and imagines nothing but what it 
ought to imagine. Now as here on earth people 
follow as they are commanded, and depend on the 
object which they are attached to, be it a country or 
a piece of land, 

6. ‘And as here on earth, whatever has been ac- 
quired by exertion, perishes, so perishes whatever is 
acquired for the next world by sacrifices and other 
good actions performed on earth. Those who de- 
part from hence without having discovered the 
Self and those true desires, for them there is no 
freedom in all the worlds. But those who depart 
from hence, after having discovered the Self and 
those true desires ?, for them there is freedom in all 
the worlds. 

SECOND KHANDA. 

1. ‘Thus he who desires the world? of the fathers, 
by his mere will the fathers come to receive him, 
and having obtained the world of the fathers, he is 

happy. 
2. ‘And he who desires the world of the mothers, 

by his mere will the mothers come to receive him, 

1 I translate this somewhat differently from the commentator, 
though the argument remains the same. 

2 True desires are those which we ought to desire, and the ful- 
filment of which depends on ourselves, supposing that we have 
acquired the knowledge which enables us to fulfil them. 

3 World is the nearest approach to loka: it means life with the 
fathers, or enjoying the company of the fathers. 

128 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

and having obtained the world of the mothers, he is 
happy. 

3. ‘And he who desires the world of the brothers, 
by his mere will the brothers come to receive him, 
and having obtained the world of the brothers, he is 
happy. 

4. ‘And he who desires the world of the sisters, 
by his mere will the sisters come to receive him, 
and having obtained the world of the sisters, he is 
happy. 

5. ‘And he who desires the world of the friends, 
by his mere will the friends come to receive him, 
and having obtained the world of the friends, he is 
happy. 

6. ‘And he who desires the world of perfumes and 
garlands (gandhamialya), by his mere will perfumes 
and garlands come to him, and having obtained the 
world of perfumes and garlands, he is happy. 

7. ‘And he who desires the world of food and 
drink, by his mere will food and drink come to him, 
and having obtained the world of food and drink, he 
is happy. 

8. ‘And he who desires the world of song and 
music, by his mere will song and music come to him, 
and having obtained the world of song and music, 
he is happy. 

9. ‘And he who desires the world of women, by 
his mere will women come to receive him, and 
having obtained the world of women, he is happy. 

‘Whatever object he is attached to, whatever 
object he desires, by his mere will it comes to him, 
and having obtained it, he is happy. 

VIII PRAPATHAKA, 3 KHANDA, 4. 129 

THIRD KHANDA. 

1. ‘These true desires, however, are hidden by 
what is false; though the desires be true, they have 
a covering which is false. Thus, whoever belonging 
to us has departed this life, him we cannot gain 
back, so that we should see him with our eyes. 

2. ‘Those who belong to us, whether living or 
departed, and whatever else there is which we wish 
for and do not obtain, all that we find there (if 
we descend into our heart, where Brahman dwells, 
in the ether of the heart). There are all our true 
desires, but hidden by what is false?. As people who 
do not know the country, walk again and again over 
a gold treasure that has been hidden somewhere in 
the earth and do not discover it, thus do all these 
creatures day after day go into the Brahma-world 
(they are merged in Brahman, while asleep), and yet 
do not discover it, because they are carried away by 
untruth (they do not come to themselves, i. e. they 
do not discover the true Self in Brahman, dwelling 
in the heart). 

3. ‘That Self abides in the heart. And this is the 
etymological explanation. The heart is called hrd- 
ayam, instead of hvzdy-ayam, i.e. He who is in the 
heart. He who knows this, that He is in the heart, 
goes day by day (when in sushupti, deep sleep) into 
heaven (svarga), i.e. into the Brahman of the heart. 

4. ‘Now that serene being? which, after having 

1 All the desires mentioned before are fulfilled, if we find their 
fulfilment in our Self, in the city of Brahman within our heart. 
There we always can possess those whom we have loved, only we 
must not wish to see them with our eyes; that would be a false 
covering to a true desire. ; 

3 Cf. Kh. Up. VIII, 12, 3. 

[a], K 
his book was downloaded from www.holybooks.com : 

130 3 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

risen from out this earthly body, and having reached 
the highest light (self-knowledge), appears in its true 
form, that is the Self,’ thus he spoke (when asked 
by his pupils). This is the immortal, the fearless, 
this is Brahman. And of that Brahman the name 
is the True, Satyam, 

5. This name Sattyam consists of three sylla- 
bles, sat-ttyam'. Sat signifies the immortal, t, the 
mortal, and with yam he binds both. Because he 
binds both, the immortal and the mortal, therefore 
it is yam. He who knows this goes day by day 
into heaven (svarga). 

FourtH KHANDA. 

1. That Self is a bank?, a boundary, so that these 
worlds may not be confounded. Day and night do 
not pass that bank, nor old age, death, and grief; 
neither good nor evil deeds. All evil-doers turn back 
from it, for the world of Brahman is free from all evil. 

2. Therefore he who has crossed that bank, if 
blind, ceases to be blind; if wounded, ceases to be 
wounded; if afflicted, ceases to be afflicted. There- 
fore when that bank has been crossed, night becomes 
day indeed, for the world of Brahman is lighted up 
once for all ?. 

3. And that world of Brahman belongs to those 

1 We ought probably to read Sattyam, and then Sat-tf-yam. 
The f in tf would then be the dual of an anubandha i. Instead of 
yaddhi, I conjecture yatti. See Ait. Aranyaka II, 5, 5- 

* Setu, generally translated by bridge, was originally a bank of 
earth (mridaidimaya), thrown up to serve as a pathway (pons) 
through water or a swamp. Such banks exist still in many places, 
and they serve at the same time as boundaries (mary4d4) between 
fields belonging to different properties. Cf. Mait. Up. VII, 7; 
Kash. Up. III, 2; Talav. Up. comm. p. 59; Murad. Up. II, 2, 5. 

3 Kh. Up. III, 11, 3. 

VIII PRAPATHAKA, 5 KHANDA, 3. 131 

only who find it by abstinence—for them there is 
freedom in all the worlds. 

Fırt KHANDA. 

1. What people call sacrifice (yagna), that is really 
abstinence (brahmazarya). For he who knows, 
obtains that (world of Brahman, which others obtain 
hy sacrifice), by means of abstinence. 

What people call sacrifice (ish¢a), that is really 
abstinence, for by abstinence, having searched (ish- 
tv), he obtains the Self. 

2. What people call sacrifice (sattrayava), that is 
really abstinence, for by abstinence he obtains from 
the Sat (the true), the safety (traza) of the Self. 

What people call the vow of silence (mauna), that 
is really abstinence, for he who by abstinence has 
found out the Self, meditates (manute). 

3. What people call fasting (anasakdyana), that 
is really abstinence, for that Self does not perish 
(na nasyati), which we find out by abstinence. 

What people call a hermit’s life (arazy4yana), that 
is really abstinence. Ara! and Wya are two lakes in 
the world of Brahman, in the third heaven from hence; 
and there is the lake Airammadtya, and the Asvattha 
tree, showering down Soma, and the city of Brahman 
(Hirazyagarbha) Apar4git4*, and the golden Prabhu- 
vimita (the hall built by Prabhu, Brahman). 

Now that world of Brahman belongs to those who 
find the lakes Ara and Wya in the world of Brahman 
by means of abstinence; for them there is freedom 
in all the worlds °. 

1 In the Kaush. Br. Up. I, 3, the lake is called Ara, at least 
according to the commentator. 

3 In the Kaush. Br. Up. Aparfgita is not pA, but 4yatanam. 

® The fifth khanda is chiefly meant to recommend brahmaearya 

K 2 

132 ` “KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

SixTH KHANDA. 

1. Now those arteries of the heart consist of a 
brown substance, of a white, blue, yellow, and red 

or abstinence from all worldly enjoyments, enjoined on the brah- 
makarin, the student, as a means of obtaining a knowledge of 
Brahman. But instead of showing that such abstinence is indis- 
pensable for a proper concentration of our intellectual faculties, we 
are told that abstinence is the same as certain sacrifices; and this 
is shown, not by arguments, but by a number of very far-fetched 
plays on words. These it is impossible to render in any transla- 
tion, nay, they hardly deserve being translated. Thus abstinence 
is said to be identical with sacrifice, yagila, because yo gfiata, 
‘he who knows,’ has a certain similarity with yagiia. Ish/a, 
another kind of sacrifice, is compared with esha, search; sattr4- 
yana with Sat, the True, the Brahman, and trfyaza, protection ; 
mauna, silence, with manana, meditating (which may be right); 
anasakayana, fasting, with nas, to perish, and arazy4gana, a 
hermit’s life, with ara, mya, and ayana, going to the two lakes 
Ara and Wya, which are believed to exist in the legendary world 
of Brahman. Nothing can be more absurd. Having once struck 
the note of Brahmanic legends, such as we find it, for instance, in 
the Kaushitaki-brahmavza-upanishad, the author goes on. Besides 
the lakes Ara and Wya (in the Kaushitaki-brahmasa-upanishad we 
have only one lake, called Ara), he mentions the Airammadtya 
lake, and explains it as aira (ira annam, tanmaya airo mandas, 
tena piirzam airam) and madiya, delightful. The Asvattha tree, 
which pours down Soma, is not tortured into anything else, except 
that Soma is explained as the immortal, or nectar. Aparagita 
becomes the city of Brahman, because it can be conquered by no 
one except those who have practised abstinence. And the hall 
which elsewhere is called Vibhu-pramita becomes Prabhu- 
vimitam, or Prabhu-vinirmita, made by Prabhu, i.e. Brahman. 
All the fulfilled desires, as enumerated in khandas 2-5, whether 
the finding again of our fathers and mothers, or entering the 
Brahmaloka with its lakes and palaces, must be taken, not as 
material (sthfila), but as mental only (manasa). On that account, 
however, they are by no means considered as false or unreal, as 
little as dreams are. Dreams are false and unreal, relatively only, 
i.e. relatively to what we see, when we awake; but not in them- 
selves, Whatever we see in waking, also, has been shown to be 

VIII PRAPATHAKA, 6 KHANDA, 5. 133 

substance, and so is the sun brown, white, blue, 
yellow, and red. 

2. Asa very long highway goes to two places, to 
one at the beginning, and to another at the end, so 
do the rays of the sun go to both worlds, to this 
one and to the other. They start from the sun, 
and enter into those arteries; they start from those 
arteries, and enter into the sun. | 

3. And when a man is asleep, reposing, and at 
perfect rest, so that he sees no dream ', then he has 
entered into those arteries. Then no evil touches 
him, for he has obtained the light (of the sun). 

4. And when a man falls ill, then those who sit 
round him, say, ‘Do you know me? Do you know 
me?’ As long as he has not departed from this 
body, he knows them. 

5. But when he departs from this body, then he 
departs upwards by those very rays (towards the 
worlds which he has gained by merit, not by know- 
ledge); or he goes out while meditating on Om? 
(and thus securing an entrance into the Brahma- 

false; because it consists of forms and names only; yet these 
forms and names have a true element in them, viz. the Sat. Before 
we know that Sat, all the objects we see in waking seem true; as 
dreams seem true in dreaming. But when once we awake from 
our waking by true knowledge, we see that nothing is true but the 
Sat. When we imagine we see a serpent, and then discover that 
it is a rope, the serpent disappears as false, but what was true in 
it, the rope, remains true. 

1 Svapna in Sanskrit is both somnus and somnium. Hence 
one might translate also, ‘so that he is not aware that he is asleep,’ 
which in some respects would seem even more appropriate in our 
passage; cf. VIII, 11, 1. 

2 According to the explanation given of the Om in the Upani- 
shads, and more particularly in the Dahara-vidya contained in this 
Prapashaka. 

134 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

loka). And while his mind is failing, he is going to 
the sun. For the sun is the door of the world (of 
Brahman). Those who know, walk in; those who 
do not know, are shut out. There is this verse!: 
‘There are a hundred and one arteries of the heart; 
one of them penetrates the crown of the head; 
moving upwards by it a man reaches the immortal ; 
the others serve for departing in different directions, 
yea, in different directions 2’ 

SEVENTH KHANDA?. 

1. Pragdpati said: ‘The Self which is free from sin, 
free from old age, from death and grief, from hunger 
and thirst, which desires nothing but what it ought 
to desire, and imagines nothing but what it ought to 
imagine, that it is which we must search out, that it 
is which we must try to understand. He who has 
searched out that Self and understands it, obtains 
all worlds and all desires.’ 

2. The Devas (gods) and Asuras (demons) both 
heard these words, and said: ‘ Well, let us search 
for that Self by which, if one has searched it out, 
all worlds and all desires are obtained.’ 

Thus saying Indra went from the Devas, Virofana 
from the Asuras, and both, without having com- 
municated with each other, approached Pragapati, 

1 Prasna Up. II, r. 

2 The same verse occurs in the Kasha 6, 16, and is frequently 
quoted elsewhere, for instance, Mait.comm. p. 164. For vishvann, 
the right reading would seem to be vishvak. In the Mait. Up. VI, 
30, the Trishtubh are reduced to Anush/ubh verses. See also 
Prasna Up. III, 6-7; Mund. Up. II, 2. 

3 Here the highest problem is treated again, the knowledge of 
the true Self, which leads beyond the world of Brahma (masc.), and 
enables the individual self to return into the Highest Self. 

VIII PRAPATHAKA, 7 KHANDA, 3. 135 

holding fuel in their hands, as is the custom for 
pupils approaching their master. 

3. They dwelt there as pupils for thirty-two 
years. Then Pragdpati asked them: ‘For what 
purpose have you both dwelt here ?’ 

They replied: ‘A saying of yours is being re- 
peated, viz. “the Self which is free from sin, free 
from old age, from death and grief, from hunger 
and thirst, which desires nothing but what it ought 
to desire, and imagines nothing but what it ought to 
imagine, that it is which we must search out, that it 
is which we must try to understand. He who has 
searched out that Self and understands it, obtains all 
worlds and all desires.” Now we both have dwelt 
here because we wish for that Self,’ 

Pragapati said to them: ‘The person that is seen — 
in the eye!, that is the Self. This is what I have 
said. This is the immortal, the fearless, this is 
Brahman.’ | 

They asked: ‘Sir, he who is perceived in the 
water, and he who is perceived in a mirror, who 
is he?’ 

He replied: ‘He himself indeed is seen in all 
these 2.’ | 

1 The commentator explains this rightly. Pragapati means by 
the person that is seen in the eye, the real agent of seeing, who is 
seen by sages only, even with their eyes shut. His pupils, however, 
misunderstand him. They think of the person that is seen, not of 
the person that sees (Yoga-sitras II, 6), The person seen in the 
eye is to them the small figure imaged in the eye, and they go on 
therefore to ask, whether the image in the water or in a mirror is 
not the Self. | 

2 The commentators are at great pains to explain that Pragapati 
told no falsehood. He meant by purusha the personal element in 
the highest sense, and it was not his fault that his pupils took 
purusha for man or body. 

1 36 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

EIGHTH KHANDA. 

1. ‘Look at your Self in a pan of water, and 
whatever you do not understand of your Self}, 
come and tell me.’ 

They looked in the water-pan. Then Pragdpati 
said to them: ‘What do you see?’ 

They said: ‘We both see the self thus altogether, 
a picture even to the very hairs and nails.’ 

2. Pragdpati said to them: ‘After you have 
adorned yourselves, have put on your best clothes 
and cleaned yourselves, look again into the water- 
pan.’ 

They, after having adorned themselves, having 
put on their best clothes and cleaned themselves, 
looked into the water-pan. 

PragApati said: ‘What do you see?’ 

3. They said: ‘Just as we are, well adorned, 
with our best clothes and clean, thus we are both 
there, Sir, well adorned, with our best clothes and 
clean.’ 

Pragapati said: ‘That is the Self, this is the im- 
-mortal, the fearless, this is Brahman.’ 

Then both went away satisfied in their hearts. 

4. And Pragdapati, looking after them, said: ‘They 
both go away without having perceived and without 
having known the Self, and whoever of these two ?, 
whether Devas or Asuras, will follow this doctrine 
(upanishad), will perish.’ 

Now Viroeana, satisfied in his heart, went to the 
Asuras and preached that doctrine to them, that the 
self (the body) alone is to be worshipped, that the 

1 I take atmanaf as a genitive, governed by yad, not as an 
accusative plural. 

* The commentator reads yatare for yatas. 

VIII PRAPATHAKA, 9 KHANDA, 2. 137 

self (the body) alone is to be served, and that he 
who worships the self and serves the self, gains 
both worlds, this and the next. 

5. Therefore they call even now a man who does 
not give alms here, who has no faith, and offers no 
sacrifices, an Asura, for this is the doctrine (upani- 
shad) of the Asuras. They deck out the body of 
the dead with perfumes, flowers, and fine raiment by 
way of ornament, and think they will thus conquer 
that world}. 

NinTH KHANDA. 

1. But Indra, before he had returned to the 
Devas, saw this difficulty. As this self (the shadow 
in the water)? is well adorned, when the body is 
well adorned, well dressed, when the body is well 
dressed, well cleaned, if the body is well cleaned, 
that self will also be blind, if the body is blind, 
lame, if the body is lame’, crippled, if the body is 
crippled, and will perish in fact as soon as the body 
perishes. Therefore I see no good in this (doctrine). 

2. Taking fuel in his hand he came again as a 
pupil to Pragdpati. PragApati said to him: ‘ Ma- 
ghavat (Indra), as you went away with Virofana, 
satishied in your heart, for what purpose did you 
come back ?’ 

1 This evidently refers to the customs and teaching of tribes 
not entirely conforming to the Brahmanic system. Whether the 
adorning of the dead body implies burial instead of burning, seems 
doubtful. 

2 The commentator remarks that though both Indra and Viro- 
kana had mistaken the true import of what Prag4pati said, yet 
while Virofana took the body to be the Self, Indra thought that 
the Self was the shadow of the body. 

3 Srama, lame, is explained by the commentator as one-eyed, 
ekanetra. 

138 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

He said: ‘Sir, as this self (the shadow) is well 
adorned, when the body is well adorned, well dressed, 
when the body is well dressed, well cleaned, if the 
body is well cleaned, that self will also be blind, if 
the body is blind, lame, if the body is lame, crippled, 
if the body is crippled, and will perish in fact as 
soon as the body perishes. Therefore I see no 
good in this (doctrine). 

3. ‘So it is indeed, Maghavat, replied Pragapati ; 
‘but I shall explain him (the true Self) further to 
you. Live with me another thirty-two years.’ 

He lived with him another thirty-two years, and 
then Pragdpati said: 

TENTH KHANDA. 

1. ‘He who moves about happy in dreams, he is 
the Self, this is the immortal, the fearless, this is 
Brahman.’ 

Then Indra went away satisfied in his heart. But 
before he had returned to the Devas, he saw this 
difficulty. Although it is true that that self is not 
blind, even if the body is blind, nor lame, if the 
body is lame, though it is true that that self is not 
rendered faulty by the faults of it (the body), 

2. Nor struck when it (the body) is struck, nor 
lamed when it is lamed, yet it is as if they struck 
him (the self) in dreams, as if they chased him?. 

1 I have adopted the reading vikł4ayayanti, because it is the 
most difficult, and therefore explains most easily the various cor- 
ruptions, or it may be emendations, that have crept into the text. 
Sankara explains vikkkadayanti by vidravayanti, and this shows 
that he too must have read viłkkayayanti, for he could not have 
explained vizkzzadayanti, which means they uncover or they deprive 
of their clothing, by vidravayanti, they drive away. It is true that 
vikkhayayanti may be explained in two ways; it may be the causa- 
tive of £24, to cut, but this meaning is not very appropriate here, 

VIII PRAPATHAKA, IO KHANDA, 4. 139 

He becomes even conscious, as it were, of pain, and 
sheds tears. Therefore I see no good in this, 

3. Taking fuel in his hands, he went again as a 
pupil to Pragdpati. Pragapati said to him: ‘ Ma- 
ghavat, as you went away satisfied in your heart, for 
what purpose did you come back ?’ 

He said: ‘Sir, although it is true that that self 
is not blind even if the body is blind, nor lame, if the 
body is lame, though it is true that that self is not 
rendered faulty by the faults of it (the body), 

4. Nor struck when it (the body) is struck, nor 
lamed when it is lamed, yet it is as if they struck 
him (the self) in dreams, as if they chased him. 
He becomes even conscious, as it were, of pain, and 
sheds tears. Therefore I see no good in this.’ 

‘So it is indeed, Maghavat,’ replied Pragdpati ; 
‘but I shall explain him (the true Self) further to 
you. Live with me another thirty-two years.’ 

He lived with him another thirty-two years. Then 
Pragapati said : 
and quite inadmissible in another passage where vitkhayayati 
occurs, whereas, if derived from viz% (ofyouas) in a causative sense, 
Sankara could hardly have chosen a better explanation than vidra- 
vayanti, they make run away. The root vikh, vikkhayayati is 
recognised in Pazini III, 1, 28, and in the Dhatupa/ka 28, 129, 
but it has hitherto been met with in this passage only, and in 
Brihadaramyaka Up. IV, 3, 20. Here also the author speaks of 
a man who imagines that people kill him or do him violence, or 
that an elephant chases him or that he falls into a pit. Here we 
have hastiva vi#khayayati, and Sankara, at least as printed by 
Dr. Roer, explains this by vik&hapayati, vikkhadayati, vidravayati ; 
dhavatity artha. Much better is Dvivedaganga’s commentary, as 
published by Dr. Weber, Satap. Brahm. p. 1145, Kadaid enam 
hasti vikkhayayativa vidravayativa ; vika gatau, gupudhuupavizzi- 
pasipanibhya Aya iti (Paz. III, 1, 28) svartha 4yapratyayak. In the 
Dictionary of Boehtlingk and Roth the derivation from £4, to 
cut, is preferred ; see Nachtrage, s.v. £44. 

140 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

ELEVENTH KHANDA. 

1. ‘When a man being asleep, reposing, and at 
perfect rest1, sees no dreams, that is the Self, this is 
the immortal, the fearless, this is Brahman.’ 

Then Indra went away satisfied in his heart. But 
before he had returned to the Devas, he saw this 
difficulty. In truth he thus does not know himself 
(his self) that he is I, nor does he know anything 
that exists. He is gone to utter annihilation. I see 
no good in this. 

2. Taking fuel in his hand he went again as a 
pupil to Pragdpati. Pragdpati said to him: ‘ Ma- 
ghavat, as you went away satisfied in your heart, 
for what purpose did you come back ?’ 

He said: ‘Sir, in that way he does not know 
himself (his self) that he is I, nor does he know 
anything that exists. He is gone to utter annihila- 
tion. I see no good in this.’ 

3. ‘So it is indeed, Maghavat,’ replied Pragapati ; 
‘but I shall explain him (the true Self) further to 
you, and nothing more than this?, Live here other 
five years.’ 

He lived there other five years. This made in all 
one hundred and one years, and therefore it is said 
that Indra Maghavat lived one hundred and one 
years as a pupil with Pragdpati. Pragdpati said to 
him: 

TWELFTH KHANDA. 

1. ‘Maghavat, this body is mortal and always 
held by death. It is the abode of that Self which is 

1 See Xh. Up. VIII, 6, 3. 

* Sankara explains this as meaning the real Self, not anything 

different from the Self, 

— oe | 

VIII PRAPATHAKA, I2 KHANDA, 3. 14I 

immortal and without body!. When in the body (by 
thinking this body is I and I am this body) the Self 
is held by pleasure and pain., So long as he is in 
the body, he cannot get free from pleasure and pain. 
But when he is free of the body (when he knows 
himself different from the body), then neither pleasure 
nor pain touches him. | 

2. ‘The wind is without body, the cloud, light- 
ning, and thunder are without body (without hands, 
feet, &c.) Now as these, arising from this heavenly 
ether (space), appear in their own form, as soon as 
they have approached the highest light, 

3. ‘ Thus does that serene being, arising from this 
body, appear in its own form, as soon as it has 
approached the highest light (the knowledge of 
Self’). He (in that state) is the highest person 
(uttama pdrusha). He moves about there laughing 
(or eating), playing, and rejoicing (in his mind), be it 
with women, carriages, or relatives, never minding 
that body into which he was born ¢, 

1 According to some, the body is the result of the Self, the 
elements of the body, fire, water, and earth springing from the 
Self, and the Self afterwards entering them, 

3 Ordinary, worldly pleasure. Comm. ` 

3 The simile is not so striking as most of those old similes are. 
The wind is compared with the Self, on account of its being for a 
time lost in the ether (space), as the Self is in the body, and then 
rising again out of the ether and assuming its own form as wind. 
The chief stress is laid on the highest light, which in the one case 
is the sun of summer, in the other the light of knowledge. 

t These are pleasures which seem hardly compatible with the 
state of perfect peace which the Self is supposed to have attained. 
The passage may be interpolated, or put in on purpose to show 
that the Self enjoys such pleasures as an inward spectator only, 
without identifying himself with either pleasure or pain. He sees 
them, as he says afterwards, with his divine eye. The Self per- 

142 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

‘Like as a horse attached to a cart, so is the 
spirit! (praza, pragfiatman) attached to this body. 

4. ‘Now where the sight has entered into the 
void (the open space, the black pupil of the eye), 
there is the person of the eye, the eye itself is the 
instrument of seeing. He who knows, let me smell 
this, he is the Self, the nose is the instrument of 
smelling. He who knows, let me say this, he is the 
Self, the tongue is the instrument of saying. He 
who knows, let me hear this, he is the Self, the ear 
is the instrument of hearing. 

5. ‘He who knows, let me think this, he is the 
Self, the mind is his divine eye? He, the Self, 
seeing these pleasures (which to others are hidden 
like a buried treasure of gold) through his divine 
eye, i.e. the mind, rejoices. 

‘The Devas who are in the world of Brahman 
meditate on that Self (as taught by Pragdpati to 
Indra, and by Indra to the Devas). Therefore all 
worlds belong to them, and all desires. He who 
knows that Self and understands it, obtains all 
worlds and all desires.’ Thus said Pragapati, yea, 
thus said Prag4pati. 

ceives in all things his Self only, nothing else. In his commentary 
on the Taittirtya Upanishad (p. 45) Sankara refers this passage 
to Brahman as an effect, not to Brahman as a cause. 

1 The spirit, the conscious self, is not identical with the body, 
but only joined to it, like a horse, or driving it, like a charioteer. 
In other passages the senses are the horses; buddhi, reason, the 
charioteer; manas, mind, the reins. The spirit is attached to the 
cart by the 4etana; cf. Anandagfienagiri. 

2 Because it perceives not only what is present, but also what 
is past and future. 

VIII PRAPATHAKA, I4 KHANDA, I. 143 

THIRTEENTH KHANDA}, 

I. From the dark (the Brahman of the heart) I 
come to the nebulous (the world of Brahman), from 
the nebulous to the dark, shaking off all evil, as a 
horse shakes his hairs, and as the moon frees herself 
from the mouth of Rahu*. Having shaken off the 
body, I obtain, self made and satisfied, the uncreated 
world of Brahman, yea, I obtain it, 

FOURTEENTH KHANDA. 

1. He who is called ether? (4k4sa) is the revealer 
of all forms and names. That within which these 
forms and names are contained is the Brahman, the 
Immortal, the Self. 

I come to the hall of Pragapati, to the house; I 
am the glorious among Brahmans, glorious among 
princes, glorious among men‘. I obtained that 
glory, I am glorious among the glorious. May I 
never go to the white, toothless, yet devouring, 
white abode c; may I never go to it. 

1 This chapter is supposed to contain a hymn of triumph. 

* Rahu, in later times a monster, supposed to swallow the sun 
and moon at every solar or lunar eclipse. At first we only hear of 
the mouth or head of Rahu. In later times a body was assigned to 
him, but it had to be destroyed again by Vishu, so that nothing 
remained of him but his head. Rahu seems derived from rah, to 
separate, to remove. From it raksh, to wish or strive to remove, 
to keep off, to protect, and in a different application r4kshas, a 
tearing away, violence, raksh4s, a robber, an evil spirit. 

3 AkAsa, ether or space, is a name of Brahman, because, like 
ether, Brahman has no body and is infinitely small. 

4 Here the three classes, commonly called castes, are clearly 
marked by the names of brahmaaa, ragan, and vis. 

® Yonisabditam pragananendriyam. 

144 KHANDOGYA-UPANISHAD. 

FIFTEENTH KHANDA. 

1. Brahma (Hirazyagarbha or Paramesvara) told 
this to Pragdpati (Kasyapa), Pragdpati to Manu (his 
son), Manu to mankind. He who has learnt the 
Veda from a family of teachers, according to the 
sacred rule, in the leisure time left from the duties 
to be performed for the Guru, who, after receiving 
his discharge, has settled in his own house, keeping 
up the memory of what he has learnt by repeating 
it regularly in some sacred spot, who has begotten 
virtuous sons, and concentrated all his senses on 
the Self, never giving pain to any creature, except 
at the tirthas! (sacrifices, &c.), he who behaves thus 
all his life, reaches the world of Brahman, and does 
not return, yea, he does not return. 

1 The commentator says that even travelling about as a mendi- 
cant causes pain, but that a mendicant is allowed to importune 
people for alms at tirthas, or sacred places. Others explain this 
differently. 



TALAVAKARA 

OR 

K ENA-UPANISHAD. 

[l L 
his book was downloaded from www.holybooks.com : 



TALAVAKARA-UPANISHAD. 

First KHANDA. 

1. THe Pupil asks: ‘At whose wish does the 
mind sent forth proceed on its errand? At whose 
command does the first breath go forth? At whose 
wish do we utter this speech? What god directs 
the eye, or the ear?’ 

2. The Teacher replies: ‘It is the ear of the ear, 
the mind of the mind, the speech of speech, the 
breath of breath, and the eye of the eye. When 
freed (from the senses) the wise, on departing from 
this world, become immortal}. 

3. ‘ The eye does not go thither, nor speech, nor 
mind. We do not know, we do not understand, how 
any one can teach it. 

4. ‘It is different from the known, it is also 
above the unknown, thus we have heard from those 
of old, who taught us this °. 

5. ‘That which is not expressed by speech and 

1 This verse admits of various translations, and still more various 
explanations. Instead of taking vasam, like all the other words, 
aS a nominative, we might take them all as accusatives, governed 
by atimudya, and sa u prazasya pranah as a parenthetical sen- 
tence. What is See TS ar er ee car is veS Taly explained 
by the commentator, but the simplest acceptation would seem to 
take it as an answer to the preceding questions, so that the ear of 
the ear should be taken for him who directs the ear, i.e. the Self, 
or Brahman. This will become clearer as we proceed. 

2? Cf. Isa Up. 11; 13. 

This book was downloadkd fom www.holybooks.com : 

148 TALAVAKARA-UPANISHAD. 

by which speech is expressed, that alone know as 
Brahman, not that which people here adore. 

6. ‘That which does not think by mind, and 
by which, they say, mind is thought’, that alone 
know as Brahman, not that which people here 
adore. 

7. ‘That which does not see by the eye, and by 
which one sees (the work of) the eyes, that alone 
know as Brahman, not that which people here 
adore. 

8. ‘That which does not hear by the ear, and by 
which the ear is heard, that alone know as Brahman, 
not that which people here adore. 

9. ‘That which does not breathe by breath, and 
by which breath is drawn, that alone know as Brah- 
man, not that which people here adore.’ 

SECOND KHANDA. 

1. The Teacher says: ‘If thou thinkest I know 
it well; then thou knowest surely but little, what is 
that form of Brahman known, it may be, to thee®?’ 

2. The Pupil says: ‘I do not think I know it 
well, nor do I know that I do not know it. ‘He 

1 The varia lectio manaso matam (supported also by the com- 
mentary) is metrically and grammatically easier, but it may be, for 
that.very reason, an emendation. 

2 In order to obtain a verse, we must leave out the words tvam 
yad asya deveshv atha nu mimamsyam eva. They were probably 
inserted, as an excuse for the third khazda treating of the relation 
of Brahman to the Devas. There is considerable variety in the 
text, as handed down in the Sama-veda and in the Atharva-veda, 
which shows that it has been tampered with. Daharam for dabhram 
may be the older reading, as synezesis occurs again and againin . 
the Upanishads. 

III KHANDA, I. 149 

among us who knows this, he knows it, nor does he 
know that he does not know it’. 

3. ‘He by whom it (Brahman) is not thought, by 
him it is thought; he by whom it is thought, knows 
it not. It is not understood by those who under- 
stand it, it is understood by those who do not 
understand it. 

4. ‘It is thought to be known (as if) by awaken- 
ing, and (then) we obtain immortality indeed. By 
the Self we obtain strength, by knowledge we obtain 
immortality. 

5. ‘Ifa man know this here, that is the true (end 
of life); if he does not know this here, then there is 
great destruction (new births). The wise who have 
thought on all things (and recognised the Self in 
them) become immortal, when they have departed 
from this world.’ 

THirp KHANDA ®. 

1. Brahman obtained the victory for the Devas. 
The Devas became elated by the victory of Brah- 

1 This verse has again been variously explained. I think the 
train of thought is this: We cannot know Brahman, as we know 
other objects, by referring them to a class and pointing out their 
differences. But, on the other hand, we do not know that we know 
him not, i. e. no one can assert that we know him not, for we want 
Brahman in order to know anything. He, therefore, who knows 
this double peculiarity of the knowledge of Brahman, he knows 
Brahman, as much as it can be known; and he does not 
know, nor can anybody prove it to him, that he does not know 
Brahman. 

* This khanda is generally represented as a later addition, but 
its prose style has more of a Brihmama character than the verses 
in the preceding khandas, although their metrical structure is 
irregular, and may be taken as a sign of antiquity. 


150 TALAVAKARA-UPANISHAD. 

man, and they thought, this victory is ours only, 
this greatness is ours only. 

2. Brahman perceived this and appeared to them. 
But they did not know it, and said: ‘What sprite 
(yaksha or yakshya) is this ?’ 

3. They said to Agni (fire): ‘O Gatavedas, find 
out what sprite this is.’ ‘Yes,’ he said. 

4. He ran toward it, and Brahman said to him: 
‘Who are you?’ He replied: ‘I am Agni, I am 
Gatavedas.’ 

5. Brahman said: ‘What power is in you?’ Agni 
replied: ‘I could burn all whatever there is on 
earth.’ 

6. Brahman put a straw before him, saying: 
‘Burn this? He went towards it with all his might, 
but he could not burn it. Then he returned thence 
and said: ‘I could not find out what sprite this is.’ 

7. Then they said to Vayu (air): ‘O V4yu, find 
out what sprite this is.’ ‘Yes,’ he said. 

8. He ran toward it, and Brahman said to him: 
‘Who are you?’ He replied: ‘I am Vayu, I am 
Matarisvan.’ 

9. Brahman said: ‘What power is in you?’ Vayu 
replied: ‘I could take up all whatever there is on 
earth.’ 

ro. Brahman put a straw before him, saying: 
‘Take it up. He went towards it with all his 
might, but he could not take it up. Then he re- 
turned thence and said: ‘I could not find out what 
sprite this is.’ 

11. Then they said to Indra: ‘O Maghavan, find 
out what sprite this is.’ He went towards it, but it 
disappeared from before him. 

12. Then in the same space (ether) he came 

IV KHANDA, 4. 151 

towards a woman, highly adorned: it was Uma, the 
daughter of Himavat?. He said to her: ‘Who is 
that sprite ?’ 

FourtH KHANDA. 

I. She replied: ‘It is Brahman. It is through 
the victory of Brahman that you have thus become 
great. After that he knew that it was Brahman. 

2. Therefore these Devas, viz. Agni, Vayu, and 
Indra, are, as it were, above the other gods, for they 
touched it (the Brahman) nearest *. 

3. And therefore Indra is, as it were, above the 
other gods, for he touched it nearest, he first 

knew_j 
4. This is the teaching of Brahman, with regard ipeter 
to the gods (mythological): It is that which now 

1 Uma may here be taken as the wife of Siva, daughter of 
Himavat, better known by her earlier name, P4rvatt, the daughter 
of the mountains. Originally she was, not the daughter of the 
mountains or of the Himalaya, but the daughter of the cloud, just 
as Rudra was originally, not the lord of the mountains, girisa, but 
the lord of the clouds. We are, however, moving here in a secon- 
dary period of Indian thought, in which we see, as among Semitic 
nations, the manifested powers, and particularly the knowledge and 
wisdom of the gods, represented by their wives. Uma means originally 
flax, from va, to weave, and the same word may have been an old 
name of wife, she who weaves (cf. duhitrz, spinster, and possibly 
wife itself, if O. H. G. wib is connected with O. H. G. weban). It is 
used almost synonymously with ambik4, Taitt. Ar. p. 839. If we 
wished to take liberties, we might translate uma haimavatf by an 
old woman coming from the Himavat mountains; but I decline all 
responsibility for such an interpretation. 

2 The next phrase was borrowed from § 3, without even changing 
the singular to the plural. As Indra only found out that it was 
Brahman, the original distinction between Indra and the other gods, 
who only came near to it, was quite justified. Still it might be y- 
better to adopt the var. lect. sa hy etat in § 2. 

152 | TALAVAKARA-UPANISHAD. 

flashes forth in the lightning, and now vanishes 
again. | 

5. And this is the teaching of Brahman, with re- 
gard to the body (psychological): It is that which 
seems to move as mind, and by it imagination 
remembers again and again!. 

6. That Brahman is called Tadvana ?, by the 
name of Tadvana it is to be meditated on. All 
beings have a desire for him who knows this. 

7. The Teacher: ‘As you have asked me to 
tell you the Upanishad, the Upanishad has now 

1 I have translated these paragraphs very differently from San- 
kara and other interpreters. The wording is extremely brief, and 
we can only guess the original intention of the Upanishad by a 
reference to other passages. Now the first teaching of Brahman, 
by means of a comparison with the gods or heavenly things in 
general, seems to be that Brahman is what shines forth suddenly 
like lightning. Sometimes the relation between the phenomenal 
world and Brahman is illustrated by the relation between bubbles 
and the sea, or lightning and the unseen heavenly light (Mait. Up. 
VI, 35). In another passage, KA. Up. VIII, 12, 2, lightning, when 
no longer seen, is to facilitate the conception of the reality of things, 
as distinct from their perceptibility. I think, therefore, that the first 
simile, taken from the phenomenal world, was meant to show that 
Brahman is that which appears for a moment in the lightning, and 
then vanishes from our sight. 

The next illustration is purely psychological. Brahman is proved 
to exist, because our mind moves towards things, because there is 
something in us which moves and perceives, and because there is 
something in us which holds our perceptions together (sankalpa), 
and revives them again by memory. 

I give my translation as hypothetical only, for certainty is ex- 
tremely difficult to attain, when we have to deal with these enigma- 
tical sayings which, when they were first delivered, were necessarily 
accompanied by oral explanations. 

* Tadvana, as a name of Brahman, is explained by ‘the desire of 
it, and derive from van, to desire, the same as vAnaA. 

IV KHANDA, 9. , 153 

been told you. We have told you the Brahmt 
U panishad. 

8. ‘The feet on which that Upanishad stands are 
penance, restraint, sacrifice; the Vedas are all its 
limbs 1, the True is its abode. 

9. ‘He who knows this Upanishad, and has 
shaken off all evil, stands in the endless, uncon- 
querable* world of heaven, yea, in the world 
of heaven.’ 

1 It is impossible to adopt Sankara’s first rendering, ‘the Vedas 
and all the Angas,’ i.e. the six subsidiary doctrines. He sees 
himself that sarvang4ni stands in opposition to pratish/h4 and 
Ayatana, but seeing Veda and Anga together, no Brahman could 
help thinking of the Vedangas. 

3 Might we read agyeye for gyeye? cf. Satap. Brahm. XI, 5, 7, 1.


# AITAREYA-UPANISHAD

# Sacred Books of the East/Volume 1/Aitareya-âranyaka

# Aitareya Upanishad

## FIRST ARANYAKA

## FIRST ADHYAYA

## =FIRST KHANDA=

1. Now follows the Mahavrata ceremony.

2. After having killed Vritra, Indra became great. When he became great, then there was the Mahavrata (the great work). This is why the Mahavrata ceremony is called Mahavrata.

3. Some people say: 'Let the priest make two (recitations with the offering of the) agya (ghee) on that day,'but the right thing is one'.

4. He who desires prosperity should use the hymn, pra vo devayagnaye (Rv. III, 13, I).

5. He who desires increase should use the hymn, viso viso atithim (Rv. VIII, 74, I).

6. The people (visah) indeed are increase, and therefore he (the sacrificer) becomes increased.

7. But (some say), there is the word atithim (in that hymn, which means a guest or stranger, asking for food). Let him not therefore take that hymn. Verily, the atithi (stranger) is able to go begging.

8. 'No,' he said, 'let him take that hymn.

9. 'For he who follows the good road and obtains distinction, he is an atithi (guest).

10. 'They do not consider him who is not so, worthy to be (called) an atithi (guest).

11. 'Therefore let him by all means take that hymn.'

12. If he takes that hymn, let him place the (second) tristich, aganma vritrahantamam, 'we came near to the victorious,' first.

13. For people worship the whole year (performing the GavAmayana sacrifice) wishing for this day (the last but one)-they do come near.

14. The (next following) three tristichs begin with an Anushtubh. Now Brahman is Gayatri, speech is Anushtubh. He thus joins speech with Brahman.

15. He who desires glory should use the hymn, abodhy agnih samidha gananam (Rv. V, i, i).

16. He who desires offspring and cattle should use the hymn, hotaganishta ketanah (Rv. II, 5, i).

## =SECOND KHANDA=

1. He who desires proper food should use the hymn, agnim naro didhitibhih (Rv. VII, I, 1).

2. Verily, Agni (fire) is the eater of food.

In the other (recitations accompanying the) offerings of Agya (where Agni is likewise mentioned) the worshipers come more slowly near to Agni (because the name of Agni does not stand at the beginning of the hymn). But here a worshipper obtains proper food at once, he strikes down evil at once.

3. Through the words (occurring in the second foot of the first verse), hastakyuti ganayanta, 'they caused the birth of Agni by moving their arms,' the hymn becomes endowed with (the word) birth. Verily, the sacrificer is born from this day of the sacrifice, and therefore the hymn is endowed with (the word) birth.

4. There are four metrical feet (in the Trishtubh verses of this hymn). Verily, cattle have four feet, therefore they serve for the gaining of cattle.

5. There are three metrical feet (in the Virag verses of this hymn). Verily, three are these three-fold worlds. Therefore they serve for the conquest of the worlds.

6. These (the Trishtubh and Virag verses of the hymn) form two metres, which form a support (pratishihi). Verily, man is supported by two (feet), cattle by four feet. Therefore this hymn places the sacrificer who stands on two feet among cattle which stand on four.

7. By saying them straight on there are twenty-five verses in this hymn. Man also consists of twenty-five. There are ten fingers on his hands, ten toes on his feet, two legs, two arms, and the trunk (Atman) the twenty-fifth. He adorns that trunk, the twenty-fifth, by this hymn.

8. And then this day (of the sacrifice) consists of twenty-five, and the Stoma hymn of that day consists of twenty-five' (verses); it becomes the same through the same. Therefore these two, the day and the hymn, are twenty-five.

9. These twenty-five verses, by repeating the first thrice and the last thrice, become thirty less one. This is a Virag verse (consisting of thirty syllables), too small by one. Into the small (heart) the vital spirits are placed, into the small stomach food is placed 3, therefore this Virag, small by one, serves for the obtainment of those desires.

10. He who knows this, obtains those desires.

11. The verses (contained in the hymn agnim naro didhitibhih) become the Brihati metre and the Virag metre, (they become) the perfection which belongs to that day (the mahavrata). Then they also become Anushtubh, for the offerings of agya (ghee) dwell in Anushtubhs.

## =THIRD KHANDA=

1. Some say: 'Let him take a Gayatri hymn for the Pra-uga. Verily, Gayatri is brightness and glory of countenance, and thus the sacrificer becomes bright and glorious.'

2. Others say: 'Let him take a Ushnih hymn for the Pra-uga. Verily, Ushnih is life, and thus the sacrificer has a long life.'

:Others say: 'Let him take an Anushtubh hymn for the Pra-uga. Verily, Anushtubh is valour, and it serves for obtaining valour.'

:Others say: 'Let him take a Brihati hymn for the Pra-uga. Verily, Brihati is fortune, and thus the sacrificer becomes fortunate.'

:Others say: 'Let him take a Pankti hymn for the Pra-uga. Verily, Pankti is food, and thus the sacrificer becomes rich in food.'

:Others say: 'Let him take a Trishtubh hymn for the Pra-uga. Verily, Trishtubh is strength, and thus the sacrificer becomes strong.'

:Others say: 'Let him take a Gagati hymn for the Pra-uga. Verily, cattle is Gagati-like, and thus the sacrificer becomes rich in cattle.'

3. But we say: 'Let him take a Gayatri hymn only. Verily, Gayatri is Brahman, and that day (the mahavrata) is (for the attainment of) Brahman. Thus he obtains Brahman by means of Brahman.

4. 'And it must be a Gayatri hymn by Madhutkhandas,

5. 'For Madhutkhandas is called Madhutkhandas, because he wishes (khandati) for honey (madhu) for the.Rishis.

6. 'Now food verily is honey, all is honey, all desires are honey, and thus if he recites the hymn of Madhutkhandas, it serves for the attainment of all desires.

7. 'He who knows this, obtains all desires.' This (Gayatri pra-uga), according to the one-day (ekaha) ceremonial ,is perfect in form. On that day (the mahavrata) much is done now and then which has to be hidden, and has to be atoned for (by recitation of hymns). Atonement (santi) is rest, the one-day sacrifice. Therefore at the end of the year (on the last day but one of the sacrifice that lasts a whole year) the sacrificers rest on this atonement as their rest.

8. He who knows this rests firm, and they also for whom a Hotri priest who knows this, recites this hymn.

## =FOURTH KHANDA=

1. Rv. I, 2, 1-3. Vayav a yahi darsateme soma aram kritah, 'Approach, 0 Vayu, conspicuous, these Somas have been made ready.' Because the word ready occurs in these verses, therefore is this day (of the sacrifice) ready (and auspicious) for the sacrificer and for the gods.

2. Yes, this day is ready (and auspicious) to him who knows this, or for whom a Hotri priest who knows this, recites.

3. Rv. I, 2, 4-6. Indravaya ime suta, a yatam upa nishkritam, 'Indra and Viyu, these Somas are prepared, come hither towards what has been prepared-.' By nishkrita, prepared, he means what has been well prepared (samskrita).

4. Indra and Vayu go to what has been prepared by him who knows this, or for whom a Hotri priest who knows this, recites.

5. Rv. I, 2, 7. Mitram huve putadaksham, dhiyam ghritakim sadhana, 'I call Mitra of holy strength; (he and Varuna) they fulfill the prayer accompanied with clarified butter.' Verily, speech is the prayer accompanied with clarified butter.

6. Speech is given to him who knows this, or for whom a Hotri priest who knows this, recites.

7. Rv. I, 3, 1. Asvina yagvarir ishah, 'O Asvinau, (eat) the sacrificial offerings.' Verily, the sacrificial offerings are food, and this serves for the acquirement of food.

8. Rv. I, 3, 3. A yatam rudravartani, 'Come hither, ye Rudravartani.'

9. The Asvinau go to the sacrifice of him who knows this, or for whom a Hotri priest who knows this, recites.

10. Rv. I, 3, 4-6. Indra yahi kitrabhano, indra yahi dhiyeshitah, indra yahi tutugana, 'Come hither, Indra, of bright splendour, Come hither, Indra, called by prayer, Come hither, Indra, quickly!' Thus he recites, Come hither, come hither!

11. Indra comes to the sacrifice of him who knows this, or for whom a Hotri priest who knows this, recites.

12. Rv. I, 3, 7. Omasas karshanidhrito visve devasa a gata, 'Visve Devas, protectors, supporters of men, come hither!'

13. Verily, the Visve Devas come to the call of him who knows this, or for whom a Hotri priest who knows this, recites.

14. Rv. 1, 3, 7. Dasvamso dasushah sutam, 'Come ye givers to the libation of the giver!' By dasushah he means dadushah, 1. e. to the libation of every one that gives.

15. The gods fulfill his wish, with whatever wish he recites this verse,

16. (The wish of him) who knows this, or for whom a Hotri priest who knows this, recites.

17. Rv. 1, 3, 10. Pavaka nah sarasvati yagnam vashtu dhiyavasuh, 'May the holy Sarasvati accept our sacrifice, rich in prayer!' Speech is meant by rich in prayer.'

18. Speech is given to him who knows this, or for whom a Hotri priest who knows this, recites.

19. And when he says, 'May she accept our sacrifice!' what he means is," May she carry off our sacrifice!'

20. If these verses are recited straight on, they are twenty-one. Man also consists of twenty-one. There are ten fingers on his hands, ten toes on his feet, and the trunk the twenty-first. He adorns that trunk, the twenty-first, by this hymn.

21. By repeating the first and the last verses thrice, they become twenty-five. The trunk is the twenty-fifth, and Pragapati is the twenty-fifth. There are ten fingers on his hands, ten toes on his feet, two legs, two arms, and the trunk the twenty-fifth. He adorns that trunk, the twenty-fifth, by this hymn'.

Now this day consists of twenty-five, and the Stoma hymn of that day consists of twenty-five: it becomes the same through the same. Therefore these two, the day and the hymn, are twenty-five, yea, twenty-five.

## SECOND ADHYAYA

## =FIRST KHANDA=

1. The two trikas, Rv. VIII, 68, 1-3, a tva ratham yathotaye, and Rv. VIII, 2, 1-3, idam vaso sutam andhah, form the first (pratipad) and the second (anukara) of the Marutvatiya hymn.

2. Both, as belonging to the one-day ceremonial, are perfect in form. On that day much is done now and then which has to be hidden, and has to be atoned for. Atonement is rest, the one-day sacrifice. Therefore at the end of the year the sacrificers rest on this atonement as their rest. He who knows this rests firm, and they also for whom a Hotri priest who knows this, recites this hymn .

3. In the second verse of (the Pragatha), indra nediya ed ihi, pra su tira sakibhir ye ta ukthinah (Rv. VIII, 53, 5, 6), there occurs the word ukthinah, reciters of hymns. Verily, this day (the mahavrata) is an uktha (hymn), and as endowed with an uktha, the form of this day is perfect.

4. In the first verse (of another Pragatha) the word vira, strong, occurs (Rv. I, 40, 3), and as endowed with the word vira, strong, the form of this day is perfect.

5. In the second verse (of another Pragatha) the word suviryam, strength, occurs (Rv. 1. 40, 1), and as endowed with the word suvirya, strength, the form of this day is perfect.

6. In the first verse (of another Pragatha) the word ukthyam, to be hymned, occurs (Rv. I, 40, 5) Verily, this day is an uktha, and as endowed with an uktha, the form of this day is perfect.

7. In the (Dhayya) verse agnir neta (Rv. III, 20, 4) the word vritraha, killer of Vritra, occurs. The killing of Vritra is a form (character) of Indra, this day (the mahavrata) belongs to Indra, and this is the (perfect) form of that day.

8. In the (Dhayya) verse tvam soma kratubhih sukratur bhuh (Rv. 1, 91, 2) the word vrisha, powerful, occurs. Powerful is a form (character) of Indra, this day belongs to Indra, and this is the (perfect) form of that day.

9. In the (Dhayya) verse pinvanty apah (Rv. I, 64, 6) the word vaginam, endowed with food, occurs. Endowed with food is a form (character) of Indra, this day belongs to Indra, and this is the (perfect) form of that day.

10. In the same verse the word stanayantam, thundering, occurs. Endowed with thundering is a form (character) of Indra, this day belongs to Indra, and this is the (perfect) form of that day.

11. In (the Pragatha) pra va indraya brihate (Rv. VIII,89,3) (the word brihat occurs). Verily, brihat is mahat (great), and as endowed with mahat, great, the form of this day (mahavrata) is perfect.

12. In (the Pragatha) brihad indraya gdyata (Rv. VI II, 89, 1) (the word brihat occurs). Verily, brihat is mahat (great), and as endowed with mahat, the form of this day is perfect.

13. In (the Pragatha) nakih sudaso ratham pary asa na riramad (Rv. VII, 32, 10) the words paryasa (he moved round) and na riramad (he did not enjoy) occur, and as endowed with the words paryasta and rinti the form of this day is perfect. He recites all (these) Pragathas, in order to obtain all the days (of the sacrifice), all the Ukthas, all the Prishthas, all the Sastras, all the Pra-ugas and all the Savanas (libations).

## =SECOND KHANDA=

1. He recites the hymn, asat su me garitah sabhivegah (Rv. X, 2 7, 1), (and in it the word) satyadhvritam, the destroyer of truth. Verily, that day is truth, and as endowed with the word satya, truth, the form of this day is perfect.

2. That hymn is composed by Vasukra. Verily, Vasukra is Brahman, and that day is Brahman. Thus he obtains Brahman by means of Brahman.

3. Here they say: 'Why then is that Marutvatiya hymn completed by the hymn of Vasukra?' Surely because no other Rishi but Vasukra brought out a Marutvatiya hymn, or divided it properly. Therefore that Marutvatiya hymn is completed by the hymn of Vasukra.

4. That hymn, asat su me, is not definitely addressed to any deity, and is therefore supposed to be addressed to Pragapati. Verily, Pragapati is indefinite, and therefore the hymn serves to win Pragapati.

5. Once in the hymn (Rv. X, 27, 22) he defines Indra (indraya sunvat); therefore it does not fall off from its form, as connected with Indra.

6. He recites the hymn (Rv. VI, 17, 1) piba somam abhi yam ugra tardah.

7. In the verse Pirvam gavyam mahi grinana indra the word mahi, great, occurs. Endowed with the word mahat, the form of this day is perfect.

8. That hymn is composed by Bharadvaga, and Bharadvaga was he who knew most, who lived longest, and performed the greatest austerities among the Rishis, and by this hymn he drove away evil. Therefore if he recites the hymn of Bharadvaga, then, after having driven away evil, he becomes learned, long-lived, and full of austerities.

9. He recites the hymn kaya, subha savayasah sanilah (Rv. I, 165, 1).

10. In the verse a sasate prati haryanty uktha (Rv. I, 165, 4) the word uktha occurs. Verily, that day (the mahdvrata) is uktha (hymn). Endowed with the word uktha, the form of this day becomes perfect.

11. That hymn is called Kayasubhiya. Verily, that hymn, which is called Kayasubhiya, is mutual understanding and it is lasting. By means of it Indra, Agastya, and the Maruts came to a mutual understanding. Therefore, if he recites the Kayasubhiya hymn, it serves for mutual understanding.

12. The same hymn is also long life. Therefore, if the sacrificer is dear to the Hotri, let him recite the Kayasubhiya hymn for him.

13. He recites the hymn marutvan indra vrishabo ranaya (Rv. III, 47, 1).

14. In it the words indra vrishabha (powerful) occur. Verily, powerful is a form of Indra, this day belongs to Indra, and this is the perfect form of that day.

15. That hymn is composed by Visvamitra. Verily, Visvamitra was the friend (mitra) of all (visva).

16. Everybody is the friend of him who knows this, and for whom a Hotri priest who knows this, recites this hymn.

17. The next hymn, ganishtha ugrah sahase turaya (Rv. I, 73, 1), forms a Nividdhana, and, according to the one-day (ekaha) ceremonial, is perfect in form. On that day much is done now and then which has to be hidden, and has to be atoned for (by recitation of hymns). Atonement is rest, the one-day sacrifice. Therefore at the end of the year (on the last day but one of the sacrifice that lasts a whole year) the sacrificers rest on this atonement as their rest.

He who knows this rests firm, and they also for whom a Hotri priest who knows this, recites this hymn .

18. These, if recited straight on, are ninety-seven verses. The ninety are three Virag, each consisting of thirty, and then the seven verses which are over. Whatever is the praise of the seven, is. the praise of ninety also.

19. By repeating the first and last verses three times each, they become one hundred and one verses.

20. There are five fingers, of four joints each, two pits (in the elbow and the arm), the arm, the eye, the shoulder-blade; this makes twenty-five. The other three parts have likewise twenty-five each 1. That makes a hundred, and the trunk is the one hundred and first.

21. Hundred is life, health, strength, brightness. The sacrificer as the one hundred and first rests in life, health, strength, and brightness.

22. These verses become Trishtubh, for the noonday-libation consists of Trishtubh verses.

## =THIRD KHANDA=

1. They say: 'What is the meaning of prenkha, swing?' Verily, he is the swing, who blows (the wind). He indeed goes forward (pra + inkhate) in these worlds, and that is why the swing is called prenkha.

2. Some say, that there should be one plank, because the wind blows in one way, and it should be like the wind.

3. That is not to be regarded.

4. Some say, there should be three planks, because there are these three threefold worlds, and it should be like them.

5. That is not to be regarded.

6. Let there be two, for these two worlds (the earth and heaven) are seen as if most real, while the ether (space) between the two is the sky (antariksha). Therefore let there be two planks.

7. Let them be made of Udumbara wood. Verily, the Udumbara tree is sap and eatable food, and thus it serves to obtain sap and eatable food.

8. Let them be elevated in the middle (between the earth and the cross-beam). Food, if placed in the middle, delights man, and thus he places the sacrificer in the middle of eatable food.

9. There are two kinds of rope, twisted towards the right and twisted towards the left. The right ropes serve for some animals, the left ropes for others. If there are both kinds of rope, they serve for the attainment of both kinds of cattle.

10. Let them be made of Darbha (Kusa grass), for among plants Darbha is free from evil, therefore they should be made of Darbha grass.

## =FOURTH KHANDA=

1. Some say: 'Let the swing be one ell (aratni) above the ground, for by that measure verily the Svarga worlds are measured. That is not to be regarded.

2. Others say: 'Let it be one span (pradesa), for by that measure verily the vital airs were measured.' That is not to be regarded.

3. Let it be one fist (mushti), for by that measure verily all eatable food is made, and by that measure all eatable food is taken; therefore let it be one fist above the ground.

4. They say: 'Let him mount the swing from east to west, like he who shines; for the sun mounts these worlds from east to west.' That is not to be regarded.

5. Others say: 'Let him mount the swing sideways, for people mount a horse sideways, thinking that thus they will obtain all desires.' That is not to be regarded.

6. They say: 'Let him mount the swing from behind, for people mount a ship from behind, and this swing is a ship in which to go to heaven.' Therefore let him mount it from behind.

7. Let him touch the swing with his chin (khubuka). The parrot (suka) thus mounts a tree, and he is of all birds the one who eats most food. Therefore let him touch it with his chin.

8. Let him mount the swing with his arms. The hawk swoops thus on birds and on trees, and he is of all birds the strongest. Therefore let him mount with his arms.

9. Let him not withdraw one foot (the right or left) from the earth, for fear that he may lose his hold.

10. The Hotri mounts the swing, the Udgatri the seat made of Udumbara wood. The swing is masculine, the seat feminine, and they form a union. Thus he makes a union at the beginning of the uktha in order to get offspring.

11. He who knows this, gets offspring and cattle.

12. Next the swing is food, the seat fortune. Thus he mounts and obtains food and fortune.

13. The Hotrakas (the Prasastri, Brahmanakkhamsin, Potri, Neshtri, Agnidhra, and Akkhavaka) together with the Brahman sit down on cushions made of grass, reeds, leaves, &c.

14. Plants and trees, after they have grown up, bear fruit. Thus if the priests mount on that day altogether (on their seats), they mount on solid and fluid as their proper food. Therefore this serves for the attainment of solid as proper food.

15. Some say: 'Let him descend after saying vashai.' That is not to be regarded. For, verily, that respect is not shown which is shown to one who does not see it.

16. Others say: ' Let him descend after he has taken the food in his hand.' That is not to be regarded. For, verily, that respect is not shown which is shown to one after he has approached quite close.

17. Let him descend after he has seen the food. For, verily, that is real respect which is shown to one when he sees it. Only after having actually seen the food (that is brought to the sacrifice), let him descend from the swing.

18. Let him descend turning towards the east, for in the east the seed of the gods springs up. Therefore let him rise turning towards the east, yea, turning towards the east.

## THIRD ADHYAYA

## =FIRST KHANDA=

1. Let him begin this day with singing 'Him,' thus they say.

2. Verily, the sound Him is Brahman, that day also is Brahman. He who knows this, obtains Brahman even by Brahman.

3. As he begins with the sound Him, surely that masculine sound of Him and the feminine Rik (the verse) make a couple. Thus he makes a couple at the beginning of the hymn in order to get offsprin g. He who knows this, gets cattle and offspring.

4. Or, as he begins with the sound Him, surely like a wooden spade, so the sound Him serves to dig up Brahman (the sap of the Veda). And as a man wishes to dig up any, even the hardest soil, with a spade, thus he digs up Brahman.

5. He who knows this digs up, by means of the sound Him, everything he may desire.

6. If he begins with the sound Him, that sound is the holding apart of divine and human speech. Therefore, he who begins, after having uttered the sound Him, holds apart divine and human speech.

## =SECOND KHANDA=

1. And here they ask: 'What is the beginning of this day?' Let him say: 'Mind and speech.'

2. All desires dwell in the one (mind), the other yields all desires.

3. All desires dwell in the mind, for with the mind he conceives all desires.

4. All desires come to him who knows this.

5. Speech yields all desires, for with speech he declares all his desires.

6. Speech yields all desires to him who knows this.

7. Here they say: 'Let him not begin this day with a Rik, a Yagus, or a Saman verse (divine speech), for it is said, he should not start with a .Rik, a Yagus, or a Saman.'

8. Therefore, let him say these Vyahritis (sacred interjections) first.

9. These interjections Bhus, Bhuvas, Svar are the three Vedas, Bhus the Rig-veda, Bhuvas the Yag-ur-veda, Svar the Sama-veda. Therefore (by intercalating these) he does not begin simply with a Rik, Yag-us, or Saman verse, he does not start with a Rik, Yagus, or Saman verse.

## =THIRD KHANDA=

He begins with tad, this, (the first word of the first hymn, tad id asa). Verily 'this, this' is food, and thus he obtains food.

2. Pragapati indeed uttered this as the first word, consisting of one or two syllables, viz. tata and tata (or tat) And thus does a child, as soon as he begins to speak, utter the word, consisting of one or two syllables, viz. tata and tata (or tat). With this very word, consisting of tat or tatta, he begins.

3. This has been said by a.Rishi (Rv. X, 7 1, 1):-

4. '0 Brihaspati, the first point of speech;'-for this is the first and highest point of speech.

5. 'That which you have uttered, making it a name;'-for names are made by speech.

6. 'That (name) which was the best and without a flaw;'-for this is the best and without a flaw.

7. 'That which was hidden by their love, is made manifest;'-for this was hidden in the body, viz. those deities (which enter the body, Agni as voice, entering the mouth, &c.); and that was manifest among the gods in heaven. This is what was intended by the verse.

## =FOURTH KHANDA=

1. He begins with: 'That indeed was the oldest in the worlds;'-for that (the Brahman) is verily the oldest in the worlds.

2. 'Whence was born the fierce one, endowed with brilliant force;'-for from it was born the fierce one, who is endowed with brilliant force.

3. 'When born he at once destroys the enemies;'- for he at once when born struck down the evil one.

4. 'He after whom all friends rejoice;'- verily all friends are the creatures, and they rejoice after him, saying, ' He has risen, he has risen.'

5. 'Growing by strength, the almighty;'-for he (the sun) does grow by strength, the almighty.

6. 'He, as enemy, causes fear to the slave;'-for everything is afraid of him.

7. 'Taking the breathing and the not-breathing;' this means the living and the lifeless.

8. 'Whatever has been offered at feasts came to thee;'-this means everything is in thy power.

9. 'All turn their thought also on thee;'-this means all these beings, all minds, all thoughts also turn to thee.

10. 'When these two become three protectors;'- i..e. when these two united beget offspring.

11. He who knows this, gets offspring and cattle.

12. 'Join what is sweeter than sweet (offspring) with the sweet (the parents);'- for the couple (father and mother) is sweet, the offspring is sweet, and he thus joins the offspring with the couple.

13. 'And this (the son, when married) being very sweet, conquered through the sweet;'- i.e. the couple is sweet, the offspring is sweet, and thus through the couple he conquers offspring.

14. This is declared by a Rishi: 'Because he (Pragapati) raised his body (the hymn tad id asa or the Veda in general) in the body (of the sacrificer)' (therefore that Nishkevalya hymn is praised);

- i. e. this body, consisting of the Veda, in that corporeal form (of the sacrificer).

15. 'Then let this body indeed be the medicine of that body;'- i.e. this body, consisting of the Veda, of that corporeal form (of the sacrificer).

16. Of this (the first foot of Rv. X, 120, 1) the eight syllables are Gayatri, the eleven syllables are Trishtubh the twelve syllables are Gagati, the ten syllables are Virag. The Virag, consisting of ten syllables, rests in these three metres.

17. The word purusha, consisting of three syllables, that indeed goes into the Virag.

18. Verily, these are all metres, these (Gayatri, Trishtubh, Gagati) having the Virag as the fourth. In this manner this day is complete in all metres to him who knows this.

## =FIFTH KHANDA=

1. He extends these (verses) by (interpolating) the sound. Verily, the sound is purusha, man. Therefore every man when he speaks, sounds loud, as it were.

2. At the end of each foot of the first verse of the hymn tad id asa, he inserts one foot of the second verse of hymn Rv. VIII, 69, nadam va odatinam, &c. Thus the verse is to be recited as follows:

:Tad id asa bhuvaneshu gyeshtham pu nadam va odatinam,

:Yato gagna ugras tveshanrimno ru nadam yoyuvatinam,

:Sadyo gagnano ni rinati satrun patim vo aghnyanam,

:Anu yam visve madanti umah sho dhenunam ishudhyasi.

In nadam va odatinam (Rv. VI II, 69, 2), odati are the waters in heaven, for they water all this; and they are the waters in the mouth, for they water all good food.

3. In nadam yoyuvatinam (Rv. VI II, 69, 2), yoyuvati are the waters in the sky, for they seem to inundate; and they are the waters of perspiration, for they seem to run continually.

4. In patim vo aghnyanam (Rv. VIII, 69, 2), aghnya are the waters which spring from the smoke of fire, and they are the waters which spring from the organ.

5. In dhenunam ishudhyasi (Rv. VIII, 69, 2), the dhenu (cows) are the waters, for they delight all this; and ishudhyasi means, thou art food.

6. He extends a Trishtubh and an Anushtubh. Trishtubh is the man, Anushtubh the wife, and they make a couple. Therefore does a man, after having found a wife, consider himself a more perfect man.

7. These verses, by repeating the first three times, become twenty-five. The trunk is the twenty-fifth, and Pragapati is the twenty-fifth. There are ten fingers on his hands, ten toes on his feet, two legs, two arms, and the trunk the twenty-fifth. He adorns that trunk as the twenty-fifth. Now this day consists of twenty-five, and the Stoma hymn of that day consists of twenty-five: it becomes the same through the same. Therefore the two, the day and the hymn, are twenty-five.

## =SIXTH KHANDA=

This is an exact repetition of the third khanda. According to the commentator, the third khanda was intended for the glory of the first word tad, while the sixth is intended for the glory of the whole hymn.

## =SEVENTH KHANDA=

1. He begins with the hymn, Tad id asa bhuvaneshu gyeshtham (Rv. X, 120). Verily, gyeshtha, the oldest, is mahat, great. Endowed with mahat the form of this day is perfect.

2. Then follows the hymn, Tam su te kirtim maghavan mahitva (Rv. X, 54), with the auspicious word mahitva.

3. Then follows the hymn, Bhuya id vavridhe viryaya (Rv. VI, 30), with the auspicious word virya.

4. Then follows the hymn, NrinAm u tvA nritamam gobhir ukthaih (Rv. 1, 51, 4), with the auspicious word uktha.

5. He extends the first two padas, which are too small, by one syllable (Rv. X, 120, 1 a, and Rv. VIII, 69, 2 a) 2. Into the small heart the vital spirits are placed, into the small stomach food is placed. It serves for the attainment of these desires. He who knows this, obtains these desires.

6. The two feet, each consisting of ten syllable (Rv. X, I 20, 1 a, b), serve for the gaining of both kinds of food, of what has feet (animal food), and what has no feet (vegetable food).

7. They come to be of eighteen syllables each. Of those which are ten, nine are the pranas (opening of the body), the tenth is the (vital) self. This is the perfection of the (vital) self. Eight syllables remain in each. He who knows them, obtains whatever he desires.

## =EIGHTH KHANDA=

1. He extends (these verses) by (interpolating) the sound. Verily, breath (prana) is sound. Therefore every breath when it sounds, sounds loud, as it were.

2. The verse (VIII, 69, 2) nadam va odatinam, &c., is by its syllables an Ushnih, by its feet an Anushtubh. Ushnih is life, Anushtubh, speech. He thus places life and speech in him (the sacrificer.)

3. By repeating the first verse three times, they become twenty-five. The trunk is the twenty-fifth, and Pragapati is the twenty-fifth. There are ten fingers on his hands, ten toes on his feet, two legs, two arms, and the trunk the twenty-fifth. He adorns that trunk as the twenty-fifth. Now this day consists of twenty-five, and the Stoma hymn of that day consists of twenty-five: it becomes the same through the same. Therefore the two, the day and the hymn, are twenty-five. This is the twenty-fifth with regard to the body.

4. Next, with regard to the deities: The eye, the ear, the mind, speech, and breath, these five deities (powers) have entered into that person (purusha), and that person entered into the five deities. He is wholly pervaded there with his limbs to the very hairs and nails. Therefore all beings to the very insects are born as pervaded (by the deities or senses).

5. This has been declared by a Rishi (Rv. X, 114, 8):-

6. 'A thousandfold are these fifteen hymns;'-for five arise from ten.

7. 'As large as heaven and earth, so large is it;'-verily, the self (givatman) is as large as heaven and earth.

8. 'A thousandfold are the thousand powers by saying this the poet pleases the hymns (the senses), and magnifies them.

9. 'As far as Brahman reaches, so far reaches speech;'-wherever there is Brahman, there is a word; and wherever there is a word, there is Brahman, this was intended.

10. The first of the hymns among all those hymns has nine verses. Verily, there are nine pranas (openings), and it serves for their benefit.

11. Then follows a hymn of six verses. Verily, the seasons are six, and it serves to obtain them.

12. Then follows a hymn of five verses. Verily, the Pankti consists of five feet. Verily, Pankti is food, and it serves for the gaining of proper food.

13. Then follows a tristich. Three are these threefold worlds, and it serves to conquer them.

14. These verses become Brihatis, that metre being immortal, leading to the world of the Devas. That body of verses is the trunk (of the bird represented by the whole sastra), and thus it is. He who knows this comes by this way (by making the verses the trunk of the bird) near to the immortal Self, yea, to the immortal Self.

## FOURTH ADHYAYA

## =FIRST KHANDA=

1. Next comes the Sudadohas verse. Sudadohas is breath, and thereby he joins all joints with breath.

2. Next follow the neck verses. They recite them as Ushnih, according to their metre.

3. Next comes (again) the Sudadohas verse. Sudadohas is breath, and thereby he joins all joints with breath.

4. Next follows the head. That is in Gayatri verses. The Gayatri is the beginning of all metres; the head the first of all members. It is in Arkavat verses (Rv. 1, 7, 1-9). Arka is Agni. They are nine verses. The head consists of nine pieces. He recites the tenth verse, and that is the skin and the hairs on the head. It serves for reciting one verse more than (the nine verses contained in) the Stoma. These form the Trivrit Stoma and the Gayatri metre, and whatever there exists, all this is produced after the production of this Stoma and this metre. Therefore the recitation of these head-hymns serves for production.

5. He who knows this, gets offspring and cattle.

6. Next comes the Sudadohas verse. Verily, Sudadohas is breath, and thereby he joins all joints With breath.

7. Next follow the vertebrae (of the bird). These verses are Virag (shining). Therefore man says to man, 'Thou shinest above us;' or to a stiff and proud man, 'Thou carriest thy neck stiff.' Or because the (vertebrae of the neck) run close together, they are taken to be the best food. For Virag is food, and food is strength.

8. Next comes the Sudadohas verse. Sudadohas is breath, and thereby he joins all joints with breath.

## =SECOND KHANDA=

1. Next follows the right wing. It is this world (the earth), it is this Agni, it is speech, it is the Rathantara, it is Vasishtha, it is a hundred. These are the six powers (of the right wing). The Sampata hymn (Rv. IV, 20) serves indeed for obtaining desires and for firmness. The Pankti verse (Rv. I, 8o, 1) serves for proper food.

2. Next comes the Sudadohas verse. Sudadohas is breath, thereby he joins all joints with breath.

3. Next follows the left wing. It is that world (heaven), it is that sun, it is mind, it is the Brihat, it is Bharadvaga, it is a hundred. These are the six powers (of the left wing). The Sampata hymn (Rv. IV, 23) serves indeed for obtaining desires and for firmness. The Pankti verse (Rv. 1, 81, 1) serves for proper food.

4. These two (the right and the left wings) are deficient and excessive. The Brihat (the left wing) is man, the Rathantara (the right wing) is woman. The excess belongs to the man, the deficiency to the woman. Therefore they are deficient and excessive.

5. Now the left wing of a bird is verily by one feather better, therefore the left wing is larger by one verse.

6. Next comes the Sudadohas verse. Sudadohas is breath, and thereby he joins all joints with breath.

7. Next follows the tail. They are twenty-one Dvipada verses. For there are twenty-one backward feathers in a bird.

8. Then the Ekavimsa is the support of all Stomas, and the tail the support of all birds.

9. He recites a twenty-second verse. This is made the form of two supports. Therefore all birds support themselves on their tail, and having supported themselves on their tail, they fly up. For the tail is a support.

10. He (the bird and the hymn) is supported by two decades which are Virag. The man (the sacrificer) is supported by the two Dvipadas, the twenty-first and twenty-second. That which forms the bird serves for the attainment of all desires; that which forms the man, serves for his happiness, glory, proper food, and honour.

11. Next comes a Sudadohas verse, then a Dhayya, then a Sudadohas verse. The Sudadohas is a man, the Dhayya a woman, therefore he recites the Dhayya as embraced on both sides by the Sudadohas. Therefore does the seed of both, when it is effused, obtain oneness, and this with regard to the woman only. Hence birth takes place in and from the woman. Therefore he recites that Dhayya in that place.

## =THIRD KHANDA=

1. He recites the eighty tristichs of Gatatris. Verily, the eighty Gatatri tristichs are this world (earth). Whatever there is in this world of glory, greatness, wives, food, and honour, may I obtain it, may I win it, may it be mine.

2. Next comes the Sudadohas verse. Sudadohas verily is breath. He joins this world with breath.

3. He recites the eighty tristichs of Brihatis. Verily, the eighty Brihati tristichs are the world of the sky. Whatever there is in the world of the sky of glory, greatness, wives, food, and honour, may I obtain it, may I win it, may it be mine.

4. Next comes the Sudadohas verse. Sudadohas verily is breath. He joins the world of the sky with breath.

5. He recites the eighty tristichs of Ushnih. Verily, the eighty Ushnih tristichs are that world, the heaven. Whatever there is in that world of glory, greatness, wives, food, and honour, also the divine being of the Devas (Brahman), may I obtain it, may I win it, may it be mine.

6. Next comes the Sudadohas verse. Sudadohas verily is the breath. He joins that world with breath, yea, with breath.

## FIFTH ADHYAYA

## =FIRST KHANDA=

1. He recites the Vasa hymn, wishing, May everything be in my power.

2. They (its verses) are twenty-one, for twenty-one are the parts (the lungs, spleen, &c.) in the belly.

3. Then the Ekavimsa is verily the support of all Stomas, and the belly the support of all food.

4. They consist of different metres. Verily, the intestines are confused, some small, some large.

5. He recites them with the pranava, according to the metre, and according to rule. Verily, the intestines are according to rule, as it were; some shorter, some longer.

6. Next comes the Sudadohas verse. Sudadohas verily is breath. He joins the joints with breath.

7. After having recited that verse twelve times he leaves it off there. These pranas are verily twelve-fold, seven in the head, two on the breast, three below. In these twelve places the pranas are contained, there they are perfect. Therefore he leaves it off there.

8. The hymn indragni yuvam su nah (Rv. VIII, 40) forms the two thighs (of the bird) belonging to Indra and Agni, the two supports with broad bones.

9. These (verses) consist of six feet, so that they may stand firm. Man stands firm on two feet, animals on four. He thus places man (the sacrificer), standing on two feet, among four-footed cattle.

10. The second verse has seven feet, and he makes it into a Gayatri and Anushtubh. Gayatri is Brahman, Anushtubh is speech; and he thus puts together speech with Brahman.

11. He recites a Trishtubh at the end. Trishtubh is strength, and thus does he come round animals by strength. Therefore animals come near where there is strength (of command, &c.); they come to be roused and to rise up, (they obey the commands of a strong shepherd.)

## =SECOND KHANDA=

1. When he recites the Nishkevalya hymn addressed to Indra (Rv. X, 50), pra vo mahe, he inserts a Nivid (between the fourth and fifth verses). Thus he clearly places strength in himself (in the vastra, in the bird, in himself).

2. They are Trishtubhs and Gagatis.

3. There they say: 'Why does he insert a Nivid among mixed Trishtubhs and Gagatis?' But surely one metre would never support the Nivid of this day, nor fill it: therefore he inserts the Nivid among mixed Trishiubhs and Gagatis.

4. Let him know that this day has three Nivids: the Vasa hymn is a Nivid, the Valakhilya are a Nivid, and the Nivid itself is a Nivid. Thus let him know that day as having three Nivids.

5. Then follow the hymns vane na va (Rv. X, 29) and yo gata eva (Rv. II, 12). In the fourth verse of the former hymn occur the words anne samasya yad asan manishah, and they serve for the winning of proper food.

6. Then comes an insertion. As many Trishtubh and Gagati verses, taken from the ten Mandalas and addressed to Indra, as they insert (between the two above-mentioned hymns), after changing them into Brihatis, so many years do they live beyond the (usual) age (of one hundred years). By this insertion age is obtained.

7. After that he recites the Saganiya hymn, wishing that cattle may always come to his offspring.

8. Then he recites the Tarkshya hymn . Tarkshya is verily welfare, and the hymn leads to welfare. Thus (by reciting the hymn) he fares well.

9. Then he recites the Ekapada (indro visvam vi ragati), wishing, May I be everything at once, and may I thus finish the whole work of metres.

10. In reciting the hymn indram visvi avivridhan (Rv. 1, 11) he intertwines the first seven verses by intertwining their feet. There are seven pranas (openings) in the head, and he thus places seven pranas in the head. The eighth verse (half-verse) he does not intertwine. The eighth is speech, and he thinks, May my speech never be intertwined with the other pranas. Speech therefore, though dwelling in the same abode as the other pranas, is not intertwined with them.

11. He recites the Virag verses. Verily, Virag verses are food, and they thus serve for the gaining of food.

12. He ends with the hymn of Vasishtha wishing, May I be Vasishiha!

13. But let him end with the fifth verse, esha stomo maha ugraya vahe, which, possessing the word mahat, is auspicious.

14. In the second foot of the fifth verse the word dhuri occurs. Verily, dhuh (the place where the horse is fastened to the car) is the end (of the car). This day also is the end (of the sacrifice which lasts a whole year). Thus the verse is fit for the day.

15. In the third foot the word arka is auspicious.

16. The last foot is: 'Make our glory high as heaven over heaven.' Thus wherever Brahmanic speech is uttered, there his glory will be, when he who knows this finishes with that verse. Therefore let a man who knows this, finish (the Nishkevalya) with that verse.

## =THIRD KHANDA=

1. Tat savitur vrinimahe (Rv. V, 82, 1-3) and adya no deva savitar (Rv. V, 82, 4-6) are the beginning (pratipad) and the next step (anukara) of the Vaisvadeva hymn, taken from the Ekaha ceremonial and therefore proper .

2 On that day much is done now and then which has to be hidden, and has to be atoned for. Atonement is rest, the one-day sacrifice. Therefore at the end of the year the sacrificers rest on this atonement as their rest. He who knows this rests firm, and they also for whom a Hotri priest who knows this, recites this hymn.

3. Then (follows) the hymn addressed to Savitri, tad devasya savitur varyam mahat (Rv. IV, 53). Verily, mahat, great, (in this foot) is the end. This day too is the end. Thus the verse is fit for the day.

4. The hymn katara purva katara parayoh (Rv. 1, 185), addressed to Dyavaprithivi, is one in which many verses have the same ending. Verily, this day also (the mahavrata) is one in which many receive the same reward. Thus it is fit for the day.

5. The hymn anasvo gato anabhisur ukthyah (Rv. IV, 36) is addressed to the Ribhus.

6. In the first verse the word tri (kakrah) occurs, and trivat is verily the end. This day also is the end (of the sacrifice). Thus the verse is fit for the day.

7. The hymn asya vamasya palitasya hotuh (Rv. I, 164), addressed to the Visvedevas, is multiform. This day also is multiform. Thus the verse is fit for the day.

8. He recites the end of it, beginning with gaurir mimiya (Rv. I, 164, 41).

9. The hymn a no bhadrah kratavo yantu visvatah (Rv. I, 89), addressed to the Visvedevas, forms the Nividdhana, taken from the Ekaha ceremonial, and therefore proper.

10. On that day much is done now and then which has to be hidden, and has to be atoned for. Atonement is rest, the one-day sacrifice. Therefore at the end of the year the sacrificers rest on this atonement as their rest. He who knows this rests firm, and they also for whom a Hotri priest who knows this, recites this hymn.

11. The hymn vaisvanaraya dhishanam ritavridhe (Rv. III, 2) forms the beginning of the Agnimaruta. Dhishana, thought, is verily the end, this day also is the end. Thus it is fit for the day.

12. The hymn prayagyavo maruto bhragadrishtayah (Rv. V, 55), addressed to the Maruts, is one in which many verses have the same ending. Verily, this day also is one in which many receive the same reward. Thus it is fit for the day.

13. He recites the verse gatavedase sunavama somam (Rv. 1, 99, 1), addressed to Gatavedas, before the (next following) hymn. That verse addressed to Gatavedas is verily welfare, and leads to welfare. Thus (by reciting it) he fares well.

14. The hymn imam stomam arhate gatavedase (Rv. I, 94), addressed to Gatavedas, is one in which many verses have the same ending. Verily, this day also (the mahavrata) is one in which many receive the same reward. Thus it is fit for the day, yea, it is fit for the day.

## SECOND ARANYAKA

## FIRST ADHYAYA

## =FIRST KHANDA=

1. This is the path : this sacrifice, and this Brahman. This is the true.

2. Let no man swerve from it, let no man transgress it.

3. For the old (sages) did not transgress it, and those who did transgress, became lost.

4. This has been declared by a Rishi (Rv. VIII, 101, 14): 'Three (classes of) people transgressed, others settled down round about the venerable (Agni, fire); the great (sun) stood in the midst of the worlds, the blowing (Vayu, air) entered the Harits (the dawns, or the ends of the earth).'

5. When he says: 'Three (classes of) people trangressed,' the three (classes of) people who trangressed are what we see here (on earth, born again) as birds, trees, herbs, and serpents.

6. When he says: 'Others settled down round about the venerable,' he means those who now sit down to worship Agni (fire).

7. When he says : 'The great stood in the midst of the worlds,' the great one in the midst of the world is meant for this Aditya, the sun.

8. When he says: 'The blowing entered the Harits,' he means that Vayu, the air, the purifier, entered all the corners of the earth.

## =SECOND KHANDA=

1. People say: 'Uktha, uktha,' hymns, hymns! (without knowing what uktha, hymn, means.) The hymn is truly (to be considered as) he earth, for from it all whatsoever exists arises,

2. The object of its praise is Agni (fire), and the eighty verses (of the hymn) are food, for by means of food one obtains everything.

3. The hymn is truly the sky, for the birds fly along the sky, and men drive following the sky. The object of its praise is Vayu (air), and the eighty verses (of the hymn) are food, for by means of food one obtains everything.

4. The hymn is truly the heaven, for from its gift (rain) all whatsoever exists arises. The object of its praise is Aditya (the sun), and the eighty verses are food, for by means of food one obtains everything.

5. So much with reference to the gods (mythological); now with reference to man (physiological).

6. The hymn is truly man. He is great, he is Pragapati. Let him think, I am the hymn.

7. The hymn is his mouth, as before in the case of the earth.

8. The object of its praise is speech, and the eighty verses (of the hymn) are food, for by means of food he obtains everything.

9. The hymn is the nostrils, as before in the case of the sky.

10. The object of its praise is breath, and the eighty verses (of the hymn) are food, for by means of food he obtains everything.

11. The slight bent (at the root) of the nose is, as it were, the place of the brilliant (Aditya, the sun).

12. The Hymn is the forehead, as before in the case of heaven. The object of its praise is the eye, and the eighty verses (of the hymn) are food, for by means of food he obtains everything.

13. The eighty verses (of the hymn) are alike food with reference to the gods as well as with reference to man. For all these beings breathe and live by means of food indeed. By food (given in alms, &c.) he conquers this world, by food (given in sacrifice) he conquers the other. Therefore the eighty verses (of the hymn) are alike food, with reference to the gods as well as with reference to man.

14. All this that is food, and all this that consumes food, is only the earth, for from the earth arises all whatever there is.

15. And all that goes hence (dies on earth), heaven consumes it all; and all that goes thence (returns from heaven to a new life) the earth consumes it all.

16. That earth is thus both food and consumer. He also (the true worshipper who meditates on himself as being the uktha) is both consumer and consumed (subject and object'). No one possesses that which he does not eat, or the things which do not eat him.

## =THIRD KHANDA=

1. Next follows the origin of seed. The seed of Pragapati are the Devas (gods). The seed of the Devas is rain. The seed of rain are herbs. The seed of herbs is food. The seed of food is seed. The seed of seed are creatures. The seed of creatures is the heart. The seed of the heart is the mind. The seed of the mind is speech (Veda). The seed of speech is action (sacrifice). The action done (in a former state) is this man, the abode of Brahman.

2. He (man) consists of food (ira), and because he consists of food (iramaya), he consists of gold (hiranmaya). He who knows this becomes golden in the other world, and is seen as golden (as the sun) for the benefit of all beings.

## =FOURTH KHANDA=

1. Brahman (in the shape of prana, breath) entered into that man by the tips of his feet, and because Brahman entered (prapadyata) into that man by the tips of his feet, therefore people call them the tips of the feet (prapada), but hoofs and claws in other animals.

2. Then Brahman crept up higher, and therefore they were (called), the thighs (uru).

3. Then he said: 'Grasp wide,' and that was (called) the belly (udara).

4. Then he said: 'Make room for me,' and that was (called) the chest (uras).

5. The Sarkarakshyas meditate on the belly as Brahman, the Arunis on the heart. Both (these places) are Brahman indeed.

6. But Brahman crept upwards and came to the head, and because he came to the head, therefore the head is called head.

7. Then these delights alighted in the head, sight, hearing, mind, speech, breath.

8. Delights alight on him who thus knows, why the head is called head.

9. These (five delights or senses) strove together, saying: 'I am the uktha (hymn), I am the uktha.' Well,' they said, 'let us all go out from this body; then on whose departure this body shall fall, he shall be the uktha among us.'

10. Speech went out, yet the body without speaking remained, eating and drinking. Sight went out, yet the body without seeing remained, eating and drinking. Hearing went out, yet the body without hearing remained, eating and drinking. Mind went out, yet the body, as if blinking, remained, eating and drinking. Breath went out, then when breath was gone out, the body fell.

11. It was decayed, and because people said, it decayed, therefore it was (called) body (sarira). That is the reason of its name.

12. If a man knows this, then the evil enemy who hates him decays, or the evil enemy who hates him is defeated.

13. They strove again, saying: 'I am the uktha, I am the uktha.' 'Well,' they said, 'let us enter that body again; then on whose entrance this body shall rise again, he shall be the uktha among us.'

14. Speech entered, but the body lay still. Sight entered, but the body lay still. Hearing entered, but the body lay still. Mind entered, but the body lay still. Breath entered, and when breath had entered, the body rose, and it became the uktha.

15. Therefore breath alone is the uktha.

16. Let people know that breath is the uktha indeed.

17. The Devas (the other senses) said to breath: Thou art the uktha, thou art all this, we are thine, thou art ours.'

18. This has also been said by a Rishi (Rv. VIII, 92, 32): 'Thou art ours, we are thine.'

## =FIFTH KHANDA=

1. Then the Devas carried him (the breath) forth, and being carried forth, he was stretched out, and when people said, 'He was stretched out,' then it was in the morning; when they said, 'He is gone to rest,' then it was in the evening. Day, therefore, is the breathing up, night the breathing down.

2. Speech is Agni, sight that Aditya (sun), mind the moon, hearing the Dis (quarters): this is the prahitam samyoga, the union of the deities as sent forth. These deities (Agni, &c.) are thus in the body, but their (phenomenal) appearance yonder is among the deities-this was intended.

3. And Hiranyadat Vaida also, who knew this (and who by his knowledge had become Hiranyagarbha or the universal spirit), said : 'Whatever they do not give to me, they do not possess themselves.' I know the prahitim samyoga, the union of the deities, as entered into the body. This is it.

4. To him who knows this all creatures, without being constrained, offer gifts.

5. That breath is (to be called) sattya (the true), for sat is breath, ti is food, yam is the sun. This is threefold, and threefold the eye also may be called, it being white, dark, and the pupil. He who knows why true is true (why sattya is sattya), even if he should speak falsely, yet what he says is true.

## =SIXTH KHANDA=

1. Speech is his (the breath's) rope, the names the knots . Thus by his speech as by a rope, and by his names as by knots, all this is bound. For all this are names indeed, and with speech he calls everything.

2. People carry him who knows this, as if they were bound by a rope.

3. Of the body of the breath thus meditated on, the Ushnih verse forms the hairs, the Gayatri the skin, the Trishtubh the flesh, the Anushtlubh the muscles, the Gagati the bone, the Pankti the marrow, the Brihati the breath (prana). He is covered with the verses (khandas, metres). Because he is thus covered with verses, therefore they call them khandas (coverings, metres).

4. If a man knows the reason why khandas are called khandas, the verses cover him in whatever place he likes against any evil deed.

5. This is said by a Rishi (Rv. 1, 164,13):

6. 'I saw (the breath) as a guardian, never tiring, coming and going on his ways (the arteries). That breath (in the body, being identified with the sun among the Devas), illuminating the principal and intermediate quarters of the sky, is returning constantly in the midst of the worlds.'

He says: 'I saw a guardian,' because he, the breath, is a guardian, for he guards everything.

7. He says : 'Never tiring,' because the breath never rests.

8. He says: 'Coming and going on his ways,' because the breath comes and goes on his ways.

9. He says: 'Illuminating the principal and intermediate,' because he illuminates these only, the principal and intermediate quarters of the sky.

10. He says: 'He is returning constantly in the midst of the worlds,' because he returns indeed constantly in the midst of the worlds.

11. And then, there is another verse (Rv. 1, 55, 81): 'They are covered like caves by those who make them,'

12. For all this is covered indeed by breath.

13. This ether is supported by breath as Brihati, and as this ether is supported by breath as Brihati, so one should know that all things, not excepting ants, are supported by breath as Brihati.

## =SEVENTH KHANDA=

1. Next follow the powers of that Person.

2. By his speech earth and fire were created. Herbs are produced on the earth, and Agni (fire) makes them ripe and sweet. 'Take this, take this,' thus saying do earth and fire serve their parent, speech.

3. As far as the earth reaches, as far as fire reaches, so far does his world extend, and as long as the world of the earth and fire does not decay, so long does his world not decay who thus knows this power of speech.

4. By breath (in the nose) the sky and the air were created. People follow the sky, and hear along the sky, while the air carries along pure scent. Thus do sky and air serve their parent, the breath.

As far as the sky reaches, as far as the air reaches, so far does his world extend, and as long as the world of the sky and the air does not decay, so long does his world not decay who thus knows this power of breath.

5. By his eye heaven and the sun were created. Heaven gives him rain and food, while the sun causes his light to shine. Thus do the heaven and the sun serve their parent, the eye. As far as heaven reaches and as far as the sun reaches, so far does his world extend, and as long as the world of heaven and the sun does not decay, so long does his world not decay who thus knows the power of the eye.

6. By his ear the quarters and the moon were created. From all the quarters they come to him, and from all the quarters he hears, while the moon produces for him the bright and the dark halves for the sake of sacrificial work. Thus do the quarters and the moon serve their parent, the ear. As far as the quarters reach and as far as the moon reaches, so far does his world extend, and as long as the world of the quarters and the moon does not decay, so long does his world not decay who thus knows the power of the ear.

7. By his mind the water and Varuna were created. Water yields to him faith (being used for sacred acts), Varuna keeps his offspring within the law. Thus do water and Varuna serve their parent, the mind. As far as water reaches and as far as Varuna reaches, so far does his world extend, and as long as the world of water and Varuna does not decay, so long does his world not decay who thus knows the power of the mind.

## =EIGHTH KHANDA=

1. Was it water really? Was it water? Yes, all this was water indeed. This (water) was the root (cause), that (the world) was the shoot (effect). He (the person) is the father, they (earth, fire, &c.) are the sons. Whatever there is belonging to the son, belongs to the father; whatever there is belonging to the father, belongs to the son. This was intended.

2. Mahidasa Aitareya, who knew this, said: 'I know myself (reaching) as far as the gods, and I know the gods (reaching) as far as me. For these gods receive their gifts from hence, and are supported from hence.'

3. This is the mountain, viz. eye, ear, mind, speech, and breath. They call it the mountain of Brahman.

4. He who knows this, throws down the evil enemy who hates him; the evil enemy who hates him is defeated.

5. He (the Prana, identified with Brahman) is the life, the breath; he is being (while the givatman remains), and not-being (when the givatman departs).

6. The Devas (speech, &c.) worshipped him (prana) as Bhuti or being, and thus they became great beings. And therefore even now a man who sleeps, breathes like bhurbhuh.

7. The Asuras worshipped him as Abhuti or not-being, and thus they were defeated.

8. He who knows this, becomes great by himself, while the evil enemy who hates him, is defeated.

9. He (the breath) is death (when he departs), and immortality (while he abides).

10. And this has been said by a Rishi (Rv. 1, 164, 38):

11. 'Downwards and upwards he (the wind of the breath) goes, held by food;'-for this up-breathing, being held back by the down-breathing, does not move forward (and leave the body altogether).

12. 'The immortal dwells with the mortal;'-for through him (the breath) all this dwells together, the bodies being clearly mortal, but this being (the breath), being immortal.

13. 'These two (body and breath) go for ever in different directions (the breath moving the senses of the body, the body supporting the senses of the breath : the former going upwards to another world, the body dying and remaining on earth). They increase the one (the body), but they do not increase the other,' i. e. they increase these bodies (by food), but this being (breath) is immortal.

14. He who knows this becomes immortal in that world (having become united with Hiranyagarbha), and is seen as immortal (in the sun) by all beings, yea, by all beings.

## SECOND ADHYAYA

## =FIRST KHANDA=

1. He (the sun), who shines, honoured this world (the body of the worshipper, by entering into it), in the form of man (the worshipper who meditates on breath). For he who shines (the sun) is (the same as) the breath. He honoured this (body of the worshipper) during a hundred years, therefore there are a hundred years in the life of a man. Because lie honoured him during a hundred years, therefore there are (the poets of the first Mandala of the Rigveda, called) the Satarkin, (having honour for a hundred years.) Therefore people call him who is really Prana (breath), the Satarkin poets.

2. He (breath) placed himself in the midst of all whatsoever exists. Because he placed himself in the midst of all whatsoever exists, therefore there are (the poets of the second to the ninth Mandala of the Rig-veda, called) the Madhyamas. Therefore people call him who is really Prana (breath), the Madhyama poets.

3. He as up-breathing is the swallower (gritsa), as down-breathing he is delight (mada). Because as up-breathing he is swallower (gritsa) and as downbreathing delight (mada), therefore there is (the poet of the second Mandala of the Rig-veda, called) Gritsamada. Therefore people call him who is really Prana (breath), Gritsamada.

4. Of him (breath) all this whatsoever was a friend. Because of him all (visvam) this whatsoever was a friend (mitram), therefore there is (the poet of the third Mandala of the Rig-veda, called) Visvamitra. Therefore people call him who is really Prana (breath), Visvamitra.

5. The Devas (speech, &c.) said to him (the breath) : 'He is to be loved by all of us.' Because the Devas said of him, that he was to be loved (vama) by all of them, therefore there is (the poet of the fourth Mandala of the Rig-veda, called) Vamadeva. Therefore people call him who is really Prana (breath), Vamadeva

6. He (breath) guarded all this whatsoever from evil. Because he guarded (atrayata) all this whatsoever from evil, therefore there are (the poets of the fifth Mandala of the Rig-veda, called) Atrayah. Therefore people call him who is really Prana (breath), Atrayah.

## =SECOND KHANDA=

1. He (breath) is likewise a Bibhradvaga (bringer of offspring). Offspring is vaga, and he (breath) supports offspring. Because he supports it, therefore there is (the poet of the sixth Mandala of the Rig-veda, called) Bharadvaga. Therefore people call him who is really Prana (breath), Bharadvaga.

2. The Devas (speech, &c.) said to him: 'He it is who chiefly causes us to dwell on earth.' Because the Devas said of him, that he chiefly caused them to dwell on earth, therefore there is (the poet of the seventh Mandala of the Rig-veda, called) Vasishtha. Therefore people call him who is really Prana (breath), Vasishtha.

3. He (breath) went forth towards all this whatsoever. Because he went forth toward all this whatsoever, therefore there are (the poets of the eighth Mandala of the Rig-veda, called) the Pragathas. Therefore people call him who is really PraAna (breath), the Pragathas.

4. He (breath) purified all this whatsoever. Because he purified all this whatsoever, theref6re there are (the hymns and also the poets I of the ninth Mandala of the Rig-veda, called) the Pavamanis. Therefore people called him who is really Prana (breath), the Pavamanis.

5. He (breath) said: 'Let me be everything whatsoever, small (kshudra) and great (mahat), and this became the Kshudrasuktas and Mahastiktas.' Therefore there were (the hymns and also the poets of the tenth Mandala of the Rig-veda, called) the Kshudrasuktas (and Mahasuktas). Therefore people call him who is really Prana (breath), the Kshudrastiktas (and Mahasuktas).

6. He (breath) said once : 'You have said what is well said (su-ukta) indeed. This became a Sukta (hymn).' Therefore there was the Sukta. Therefore people call him who is really Prana (breath), Sukta.

7. He (breath) is a Rik (verse), for he did honour to all beings (by entering into them). Because he did honour to all beings, therefore there was the Rik verse. Therefore people call him who is really Prana (breath), Rik.

8. He (breath) is an Ardharka (half-verse), for he did honour to all places (ardha). Because he did honour to all places, therefore there was the Ardharka. Therefore people call him who is really Prana (breath), Ardharka.

9. He (breath) is a Pada (word), for he got into all these beings. Because he got (padi) into all these beings, therefore there was the Pada (word). Therefore people call him who is really Prdna (breath), Pada.

10. He (breath) is an Akshara (syllable), for he pours out (ksharati) gifts to all these beings, and without him no one can pour out (atiksharati) gifts. Therefore there was the Akshara (syllable). Therefore people call him who is really Prana (breath), Akshara.

11. Thus all these Rik verses, all Vedas, all sounds are one word, viz. Prana (breath). Let him know that Prana is all Rik verses.

## =THIRD KHANDA=

1. While Visvamitra was going to repeat the hymns of this day (the mahavrata), Indra sat down near him. Visvamitra (guessing that Indra wanted food) said to him, 'This (the verses of the hymn) is food,' and repeated the thousand Brihati verses. By means of this he went to the delightful home of Indra (Svarga).

2. Indra said to him : 'Rishi, thou hast come to my delightful home. Rishi, repeat a second hymn.' Visvamitra (guessing that Indra wanted food) said to him, 'This (the verses of the hymn) is food,' and repeated the thousand Brihati verses. By means of this he went to the delightful home of Indra (Svarga).

3. Indra said to him: 'Rishi, thou hast come to my delightful home. Rishi, repeat a third hymn.' Visvamitra (guessing that Indra wanted food) said to him, 'This (the verses of the hymn) is food,' and repeated the thousand Brihati verses. By means of this he went to the delightful home of Indra (Svarga).

4. Indra said to him: 'Rishi, thou hast come to my delightful home. I grant thee a boon.' Visvamitra said: 'May I know thee.' Indra said: ' I am Prana (breath), O Rishi, thou art Prana, all things are Prana. For it is Pra'na who shines as the sun, and I here pervade all regions under that form. This food of mine (the hymn) is my friend and my support (dakshina). This is the food prepared by VisvAmitra. I am verily he who shines (the sun).'

## =FOURTH KHANDA=

1. This then becomes perfect as a thousand of Brihati verses. Its consonants form its body, its voice (vowels) the Soul, its sibilants the air of the breath.

2. He who knew this became Vasishtha, he took this name from thence.

3. Indra verily declared this to Visvamitra, and Indra verily declared this to Bharadvaga. Therefore Indra is invoked by him as a friend.

4. This becomes perfect as a thousand of Brihati verses, and of that hymn perfect with a thousand Brihati verses, there are 36,000 syllables. So many are also the thousands of days of a hundred years (36,000). With the consonants they fill the nights, with the vowels the days.

5. This becomes perfect as a thousand of Brihati verses. He who knows this, after this thousand of Brihatis thus accomplished, becomes full of knowledge, full of the gods, full of Brahman, full of the immortal, and then goes also to the gods.

6. What I am (the worshipper), that is he (sun); what he is, that am I.

7. This has been said by a Rishi (Rv. I, 115, I): 'The sun is the self of all that moves and rests.'

8. Let him look to that, let him look to that!

## THIRD ADHYAYA

## =FIRST KHANDA=

1. He who knows himself as the fivefold hymn (uktha), the emblem of Prana (breath), from whence all this springs, he is clever. These five are the earth, air, ether, water, and fire (gyotis). This is the self, the fivefold uktha. For from him all this springs, and into him it enters again (at the dissolution of the world). He who knows this, becomes the refuge of his friends.

2. And to him who knows the food (object) and the feeder (subject) in that uktha, a strong son is born, and food is never wanting. Water and earth are food, for all food consists of these two. Fire and air are the feeder, for by means of them man eats all food. Ether is the bowl, for all this is poured into the ether. He who knows this, becomes the bowl or support of his friends.

3. To him who knows the food and the feeder in that uktha, a strong son is born, and food is never wanting. Herbs and trees are food, animals the feeder, for animals eat herbs and trees.

4. Of them again those who have teeth above and below, shaped after the likeness of man, are feeders, the other animals are food. Therefore these overcome the other animals, for the eater is over the food.

5. He who knows this is over his friends.

## =SECOND KHANDA=

1. He who knows the gradual development of the self in him (the man conceived as the uktha), obtains himself more development.

2. There are herbs and trees and all that is animated, and he knows the self gradually developing in them. For in herbs and trees sap only is seen, but thought (kitta) in animated beings.

3. Among animated beings again the self develops gradually, for in some sap (blood) is seen (as well as thought), but in others thought is not seen.

4. And in man again the self develops gradually, for he is most endowed with knowledge. He saying what he has known, he sees what he has known. He knows what is to happen tomorrow, he knows heaven and hell. By means of the mortal he desires the immortal-thus is he endowed.

5. With regard to the other animals hunger and thirst only are a kind of understanding. But they do not say what they have known, nor do they see what they have known. They do not know what is to happen to-morrow, nor heaven and hell. They go so far and no further, for they are born according to their knowledge (in a former life).

## =THIRD KHANDA=

1. That man (conceived as uktha) is the sea, rising beyond the whole world. Whatever he reaches, he wishes to go beyond. If he reaches the sky, he wishes to go beyond.

2. If he should reach that (heavenly) world, he would wish to go beyond.

3. That man is fivefold. The heat in him is fire; the apertures (of the senses) are ether; blood, mucus, and seed are water; the body is earth; breath is air.

4. That air is fivefold, viz. up-breathing, down-breathing, back-breathing, out-breathing, on-breathing. The other powers (devatis), viz. sight, hearing, mind, and speech, are comprised under up-breathing and down-breathing. For when breath departs, they also depart with it.

5. That man (conceived as uktha) is the sacrifice, which is a succession now of speech and now of thought. That sacrifice is fivefold, viz. the Agni-hotra, the new and full moon sacrifices, the four monthly sacrifices, the animal sacrifice, the Soma sacrifice. The Soma sacrifice is the most perfect of sacrifices, for in it these five kinds of ceremonies are seen : the first which precedes the libations (the Diksha, &c.), then three libations, and what follows (the Avabhritha, &c.) is the fifth.

## =FOURTH KHANDA=

1. He who knows one sacrifice above another, one day above another, one deity above the others, he is clever. Now this great uktha (the nishke-valya-sastra) is the sacrifice above another, the day above another, the deity above others 1.

2. This uktha is fivefold. With regard to its being performed as a Stoma (chorus), it is Trivrit, Pahkadasa, Saptadasa, Ekavimsa, and Pankavimsa. With regard to its being performed as a Siman (song), it is Gayatra, Rathantara, Brihat, Bhadra, and Ragana. With regard to metre, it is Gayatri, Ushnih, Brihati, Trishtubh, and Dvipadi. And the explanation (given before in the Aranyaka) is that it is the head, the right wing, the left wing, the tail, and the body of the bird.

3. He performs the Prastava in five ways, he performs the Udgitha in five ways, he performs the Pratihara in five ways, he performs the Upadrava in five ways, he performs the Nidhana in five ways. All this together forms one thousand Stobhas, or musical syllables.

4. Thus also are the Rik verses, contained in the Nishkevalya, recited (by the Hotri) in five orders. What precedes the eighty trikas, that is one order, then follow the three sets of eighty trikas each, and what comes after is the fifth order.

5. This (the hymns of this Sastra) as a whole (if properly counted with the Stobha syllables) comes to one thousand (of Brihati verses). That (thousand) is the whole, and ten, ten is called the whole. For number is such (measured by ten). Ten tens are a hundred, ten hundreds are a thousand, and that is the whole. These are the three metres (the tens, pervading everything). And this food also (the three sets of hymns being represented as food) is threefold, eating, drinking, and chewing. He obtains that food by those (three numbers, ten, hundred, and thousand, or by the three sets of eighty trikas).

## =FIFTH KHANDA=

1. This (nishkevalya-sastra) becomes perfect as a thousand of Brihati verses.

2. Some teachers (belonging to a different Sakha) recognise a thousand of different metres (not of Brihatis only). They say: 'Is another thousand (a thousand of other verses) good? Let us say it is good.'

3. Some say, a thousand of Trishtubh verses, others a thousand of Gagati verses, others a thousand of Anushtubh verses.

4. This has been said by a Rishi (Rv. X, 124, 9):-

5. 'Poets through their understanding discovered Indra dancing an Anushtubh.' This is meant to say: They discovered (and meditated) in speech (called Anushtubh)-at that time (when they worshipped the uktha)-the Prana (breath) connected with Indra.

6. He (who takes the recited verses as Anushtubhs) is able to become celebrated and of good report.

7. No! he says; rather is such a man liable to die before his time. For that self (consisting of Anushtubhs) is incomplete. For if a man confines himself to speech, not to breath, then driven by his mind, he does not succeed with speech.

8. Let him work towards the Brihati, for the Brihati (breath) is the complete self.

9. That self (givatman) is surrounded on all sides by members. And as that self is on all sides surrounded by members, the Brihati also is on all sides surrounded by metres.

10. For the self (in the heart) is the middle of these members, and the Brihad is the middle of the metres.

11. 'He is able to become celebrated and of good report, but (the other) able to die before his time,' thus he said. For the Brihati is the complete self, therefore let him work towards the Brihati (let him reckon the sastra recitation as a thousand Brihatis).

## =SIXTH KHANDA=

1. This (nishkevalya-sastra) becomes perfect as a thousand of Brihati verses. In this thousand of Brihatis there are one thousand one hundred and twenty-five Anushtubhs. For the smaller is contained in the larger.

2. This has been said by a Rishi (Rv. VIII, 76, 12):-

3. 'A speech of eight feet;'-because there are eight feet of four syllables each in the Anushtubh.

4. 'Of nine corners;'- because the Brihati becomes nine-cornered (having nine feet of four syllables each).

5. 'Touching the truth;'-because speech (Anushtubh) is truth, touched by the verse (Brihati).

6. 'He (the Hotri) makes the body out of Indra;' for out of this thousand of Brihati verses turned into Anushtubhs, and therefore out of Prana as connected with Indra, and out of the Brihati (which is Prana), he makes speech, that is Anushtubh, as a body.

7. This Mahaduktha is the highest developmentof speech, and it is fivefold, viz. measured, not measured, music, true, and untrue.

8. A Rik verse, a gatha, a kumbya are measured (metrical). A Yagus line, an invocation, and general remarks, these are not measured (they are in prose). A Saman, or any portion (parvan) of it, is music. Orn is true, Na is untrue.

9. What is true (Om) is the flower and fruit of speech. He is able to become celebrated and of good report, for he speaks the true (Om), the flower and fruit of speech.

10. Now the untrue is the root of speech, and as a tree whose root is exposed dries up and perishes, thus a man who says what is untrue exposes his root, dries up and perishes. Therefore one should not say what is untrue, but guard oneself from it.

11. That syllable Om (yes) goes forward (to the first cause of the world) and is empty. Therefore if a man says Orn (yes) to everything, then that (which he gives away) is wanting to him here. If he says Om (yes) to everything, then he would empty himself, and would not be capable of any enjoyments.

12. That syllable Na (no) is full for oneself. If a man says No to everything, then his reputation would become evil, and that would ruin him even here.

13. Therefore let a man give at the proper time only, not at the wrong time. Thus he unites the true and the untrue, and from the union of those two he grows, and becomes greater and greater.

14. He who knows this speech of which this (the mahaduktha) is a development, he is clever. A is the whole of speech, and manifested through different kinds of contact (mutes) and of wind (sibilants.), it becomes manifold and different.

15. Speech if uttered in a whisper is breath, if spoken aloud, it is body. Therefore (if whispered) it is almost hidden, for what is incorporeal is almost hidden, and breath is incorporeal. But if spoken aloud, it is body, and therefore it is perceptible, for body is perceptible.

## =SEVENTH KHANDA=

1. This (nishkevalya-sastra) becomes perfect as a thousand of Brihatis. It is glory (the glorious Brahman, not the absolute Brahman), it is Indra. Indra is the lord of all beings. He who thus knows Indra as the lord of all beings, departs from this world by loosening the bonds of life '-so said Mahidasa Aitareya. Having departed he becomes Indra (or Hiranyagarbha) and shines in those worlds.

2. And with regard to this they say: 'If a man obtains the other world in this form (by meditating on the prana, breath, which is the uktha, the hymn of the mahavrata), then in what form does he obtain this world?'

3. Here the blood of the woman is a form of Agni (fire); therefore no one should despise it. And the seed of the man is a form of ditya (sun) therefore no one should despise it. This self (the woman) gives her self (skin, blood, and flesh) to that self (fat, bone, and marrow), and that self (man) gives his self (fat, bone, and marrow) to this self (skin, blood, and flesh). Thus these two grow together. In this form (belonging to the woman and to fire) he goes to that world (belonging to the man and the sun), and in that form (belonging to man and the sun) he goes to this world (belonging to the woman and to fire).

## =EIGHTH KHANDA=

1. Here (with regard to obtaining Hiranyagarbha) there are these Slokas:

2. The fivefold body into which the indestructible (prana, breath) enters, that body which the harnessed horses (the senses) draw about, that body where the true of the true (the highest Brahman) follows after, in that body (of the worshipper) all gods become one.

3. That body into which goes the indestructible (the breath) which we have joined (in meditation), proceeding from the indestructible (the highest Brahman), that body which the harnessed horses (the senses) draw about, that body where the true of the true follows after, in that body all gods become one.

4. After separating themselves from the Yes and No of language, and of all that is hard and cruel, poets have discovered (what they sought for); dependent on names they rejoiced in what had been revealed.

5. That in which the poets rejoiced (the revealed nature of prana, breath), in it the gods exist all joined together. Having driven away evil by means of that Brahman (which is hidden in prana), the enlightened man goes to the Svarga world (becomes one with Hiranyagarbha, the universal spirit).

6. No one wishing to describe him (prana, breath) by speech, describes him by calling him 'woman,' 'neither woman nor man,' or 'man' (all such names applying only to the material body, and not to prana or breath).

7. Brahman (as hidden beneath prana) is called the A; and the I (ego) is gone there (the worshipper should know that he is uktha and prana).

8. This becomes perfect as a thousand of Brihati verses, and of that hymn, perfect with a thousand Brihati verses, there are 36,000 syllables. So many are also the thousands of days of human life. By means of the syllable of life (the a) alone (which is contained in that thousand of hymns) does a man obtain the day of life (the mahavrata day, which completes the number of the days in the Gavamayana sacrifice), and by means of the day of life (he obtains) the syllable of life.

9. Now there is a chariot of the god (prana) destroying all desires (for the worlds of Indra, the moon, the earth, all of which lie below the place of Hiranyagarbha). Its front part (the point of the two shafts of the carriage where the yoke is fastened) is speech, its wheels the ears, the horses the eyes, the driver the mind. Prana (breath) mounts that chariot (and on it, i. e. by means of meditating on Prana, he reaches Hiranyagarbha).

10. This has been said by a Rishi (Rv. X, 39,12):-

11. 'Come hither on that which is quicker than mind,' and (Rv.VIII, 73, 2) 'Come hither on that which is quicker than the twinkling of an eye,' yea, the twinkling of an eye.

## FOURTH ADHYAYA

## =FIRST KHANDA:=

Adoration to the Highest Self Hari, Om!

1. Verily, in the beginning all this was Self, one only; there was nothing else blinking whatsoever.

2. He thought: 'Shall I send forth worlds?' (1) He sent forth these worlds,

3. Ambhas (water), Mariki (light), Mara (mortal), and Ap (water).

4. That Ambhas (water) is above the heaven, and it is heaven, the support. The Marikis (the lights) are the sky. The Mara (mortal) is the earth, and the waters under the earth are the Ap world. (2)

5. He thought: 'There are these worlds; shall I send forth guardians of the worlds?' He then formed the Purusha (the person), taking him forth from the water. (3)

6. He brooded on him , and when that person had thus been brooded on, a mouth burst forth like an egg. From the mouth proceeded speech, from speech Agni (fire),. Nostrils burst forth. From the nostrils proceeded scent (prana), from scent Vayu (air). Eyes burst forth. From the eyes proceeded sight, from sight Aditya (sun). Ears burst forth. From the ears proceeded hearing, from hearing the Dis (quarters of the world). Skin burst forth. From the skin proceeded hairs (sense of touch), from the hairs shrubs and trees. The heart burst forth. From the heart proceeded mind, from mind Kandramas (moon). The navel burst forth. From the navel proceeded the apana (the down-breathing), from apana death. The generative organ burst forth. From the organ proceeded seed, from seed water. (4)

## =SECOND KHANDA=

1. Those deities (devata), Agni and the rest, after they had been sent forth, fell into this great ocean.

Then he (the Self) besieged him, (the person) with hunger and thirst.

2. The deities then (tormented by hunger and thirst) spoke to him (the Self) : 'Allow us a place in which we may rest and eat food' (1)

He led a cow towards them (the deities). They said : 'This is not enough.' He led a horse towards them. They said: 'This is not enough.' (2) He led man towards them. Then they said: 'Well done, indeed.' Therefore man is well done.

3. He said to them: 'Enter, each according to his place.' (3)

4. Then Agni (fire), having become speech, entered the mouth. Vayu (air), having become scent, entered the nostrils. ditya (sun), having become sight, entered the eyes. The Dis (regions), having become hearing, entered the ears. The shrubs and trees, having become hairs, entered the skin. Kandramas (the moon), having become mind, entered the heart. Death, having become down-breathing, entered the navel. The waters, having become seed, entered the generative organ. (4)

5. Then Hunger and Thirst spoke to him (the Self): 'Allow us two (a place).' He said to them: ' I assign you to those very deities there, I make you co-partners with them.' Therefore to whatever deity an oblation is offered, hunger and thirst are co-partners in it. (5)

## =THIRD KHANDA=

1. He thought: 'There are these worlds and the guardians of the worlds. Let me send forth food for them.' (1)

He brooded over the water. From the water thus brooded on, matter (mutrti) was born. And that matter which was born, that verily was food. (2)

2. When this food (the object matter) had thus been sent forth, it wished to flee, crying and turning away. He (the subject) tried to grasp it by speech. He could not grasp it by speech. If he had grasped it by speech, man would be satisfied by naming food. (3)

:He tried to grasp it by scent (breath). He could not grasp it by scent. If he had grasped it by scent, man would be satisfied by smelling food. (4)

:He tried to grasp it by the eye. He could not grasp it by the eye. If he had grasped it by the eye, man would be satisfied by seeing food. (5)

:He tried to grasp it by the ear. He could not grasp it by the ear. If he had grasped it by the ear, man would be satisfied by hearing food. (6)

:He tried to grasp it by the skin. He could not grasp it by the skin. If he had grasped it by the skin, man would be satisfied by touching food. (7)

:He tried to grasp it by the mind. He could not grasp it by the mind. If he had grasped it by the mind, man would be satisfied by thinking food. (8)

:He tried to grasp it by the generative organ. He could not grasp it by the organ. If he had grasped it by the organ, man would be satisfied by sending forth food. (9)

:He tried to grasp it by the down-breathing (the breath which helps to swallow food through the mouth and to carry it off through the rectum, the payvindriya). He got it.

3. Thus it is Vayu (the getter) who lays hold of food, and the Vayu is verily Annayu (he who gives life or who lives by food). (10)

4. He thought: ' How can all this be without me?

5. And then he thought: By what way shall I get there?

6. And then he thought: If speech names, if scent smells, if the eye sees, if the ear hears, if the skin feels, if the mind thinks, if the off-breathing digests, if the organ sends forth, then what am I?' (11)

7. Then opening the suture of the skull, he got in by that door.

8. That door is called the Vidriti (tearing asunder), the Nandana (the place of bliss).

9. There are three dwelling-places for him, three dreams; this dwelling-place (the eye), this dwelling-place (the throat), this dwelling-place (the heart). (12)

10. When born (when the Highest Self had entered the body) he looked through all things, in order to see whether anything wished to proclaim here another (Self). He saw this person only (himself) as the widely spread Brahman. 'I saw it,' thus he said; (13) Therefore he was Idam-dra (seeing this).

11. Being Idamdra by name, they call him Indra mysteriously. For the Devas love mystery, yea, they love mystery. (14)

## FIFTH ADHYAYA

## =FIRST KHANDA=

1. Let the women who are with child move away!

2. Verily, from the beginning he (the self) is in man as a germ, which is called seed.

3. This (seed), which is strength gathered from all the limbs of the body, he (the man) bears as self in his self (body). When he commits the seed to the woman, then he (the father) causes it to be born. That is his first birth. (1)

4. That seed becomes the self of the woman, as if one of her own limbs. Therefore it does not injure her.

5. She nourishes his (her husband's) self (the son) within her. (2) She who nourishes, is to be nourished.

6. The woman bears the germ. He (the father) elevates the child even before the birth, and immediately after.

7. When he thus elevates the child both before and after his birth, he really elevates his own self,

8. For the continuation of these worlds (men). For thus are these worlds continued.

9. This is his second birth. (3)

10. He (the son), being his self, is then placed in his stead for (the performance of) all good works.

11. But his other self (the father), having done all he has to do, and having reached the full measure of his life, departs.

12. And departing from hence he is born again. That is his third birth.

13. And this has been declared by a Rishi (Rv. IV, 27, 1): (4)

14. 'While dwelling in the womb, I discovered all the births of these Devas. A hundred iron strongholds kept me, but I escaped quickly down like a falcon.'

15. Vamadeva, lying in the womb, has thus declared this. (5) And having this knowledge he stepped forth, after this dissolution of the body, and having obtained all his desires in that heavenly world, became immortal, yea, he became immortal. (6)

## SIXTH ADHYAYA

## =FIRST KHANDA=

1. Let the women go back to their place.

2. Who is he whom we meditate on as the Self? Which is the Self?

3. That by which we see (form), that by which we hear (sound), that by which we perceive smells, that by which we utter speech, that by which we distinguish sweet and not sweet, (1) and what comes from the heart and the mind, namely, perception, command, understanding, knowledge, wisdom, seeing, holding, thinking, considering, readiness (or suffering), remembering, conceiving, willing, breathing, loving, desiring?

4. No, all these are various names only of knowledge (the true Self). (2)

5. And that Self, consisting of (knowledge), is Brahman (m.), it is Indra, it is Pragapati . All these Devas, these five great elements, earth, air, ether, water, fire, these and those which are, as it were, small and mixed, and seeds of this kind and that kind, born from eggs, born from the womb, born from heat, born from germs, horses, cows, men, elephants, and whatsoever breathes, whether walking or flying, and what is immoveable-all that is led (produced) by knowledge (the Self).

6. It rests on knowledge (the Self). The world is led (produced) by knowledge (the Self). Knowledge is its cause.

7. Knowledge is Brahman. (3)

8. He (Vamadeva), having by this conscious self stepped forth from this world, and having obtained all desires in that heavenly world, became immortal, yea, he became immortal. Thus it is, Om. (4)

## SEVENTH ADHYAYA

## =FIRST KHANDA=

1. My speech rests in the mind, my mind rests in speech . Appear to me (thou, the Highest Self)! You (speech and mind) are the two pins (that hold the wheels) of the Veda. May what I have learnt not forsake me. I join day and night with what I have learnt. I shall speak of the real, I shall speak the true. May this protect me, may this protect the teacher! May it protect me, may it protect the teacher, yea, the teacher!

## THIRD ARANYAKA

## FIRST ADHYAYA

## =FIRST KHANDA=

1. Next follows the Upanishad of the Samhita.

2. The former half is the earth, the latter half the heaven, their union the air, thus says Mandukeya; their union is the ether, thus did Makshavya, teach it.

3. That air is not considered independent, therefore I do not agree with his (Manduka's) son.

4. Verily, the two are the same, therefore air is considered independent, thus says Agastya. For it is the same, whether they say air or ether.

5. So far with reference to deities (mythologically); now with reference to the body (physiologically):

6. The former half is speech, the latter half is mind, their union breath (prana), thus says Suravira Mandukeya.

7. But his eldest son said: The former half is mind, the latter half speech. For we first conceive with the mind indeed, and then we utter with speech. Therefore the former half is indeed mind, the latter half speech, but their union is really breath.

8. Verily, it is the same with both, the father (Mandukeya) and the son.

9. This (meditation as here described), joined with mind, speech, and breath, is (like) a chariot drawn by two horses and one horse between them (prashlivdhana).

10. And he who thus knows this union, becomes united with offspring, cattle, fame, glory of countenance, and the world of Svarga. He lives his full age.

11. Now all this comes from the Mandukeyas.

## =SECOND KHANDA=

1. Next comes the meditation as taught by Sakalya.

2. The first half is the earth, the second half heaven, their uniting the rain, the uniter Parganya.

3. And so it is when he (Parganya) rains thus strongly, without ceasing, day and night,

4. Then they say also (in ordinary language), 'Heaven and earth have come together.'

5. So much with regard to the deities; now with regard to the body:-

6. Every man is indeed like an egg. There are two halves (of him), thus they say: 'This half is the earth, that half heaven.' And there between them is the ether (the space of the mouth), like the ether between heaven and earth. In this ether there (in the mouth) the breath is fixed, as in that other ether the air is fixed. And as there are those three luminaries (in heaven), there are these three luminaries in man.

7. As there is that sun in heaven, there is this eye in the head. As there is that lightning in the sky, there is this heart in the body; as there is that fire on earth, there is this seed in the member.

8. Having thus represented the self (body) as the whole world, Sakalya said: This half is the earth, that half heaven.

9. He who thus knows this union, becomes united with offspring, cattle, fame, glory of countenance, and the world of Svarga. He lives his full age.

## =THIRD KHANDA=

1. Next come the reciters of the Nirbhuga.

2. Nirbhuga abides on earth, Pratrinna in heaven, the Ubhayamantarena in the sky.

3. Now, if any one should chide him who recites the Nirbhuga, let him answer: 'Thou art fallen from the two lower places.' If any one should chide him who recites the Pratrinna, let him answer: 'Thou art fallen from the two higher places.' But he who recites the Ubhayamantarena, there is no chiding him.

4. For when he turns out the Sandhi (the union of words), that is the form of Nirbhuga; and when he pronounces, two syllables pure (without modification), that is the form of Pratrinna. This comes first. By the Ubhayamantara (what is between the two) both are fulfilled (both the sandhi and the pada).

5. Let him who wishes for proper food say the Nirbhug-a; let him who wishes for Svarga, say the Pratrinna; let him who wishes for both say the Ubhayamantarena.

6. Now if another man (an enemy) should chide him who says the Nirbhuga, let him say to him : 'Thou hast offended the earth, the deity; the earth, the deity, will strike thee.'

If another man should chide him who says the Pratrinna, let him say to him: 'Thou hast offended heaven, the deity; heaven, the deity, will strike thee.'

If another man should chide him who says the Ubhayamantarena, let him say to him: 'Thou hast offended the sky, the deity; the sky, the deity, will strike thee.'

7. And whatever the reciter shall say to one who speaks to him or does not speak to him, depend upon it, it will come to pass.

8. But to a Brahmana let him not say anything except what is auspicious.

9. Only he may curse a Brahmana in excessive wealth.

10. Nay, not even in excessive wealth should he curse a Brahmana, but he should say, 'I bow before Brahmanas,'-thus says Suravira Mandukeya.

## =FOURTH KHANDA=

1. Next follow the imprecations.

2. Let him know that breath is the beam (on which the whole house of the body rests).

3. If any one (a Brahmana or another man) .should chide him, who by meditation has become that breath as beam, then, if he thinks himself strong, he says: 'I grasped the breath, the beam, well; thou dost not prevail against me who have grasped the breath as the beam.' Let him say to him: 'Breath, the beam, will forsake thee.'

4. But if he thinks himself not strong, let him say to him : 'Thou couldst not grasp him who wishes to grasp the breath as the beam. Breath, the beam, will forsake thee.'

5. And whatever the reciter shall say to one who speaks to him or does not speak to him, depend upon it, it will come to pass. But to a Brahmana let him not say anything except what is auspicious. Only he may curse a Brahmana in excessive wealth. Nay, not even in excessive wealth should he curse a Brahmana, but he should say, 'I bow before Brahmanas,'-thus says Suravira, Mandukeya.

## =FIFTH KHANDA=

1. Now those who repeat the Nirbhuga say:

2. 'The former half is the first syllable, the latter half the second syllable, and the space between the first and second halves is the Samhita (union).'

3. He who thus knows this Samhita (union), becomes united with offspring, cattle, fame, glory of countenance, and the world of Svarga. He lives his full age.

4. Now Hrasva Mandukeya says: 'We reciters of Nirbhuga say, "Yes, the former half is the first syllable, and the latter half the second syllable, but the Samhita is the space between the first and second halves in so far as by it one turns out the union (sandhi), and knows what is the accent and what is not, and distinguishes what is the mora and what is not."'

5. He who thus knows this Samhita (union), becomes united with offspring, cattle, fame, glory of countenance, and the world of Svarga. He lives his full age.

6. Now his middle son, the child of his mother Pratibodhi, says: 'One pronounces these two syllables letter by letter, without entirely separating them, and without entirely uniting them. Then that mora between the first and second halves, which indicates the union, that is the Saman (evenness, sliding). I therefore hold Saman only to be the Samhita (union).

7. This has also been declared by a Rishi (Rv. 23, 16):-

8. 'O Brihaspati, they know nothing higher than Saman.'

9. He who thus knows this Samhita (union), becomes united with offspring, cattle, fame, glory of countenance, and the world of Svarga. He lives his full age.

## =SIXTH KHANDA=

1. Tarukshya said: 'The Samhita (union) is formed by means of the Brihat and Rathantara Samans.'

2. Verily, the Rathantara Saman is speech, the Brihat Saman is breath. By both, by speech and breath, the Samhita is formed.

3. For this Upanishad (for acquiring from his teacher the knowledge of this Samhita of speech and breath) Tarukshya guards (his teacher's) cows a whole year.

4. For it alone Tarukshya guards the cows a whole year.

5. This has also been declared by a Rishi (Rv. X, 181, I; and Rv. X, 181, 2):-

6. 'Vasishtha carried hither the Rathantara; 'Bharadvaga brought hither the Brihat of Agni.'

7. He who thus knows this Samhita. (union), becomes united with offspring, cattle, fame, glory of countenance, and the world of Svarga. He lives his full age.

8. Kauntharavya said: 'Speech is united with breath, breath with the blowing air, the blowing air with the Visvedevas, the Visvedevas with the heavenly world, the heavenly world with Brahman. That Samhiti is called the gradual Samhiti.'

9. He who knows this gradual Samhita (union), becomes united with offspring, cattle, fame, glory of countenance, and the world of Svarga, in exactly the same manner as this Samhita, i.e. gradually.

10. If that worshipper, whether for his own sake or for that of another, recites (the Samhita), let him know when he is going to recite, that this Samhita went up to heaven, and that it will be even so with those who by knowing it become Devas. May it always be so!

11. He who thus knows this Samhita (union), becomes united with offspring, cattle, fame, glory of countenance, and the world of Svarga. He lives his full age.

12. Pankalakanda said: 'The Samhita (union, composition) is speech.'

13. Verily, by speech the Vedas, by speech the metres are composed. Friends unite through speech, all beings unite through speech; therefore speech is everything here.

14. With regard to this (view of speech being more than breath), it should be borne in mind that when we thus repeat (the Veda) or speak, breath is (absorbed) in speech; speech swallows breath. And when we are silent or sleep, speech is (absorbed) in breath; breath swallows speech. The two swallow each other. Verily, speech is the mother, breath the son.

15. This has been declared also by a Rishi (Rv. X, 114, 4): -

16. 'There is one bird; (as wind) he has entered the sky; (as breath or living soul) he saw this whole world. With my ripe mind I saw him close to me (in the heart); the mother (licks or) absorbs him (breath), and he absorbs the mother (speech).'

17. He who thus knows this Samhita (union), becomes united with offspring, cattle, fame, glory of countenance, and the world of Svarga. He lives his full age.

18. Next follows the Pragapati-Samhita.

19. The former half is the wife, the latter half the man; the result of their union the son; the act of their union the begetting; that Samhita is Aditi (indestructible).

20. For Aditi (indestructible) is all this whatever there is, father, mother, son, and begetting.

21. This has also been declared by a Rishi (Rv. 1, 189, 10):-

22. 'Aditi is mother, is father, is son.'

23. He who thus knows this Samhita (union), becomes united with offspring, cattle, fame, glory of countenance, and the world of Svarga. He lives his full age.

## SECOND ADHYAYA

## =FIRST KHANDA=

1. Sthavira Sakalya said that breath is the beam, and as the other beams rest on the house-beam, thus the eye, the ear, the mind, the speech, the senses, the body, the whole self rests on this breath.

2. Of that self the breathing is like the sibilants, the bones like the mutes, the marrow like the vowels, and the fourth part, flesh, blood, and the rest, like the semivowels, - so said Hrasva Mandukeya.

3. To us it was said to be a triad only.

4. Of that triad, viz. bones, marrow, and joints, there are 360 (parts) on this side (the right), and 360 on that side (the left). They make 720 together, and 720 are the days and nights of the year. Thus that self which consists of sight, hearing, metre, mind, and speech is like unto the days.

5. He who thus knows this self, which consists of sight, hearing, metre, mind, and speech, as like unto the days, obtains union, likeness, or nearness with the days, has sons and cattle, and lives his full age.

## =SECOND KHANDA=

1. Next comes Kauntharavya:

2. There are 360 syllables (vowels), 360 sibilants (consonants), 360 groups.

3. What we called syllables are the days, what we called sibilants are the nights, what we called groups are the junctions of days and nights. So far with regard to the gods (the days).

4. Now with regard to the body. The syllables which we explained mythologically, are physiologically the bones; the sibilants which we explained mythologically, are physiologically the marrow.

5. Marrow is the real breath (life), for marrow is seed, and without breath (life) seed is not sown. Or when it is sown without breath (life), it will decay, it will not grow.

6. The groups which we explained mythologically, are physiologically the joints.

7. Of that triad, viz. bones, marrow, and joints, there are 540 (parts) on this side (the right), and 540 on that side (the left). They make1080 together, and 1080 are the rays of the sun. They make the Brihatt verses and the day (of the Mahavrata).

8. Thus that self which consists of sight, hearing, metre, mind, and speech is like unto the syllables.

9. He who knows this self which consists of sight, hearing, metre, mind, and speech, as like unto syllables, obtains union, likeness, or nearness with the syllables, has sons and cattle, and lives his full age.

## =THIRD KHANDA=

1. Badhval says, there are four persons (to be meditated on and worshipped).

2. The person of the body, the person of the metres, the person of the Veda, and the Great person. What we call the person of the body is this corporeal self. Its essence is the incorporeal conscious self.

4. What we call the person of the metres is this collection of letters (the Veda). Its essence is the vowel a.

5. What we call the person of the Veda is (the mind) by which we know the Vedas, the Rig-veda, Yagur-veda, and Sama-veda. Its essence is Brahman (m.)

6. Therefore let one chose a Brahman-priest who is full of Brahman (the Veda), and is able to see any flaw in the sacrifice.

7. What we call the Great person is the year, which causes some beings to fall together, and causes others to grow up. Its essence is yonder sun.

8. One should know that the incorporeal conscious self and yonder sun are both one and the same. Therefore the sun appears to every man singly (and differently).

9. This has also been declared by a Rishi (Rv. 1, 115, 1) :-

10. 'The bright face of the gods arose, the eye of Mitra, Varuna, and Agni; it filled heaven and earth and the sky,-the sun is the self of all that rests and moves.'

11. I This I think to be the regular Samhita as conceived by me,' thus said Badhva.

12. For the Bahvrikas consider him (the self) in the great hymn (mahad uktha), the Adhvaryus in the sacrificial fire, the Khandogas in the Mahavrata ceremony. Him they see in this earth, in heaven, in the air, in the ether, in the water, in herbs, in trees, in the moon, in the stars, in all beings. Him alone they call Brahman.

13. That self which consists of sight, hearing, metre, mind, and speech is like unto the year.

14. He who recites to another that self which consists of sight, hearing, metre, mind, and speech, and is like unto the year,

## =FOURTH KHANDA=

1. To him the Vedas yield no more milk, he has no luck in what he has learnt (from his Guru); he does not know the path of virtue.

2. This has also been declared by a Rishi (Rv. X, 7 1, 6) :-

3. 'He who has forsaken the friend (the Veda), that knows his friends, in his speech there is no luck. Though he hears, he hears in vain, for he does not know the path of virtue.'

4. Here it is clearly said that he has no luck in what he has learnt, and that he does not know the path of virtue.

5- Therefore let no one who knows this, lay the sacrificial fire (belonging to the Mahavrata) for another, let him not sing the Samans of the Mahavrata for another, let him not recite the Sastras of that day for another.

6. However, let him willingly do this for a father or for an Akarya; for that is done really for himself.

7. We have said that the incorporeal conscious self and the sun are one1. When these two become separated, the sun is seen as if it were the moon; no rays spring from it; the sky is red like madder; the patient cannot retain the wind, his head smells bad like a raven's nest:-let him know then that his self (in the body) is gone, and that he will not live very long.

8. Then whatever he thinks he has to do,. let him do it, and let him recite the following hymns: Yad anti yak ka durake (Rv. I X, 6 7, 2 1 -2 7) ; Ad it pratnasya retasah (Rv. VIII, 6, 30); Yatra brahma pavamana (Rv. I X, 113, 6- 11) ; Ud vayam tamasas pari (Rv. 1, 50, 10)-

9. Next, when the sun is seen pierced, and seems like the nave of a cart-wheel, when he sees his own shadow pierced, let him know then that it is so (as stated before, i. e. that he is going to die soon).

10. Next, when he sees himself in a mirror or in the water with a crooked head, or without a head-, or when his pupils are seen inverted or not straight, let him know then that it is so.

11. Next, let him cover his eyes and watch, then threads are seen as if falling together'. But if he does not see them, let him know then that it is so.

12. Next, let him cover his ears and listen, and there will be a sound as if of a burning fire or of a carriage. But if he does not hear it, let him know then that it is so.

13. Next, when fire looks blue like the neck of a peacock, or when he sees lightning in a cloudless sky, or no lightning in a clouded sky, or when he sees as it were bright rays in a dark cloud, let him know then that it is so.

14. Next, when he sees the ground as if it were burning, let him know that it is so.

15. These are the visible signs (from 7-14).

16. Next come the dreams.

17. If he sees a black man with black teeth, and that man kills him; or a boar kills him; a monkey jumps on him; the wind carries him along quickly; having swallowed gold he spits it out; he eats honey; he chews stalks; he carries a red lotus; he drives with asses and boars; wearing a wreath of red flowers (naladas) he drives a black cow with a black calf, facing the south,

18. If a man sees any one of these (dreams), let him fast, and cook a pot of milk, sacrifice it, accompanying each oblation with a verse of the Ratri hymn (Rv. X, 127), and then, after having fed the Brahmanas, with other food (prepared at his house) eat himself the (rest of the) oblation.

19. Let him know that the person within all beings, not heard here, not reached, not thought, not subdued, not seen, not understood, not classed, but hearing, thinking, seeing, classing, sounding, understanding, knowing, is his Self

## =FIFTH KHANDA=

1. Now next the Upanishad of the whole speech. True all these are Upanishads of the whole speech, but this they call so (chiefly).

2. The mute consonants represent the earth, the sibilants the sky, the vowels heaven. The mute consonants represent Agni (fire), the sibilants air, the vowels the sun. The mute consonants represent the Rig-veda, the sibilants the Yagur-veda, the vowels the Sama-veda. The mute consonants represent the eye, the sibilants the ear, the vowels the mind. The mute consonants represent the up-breathing, the sibilants the down-breathing, the vowels the back-breathing.

3. Next comes this divine lute (the human body, made by the gods). The lute made by man is an imitation of it.

4. As there is a head of this, so there is a head of that (lute, made by man). As there is a stomach of this, so there is the cavity (in the board) of that. As there is a tongue of this, so there is a tongue in that. As there are fingers of this, so there are strings of that. As there are vowels of this, so there are tones of that. As there are consonants of this, so there are touches of that. As this is endowed with sound and firmly strung, so that 's endowed with sound and firmly strung. As this is covered with a hairy skin, so that is covered with hairy skin.

5. Verily, in former times they covered a lute with hairy skin.

6. He who knows this lute made by the Devas (and meditates on it), is willingly listened to, his glory fills the earth, and wherever they speak Aryan languages, there they know him.

7. Next follows the verse, called vagrasa, the essence of speech. When a man reciting or speaking in an assembly does not please, let him say this verse:

8. 'May the queen of all speech, who is covered, as it were, by the lips, surrounded by teeth, as if by spears, who is a thunderbolt, help me to speak well.' This is the vagrasa, the essence of speech.

## =SIXTH KHANDA.=

1. Next Krishna-Harita confided this Brahmana concerning speech to him (his pupil) :

2. PragaApati, the year, after having sent forth all creatures, burst. He put himself together again by means of khandas (Vedas). Because he put himself together again by means of khandas, therefore (the text of the Veda) is called Samhita (put together).

3. Of that Samhita the letter n is the strength, the letter sh the breath and self (gaman).

4. He who knows the Rik verses and the letters n and sh for every SamhiOL, he knows the Samhita with strength and breath. Let him know that this is the life of the Samhita.

5. If the pupil asks, 'Shall I say it with the letter n or without it ? ' let the teacher say, 'With the letter n.' And if he asks, ' Shall I say it with the letter sh or without it ?' let the teacher say, 'With the letter sh.'

6. Hrasva Mandukeya said: 'If we here recite the verses according to the Samhita (attending to the necessary changes of n and s into n and sh 2), and if we say the adhyaya of Mandilkeya (Ait. Ar.III, 1), then the letters n and sh (strength and breath) have by this been obtained for us.'

7. Sthavira Sakalya said: 'If we recite the verses according to the Samhita, and if we say the adhyaya of Mandukeya, then the letters n and sh have by this been obtained for us.'

8. Here the Rishis, the Kavasheyas, knowing this, said: 'Why should we repeat (the Veda), why should we sacrifice? We offer as a sacrifice breath in speech, or speech in breath. What is the beginning (of one), that is the end (of the other).'

9. Let no one tell these Samhitas (Ait. Ar. III, I-III, 2) to one who is not a resident pupil, who has not been with his teacher at least one year, and who is not himself to become an instructor. Thus say the teachers, yea, thus say the teachers.

sa:ऐतरेय उपनिषद्


# KAUSHITAKI-UPANISHAD

KAUSHITAKI-UPANISHAD. 

First ADHYAYA. 

1. Kirra Ganngyayani!, forsooth, wishing to per- 
form a sacrifice, chose Arumi (Uddalaka ?, to be his 
chief priest). But Arumi sent his son, Svetaketu, 
and said: ‘Perform the sacrifice for him? When 
Svetaketu? had arrived, Aitra asked him: ‘Son of 
Gautama‘, is there a hidden place in the world: 
where you are able to place me, or is it the other 
way, and are you going to place me in the world 
to which it (that other way) leads*?’ 

1 It is difficult to determine whether Xitra’s name was Gaugya- 
yani or Gargydyazi. Professor Weber adopted first Gargyayani 
(Indische Studien I, p. 395), afterwards Gangy4yani (ibid. II, 395). 
Professor Cowell adopts Gangy4yani, but he tells us that the Telugu 
MS. reads Gargyayami throughout, and the other MSS. B, C do so 
occasionally. The commentator explains Gangy4yani as the 
descendant (yuvapatyam) of Gangya. I confess a preference for 
GAargyayani, because both Ganga and Gangya are names of rare 
occurrence in ancient Vedic literature, but I admit that for that 
very reason the transition of Gangy4yani into Gargyayani is perhaps 
more intelligible than that of Gargyayani into Gangy4yani. 

2 Cf. Kh. Up. V, 11, 2; Brih. Ar. VI, 2, 1. 

s Cf. Kh. Up. V, 3; VI 1. ‘ Brih. Ar. VI, 2, 4. 

8 The question put by Xitra to Svetaketu is very obscure, and 
was probably from the first intended to be obscure in its very 
wording. What Xitra wished to ask we can gather from other 
passages in the Upanishads, where we see another royal sage, Pra- 
vahana Gaivali (KA. Up. V, 3; Brih. Ar. VI, 2), enlightening Sveta- 
ketu on the future life. That future life is reached by two roads; 

http:/ /www.holybooks.com/the-sacred-books-of-the-east-all-50-volumes/ 

272 KAUSHiTAKI-UPANISHAD. 

He answered and said: ‘I do not know this. 
But, let me ask the master.’ Having approached 
his father, he asked: ‘Thus has Aitra asked me; 
how shall I answer ?’ 

one, the Devapatha, leading to the world of Brahman (the con- 
ditioned), beyond which there lies one other stage only, represented 
by knowledge of and identity with the unconditioned Brahman ; 
the other leading to the world of the fathers, and from thence, 
after the reward of good works has been consumed, back to a 
new round of mundane existence. There is a third road for 
creatures which live and die, worms, insects, and creeping things, 
but they are of little consequence. Now it is quite clear that the 
knowledge which king Xitra possesses, and which Svetaketu does 
not possess, is that of the two roads after death, sometimes called 
the right and the left, or the southern and northern roads. These 
roads are fully described in the KAandogya-upanishad and in the 
Brihad-aranyaka, with certain variations, yet on the whole with the 
same purpose. The northern or left road, called also the path of 
the Devas, passes on from light and day to the bright half of the 
moon; the southern or right road, called also the path of the 
fathers, passes on from smoke and night to the dark half of the 
moon. Both roads therefore meet in the moon, but diverge after- 
wards. While the northern road passes by the six months when 
the sun moves towards the north, through the sun, (moon,) and the 
lightning to the world of Brahman, the southern passes by the six 
months when the -sun moves towards the south, to the world of the 
fathers, the ether, and the moon. The great difference, however, 
between the two roads is, that while those who travel on the former 
do not return again to a new life on earth, but reach in the end 
a true knowledge of the unconditioned Brahman, those who pass 
on to the world of the fathers and the moon return to earth to be 
born again and again. 

The question therefore which Xitra addresses to Svetaketu can 
refer to these two roads only, and though the text is very corrupt, 
and was so evidently even at the time when the commentary was 
written, we must try to restore it in accordance with the teaching 
imparted by Aitra in what follows. I propose to read: Gautamasya 
putra, asti samvritam loke yasmin ma dhasyasy anyatamo vadhva 
tasya (or yasya) ma loke dhasyasi, ‘Is there a hidden place in the 
world where you (by your sacrificing and teaching) are able to 

I ADHYAYA, 2. 273 

Arumi said : ‘I also do not know this. Only after 
having learnt the proper portion of the Veda in 
Kitra’s own dwelling, shall we obtain what others 
give us (knowledge). Come, we will both go.’ 
Having said this he took fuel in his hand (like 
a pupil), and approached Xitra GAngy4yani, say- 
ing: ‘May I come near to you?’ He replied: 
‘You are worthy of Brahman’, O Gautama, because 
you were not led away by pride. Come hither, I 
shall make you know clearly.’ 

2. And Kitra said: All who depart from this 
world (or this body) go to the moon ?. In the former, 
(the bright) half, the moon delights in their spirits; 
in the other, (the dark) half, the moon sends them on 

place me, or is it the other way, and will you place me in the 

world to which it leads?’ Even thus the text is by no means 

satisfactory, but it is better than anyam aho vadhv4, adopted by the 
commentator and explained by him: Is therea hidden place in that 
world in which you will place me as another, i. e. as different from 
the whole world or identical with the whole world, and, if as dif- 
ferent, then having bound me (vadhva=baddhva) and made me a 
different person? We may read anyataro for anyatamo vadhva. The 
commentator sums up the question as referring to a hidden or not 
hidden place, where Aitra should be placed as another person 
or not another person, as bound or not bound; or, as Professor 
Cowell renders it, ‘O son of Gautama, is there any secret place in 
the world where thou canst set me unconnected, having fixed me 
there (as wood united with glue); or is there some other place 
where thou canst set me?’ The speculations on the fate of the 
soul after death seem to have been peculiar to the royal families of 
India, while the Brahmans dwelt more on what may be called the 
shorter cut, a knowledge of Brahman as the true Self. To know, 
with them, was to be, and, after the dissolution of the body, they 
looked forward to immediate emancipation, without any further 

wanderings. 

1 Worthy to know Brahman, or, as the commentator, who reads 
brahmargha, thinks, to be honoured like Brahman. 
2 Both roads lead to the moon, and diverge afterwards. 

[3] T 

a2 

274 KAUSHITAKI-UPANISHAD. 

to be born again. Verily, the moon is the door of 
the Svarga world (the heavenly world). Now, if a 
man objects to the moon (if one is not satisfied with 
life there) the moon sets him free*. But if a man 
does not object, then the moon sends him down as 
rain upon this earth. And according to his deeds 
and according to his knowledge he is born again 
here as a worm, or as an insect, or as a fish, or as a 
bird, or as a lion, or as a boar, or as a serpent *, or 
as a tiger, or as a man, or as something else in dif- 
ferent places*. When he has thus returned to the 
earth, some one (a sage) asks: ‘Who art thou ?’ 
And he should answer : ‘ From the wise moon, who 
orders the seasons’, when it is born consisting of 
fifteen parts, from the moon who is the home of our 
ancestors, the seed was brought. This seed, even 
me, they (the gods mentioned in the Pafif4gnividya®) 
gathered up in an active man, and through an active 

1 I should like to read aparapakshe praganayati, instead of 
aparapaksheza, or aparapakshe na. The negative is out of the 
question, for praganayati, he sends into a new life, is exactly what - 
the moon does to those who do not proceed on the Devapatha to 
the Brahmaloka. Therefore if the reading aparapaksheza must be 
retained, it should be rendered by ‘the moon with the dark half 
sends them into a new life.’ 

* This is supposed to be the hidden place, or rather the way to 
it, when the departed leave the moon, and pass on to lightning 
and to the world of Brahman. This is in fact the Devay4na, as 
opposed to the Pitrryava, described in the KAAndogya-upanishad. 

° Parasva, dandasfkaviseshaZ. There is no authority for trans- 
lating it by dog; cf. Indische Studien I, 396. 

* This might even include naraka or hell. 

6 If rttavahk is here the genitive of rrtu, its meaning would be 
the ordainer of the seasons; cf. Hibbert Lectures, p. 247. Vita- 
kshana is applied to the moon again, II, 9, and the throne of 
Brahman also is called vifakshaw&, I, 3. 

* Kh. Up. V, 4-8. 

http:/ /www.holybooks.com/the-sacred-books-of-the-east-all-50-volumes/ 

I ADHYAYA, 3. 275 

man they brought me toa mother. Then I, growing 
up to be born, a being living by months, whether 
twelve or thirteen, was together with my father, who 
also lived by (years of) twelve or thirteen months, 
that I might either know it (the true Brahman) or 
not know it. Therefore, O ye seasons’, grant that 
I may attain immortality (knowledge of Brahman). 
By this my true saying, by this my toil (beginning 
with the dwelling in the moon and ending with my 
birth on earth) I am (like) a season, and the child 
of the seasons.’ ‘Who art thou?’ the sage asks 
again. ‘Iam thou,’ he replies. Then he sets him 
free? (to proceed onward). 

3. He (at the time of death), having reached 
the path of the gods, comes to the world of Agni 
(fire), to the world of Vayu (air), to the world of 
Varuaa, to the world of Indra, to the world of 
Pragapati (Virag), to the world of Brahman (Hira- 
myagarbha). In that world there is the lake Ara ?, 
the moments called Yesh/iha‘*, the river Vigara 
(age-less), the tree Ilya®, the city Salagya, the palace 
Aparagita (unconquerable), the door-keepers Indra 

1 The commentator takes r:tavah as an accusative. I take it as 
a vocative, and as used in a sense analogous to the Zend ratu, an 
epithet of Ahura. Darmesteter, Ormazd, p. 12, n. 3. 

2 If a person fears heaven (svarga) as much as hell, because 
neither gives final liberation, then he is fit to proceed to a know- 
ledge of Brahman.. It would seem that after this, this person is in 
the same position as the other who, objecting to remain in the 
moon, was set free at once. 

* Consisting of ari’s, enemies, such as love, anger, &c. In the 
Kh. Up. VIII, 5, 3, it is called Ara. 

* Explained to mean, killing the sacrifice, which consists in a 
desire for Brahman. 

6 The same as the asvatthas somasavana’ in KA. Up. VIII, 5, 3. 

2 

276 KAUSHITAKI-UPANISHAD. 

and Prag&pati, the hall of Brahman, called Vibhu ! 
(built by vibhu, egoism), the throne Visakshaza 
(buddhi, perception), the couch Amitaugas (endless 
splendour), and the beloved Manast (mind) and her 
image AK 4kshusht (eye), who, as if taking flowers, are 
weaving the worlds, and the Apsaras, the Ambdas 
(sruti, sacred scriptures), and Ambayavis (buddhi, 
understanding), and the rivers Ambay4s (leading 
to the knowledge of Brahman). To this world he 
who knows this (who knows the Paryanka-vidy4) 
approaches. Brahman says to him: ‘ Run towards 
him (servants) with such worship as is due to myself. 
He has reached the river Vigara (age-less), he will 
never age.’ 

4. Then five hundred Apsaras go towards him, one 
hundred with garlands in their hands, one hundred 
with ointments in their hands, one hundred with per- 
fumes in their hands, one hundred with garments in 
their hands, one hundred with fruit ? in their hands. 
They adorn him with an adornment worthy of Brah- 
man, and when thus adorned with the adornment of 
Brahman, the knower of Brahman moves towards 
Brahman (neut.)? He comes to the lake Ara, and he 
crosses it by the mind, while those who come to it 
without knowing the truth ‘, are drowned. He comes 
to the moments called Yesh/iha, they flee from him. 

1 Vibhunamakam pramitam sabhasthalam. 

2 Some MSS. read phamahasta, and the commentator explains 
phana by abharama. 

3 Though brahman is used here as a neuter, it refers to the 
conditioned Brahman. 

t Samprativid is here explained as brahmavidyasfinya, ignorant, 
while in other places (Ait. Ar. II, 3, 1) it stands for samyagabhigfia. 
If the latter is the true meaning, we might read here tam itvasam- 
prativido. 

I ADHYAYA, 5. 277 

He comes to the river Vigara, and crosses it by the 
mind alone, and there shakes off his good and evil 
deeds. His beloved relatives obtain the good, his 
unbeloved relatives the evil he has done. And as a 
man, driving in a chariot, might look at the two 
wheels (without being touched by them), thus he 
will look at day and night, thus at good and evil 
deeds, and at all pairs (at all correlative things, such 
as light and darkness, heat and cold, &c.) Being 
freed from good and freed from evil he, the knower 
of Brahman (neut.), moves towards Brahman. 

5. He approaches the tree Ilya, and the odour 
of Brahman reaches him. He approaches the city 
Salagya, and the flavour of Brahman reaches him. 
He approaches the palace Aparagita, and the splen- 
dour of Brahman reaches him. He approaches the 
door-keepers Indra and Pragapati, and they run 
away from him. He approaches the hall Vibhu, and 
the glory of Brahman reaches him (he thinks, I am 
Brahman). He approaches the throne Vikakshaza. 
The S4man verses, Bvzhad and Rathantara, are the 
eastern feet of that throne’; the Saman verses, Syaita 
and Naudhasa, its western feet; the SAman verses, 
Vairtpa and Vairaga, its sides lengthways (south 
and north); the Saman verses, Sdkvara and Raivata, 
its sides crossways (east and west). That throne is Pra- 
giid, knowledge, for by knowledge (self-knowledge) he 
sees clearly. He approaches the couch Amitaugas. 
That is Praza (speech). The past and the future are 
its eastern feet; prosperity and earth its western feet ; 
the Saman verses, Brzhad and Rathantara, are the 
two sides lengthways of the couch (south and north); 

1 Cf, Atharva-veda XV; Aufrecht, in Indische Studien I, p. 122. 

.278 KAUSHITAKI-UPANISHAD. 

the Saman verses, Bhadra and Yagfiayagfitya, are 
its cross-sides at the head and feet (east and west) ; 
the A7& and Saman are the long sheets? (east and 
west); the Yagus the cross-sheets (south and north); 
the moon-beam the cushion ; the Udgitha the (white) 
coverlet; prosperity the pillow?. On this couch sits 
Brahman, and he who knows this (who knows him- 
self one with Brahman sitting on the couch) mounts 
it first with one foot only. Then Brahman says to 
him: ‘Who art thou ?’ and he shall answer : 

6. ‘I am (like) a season, and the child of the 
seasons, sprung from the womb of endless space, 
from the light (from the luminous Brahman). The 
light, the origin of the year, which is the past, which 
is the present, which is all living things, and all ele- 
ments, is the Self*. Thou art the Self. What thou 
art, that am I.’ 

Brahman says to him: ‘ Who am I?’ He shall 
answer : ‘ That which is, the true’ (Sat-tyam). 

Brahman asks: ‘ What is the true?’ He says to 
him: ‘What is different from the gods and from 
the senses (praza) that is Sat, but the gods and the 

1 Sheets or coverings seem more applicable here than mere 
threads forming the woof and warp; cf. Aufrecht, Indische Studien 
I, p. 131. 

* I read udgftha upasrif, srir upabarhazam. The Atharva text 
has udgitho ’pasrayah. 

>` This passage is corrupt, and the various readings and various 
interpretations of the commentators do not help us much. One 
view, which I have followed, as far as possible, is that it had to be 
explained how the same being could be the child of the seasons, 
or living from year to year, and, at the same time, born of the 
light. The answer is, Because light is the seed or cause of the 
year, and the year the cause of everything else. I take no respon- 
sibility for this view, and I see no way of discovering the original 
reading and the original meaning of these sentences. 

I ADHYAYA, 7. 279 

senses are Tyam. Therefore by that name Sat- 
tya (true) is called all this whatever there is. All 
this thou art.’ 

7. This is also declared by a verse: ‘ This great 
Ashi, whose belly is the Yagus, the head the SAman, 
the form the Aze, is to be known as being imperish- 
able, as being Brahman.’ 

Brahman says to him: ‘How dost thou obtain 
my male names?’ He should answer: ‘By breath 
(prazah),’ 

Brahman asks: ‘How my female names?’ He 
should answer : ‘ By speech (v4e).’ 

Brahman asks: ‘How my neuter names?’ He 
should answer : ‘ By mind (manas). 

‘How smells?’ ‘By the nose.’ ‘How forms?’ 
‘By the eye. ‘How sounds?’ ‘By the ear.’ 
‘ How flavours of food ?’ ‘By the tongue.’ ‘How 
actions ?’ ‘By the hands.’ ‘How pleasures and 
pain?’ ‘By the body. ‘ How joy, delight, and 
offspring ?’ ‘ By the organ. ‘How journeyings ?’ 
‘By the feet.’ ‘How thoughts, and what is to be 
known and desired ?’ ‘ By knowledge (prag7i4) alone.’ 

Brahman says to him: ‘ Water indeed is this my 
world 1, the whole Brahman world, and it is thine.’ 

Whatever victory, whatever might belongs to 
Brahman, that victory and that might he obtains 
who knows this, yea, who knows this #*. 

1 It sprang from water and the other elements. Comm. Pro- 
fessor Weber proposes to translate apa by Erlangungen, acquisi- 
tions, with reference to apnoshi, ‘how dost thou acquire my 
names?’ in what precedes. 

2 Who knows the conditioned and mythological form of Brai- 
man as here described, sitting on the couch. 

280 KAUSH!ITAKI-UPANISHAD. 

SECOND ADHYAYA. 

1. PrAsza (breath)! is Brahman, thus says Kau- 
shitaki. Of this praxa, which is Brahman, the mind 
(manas) is the messenger, speech the housekeeper, 
the eye the guard, the ear the informant. He who 
knows mind as the messenger of praza, which is 
Brahman, becomes possessed of the messenger. He 
who knows speech as the housekeeper, becomes 
possessed of the housekeeper. He who knows the 
eye as the guard, becomes possessed of the guard. 
He who knows the ear as the informant, becomes 
possessed of the informant. 

Now to that praza, which is Brahman, all these 
deities (mind, speech, eye, ear) bring an offering, 
though he asks not for it, and thus to him who 
knows this all creatures bring an offering, though he 
asks not for it. For him who knows this, there is 
this Upanishad (secret vow), ‘ Beg not!’ As aman 
who has begged through a village and got nothing 
sits down and says, ‘I shall never eat anything 
given by those people, and as then those who for- 
merly refused him press him (to accept their alms), 
thus is the rule for him who begs not, but the 
charitable will press him and say, ‘Let us give to 
thee.’ 

2. Praza (breath) is Brahman, thus says Paingya. 
And in that pradza, which is Brahman, the eye 

1 In the first chapter it was said, ‘He approaches the couch 
Amitaugas, that is praza, breath, spirit, life. Therefore having 
explained in the first adhyaya the knowledge of the couch (of 
Brahman), the next subject to be explained is the knowledge of 
praaa, the living spirit, taken for a time as Brahman, or the last 
cause of everything,’ 

II ADHYAYA, 3. 281 

stands firm behind speech, the ear stands firm 
behind the eye, the mind stands firm behind the 
ear, and the spirit stands firm behind the mind}, 
To that praza, which is Brahman, all these deities 
bring an offering, though he asks not for it, and 
thus to him who knows this, all creatures bring an 
offering, though he asks not for it. For him who 
knows this, there is this Upanishad (secret vow), 
‘Beg not!’ As a man who has begged through a 
village and got nothing sits down and says, ‘I shall 
never eat anything given by those people, and as 
then those who formerly refused him press him 
(to accept their alms), thus is the rule for him who 
begs not, but the charitable will press him and say, 
‘Let us give to thee.’ 

3. Now follows the attainment of the highest 
treasure (scil. praza, spirit”). If a man meditates 
on that highest treasure, let him on a full moon or 
a new moon, or in the bright fortnight, under an 
auspicious Nakshatra, at one of these proper times, 
bending his right knee, offer oblations of ghee with 
a ladle (sruva), after having placed the fire, swept 
the ground ?, strewn the sacred grass, and sprinkled 
water. Let him say: ‘The deity called Speech is 

1 I translate vakparastat, AakshuAparastet, manafparastat as 
compounds, and read srotraparastat. The commentator requires 
this. He says that speech is uncertain, and has to be checked 
by the eye. The eye is uncertain, taking mother of pearl for 
silver, and must be checked by the ear. The ear is uncertain, and 
must be checked by the mind, for unless the mind is attentive, 
the ear hears not. The mind, lastly, depends on the spirit, for 
without spirit there is no mind. The commentator is right in 
reading rundhe or runddhe instead of rundhate. 

2 The vital spirits are called the highest treasure, because a man 
surrenders everything to preserve his vital spirits or his life, 

3 Cf. Brih. Ar. VI, 3, 1. 

282 KAUSHITAKI-UPANISHAD. 

the attainer, may it attain this for me from him (who 
possesses and can bestow what I wish for). Svaha 
to it!’ 

‘The deity called praxa (breath) is the attainer, 
may it attain this for me from him. Svaha to it!’ 

‘The deity called the eye is the attainer, may it 
attain this for me from him. Sv&ha to it!’ 

‘The deity called the ear is the attainer, may it 
attain this for me from him. Svd4he to it!’ 

‘The deity called mind (manas) is the attainer of it, 
may it attain this for me from him. Svaha to it.’ 

‘The deity called pragna (knowledge) is the 
attainer of it, may it attain this for me from him. 
Svaha to it!’ 

Then having inhaled the smell of the smoke, and 
having rubbed his limbs with the ointment of ghee, 
walking on in silence, let him declare his wish, or 
let him send a messenger. He will surely obtain 
his wish. 

4. Now follows the Daiva Smara, the desire to 
be accomplished by the gods. Ifa man desires to 
become dear! to any man or woman, or to any men 
or women, then at one of the (fore-mentioned) 
proper times he offers, in exactly the same manner 
(as before), oblations of ghee, saying: ‘I offer thy 
speech in myself, I (this one here ?), Svaha.’ ‘I offer 
thy ear in myself, I (this one here), Svah4.’ ‘I offer thy 

1 As dear as prfva or life. 

? The commentator explains these mysterious utterances by : 
‘I offer, I throw, in the fire, which is lit by the fuel of thy indiffer- 
ence or dislike, in myself, being the object of thy love, speech, 
the organ of speech, of thee, who art going to love me. This 
one, i.e. I myself, or my love, may prosper. Sv4h4, my speech, 
may grant approval to the oblation of me, the lover.’ 

II ADHYAYA, 6. 283 

mind in myself, I (this one here), Svaha.’ ‘I offer thy 
pragna (knowledge) in myself, I (this one here), Svaha.’ 
Then having inhaled the smell of the smoke, and 
having rubbed his limbs with the ointment of ghee, 
walking on in silence, let him try to come in contact 
or let him stand speaking in the wind, (so that the 
wind may carry his words to the person by whom he 
desires to be loved). Surely he becomes dear, and 
they think of him. 

5. Now follows the restraint (samzyamana) insti- 
tuted by Pratardana (the son of Divod4sa): they 
call it the inner Agni-hotra. So long as a man 
speaks, he cannot breathe, he offers all the while 
his praza (breath) in his speech. And so long asa 
man breathes, he cannot speak, he offers all the 
while his speech in his breath. These two endless 
and immortal oblations he offers always, whether 
waking or sleeping. Whatever other oblations 
there are (those, e.g. of the ordinary Agnihotra, 
consisting of milk and other things), they have an 
end, for they consist of works (which, like all works, 
have an end). The ancients, knowing this (the best 
Agnihotra), did not offer the (ordinary) Agnihotra. 

6. Uktha! is Brahman, thus said Sushkabhvzn- 
gara. Let him meditate on it (the uktha) as the 
same with the œt, and all beings will praise him 
as the best. Let him meditate on it as the same 
with the Yagus, and all beings will join before him 

1 Uktha, a Vedic hymn, has been identified with praxa, breath, in 
the Kazva and other Sakhas (Brzh. Ar. V, 13,1; Ait. Ar. II, r, 2). 
Here uktha, i.e. the praza of the uktha, is further identified with 
Brahman. As uktha (the hymn) is praza, and as the sacrifice is 
performed with hymns, the sacrifice, too, is uktha, and therefore 
praza, and therefore Brahman. Comm. 

284 KAUSHITAKI-UPANISHAD. 

as the best. Let him meditate on it as the same 
with the Saman, and all beings will bow before 
him as the best?. Let him meditate on it as the 
same with might, let him meditate on it as the same 
with glory, let him meditate on it as the same with 
splendour. For as the bow is among weapons the 
mightiest, the most glorious, the most splendid, thus 
is he who knows this among all beings the mightiest, 
the most glorious, the most splendid. The Adhvaryu 
conceives the fire of the altar, which is used for the 
sacrifice, to be himself. In it he (the Adhvaryu) 
weaves the Yagus portion of the sacrifice. And in 
the Yagus portion the Hoty: weaves the Aze portion 
of the sacrifice. And in the A2ze portion the Ud- 
gatvz weaves the SAman portion of the sacrifice. 
He (the Adhvaryu or praza) is the self of the 
threefold knowledge; he indeed is the self of it 
(of prava). He who knows this is the self of it 
(becomes praza *). 

! The verbs ark, yug, and sannam are not used idiomatically, 
but with reference to the words rrk, yagus, and siman. 

2 The commentator explains this somewhat differently. He 
takes it to be the object of the last paragraph to show that the 
Prana-vidya can ultimately produce final liberation, and not only 
temporal rewards. The Adhvaryu priest, he says, takes what is 
called uktha, and has been identified with R:’, Yagus, and Sdman 
hymns, all contained in the mouth, as being outwardly the sacri- 
ficial fire of the altar, because that fire cannot be lighted without 
such hymns. Thus the self of the Adhvaryu priest becomes iden- 
tified, not only with the uktha, the hymns, but also with the sacrificial 
fire, and he meditates on himself as fire, as hymn (uktha), and as 
breath (praza). I read sa esha sarvasyai trayyai vidy4ya 4tme, 
esha u evasyatma. Etadatm4 bhavati ya evam veda. But if we 
read asydtma, we cannot with the commentator explain it by asya 
uktayas trayy4 4tm4, but must refer asya to pr4ma, breath, life, 
which is here to be identified with Brahman. 

II ADHYAYA, 8. 285 

7. Next follow the three kinds of meditation of 
the all-conquering (sarvagit) Kaushitaki. The all- 
conquering Kaushttaki adores the sun when rising, 
having put on the sacrificial cord}, having brought 
water, and having thrice sprinkled the water-cup, 
saying: ‘Thou art the deliverer, deliver me from 
sin. In the same manner he adores the sun when 
in the zenith, saying: ‘Thou art the highest de- 
liverer, deliver me highly from sin.’ In the same 
manner he adores the sun when setting, saying: 
‘Thou art the full deliverer, deliver me fully from 
sin. Thus he fully removes whatever sin he com- 
mitted by day and by night. And in the same 
manner he who knows this, likewise adores the sun, 
and fully removes whatever sin he committed by day 
and by night. 

8. Then (secondly) let him worship every month 
(in the year) at the time of the new moon, the moon 
as it is seen in the west in the same manner (as 
before described with regard to the sun), or let him 
send forth his speech toward the moon with two 
green blades of grass, saying: ‘O thou who art 
mistress of immortal joy, through that gentle heart 
of mine which abides in the moon, may I never 
weep for misfortune concerning my children.’ 

The children of him (who thus adores the moon) 
do not indeed die before him. Thus it is with a man 
to whom a son is already born. 

Now for one to whom no son is born as yet. He 
mutters the three z verses. ‘ Increase, O Soma! 
may vigour come to thee’ (Rv. I, 91,16; IX, 31, 4). 

1 This is one of the earliest, if not the earliest mention of the 
yagfiopavita, the sacred cord as worn over the left shoulder for 
sacrificial purposes; cf. Taitt. Brahm. III, 10, 19, 12. 

286 KAUSHITAKI-UPANISHAD. 

‘May milk, may food go to thee’ (Rv. I, 91, 18); 
‘That ray which the Adityas gladden.’ 

Having muttered these three /ze verses, he says : 
‘Do not increase by our breath (praza), by our off- 
spring, by our cattle; he who hates us and whom we 
hate, increase by his breath, by his offspring, by his 
cattle. Thus I turn the turn of the god, I return 
the turn of Aditya.’ After these words, having 
raised the right arm (toward Soma), he lets it go 
again ?. 

1 This refers to movements of the arm, following the moon and 
the sun. 

2 It is extremely difficult to translate the Vedic verses which are > 
quoted in the Upanishads. They are sometimes slightly changed 
on purpose (see § 11), frequently turned from their original purport 
by the authors of the Upanishads themselves, and then again sub- 
jected to the most fanciful interpretations by the various commen- 
tators on the Upanishads. In our paragraph (§ 8) the text followed 
by the commentator differs from the printed text. The commen- 
tator seems to have read: Yat te susimam hridayam adhi sandra- 
masi sritam, ten4mrttatvasyesine maham pautram agham rudam. 
I have translated according to the commentator, at least up to 
a certain point, for, as Professor Cowell remarks, there is an under- 
current in the commentator’s explanation, implying a comparison 
between the husband as the sun or fire, and the wife as the moon, 
which it would be difficult to render in an English translation. 
The same or a very similar verse occurs in § 10, while other modi- 
fications of it may be seen in Asval. Grithya-sitras I, 13, 7, and else- 
where. The trahslation of the verses in full, of three of which the 
Upanishad gives the beginnings only, would be according to the 
commentator : ‘(O goddess of the moon) who hast obtained im- 
mortal joy through that which is a beautiful (portion of the sun) 
placed in the moon, and filling thy heart (with pleasure), may 
I never weep for misfortune concerning my children.’ 

Rv. I, 91, 16; IX, 31, 4. ʻO goddess of the moon, increase! 
may the vigour from everywhere (from every limb of the fire or the 
sun) go to thee! Help us in the attainment of food.’ Rv. I, 91, 
18. ‘O goddess of the moon, may the streams of thy milk go 
well to our sons, those streams of milk which are invigorating, and 

II ADHYAYA, IO. 287 

9. Then (thirdly) let him worship on the day of 
the full moon the moon as it is seen in the east in 
the same manner, saying: ‘Thou art Soma, the 
king, the wise, the five-mouthed, the lord of crea- 
tures. The Brahmaza is one of thy mouths; with 
that mouth thou eatest the kings (Kshatriyas) ; 
make me an eater of food by that mouth! The 
king is one of thy mouths; with that mouth thou 
eatest the people (Vaisyas); make me an eater of 
food by that mouth! The hawk is one of thy 
mouths; with that mouth thou eatest the birds; 
make me an eater of food by that mouth! Fire is 
one of thy mouths; with that mouth thou eatest this 
world; make me an eater of food by that mouth! 
In thee there is the fifth mouth; with that mouth 
thou eatest all beings; make me an eater of food by 
that mouth! Do not decrease by our life, by our 
offspring, by our cattle; he who hates us and whom 
we hate, decrease by his life, by his offspring, by his 
cattle. Thus I turn the turn of the god, I return 
the turn of Aditya’ After these words, having 
raised the right arm, he lets it go again. 

10. Next (having addressed these prayers to 
Soma) when being with his wife, let him stroke her 

help to conquer the enemy. O Soma-goddess, increasing for im- 
mortal happiness (for the birth of a son), do thou place the highest 
glory (the streams of thy milk) in the sky.’ ‘That ray (sushumza) 
which (as a woman) the Adityas gladden, that Soma which as im- 
perishable the imperishable Adityas drink, may the guardian of 
the world (Prag4pati), Brthaspati, and king Varusa gladden us 
by it.’ 

The translations are made by the commentator regardless of 
grammar and sense: yet they command a certain authority, and 
must be taken into account as throwing light on the latest develop- 
ment of Indian mysticism. 

288 KAUSHITAKI-UPANISHAD. 

heart, saying: ‘O fair one, who hast obtained 
immortal joy by that which has entered thy heart 
through Pragdpati, mayest thou never fall into sor- 
row about thy children'.’ Her children then do not 
die before her. 

11. Next, if a man has been absent and returns 
home, let him smell (kiss) his son’s head, saying : 
‘Thou springest from every limb, thou art born from 
the heart, thou, my son, art my self indeed, live thou 
a hundred harvests. He gives him his name, 
saying: ‘Be thou a stone, be thou an axe, be thou 
solid ? gold; thou, my son, art light indeed, live thou 
a hundred harvests’ He pronounces his name. 
Then he embraces him, saying: ‘As Pragapati (the 
lord of creatures) embraced his creatures for their 
welfare, thus I embrace thee, (pronouncing his name.) 
Then he mutters into his right ear, saying: ‘O thou, 
quick Maghavan, give to him’ (Rv. III, .36, 10%). 
‘O Indra, bestow the best wishes’ (Rv. II, 21, 6), 
thus he whispers into his left ear. Let him then 
thrice smell (kiss) his head, saying: ‘ Do not cut off 
(the line of our race), do not suffer. Live a hun- 
dred harvests of life; I kiss thy head, O son, with 
thy name. He then thrice makes a lowing sound 
over his head, saying: ‘I low over thee with the 
lowing sound of cows.’ 

12. Next follows the Daiva Parimara ‘, the dying 
around of the gods (the absorption of the two 

1 Cf. Asvalayana Grrhya-sftras I, 13, 7. 

2 Widely scattered, everywhere desired. Comm. Professor 
Cowell proposes unscattered, hoarded, or unconcealed. 

3 The original has asme, to us, not asmai, to him. 

4 Cf. Taitt. Up. III, 10, 4; Ait. Brahm. V, 28; Colebrooke, 
Miscellaneous Essays (1873), II, p. 39. 

II ADHYAYA, I3. 289 

classes of gods, mentioned before, into praza or 
Brahman). This Brahman shines forth indeed 
when the fire burns, and it dies when it burns not. 
Its splendour goes to the sun alone, the life (praza, 
the moving principle) to the air. 

This Brahman shines forth indeed when the sun 
is seen, and it dies when it is not seen. Its splendour: 
goes to the moon alone, the life (praza) to the air. 

This Brahman shines forth indeed when the moon 
is seen, and it dies when it is not seen. Its splen- 
dour goes to the lightning alone, its life (praza) to 
the air. 

This Brahman shines forth indeed when the 
lightning flashes, and it dies when it flashes not. 
Its splendour goes to the air, and the life (prdza) 
to the air. 

Thus all these deities (i.e. fire, sun, moon, light- 
ning), having entered the air, though dead, do not 
vanish ; and out of the very air they rise again. So 
much with reference to the deities (mythological). 
Now then with reference to the body (physiolo- 
gical). . 

13. This Brahman shines forth indeed when one 
speaks with speech, and it dies when one does not 
speak. His splendour goes to the eye alone, the life 
(praza) to breath (praza). 

This Brahman shines forth indeed when one sees 
with the eye, and it dies when one does not see. Its 
splendour goes to the ear alone, the life (praza) to 
breath (praza). 

This Brahman shines forth indeed when one hears 
with the ear, and it dies when one does not hear. 
Its splendour goes to the mind alone, the life (praza) 
to breath (pr4za). 

[3] U 

This book was downldeaded from www.holybooks.com : 
http:/ /www.holybooks.com/the-sacred-books-of-the-east-all-50-volumes/ 

290 KAUSHITAKI-UPANISHAD. 

This Brahman shines forth indeed when one 
thinks with the mind, and it dies when one does 
not think. Its splendour goes to the breath (praza) 
alone, and the life (praza) to breath (prama). 

Thus all these deities (the senses, &c.), having 
- entered breath or life (praza) alone, though dead, do 
not vanish ; and out of very breath (praza) they rise 
again. ` And if two mountains, the southern and 
northern, were to move forward trying to crush him 
who knows this, they would not crush him. But 
those who hate him and those whom he hates, they 
die around him. 

14. Next follows the Nissreyasddana! (the accept- 
ing of the pre-eminence of pra#a (breath or life) 
by the other gods). The deities (speech, eye, ear, 
mind), contending with each for who was the best, 
went out of this body, and the body lay without 
breathing, withered, like a log of wood. Then 
speech went into it, but speaking by speech, it lay 
still. Then the eye went into it, but speaking by 
speech, and seeing by the eye, it lay still. Then the 
ear went into it, but speaking by speech, seeing by 
the eye, hearing by the ear, it lay still. Then mind 
went into it, but speaking by speech, seeing by the 
eye, hearing by the ear, thinking by the mind, it lay 
still. Then breath (pr4za, life) went into it, and thence 
it rose at once. All these deities, having recognised 
the pre-eminence in praza, and having comprehended 
prava alone as the conscious self (pragiiatman)*, went 
out of this body with all these (five different kinds of 

1 For other versions of this story see AA. Up. V, 1, note 2; Ait, 
Ar. II, 1, 4, 9; Brih. Ar. VI, 1, 1-14; and Kaush. Up. III, 3. 
3 Cf. Kh. Up. VII, 15, note. 

II ADHYAYA, I5. 291 

praza), and resting in the air (knowing that praza 
had entered the air), and merged in the ether (4k4sa), 
they went to heaven. And in the same manner he 
who knows this, having recognised the pre-eminence 
in praza, and having comprehended prada alone as 

the conscious self (pragfiatman), goes out of this- 

body with all these (does no longer believe in 
this body), and resting in the air, and merged in 
the ether, he goes to heaven, he goes to where those 
gods (speech, &c.) are. And having reached this 
he, who knows this, becomes immortal with that 
immortality which those gods enjoy. 

15. Next follows the father's tradition to the son, 
and thus they explain it. The father, when going 
to depart, calls his son, after having strewn the 
house with fresh grass, and having laid the sacrificial 
fire, and having placed near it a pot of water with a 
jug (full of rice), himself covered with a new cloth, 
and dressed in white. He places himself above his 
son, touching his organs with his own organs, or he 
may deliver the tradition to him while he sits before 
him. Then he delivers it tohim. The father says: 
‘Let me place my speech in thee.’ The son says: 
‘I take thy speech in me.’ The father says: ‘ Let 
me place my scent (praza) in thee.’ The son says: 
‘I take thy scent in me. The father says: ‘Let 
me place my eye in thee.’ The son says: ‘I take 
thy eye in me.’ The father says: ‘Let me place 
my ear in thee.’ The son says: ‘I take thy ear in me.’ 
The father says: ‘Let me place my tastes of food in 
thee.’ The son says: ‘I take thy tastes of food 
in me.’ The father says: ‘Let me place my actions 

1 Cf. Brihad-dranyaka I, 5,17. 
U 2 

292 KAUSHI{TAKI-UPANISHAD. 

in thee? The son says: ‘I take thy actions in me.’ 
The father says: ‘Let me place my pleasure and 
pain in thee.’ The son says: ‘I take thy pleasure 
and pain in me.’ The father says: ‘ Let me place 
happiness, joy, and offspring in thee.’ The son says: 
‘I take thy happiness, joy, and offspring inme. The 
father says: ‘Let me place my walking in thee.’ 
The son says: ‘1 take thy walking in me’. The 
father says: ‘Let me place my mind in thee. The 
son says: ‘I take thy mind in me.’ The father says: 
‘Let me place my knowledge (pragiia) in thee.’ The 
son says: ‘I take thy knowledge in me.’ But if the 
father is very ill, he may say shortly: ‘ Let me place 
my spirits (pra#zas) in thee,’ and the son: ‘I take 
thy spirits in me.’ 

Then the son walks round his father keeping his 
right side towards him, and goes away. The father 
calls after him: ‘ May fame, glory of countenance, and 
honour always follow thee.’ Then the other looks 
back over his left shoulder, covering himself with his 
hand or the hem of his garment, saying: ‘ Obtain 
the heavenly worlds (svarga) and all desires.’ 

If the father recovers, let him be under the 
authority of his son, or let him wander about (as 
an ascetic). But if he departs, then let them 
despatch him, as he ought to be despatched, yea, 
as he ought to be despatched 2, 

1 Another sakha adds here dhiya4, the thoughts (active), vigfiata- 
vyam, their object, and kam&4, desires. 
. ° Ihave taken sam4payati in the sense of performing the last 
duties towards a dead person, though I confess I know of no 
parallel passage in which sam4payati occurs in that sense. Pro- 
fessor Cowell translates: ‘If he dies, then let them cause the son 
duly to receive the tradition, as the tradition is to be given.’ The 
text itself varies, for the reading presupposed by the commentator 
is enam (putram) samApayati, instead of enam samApayeyus. 

III ADHYAYA, I. 29 3 

THIRD ApHYAYA}, 

I. Pratardana, forsooth, the son of DivodAsa 
(king of Kast), came by means of fighting and 
strength to the beloved abode of Indra. Indra said 
to him: ‘ Pratardana, let me give you a boon to 
choose. And Pratardana answered: ‘Do you your- 
self choose that boon for me which you deem most 
beneficial fora man.’ Indra said to him: ‘No one 
who chooses, chooses for another; choose thyself.’ 
Then Pratardana replied: ‘Then that boon to 
choose is no boon for me.’ 

Then, however, Indra did not swerve from the 
truth, for Indra is truth. Indra said to him: ‘ Know 
me only; that is what I deem most beneficial for man, 
that he should know me. I slew the three-headed 
son of Tvash¢vz; I delivered the Arunmukhas, the 
devotees, to the wolves (salavvzka) ; breaking many 
treaties, I killed the people of Prahlada in heaven, 
the people of Puloma in the sky, the people of K4la- 
kafiga on earth? And not one hair of me was 
harmed there. And he who knows me thus, by no 
deed of his is his life harmed, not by the murder of 

1 The object now is to explain the true Brahma-vidy4, while the 
first and second chapters are only introductory, treating of the 
worship of the couch (paryankop4san4) and of the worship of 
prana. 

2 This refers to heroic deeds performed by Indra, as represented 
in the hymns of the Rig-veda. See Rig-veda V, 34, 4, and Sayana’s 
commentary; Ait. Brahm. VII, 28. Weber, Indische Studien I, 
410-418, has tried to discover an original physical meaning in the 
heroic deeds ascribed to Indra. A curious remark is made by 
the commentator, who says that the skulls of the Arunmukhas were 
turned into the thorns of the desert (karfra) which remain to 
this day,—a very common phase in popular tradition. 

294 KAUSH{TAKI-UPANISHAD. 

his mother, not by the murder of his father, not by 
theft, not by the killing of a Brahman. If he is 
going to commit a sin, the bloom! does not depart 
from his face.’ 

2. Indra said: ‘I am pras#a, meditate on me as 
the conscious self (pragfiatman), as life, as immor- 
tality. Life is praza, praxa is life. Immortality is 
praza, praza is immortality. As long as praxa 
dwells in this body, so long surely there is life. By 
praza he obtains immortality in the other world, by 
knowledge true conception. He who meditates on 
me as life and immortality, gains his full life in this 
world, and obtains in the Svarga world immortality 
and indestructibility.’ 

(Pratardana said): ‘Some maintain here, that the 
prazas become one, for (otherwise) no one could at 
the same time make known a name by speech, see 
a form with the eye, hear a sound with the ear, 
think a thought with the mind. After having 
become one, the prazas perceive all these together, 
one by one. While speech speaks, all prazas speak 
after it. While the eye sees, all pravas see after it. 
While the ear hears, all praas hear after it. While 
the mind thinks, all pr4zas think after it. While the 
praza breathes, all prazas breathe after it.’ 

‘Thus it is indeed,’ said Indra, ‘but nevertheless 
there is a pre-eminence among the prdamas ?. 

3. Man lives deprived of speech, for we see dumb 
people. Man lives deprived of sight, for we see 

1 Professor Cowell compares Taittirtya-Samhit4 III, 1,1, nasya 
nitam na haro vyeti. 

? Prands, in the plural, is supposed to stand for the five senses 
as modifications of breath. It would be better if we coma read 
prazasya nisreyasam. See before, II, 14. 

A 
III ADHYAYA, 3. 295 

blind people. Man lives deprived of hearing, for 
we see deaf people. Man lives deprived of mind, 
for we see infants. Man lives deprived of his arms, 
deprived of his legs, for we see it thus. But praza 
alone is the conscious self (pragfidtman), and having 
laid hold of this body, it makes it rise up. There- 
fore it is said, Let man worship it alone as uktha!. 
What is praxa, that is pragfia (self-consciousness); 
what is pragiia (self-consciousness), that is praza, for 
together they (pragiia and pr4za) live in this body, 
and together they go out of it. Of that, this is the 
evidence, this is the understanding. When a man, 
being thus asleep, sees no dream whatever, he be- 
comes one with that praza alone? Then speech 
goes to him (when he is absorbed in pr4za) with 
all names, the eye with all forms, the ear with all 
sounds, the mind with all thoughts. And when 
he awakes, then, as from a burning fire sparks 
proceed in all directions, thus from that self the 
prazas (speech, &c.) proceed, each towards its place; 
from the prazas the gods (Agni, &c.), from the gods 
the worlds. 

Of this, this is the proof, this is the understanding. 
When a man is thus sick, going to die, falling into 
weakness and faintness, they say: ‘His thought has 
departed, he hears not, he sees not, he speaks not, 
he thinks not.’ Then he becomes one with that 
praza alone. Then speech goes to him (who is 
absorbed in praza) with all names, the eye with all 

1 Uktha, hymn, is artificially derived from ut-thApayati, to raise 
up, and hence uktha, hymn, is to be meditated on as prama, breath, 
which likewise raises up the body. See Ait. Ar. II, 1, 15. 

2 He is absorbed in praza. Or should it be pranah as 
nominative ? 

zal 

296 KAUSHITAKI-UPANISHAD. 

forms, the ear with all sounds, the mind with all 
thoughts. And when he departs from this body, he 
departs together with all these +. 

4. Speech gives up to him (who is absorbed in 
praza) all names, so that by speech he obtains all 
names. The nose gives up to him all odours, so 
that by scent he obtains all odours. The eye gives 
up to him all forms, so that by the eye he obtains 
all forms. The ear gives up to him all sounds, so 
that by the ear he obtains all sounds. The mind 
gives up to him all thoughts, so that by the mind he 
obtains all thoughts. This is the complete absorp- 
tion in praza. And what is pravza is pragiia (self- 
consciousness), what is pragna (self-consciousness) is 
praza. For together do these two live in the body, 
and together do they depart. 

Now we shall explain how all things become one 
in that pragna (self-consciousness). 

5. Speech is one portion taken out? of pragna 
(self-conscious knowledge), the word is its object, 
placed outside. The nose is one portion taken out 
of it, the odour is its object, placed outside. The 
eye is one portion taken out of it, the form is its 
object, placed outside. The ear is one portion taken 
out of it, the sound is its object, placed outside. The 
tongue is one portion taken out of it, the taste of 
food is its object, placed outside. The two hands 

! According to another reading we might translate, ‘Speech 
takes away all names from that body; and pr4za, in which speech 
is absorbed, thus obtains all names.’ 

? I read udfi/zam or udddham, instead of adudkam, explained 
by the commentator as adfiduhat. Professor Cowell translates, 
‘Speech verily milked one portion thereof,’ which may have been 
the original purport of the writer. 

III ADHYAYA, 7. 297 

are one portion taken out of it, their action is their 
object, placed outside. The body is one portion 
taken out of it, its pleasure and pain are its 
object, placed outside. The organ is one portion 
taken out of it, happiness, joy, and offspring are its 
object, placed outside. The two feet are one portion 
taken out of it, movements are their object, placed 
outside. Mind is one portion taken out of it, thoughts 
and desires are its object, placed outside. 

6. Having by pragiia (self-conscious knowledge) 
taken possession of speech, he obtains by speech all 
words. Having by pragna takcn possession of the 
nose, he obtains all odours. Having by pragfid 
taken possession of the eye, he obtains all forms. 
Having by pragna taken possession of the ear, he 
obtains all sounds. Having by pragiid taken posses- 
sion of the tongue, he obtains all tastes of food. 
Having by pragfid taken possession of the two 
hands, he obtains all actions. Having by pragiiae 
taken possession of the body, he obtains pleasure 
and pain. Having by pragfia taken possession of 
the organ, he obtains happiness, joy, and offspring. 
Having by pragna taken possession of the two feet, 
he obtains all movements. Having by pragiie taken 
possession of mind, he obtains all thoughts. 

7. For without pragiia (self-consciousness) speech 
does not make known (to the self) any word!. ‘My 

1 Professor Cowell has translated a passage from the com- 
mentary which is interesting as showing that its author and the 
author of the Upanishad too had a clear conception of the 
correlative nature of knowledge. ‘The organ of sense,’ he says, 
‘cannot exist without pragfa (self-consciousness), nor the objects 
of sense be obtained without the organ, therefore—on the princi- 
ple, that when one thing cannot exist without another, that thing is 
said to be identical with the other—as the cloth, for instance, being 

298 KAUSH!ITAKI-UPANISHAD. 

mind was absent,’ he says, ‘I did not perceive that 
word. Without pragiia the nose does not make 
known any odour. ‘My mind was absent, he says, 
‘I did not perceive that odour.’ Without pragna 
the eye does not make known any form. ‘My mind 
was absent,’ he says, ‘I did not perceive that form.’ 
Without pragfia the ear does not make known any 
sound. ‘My mind was absent, he says, ‘I did not 
perceive that sound. Without pragnna the tongue 
does not make known any taste. ‘My mind was 
absent,’ he says, “I did not perceive that taste.’ 
Without pragna the two hands do not make known 
any act. ‘Our mind was absent, they say, ‘we did 
not perceive any act? Without pragna the body 
does not make known pleasure or pain. ‘My mind 
was absent, he says, ‘I did not perceive that 
pleasure or pain. Without pragiia the organ does 
not make known happiness, joy, or offspring. ‘My 
mind was absent, he says, ‘I did not perceive that 
happiness, joy, or offspring.’ Without pragiia the 
two feet do not make known any movement. ‘Our 
mind was absent, they say, ‘we did not perceive 
that movement.’ Without pragna no thought suc- 
ceeds, nothing can be known that is to be known. 

8. Let no man try to find out what speech is, let 
him know the speaker, Let no man try to find out 
what odour is, let him know him who smells. Let no 
man try to find out what form is, let him know the 
seer. Let no man try to find out what sound is, let 

never perceived without the threads, is identical with them, or the 
(false perception of) silver being never found without the mother of 
pearl is identical with it, so the objects of sense being never found 
without the organs are identical with them, and the organs being 
never found without pragfia (self-consciousness) are identical with it. 

II ADHYAYA, 8. 299 

him know the hearer. Let no man try to find out 
the tastes of food, let him know the knower of 
tastes. Let no man try to find out what action is, 
let him know the agent. Let no man try to find 
out what pleasure and pain are, let him know the 
knower of pleasure and pain. Let no man try to 
find out what happiness, joy, and offspring are, let 
him know the knower of happiness, joy, and offspring. 
Let no man try to find out what movement is, let him 
know the mover. Let no man try to find out what 
mind is, let him know the thinker. These ten objects 
(what is spoken, smelled, seen, &c.) have refer- 
ence to pragna (self-consciousness), the ten subjects 
(speech, the senses, mind) have reference to objects. 
If there were no objects, there would be no subjects; 
and if there were no subjects, there would be no 
objects. For on either side alone nothing could be 
achieved. But that (the self of pragiia, conscious- 
ness, and praxa, life) is not many, (but one.) For as 
in a car the circumference of a wheel is placed on 
the spokes, and the spokes on the nave, thus are 
these objects (circumference) placed on the subjects 
(spokes), and the subjects on the praza. And that 
praza (breath, the living and breathing power) in- 
deed is the self of pragiia (the self-conscious self), 
blessed, imperishable, immortal. He does not in- 
crease by a good action, nor decrease by a bad 
action. For he (the self of praza and pragiia) makes 
him, whom he wishes to lead up from these worlds, 
do a good deed; and the same makes him, whom 
he wishes to lead down from these worlds, do a bad 
deed'. And he is the guardian of the world, he is 

1 The other text says, ‘whom he wishes to draw after him ; and 
whom he wishes to draw away from these worlds.’ Rdamatirtha, in 

300 KAUSHITAKI-UPANISHAD. 

the king of the world, he is the lord of the universe,— 
and he is my (Indra’s) self, thus let it be known, 
yea, thus let it be known! 

FOURTH ADHYAYA}!. 

1. There was formerly Gargya Balaki ?, famous as 
aman of great reading; for it was said of him that 
he lived among the Usinaras, among the Satvat- 
Matsyas, the Kuru-Pafifelas, the K4st-Videhas *. 
Having gone to Agatasatru, (the king) of Kast, he 
said to him: ‘Shall I tell you Brahman?’ Ageata- 
satru said to him: ‘We give a thousand (cows) for 
that speech (of yours), for verily all people run away, 
saying, “ Ganaka (the king of Mithila) is our father 

(patron).”’ 
2.4 BRIHAD-ARANYAKA- KAUSHYTAKI-BRAHMANA- 
UPANISHAD. UPANISHAD. 
i. Aditye purushad. i. Id. 
atish¢has sarvesham brzhat pasdaravase 

his commentary on the Mait. Up. 3, 2, quotes the text as translated 
above. 

1 Praza, breath or life, has been explained in the preceding 
chapter. But this praza is not yet the highest point that has to 
be reached. Praza, life, even as united with pragaa, consciousness, 
is only a covering of something else, viz. the Self, and this Highest 
Self has now to be explained. 

2 The same story is told in the Brzhad-dramyaka II, 1 seq., but 
with important variations. 

° I take iti to depend on samspash/a, and read satvanmatsyeshu, 
though the commentary seems to have read so ’vasan, or sa vasan, 
for savasan. See Introduction, p. lxxvii. 

‘ The second paragraph forms a kind of table of contents for 
the discussion which is to follow. I have given instead a fuller 
table of contents, taken from the Brzhad-Gramyaka II, as compared 
with the Kaushitaki-upanishad in its two texts. The variations of 
text A are given in small letters. In text B, the table of contents 
is given at the end of the discussion, in § 18. 

iii. 

iv. 

vi. 

vil. 

viii. 

1X. 

IV ADHYAYA, 2. 

bhutanam murdha 
raga. 

i. Kandre purushad. 

brzhat pazdaravasah 
somo raga. (N4- 
syannam kshtyate, 
is the reward.) 
Vidyuti purushadZ. 
tegasvi. 

AkAse purushad. 
pirzam apravarti. 

. Vayau purushaZ. 

indro vaikuz¢ho ’pa- 
rAgita sena. 

Agnau purushad. 

vishasaht. 

Apsu purushad. 

pratirupag. 

Adarse purushad. 
rokishnul. 

Yantam paskak &hab- 
dak. 

asu&, 

ii. 

iiib, 

< 

vi. 

Vil. 

Vili. 

301 

( pdnduravdsd) atish- 
thih —sarveshadm 
bhutanam murdha. 
Kandramasi. 
somo raga, annasya- 
tma. Only annasydtmd. 

iii. Id. 

tegasy atma. 
sydimd. 
stanayitnau 
shah. 
sabdasy4tme. 
Id. (5) 
pirzam = apravarti 
brahma. apravritti. 
Id. (4) 

satya- 

puru- 

namnasyatma. tegusa 
atm. . 

Id. 
pratirupac. 

viiib, pratisrutkayam pu- 

ix. 

rushad. (9) 

dvittyo ‘napagak. a- 
suh. 

Yak sabda% purus- 
ham anveti. (10)sabde. 

Id. mrityuh. 

302 K AUSHITAKI-UPANISHAD. 

x. Dikshu purushad. x. Deest. 
dvitiyo ’napaga, 

xi, Ahayamaya& puru- x. AAA&yApurushas. (8b) 

shad. khdeydydm. 

mrztyud. Id. dvitiyo ’napugah. 

xii, Atmani purushad. xi, Sartrak  purushae. 
atmanvt. (12) sarfre purushah. 

pragapatiz. 

xii, Yak pragha 4tme, 
yenaitat  supta% 
svapnaya arati. 

Yamo raga. (11) puru- 
shah svapnayd karati 
yamo rdgd. 

xiii, Dakshize ’kshan pu- 
rushad. 

namna (vaka) Atma, 
agner atma, gyoti- - 
sha atma. 

xiv. Savye ’kshan puru- 
shah. 

satyasyatm4,vidyuta 
Atma, tegasa atma. 

3. Balaki said; ‘ The person that is in the sun, 
on him I meditate (as Brahman). 

Agatasatru said to him: ‘No, no! do not chal- 
lenge me (to a disputation) on this}. 1 meditate on 
him who is called great, clad in white raiment ?, the 
supreme, the head of all beings. Whoso meditates 

1 The king means to say that he knows this already, and that he 
can mention not only the predicates of the person in the sun thus 
meditated on as Brahman, but also the rewards of such meditation. 

* This is properly a predicate of the moon, and used as such in 
the Brthad-a4ramzyaka-upanishad, in the second paragraph of the 
dialogue, 

IV ADHYAYA, 8. 303 

on him thus, becomes supreme, and the head of all 
beings.’ 

4. Balaki said: ‘The person that is in the moon, 
on him I meditate.’ 

Agatasatru said to him; ‘Do not challenge me on 
this. I meditate on him as Soma, the king, the self, 
(source) of all food. Whoso meditates on him thus, 
becomes the self, (source) of all food.’ 

5. Balaki said; ‘The person that is in the 
lightning, on him I meditate.’ 

Agatasatru said to him: ‘Do not challenge me on 
this. I meditate on him as the self in light. Whoso 
meditates on him thus, becomes the self in light.’ 

6. Balaki said: ‘The person that is in the 
thunder, on him I meditate.’ 

Agatasatru said to him: ‘Do not challenge me 
on this. I meditate on him as the self of sound’. 
Whoso meditates on him thus, becomes the self of 
sound. 

7. Balaki said: ‘ The person that is in the ether, 
on him I meditate.’ 

Agatasatru said to him: ‘Do not challenge me 
on this. I meditate on him as the full, quiescent 
Brahman, Whoso meditates on him thus, is filled 
with offspring and cattle. Neither he himself nor 
his offspring dies before the time.’ 

8, Balaki said: ‘The person that is in the air, 
on him I meditate.’ 

Agatasatru said to him: ‘Do not challenge me 
on this, I meditate on him as Indra Vaikuz¢ha, as 
the unconquerable army. Whoso meditates on him 
thus, becomes victorious, unconquerable, conquering 
his enemies.’ | 

1 This is not mentioned in the Brzhad-&razyaka, 

304 K AUSH{TAKI-UPANISHAD. 

9. Balaki said: ‘The person that is in the fire, 
on him I meditate.’ 

Agatasatru said to him: ‘Do not challenge me 
on this. I meditate on him as powerful. Whoso 
meditates on him thus, becomes powerful among 
others.’ 

10. Balaki said: ‘The person that is in the 
water, on him I meditate.’ 

Agatasatru said to him : ‘ Do not challenge me on 
this. I meditate on him as the self of the name. 
Whoso meditates on him thus, becomes the self 
of the name.’ So far with regard to deities (my- 
thological) ; now with regard to the body (physio- 
logical). 

11. Balaki said: ‘The person that is in the 
mirror, on him I meditate.’ | 

Ag&tasatru said to him: ‘ Do not challenge me on 
this. I meditate on him as the likeness. Whoso 
meditates on him thus, to him a son is born in his 
family who is his likeness, not one who is not his 
likeness,’ 

12. Balaki said: ‘The person that is in the 
echo, on him I meditate.’ 

Agatasatru said to him: ‘Do not challenge me on 
this. I meditate on him as the second, who never 
goes away. Whoso meditates on him thus, he gets 
a second from his second (his wife), he becomes 
doubled *. 

13. Balaki said: ‘The sound that follows a 
man, on that I meditate. 

Ag&tasatru said to him: ‘Do not challenge me on 

1 Instead of anyeshu, the second text, as printed by Professor 
Cowell, has anv esha. 
* This paragraph does not occur in the Brzhad-franyaka. 

IV ADHYAYA, 18. 305 

this. I meditate on him as life. Whoso meditates 
on him thus, neither he himself nor his offspring 
will faint before the time.’ 

14. Balaeki said: ‘The person that is in the 
shadow, on him I meditate.’ 

Ag&tasatru said to him: ‘Do not challenge me on 
this. I meditate on him as death. Whoso medi- 
tates on him thus, neither he himself nor his off- 
spring will die before the time.’ 

15. Balaki said: ‘The person that is em- 
bodied, on him I meditate.’ 

Agatasatru said to him: ‘Do not challenge me 
on this. I meditate on him as Lord of creatures. 
Whoso meditates on him thus, is multiplied in off- 
spring and cattle.’ 

16. Balaki said: ‘The Self which is conscious 
(pragiia), and by whom he who sleeps here, walks 
about in sleep, on him I meditate.’ 

Agatasatru said to him: ‘Do not challenge me on 
this. I meditate on him as Yama the king. Whoso 
meditates on him thus, everything is subdued for 
his excellencies.’ 

17. Balaki said: ‘The person that is in the 

right eye, on him I meditate.’ 
_ AgeAtasatru said to him: ‘Do not challenge me on 
this. I meditate on him as the self of the name, as 
the self of fire, as the self of splendour. Whoso 
meditates on him thus, he becomes the self of 
these.’ 

18, Balaki said: ‘The person that is in the 
left eye, on him I meditate.’ 

Agatasatru said to him: ‘Do not challenge me 
on this. I meditate on him as the self of the true, 
as the self of lightning, as the self of light. Whoso 

306 KAUSH{TAKI-UPANISHAD, 

meditates on him thus, he becomes the self of 
these.’ 

19. After this Bal4ki became silent. Agatasatru 
said to him: ‘Thus far only (do you know), O 
Balaki?’ ‘Thus far only,’ replied Balaki. 

Then AgAtasatru said to him: ‘Vainly did you 
challenge me, saying: ‘Shall I tell you Brahman ? 
O Balaki, he who is the maker of those persons 
(whom you mentioned), he of whom all this is the 
work, he alone is to be known.’ 

Thereupon Balaki came, carrying fuel in his hand, 
saying: ‘May I come to you asa pupil?’ AgeAta- 
satru said to him: ‘I deem it improper that a 
Kshatriya should initiate a Braehmaza. Come, I 
shall make you know clearly.’ Then taking him by 
the hand, he went forth. And the two together 
came to a person who was asleep. And Agatasatru 
called him, saying: ‘Thou great one, clad in white 
raiment, Soma, King!’ But he remained lying. 
Then he pushed him with a ‘stick, and he rose at 
once. Then said Ag@tasatru to him: ‘ Balaki, 
where did this person here sleep? Where was he? 
Whence came he thus back?’ Baleki did not 
know. l 

20. And Agatasatru said to him: ‘Where this per- 
son here slept, where he was, whence he thus came 
back, is this: The arteries of the heart called Hita 
extend from the heart of the person towards the 
surrounding body. Small as a hair divided a thou- 
sand times, they stand full of a thin fluid of various 
colours, white, black, yellow, red. In these the 
person is when sleeping he sees no dream. 

1 See § 3 init. 

IV ADHYAYA, 20. 307 

Then he becomes one with that prdza alone. 
Then speech goes to him with all names, the eye 
with all forms, the ear with all sounds, the mind 
with all thoughts. And when he awakes, then, as 
from a burning fire, sparks proceed in all directions, - 
thus from that self the prazas (speech, &c.) proceed, 
each towards its place, from the prazas the gods, 
from the gods the worlds. And as a razor might 
be fitted in a razor-case, or as fire in the fire-place 
(the arazi on the altar), even thus this conscious 
self enters the self of the body (considers the body 
as himself) to the very hairs and nails. And the 
other selfs (such as speech, &c.) follow that self, as 
his people follow the master of the house. And 
as the master feeds with his people, nay, as his 
people feed on the master, thus does this conscious 
self feed with the other selfs, as a master with his 
people, and the other selfs follow him, as his people 
follow the master. So long as Indra did not under- 
stand that self, the Asuras conquered him. When 
he understood it, he conquered the Asuras and 
obtained the pre-eminence among all gods, sove- 
reignty, supremacy. And thus also he who knows 
this obtains pre-eminence among all beings, sove- 
reignty, supremacy,—yea, he who knows this. 

X 2 

VAGASANEYI-SAWHITA- 
UPANISHAD, 

SOMETIMES CALLED 

TSAVASYA or {SA- 
UPANISHAD. 

This book was downlo ee SOU eda oks.c 

ott 

VAGASANEYI-SAWHITA- 
UPANISHAD. 

1. ALL this, whatsoever moves on earth, is to 
be hidden in the Lord (the Self). When thou hast 
surrendered all this, then thou mayest enjoy. Do 
not covet the wealth of any man! 

2. Though a man may wish to live a hundred 
years, performing works, it will be thus with him ; 
but not in any other way: work will thus not cling 
to a man. | 

3. There are the worlds of the Asuras! covered 
with blind darkness. Those who have destroyed 
their self (who perform works, without having ar- 
rived at a knowledge of the true Self), go after 
death to those worlds. 

4. That one (the Self), though never stirring, is 
swifter than thought. The Devas (senses) never 
reached it, it walked? before them. Though 
standing still, it overtakes the others who are 
running. M§tarisvan (the wind, the moving spirit) 
bestows powers ° on it. 

1 Asury3, V4g. Samhita ; asurya, Upan. Asurya in the Upanishads 
in the sense of belonging to the Asuras, i.e. gods, is exceptional. 
I should prefer asfiry4, sunless, as we find asurye tamasi in the 
Rig-veda, V, 32, 6. 

2 Pfirvam arsat, Vag. Samh.; pfirvam arshat, Upan. Mahidhara 
suggests also arsat as a contraction of a-risat, not perishing. 

5 Apas is explained by karm4zi, acts, in which case it would be ° 
meant for 4pas, opus. But the Vag. Samhit4 accentuates apas, i. e. 

312


# VAGASANEYI-SAMHITA-UPANISHAD

VAGASANEYI-SAMHITA-UPANISHAD. 

5. It stirs and it stirs not; it is far, and likewise 
near’, It is inside of all this, and it is outside of 
all hae 

. And he who beholds all beings in the Self, and 
‘a Self i in all beings, he never turns away from it?. 

7. When to a man who understands, the Self has 
become all things, what sorrow, what trouble can 
there be to him who once beheld that unity? 

8. He? (the Self) encircled all, bright, incor- 
poreal, scatheless, without muscles, pure, untouched 
by evil; a seer, wise, omnipresent, self-existent, he 
disposed all things rightly for eternal years. 

9. All who worship what is not real knowledge 
(good works), enter into blind darkness: those who 
delight in real knowledge, enter, as it were, into 
greater darkness. 

10. One thing, they say, is obtained from real 
knowledge; another, they say, from what is not 
knowledge. Thus we have heard from the wise 
who taught us this‘. : 

11. He who knows at the same time both know- 
ledge and not-knowledge, overcomes death through 
not-knowledge, and obtains immortality through 
knowledge. 

12, All who worship what is not the true cause, 

aquas, and Anandagiri explains that water stands for acts, because 
most sacrificial acts are performed with water. 

1 Tad v antike, Vag. Samh.; tadvad antike, Upan. 

2 Vikikitsati, Vag. Samh.; vigugupsate, Upan. 

s Sankara takes the subject to be the Self, and explains the 
neuter adjectives as masculines. Mahfdhara takes the subject to 
be the man who has acquired a knowledge of the Self, and who 
reaches the bright, incorporeal Brahman, &c. Mahfdhara, however, 
likewise allows the former explanation. 

* Cf. Talavak. Up. I, 4; vidyay4A, avidy4y4s, Vag. Samh.; vidyaya, 
avidyaya, Upan. 

VAGASANEYI-SAMHITA-UPANISHAD. 353 

enter into blind darkness: those who delight in the 
true cause, enter, as it were, into greater darkness. 

13. One thing, they say, is obtained from (know- 
ledge of ) the cause; another, they say, from (know- 
ledge of) what is not the cause. Thus we have 
heard from the wise who taught us this. 

14. He who knows at the same time both the 
cause and the destruction (the perishable body), 
overcomes death by destruction (the perishable 
body), and obtains immortality through (knowledge 
of) the true cause. 

15. The door of the True is covered with a 
golden disk?. Open that, O Pushan, that we may 
see the nature of the True? 

16. O Pishan, only seer, Yama (judge), Sfrya 
(sun), son of Pragdpati, spread thy rays and gather 
them! The light which is thy fairest form, I see it. 
I am what He is (viz. the person in the sun)’. 

17. Breath‘ to air, and to the immortal! Then 
this my body ends in ashes. Om! Mind, remem- 
ber! Remember thy deeds! Mind, remember! 
Remember thy deeds €! 

18. Agni, lead us on to wealth (beatitude) by a 
good path, thou, O God, who knowest all things! 

1 Mahidhara on verse 17: ‘The face of the true (purusha in the 
sun) is covered by a golden disk.’ 

2 Cf. Maitr. Up. VI, 35. 

3 Asau purushae should probably be omitted. 

* These lines are supposed to be uttered by a man in the hour 
of death. 

5 The VAgasaneyi-samhita reads: Om, krato smara, k/be smara, 
kritam smara. Uvasa holds that Agni, fire, who has been wor- 
shipped in youth and manhood, is here invoked in the form of 
mind, or that kratu is meant for sacrifice. ‘ Agni, remember me! 
Think of the world! Remember my deeds }’ l i 

314 VAGASANEYI-SAMHITA-UPANISHAD. 

Keep far from us crooked evil, and we shall offer 
thee the fullest praise! (Rv. I, 189, 1.) 

This Upanishad, though apparently simple and intelligible, is in 
reality one of the most difficult to understand properly. Coming 
at the end of the V4gasaneyi-samhit4, in which the sacrifices and 
the hymns to be used by the officiating priests have been described, 
it begins by declaring that all has to be surrendered to the Lord. 
The name fs, lord, is peculiar, as having a far more personal colour- 
ing than Atman, Self, or Brahman, the usual names given by the 
Upanishads to what is the object of the highest knowledge. 

Next follows a permission to continue the performance of sacri- 
fices, provided that all desires have been surrendered. And here 
occurs our first difficulty, which has perplexed ancient as well as 
modern commentators. 

I shall try, first of all, to justify my own translation. I hold that 
the Upanishad wishes to teach the uselessness by themselves of all 
good works, whether we call them sacrificial, legal, or moral, and 
yet, at the same time, to recognise, if not the necessity, at least the 
harmlessness of good works, provided they are performed without 
any selfish motives, without any desire of reward, but simply as a 
preparation for higher knowledge, as a means, in fact, of subduing 
all passions, and producing that serenity of mind without which 
man is incapable of receiving the highest knowledge. From that 
point of view the Upanishad may well say, Let a man wish to live 
here his appointed time, let him even perform all works. If only 
he knows that all must be surrendered to the Lord, then the work 
done by him will not cling to him. It will not work on and produce 
effect after effect, nor will it involve him in a succession of new 
births in which to enjoy the reward of his works, but it will leave him 
free to enjoy the blessings of the highest knowledge. It will have. 
served as a preparation for that higher knowledge which the Upani- 
shad imparts, and which secures freedom from further births. 

The expression ‘na karma lipyate nare’ seems to me to admit 
of this one explanation only, viz. that work done does not cling to 
man, provided he has acquired the highest knowledge. Similar 
expressions occur again and again. Lip was, no doubt, used 
originally of evil deeds which became, as it were, engrained in man; 
but afterwards of all work, even of good work, if done with a 
desire of reward. The doctrine of the Upanishads is throughout 
that orthodoxy and sacrifice can procure a limited beatitude only, 

VAGASANEYI-SAMHITA-UPANISHAD. 315 

and that they are a hindrance to real salvation, which can be 
obtained by knowledge alone. In our passage therefore we can 
recognise one meaning only, viz. that work does not cling to man 
or stain him, if only he knows, i.e. if he has been enlightened by 
the Upanishad. 

Sankara, in his commentary on the Ved4nta-stitras III, 4, 7; 
13; 14, takes the same view of this passage. The opponent of 
Badarayama, in this case, Gaimini himself, maintains that karma, 
work, is indispensable to knowledge, and among other arguments, 
he says, III, 4, 7, that it is so ‘Niyamat,’ ‘Because it is so laid 
down by the law.’ The passage here referred to is, according to 
Sankara, our very verse, which, he thinks, should be translated as 
follows: ‘Let a man wish to live a hundred years here (in this 
body) performing works; thus will an evil deed not cling to thee, 
while thou art a man; there is no other way but this by which to 
escape the influence of works.’ In answer to this, Badarayana says, 
first of all, III, 4, 13, that this rule may refer to all men in general, 
and not to one who knows; or, III, 4, 14, if it refers to a man who 
knows, that then the permission to perform works is only intended 
to exalt the value of knowledge, the meaning being that even to a 
man who performs sacrifices all his life, work does not cling, if 
only he knows ;—such being the power of knowledge. 

The same Sankara, however, who here sees quite clearly that 
this verse refers to a man who knows, explains it in the Upanishad 
as referring to a man who does not know (itarasyanatmagnatayat- 
magrahamasaktasya). It would then mean: ‘ Let such a one, while 
performing works here on earth, wish to live a hundred years. In 
this manner there is no other way for him but this (the performance 
of sacrifices), so that an evil deed should not be engrained, or so 
that he should not be stained by such a deed.’ The first and 
second verses of the Upanishad would thus represent the two paths 
of life, that of knowledge and that of works, and the following verses 
would explain the rewards assigned to each. 

Mahidhara, in his commentary on the V4gasaneyi-samhita, steers 
at first a middle course. He would translate: ‘ Let one who per- 
forms the Agnihotra and other sacrifices, without any desire of 
reward, wish to live here a hundred years. If thou do so, there 
will be salvation for thee, not otherwise, There are many roads that 
lead to heaven, but one only leading to salvation, namely, perform- 
ance of good works, without any desire of reward, which produces 
a pure heart. Work thus done, merely as a preparation for salvation, 
does not cling to man, i.e. it produces a pure heart, but does not 

316 VAGASANEYI-SAMHITA-UPANISHAD. 

entail any further consequences.” So far he agrees with Uvasa’s 
explanation’. He allows, however, another explanation also, so 
that the second line would convey the meaning: ‘ Ifa man lives thus 
(performing good works), then there is no other way by which an 
evil deed should not be engrained; i.e. in order to escape the 
power of sin, he must all his life perform sacred acts.’ 

Next follows a description of the lot of those who, immersed in 
works, have not arrived at the highest knowledge, and have not 
recovered their true self in the Highest Self, or Brahman. That 
Brahman, though the name is not used here, is then described, and 
salvation is promised to the man who beholds all things in the Self 
and the Self in all things. 

The verses 9-14 are again full of difficulty, not so much in 
themselves as in their relation to the general system of thought 
which prevails in the Upanishads, and forms the foundation of the 
Vedanta philosophy. The commentators vary considerably in their 
interpretations. Sankara explains avidy4, not-knowledge, by good 
works, particularly sacrifice, performed with a hope of reward ; 
vidya, or knowledge, by a knowledge of the gods, but not, as yet, 
of the highest Brahman. The former is generally supposed to lead 
the sacrificer to the pitrtloka, the world of the fathers, from whence 
he returns to a series of new births; the latter to the devaloka, the 
world of the gods, from whence he may either proceed to Brahman, 
or enter upon a new round of existences. The question then 
arises, how in our passage the former could be said to lead to 
blind darkness, the latter to still greater darkness. But for that 
statement, I have no doubt that all the commentators would, as 
usual, have taken vidya for the knowledge of the Highest Brahman, 
and avidy4 for orthodox belief in the gods and good works, the 
former securing immortality in the sense of freedom from new 
births, while the reward of the latter is blessedness in heaven for 
a limited period, but without freedom from new births. 

This antithesis between vidya and avidy4 seems to me so firmly 
established that I cannot bring myself to surrender it here. Though 
this Upanishad has its own very peculiar character, yet its object is, 
after all, to impart a knowledge of the Highest Self, and not to 
inculcate merely a difference between faith in the ordinary gods 
and good works. It was distinctly said before (ver. 3), that those 
who have destroyed their self, i.e. who perform works only, 

1 Uvafa explains gigishivishes for gigivishet as a purusha- 
vyatayah. 

VAGASANEYI-SAMHITA-UPANISHAD. 317 

and have not arrived at a knowledge of the true Self, go to the 
worlds of the Asuras, which are covered with blind darkness. If 
then the same blind darkness is said in verse 9 to be the lot of those 
who worship not-knowledge, this can only mean those who have 
not discovered the true Self, but are satisfied with the performance 
of good works. And if those who perform good works are opposed 
to others who delight in true knowledge, that knowledge can be 
the knowledge of the true Self only. 

The difficulty therefore which has perplexed Sankara is this, 
how, while the orthodox believer is said to enter into blind dar


# KATHA-UPANISHAD

KATHA-UPANISHAD. 

[15] e 

KAZ777A-UPANISHAD. 

FIRST ADHYAYA. 

First Var. 

I. VAGASRAVASA!, desirous (of heavenly rewards), 
surrendered (at a sacrifice) all that he possessed. He 
had a son of the name of NaZiketas. | 

2. When the (promised) presents were being given 
(to the priests), faith entered into the heart of Naki- 
ketas, who was still a boy, and he thought : 

. ‘Unblessed?, surely, are the worlds to which 
a man goes by giving (as his promised present at a 
sacrifice) cows which have drunk water, eaten hay, 
given their milk?, and are barren.’ 

4. He (knowing that his father had promised 
to give up all that he possessed, and therefore his 
son alsoysaid to his father: ‘ Dear father, to whom 
wilt thou give me ?' 

! VAgasravasa is called Arusi Auddalaki Gautama, the father of 
Nafiketas. The father of Svetaketu, another enlightened pupil 
(see KhAnd. Up. VI,1,1), is also called Aruni (Uddalaka, comm. 
Kaush. Up. I, r) Gautama. Svetaketu himself is called Aruneya, 
i. e. the son of Arusi, the grandson of Aruna, and likewise Audda- 
laki. Auddalaki is a son of Uddalaka, but Sankara (K445. Up. I, 11) 
takes Apddalaki as posibi the same as Uddalaka. See Brih. Ar. 
Up. III, 6, 1. 

? As to Ananda, unblessed, see Brzh. Ar. Up. IV, 4,11; Vagas. 
Samh. Up. 3 (Sacred Books of the East, vol. i, p. 311). 

* Anandagiri explains that the cows meant here are cows no 
longer able to drink, to eat, to give milk, and to calve. 

[15] B 

2 KATHA-UPANISHAD. 

He said it a second and a third time. Then the 
father replied (angrily): 

‘I shall give thee! unto Death.’ 

(The father, having once said so, though in haste, 
had to be true to his word and to sacrifice his son.) 

5. The son said: ‘I go as the first, at the head 
of many (who have still to die); I go in the midst 
of many (who.are now dying). What will be the 
work of Yama (the ruler of the departed) which 
to-day he has to do unto me?? 

* Dadami, I give, with the meaning of the future. pone MSS. 
write dasyami. 

2 I translate these verses freely, i. e. independently of the commen- 
tator, not that I ever despise the traditional interpretation which the 
commentators have preserved to us, but because I think that, after 
having examined it, we have a right to judge for ourselves. Sankara 
says that the son, having been addressed by his father full of anger, 
was sad, and said to himself: *Among many pupils I am the first, 
among many middling pupils I am the middlemost, but nowhere am 
Ithelast. Yet though I am such a good pupil, my father has said 
that he will consign me unto death. What duty has he to fulfil toward 
Yama which he means to fulfil to-day by giving meto him? "There 
may be no duty, he may only have spoken in haste. Yet a father's 
word must not be broken. Having considered this, the son com- 
forted his father, and exhorted him to behave like his forefathers, and 
to keep his word. I do not think this view of Sankara’s could have 
been the view of the old poet. He might have made the son say that 
he was the best or one of the best of his father’s pupils, but hardly 
that he was also one of his middling pupils, thus implying that he 
never was among the worst. That would be out of keeping with the 
character of Nafiketas, as drawn by the poet himself. NaZiketas is 
full of faith and wishes to die, he would be the last to think of 
excuses why he should not die. The second half of the verse may 
be more doubtful. It may mean what Sankara thinks it means, only 
that we should get thus again an implied complaint of Nafiketas 
against his father, and this is not in keeping with his character. The 
mind of Nafiketas is bent on what is to come, on what he will see 
after death, and on what Yama will do unto him. ‘What has Yama — 
to do,’ he asks, ‘what can he do, what is it that he will to-day do unto 

I ADHYAYA, I VALLI, 9. 3 

6. ‘ Look back how it was with those who came 
before, look forward how it will be with those who 
come hereafter. A mortal ripens like corn, like 
corn he springs up again !.' 

(NaZiketas enters into the abode of Yama Vai- 
vasvata, and there is no one to receive him. 
Thereupon one of the attendants of Yama is sup- 
posed to say :) 

| 7. ‘Fire enters into the houses, when a Brahmaza 
enters as a guest?, That fire is quenched by this 
peace-offering ;—bring water, O Vaivasvata *! 

8. ‘A Brahmaza that dwells in the house of a 
foolish man without receiving food to eat, destroys 
his hopes and expectations, his possessions, his 
righteousness, his sacred and his ¥°! deeds, and 
all his sons and cattle 4.’ 

(Yama, returning to his house aff an absence 
of three nights, during which time NaZiketas had 
io no hospitality from him, says :) 

‘O Brahmaza, as thou, a venerable guest, hast 
dwelt in my house three nights without eating, 

me?’ This seems to me consistent with the q- ancient story, 
while Sankara’s interpretations and interpolatfOns savour too much 
of the middle ages of India. : 

1 Sasya, corn rather than grass; ela, fiov, Benfey ; Welsh haidd, 
according to Rhys; different from sash-pa, ces-pes, Benfey. 

2 Cf. Vasish/ha XI, 13; Sacred Books of the East, vol. xiv, p. 51. 

3 Vaivasvata, a name of Yama, the ruler of the departed. Water 
is the first gift to be offered to a stranger who claims hospitality. 

* Here again some words are translated differently from Sankara. 
He explains 4s4 as asking for a wished-for object, pratiksha as look- 
ing forward with a view to obtaining an unknown object. Sangata 
he takes as reward for intercourse with good people; sunr:ta, as 
usual as good and kind speech; ish/a as rewards for sacrifices; 
purta as rewards for public benefits. 

B2 

TN 

4 KATH A-UPANISHAD. 

therefore choose now three boons. Hail to thee! 

œ and welfare to me!’ 

i IO. NaZiketas said: ‘O Death, as the first of the 
three boons I choose that Gautama, my father, be. 
pacified, kind, and free from anger towards me; and . . 

*that?he may nawe and.greet me, when: I shall. 
-— been dismissed by thee.' | 

. Yama said: ' Through my favour Auddalaki 
eae ,thy father, will know thee, and be again towards 
thee as he was before. He shall sleep peacefully 
through the night, and free from anger, after having 
seen thee freed from the*mouth of death.’ 

12. NaZiketas said: * In the heaven-world there is 
no fear; thou art not there, O Death, and no one is 

x afraid on account of old age. Leaving behind both 

hunger and thirst, and out of the reach of sorrow, all 
rejoice in the world of heaven.' 

A) 13. ‘Thou knowest, O Death, the fire-sacrifice 5) 

which lead& us to heaven; tell it to me, for I am 
full of faith:¥-Those who live in the heaven-world 
reach immo ality,+—this I ask as my second boon.’ 

I4. ! : ‘I tell it thee, learn it from me, 
and when thou ainderstandest that fire-sacrifice which 
leads to heaven, know, O Naeiketas, that it is the 
attainment of the endless-worlds, and their firm sup- 
port, hidden in darkness’? 

15. Yama then told him dic — U the 
beginning of all the worlds?, and what bricks are 

1 The commentator translates: ‘I tell it thee, attend to me wha 
knows the heavenly fire.’ Here the nom. sing. of the participle 
would be very irregular, as we can hardly refer it to bravimi. Then 
* Know this fire as a means of obtaining the heavenly world, kna 
that fire as the rest or support of the world, when it assumes; the Y 
form of Virag, and as hidden in the heart of men.’ - 

? Sankara: the first embodied, in the shape of Virag. 

€ 

I ADHYAYA, I VALLI, 21. 5 

required for the altar, and how many, and how they 
* are to be placed. And NaZiketas repeated all as it 
had been told to him. Then Mvztyu, being pleased 
with him, said again : 
16, The generous’, being satisfied, said to him: 
‘I give thee now another boon; that fire-sacrifice 
shall be named after thee, take also this many- 
coloured chain?’  * 

17. ‘He who has three times T this NaZi- 
keta-rite,‘and has been united with the three (father, | 
mother, and teacher), and has performed the thtee 
duties (study, sacrific ce, almsgiving) overcomes birth 
and death. When he has learnt and undefstood W 
this fire, which knows (or makes us know) all/that is- 
born of Brahman’, which is venerable and, divine, 
then he obtains GVerlastino peace,’ 

18.° ‘He who knows the three NaZiketa fires, and 
knowing the three, piles up the NaZiketa sacrifice, he, 
having first. thrown off the chains of death, rejoices 
in the warld of heaven, beyond the reach of grief.’ 

I9. ‘g@ his, O NaZiketas, is thy fire which leads 
to heana, and which thou hast chosen as thy second 
boon. That fire all men will proclaim *. Choose now, 
Q ae thy third boon.’ 

. Nafiketas said: ‘There is that doubt, when a 
man is dead,—some saying, he is; others, he is not. 
This I should like to know, taught by thee; this is 
the third of my boons.” ^ | 

21. Death said: ‘On this point even the gods (4) 

! Verses 16—18 seem a later addition. 

? This arises probably from a misunderstanding of verse II, 3. 

3 (atavedas. 

* Tavaiva is a later addition, caused by the interpolation of 
verses 15-18. 

6 KATHA-UPANISHAD. 

have doubted-formerly ; it is not easy to understand. 
That subject is subtle. Choose another boon, O 
NaZiketas, do not press me, and let me off that 
boon.' 

22. NaZiketas said: ‘On this point even the gods 
have doubted indeed, and thou, Death, hast declared. 
it to be not easy to understand, and another teacher. 
like thee is not to be found :—surely no other boon- : 
is like unto this.' 

23. Death said: ‘Choose sons and grandsons who 
shail live a hundred years, herds of cattle, elephants, 
gold, and horses. Choose the wide abode of the 
earth, and live thyself as many harvests as thou 
desirest.’ | 

24. ‘If you can think of any boon equal to that, 
choose wealth, and long life. Be (king), NaZiketas, 
on the wide earth!. I make thee the enjoyer of 
all desires.’ 

25. ‘Whatever desires are difficult to attain among 
mortals, ask for them according to thy wish ;—these 
fair maidens with their chariots and musical instru- 
ments,—such are indeed not to be obtained by 
men,—be waited on by them whom I give to thee, 
but do not ask me about dying.’ 

26. Nakiketas said: ‘These things last till to- 
morrow, O Death, for they wear out this vigour of 
all the senses. Even the whole of life is short. Keep 
thou thy horses, keep dance and song for thyself.’ 

27. ‘No mancan be made happy by wealth. Shall 

we possess wealth, when we see thee ? Shall we live, 

1 Mahabhumau, on the great earth, has been explained also by 
maha bhumau, be great on the earth. It is doubtful, however, 
whether maha for mahan could be admitted in the Upanishads, and 
whether it would not be easier to write mahan bhumau. 

-— 

- 

I ADHYAYA, I VALLI, 29. 7 

as long as thou rulest? Only that boon (which I 
have chosen) is to be chosen by me.’ 

28. * What mortal, slowly decaying here below, and 
knowing, after having approached them, the freedom 
from decay enjoyed by the immortals, would delight 
in a long life, after he has pondered on the pleasures 
which arise from beauty and love !?' 

. 29.'No,that on which there is this doubt, O Death, 

tell us what there is in that great Hereafter. Naki- 
ketas does not choose another boon but that which 
enters into the hidden world.' 

1 A very obscure verse. Sankara gives a various reading kva 
tadastha’ for kvadhaZsthaZ, in the sense of ‘given to these pleasures,’ 
which looks like an emendation. I have changed agiryatem into 
agaryatam, and take it for an acc. sing., instead of a gen. plur., 
which could hardly be governed by upetya. 

8 ^ KATHA-UPANISHAD. 

SECOND VALLI. 

1. Death said: ‘The good is one thing, the pleasant 
another; these two, having different objects, chain 
aman. It is well with him who clings to the good; . 
he who chooses the pleasant, misses his end? ^ 4 

2. ‘The good and the pleasant approach man: . 
the wise goes round about them and distinguishes 
them. Yea, the wise prefers the good to the 
pleasant, but the fool chooses the pleasant through 
greed and avarice.’ m 

3. ‘Thou, O NaZiketas, after pondering all plea- 
sures that are or seem delightful, hast dismissed 
them all. Thou hast not gone into. the road! that 
— to wealth, in which many men perisp.’ 

. ‘Wide apart and leading to different points are 

"hal two, ignorance, and what is known as wisdom; 

I believe NaZiketas to be one who desires know- 

ledge, for even many pleasures did not tear thee 

away ?.' 

SX 5. ‘Fools dwelling in darkness, wise in their own 

conceit, and puffed up with vain knowledge, go 

round and. round, staggering to and fro, like’ blind 
men led by the blind 3.’ : 

6. ‘The Hereafter never rises before the eves of 
the careless child, deluded by the delusion of wealth. 
“This is the world," he thinks, “there is no other oa 
thus he falls again and again under my sway. 

7. ‘He (the Self) of whom many are not even able 

--— 

“1 Cf. I, 16. 
2 The commentator explains lolupantah by vi&&AZedaz kritavan- 
tak. Some MSS. read lolupante and lolupanti, but one expects 

either lolupyante or lolupati. 
* Cf. Muzd. Up. II, 8. 

I ADHYAYA, 2 VALLI, II. 9 

tq hear, whom many, even when they hear of him, 
do not comprehend ; wonderful is a man, when found, 

 ' who is able to teach him (the Self); wonderful is 

he who comprehends him, when taught by an able 
teacher 1.’ 

8. ‘ That (Self), when taught by an inferior man, 
is not easy to be known, even though often thought 
upon?; unless it be taught by another, there is no 
way to it, for it is inconceivably smaller than what 
is small 3; 

9. ‘That doctrine is not to be obtained‘ by argu- 
ment, but when it is declared by another, then, O 
Care it is easy to understand. Thou hast obtained 
it now’; thou art truly a man of true resolve. May 
we have always an inquirer like thee *!' | 

10. Nagiketas said : ‘I know that what is called a 
treasure Is transient Mor that eternal is not obtained - 
by things which are not eternal) Hence the Naei-. 
keta fire(-sacrifice) has been laid.by me (first); then, 
by means of transient things, I have obtained what 
is not transient (the teaching of Yama)’. | 

II. Yama said: ' Though thou hadst seen the 
fulfilment of all desires, the foundation of the world, 
the endless rewards of good deeds, the shore where | 

SCE Bhag. Gita II, 29. 2 Cf. Mund. Up. II, 4. 
28 ? I read amupram4zat. Other interpretations: If it is taught by 
one who is identified with the Self, then there is no uncertainty. If 
it has been taught as identical with ourselves, then there is no per- 
ception of anything else. If it has been taught by one who is 
identified with it, then there is no failure in understanding it (agati). 

$ Apaneya; should it be apanaya, as afterwards sugnanaya ? 

5 Because you insist on my teaching it to thee. 

* Unless no is negative, for Yama, at first, does not like to com- 
municate his knowledge. 

7 The words in parentheses have been added in order to remove 
the otherwise contradictory character of the two lines, 

a 
IO KATHA-UPANISHAD, * 

there is no fear, that which # magnified by praise, 

the wide abode, the rest!, yet being wise thou hast 
- with firm resolve dismissed it all.' 

12. ‘The wise who, by means of meditation on his 
ES recognises the Ancient, who is difficult to be 
seen, who has entered into the dark, who is hidden 
in the cave, who dwells in the abyss, as God, he 
indeed leaves joy and sorrow far behind? 

I3. ‘A mortal who has heard this and embraced 
it, who has separated from it all qualities, and has 
thus reached the subtle Being, rejoices, because he 
has obtained what is a cause for rejoicing. The 
house (of Brahman) is open, I believe, O NaZiketas.' 

I4. NaZiketas said: ‘That which thou seest as. 
neither this nor that, as neither effect nor cause, as . 
neither past nor future, tell me that.’ | 

I5. Yama said: ‘That word (or place) which all 
the Vedas record, which all penances proclaim, which 
men desire when they live as religious studehts, that 
word I tell thee briefly, it is Om*.’ 

16. ‘ That (imperishable) syllable means Brahman, 
that syllable means the highest (Brahman); he who 
knows that syllable, whatever he desires, is his.’ 

17. ‘ This is the best support, thts is the highest 
support; he who knows that support is magnified 
in the world of Brahma.’ l 
18. ‘The knowing (Self) is not born, it dies not; 
it sprang from nothing, nothing sprang from it. The 

- 

! Cf. Khand. Up. VII, 12, 2. 

? Yama seems here to propound the lower Brahman only, not yet 
the highest. Deva, God, can only be that as what the Old, i. e. the 
Self in the heart, is to be recognised. It would therefore mean, he 
who finds God or the Self in his heart. See afterwards, verse 21. 

? Cf. Svet. Up. IV, 9; Bhag. Gita VIII, rr. 

I ADHYAYA, 2 VALLI, 25. II 

Ancient is unborn, eternal, everlasting; he is not 
— though the body is killed +> 

‘If the killer thinks that he kills, if the killed 
thinks that he is killed, they do not understand; for 
this one does not kill, nor is that one killed.’ 

20. ‘ The Self?, smaller than small, greater than 
great, is hidden in the heart of that creature. A- 
man who is free from desires and free from grief, sees 
the majesty of the Self by the grace of the Creator *.' 

21. ‘ Though sitting stil], he walks far; though lying 
down, he goes everywhere. ‘, Who, save myself,is able 
to know that God who rejoices and rejoices not ?’ 

22. ‘The wise who knows the Self as bodiless 
within the ithin the bodjes, as 1 unchanging among changing 
things, as great and ings, as great and omnipresent, does never grieve. 

at, Se ot be gained by the Veda, 
does understanding, nor or by much learning. He . 
whom the SAT chooses, by him the Self can be : 

ater ter ceram quies tct Pile GE EE pem 

gained. The Self. chooses him (his bo body) as his own. 
LA ~~ anode SEAR E fc eee t 
24. ‘But he who has not first turned away from 
his wickedness, who is not tranquil, and subdued, 
or whose mind is not at rest, he can never obtain 
the Self (even) by knowledge.’ 
25. ‘Who then knows where He is, He to whom 
the Brahmans and Ksbatriyas are (as it were) but 

food *, and death itself a condiment ?' 

24 

! As to verses 18 and 19, see Bhag. Gita II, 19, 20. 

3 Cf. Svet. Up. III, 20; Taitt. Ar. X, 12, 1. 

j es commentator translates ‘through the tranquillity of the 
senses, i.e. dhatuprasadat, taking prasdda in the technical sense 
of samprasada. As to kratu, desire, or rather, will, see Brzh. Ar. 
IV, 4, 5. 

* Cf. Tal. Up. 5. 

5 Cf. I, 7-9; Muzd. Up. III, 2, 3; Bhag. Gita I, 53. 

* In whom alldisappears, and in whom even death is swallowed up. 

I2 KATH A-UPANISHAD. 

Tuirp Vari 

1. ‘There are the two!, drinking their reward in 
the world of their own works, entered into the cave . 
(of the heart), dwelling on the highest summit (the 
ether in the heart). Those who know Brahman call 
them shade and light; likewise, those’householders 
who perform the TrizaZiketa sacrifice.’ | 

2. ‘May we be able to master that NaZiketa rite 
which is a bridge for sacrificers; also that which is 
the highest, imperishable Brahman for those who 
wish to cross over to the fearless shore ?.' 

' 8$. ‘Know the Self to be sitting in the chariot, 
: the body to be the chariot, the intellect (buddhi) 
. the charioteer, and the mind the reins 3.’ 

4. ' The senses they call the horses, the objects of 
the senses their roads. When he (the Highest Self) 
is in union with the body, the senses, and the mind, 

»then wise people call him the Enjoyere 

5. ‘He who has no understanding and whose mind 

! The two are ae, cena c and 2. Brahman, the 
former being the lightthe latter the shadow? rta is explained 
as reward, and connected with sukrzta, lit. good deeds, but fre- 
quently used in the sense of svakrzta, one's own good and evil 
deeds. The difficulty is, how the highest Brahman can be said to 

- drink the reward (zztapa) of former deeds, as it is above all works and 
above all rewards. The commentator explains it away as a meta- t 
phorical expression, as we often speak of many, when we mean one. 
(Cf. Mund. Up. III, 1, 1.) I have joined sukrztasya with loke, loka 
meaning the world, i. e. the state, the environment, which we made 
to ourselves by our former deeds. 

2 These two verses may be later additions. 

3 The simile of the chariot has some points of similarity with the 
well-known passage in Plato's Phaedros, but Plato did not borrow 
this simile from the Brahmans, as little as Xenophon need have 
consulted our Upanishad (II, 2) in writing his prologue of Prodikos. 

I ADHYAYA, 3 VALLI, I4. ` 13 

(the reins) is never firmly held, his senses (horses) are 
unmanageable, like vicious horses of a charioteer.’ 
6. ‘ But he who has understanding and whose mind | 
is always firmly held, his senses are under control, 
like good horses of a charioteer.’ 
7. ‘He who has no understanding, who is unmind- | | 
ful and always impure, never reaches that place, but 
enters into the round of births.' 
8. ‘ But he who has understanding, who is mindful | L 
and always pure, reaches indeed that place; from 
— he is not born again. 
. ‘But he. who: has understanding for his cha- . -< 
PEN. and who holds the reins of the mind, he- 
reaches the end of his journey, and that is the / 
highest place of Vishzu,' 
. * To. 'Beyondthesenses there are the objects, beyond. - 
= the objects there is the mind, beyond the mind tere, `. 
is the intellect, the Great Self is beyond the intellect, " E 
N. ‘Beyond the Great there is the Undeveloped, |. 
beyond the Undeveloped there is the Person] — 
€— on there is s nothing— 
heg ghest road.’ 
hat Self is hidden in all beings and does not 
shine forth, but it is seen by subtle seers through 
their sharp and subtle intellect.’ 
I} ‘A wise-man should keep down speech and 
mind!; he should keep them within the Self which 
is knowledge; he should keep knowledge wi 
Self which is the-Great; and he should keep that 
(the Great) within the Self which is the. Quiet.’ 

j 7 H € e . e t 2 
EET 14. ‘ Rise, awake! having obtained your boons?, 

! Sankara interprets, he should keep down speech in the mind. 
2 Comm., excellent teachers. 

e 

I4 | KATHA-UPANISHAD. 
v 

understand them! The sharp edge of a razor is 
difficult to pass over; thus the wise say the path (to 
the Self) is hard.’ 

15. ‘He who has perceived that which is without 
sound, without touch, without form, without decay, 
without taste, eternal, without smell, without begin- 
ning, without end, beyond the Great, and unchange- 
able, is freed from the jaws of death.’ 

16. ‘A wise man who has repeated c or heard the 
ancient story of NaZiketas told by Death, is magni- 
fied in the world of Brahman.’ 

. 17. ‘And he who repeats this greatest mystery in 
an assembly of Brahmans, or full of devotion at the 
time of the Sraddha sacrifice, obtains thereby infinite 
rewards.’ 

II ADHYAYA, 4 VALLI, 6. £5 

SECOND ADHYAYA: 

FOURTH V ALLI. 

. Death said: ‘The Self-existent pierced the 
Pici siia (of the senses) so that they turn forward : 
therefore mati looks forward, not backward into 
himself. Some wise man, however, with his eyes 
closed and wishing for immortality, saw the Self 
behind,’ 

2. ‘Children follow after outward pleasures, and ! 
fall into the snare of wide-spread death. Wise men 
only, knowing the nature of what is immortal, do 
not, look for anything stable here among Pungs 
unstable.' 
| 3..‘That by which we know form, taste, smell, 
sounds, and loving touches, by that also we know 
what exists besides. This ‘is that (which thou hast 
FY for. ^ . 

t. ‘The wise, when he knows that that by which , ~ , 
"n perceives all objects in sleep or in waking is the 
great omnipresent Self, grieves no more.' 

5. ‘He who knows this living soul. which eats. 
honey (perceives objects) as being the Self, always . 
near, the Lord of the past and the future, hence- 
forward fears no more. This is that.’ 

6. ‘He who (knows) him! who was born first from 

- 

? The first manifestation of Brahman, commonly called Hirazya- 
garbha, which springs from the tapas of Brahman. Afterwards only 
water and the rest of the elements become manifested. The text of 
these verses is abrupt, possibly corrupt. The two accusatives, 
tishZzantam and tish/Zantim, seem to me to require veda to be 
supplied from verse 4. 

16 KATH A-UPANISHAD. 

the brooding heat! (for he was born before the water), 
who, entering into the heart, abides therein, and was 
perceived from the elements. This is that.' 

7. ‘(He who knows) Aditi also, who is one with 
all deities, who arises with Praza (breath or Hirazya-, 
garbha), who, entering into the heart, abides therein, 
and was born from the elements. This is that.’ 

8. ‘There is Agni (fire), the all-seeing, hidden in 
the two fire-sticks, well-guarded like a child (in the 
womb) by the mother, day after day to be adored by 
men when they awake and bring oblations. This 
is that.' | | 

9. ‘And that whence the sun rises, and whither 
it goes to set, there all the Devas are contained, and 
no one goes beyond. This is that,’ 

10. ‘ What is here (visible in the world), the same 
is there (invisible in Brahman); and what is there, 
the same is here. He who sees any.difference here 
(between Brahman and the world), goes from death 
to death.' | S 

1I. ‘Ewen by the mind this (Brahman) is to be 
obtained, and then there is no difference whatsoever. | 
He goes from death to death who sees any difference 
here.' | 

12. ‘The person (purusha), of the size of a thumbs, 
stands in the middle of the Self (body?), as lord of 
the past and the future, and henceforward fears 
no more. This is that.’ 

13. ‘That person, of the size of a thumb, is like 
a light without smoke, lord of the past and the 
future, he is the same to-day and to-morrow. This 
is that.’ ij 

1 Cf. srishfkrama. 3 Cf, V, 8. 
3 Svet. Up. III, 13. 

II ADHYAYA, 4 VALLI, 15. 17 

14. ‘As rain-water that has fallen on a mountain- 

ridge runs down the rocks on all sides, thus does he, 
who sees a difference between qualities, run after 
‘them on all sides.’ 

I5. ' As pure water poured into pure water remains a 

the same, thus, O Gautama, is the Self of a thinker 

who knows.’ 
oy iei 

[15] C 

— 

18 KATHA-UPANISHAD. 

FirrH VA tti. 

1. ‘There is a town with eleven! gates belonging 
to the Unborn (Brahman), whose thoughts are never 
crooked. He who approaches it, grieves no more, 
and liberated (from all bonds of ignorance) becomes 
es This is that.’ 

‘He (Brahman)? i is the swan (sun), waliasi in the» 
bright heaven; he is the Vasu (air), dwelling in the; 
sky ; he is the sacrificer (fire), dwelling on the aka 
he is the guest (Soma), dwelling in the sacrificial jar; 
he dwells in men, in gods (vara), in the sacrifice (rita), 
in heaven; he is born in the water, on earth, in the 
sacrifice (7zta), on the mountains; he is the True 
and the Great.’ l 

3. ' He (Brahman) it is who sends up the breath 
(praza), and who throws back the breath (apana). 
All the Devas (senses) worship him, the adorable (or 
the dwarf), who sits in the centre.' 

4. ‘When that incorporated (Brahman), who dwells 
in the body, is torn away and freed from the body, 
what remains then? This is that.’ 

5. ‘No mortal lives by the breath that goes up and 
by the breath that goes down. We live.by another, 
in pes these two-repose.’ | 

. ‘Well then, O Gautama, I shall tell thee this 

Wohn the old Brahman, and what noppen to the 
Self, after reaching death. i 

! Seven apertures in the head, the navel two below, and the one 
at the top of the head through which the Self escapes. Cf. Svet. 
Up. III, 18; Bhag. Gita V, 13. 

2 Cf. Rig-veda IV, 40, 5. 

. I1. ADHYAYA, 5 VALLI, 13. 19 

7. ‘Some enter the womb in order to havea body, 
as organic beings, others go into inorganic matter, 
according to their work and according to their 
knowledge !.' < y | 

8. (He, the highest Person, who is awake in us 
while we are asleep, shaping one lovely sight after 
another, that indeed is the Bright, that is Brahman, 
that alone is called the Immortal» All worlds are 
contained in it, and no one goes beyond. This 
is that 2.’ | 

9. ‘As the one fire, after it has entered the world, 
though one, becomes different according to whatever ; 
it burns, thus the one Self within all things becomes] 
different, according to whatever it enters, and seed 
- without 3.’ 

o. ‘As the one air, after it has entered the world, 
Pau one, becomes different according to whatever x“ 
it enters, thus the one Self within all things becomes 
different, according to whatever it enters, and exists 
also without.’ 

II. 'Asthe sun, the eye of the whole world, is not 
contaminated by the external impurities seen by the  , 
eyes, thus the one Self within all things is never | 
contaminated by the misery of the world, being 
himself without 4’ 

12. ‘There js one ruler, the Self within all things, | _ 
who makes the one form manifold. The wise who | uU 
perceive him within their Self, to them belongs 

eternal happiness, not to others 5. | 
13. ‘There is one eternal thinker, thinking non 

! Cf. Brih. Ar. II, 2, 13. ? Cf. IV, 9; VI, 1. 
* Cf. Brih. Ar. H, 5, 19. * Cf. Bhag. Gita XIII, 52. 
5 Cf. Svet. Up. VI, 12. 

20 KATHA-UPANISHAD. 

/ 

eternal thoughts, who, though one, fulfils the desires - 
of many. The wise who perceive him within their 
Self, to them belongs eternal peace, not to others £; 

14. ‘They perceive that highest indescribable 
pleasure, saying, This is that. How then can I9 \ 
understand it?* Has it its own light, or does it ~ 
reflect light ? ' 

15. ‘The sun does not shine there, nor the moon 
and the stars, nor these lightnings, and much less 
this fire. When he shines, everything shines after 
him; by his light all this is lighted ?.' 

! Cf. Svet. Up. VI, 13. 
? Cf. Svet. Up. VI, 14; Mund. Up. II, 2, 10; Bhag. Gita XV, 6. 

Il ADHYAYA, 6 VALLI, 4. 21 

SixrH VALLE. 

. ‘There is that ancient tree!, whose roots grow 
sl and whose branches grow downward ;—that 
indeed is called the Bright ?, that is called Brahman, ' 
that alone is called the Immortal‘. All worlds are 

` 

contained in it, and no one goes beyond. This * 
is that.’ 

2. ‘Whatever there is, the whole world, when gone 
forth (from the Brahman), trembles in its breath 5. 
That Brahman is a great terror, like a drawn sword. 
Those who know it become immortal.' 

3. ‘From terror of Brahman fire burns, from terror 
the sun burns, from terror Indra and Vayu, and 
= as the fifth, run away *. 

. ‘If a man could not understand it before the 
falling asunder of his body, then he has to take body ^ 
again in the worlds of creation ".' 

1 The fig-tree which sends down its branches so that they strike 
root and form new stems, one tree growing into a complete forest. 

2 Cf. Bhag. Gita XV, 1-3. 3 Cf. V, 8. 

* The commentator says that the tree is the world, and its root 
is Brahman, but there is nothing to support this view in the original, 
where tree, roots, and branches are taken together as representing 
the Brahman in its various manifestations. 

5 According to the commentator, in the highest Brahman. 

* Cf. Taitt. Up. II, 8, r. 

7 The commentator translates: ‘If a man is able to understand 
(Brahman), then even before the decay of his body, he is liberated. 
If he is not able to understand it, then he has to take body again 
in the created worlds.’ I doubt whether it is possible to supply so 
much, and should prefer to read iha zen nasakad, though I find it 
difficult to explain how so simple a text should have been mis- 
understood and corrupted. 

22 KATHA-UPANISHAD. 

5. ‘As ina mirror, so (Brahman may be seen clearly) 
here in this body; as in a dream, in the world of 
the Fathers; as in the water, he is seen about in the 

world of the Gandharvas; as in light and shade !, in 
- world of Brahma.' 

‘Having understood that the senses are distiact? 
dics the Atman), and that their rising and setting 
| (their waking and sleeping) belongs to them in their 
| distinct. existence (and not to the Atman), a wise 
man grieves no more. 

7. ‘Beyond the senses is the mind, beyond the 
mind is the highest (created) Being?, higher than 
that Being is the Great Self, higher than the Great, 
the highest Undeveloped.' 

8. ' Beyond the Undeveloped is the Person, the 
all-pervading and entirely imperceptible. Every 
creature that knows him is liberated, and obtains 
— 

. ‘His form is not to be' seen, no one beholds 
him with the eye. He is imagined by the heart, 

| by wisdom, by the mind. Those who know this, are 
immortal *.’ 
ro. ‘When the five instruments of TET stand 
X still together with the mind, and when the intellect 
does not move, that is called the highest state’ 
1I. ' This, the firm holding back of the senses, is 
what is called Yoga. He must be free from thought- 
lessness then, for Yoga comes and goes *5.' 

i 
| 

; 

! Roer: ‘As in a picture and in the sunshine.’ 

2 They arise from the elements, ether, &c. 

3 Buddhi or intellect, cf. III, ro. 

* Much better in Svet. Up. IV, 20: *Those who know him by the 
heart as being in the heart, and by the mind, are immortal.’ 

5 Sankara explains apyaya by apayg. 

H ADHYAYA, 6 VALLI, 17. 23 

12, * He (the Self) cannot be reached by speech, Zu 
by mind, or by the eye. How can it be apprehended— ^ 
except by him who says: “ He is? "' | 

13. ‘By the words “ Heis,” is he to be apprehended, 
and by (admitting) the reality of both (the invisible 
Brahman and the visible world, as coming from 
Brahman). When he has been apprehended by the 

words “ He is,” then his reality reveals itself,’ 2—~ 
~ 14. ‘When all desires that dwell in his heart cease, - L^. 
then the mortal becomes immortal, and obtains 
Brahman,’ | 

15. *'When all the ties! of the heart are severed. i- 
here on earth, then the mortal becomes immoral] 
here ends the teaching 2.’ i 

16. ‘There are a hundred and one arteries of the 
heart’, one of them penetrates the crown of the head*,, 
Moving upwards by it, a‘man (at his death) reaches 
the Immortal 5; the other arteries serve for departing 
in different directions.’ 

I7. ‘The Person not larger than a thumb, the inner., 
Self, is always settled in the heart of men*. Leta 
man draw that Self forth from his body with steadi- 

1 Ignorance, passion, &c. Cf. Mund. Up. II, 1, 10; II, 2, 9. 

2 The teaching of the Vedanta extends so far and no farther. 
(Cf. Prasna Up. VI, 7.) What follows has reference, according to the 
commentator, not to him who knows the highest Brahman, for he 
becomes Brahman at once and migrates no more; but to him who 
does not know the highest Brahman fully, and therefore migrates to 
the Brahmaloka, receiving there the reward for his pargal knowledge 
and for his good works. 

* Cf. Khand. Up. VIII, 6, 6. 

* It passes out by the head. 

* The commentator says: He rises through the sun (Mund. Up. 
I, 2, 11) to a world in which he enjoys some kind of immortality. 

* Svet. Up. III, 13. 

24 KATH A-UPANISHAD. 

ness, as one draws the pith from a reed’. Let 
him know that Self as the Bright, as the Immortal ; 
yes, as the Bright, as the Immortal 2.’ 

18. Having received this knowledge taught by 

Death and the whole rule of Yoga (meditation 

X Nakiketa became free from passion ? and death, and 
obtained Brahman. Thus it will be with another 
also who knows thus what relates to the Self. 

19. May He protect us both! May He enjoy us 
both! May we acquire strength together! May our 
knowledge become bright! May we never quarrel?! 
Om! Peace! peace! peace! HariZ, Om! 

! Roer: ‘As from a painter's brush a fibre.’ 
2 This repetition marks,.as usual, the end of a chapter. 
-° Viraga, free from vice and virtue. It may have been vigara, 

Wii aom old age. See, however, Muzd. Up. I, 2, 11. 
* Cf. Taitt. Up. III, 1; III, ro, note.


# MUNDAKA-UPANISHAD

MUNDAKA-UPANISHAD. 

— 

"e 
€. v 
"o 

wr 

Naor toe Ya 

FIRST MUNDAKA. 

First KHANDA. 

I. BRAHMA was the first of the Devas, the maker 
of the universe, the preserver of the world. He 
told the knowledge of Brahman, the foundation_of 
all knowledge, to his eldest son Atharva !. 

2. Whatever Brahma told Atharvan, that know- 
ledge of Brahman Atharvan formerly told to Angir; | 
he told it to Satyavaha Bharadvaga, and Bharadvaga 
told it in succession to Angiras. 

3. Saunaka, the great householder, approached ‘7 ' 
Angiras respectfully and asked: ‘Sir, what is that. 2 
through which, if it is known, everything else becomes 
kiona? sets ge ee 

4. He said to him: ‘Two kinds of knowledge must 
be known, this is what all who know Brahman tell us, 
the higher and the lower knowledge.’ 

5. ‘The lower knowledge is the Azg-veda, Yagur- 
veda, Sama-veda, Atharva-veda, Siksha (phonetics), 

Kalpa (ceremonial), Vyakaraza (grammar), Nirukta 
(etymology), K Zandas(metre), Gyotisha (astronomy)?; 

—— 5. 
i 

! The change between Atharva and Atharvan, like that between 
Nakiketas and Nafiketa, shows the freedom of the phraseology of 
the Upanishad, and cannot be used for fixing the date of the con- 
stituent elements of the Upanishad. 

2 Other MSS. add here itihasa-purana-nyaya-mimamsa-dharma- 
sastrani. 

vA n ] 

28 MUNDAKA-UPANISHAD. 

but the higher knowledge is that by which the 

Indestructible (Brahman) is apprehended.’ 

6. ‘That which cannot be seen, nor seized, which 
has no family and no caste!, no eyes nor ears, no 
hands nor feet, the eternal, the omnipresent (all- 
pervading), infinitesimal, that which is imperishable, 
that it is which the wise regard as the source of 
all beings.’ 

7. ‘As the spider sends forth and draws in its 
thread, as plants grow on the earth, as from every 
man hairs spring forth on the head and the body, thus 
does everything arise here from the Indestructible.’ 

8. ‘The Brahman swells by means of brooding 
(penance)?; hence is produced matter (food); from. 
matter breath’, mind, the true‘, the worlds (seven), 
and from the works (performed by men in the 
worlds), the immortal (the eternal effects, rewards, 
and punishments of works).' 

1 I translate varva by caste on account of its conjunction with 
gotra. The commentator translates, * without origin and without 
qualities, We should say that which belongs to no genus or 
species. o | 

2 I have translated tapas by brooding, because this is the only 
word in English which combines the two meanings of warmth and 
thought. Native authorities actually admit two roots, one tap, 
to burn, the other tap, to meditate; see commentary on Para- 
sara-smriti, p. 395 (MS. Bodl), Tapah krikkhrakandrayanddir(- 
pezaharavarganam. Nanu Vyasena tapo 'nyatha smaryate, tapas 
svadharma-vartitvam saukam sanganibarhamam iti; nayam dosha, 
krikkhrader api svadharmaviseshat. Tapa samtapa ity asmad dhator 
utpannasya tapa#-sabdasya dehasoshaze vrittir mukhya.... Yat 
tu tatraivoktam, ko 'yam moksha% katham tena samsdram prati- 
pannavan ity alo£anam arthagnas tapa% samsanti pandita iti so nya 
eva tapaZsabdaZ, tapa alokana ity asmad dhator utpannaZ. 

? Hirazyagarbha, the living world as a whole. Comm. 

t Satya, if we compare Kazh. VI, 7 and III, 10, seems to mean 
buddhi. Here it is explained by the five elements. 

I MUNDAKA, I KHANDA, 9. 29 

9. ‘From him who perceives all and who knows 
all, whose brooding (penance) consists of knowledge, 
from him (the highest Brahman) is born that Brah- 
man!, name, form ?, and matter (food). 

1 Hirazyagarbha. Comm. 
2 Namarupam, a very frequent concept in Buddhistic literature. 

30 MUNDAKA-UPANISHAD. 

SECOND KHANDA. 

1, This is the truth!: the sacrificial works which 
they (the poets) saw in the hymns (of the Veda) 
have been performed in many ways in the Treta 

age*, Practise? them diligently, ye lovers of T 
this is your path that leads to the world of goo 

works *! 

2. When the fire is lighted and the flame flickers, 
let a man offer his oblations between the two por- 
tions of melted butter, as an offering with faith. 

3. If a man's Agnihotra sacrifice is not followed 

1 In the beginning of the second Khanda the lower knowledge 
is first described, referring to the performance of sacrifices and 
other good deeds. The reward of them is perishable, and therefore 
a desire is awakened after the higher knowledge. 

3 The Treta age is frequently mentioned as the age of sacrifices. 
I should prefer, however, to take treta in the sense of trayi 
vidya, and santata as developed, because the idea that the Treta 
age was distinguished by its sacrifices, seems to me of later origin. 
Even the theory of the four ages or yugas, though known in the Ait. 
Brahmaza, is not frequently alluded to in' the older Upanishads. 
See Weber, Ind. Stud. I, p. 283. 

? The termination tha for ta looks suspiciously Buddhistic; see 
‘Sanskrit Texts discovered in Japan,’ J. R. A. S. 1880, p. 180. 

t Svakrzta and sukrzta are constantly interchanged. They mean 
the same, good deeds, or deeds performed by oneself and believed 
to be good. 

5 At the Agnihotra, the first of all sacrifices, and the type of 
many others, two portions of agya are sacrificed on the right and 
left side of the Ahavantya altar. The place between the two is 
called the Avapasthana, and here the oblations to the gods are to 
be offered. There are two oblations in the morning to Surya and 
Pragapati, two in the evening to Agni and Pragapati. Other sacri- 
fices, such as the Darsa and Purzamasa, and those mentioned i in 
verse 3, are connected with the Agnihotra. 

See 

( 1 MUNDAKA, 2 KHANDA, 7.) att P. 

by the new-moon and full-moon sacrifices, by the 
four-months' sacrifices, and by the harvest sacrifice, 
if it is unattended by guests, not offered at all, or 
without the Vaisvadeva ceremony, or not offered 
according to rule, then it destroys his seven worlds !. 

4. Kali (black), Karalt (terrific), Manogava (swift 
as thought), Sulohita (very red), Sudhumravarza 
(purple), Sphuliugint (sparkling), and the brilliant 
Visvarupt ? (having all forms), all these playing about 
are called the seven tongues (of fire). 

5. If a man performs his sacred works when these 
flames are shining, and the oblations follow at the 
right time, then they lead him as sun-rays to where 
the one Lord of the Devas dwells. l 

6. Come hither, come hither! the brilliant obla- 
tions say to him, and carry the sacrificer on the rays 
of the sun, while they utter pleasant speech and 
praise him, saying: ‘ This is thy holy Brahma-world 
(Svarga), gained by thy good, works. 

7. But frail, in truth, are those boats, the sacri-. 
fices, the eighteen, in which this lower ceremonial 

has been told?*. Fools who praise this as the highest 

good, E ais 
death. 

1 The seven worlds form the rewards of a pious sacrificer, the 
first is BhuZ, the last Satya. The seven worlds may also be ex- 
plained as the worlds of the father, grandfather, and great-grand- 
father, of the son, the grandson, and great-grandson, and of the 
sacrificer himself. 

3 Or Visvarufi, if there is any authority for this reading in Mahi- 
dhara’s commentary to the Vagas. Samhita XVII, 79. The Rajah 
of Besmah’s edition has visvaruki, which is also the reading adopted 
by Rammohun Roy, see Complete Works, vol. i, p. 579. 

? The commentator takes the eighteen for the sixteen priests, 
the sacrificer, and his wife. But such an explanation hardly yields 
a satisfactory meaning, nor does plava mean perishable. 

32 MUNDAKA-UPANISHAD. 

8. Fools dwelling in darkness, wise in their own 
conceit, and puffed up with vain knowledge, go round 
and round staggering to and fro, like blind men led 
by the blind !. 

9. Children, when they have long lived in igno- 
rance, consider themselves happy. Because those 
who depend on their good works are, owing to their 
passions, improvident, they fall and become miserable 
when their life (in the world which they m gained 
by their good works) i is finished. 

10. Considering sacrifice and good works as the 
best, these fools know no higher good, and having 
enjoyed (their reward) on the height of heaven, 
gained by good works, they enter again this world 
or a lower one. 

II. But those? who practise-penenee and faith 
in the forest, tranquil, wise, and living on alms, 
depart free from passion through the sun to where 
that immortal Person dwells whose nature is impe- 
rishable?. 

12. Let-a-Brahmaza, after he has bxamibed all 
these worlds which are gained by works, acquire 
freedom from all desires. Nothing that is eternal 
(not made) can be gained by what is not eternal 
(made) Let him, in order to understand this, take 

1 Cf. Kath. Up. II, 5. 

3 According to the commentator, this verse refers to those who 
know the uselessness of sacrifices and have attained to a knowledge 
ofthe qualified Brahman. They live in the forest as Vanaprasthas 
and Saznyasins, practising tapas, i.e. whatever is proper for their 
state, and sraddha, i.e. a knowledge of Hirazyagarbha. The wise 
are the learned Grzhasthas, while those who live on alms are those 
who have forsaken their family. 

8 That person is Hiranyagarbha. His immortality is relative 
only, it lasts no longer than the world (sazsara). 

I MUNDAKA, 2 KHANDA, I3. 23 

fuel in his hand and approach a Guru who is learned 
and dwells entirely in Brahman. 

13. To that pupil who has approached him re- 
spectfully, whose thoughts are not troubled by any 
desires, and who has obtained perfect peace, the 
wise teacher truly told that knowledge of Brah- 
man through which he knows the eternal and true , 
Person. | 

[15] D 

34 MUNDAKA-UPANISHAD. 

SECOND MUNDAKA. 

First KHANDA. 

I. This is the truth. As from a blazing fire sparks, 
being like unto fire’, fly forth a thousandfold, thus are 
various beings brought forth from the Imperishable, 
my friend, and return thither also. 

2. That heavenly Person is without body, he is 
both without and within, not produced, without 

breath and without mind, pure, higher than the high 
. Imperishable 2. 

3. From him (when entering on creation) is born 
breath, mind, and all organs of sense, ether, air, light, 
water, and the earth, the support of all. 

4. Fire (the sky) is his head, his eyes the sun and 
the moon, the quarters his ears, his speech the Vedas 
disclosed, the wind his breath, his heart the universe; 
from his feet came the earth; he is indeed the inner 

Self of all things ?. 
5. From him comes Agni (fire)*, the sun being the 

fuel; from the moon (Soma) comes rain (Parganya); 
from the earth herbs; and man gives seed unto the 

woman. Thus many bei re begotten , the 

Person (purusha). 
6. From him come the Aze, the Saman, the 

1 Cf. Brh. Ar. II, r, 20. 

2 The high Imperishable is here the creative, the higher the non- 
creative Brahman. 

3 Called Vishzu and Virag by the commentators. 

* 'There are five fires, those of heaven, rain, earth, man, and 
woman. Comm. 

II MUNDAKA, I KHANDA, IO. 35 

Yagush, the Diksha (initiatory rites), all sacrifices 
and offerings of animals, and the fees bestowed on 
priests, the year too, the sacrificer, and the worlds, 
in which the moon shines brightly and the sun. 

7. From him the many Devas too are begotten, 
the Sadhyas (genii), men, cattle, birds, the up and 
down breathings, rice and corn (for sacrifices), penance, 
faith, truth, abstinence, and law. 

8. The seven senses (praza) also spring hom him, 
the seven lights (acts of sensation), the seven kinds 
of fuel (objects by which the senses are lighted), the 
seven sacrifices (results of sensation), these seven 
worlds (the places of the senses, the worlds deter- 
mined by the senses) in which the senses move, 
which rest in the cave (of the heart), and are placed 
there seven and seven. 

9. Hence come the seas and all the mountains, 
from him flow the rivers of every kind ; hence come 
all herbs and the juice through which the inner Self 
subsists with the elements. 

IO. The Person is all this, sacrifice, penance, Brah- 
man, the highest immortal; he who knows this hidden 
in the cave (of the heart), he, O friend, scatters the 
knot of ignorance here on earth. 

36 | MUNDAKA-UPANISHAD. 

SECOND KHANDA. 

1. Manifest, near, moving in the cave (of the heart) 

is the great Being. In it everything is centred which 
ye know as moving, breathing, and blinking, as being 
and not-being, as adorable, as the best, that is beyond 
the understanding of creatures. 
V 2. That which is brilliant, smaller than small, that 
on which the worlds are founded and their inhabit- 
ants, that is the indestructible Brahman, that is the 
breath, speech, mind; that is the true, that is the 
immortal. That is to be hit. Hit it, O friend! 

3. Having taken the Upanishad as the bow, as 
the great weapon, let him place on it the arrow, 
sharpened by devotion! Then having drawn it with 
a thought directed to that which is, hit the mark, O 
friend, viz. that which is the Indestructible! 

4. Om is the bow, the Self is the arrow, Brahman _ 
is called its aim. It is to be hit by a man who is 

ot thoughtless ; and then, as the arrow (becomes one 

ith the target), he will become one with Brahman. 

Q 5. In him the heaven, the earth, and the sky are 
woven, the mind also with all the senses. Know 
d du 0r Sd us ee d obe words ! 
He is the bridge of the Immortal. 

6. He moves about becoming manifold within 
the heart where the arteries meet, like spokes 
fastened to the nave. Meditate on the Self as 
Om! Hail to you, that you may cross beyond (the 
sea of) darkness! 

7. He who understands all and who knows all, he 
to whom all this glory in the world belongs, the 

II MUNDAKA, 2 KHANDA, II. 37 

Self, is placed in the ether, in the heavenly city of 
Brahman (the heart). He assumes the nature of 
mind, and becomes the guide of the body of the 
senses. He subsists in food, in close proximity to 
the heart. The wise who understand this, behold 
the Immortal which shines forth full of bliss. 

8. The fetter of the heart is broken, all doubts 
are solved, all his works (and their effects) perish 
when He has been beheld who is high and low (cause - 
and effect) !. | 

9. In the highest golden sheath there is the 
Brahman without passions and without parts. That 
is cu eat ce IO ep which they 
know who know the Self. 

IO. The? sun does not shine there, nor the moon 
and the stars, nor these lightnings, and much less 
this fire. When he shines, everything shines after 
him ; by his light all this is lighted °. 

11. That immortal Brahman is before, that Brah- 
man is behind, that Brahman is right and left. It 
has gone forth below and above; Brahman alone is 
all this, it is the best. 

! Cf. Kash. Up. VI, 15. ? Kash. Up. V, 15. 
3 Svet. Up. VI, 14; Bhag. Gita IX, 15, 6. 

38 MUNDAKA-UPANISHAD. 

THIRD MUNDAKA. 

First KHANDA. 

1. Two birds, inseparable friends, cling to the same 
tree. One of them eats the sweet fruit, the other 
looks on without eating !. 

2. On the same tree man sits grieving, immersed, 
bewildered by his own impotence (an-1sa). But when 
he sees the other lord (isa) contented and knows his 
glory, then his grief passes away?.. 

3. When the seer sees the brilliant maker and 
lord (of the world) as the Person who has his source 
in Brahman, then he is wise, and shaking off good 
and evil, he reaches the highest oneness, free from 
passions ; 

4. For he is the Breath shining forth in all beings, 
and he who understands this becomes truly wise, 
not a talker only. He revels in the Self, he delights ` 
in the Self, and having performed his works (truth- 
fulness, penance, meditation, &c.) he rests, firmly 
established in Brahman, the best of those who know 
Brahman °. 

1 Cf. Rv. I, 164, 20; Nir. XIV, 30; Svet. Up. IV, 6; Kash. Up. 
III, 1. 

2 Cf. Svet. Up. IV, 7. 

* The commentator states that, besides 4tmarati# kriyavan, there 
was another reading, viz. atmaratikriyavan. This probably owed 
its origin to a difficulty felt in reconciling kriyavan, performing 
acts, with the brahmavidam varish/ZaZ, the best of those who know 
Brahman, works being utterly incompatible with a true knowledge 
of Brahman. Kriyavan, however, as Sankara points out, may 
mean here simply, having performed meditation and other acts 
conducive to a knowledge of Brahman. Probably truthfulness, 

III MUNDAKA, I KHANDA, IO. 39 

5. By truthfulness, indeed, by penance right know- 
ledge, and abstinence must that Self be gained; the 
Self whom spotless anchorites gain is pure, and like ; 
a light within the body. 

6. The true prevails, not the untrue; by the true 
the path is laid out, the way of the gods (devayanaZ), 
on which the old sages, satisfied in their desires, 
proceed to where there is that highest place of the 
True One. 

7. That (true Brahman) shines forth grand, divine, 
inconceivable, smaller than small; it is far beyond 
what is far and yet near here, it is hidden in the 
cave (of the heart) among those who see it even 
here. 

8. He is not apprehended by the eye, nor by 
speech, nor by the other senses, not by penance or 
good works! When a man's nature has become 
sees him, meditating on him as without parts. 

9. That subtle Self is to be known by thought 
(ketas) there where breath has entered fivefold; 
for every thought of men is interwoven with the 
senses, and when thought is purified, then the Self 
arises. 

10. Whatever state a man whose nature is puri- 
fied imagines, and whatever desires he desires (for 
himself or for others)’, that state he conquers and 

penance, &c., mentioned in the next following verse, are the kriyas 
or works intended. For grammatical reasons also this reading is 
preferable. But the last foot esha brahmavidaz varish¢hah is 
clearly defective. If we examine the commentary, we see that 
Sankara read brahmanish/ZaZ, and that he did not read esha, which 
would give us the correct metre, brahmanish/o brahmavidam 
varish/hak. | 
1 Cf. Kath. Up. VI, 12. 2 Cf. Brih. Ar. I, 4, I5. 

40 MUNDAKA-UPANISHAD. 

those desires he obtains. Therefore let.every man 

who desires happin orship the man who knows 
rcs 

SECOND KHANDA. 

I. He (the knower of the Self) knows that high- 
est honie of Brahman?, in which all is contained and 
shines brightly. The wise who, without desiring 
happiness, worship that Person?, transcend this seed, 
(they are not born again.) 

.2. He who forms desires in his mind, is born again 
through his desires here and there. But to him 
whose desires are fulfilled and who is conscious of 
the true Self (within himself) all desires vanish, even 
here on earth. 

3. That Self* cannot be gained by the Veda, nor 
nem by understanding, nor by much learning. He whom 
the Self chooses, by him the Self can be gained. 
| The Self chooses him (his body) as his own. 

_ 4. Nor is that Self to be gained by one who is 
 destitute of strength, or without earnestness, or 
without right meditation. But if a wise man strives 
after it by those means (by strength, earnestness, 
and right meditation), then his Self enters the home 
f Brahman. 

5. When they have reached him (the Self), the 
sages become satisfied through knowledge, they are 
conscious of their Self, their passions have passed 

! Allthis is said by the commentator to refer to a knowledge of 
the conditioned Brahman only. 

? See verse 4. 

* The commentator refers purusha to the knower of the Self. 

t Kazh. Up. II, 23. 

III MUNDAKA, 2 KHANDA, IO. 41 

away, and they are tranquil The wise, having 
reached Him who is omnipresent everywhere, de- 
voted to the Self, enter into him wholly. 

6. Having well ascertained the object of the know- 

ledge of the Vedanta’, and having purified their nature 
by the Yoga? of renunciation, all anchorites, enjoying 

the highest immortality, bec become free at the time of 
the great end (death) in the worlds of Brahma. 

7. Their fifteen parts? enter into their elements, 

their Devas (the senses) into their (corresponding) 
Devas*. Their deeds and their is 
able. 
7 8. As the flowing rivers disappear in the sea 5, 
losing their name and their form, thus a wise man, 
freed from name and form, goes to the divine Person, 
who is greater than the great 5. 

9. He who knows that highest Brahman, becomes 
even Brahman. In his race no one is born ignorant 
of Brahman. He overcomes grief, he overcomes 
evil ; free from the fetters of the heart, he becomes 
immortal. | 

10. And this is declared by the following Ær- 
verse: ‘Let a man tell this science of Brahman t 
those only who have performed all (necessary) acts, 
who are versed in the Vedas, and firmly established 
in (the lower) Brahman, who themselves offer as 

! Cf. Taitt. Ar. X, 12, 3; Svet. Up. VI, 22; Kaiv. Up. 3; see 
Weber, Ind. Stud. I, p. 288. 

2 By the Yoga system, which, through restraint (voa leads a 
man to true knowledge. 

* Cf. Prasna Up. VI, 4. * The eye into the sun, &c. 

5 Cf. Prasna Up. VI, 5. 

€ Greater than the conditioned Brahman. Comm. 

42 MUNDAKA-UPANISHAD. 

n oblation the one Avzshi (Agni), full of faith, and 
by whom the rite of (carrying fire on) the head 
\has been performed, according to the rule (of the 
tharvamas).’ 
i1. The Azshi Augiras formerly told this true 
(science'); a man who has—not performed the 
(proper) rites, does not read it. Adoration to the 
highest Azshis! Adoration to the highest Azshis! 

! To Saunaka, cf. I, 1, 3. 

ee


# TAITTIRIYAKA-UPANISHAD

TAITTIRIYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

FIRST VALLI, 

On, THE CHAPTER ON SIKSHA (PRONUNCIATION). 

. First ANUvAEKA . 

OL HARIH, Om! Ma Mitra be propitious to us, 
and Varuna, Ain also, Indra, Brehaspati, and 
thowidestidmy Velautuen oO 

Adoration to Brahman! Adoration to thee, O 
Vayu (air)! Thou indeed art the visible Brahman. 
I shall proclaim thee alone as the visible Brahman. 
I shall proclaim the right. I shall proclaim the true 
(scil. Brahman). 

(1-5)? May it protect me! May it protect the 
teacher! yes, may it protect me, and may it protect 
the teacher! Om! Peace! peace! peace! 

~ 

1 This invocation is here counted as an Anuvaka; see Taitt. 
Ar., ed. Rajendralal Mitra, p. 725. 

2 This verse is taken from Rig-veda-samhita I, 9o, 9. The deities 
are variously explained by the commentators: Mitra as god of the 
Praza (forth-breathing) and of the day; Varuna as god of the 
Apana (off-breathing) and of the night. Aryaman is supposed to 
represent the eye or the sun; Indra, strength; Brzhaspati, speech 
or intellect; Vishzu, the feet. Their favour is invoked, because 
it is only if they grant health that the study of the highest wisdom 
can proceed without fail. 

3 Five short sentences, in addition to the one paragraph. Such 
sentences occur at the end of other Anuvakas also, and are counted 
separately. 

46 TAITTIRIYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

SECOND ANUVAKA. 
1. Om!! Let us explain Stksha, the doctrine of 
pronunciation, viz. letter, accent, quantity, effort (in 

the formation of letters), modulation, and union of 
letters (sandhi). This is the lecture on Siksha. 

THIRD ANUVAKA. 

1. May glory come to both of us (teacher and pupil) 
together! May Vedic light belong to both of us! 

Now let us explain the Upanishad (the secret 
meaning) of the union (sazzhita)?, under five heads, 
with regard to the worlds, the heavenly lights, know- 
ledge, offspring, and self (body). People call these 
the great Samhitas. 

First, with regard to the worlds. The earth is 

(ine fonen slemeni heaven the latter, ether their 

union; 

2. That union takes place through Vayu (air). So 
much with regard to the worlds. | ———- 

Next, with regard to the heavenly lights. Agni 

(fire) is the former element, Aditya (the sun) the 

latter, water their union. That union takes place 

through lightning. So much with regard to the — 

heavenly lights. 
Next, with regard to knowledge. The teacher is 
| the former element, 
| 3. The pupil the latter, knowledge their-union. 
| That union takes place through the recitation of the 
! Veda. So much with regard to knowledge. 
— Next, with regard to offspring. The mother is 
———— —— A— Ao e —— —— — 
! Cf. Rig-veda-pratisakhya, ed. M. M., p. iv seq. 
? Cf. Aitareya-arazyaka III, 1, 1 (Sacred Books, vol. i, p. 247). 

I VALLI, 4 ANUVAKA, 2. 47 

the former element, the father the latter, offspring 
their union. That union takes place through pro- 
creation. So much with regard to offspring. 

4. Next, with regard to the self (body). The 
lower jaw is the former element, the upper jaw the 
fatter, speech their union. That union takes place 
through speech. So much with regard to the Self. 
These are the great Samhitas. He who knows 
these Sazhitas (unions), as here explained, becomes 
united with offspring, cattle, Vedic light, food, and 

with the heavenly world. 
E a 

FOURTH ANUVAKA. 

1. May he! who is the strong bull of the Vedas, 
assuming all forms, who has risen from the Vedas, 
from the Immortal, may that Indra (lord) strengthen 
me with wisdom! May I, OO God, become an upholder 
of the Immortal ! 

May my body he able, my tongue sweet, may 
I hear much with my ears! Thou (Om) art the 
shrime-(ef-Bratrian), covered by wisdom. Guard 
what I have learnt ?. 

She (Sri, happiness) brings near and spreads, 

2. And makes, without delay, garments for herself, 
cows, food, and drink at all times; therefore bring 
that Sri (happiness) hither to me, the woolly, with 

1 The next verses form the prayer and oblation of those who 
wish for wisdom and happiness. In the first verse it is supposed 
that the Om is invoked, the most powerful syllable of the Vedas, 
' the essence extracted from all the Vedas, and in the end a name 
of Brahman, See Ahand. Up. p. 1 seq. 

2 Here end the prayers for the attainment of wisdom, to be fol- 
lowed by oblations for the attainment of happiness. 

48 TAITTIRIYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

her cattle!! Svaha?! May the Brahman-students 
come to me, Svaha! May they come from all 
sides, Svaha! May they come forth to me, Svaha! 
May they practise restraint, Svaha! May they enjoy 
peace, Svaha! 

3. May I be a glory among men, Svaha! May 
I be better than the richest, Svaha! May I enter 
into thee, O treasure (Om), Svaha! Thou, O 
treasure?, enter into me, Svaha! In thee, con- 
sisting of a thousand branches, in thee, O treasure, 
I am cleansed, Svaha! As water runs downward, as 
the months go to the year, so, O preserver of the 

world, may Brahman-students always come to me 
from all sides, Svaha! 

(1) Thou art a refuge! Enlighten me! Take pos- 
session of me! 

FirtH ANUVAKA. 

I. Bhd, Bhuvas, Suvas‘, these are the three sacred 
interjections (vydhvzti). MahaZamasya taught a 
fourth, viz. rer eT es a 
Self. The others (devatas) are its members. 
~ Bhi_is_this world, Bhuvas is the sky, Suvas is 
the other world. nem 

2. Mahasis the sun. All the worlds are increased 
by the sun. Bhd is Agni (fire), Bhuvas is Vayu 

(air), Suvas is Aditya (sun). Mahas is the moon. All 
the heavenly lights are increased by the moon. 

1 The construction is not right. Woolly, lomasa, is explained 
as ‘ possessed of woolly sheep.’ 

2 With the interjection Svaha each oblation is offered. 

3 Bhaga, here explained as bhagavat. 

t The text varies between Bhu, Bhuvas, Suvas, Mahas, and Bhd, 
Bhuvar, Suvar, Mahar. 

I VALLI, 6 ANUVAKA, 2. 49 

Bhd is the A?£-verses, Bhuvas is the SAman-verses, 
Suvas is the Yagus-verses. 

3. Mahasis Brahman. All theVedas are increased 
by the Brahman. 

(1-2) Bhd is Praza (up-breathing), Bhuvas is 
Apana (down-breathing), Suvas is Vyana (back- 
breathing). Mahas is food. All breathings are 
increased by food. 

Thus there are these four times four, the four and 
four sacred interjections. He who knows these, 

(1-2) Knows the Brahman. All Devas bring 
offerings to him. 

—_— AJ 
SIXTH ANUVAKA. 

I. There is the ether within the heart, and in it 
there is the Person (purusha) consisting of mind, 
immortal, golden — — —  — 

Between the two palates there hangs the uvula, 
like a nipple—that is the starting-point of Indra (the 
lord) Where the root of the hair divides, there 
he opens the two sides of the head, and saying Bhd, 
he enters Agni (the fire); saying Bhuvas, he enters 
Vayu (air); 

2. Saying Suvas, he enters Aditya (sun); saying 
Mahas, he enters Brahman. He there obtains lord- 
ship, he reaches the lord of the mind. He becomes 
lord of speech, lord of sight, lord of hearing, lord of 
knowledge. Nay, more than this. There is the 
Brahman whose body is ether, whose nature is true, 
rejoicing in the senses (praza), delighted in the mind, 
perfect in peace, and immortal. 

(1) Worship thus, O PraZinayogya! 

! Cf. I, 4, 1. 
[t5] E 

50 TAITTIRIYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

SEVENTH ANUVAKA. 

I. eee earth. the sky, heaven, the four quarters, 
and the intermediate quarters, —' Agni (fire), Vayu 
(air), Aditya (sun) Kandramas (moon), and the 
stars, —‘ Water, herbs, trees, ether, the universal Self 
(virag),—so much with reference to material objects 
(bhata). 

Now with reference to the self (the body): 'Praza 
(up-breathing), Apana (down-breathing), Vyana (back- 
breathing), Udana (out-breathing), and Samaza (on- 
breathing),—' The eye, the ear, mind, speech, and 
touch, —' The skin, flesh, muscle, bone, and marrow.' 
Having dwelt on this (fivefold arrangement of the 
worlds, the gods, beings, breathings, senses, and 
elements of the body) a Rishi said: ‘Whatever 
exists is fivefold (pankta)!.' 

(1) By means of the one fivefold set (that referring 
to the body) he completes the other fivefold set. 

EIGHTH ANUVAKA. 

I. Om means Brahman. 2. Om means all this. 
3. Om means obedience. When they have been 
told, ‘Om, speak, they speak. 4. After Om they 
sing Samans. 5. After Om they recite hymns. 
6. After Om the Adhvaryu gives the response. 
7. After Om the Brahman-priest gives orders. 
8. After Om he (the sacrificer) allows the perform- 
ance of the Agnihotra. 9. When a Brahmaza is 
going to begin his lecture, he says, 10. ‘Om, ma 

I acquire Brahman (the Veda), He thus acquires 
the Veda:——<— | | 

1 Cf. Brih. Ar. Up. I, 4, 17. 

I VALLI, IO ANUVAKA, 3. 5I 

NINTH ANuvakKA! 

I. (What is necessary?) The right, and learning 
Me practising the Veda, The true, and learning and 

practising the Veda. Penance, and learning and prac- 

tising the Veda, Restraint, and learning and practising 
the Veda. Tranquillity, and learning and practising 

the Veda. The fires (to be consecrated), and learning 
and practising the Veda. The Agnihotra sacrifice, 
and learning and practising the Veda. Guests (to 
be entertained), and learning and practising the Veda, 
Man’s duty, and learning and practising the Veda, 
Children, and learning and practising the Veda. 
(1-6) Marriage, and learning and practising the 
Veda. Children's children, and learning and prac- 
tising the Veda, 

Satyava£as Rathitara thinks that the true only 
is necessary.  Taponitya Paurasish/ thinks that 
penance only is necessary. Naka Maudgalya thinks 
that learning and practising the Veda only are neces- 
sary,—for that is penance, that is penance. 

TENTH ANUVAKA. 

1. ‘I am he who shakes the tree (i.e. the tree of 
the world, which has to be cut down by knowledge). 
2. My glory is like the top of a mountain. 3. I, whose 
pure light (of knowledge) has risen high, am that 
which is truly immortal, as it resides in the sun. 

1 This chapter is meant to show that knowledge alone, though 
it secures the highest object, is not sufficient by itself, but must be 
preceded by works. The learning of the Veda by heart and the 
practising of it so as not to forget it again, these two must always 
have been previously performed. 

E 2 

52 TAITTIRIYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

4. Iam the brightest treasure. 5. I am wise, im- 

mortal, imperishable’ 6. This is the teaching of 

the Veda, hy the poet Trisanku. 

ELEVENTH ANUVAKA. 

I. After having taught the Veda, the teacher in- 
‘structs the pupil: ‘Say what is true! Do thy duty! 
Do not neglect the study of the Veda! After 
having brought to thy teacher his proper reward, 
do not cut off the line of children! Do not swerve 
from the truth! Do not swerve from duty! Do not 
neglect what is useful! Do not neglect greatness! 
Do not neglect the learning and teaching of the 
Veda! 

2. ‘Do not neglect the (sacrificial) works due to the 
Gods and Fathers !( Let thy mother be to thee like 
unto a god! Let thy father be to thee like unto a 

— god! Let thy teacher be to thee like unto a god! 
Let thy guest be to thee like unto a god! 
Whatever actiens are blame]ess, those—should be 
n M Whatever good works have 
been performed by us, those should be observed by 
thee ——— 

3. ‘Not others. And there are some Brahmazas 
better than we. They should be comforted by thee by 

| giving them a seat. Whatever is given should be 
| given with faith, not without faith,—with joy, with 
modesty, with fear, with kindness. If there should 

1 This verse has been translated as the commentator wishes it 
to be understood, in praise of that knowledge of Self which is only 
to be obtained after all other duties, and, more particularly, the 
study of the Veda, have been performed. The text is probably 
corrupt, and the interpretation fanciful. 

I VALLI, I2 ANUVAKA, 5. 53 

be any doubt in thy mind with regard to any sacred 
act or with regard to conduct,— 

4. ‘Inthat case conduct thyself as Brahmazas who 
possess good judgment conduct themselves therein, 
whether they be appointed or not}, as long as they 
are not too severe, but devoted to duty. And with 
regard to things that have been spoken against, 

as Drahmazas who possess good judgment conduct 

themselves therein, whether they be appointed or 
not, as long as the , but devoted 
to duty, 

(1-7) Thus conduct thyself. ‘This is the rule. 
This is the teaching. This is the true purport 
(Upanishad) of the Veda. This is the command. 
Thus should you observe. Thus should this be 
observed.’ 

TWELFTH ANUVAKA. 

1. May Mitra be propitious to us, and Varuza, 
Aryaman also, Indra, Bzzhaspati, and the wide- 
striding Vishzu! Adoration to Brahman! Adora- 
tion to thee, O Vayu! Thou indeed art the visible 
Brahman. I proclaimed thee alone as the visible 
Brahman. 

(1-5) I proclaimed the right. I proclaimed the 
true. It protected me. It protected the teacher. 
Yes, it protected me, it protected the teacher. Om! 
Peace! peace! peace! 

1 Aparaprayukta iti svatantra#. For other renderings, see Weber, 
Ind. Stud. II, p. 216. | 

54 TAITTIRIYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

SECOND VALLI, 

On, THE CHAPTER on ANANDA (BLISS). 

HarizZ, Om! May it (the Brahman) protect us 
both (teacher and pupil)! May it enjoy us both! 
May we acquire strength together! May our know- 
ledge become bright! May we never quarrel! Peace! 
peace! peace!! 

First ANUVAKA. 

He who knows the Brahman attains the highest 
(Brahman). On this the following verse is recorded : 

‘He who knows Brahman, which is (i.e. cause, 
not effect), which is conscious, which is without 
end, as hidden in the depth (of the heart), in the 
highest ether, he_enjoys all blessings, at one with 
the omniscient Brahman.’ 
& From that Self? (Brahman) sprang ether (akasa, 
that through which we hear); from_ether_air (that 
through which we hear and feel); from air fire (that 
through which we hear, feel, and see); from fire water 
(that through which we hear, feel, see, and taste); 
from water earth (that through which we hear, feel, 
see, taste, and smell). From earth herbs, from herbs 
food, from food seed, from seed man. Man thus 
consists of the essence of food. This is his head, 

1 Not counted here as an Anuvaka. The other Anuvakas are 
divided into a number of small sentences. . 

* Compare with this srishfikrama, Xkand. Up. VI, 2; Ait. Ar. 
II, 4, 1. 

II VALLI, 2 ANUVAKA. 55 

this his right arm, this his left arm, this his trunk 
(&tman), this the seat (the support)1. 
On this there is also the following .Sloka : 

SECOND ANUVAKA, 

V ‘From food? are-preduced—all creatures which 
dwell on earth. Then they live by food, and in the 
end they return to food. For food is the oldest of 
all beings, and therefore it is called panacea (sar- 
vaushadha, i.e. consisting of all herbs, or quieting 
the heat of the body of all beings).' 

i They who worship food as Brahman ?, obtain all 
food. For f all beings, and 
therefore it is called panacea. From food all crea- 
tures are produced ; by food, when born, they grow. 
Because it is fed on, or because it feeds on beings, 
therefore it is called food (anna). 

4 Different from this, which consists of the essence 
of food, is the other, the inner Self, which consists 
of breath. The former is filled by-this. It also 
has the shape of man. Like the human shape 
of the former is the human shape of the latter. 
Prava (up-breathing) is its head. Vyana (back- 
breathing) is its right arm. Apana (down-breathing) 
is its left arm. Ether is its trunk. The earth 
the seat (the support). 

« On this there is also the following Sloka : 

1 The text has ‘the tail, which is his support. But pratish/Za 
seems to have been added, the Anuvaka ending originally with 
puza, which is explained by nabher adhastad yad angam. In the 
Persian translation the different members are taken for members 
of a bird, which is not unlikely. 

2 Anna is sometimes used in the more general sense of matter. 

® Worship consisting in the knowledge that they are born of 
food, live by food, and end in food, which food is Brahman. 

56 TAITTIRIYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

THIRD ANUVAKA. 
‘The Devas breathe after breath (praza), so do 

men and cattle. Breath is Beare ot beings, there- 

fore it is called sarvayusha (all-enlivening).’ 

Q They who worship breath as Brahman, obtain 
the full life- For breath is the life of all beings, and 
therefore it is called sarvayusha. The embodied 

Self of this (consisting of breath) is the same as that 
of the former (consisting of food). 

q Different from this, which consists of breath, is the 
other, the inner Self, which ists-of mind. The 
former is filed Ey this. Italo hus the shape of 
man. Like the human shape of the former is the 
human shape of the latter. Yagus is its head. AZ 
is its right arm. Saman is its left arm. The doctrine 
(&desa, i.e. the Brahmaza) is its trunk. The Athar- 
vaugiras (Atharva-hymns) the seat (the support). 

On this there is also the following Sloka : 

FOURTH ANUVAKA] 

a He who knows the bliss of that Brahman, from 
whence all speech, with the_mind, turns away unable 
to reach it, he never fears.’ The embodied Self of 
this (consisting of mind) is the same as that of the 
former (consisting of breath). 

4 Different from this, which consists of mind, is the 
other, the inner Self, which consists of understanding. 
The former is filled by this. It also has the shape 
of man. Like the human shape of the former is the 
human shape of the latter. Faith is its head. What 
is right is its right arm, What is true is its left arm. 

1 Cf. II, 9. 

II VALLI, 6 ANUVAKA. 57 

Absorption (yoga) is its trunk. The great (intellect ?) 
is the seat (the support). 
On this there is also the following Sloka : 

FIFTH ANUVAKA. 

' Understanding performs the sacrifice, it performs 
all sacred acts. All Devas worship understanding 
as Brahman, as the oldest If a man knows 
understanding as Brahman, and if he does not 
swerve from it, he leaves al] evi ind—i 
body, and attains all his wishes.’ The embodied Self 
of this (consisting of understanding) is the same as 
that of the former (consisting of mind). 
Y Different from this, which consists of understand- 
ing, is the other inner Self, which consists of bliss. 
The former is filled by this. It also has the shape 
of man. Like the human shape of the former is the 
human shape of the latter. Joy is its head. Satisfac- 
tion its right arm. Great satisfaction is its left arm. 
Bliss is its trunk. Brahman is the seat (the support). 

On this there is also the following Sloka : 

SIXTH ANUVAKA. 

‘He who knows the Brahman as non-existing, 
becomes himself non-existing. He who knows the 
Brahman as existing, hii i as exist- 
ing. — The embodied Self of this (bliss) is the same 
as that of the former (understanding). 

Thereupon follow the questions of the pupil : 

‘Does any one who knows not, afterhe has departed 
this life, ever go to that world? Or does he who 
knows, after he has departed, go to that world! ?' 

1 As he who knows and he who knows not, are both sprung 

from Brahman, the question is supposed to be asked by the pupil, 
whether both will equally attain Brahman. 

58 TAITTIRIYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

The answer is: He wished, may I be many!, 
may I grow forth. He brooded over himself (like 
a man performing penance). After he had thus 
brooded, he sent forth (created) all, whatever there 
is. Having sent forth, he entered into it. Having 
entered it, he became sat (what is manifest) and 
tyat (what is not manifest), defined and undefined, 
supported and not supported, (endowed with) know- 
ledge and without knowledge (as stones), real and 
unreal?, The Sattya (true) became all this what- 
soever, and therefore the wise call it (the Brahman) 
Sat-tya (the true). 

On this there is also this Sloka : 

SEVENTH ANUVAKA. 

‘In the beginning this was non-existent (not yet 
defined by form and name). From it was born what 
exists. That made itself its Self, therefore it is 
called the Self-made*. That which is Self-made is 
a flavour‘ (can be tasted), for only after perceiving a 
flavour can any one perceive pleasure. Who could 
breathe, who could breathe forth, if that bliss (Brah- 

1 [n the AZandogya-upanishad VI, 2, 1, where a similar account 
of the creation is given, the subject is spoken of as tad, neuter. It 
is said there: ‘In the beginning there was that only which is, one 
only, without a second. It willed, may I be many, &c. (Cf. Bzzh. 
Ar. Up. vol. ii, p. 52.) 

? What appears as real and unreal to the senses, not the really 
real and unreal. 

* 3 Cf. Ait. Up. I, 2, 3. 

* As flavour is the cause of pleasure, so Brahman is the cause 
of all things. "The wise taste the flavour of existence, and know 
that it proceeds from Brahman, the Self-made. See Kaushitaki- 
upanishad I, 5; Sacred Books, vol. i, p. 277. 

II VALLI, 8 ANUVAKA, 2. 59 

man) existed not in the ether (in the heart)? For 
he alone causes blessedness. 

When he finds freedom from fear and rest in that 
which is invisible, incorporeal, undefined, unsup- 
ported, then he has obtained the fearless. For if 
he makes but the smallest distinction in it, there 
is fear for him’, But that fear exists only for 
one who thinks himself wise?, (not for the true 
sage.) 

On this there is also this .Sloka : 

EIGHTH ANUVAKA. 

(1) ‘From terror of it (Brahman) the wind blows, 
from terror the sun rises; from terror of it Agni 
and Indra, yea Death runs as the fifth,’ 

Naw this is an examination of (what is meant by) 
Bliss (ananda): 

Let there be a noble young man, who is well 
read (in the Veda), very swift, firm, and strong, and 
let the whole world be full of wealth for him, that is 
one measure of human bliss. 

One hundred times that human bliss (2) is one 
measure of the bliss of human Gandharvas (genii), 

! Fear arises only from what is not ourselves. Therefore, as 
Soon as there is even the smallest distinction made between our Self 
and the real Self, there is a possibility of fear. "The explanation 
ud=api, aram=alpam is very doubtful, but recognised in the 
schools. It could hardly be a proverbial expression, ‘if he makes 
another stomach’ meaning as much as, ‘if he admits another person.’ 
According to the commentator, we should translate, * for one who 
knows (a difference), and does not know the oneness.' 

2 I read manvanasya, the commentator amanvanasya. 

5 Kash. Up. VI, 3. 

.£ 

60 TAITTIRIYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

and likewise of a great sage (learned in the Vedas) 
who is free from desires. 

t One hundred times that bliss of human Gan- 
dharvas is one measure of the bliss of divine 
Gandharvas (genii) and likewise of a great sage 
who is free from desires. 

¥ One hundred times that bliss of divine Gandharvas 
is one measure of the bliss of the Fathers, enjoying 
their long estate, and likewise of a great sage who is 
free from desires. | 
¢ One hundred times that bliss of the Fathers is 
one measure of the bliss of the Devas, born in the 
Agana heaven (through the merit of their lawful 
works), (3) and likewise of a great sage who is free 
from desires. 

One hundred times that bliss of the Devas born 
in the Agana heaven is one measure of the bliss of 
the sacrificial Devas, who go to the Devas by means 
of their Vaidik sacrifices, and likewise of a great 
sage who is free from desires, | 

‘One hundred times that bliss of the sacrificial 
Devas is one measure of the bliss of the (thirty-three) 
Devas, and likewise of a great sage who is free from 
desires. 

"One hundred times that bliss of the (thirty-three) 
Devas is one measure of the bliss of Indra, (4) and 
likewise of a great sage who is free from desires. 

\One hundred times that bliss of Indra is one 
measure of the bliss of Brzhaspati, and likewise of 
a great sage who is free from desires. 

«One hundred times that bliss of Bzzhaspati is one 
measure of the bliss of Pragapati, and likewise of 
a great sage who is free from desires. 

* One hundred times that bliss of Pragapati is one 

II VALLI, 8 ANUVAKA, 5. 61 

measure of the bliss of Brahman, and likewise of 
a great sage who is free from desires. 

V (5) He! who is this (Brahman) in man, and he who 
is that (Brahman) in the sun, both are one?. 

$ 1 Cf. III, ro, 

2 In giving the various degrees of happiness, the author of the 
Upanishad gives us at the same time the various classes of human 
and divine beings which we must suppose were recognised in his 
time. We have Men, human Gandharvas, divine Gangharvas, 
Fathers (pitaras AiralokalokaZ), born Gods (&ganaga devaZ), Gods 
by merit, (karmadeva4), Gods, Indra, Bz/haspati, Pragapati, Brah- 
man. Such a list would seem to be the invention of an individual 
rather than the result of an old tradition, if it did not occur in a very 
similar form in the Satapatha-brahmana, Madhyandina-sakha XIV, 
4, 1,31, Kanva-sakha (Brih. Ar. Up. IV, 3,32). Here, too,the highest 
measure of happiness is ascribed to the Brahmaloka,and other 
beings are supposed to share a certain measure only of its supreme 
happiness. The scale begins in the Madhyandina-sakha with men, 
who are followed by the Fathers (pitaro gitalokah), the Gods by 
merit (karmadevah), the Gods by birth (&eanadevaA, with whom 
the Srotriya is joined), the world of Gods, the world of Gandharvas, 
the world of Pragapati, the world of Brahman. In the Brzhad- 
arazyaka-upanishad we have Men, Fathers, Gandharvas, Gods by 
merit, Gods by birth, Pragapati, and Brahman. If we place the 
three lists side by side, we find— 

TAITTIRIYA-UPAN. SATAPATHA-BRAH. BRIHADARAN.-UPAN, 

Men Men Men 
Human Gandharvas — — 
(and Srotriya) 
Divine Gandharvas — — 
Fathers (Airaloka) Fathers (gitaloka) ^ Fathers (gitaloka) 
| == Gandharvas 
Gods by birth Gods by merit Gods by merit 
Gods by merit Gods by birth Gods by birth 
(and Srotriya) (and Srotriya) 
Gods Gods — 
Indra Gandharvas ss 
Brzhaspati — — 
Pragapati Pragapati Pragapati 
Brahman Brahman Brahman. 

The commentators do not help us much. Sankara on the Taitti- 

62 TAITTIRIYAK A-UPANISHAD. 

He who knows this, when he has departed this 
world, reaches and comprehends the Self which con- 
sists of food, the Self which consists of breath, the 
Self which consists of mind, the Self which consists 
of understanding, the Self which consists of bliss. 

On this there is also this Sloka : 

riyaka-upanishad explains the human Gandharvas as men who 
have become Gandharvas, a kind of fairies; divine Gandharvas, as 
Gandharvas by birth. ‘The Fathers or Manes are called Xiraloka, 
because they remain long, though not for ever, in their world. The 
aganaga Gods are explained as born in the world of the Devas 
through their good works (smarta), while the Karmadevas are ex- 
plained as born there through their sacred works (vaidika). The 
Gods are the thirty-three, whose lord is Indra, and whose teacher 
Brihaspati. Pragapati is Virag, Brahman Hiranyagarbha. Dvive- 
daganga, in his commentary on the Satapatha-brahmama, ex 
the Fathers as those who, proceeding on the Southern path, ha 
conquered their world, more particularly by having themselves 
offered in their life sacrifices to their Fathers. "The Karmadevas, 
according to him, are those who have become Devas by sacred 
works (srauta), the Aganadevas those who were gods before there 
were men. The Gods are Indra and the rest, while the Gandharvas 
are not explained. Pragapati is Virag, Brahman is Hirazyagarbha. 
Lastly, Sankara, in his commentary on the Brzhadaramyaka- 
upanishad, gives nearly the same explanation as before; only that 
he makes aganadevaA stil clearer, by explaining them as gods 
ac&nataA, i. e. utpattitaZ, from their birth. 

The arrangement of these beings and their worlds, one rising 
above the other, reminds us of the cosmography of the Buddhists, 
but the elements, though in a less systematic form, existed evidently 
before. Thus we find in the so-called Gargi-brahmaza (Satapatha- 
brahmaza XIV, 6, 6, 1) the following succession: Water, air, ether®, 
the worlds of the sky b, heaven, sun, moon, stars, gods, Gandharvas¢, 
Pragapati, Brahman. In the Kaushitaki-upanishad I, 3 (Sacred 
Books of the East, vol. i, p. 275) there is another series, the worlds 
of Agni, Vayu, Varuza, Indra, Pragapati, and Brahman. See Weber, 
Ind. Stud. II, p. 224. 

a Deest in Kazva-s&kha. " 

> Between sky and sun, the Kanva-sakha places the Gandharvaloka (Brih. Ar. 
Up. III, 6, 1, p. 609). 

c Instead of Gandharvas, the Brih. Ar. Up. places Indra. < 

II VALLI, 9 ANUVAKA. 63 

NINTH ANvuvVAKA}, 

* He who knows the bliss of that Brahman, from 
whence all speech, with the mind, turns away unable 
to reach it, he fears nothing ?. : 

He does not distress himself with the thought, 
Why did I not do what is good? Why did I do 
what is bad? He who thus knows these two (good 
and bad), frees himself. | He who knows both, frees 
himself?. This is the Upanishad 

=n 

1 Cf. II, 4. 

2 Even if there is no fear from anything else, after the knowledge 
If and Brahman has been obtained, it might be thought that 
might still arise from the commission of evil deeds, and the 
mission of good works. Therefore the next paragraphs have been 
added. 

5 The construction of these two sentences is not clear to me. 
* Here follows the Anukramazi, and in some MSS. the same 
invocation with which the next Valli begins. 

of 

64 TAITTIRIYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

THIRD VALLI, 

Or, THE CHAPTER OF BHRIGU. 

Harzk, Om! May it (the Brahman) protect us 
both! May it enjoy us both! May we acquire strength 
together! May our knowledge become bright! May 
we never quarrel! Peace! peace! peace?! 

First ANUVAKA. 

zou Vari went to his father Varuya, saying: 

‘Sir, teach me Brahman.’ He told^him this, viz. 
Food, breath, the eye, the ear, mind, speech. 

Then he said again to him: * That from whence 

these beings are born, that—by which, when born, 

they live, that into which they enter at their death, 
| try to know that. at is Brahman.’ 
He ow at Thats E Having performed 
penance— .^ 
SECOND ANUVAKA. 

_ He perceived that food is Brahman, for from food 
= these beings are produced; by food, when born, they 
live; and into food they enter at their death. 
Having perceived this, he went again to his father 
Varuza, saying: ‘Sir, teach me Brahman. He said 
to him: ‘Try to know Brahman by penance, for 
penance is (the means of knowing) Brahman.’ 
He performed penance. Having performed 
penance— 

1 The same paragraph, as before (II, 1), occurs at the end of the 
Ka//a-upanishad, and elsewhere. 

III VALLI, 5 ANUVAKA. 65 

THIRD ANUVAKA. 

He perceived that breath" is Brahman, for from ` 

breath these beings are born; by breath, when born, 
they live; into breath they enter at their death. 

Having perceived this, he went again to his father 
Varuza, saying : ‘Sir, teach me Brahman.’ He said 
to him: ‘Try to know Brahman by penance, for 
penance is (the means of knowing) Brahman.’ 

He performed penance. Having performed 
penance— | 

FOURTH ANUVAKA. 

He perceived that mind (manas) is Brahman, for 
from mind these beings are born; by mind, when 
born, they live; into mind they enter at their death. __ 

Having perceived this, he went again to his father 
Varuza, saying : ‘Sir,teach me Brahman.’ He said 
to him: ‘Try to know Brahman by penance, for 
penance is (the means of knowing) Brahman.’ 

He performed penance. Having performed 
penance — 

FirtH ANUVAKA. 

He perceived that understanding (vigZana) was 
Brahman; for from understanding these beings are 
born; by understanding, when born, they live; into 
understanding they enter at their death. 

Having perceived this, he went again to his father 
Varuza, saying: *Sir, teach me Brahman.’ He said 
to him: ‘Try to know Brahman by penance, for 
penance is (the means of knowing) Brahman.’ 

ra RAT TT Rp 

! Or life; see Brzh. Ar. Up. IV, 1, 3. 
[15] F 

66 TAITTIRIYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

He performed penance. Having performed 
penance — cas 

e 
om 
- 

SIXTH ANUVAKA. 
"He perceived that bliss is Brahman, for from bliss 

~~ these beings are born; by bliss, when born, they 

live; into bliss they enter at their death. 

This is the knowledge of Bhzzgu and Varuza}, 
exalted in the highest heaven (in the heart).. 
who knows this becomes exalted, becomes rich in 
food, and able to eat food (healthy), becomes great 
by offspring, cattle, and the splendour of his know- 
ledge (of Brahman), great by fame. 

SEVENTH ANUVAKA. 

Let him never abuse food, that is the rule. 

Breath is.food?, the body eats the food. The 
body rests on breath, breath rests on the body. This 
is the food resting on food. He who knows this 
food resting on food’, rests exalted, becomes rich 
in food, and able to eat food (healthy), becomes 
great by offspring, cattle, and the splendour of his 
knowledge (of Brahman), great by fame. 

EIGHTH ANUVvAKEKA. 
Let him.never shun food, that is the rule. Water 

UU a i iu 

is food, the light eats “the food. The light rests on 
water, water rests on light. This is the food resting 

1 Taught by Varuza, learnt by Bhrzgu V4ruzi. 

? Because, like food, it is inside the body. 

3 The interdependence of food and breath. The object of this . 
discussion is to show (see Sankara’s commentary, p. 135) that the 
world owes its origin to there being an enjoyer (subject) and what is 
enjoyed (object), but that this distinction does not exist in the Self. 

III VALLI, IO ANUVAKA, 2. 67 

on food!, He who knows this food resting on food, 
rests exalted, becomes rich in food, and able to eat 
food (healthy), becomes great by offspring, cattle, and 
the splendour of his knowledge (of Brahman), great 
by fame. 

NINTH ANUVAKA. 

Let him acquire much food, that is the rule. Earth 
is food, the ether eats the Tood. The ether rests 
on the earth, the earth rests on the ether. /lhis is 
the food resting on food. He who knows this food 
resting on food, rests exalted, becomes rich in food, 
and able to eat food (healthy), becomes great by 
offspring, cattle, and the splendour of his knowledge 
(of Brahman), great by fame. - 

TENTH ANUVAKA. 
1. Let him never turn away (a stranger) from his 

house, that is the rule. Therefore a man should 
by all means acquire much food, for (good) people 
say (to the stranger): ' There is food ready for him.’ 
If he gives food amply, food is given to him amply. 
If he gives food fairly, food is given to him fairly. 
If he gives food meanly, food is given to him 
meanly. 

2. He who knows this, (recognises and worships 
Brahman?) as possession in speech, as acquisition 
and possession in up-breathing (praza) and down- 
breathing (apana); as action in the hands; as walking 
in the feet; as voiding in the anus. ‘These are the 
human recognitions (of Brahman as manifested in 
human actions) Next follow the recognitions (of 

1 The interdependence of water and light. 
2 Brahmana upasanaprakarah. 

F2 

68 TAITTIRIYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

Brahman) with reference to the Devas, viz. as satis- 
faction in rain; as power in lightning; | 

3. As glory in cattle; as light in the stars; as 
procreation, immortality, and bliss in the member ; 
as everything in the ether. Let him worship that 
(Brahman) as support, and he becomes supported. 
Let him worship that (Brahman) as greatness (mahaZ), 
and he becomes great. Let him worship that (Brah- 
man) as mind, and he becomes endowed with mind. 

4. Let him worshi n) as adoration, 

and all desires fall IT down | before him. in-adoration. 
Let him worship. that t (Brahman) as. Brahman, and 

oo cag ar Atos" T- 

he will become "possessed of . Let him 
worship this as the absorption of the gods! in Brah- 
man, and the enemies who hate him will die all 
around him, all around him will die the foes whom 
he does not love. 
He? who is this (Brahman) in man, and he who is 
that (Brahman) i in the sun, both ‘are one — 

2 pice et hy 

world. after reaching | ‘and comprehending the Self 
which consists of food; the-Self-which consists of 
breath, the Self which consists of mind, the Self 
which consists of understanding, the Self which con- 
sists of bliss, enters and takes possession of these 
worlds, and having as much food as he likes, and 
assuming as many forms as he likes, he sits down 
singing this Saman (of Brahman): 'Havu, havu, 

havu! 

1 Cf. Kaush. Up. II, 12. Here the absorption of the gods of fire, 
sun, moon, and lightning in the god of the air (vayu) is described. 
Sankara adds the god of rain, and shows that air is identical with 
ether. 

? Cf. II, 8. 

III VALLI, IO ANUVAKA, 6. 69 

6. ‘Iam food (object), I am food, I am food! I am 
the eater of food (subject), I am the eater of food, 
I am the eater of food! I am the poet (who joins 
the two together), I am the poet, I am the poet! 
I am the first-born of the Right (zzta). Before the 
Devas I was in the centre of all that is immortal. 
He who gives me away, he alone preserves me: him 
who eats food, I eat as food. 

‘I overcome the whole world, I, endowed with 
golden light’. He who knows this, (attains all this).’ 
This is the Upanishad ?. 

1 [f we read suvarzagyotil. The commentator reads suvar za 
gyotiA, i.e. the light is like the sun. 

2 After the Anukramami follows the same invocation as in the 
beginning of the third Valli, * May it protect us both,’ &c. 

e St NL PA Ao 
A at cf Tre 1s 
(UNIVERSITY | 

CAE GRA 

paa » Google


# BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD

BRJIHADARANYAKA- 
UPANISHAD. 

paa » Google 

BRJHADARANYAK A- 
UPANISHAD. 

FIRST ADHYAYA: 
First BRAHMANA. 

1. Verily? the dawn is the head of the horse which 
is fit for sacrifice, the sun its eye, the wind its breath, 
the mouth the Vaisvanara? fire, the year the body 
of the sacrificial horse. Heaven is the back, the sky 
the belly, the earth the chest*, the quarters the two 
sides, the intermediate quarters the ribs, the members 
the seasons, the joints the months and half-months, 
the feet days and nights, the bones the stars, the 

1 It is the third Adhyaya of the Arazyaka, but the first of the 
Upanishad. 

? This Brahmaza is found in the Madhyandina text of the Sata- 
patha, ed. Weber, X, 6, 4. Its object is there explained by the 
commentary to be the meditative worship of Virag, as represented 
metaphorically in the members of the horse. Sayaza dispenses with 
its explanation, because, as part of the Brzhadaranyaka-upanishad, 
according to the Kazva-sakha, it had been enlarged on by the 
Varttikakara and explained. 

* Agni or fire, as pervading everything, as universally present 
in nature. 

t Pagasya is doubtful. The commentator suggests pad-asya, the 
place of the feet, i. e. the hoof. The Greek Pegasos, or immo: mnyoi, 
throws no light on the word. "The meaning of hoof would hardly 
be appropriate here, and I prefer chest on account of uras in 
I, 2, 3. Deussen (Vedanta, p. 8) translates, die Erde seiner Fusse 
Schemel; but we want some part of the horse. 

74 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

flesh the clouds. The half-digested food is the sand, 
the rivers the bowels’, the liver and the lungs? the 
mountains, the hairs the herbs and trees. As the 
sun rises, it is the forepart, as it sets, the hindpart of 
the horse. When the horse shakes itself’, then it 
lightens; when it kicks, it thunders; when it makes 
water, it rains; voice‘ is its voice. 

2. Verily Day arose after the horse as the (golden) 
vessel5, called Mahiman (greatness), which (at the 
sacrifice) is placed before the horse. Its place is in 
the Eastern sea, The Night arose after the horse 
as the (silver) vessel, called Mahiman, which (at the 
sacrifice) is placed behind the horse. Its place is in 
the Western sea. Verily, these two vessels (or great- 
nesses) arose to be on each side of the horse. 

As a racer he carried the Devas, as a stallion the 
Gandharvas, as a runner the Asuras, as a horse men. 
The sea is its kin, the sea is its birthplace. 

SECOND BRAHMANA S. 

I. In the beginning.there was nothing (to be per- 

1 Guda, being in the plural, is explained by nadi, channel, and ` 
sirahk; for we ought to read sira or hirdgrahame for sira, p. 22, l. 16. 

? KlomanaZ is explained as a plurale tantum (nityam bahuva- 
kanam ekasmin), and being described as a lump below the heart, 
on the opposite side of the liver, it is supposed to be the lungs. 

5 «When it yawns.’ Anandagiri. 

* Voice is sometimes used as a personified power of thunder 
and other aerial sounds, and this is identified with the voice of the 
horse. 

5 Two vessels, to hold the sacrificial libations, are placed at the 
Asvamedha before and behind the horse, the former made of gold, 
the latter made of silver. They are called Mahiman in the technical 
language of the ceremonial. The place in which these vessels are 
set, is called their yoni. Cf. Vagas. Samhita XXIII, 2. 

* Called the Agni-brahmaza, and intended to teach the origin of 

I ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, 3. | 75 

ceived) here whatsoever. By Death indeed all this 
was concealed,—by hunger; for death is hunger. 
Death (the first being) thought, ' Let me have a 
body. Then he moved about, worshipping. From 
him thus worshipping water was produced. And he 
said: ‘Verily, there appeared to me, while I wor- 
shipped (arate), water (ka). This is why water is 
called ar-ka!. Surely there is water (or pleasure) 
for him who thus knows the reason why water is 
called arka. 

2. Verily water is arka. And what was there as 
the froth of the water, that was hardened, and became 
the earth. On that earth he (Death) rested, and from 
him, thus resting and heated, Agni (Virag) proceeded, 
full of light. 

3. That being divided itself threefold, Aditya (the 
sun) as the third, and Vayu (the air) as the third*. 
That spirit (praza)? became threefold. The head was 
the Eastern quarter,and the arms this and that quarter 

Agni, the fire, which is here used for the Horse-sacrifice. It is 
found in the Satapatha-brahmaza, Madhyandina-sakha X, 6, 5, and 
there explained as a description of Hirazyagarbha. 

1 We ought to read arkasyarkatvam, as in Poley’s edition, or 
ark-kasyarkkatvam, to make the etymology still clearer. The com- 
mentator takes arka in the sense of fire, more especially the sacri- 
ficial fire employed at the Horse-sacrifice. It may be so, but the 
more natural interpretation seems to me to take arka here as water, 
from which indirectly fire is produced. From water springs the 
earth; on that earth he (Mrztyu or Pragapati) rested, and from 
him, while resting there, fire (Virag) was produced. That fire 
assumed three forms, fire, sun, and air, and in that threefold form 
it is called praza, spirit. 

2 As Agni, Vayu, and Aditya. 

$ Here Agni (Virag) is taken as representing the fire of the altar 
at the Horse-sacrifice, which is called Arka. The object of the 
whole Brahmaza was to show the origin and true character of that 
fire (arka). 

76 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

(i.e. the N. E. and S. E., on the left and right sides). 
Then the tail was the Western quarter, and the two 
legs this and that quarter (i.e. the N.W. and S.W.) 
The sides were the Southern and Northern quarters, 
the back heaven, the belly the sky, the dust the 
earth. Thus he (Mvztyu, as arka) stands firm in 
the water, and he who knows this stands firm wher- 
ever he goes. 

4. He desired!, ‘Let a second body be born of 
me, and he (Death or Hunger) embraced Speech 
in his mind. Then the seed became the year. 
Before that time there was no year. Speech? bore 
him so long as a year, and after that time sent 
him forth. Then when he was born, he (Death) 
opened his mouth, as if to swallow him. He cried 
Bhaz! and that became speech? m 

5. He thought, ‘If I kill him, I shall have but little 
food.” He therefore brought forth by that speech 
and by that body (the year) all whatsoever exists, 
the A74, the Yagus, the Saman, the metres, the 
sacrifices, men, and animals. 

And whatever he (Death) brought forth, that 
he resolved to eat (ad)  Verily because he eats 
everything, therefore is Aditi (Death) called Aditi. 
He who thus knows why Aditi is called Aditi, 
becomes an eater of everything, and everything 
becomes his food‘. 

1 He is the same as what was before called mrztyu, death, who, 
after becoming self-conscious, produced water, earth, fire, &c. He 
now wishes for a second body, which is the year, or the annual 
sacrifice, the year being dependent on the sun (Aditya). 

2 The commentator understands the father, instead of Speech, the 
mother. 

3 The interjectional theory. 

* All these are merely fanciful etymologies of asvamedha and arka. 

I ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, 7. 77 

6. He desired to sacrifice again with a greater 
sacrifice. He toiled and performed penance. And 
while he toiled and performed penance, glorious 
power' went out of him. Verily glorious power 
means the senses (praza) Then when the senses 
had gone out, the body took to swelling (sva-yitum), 
and mind was in the body. 

7. He desired that this body should be fit for sacri- 
fice (medhya), and that he should be embodied by it. 
Then he became a horse (asva), because it swelled 
-(asvat), and was fit for sacrifice (medhya); and this 
is why the horse-sacrifice is called Asva-medha. 

Verily he who knows him thus, knows the Asva- 
medha. Then, letting the horse free, he thought?, 
and at the end of a year he offered it up for himself, 
while he gave up the (other) animals to the deities. 
Therefore the sacrificers offered up the purified 
horse belonging to Pragapati, (as dedicated) to all 
the deities. 

Verily the shining sun is the Asvamedha-sacri- 
fice, and his body is the year; Agni is the sacrificial 
fire (arka), and these worlds are his bodies. These 
two are the sacrificial fire and the Asvamedha-sacri- 
fice, and they are again one deity, viz. Death. He 
(who knows this) overcomes another death, death 
does not reach him, death is his Self, he becomes 

one of those deities. 

1 Or glory (senses) and power. Comm. 
* He considered himself as the horse. Roer. 

78 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

Tnuinp BrRAHMANA 1, 

I. There were two kinds of descendants of Prage- 
pati, the Devas and the Asuras’. Now the Devas 
were indeed the younger, the Asuras the elder ones’. 
The Devas, who were struggling in these worlds, 
said: ‘Well, let us overcome the Asuras at the sacri- 
fices (the Gyotish¢oma) by means of the udgitha.’ 

2. They said to speech (V&Z): ‘Do thou sing out 
for us (the udgitha)' ‘Yes, said speech, and sang 
(the udgitha). Whatever delight there is in speech, 
that she obtained for the Devas by singing (the three 
pavamanas); but that she pronounced well (in the 
other nine pavamanas), that was for herself. The 
Asuras knew: 'Verily, through this singer they will 
overcome us. They therefore rushed at the singer 
and pierced her with evil. That evil which consists 
in saying what is bad, that is that evil. 

3. Then they (the Devas) said to breath (scent) : 
‘Do thou sing out for us.’ ‘Yes, said breath, and 
sang. Whatever delight there is in breath (smell), 
that he obtained for the Devas by singing; but that 
he smelled well, that was for himself. The Asuras 
knew: ‘Verily, through this singer they will over- 
come us. They therefore rushed at the singer, and 

' Called the Udgitha-brahmaza. In the Madhyandina-sakha, 
the Upanishad, which consists of six adhy&yas, begins with this 
Brahmaza (cf. Weber's edition, p. 1047; Commentary, p. 1109). 

? The Devas and Asuras are explained by the commentator 
as the senses, inclining either to sacred or to worldly objects, to 
good or evil. 

* According to the commentator, the Devas were the less 
numerous and less strong, the Asuras the more numerous and 
more powerful. 

I ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, 7. 79 

pierced him with evil. That evil which consists in 
smelling what is bad, that is that evil. 

4. Then they said to the eye: ‘ Do thou sing out 
for us. ‘Yes,’ said the eye, and sang. Whatever 
delight there is in the eye, that he obtained for the 
Devas by singing; but that he saw well, that was 
for himself. The Asuras knew: ‘ Verily, through this 
singer they will overcome us. They therefore rushed 
at the singer, and pierced him with evil. That evil 
which consists in seeing what is bad, that is that evil. 

5. Then they said to the ear: ' Do thou sing out 
for us. ‘Yes, said the ear, and sang. Whatever 
delight there is in the ear, that he obtained for the 
Devas by singing; but that he heard well, that was 
for himself. The Asuras knew: 'Verily, through this 
singer they will overcome us.’ They therefore rushed 
at the singer, and pierced him with evil. That evil 
which consists in hearing what is bad, that is that evil. 

6. Then they said to the mind: ‘Do thou sing out 
for us. ‘Yes, said the mind, and sang. Whatever 
delight there is in the mind, that he obtained for the 
Devas by singing; but that he thought well, that 
was for himself. The Asuras knew: ‘Verily, through 
this singer they will overcome us. They therefore 
rushed at the singer, and pierced him with evil. That 
evil which consists in thinking what is bad, that is 
that evil. | 

Thus they overwhelmed these deities with evils, 
thus they pierced them with evil. 

7. Then they said to the breath in the mouth!: 
‘Do thou sing for us.’ ‘Yes, said the breath, and 
sang. The Asuras knew: ‘Verily, through this singer 

! This is the chief or vital breath, sometimes called mukhya. 

80 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

they will overcome us, They therefore rushed at 
him and pierced him with evil. Now as a ball of 
earth will be scattered when hitting a stone, thus 
they perished, scattered in all directions. Hence 
the Devas rose, the Asuras fell He who knows 
this, rises by his self, and the enemy who hates 
him falls. z 

8. Then they (the Devas) said: ‘Where was he 
then who thus stuck to us??’ It was (the breath) 
within the mouth (asye 'ntar?), and therefore called 
Ayasya; he was the sap (rasa) of the limbs (anga), 
and therefore called Angirasa. 

9. That deity was called Dur, because Death was 
far (duran) from it. From him who knows this, 
Death is far off. 

IO. That deity, after having taken away the evil 
of those deities, viz. death, sent it to where the 
end of the quarters of the earth is. There he 
deposited their sins. "Therefore let no one go to 
a man, let no one go to the end (of the quarters 
of the earth?) that he may not meet there with 
evil, with death. 

II. That deity, after having taken away the evil of 
those deities, viz. death, carried them beyond death. 

12. He carried speech across first. When speech 
had become freed from death, it became (what it 
had been before) Agni (fire)) That Agni, after 
having stepped beyond death, shines. 

13. Then he carried breath (scent) across. When 
breath had become freed from death, it became 

1 Asakta from safig, to embrace; cf. Rig-veda I, 33, 3. Here 
it corresponds to the German anhanglich. 

? See Deussen, Vedanta, p. 359. 

* 'To distant people. 

I ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, I8. 81 

Vayu (air). That Vayu, after having stepped beyond 
death, blows. 

14. Then he carried the eye across. When the 
eye had become freed from death, it became Aditya 
(the sun). That Aditya, after having stepped beyond 
death, burns. 

IS. Then he carried the ear across. When the 
ear had become freed from death, it became the 
quarters (space). These are our quarters (space), 
which .have stepped beyond death. 

16. Then he carried the mind across. When the 
mind had become freed from death, it became the 
moon (Aandramas). That moon, after having stepped 
beyond death, shines. Thus does that deity .carry 
him, who knows this, across death. 

17. Then breath (vital), by singing, obtained for 
himself eatable food. For whatever food is eaten, 
is eaten by breath alone, and in it breath rests’. 

The Devas said : ' Verily, thus far, whatever food 
there is, thou hast by singing acquired it for thyself. 
Now therefore give us a share in that food.’ He 
said: ‘You there, enter into me.’ They said Yes, and 
entered all into him. Therefore whatever food is 
eaten by breath, by it the other senses are satisfied. 

18. If a man knows this, then his own relations 
come to him in the same manner; he becomes their 
supporter, their chief leader, their strong ruler?. And 
if ever any one tries to oppose? one who is possessed 
of such knowledge among his own relatives, then he 

' This is done by the last nine Pavamanas, while the first three 
were used for obtaining the reward common to all the prazas. 

? Here annada is well explained by anamayavin, and vyadhirahita, 
free from sickness, strong. 

? Read pratiprati4 ; see Poley, and Weber, p. 1180. 

[15] | G 

82 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

will not be able to support his own belongings. But 
he who follows the man who is possessed of such 
knowledge, and who with his permission wishes to 
support those whom he has to support, he indeed 
will be able to support his own belongings. 

I9. He was called Ayasya Angirasa, for he is the 
sap (rasa) of the limbs (anga). Verily, breath is 
the sap of the limbs. Yes, breath is the sap of the 
limbs. Therefore from whatever limb breath goes 
away, that limb withers, for breath verily is the sap 
of the limbs. 

20. He (breath) is: also Brzhaspati, for speech is 
Bzzhati ( Rig-veda), and he is her lord; therefore he 
is Brzhaspati. 

21. He (breath) is also Brahmazaspati, for speech 
is Brahman (Yagur-veda), and he is her lord; there- 
fore he is Brahmazaspati. 

He (breath) is also Saman (the Udgitha), for 
speech, is Saman (Sama-veda), and that is both 
speech (sa) and breath (ama)'. This is why Saman 
is called Saman. 

22. Or because he is equal (sama) toa grub, equal 
to a gnat, equal to an elephant, equal to these three 
worlds, nay, equal to this universe, therefore he is 
Saman. He who thus knows this Saman, obtains 
union and oneness with Saman. 

23. He (breath) is Udgitha?. Breath verily is Ut, 
for by breath this universe is upheld (uttabdha) ; and 
speech is Githa, song. And because he is ut and 
githa, therefore he (breath) is Udgitha. 

! Cf. Khand. Up. V, 2, 6. 
2 Not used here in the sense of song or hymn, but as an act of 
worship connected with the Saman. Comm. 

I ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, 27. 83 

24. And thus Brahmadatta Aaikitaneya (the 
grandson of Aikitana), while taking Soma (ragan), 
said: ‘May this Soma strike my head off, if Ayasya 
Angirasa sang another Udgitha than this. He sang 
it indeed as speech and breath.’ 

25. He who knows what is the property of this 
Saman, obtains property. Now verily its property 
is tone only. Therefore let a priest, who is going to 
perform the sacrificial work of a Sama-singer, desire 
that his voice may have a good tone, and let him 
perform the sacrifice with a voice that is in good 
tone. "Therefore people (who want a priest) for a 
sacrifice, look out for one who possesses a good 
voice, as for one who possesses property. He who 
thus knows what is the property of that Saman, 
obtains property. 

26. He who knows what is the gold of that 
S4man, obtains gold. Now verily its gold is tone 
only He who thus knows what is the gold of that 
Saman, obtains gold. 

27. He who knows what is the support of that 
Saman, he is supported. Now verily its support 
is speech only. For, as supported in speech, that 
breath is sung as that Saman. Some say the 
support is in food. 

Next follows the Abhyaroha! (the ascension) of 
the Pavamana verses. Verily the Prastotvz begins 
to sing the Saman, and when he begins, then let him 
(the sacrificer) recite these (three Yagus-verses): 

‘Lead me from the unreal to the real! Lead me 

! "The ascension is a ceremony by which the performer reaches 
the gods, or becomes a god. It consists in the recitation of three 
Yagus, and is here enjoined to take place when the Prastotr? priest 
begins to sing his hymn. 

G 2 

84 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD, 

from darkness to light! Lead me from death to 
immortality!’ 

Now when he says, ‘ Lead me from the unreal to 
the real, the unreal is verily death, the real immor- 
tality. He therefore says, ‘Lead me from death to 
immortality, make me immortal.’ 

When he says, ‘Lead me from darkness to light,’ 
darkness is verily death, light immortality. He 
therefore says, ‘Lead me from death to immortality, 
make me immortal.’ 

When he says, ‘Lead me from death to immor- 
tality,’ there is nothing there, as it were, hidden 
(obscure, requiring explanation) !. 

28. Next come the other Stotras with which the 
priest may obtain food for himself by singing them. 
Therefore let the sacrificer, while these Stotras are 
being sung, ask for a boon, whatever desire he may 
desire. An Udgatzz priest who knows this obtains 
by his singing whatever desire he may desire either 
for himself or for the sacrificer. This (knowledge) in- 
deed is called the conqueror of the worlds. He who 
thus knows this Saman ?, for him there is no fear of 
his not being admitted to the worlds®. 

! See Deussen, Vedanta, p. 86. 
. * He knows that he is the Praza, which Prana is the Saman. 

' hat Prana cannot be defeated by the Asuras, i.e. by the senses’ 

which are addicted to evil; it is pure, and the five senses finding 
refuge in him, recover there their original nature, fire, &c. The 
Praza is the Self of all things, also of speech (zg-yaguA-samodgitha), 
and of the Saman that has to be sung and well sung. The Praza 
pervades all creatures, and he who identifies himself with that 
Praza, obtains the rewards mentioned in the Brahmaza. Comm. 

* In connection with lokagit, lokyata is here explained, and 
may probably have been intended, as worthiness to be admitted to 
the highest world. Originally lokyata and alokyata meant right 
and wrong. See also I, 5, 17. 

I ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, 3. 85 

FovnrH BRAHMANA 1. 

I. Inthe beginning this was Self alone, in the shape 
of a person (purusha). He looking round saw nothing 
but his Self. He first said, ‘This is I;’ therefore 
he became I by name. Therefore even now, if a 
man is asked, he first says, ‘This is I, and then 
pronounces the other name which he may have. And 
because before (purva) all this, he (the Self) burnt 
down (ush) all evils, therefore he was a person 
(pur-usha). Verily he who knows this, burns down 
every one who tries to be before him. 

2. He feared, and therefore any one who is lonely 
fears. He thought, ‘As there is nothing but myself, 
why should I fear?’ Thence his fear passed away. 
For what should he have feared? Verily fear arises 
from a second only. | 

3. But he felt no delight. Therefore a man who 
is lonely feels no delight. He wished for a second. 
He was so large as man and wife together. He then 
made this his Self to fall in two (pat), and thence 
arose husband (pati) and wife (patni). Therefore : 
Yagfavalkya said: ‘We two? are thus (each of us) 

like half a shell? Therefore the void which was 

1 Called Purushavidhabrahmaza (Madhyandina-s&kha, p. 1050). — 
See Muir, Original Sanskrit Texts, vol. i, p. 24. - 

2 The Comm. explains svak by atmanaZ, of himself. But see 
Boehtlingk, Sanskrit Chrestomathie, p. 357. 

5 Roer translates : ‘Therefore was this only one half of himself, as 
a split pea is of a whole. Brzgala is a half of anything. Muir 
(Orig. Sansk. Texts, vol. i, p. 25) translates : * Yagfiavalkya has said 
that this one’s self is like the half of a split pea.’ I have translated 
the sentence according to Professor Boehtlingk's conjecture (Chres- 
tomathie, 2nd ed. p. 357), though the singular after the dual (svaZ) 
_ is irregular. 

86 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

there, is filled by the wife. He embraced her, and 
men were born. 

4. She thought, ' How can he embrace me, after 
having produced me from himself? I shall hide 
myself.’ 

She then became a cow, the other became a 
bull and embraced her, and hence cows were born. 
The one became a mare, the other a stallion; the 
one a male ass, the other a female ass. He em- 
braced her, and hence one-hoofed animals were born. 
The one became a she-goat, the other a he-goat ; 
the one became a ewe!, the other a ram. He em- 
braced her, and hence goats and sheep were born. 
And thus he created everything that exists in pairs, 
down to the ants. 

5. He knew, ‘I indeed am this creation, for I 
created all this, Hence he became the creation, 
and he who knows this lives in this his creation. 

6. Next he thus produced fire by rubbing. From 
the mouth, as from the fire-hole, and from the hands 
he created fire?, Therefore both the mouth and the 
hands are inside without hair, for the fire-hole is . 
inside without hair. 

And when they say, ‘Sacrifice to this or sacrifice to 
that god,’ each god is but his manifestation, for he 
is all gods. 

.. Now, whatever there is moist, that he created 
from seed; this is Soma. So far verily is this uni- 
verse either food or eater. Soma indeed is food, 
Agni eater. This is the highest creation of Brah- 

! The reading avir itaro, i. e. itara u, is not found in the Kazva 
text, See Boehtlingk, Chrestomathie, p. 357. 
? He blew with the mouth while he rubbed with the hands. 

I ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, 7. 87 

man, when he created the gods from his better part}, 
and when he, who was (then) mortal?, created the im- 
mortals. Therefore it was the highest creation. And 
he who knows this, lives in this his highest creation. 

7. Now all this was then undeveloped. It became 
developed by form and name, so that one could say, 
‘He, called so and so, is such a one?.’ Therefore at 
present also all this is developed by name and form, so 
that one can say, ‘He, called so and so, is such a one.’ 

He (Brahman or the Self) entered thither, to the 
very tips of the finger-nails, as a razor might be 
fitted in a razor-case, or as fire in a fire-place *. 

He cannot be seen, for, in part only, when breath- 
ing, he is breath by name; when speaking, speech 
by name; when seeing, eye by name; when hearing, 
ear by name; when thinking, mind by name. All 
these are but the names of his acts. And he who 
worships (regards) him as the one or the other, does 
not know him, for he is apart from this (when quali- 
fied) by the one or the other (predicate). Let men 
worship him as Self, for in the Self all these are one. 

This Self is the fo gh 
it one knows everything*. And as one can find 

again by footsteps what was lost, thus he who knows 
this finds glory and praise. 

! Or, when he created the best gods. 

* As man and sacrificer. Comm. 

3 The Comm. takes asau-nama as a compound, instead of idam- 
nama. Iread asau nama, he is this by name, viz. Devadatta, &c. 
Dr. Boehtlingk, who in his Chrestomathie (2nd ed. p. 31) had 
accepted the views of the Commentator, informs me that he has 
changed his view, and thinks that we should read asau nama. 

* Cf. Kaush. Br. Up. VI, r9. 

5 * As one finds lost cattle again by following their footsteps, thus 
one finds everything, if one has found out the Self? Comm. 

88 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

8. This, which is nearer to us than anything, this 
Self, is dearer than a son, dearer than wealth, dearer 
than all else. 

And if one were to say to one who declares an- 
other than the Self dear, that he will lose what is dear 
to him, very likely it would be so. Let him worship 
the Self alone as dear. He who worships the Self 
alone as dear, the object of his love will never perish !. 

9. Here they say: ‘If men think that by know- 
ledge of Brahman they will become everything, what 
then did that Brahfnan know, from whence all this 
sprang ?' 

10. Verily in the beginning this was Brahman, that 
Brahman knew (its) Self only, saying, ‘I am Brah- 
man. From it all this sprang. Thus, whatever 
Deva was awakened (so as to know Brahman), he 
indeed became that (Brahman); and the same with 

Rishis and men. The Rishi Vamadeva saw and 

understood it, singing, ‘I was Manu (moon), I was the 
sun. Therefore now also he who thus knows that 
he is Brahman, becomes all this, and even the Devas 
cannot prevent it, for he himself is their Self. 

Now if a man worships another deity, thinking 
the deity is one and he another, he does not know. 
He is like a beast for the Devas. For verily, as 
many beasts nourish a man, thus does every man 
nourish the Devas. If only one beast is taken 
away, it is not pleasant; how much more when many 
are taken! Therefore it is not pleasant to the 
Devas that men should know this. 

11. Verily in the beginning this was Brahman, one 

? On rudh, to lose, see Taitt. Samh. II, 6, 8, 5, pp. 765, 771, as 

pointed out by Dr. Boehtlingk. On isvaro (yat) tathaiva syat, see 
Boehtlingk, s. v. 

I ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, 14. 89 

only. That being one, was not strong enough. It 
created still further the most excellent Kshatra 
(power), viz. those Kshatras (powers) among the 
Devas,— Indra, Varuza, Soma, Rudra, Parganya, 
Yama, Mzityu, lsana. Therefore there is nothing 
beyond the Kshatra, and therefore at the Razasaya 
sacrifice the Brahmaza sits down below the Kshatriya. 
He confers that gloryon the Kshatra alone. But Brah- 
man is (nevertheless) the birth-place of the Kshatra. 
Therefore though a king is exalted, he sits down at 
the end (of the sacrifice) below the Brahman, as his 
birth-place. He who injures him, injures his own 
birth-place. He becomes worse, because he has 
injured one better than himself. 

12. He! was not strong enough. He created the 
Vis (people), the classes of Devas which in their 
different orders are called Vasus, Rudras, Adityas, 
Visve Devas, Maruts. 

13. He was not strong enough. He created the 
Sudra colour (caste), as Pushan (as nourisher). This 
earth verily is Pushan (the nourisher) ; for the earth 
nourishes all this whatsoever. 

14. He was not strong enough. He erected still 
further the most excellent Law (dharma). Law is 
the Kshatra (power) of the Kshatra?, therefore there 
is nothing higher than the Law. Thenceforth even 
a weak man rules a stronger with the help of the 
Law, as with the help of a king. Thus the Law is 
what is called the true. And if a man declares what 
Is true, they say he declares the Law; and if he 
declares the Law, they say he declares what is true. 
Thus both are the same. 

! Observe the change from tad, it, to sa, he. 
2 More powerful than the Kshatra or warrior caste. Comm. 

go BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

15. There are then this Brahman, Kshatra, Vis, 
and Sidra. Among the Devas that Brahman existed 
as Agni (fire) only, among men as Brahmaza, as 
Kshatriya through the (divine) Kshatriya, as Vaisya 
through the (divine) Vaisya, as SQdra through the 
(divine) .Sudra. Therefore people wish for their 
future state among the Devas through Agni (the 
sacrificial fire) only; and among men through the 
Brahmaza, for in these two forms did Brahman 
exist. 

Now if a man departs this life without having 
seen his true future life (in the Self), then that 
Self, not being known, does not receive and bless 
him, as if the Veda had not been read, or as if a 
good work had not been done. Nay, even if one 
who does not know that (Self), should perform here 
on earth some great holy work, it will perish for : 
him in the end. Let a man worship the Self only 

as his true state. If a man worships the Self only as 
his true state, his work does not = for whatever 

he desires that he gets f 

16. Now verily this Self (of the uM man) is 
the world! of all creatures. In so far as man sacri- 
fices and pours out libations, he is the world of the 
Devas ; in so far as he repeats the hymns, &c., he is 
the world of the Æzshis ; in so far as he offers cakes 
to the Fathers and tries to obtain offspring, he is the 
world of the Fathers ; in so far as he gives shelter and 
food to men, he is the world of men ; in so far as he 
finds fodder and water for the animals, he is the world 
of the animals; in so far as quadrupeds, birds, and 
even ants live in his houses, he is their world. And 
as every one wishes his own world not to be injured, 

* Is enjoyed by them all. Comm. 

I ADHYAYA, 5 BRAHMANA, I. 9I 

thus all beings wish that he who knows this should 
not be injured. Verily this is known and has been 
well reasoned. 

17. In the beginning this was Self alone, one only. 
He desired, ‘Let there be a wife for me that I may 
have offspring, and let there be wealth for me that I 
may offer sacrifices.’ Verily this is the whole desire, 
and, even if wishing for more, he would not find it. 
Therefore now also a lonely person desires, ‘Let 
there be a wife for me that I may have offspring, and 
let there be wealth for me that I may offer sacrifices.’ 
And so long as he does not obtain either of these 
things, he thinks he is incomplete. Now his com- 
pleteness (is made up as follows): mind is his self 
(husband); speech the wife; breath the child; the 
eye all worldly wealth, for he finds it with the eye; 
the ear his divine wealth, for he hears it with the 
ear. The body (atman) is his work, for with the 
body he works. This is the fivefold? sacrifice, for 
fivefold is the animal, fivefold man, fivefold all this 
whatsoever. He who knows this, obtains all this. 

FirtH BrRAHMANA 2%, 

1. ‘When the father (of creation) had produced by 
knowledge and penance (work) the seven kinds of 
food, one of his (foods) was common to all beings, 
two he assigned to the Devas, (1) 

‘Three he made for himself, one he gave to the 
animals. In it all rests, whatsoever breathes and 
breathes not. (2) 

1 Fivefold, as consisting of mind, speech, breath, eye, and ear. 
See Taitt. Up. I, 7,1. | 
2 Madhyandina text, p. 1054. 

92 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

‘Why then do these not perish, though they are 
always eaten? He who knows this imperishable 
one, he eats food with his face. (3) 

‘He goes even to the Devas, he lives on 
strength.’ (4) 

2. When it is said, that ‘the father produced by 
knowledge and penance the seven kinds of food, it 
is clear that (it was he who) did so. When it is 
said, that ‘one of his (foods) was common,’ then that 
is that common food of his which is eaten. He who 
worships (eats) that (common food), is not removed 
from evil, for verily that food is mixed (property)?. 
When it is-said, that ‘two he assigned to the Devas,’ 
that is the huta, which is sacrificed in fire, and the 
prahuta, which is given away at a sacrifice. But 
they also say, the new-moon and full-moon sacrifices 
are here intended, and therefore one should not offer 
them as an ishZ or with a wish. 

When it is said, that ‘one he gave to animals,’ 
that is milk. For in the beginning (in their infancy) 
both men and animals live on milk. And therefore 
they either make a new-born child lick ghvzta 
(butter), or they make it take the breast. And 
they call a new-born creature 'atzzzada, i.e. not 
eating herbs. When it is said, that ‘in it all rests, 
whatsoever breathes and breathes not,’ we see that 
all this, whatsoever breathes and breathes not, rests 
and depends on milk. 

And when it is said (in another Brahmaza), that 
a man who sacrifices with milk a whole year ?, over- 
comes death again, let him not think so. No, on 

! [t belongs to all beings. 
? This would imply 360 sacrificial gays, each with two oblations, 
i. e. 720 oblations. 

I ADHYAYA, 5 BRAHMANA, 3. 93 

the very day on which he sacrifices, on that day he 
overcomes death again; for he who knows this, 
offers to the gods the entire food (viz. milk). 

When it is said, ‘Why do these not perish, though 
they are always eaten, we answer, Verily, the Person 
is the imperishable, and he produces that food agamn 
and again}, 

When it is said, ‘He who knows this imperishable 
one, then, verily, the Person is the imperishable 
one, for he produces this food by repeated thought, 
and whatever he does not work by his works, that 
perishes. 

When it is said, that ‘he eats food with his face,’ 
then face means the mouth, he eats it with his 
mouth. 

When it is said, that ‘he goes even to the Devas, 
he lives on strength,’ that is meant as praise. 

3. When it is said, that ‘he made three for him- 
self, that means that he made mind, speech, and 
breath for himself. As people say, ‘My mind was 
elsewhere, I did not see; my mind was elsewhere, 
I did not hear,’ it is clear that a man sees with his: 
mind and hears with his mind?. Desire, representa- 
tion, doubt, faith, want of faith, memory?, forgetful- 
ness, shame, reflexion, fear, all this is mind. There- 
fore even if a man is touched on the back, he knows 
it through the mind. 

Whatever sound there is, that is speech. Speech 
indeed is intended for an end or object, it is nothing 
by itself. 

! Those who enjoy the food, become themselves creators. Comm. 
2 See Deussen, Vedanta, p. 358. 
* Firmness, strength. Comm. 

94 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

The up-breathing, the down-breathing, the back- 
breathing, the out-breathing, the on-breathing, all 
that is breathing is breath (praza) only. Verily 
that Self consists of it; that Self consists of speech, 
mind, and breath. 

4. These are the three worlds: earth is speech, 
sky mind, heaven breath. 

5. These are the three Vedas: the Rig-veda is 
speech, the Yagur-veda mind, the SAma-veda breath. 

6. These are the Devas, Fathers, and men: the 
Devas are speech, the Fathers mind, men breath. 

7. These are father, mother, and child: the father 
is mind, the mother speech, the child breath. 

8. These are what is known, what is to be known, 
and what is unknown. 

What is known, has the form of speech, for speech 
is known. Speech, having become this, protects 
man }, 

9. What is to be known, has the form of mind, 
for mind is what is to be known. Mind, having 
become this, protects man. 

10. What is unknown, has the form of breath, for 
breath is unknown. Breath, having become this, 
protects man ?, 

11, Of that speech (which is the food of Praga- 
pati) earth is the body, light the form, viz. this fire. 
And so far as speech extends, so far extends the 
earth, so far extends fire. 

12. Next, of this mind heaven is the body, light 
the form, viz. this sun. And so far as this mind 

1 «The food (speech), having become known, can be consumed.’ 
Comm. 

2 This was adhibhautika, with reference to bhutas, beings. Next 
follows the adhidaivika, with reference to the devas, gods. Comm. 

I ADHYAYA, 5 BRAHMANA, I6. 95 

extends, so far extends heaven, so far extends the 
sun. If they (fire and sun) embrace each other, then 
wind is born, and that is Indra, and he is without a 
rival. Verily a second is a rival, and he who knows 
this, has no rival. 

13. Next, of this breath water is the body, light 
the form, viz. this moon. And so far as this breath 
extends, so far extends water, so far extends the 
moon. 

These are all alike, all endless. And he who wor- 
ships them as finite, obtains a finite world, but he who 
worships them as infinite, obtains an infinite world. 

I4. That Prazgapati is the year, and he consists of 
sixteen digits. The nights! indeed are his fifteen 
digits, the fixed point? his sixteenth digit. He is 
increased and decreased by the nights. Having on 
the new-moon night entered with the sixteenth part 
into everything that has life, he is thence born again 
in the morning. Therefore let no one cut off the life 
of any living thing on that night, not even of a lizard, 
in honour (pugartham) of that deity. 

15. Now verily that Pragapati, consisting of six- 
teen digits, who is the year, is the same as a man 
who knows this. His wealth constitutes the fifteen 
digits, his Self the sixteenth digit. He is increased 
and decreased by that wealth. His Self is the nave, 
his wealth the felly. Therefore even if he loses 
everything, if he lives but with his Self, people say, 
he lost the felly (which can be restored again). 

16. Next there are verily three worlds, the world 
of men, the world of the Fathers, the world of the 
Devas. The world of men can be gained by a son 

! Meant for nychthemera. | 
? When he is just invisible at the new moon. 

96 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

only, not by any other work. By sacrifice the world 
of the Fathers, by knowledge the world of the Devas 
is gained. The world of the Devas is the best of 
worlds, therefore they praise knowledge. 

17. Next follows the handing over. When a man 
thinks he is going to depart, he says to his son: 
‘Thou art Brahman (the Veda, so far as acquired by 
the father); thou art the sacrifice (so far as performed 
by the father); thou art the world.’ The son answers: 
‘I am Brahman, I am the sacrifice, I am the world.’ 
Whatever has been learnt (by the father) that, taken 
as one, is Brahman. Whatever sacrifices there are, 
they, taken as one, are the sacrifice. Whatever 
worlds there are, they, taken as one, are the world. 
Verily here ends this (what has to be done by a 
father, viz. study, sacrifice, &c.) ‘He (the son), being 
all this, preserved me from this world}, thus he 
thinks. Therefore they call a son who is instructed 
(to do all this), a world-son (lokya), and therefore 
they instruct him. 

When a father who knows this, departs this world, 
then he enters into his son together with his own 
spirits (with speech, mind, and breath). If there is 
anything done amiss by the father, of all that the son 
delivers him, and therefore he is called Putra, son?. 
By help of his son the father stands firm in this 
world?. ‘Then these divine immortal spirits (speech, 
mind, and breath) enter into him. 

1 Roer seems to have read saznaya, ‘all this multitude. I read, 
etan ma sarvam sann ayam ito 'bhunagad iti. 

? The Comm. derives putra from pu (pfir), to fill, and tra (tra), to 
deliver, a deliverer who fills the holes left by the father, a stop- 
gap. Others derive it from put, a hell, and tra, to protect; cf. 
Manu IX, 138. 

> «The manushya-loka, not the pitrz-loka and deva-loka.’ Comm. 

I ADHYAYA, 5 BRAHMANA, 2I. 97 . 

18. From the earth and from fire, divine speech 
enters into him. And verily that is divine speech 
whereby, whatever he says, comes to be. 

19. From heaven and the sun, divine mind enters 
into him. And verily that is divine mind whereby 
he becomes joyful, and grieves no more. 

20. From water and the moon, divine breath 
(spirit) enters into him. And verily that is divine 
breath which, whether moving or not moving, does 
not tire, and therefore does not perish. He who 
knows this, becomes the Self of all beings. As that 
deity (Hirazyagarbha) is, so does he become. And 
as all beings honour that deity (with sacrifice, &c.), 
so do all beings honour him who knows this. 

Whatever grief these creatures suffer, that is 
all one! (and therefore disappears). Only what is 
good approaches him ; verily, evil does not approach 
the Devas. 

21. Next follows the consideration of the observ- 
ances? (acts). Pragapati created the actions (active 
senses) When they had been created, they strove 
among themselves. Voice held, I shall speak; the 
eye held, I shall see; the ear held, I shall hear; 
and thus the other actions too, each according to its 
own act. Death, having become weariness, took 
them and seized them. Having seized them, death 
held them back (from their work). Therefore 
speech grows weary, the eye grows weary, the ear 
grows weary. But death did not seize the central 
breath. Then the others tried to know him, and 

! ‘Individuals suffer, because one causes grief to another. But 
in the universal soul, where all individuals are one, their sufferings 
are neutralised.’ Comm. 

2 The upasana or meditative worship. 

[15] H 

98 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

said: ‘Verily, he is the best of us, he who, whether 
moving or not, does not tire and does not perish. 
Well, let all of us assume his form.’ Thereupon 
they all assumed his form, and therefore they are 
called after him ‘breaths’ (spirits). 

In whatever family there is a man who knows 
this, they call that family after his name. And he 
who strives with one who knows this, withers away 
and finally dies. So far with regard to the body. 

22. Now with regard to the deities. 

Agni (fire) held, I shall burn; Aditya (the sun) 
held, I shall warm; Aandramas (the moon) held, 
I shall shine; and thus also the other deities, each 
according to the deity. And as it was with the 
central breath among the breaths, so it was with 
Vayu, the wind among those deities. The other 
deities fade, not Vayu. Vayu is the deity that 
never Sets. 

23. And here there is this Sloka: 

‘He from whom the sun rises, and into whom it 
sets’ (he verily rises from the breath, and sets in 
the breath) 

‘Him the Devas made the law, he only is te-day, 
and he to-morrow also’ (whatever these Devas de- 
termined then, that they perform to-day also’). 

Therefore let a man perform one observance only, 
let him breathe up and let him breathe down, that 
the evil death may not reach him. And when he 
performs it, let him try to finish it. Then he ob- 
tains through it union and oneness SR that deity 
(with praza). 

! The praza-vrata and vayu-vrata. Comm. 

I ADHYAYA, 6 BRAHMANA, 3. 99 

SixtH BRAHMANA!, 

1. Verily this is a triad, name, form, and work. 
Of these names, that which is called Speech is the 
Uktha (hymn, supposed to mean also origin), for 
from it all names arise, It is their Saman (song, 
supposed to mean also sameness), for it is the same 
as all names. It is their Brahman (prayer, supposed 
to mean also support), for it supports all names. 

2. Next, of the forms, that which is called Eye is 
the Uktha (hymn), for from it all forms arise. It is 
their Saman (song), for it is the same as all forms. It 
is their Brahman (prayer), for it supports all forms. 

3. Next, of the works, that which is called Body is 
the Uktha (hymn), for from it all works arise. It is 
their Saman (song), for it is the same as all works. It 
is their Brahman (prayer), for it supports all works. 

That being a triad is one, viz. this Self; and the 
Self, being one, is that triad. This is the immortal, 
covered by the true. Verily breath is the immortal, 
name and form are the true, and by them the im- 
mortal is covered. 

1 Madhyandina text, p. 1058. 

100 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

SECOND ADHYAYA). 

‘First BRAHMANA2, 

I. There? was formerly the proud Gargya Balaki¢, 
a man of great reading. He said to AgAtasatru of 
Kasi, ‘Shall I tell you Brahman?’ . Agatasatru said: 
'We give a thousand (cows) for that speech (of 
yours), for verily all people run away, saying, Ganaka 
(the king of Mithila) is our father (patron)*. 

2. Gargya said: ‘The person that is in the sun °, 
that I adore as Brahman.  Agatasatru said to him: 
‘No, no! Do not speak to me on this. I adore him 

1 Madhyandina text, p. 1058. 

3 Whatever has been taught to the end of the third (according 
to the counting of the Upanishad, the first) Adhyaya, refers to 
avidya, ignorance. Now, however, vidya, the highest knowledge, 
is to be taught, and this is done, first of all, by a dialogue between 
Gargya Drz?ptabalaki and king Agatasatru, the former, though a 
Brahmaza, representing the imperfect, the latter, though a Kshatriya, 
the perfect knowledge of Brahman. While Gargya worships the 
Brahman as the sun, the moon, &c., as limited, as active and passive, 
- Agatasatru knows the Brahman as the Self. 

* Compare with this the fourth Adhyaya of the Kaushitaki- 
upanishad, Sacred Books of the East, vol i, p. 300; Gough, 
Philosophy of the Upanishads, p. 144. 

* Son of Balaka, of the race of the Gargyas. 

5 Ganaka, known as a wise and liberal king. "There is a play 
on.his name, which means father, and is understood in the sense 
of patron, or of teacher of wisdom. The meaning is obscure; and 
in the Kaush. Up. IV. 1, the construction is still more difficult. 
What is intended seems to be that Agatasatru is willing to offer 
any reward to a really wise man, because all the wise men are 
running after Ganaka and settling at his court. 

* The commentator expatiates on all these answers and brings 
them more into harmony with Vedanta doctrines. Thus he adds 
that the person in the sun is at the same time the person in the eye, 
who is both active and passive in the heart, &c. 

II ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, 6. IOI 

verily as the supreme, the head of all beings, the 
king. Whoso adores him thus, becomes supreme, 
the head of all beings, a king.’ 

3. Gargya said: ‘The person that is in the moon 
(and in the mind), that I adore as Brahman.’ Aga- 
tasatru said to him: ‘No, no! Do not speak to me 
on this. I adore him verily as the_great, clad in 
white raiment, as Soma, the king. Whoso adores 
him thus, Soma is poured out and poured forth for 
him day by day, and his food does not fail !. 

4. Gargya said: ‘The person that is in the light- 
ning (and in the heart), that I adore as Brahman.’ 
Agatasatru said to him: ‘No, no! Do not speak to 
me on this. I adore him verily as the luminous. 
Whoso adores him thus, becomes luminous, and his 
offspring becomes luminous. 

5. Gargya said: ‘The person that is in the ether 
(and in the ether of the heart), that I adore as Brah- 
man.  Agatasatru said to him: ‘No, no! Do not 
speak to me on this. I adore him as what is full, 
and quiescent. Whoso adores him thus, becomes 
filled with offspring and cattle, and his offspring does 
not cease from this world. 

6. Gargya said: ‘The person that is in the wind 
(and in the breath), that I adore as Brahman.’ Aga- 
tasatru said to him: ‘No, no! Do not speak to me 
on this. I adore him as Indra VaikuzZZa, as the ^ 
unconquerable army (of the Maruts). Whoso adores 
him thus, becomes victorious, unconquerable, con- 
quering his enemies. 

' We miss the annasyatma, the Self of food, mentioned in the 
Kaush. Up., and evidently referred to in the last sentence of our 
paragraph. Suta and prasuta, poured out and poured forth, are 
explained as referring to the principal and the secondary sacrifices. 

Tt 

102 BRIHADARANYAK A-UPANISHAD. 

7. Gargya said : ‘The person that is in the fire (and 
in the heart), that I adore as Brahman.  Agatasatru 
said to him: ‘No, no! Do not speak to meon this. I 
adore him as powerful.’ Whoso adores him thus, be- 
comes powerful, and his offspring becomes powerful. 

8. Gargya said: ' The person that is in the water 
(in seed, and in the heart), that I adore as Brahman.’ 
Agatasatru said to him: ‘No, no! Do not speak 
to me on this. I adore him as likeness.’ Whoso 
adores him thus, to him comes what is likely (or 
proper), not what is improper; what is born from 
him, is like unto him}, 

9. Gargya said: ‘The person that is in the 
mirror, that I adore as Brahman. — Azatasatru said 
to him: * No, no! Do not speak to me on this. 
I adore him verily as the brilliant. Whoso adores 
him thus, he becomes brilliant,.his offspring becomes 
brilliant, and with whomsoever he comes together, 
he outshines them. 

IO. Gargya said: ‘ The sound that follows a man 
while he moves, that I adore as Brahman.’ Agata- 
satru said to him: ‘No, no! Do not speak to me 
on this. I adore him verily as life.’ Whoso adores 
him thus, he reaches his full age in this world, breath 
does not leave him before the time. 

II. Gargya said: ‘The person that is in space, 
that I adore as Brahman. — Azgatasatru said to him: 
‘No, no! Do net speak to me on this. I adore 

him verily as the second 'w S uS. 

! Here the Kaush. Up. has the Self of the name, instead of 
pratirupa, likeness. The commentator thinks that they both mean 
the same thing, because a name is the likeness of a thing. Another 
text of the Kaush. Up. gives here the Self of light. Pratirupa in 
the sense of likeness comes in later in the Kaush. Up., $ r1. 

II ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, I5. 103 

Whoso adores him thus, becomes possessed of a 
second, his party is not cut off from him. 

12. Gargya said: ‘The person that consists of the 

shadow, that I adore as Brahman.’ Azatasatru said 
to him: ‘No, no! Do not speak to me on this. 
I adore him verily as death. Whoso adores him 
thus, he reaches his whole age in this world, death 
does not approach him before the time. 
. 13. Gargya said: ‘The person that is in the body}, 
that I adore as Brahman.’ | Agatasatru said to him: 
'No, no! Do not speak to me on this. I adore him 
verily as embodied.’ Whoso adores him thus, becomes 
embodied, and his offspring becomes embodied ?. 

Then Gargya became silent. 

14. Agatasatru said: ‘Thus far only?’ ‘Thus far 
only, he replied. Agdtasatru said: ‘This does not 
suffice to know it (the true Brahman)? Gargya 
replied : ‘Then let me come to you, as a pupil.’ 

IS. Agatasatru said: ‘ Verily, it is unnatural that 
a Brahmaza should come to a Kshatriya, hoping 
that he should tell him the Brahman. However, I 
shall make you know him clearly,’ thus saying he 
took him by the hand and rose. 

And the two together came to a person who was 
asleep. He called him by these names, ‘ Thou, 
great one, clad in white raiment, Soma, King?" He 

1 «In the Atman, in Pragapati, in the Buddhi, and in the heart.’ 
Comm. 

2 It is difficult to know what i is meant here by atman and atman- 
vin. In the Kaush. Up. Agatasatru refers to Pragapati, and the 
commentator here does the same, adding, however, buddhi and 
hrzd. Gough translates atmanvin by ‘having peace of mind.’ 
Deussen, p. 195, passes it over. 

5 These names are given here as they occur in the Kaushitaki- 
upanishad, not. as in the Brzzhadarazyaka-upanishad, where the 

IO4 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

did not rise. Then rubbing him with his hand, he 
woke him, and he arose. 

16. AgAtasatru said: ‘When this man was thus 
asleep, where was then the person (purusha), the in- 
telligent ? and from whence did he thus come back?’ 
Gargya did not know this ? 

17. Agatasatru said: ‘When this man was thus 
asleep, then the intelligent person (purusha), having 
through the intelligence of the senses (prazas) ab- 
sorbed within himself all intelligence, lies in the 
ether, which is in the heart® When he takes in 
these different kinds of intelligence, then it is said 
that the man sleeps (svapiti)®& Then the breath 
is kept in, speech is kept in, the ear is kept in, the 
eye is kept in, the mind is kept in. 

I8. But when he moves about in sleep (and 
dream), then these are his worlds. He is, as it were, 
|a great king; he is, as it were, a great Brahmaza ; he 
rises, as it were, and he falls. And as a great king 
might keep in his own subjects, and move about, 
according to his pleasure, within his own domain, 
thus does that person (who is endowed with intel- 
ligence) keep in the various senses (prazas) and move 
about, according to his pleasure, within his own body 
(while dreaming). 

19. Next, when he is in profound sleep, and knows 

first name was atish/ZAA sarvesham bhutanam murdha raga. This 
throws an important light on the composition of the Upanishads. 

1 The ether in the heart is meant for the real Self. He has 
come to himself, to his Self, i.e. to the true Brahman. 

? Svapiti, he sleeps, is explained as sva, his own Self, and 
apiti for apyeti, he goes towards, so that *he sleeps' must be 
interpreted as meaning ‘he comes to his Self? In another passage 
it is explained by svam apito bhavati. See Sankara’s Commentary 
on the Brzh. Ar. Up. vol. i, p. 372. 

II ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, 2. IOS 

nothing, there are the seventy-two thousand arteries 
called Hita, which from the heart spread through 
the body?. Through them he moves forth and rests 
in the surrounding body. And as a young man, or a 
great king, or a great Brahmaza, having reached the 
summit of happiness, might rest, so does he then rest. 
= A 20. As the spider comes out with its thread, or as 
small sparks come forth from fire, thus do all senses, 
all worlds, all Devas, all beings come forth from that 
Self. The Upanishad (the true name and doctrine) 
of that Self is ‘the True of the True. Verily the 
senses are the true, and he is the true of the true. 

SECOND BRAHMANA ?, 

1, Verily he who knows the babe? with his place‘, 
his chamber 5, his post *, and his rope", he keeps off 
the seven relatives? who hate him. Verily by the 
young is meant the inner life, by his place this 
(body)?, by his chamber this (head), by his a the 
vital breath by his rope the food. 

2. Then the seven imperishable ones’ € 
him. There are the red lines in the eye, and by 
them Rudra clings to him. "There is the water 

1 * Not the pericardium only, but the whole body.’ Comm. 

? Madhyandina text, p. 1061. 

3 The lingatman, or subtle body which has entered this body in 
five ways. Comm. 

* The body. 5 The head. ` 6 The vital breath. 

7 Food, which binds the subtle to the coarse body. 

€ The seven organs of the head through which man perceives 
and becomes attached to the world. 

? The commentator remarks that while saying this, the body 
and the head are pointed out by touching them with the hand 
(pazipeshapratibodhanena). 

10 See before, I, 5, 1, 2. They are called imperishable, because 
they produce imperishableness by supplying food for the praza, 
here called the babe. 

106 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

in the eye, and by it Parganya clings to him. There 
is the pupil, and by it Aditya (sun) clings to him. 
There is the dark iris, and by it Agni clings to him. 
There is the white eye-ball, and by it Indra clings to 
him. With the lower eye-lash the earth, with the 
upper eye-lash the heaven clings to him. He who 

knows this, his food does never perish. | 

3. On this there is this Sloka : 

‘There! is a cup having its mouth below and its 
bottom above. Manifold glory has been placed into 
it. On its lip sit the seven &Æzshis, the tongue as 
the eighth communicates with Brahman.’ What is 
called the cup having its mouth below and its bottom 
above is this head, for its mouth (the mouth) is 
below, its bottom (the skull) is above. When it is 
said that manifold glory has been placed into it, 
the senses verily are manifold glory, and he there- 
fore means the senses. When he says that the 
seven &zshis sit on its lip, the Æzshis are verily the 
(active) senses, and he means the senses, And 
when he says that the tongue as the eighth com- 
municates with Brahman, it is because the tongue, 
as the eighth, does communicate with Brahman. 

4. These two (the two ears) are the Azshis Gau- 
tama and Bharadvaga; the right Gautama, the left 
Bharadvaga. These two (the eyes) are the A?shis 
Visvamitra and Gamadagni; the right Visvamitra, 
the left Gamadagni. These two (the nostrils) are 
the Azshis Vasish/Za and Kasyapa; the right Va- 
sishZZa, the left Kasyapa. The tongue is Atri, for 
. with the tongue food is eaten, and Atri is meant for 
Atti, eating. He who knows this, becomes an eater 
of everything, and everything becomes his food. 

1 Cf. Atharva-veda-samh. X, 8, 9. 

II ADIIYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, 6. 107 

TuHirD BrRAHMANA?. 

1. There are two forms of Brahman, the material 
and the immaterial, the mortal and the immortal, the 
solid and the fluid, sat (being) and tya (that), (i.e. 
sat-tya, true). 

2. Everything except air and sky is material, is 
mortal, is solid, is definite. The essence of that 
which is material, which is mortal, which is solid, 
which is definite is the sun that shines, for he is the 
essence of sat (the definite). 

3. But air and sky are immaterial, are immortal, 
are fluid, are indefinite. The essence of that which 
is immaterial, which is immortal, which is fluid, which 
is indefinite is the person in the disk of the sun, for 
he is the essence of tyad (the indefinite), So far with 
regard to the Devas. 

4. Now with regard to the body. Everything 
except the breath and the ether within the body is 
material, is mortal, is solid, is definite. The essence 
of that which is material, which is mortal, which is 
solid, which is definite is the Eye, for it is the essence 
of sat (the definite). 

5. But breath and the ether within ae body are 
immaterial, are immortal, are fluid, are indefinite. 
The essence of that which is immaterial, which is 
immortal, which is fluid, which is indefinite is the 
person in the right eye, for he is the essence of tyad 
(the indefinite). 

6. And what is the appearance of that person? 
Like a saffron-coloured raiment, like white wool, 

1 Madhyandina text, p. 1062. i 
2 Sat is explained by definite, tya or tyad by indefinite. 

108 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

like cochineal, like the flame of fire, like the white 
lotus, like sudden lightning. He who knows this, 
his glory is like unto sudden lightning. 

Next follows the teaching (of Brahman) by No, 
no?! for there is nothing else higher than this (if 
one says): ‘It is not so.’ Then comes the name 
‘the True of the True, the senses being the True, 
and he (the Brahman) the True of them. 

- 

FOURTH BRAHMANA?. 

I. Now when Yagfavalkya was going to enter 
upon another state, he said: ‘ Maitreyi’, verily I am 
going away from this my house (into the forest‘). 
Forsooth, let me make a settlement between thee 
and that Katyayant (my other wife).’ | 

.2. Maitreyt said: ‘My Lord, if this whole earth, . 
full of wealth, belonged to me, tell me, should I be 
immortal by ite?’ 

1 See III, 9, 26; IV, 2,4; IV, 4, 22; IV, 5,15. 

2 Madhyandina text, p. 1062. To the end of the third Brahmaza 
of the second Adhya&ya, all that has been taught does not yet impart 
the highest knowledge, the identity of the personal and the true Self, 
the Brahman. In the fourth Brahmaza, in which the knowledge 
of the true Brahman is to be set forth, the Samnydasa, the retiring 
from the world, is enjoined, when all desires cease, and no duties 
are to be performed (Saznyasa, parivragya). The story is told again 
with slight variations in the Brzhadarazyaka-upanishad IV, 5. The 
more important variations, occurring in IV, 5,are added here, marked 
with B. There are besides the various readings of the Madhyandina- - 
sikha of the Satapatha-brahmaza. See also Deussen, Vedanta, p.185. 

? In Brzh. Up. IV,5, the story begins: Yagviavalkya had two wives, 
Maitrey? and Katy&ayani. Of these Maitreyi was conversant with 
Brahman, but Katyayani possessed such knowledge only as women 
possess. 

* Instead of udyasyan, B. gives pravragishyan, the more 
technical term. 

5 Should I be immortal by it, or no? B. 

124 n» 
NI D E 
IO y 

II ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, 5.\ c. 
, Siig he 

‘No, replied YagZavalkya; ‘like the life of rich 
people will be thy life. But there is no hope of 
immortality by wealth.’ 

3. And Maitreyt said: ‘What should I do with 
that by which I do not become immortal ? What my 
Lord knoweth (of immortality), tell that to me?’ 

4. Yagfiavalkya replied : ‘ Thou who art truly dear 
to me, thou speakest dear words?. Come, sit down, 
I will explain it to thee, and mark well what I say.’ 

.5. And he said : 'Verily, a husband is not dear, that 
you may love the husband; but that you may love 
the Self, therefore a husband is dear. 

‘Verily, a wife is not dear, that you may love the 
wife; but that you may love the Self, therefore a 
. wife is dear. 

“Verily, sons are not dear, that you may love 
the sons; but that you may love the Self, therefore 
sons are dear. 

‘Verily, wealth is not dear, that you may love 
wealth; but that you may love the Self, therefore 
wealth is dear’. 
Verily, the Brahman-class is not dear, that you 
may love the Brahman-class; but that you may love 
the Self, therefore the Brahman-class is dear. 
‘Verily, the Kshatra-class is not dear, that you 
may love the Kshatra-class; but that you may love 
. the Self, therefore the Kshatra-class is dear. 
‘Verily, the worlds are not dear, that you may 
love the worlds; but that you may love the Self, 
therefore the worlds are dear. 

1 Tell that clearly to me. B. 

? Thou who art dear to me, thou hast Reese] what is dear (to 
-me in this). B. 

* B. adds, Verily, cattle are not dear, &c. 

IIO BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD, 

‘Verily, the Devas are not dear, that you may 
love the Devas; but that you may love the Self, 
therefore the Devas are dear’. | 

‘Verily, creatures are not dear, that you may love 
the creatures; but that you may love the Self, there- 
fore are creatures dear. 

‘Verily, everything is not dear that you may love 
everything; but that you may love the Self, there- 
fore everything is dear. 

‘Verily, the Self is to be seen, to be heard, to 
be perceived, to be marked, O Maitreyi! When 
we see, hear, perceive, and know the Self?, then 
all this is known. | 

6. ‘Whosoever looks for the Brahman-class else-. 
where than in the Self, was? abandoned by the 
Brahman-class. Whosoever looks for the Kshatra- 
class elsewhere than in the Self, was abandoned by 
the Kshatra-class. Whosoever looks for the worlds 
elsewhere than in the Self, was abandoned by the 
worlds. Whosoever looks for the Devas elsewhere 
than in the Self, was abandoned by the Devas‘. 
Whosoever looks for creatures elsewhere than in the 
Self, was abandoned by the creatures. Whosoever 
looks for anything elsewhere than in the Self, was 
abandoned by everything. This Brahman-class, this 
Kshatra-class, these worlds, these Devas*, these® 
creatures, this everything, all is that Self. 

7. ‘Now as’ the sounds of a drum, when beaten, 

1 B. inserts, Verily, the Vedas are not dear, &c. 

2 When the Self has been seen, heard, perceived, and known. B. 
* The commentator translates, ‘should be abandoned.’ 

* B. inserts, Whosoever looks for the Vedas, &c. 

5 B. adds, these Vedas. 6 B. has, all these creatures. 

7 I construe sa yatha with evam vai in § 12, looking upon 

II ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, I2. III 

cannot be seized externally (by themselves), but the 
sound is seized, when the drum is seized or the beater 
of the drum; 

8. ‘And as the sounds of a conch-shell, when 
blown, cannot be seized externally (by themselves), 
but the sound is seized, when the shell is seized or 
- blower of the shell ; 

. ‘And as the sounds of a lute, when played, 
BN be seized externally (by themselves), but the 
sound is seized, when the lute is seized or the 
player of the lute; 

€ 10. * As clouds of smoke proceed by uiemselves 
out of a lighted fire kindled with damp fuel, thus, 
verily, O Maitreyt, has been breathed forth from 
this great Being what we have as Azg-veda, Yagur- 
veda, Sama-veda, Atharvaugirasas, Itihasa (legends), 
Puraza (cosmogonies), Vidya (knowledge), the U pa- 
nishads, Slokas (verses), Sutras (prose rules), Anu- 
vyakhyanas (glosses), Vyakhyanas (commentaries)! 
From him alone all these were breathed forth. 

f rr. ‘As all waters find their centre in the sea, 
all touches in the skin, all tastes in the tongue, all 
smells in the nose, all colours in the eye, all sounds 
in the ear, all percepts in the mind, all knowledge in 
the heart, all actions in the hands, all movements in 
the feet, and all the Vedas in speech,— 

$ I2. ‘Asa lump of salt?, when thrown into water, 
becomes dissolved into water, and could not be taken 

$ 11 as probably a later insertion. The sa is not the pronoun, but 
a particle, as in sa yadi, sa fet, &c, 

1 B. adds, what is sacrificed, what is poured out, food, drink, this 
world and the other world, and all creatures. 

.? See Khand. Up. VI, 13. 

II2 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

out again, but wherever we taste (the water) it is 
salt,—thus verily, O Maitreyt, does this great Being, 
endless, unlimited, consisting of nothing but know- 
ledge’, rise from out these elements, and vanish again 
in them. When he has departed, there is no more 
knowledge (name), I say, O Maitreyt. Thus spoke 
YagZavalkya. | 

I3. Then Maitreyi said: ‘Here thou hast be- 
wildered me, Sir, when thou sayest that having 
departed, there is no more knowledge?’ 

But Yag#avalkya replied: ‘ʻO Maitreyi, I say nothing 
that is bewildering. This is enough, O beloved, for 

? wisdom’. 

g ‘For when there is as it were duality, then one. 
sees the other, one smells the other, one hears the 
other +t, one salutes the other®, one perceives the 
other*, one knows the other; but when the Self only 
is all this, how should he smell another’, how should 
he see? another?, how should he hear! another, how 
should he salute ™ another, how should he perceive 
another ?, how should he know another? How 
should he know Him by whom he knows all this ? 

1 Asa mass of salt has neither inside nor outside, but is altogether 
a mass of taste, thus indeed has that Self neither inside nor outside, 
but is altogether a mass of knowledge. B. 

? * Here, Sir, thou hast landed me in utter bewilderment. Indeed, 
I do not understand him.’ B. 
R * Verily, beloved, that Self is imperishable, and of an inde- 
structible nature, B. 

* B. inserts, one tastes the other. 

5 B. inserts, one hears the other. 

$ B. inserts, one touches the other. 7 See, B. 
5 Smell, B. ? B. inserts taste. 
10 Salute, B. 11 Hear, B. 

12 B. inserts, how should he touch another? 

II ADHYAYA, 5 BRAHMANA, 2. IIj 

How, O beloved, should he know (himself), the 
Knower! ?' 

FirtH BRAHMANA 2. 

I. This earth is the honey ? (madhu, the effect) of 
all beings, and all beings are the honey (madhu, the 
effect) of this earth. Likewise this bright, immortal 
person in this earth, and that bright immortal person 
incorporated in the body (both are madhu). He 
indeed is the same as that Self, that Immortal, that 
Brahman, that All. 

2. This water is the honey of all beings, and all 
beings are the honey of this water. Likewise this 
bright, immortal person in this water, and that 
bright, immortal person, existing as seed in the body 
(both are madhu). He indeed is the same as that 
Self, that Immortal, that Brahman, that All. 

1 Instead of the last line, B. adds (IV, 5, 15): ‘That Self is to 
be described by No, no! He is incomprehensible, for he cannot 
be comprehended; he is imperishable, for he cannot perish; he is 
unattached, for he does not attach himself; unfettered, he does 
not suffer, he does not fail. How, O beloved, should he know the 
Knower? Thus, O Maitreyi, thou hast been instructed. Thus 
far goes immortality.’ Having said so, Yagfavalkya went away 
(into the forest). 15. See also KAand. Up. VII, 24, 1. 

? Madhyandina text, p. 1064. 

* Madhu, honey, seems to be taken here as an instance of some- 
thing which is both cause and effect, or rather of things which are 
mutually dependent on each other, or cannot exist without one 
other. As the bees make the honey, and the honey makes or 
supports the bees, bees and honey are both cause and effect, 
or at all events are mutually dependent on one other. In the same 
way the earth and all living beings are looked upon as mutually 
dependent, living beings presupposing the earth, and the earth 
presupposing living beings. This at all events seems to be the 
general idea of what is called the Madhuvidya, the science of honey, 
which Dadhya£ communicated to the Asvins. 

[15] I 

114 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

3. This fire is the honey of all beings, and all 
beings are the honey of this fire. Likewise this 
bright, immortal person in this fire, and that bright, 
immortal person, existing as speech in the body (both 
are madhu) He indeed is the same as that Self, 
that Immortal, that Brahman, that All. 

4. This air is the honey of all beings, and all 
beings are the honey of this air. Likewise this 
bright, immortal person in this air, and that bright, 
immortal person existing as breath in the body (both 
are madhu). He indeed is the same as that Self, 
that Immortal, that Brahman, that All. 

5. This sun is the honey of all beings, and all 
beings are the honey of this sun. Likewise this 
bright, immortal person in this sun, and that bright, 
immortal person existing as the eye in the body 
(both are madhu). He indeed is the same as that 
Self, that Immortal, that Brahman, that All. 

6. This space (disaZ, the quarters) is the honey of 
all beings, and all beings are the honey of this 
space. Likewise this bright, immortal person in this 
space, and that bright, immortal person existing as 
the ear in the body (both are madhu). He indeed 
is the same as that Self, that Immortal, that Brah- 
man, that All. 

7. This moon is the honey of all beings, and all 
beings are the honey of this moon. Likewise this 
bright, immortal person in this moon, and that bright, 
immortal person existing as mind in the body (both 
are madhu). He indeed is the same as that Self, 
that Immortal, that Brahman, that All. 

8. This lightning is the honey of all beings, and 
all beings are the honey of this lightning. Likewise 
this bright, immortal person in this lightning, and 

II ADHYAYA, 5 BRAHMANA, I 3. II5 

that bright, immortal person existing as light in the 
body (both are madhu). He indeed is the same as 
that Self, that Immortal, that Brahman, that All. 

9. This thunder! is the honey of all beings, and all 
. beings are the honey of this thunder. Likewise this 
bright, immortal person in this thunder, and that 
bright, immortal person existing as sound and voice 
in the body (both are madhu). He indeed is the 
same as that Self, that Immortal, that Brahman, 
that All. | 

IO. This ether is the honey of all beings, and all 
beings are the honey of this ether. Likewise this 
bright, immortal person in this ether, and that bright, 
immortal person existing as heart-ether in the body 
(both are madhu) He indeed is the same as that 
Self, that Immortal, that Brahman, that All. 

1I. This law (dharmaZ) is the honey of all beings, 
and all beings are the honey of this law. Likewise 
this bright, immortal person in this law, and that 
bright, immortal person existing as law in the body 
(both are madhu). He indeed is the same as that 
Self, that Immortal, that Brahman, that All. 

12. This true? (satyam) is the honey of all beings, 
and all beings are the honey of this true. Likewise 

— this bright, immortal person in what is true, and that 

bright, immortal person existing as the true in the 
body (both are madhu). He indeed is the same as 
that Self, that Immortal, that Brahman, that All. 

I3. This mankind is the honey of all beings, and 
all beings are the honey of this mankind. Likewise 

1 Stanayitnu, thunder, is explained by the commentator as 
Parganya. 
* Satyam, the true, the real, not, as it is generally translated, the 
truth. | 
I2 

116 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

this bright, immortal person in mankind, and that 
bright, immortal person existing as man in the body 
(both are madhu). He indeed is the same as that 
Self, that Immortal, that Brahman, that All. 

14. This Self is the honey of all beings, and all 
beings are the honey of this Self. Likewise this 
bright, immortal person in this Self, and that bright, 
immortal person, the Self (both are madhu). He 
indeed is the same as that Self, that Immortal, that 
Brahman, that All. 

15. And verily this Self is the lord of all beings, 
the king of all beings. And as all spokes are con- 
tained in the axle and in the felly of a wheel, all 
beings, and all those selfs (of the earth, water, &c.) 
are contained in that Self. | 

16. Verily Dadhya£ Atharvaza proclaimed this 
honey (the madhu-vidya) to the two Asvins, and a 
Rishi, seeing this, said (Rv. I, 116, 12): 

‘O ye two heroes (Asvins), I make manifest that 
fearful deed of yours (which you performed) for the 
sake of gain !, like as thunder? makes manifest the 
rain. The honey (madhu-vidy4) which Dadhya£ 
Atharvaza proclaimed to you through the head of 
a horse, . .. 

17. Verily Dadhya£ Atharvaza? proclaimed this 
honey to the two Asvins, and a shi, seeing this, 
said (Rv. I, 117, 22); 

ʻO Asvins, you fixed a horse's head on Atharvana 
Dadhyae, and he, wishing to be true (to his promise), 

! The translation here follows the commentary. 
? Tanyatu, here explained as Parganya. 

* Sankara distinguishes here between Atharvana and Atharvaaa, 
if the text is correct. 

II ADHYAYA, 5 BRAHMANA, IQ. II7 

proclaimed to you the honey, both that of Tvashzzz! 
and that which is to be your secret, O ye strong 
ones.' 

18. Verily Dadhya£ Atharvana proclaimed this 
honey to the two Asvins, and a Rishi, seeing this, 
said : 

‘He (the Lord) made bodies with two feet, he 
made bodies with four feet. Having first become 
a bird, he entered the bodies as purusha (as the 
person). This very purusha is in all bodies the puri- 
saya, i.e. he who lies in the body (and is therefore 
called purusha) There is nothing that is not 
covered by him, nothing that is not filled by him. 

19. Verily Dadhya£ Atharvaza proclaimed this 
honey to the two Asvins, and a Rishi, seeing this, 
said (Rv. VI, 47, 18): 

‘He (the Lord) became like unto every form?, and 
this is meant to reveal the (true) form of him (the 
Atman). Indra (the Lord) appears multiform through 
the Mayas (appearances), for his horses (senses) are 
yoked, hundreds and ten.' 

This (Atman) is the horses, this (Atman) is the 
ten, and the thousands, many and endless. This is 
the Brahman, without cause and without effect, with- 
out anything inside or outside; this Self is Brahman, 
omnipresent and omniscient. This is the teaching 
(of the Upanishads). 

1 Sankara explains Tvash/r? as the sun, and the sun as the head 
of the sacrifice which, having been cut off, was to be replaced by 
the pravargya rite. The knowledge of this rite forms the honey 
of Tvash/rz. The other honey which is to be kept secret is the 
knowledge of the Self, as taught before in the Madhu-brahmaza. 

3 He assumed all forms, and such forms, as two-footed or four- 
footed animals, remained permanent. Comm. 

II BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

SixtH BRAHMANA. 

I. Now follows the stem !: 

I. Pautimashya from Gaupavana, 

2. Gaupavana from Pautimashya, 

3. Pautimashya from Gaupavana, 

4. Gaupavana from Kausika, 

5. Kausika from Kauzdinya, 

6. Kauzdinya from Sazdilya, 

7. SAndilya from Kausika and Gautama, 

8. Gautama 

.2. from | Agnivesya, 

9. Agnivesya from Sandilya and Anabhimlata, 
10. .Sazdilya and Anabhimlata from Anabhimlata, 
11. Anabhimlata from Anabhimlata, 

12. Anabhimlata from Gautama, 

13. Gautama from Saitava and Pragae 
14. Saitava and Pra£Zinayogya from Parasarya, 
15. Parasarya from Bharadvaga, 

16. Bharadvaza from Bharadvaga and Gautama, 
17. Gautama from Bharadvaza, 

1 The line of teachers and pupils by whom the Madhukanda 
(the fourth Brahmaza) was handed down. The Madhyandina-sakha 
begins with ourselves, then 1. Saurpazayya, 2. Gautama, 3. Vatsya, 
4. Vatsya and Parasarya, 5. Sankzztya and Bharadvaga, 6. Auda- 
vahi and Sazilya, 7. Vaigavapa and Gautama, 8. Vaigavapayana 
and Vaish/apureya, 9. Sazdilya and Rauhizayana, ro. Saunaka, 
Atreya, and Raibhya, r1. Pautimashyayaza and Kaundiny ayana, 
12. Kaundinya, 13. Kauzdinya, 14. Kaundinya and Agnivesya, 
15. Saitava, 16. Parasarya, 17. Gatukarzya, 18. Bharadvaga, 19. Bha- 
radvaga, Asuray ana, and Gautama, 20. Bharadvaga, 21. Vaigavapa- 
yana. ‘Then the same as the Kazvas to Gatukarnya, who learns 
from Bharadvaga, who learns from Bharadvaga, AsurAyana, and 
Yaska. Then Traivazi &c. as in the Kanva-vamsa. 

II ADHYAYA, 6 BRAHMANA, 3. 119 

18. 
I9. 

Bharadvaga from Parasarya, 
Parasarya from Vaigavdpayana, 

20. Vaigavapayana from Kausikayani, 
21!. Kausikayani 

41. 
42. 
43- 
44. 
45. 

. from Ghvztakausika, 
22, 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
29. 
30. 
3I. 
22, 
33: 
34- 
35. 
36. 
37- 
38. 
39. 
40. 

Ghzztakausika from Parasaryayaza, 

Parasaryayaza from Parasarya, 

Parasarya from Gatdkarzya?, | 

Gatukarzya from Asurayaza and Yaska ` » 

Asurayaza and Yaska from Traivazi, 

Traivazi from Aupagandhani, 

Aupagandhani from Asuri, 

Asuri from Bharadvaga, 

Bharadvaga from Atreya, 

Atreya from Mazzi, 

Mazdei from Gautama, 

Gautama from Gautama, 

Gautama from Vatsya, 

Vatsya from Sazdilya, 

Sandilya from Kaisorya Kapya, 

Kaisorya Kapya from Kumaraharita, 

Kumaraharita from Galava, 

Galava from Vidarbhi-kauzdinya, 

Vidarbhi-kauzdinya from Vatsanapat Ba- 
bhrava, 

Vatsanapat Babhrava from Pathi Saubhara, 

Pathi Saubhara from Ayasya Angirasa, 

Ayasya Angirasa from Abhati T vash/ra, 

Abhati Tvash/ra from Visvarupa Tvash/ra, 

Visvarupa Tvash/ra from Asvinau, 

! From here the Vamsa agrees with the Vamsa at the end of 

IV, 6. 

* Bharadvaga, in Madhyandina text. 
3 Bharadvaga, Asurayana, and Yaska, in Madhyandina text. 

120 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

46. Asvinau from Dadhya£ Atharvana, 

47. Dadhyae Atharvaza from Atharvan Daiva, 
48. Atharvan Daiva from Mrztyu Pradhvamsana, 
49. Mzztyu Pradhvamsana from Pradhvamsana, 
50. Pradhvamsana from Ekarshi, 

51. Ekarshi from VipraZitti !, 

52. VipraZitti from Vyashdi, 

53. Vyashzi from Sanaru, 

54. Sanaru from Sanatana, 

55. oanatana from Sanaga, 

56. Sanaga from Paramesh/Zin, 

57. Paramesh/Zin from Brahman, 

58. Brahman is Svayambhu, self-existent. 
Adoration to Brahman ?, 

! Vipragitti, in Madhyandina text. 
? Similar genealogies are found Brzh. Ar. Up. IV, 6, and VI, "n 

III ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, 2. I2I 

THIRD ADHYAYA. 

First BRAHMANA 1, 

Adoration to the Highest Self (Paramatman)! 

I. Ganaka Vaideha (the king of the Videhas) sacri- 
ficed with a sacrifice at which many presents were | 
offered to the priests of(the Asvamedha). Brahmazas 
of the Kurus and the PaZZalas had come thither, 
and Ganaka Vaideha wished to know, which of those 
Brahmazas was the best read. So he enclosed a \ 
thousand cows, and ten padas (of gold)? were fastened 
to each pair of horns. 

2. And Ganaka spoke to them: ‘ Ye venerable 
Brahmazas, he who among you is the wisest, let 
him drive away these cows.’ 

Then those Brahmazas durst not, but YaeZavalkya 
said to his pupil: ‘ Drive them away, my dear.’ 

He replied: ‘O glory of the Saman 5, and drove 
them away. 

The Brahmazas became angry and said: ‘How 
could he call himself the wisest among us ?’ 

Now there was Asvala, the Hotz? priest of Ganaka 
Vaideha. He asked him: ‘Are you indeed the 

! Madhyandina text, p. 1067. 

2 Palakaturbhagah padaZ suvarsasya. Comm. 

* One expects iti after udaga, but Sdmasravas is applied to 
Yaefavalkya, and not to the pupil. Yaefavalkya, as the com- 
mentator observes, was properly a teacher of the Yagur-veda, but 
as the pupil calls him Sama:sravas, he shows that Yagsiavalkya 
knew all the four Vedas, because the Samans are taken from the 
Rig-veda, and the Atharva-veda is contained in the other three 
Vedas. Regnaud, however, refers it to the pupil, and translates, 
‘O toi qui apprends le S4ma-veda.’ 

122 BRIHADARANYAK A-UPANISHAD. 

wisest among us, O YagZavalkya?' He replied: ‘I 
bow before the wisest (the best knower of Brahman), 
but I wish indeed to have these cows.’ 

Then Asvala, the Hotsz priest, undertook to 
question him. 

3. ‘ VAgiiavalkya,’ he said, ‘everything here (con- 
nected with the sacrifice) is reached by death, every- 
thing is overcome by death. By what means then 
is the sacrificer freed beyond the reach of death ?’ 

Yag/Aavalkya said: ‘ By the Hotzz priest, who is 
Agni (fire), who is speech. For speech is the Hotzz 
of the sacrifice (or the sacrificer), and speech is 
Agni, and he is the Hotzz. This constitutes free- 
dom, and perfect freedom (from death). 

4. 'YagZavalkya, he said, ‘everything here is 
reached by day and night, everything is overcome by - 
day and night. By what means then is the sacrificer 
freed beyond the reach of day and night ?' 

YagZavalkya said: ‘By the Adhvaryu priest, who 
is the eye, who is Aditya (the sun). For the eye is 
the Adhvaryu of the sacrifice, and the eye is the sun, 
and he is the Adhvaryu. This constitutes freedom, 
and perfect freedom.’ 

5. ' YagZavalkya, he said, ‘everything here is 
reached by the waxing and waning of the moon, 
everything is overcome by the waxing and waning 
of the moon. By what means then is the sacrificer 
freed beyond the reach of the waxing and waning 
of the moon?’ 

YagZavalkya said: ‘By the Udgatzz priest, who 
is Vayu (the wind), who is the breath. For the 

* One expects adityena 4akshusha, instead of Zakshushadityena, 
but see $ 6. 

III ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, 8. 123 

breath is the Udgatzz of the sacrifice, and the breath 

is the wind, and he is the Udgatzz. This constitutes 
freedom, and perfect freedom.’ 

6. ‘ YagZavalkya, he said, ' this sky is, as it were, 
without an ascent (staircase.) By what approach 
does the sacrificer approach the Svarga world?’ 

YAgviavalkya said: ‘By the Brahman priest, who 

is the mind (manas), who is the moon. For the 
mind is the Brahman of the sacrifice, and the mind 
is the moon, and he is the Brahman. This consti- 
tutes freedom, and perfect freedom. These are the 
complete deliverances (from death).' 

Next follow the achievements. 

7. ‘ Yagsiavalkya, he said, ‘how many /ze verses 
will the Hotz priest employ to-day at this sacrifice?’ 

‘Three,’ replied Yag#avalkya. 

‘And what are these three?’ 

‘Those which are called Puronuvakya, Yagye, ud 
thirdly, .Sasya '.' 

‘What does he gain by them ?’ 

‘All whatsoever has breath.’ 

8. 'Y&gfavalkya, he said, ‘how many oblations 
(ahuti) will the Adhvaryu priest employ to-day at 
this sacrifice ?’ 

‘Three,’ replied YagZavalkya. 

‘And what are these three?’ 

"Those which, when offered, flame up; those which, 
when offered, make an excessive noise; and those 
which, when offered, sink down 2.’ 

! The Puronuvakyas are hymns employed before the actual 

sacrifice, the Yagyas accompany the sacrifice, the Sasyas are used 
for the Sastra. All three are called Stotriyas. 

2 These oblations are explained as consisting of wood and oil, 
of flesh, and of milk and Soma. The first, when thrown on the 

124 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

‘What does he gain by them?’ 

‘By those which, when offered, flame up, he gains 
the Deva (god) world, for the Deva world flames 
up, as it were. By those which, when offered, make 
an excessive noise, he gains the Pitz? (father) world, 
for the Pitzz world is excessively (noisy)!. By those 
which, when offered, sink down, he gains the Manu- 
shya (man) world, for the Manushya world is, as it 
were, down below.' 

9. ‘ Yagnavalkya, he said, ‘with how many deities 
does the Brahman priest on the right protect to-day 
this sacrifice ?’ 

‘By one, replied YagZavalkya. 

‘And which is it?’ 

‘The mind alone; for the mind is endless, and the 
Visvedevas are endless, and he thereby gains the 
endless world.’ 

IO. ‘ Yag#avalkya,’ he said, ‘how many Stotriya 
hymns will the Udgatzz priest employ to-day at this 
sacrifice ?' 

‘Three, replied YagZavalkya. 

‘And what are these three ?’ 

‘Those which are called Puronuvakya, Yagya, and, 
thirdly, Sasy&.’ 

‘And what are these with regard to the body 
(adhyatmam) ?' 

‘The Puronuvakya is Praza (up-breathing), the 
Yagya the Apana (down-breathing), the .Sasya the 
V yana (back-breathing).' 

fire, flame up. The second, when thrown on the fire, make a 
loud hissing noise. The third, consisting of milk, Soma, &c., sink 
down into the earth. 

! On account of the cries of those who wish to be delivered out 
ofit. Comm. 

III ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, 7. 125 

* What does he gain by them ?’ 

‘He gains the earth by the Puronuvakya, the sky 
by the Yagya&, heaven by the .Sasya.' 

After that Asvala held his peace. 

SECOND BRAHMANA}, 

/ 1, Then Garatkarava Artabhaga? asked. ‘ YAg#a- 

valkya, he said, ‘how many Grahas are there, and 
how many Atigrahas ? ?' 

‘Eight Grahas,’ he replied, ‘and eight Atigrahas.’ 

‘And what are these eight Grahas and eight 
Atigrahas ?’ | | 

2. 'Praza (breath) is one Graha, and that is seized 
by Apana (down-breathing) as the Atigraha *, for one 
smells with the Apana.' 

3. ‘Speech (va) is one Graha, and that is seized 
by name (naman) as the Atigraha, for with speech 
one pronounces names.’ 

4. ‘The tongue is one Graha, and that is seized 
by taste as the Atigraha, for with the tongue one 
perceives tastes,’ 

5. ‘The eye is one Graha, and that is seized by form 
as the Atigraha, for with the eye one sees forms.’ 

6. ‘The ear is one Graha,and that is seized by sound 
as the Atigraha, for with the ear one hears sounds.’ 

7. ‘The mind is one Graha, and that is seized by 

! Madhyandina text, p. 1069. 

2 A descendant of Aitabhaga of the family of Garatkaru. 

5 Graha is probably meant originally in its usual sacrificial sense, 
as a vessel for offering oblations. But its secondary meaning, 
in which it is here taken, is a taker, a grasper, i. e. an organ of 
sense, while atigraha is intended for that which is grasped, i. e. an 
object of sense. 

* Here the a is long, ZZandasatvat. 

126 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

desire as the Atigraha, for us the mind one desires 
desires.’ 

8. ‘The arms are one Graha, and these are seized 
by work as the Atigraha, for with the arms one 
works work.’ 

9. ‘The skin is one Graha, and that is seized by. 

touch as the Atigraha, for with the skin one per- 
ceives touch. These are the eight Grahas and the 
eight Atigrahas.’ 

IO. ‘ Yagsiavalkya, he said, ‘everything is the food 
of death. What then is the deity to whom death is 
food ?' 

‘Fire (agni) is death, and that is the food water. 
Death is conquered again.’ 

II. ‘ Yag#avalkya, he said, ‘when such a person 
(a sage) dies, do the vital breaths (prazas) move out 
of him or no?’ 

‘No, replied Yag#avalkya ; ‘they are gathered up 
in him, he swells, he is inflated, and thus inflated the 
dead lies at rest. 

12. ‘Yag#avalkya, he said, ‘when such a man 
dies, what does not leave him ?’ 

g ‘The name,’ he replied; ‘for the name is endless, 
the Visvedevas are endless, and by it he gains the 
endless world.’ 

13. 'Yagavalkya, he said, ‘when the speech of 
this dead person enters into the fire’, breath into the 
air, the eye into the sun, the mind into the moon, 
the hearing into space, into the earth the body, into 
the ether the self, into the shrubs the hairs of the 

body, into the trees the hairs of the head, when the 

1 The commentator explains purusha here by asamyagdarsin, 
one who does not know the whole truth. See also Deussen, 
Vedanta, p. 405, and p. 399, note. 

- 

III ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, 2. 127 

blood and the seed are deposited in the water, where 
is then that person ?' | 

YagZavalkya said: ‘Take my hand, my friend. 
We two alone shall know of this; let this question 
of ours not be (discussed) in public.’ Then these 
two went out and argued, and what they said was 
karman (work), what they praised was karman!, 
viz. that a man becomes good by good work, and 
bad by bad work. After that Garatkarava Arta- 
bhaga held his peace. | 

Turrp BRAHMANA 2, 

"1. Then Bhugyu Lahyayani asked. ' YagZavalkya, 
he said, ‘we wandered about as students?, and came to 
the house of Patazkala Kapya. He had a daughter 
who was possessed by a Gandharva. We asked 
him, ‘Who art thou?’ and he (the Gandharva) replied: 
‘Iam Sudhanvan, the Angirasa.’ And when we 
asked him about the ends of the world, we said to 
him, ‘Where were the Parikshitas*? Where then 
were the Parikshitas, I ask thee, YagZavalkya, where 
were the Parikshitas ?' 

2. YAgiavalkya said: ‘ He said to thee, I suppose, 
that they went where those go who have performed 
a horse-sacrifice.’ | 

He said: ‘And where do they go who have per- 
formed a horse-sacrifice ?’ - 

1 What is intended is that the samsara continues by means of 
karman, while karman by itself never leads to moksha. 

? Madhyandina text, p. 1070. 

3 The commentator explains Zaraka/ as adhyayanartham vrata- 
&arana£ karakah, adhvaryavo va. See Professor R. G. Bhandarkar, 
in Indian Antiquary, 1883, p. 145. 

* An old royal race, supposed to have vanished from the earth. 

128 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

YagZavalkya replied : ‘ Thirty-two journeys of the 
car of the sun is this world. The earth surrounds 
it on every side, twice as large, and the ocean 
surrounds this earth on every side, twice as large. 
Now there is between! them a space as large as the 
edge ofa razor or the wing of a mosquito. Indra, 
having become a bird, handed them (through the 
space) to Vayu (the air), and Vayu (the air), holding 
them within. himself, conveyed them to where they 
dwell who have performed a horse-sacrifice. Some- 
what in this way did he praise Vayu indeed. There- 
fore Vayu (air) is everything by itself, and Vayu is 
all things together. He who knows this, conquers 
death. After that Bhugyu Lahyayani held his 

peace. 

FourTH BRAHMANA 2. 

“1. Then Ushasta Kakrayaza asked. ‘ YAgzaval- 
kya,’ he said, ‘tell me the Brahman which is visible, 
not invisible’, the Self (Atman), who is within all,’ 

YAgvavalkya replied: ‘This, thy Self, who is 
within all.’ 

* Which Self, O YAgzavalkya, is within all ?’ 

YagZavalkya replied: ‘He who breathes in the 
up-breathing, he is thy Self, and within all. He who 
breathes in the down-breathing, he is thy Self, and 
within all. He who breathes in the on-breathing, 
he is thy Self, and within all. He who breathes in 

1 The commentator explains that this small space or hole is 
between the two halves of the mundane egg. 

? Madhyandina text, p. 1071. It follows after what is here 
the fifth Brahmaza, treating of Kahoda Kaushitakeya. : 
? Deussen, Vedanta, p. 163, translates, ‘das immanente, nicht 
transcendente Brahman,' which is right, but too modern. 

/ 

III ADHYAYA, 5 BRAHMANA, I. 129 

the out-breathing, he is thy Self, and within all. 
This is thy Self, who is within all.’ | 

2. Ushasta Kakrayaza said: ‘As one might say, 
this is a cow, this is a horse, thus has this been 
explained by thee. Tell me the Brahman which is 
visible, not invisible, the Self, who is within all.’ 

Yag#avalkya replied: ‘This, thy Self, who is | 
within all.' | 

. * Which Self, O YagZavalkya, is within all ?’ 

Yag£avalkya replied: ‘Thou couldst not see the 
(true) seer of sight, thou couldst not hear the (true) 
hearer of hearing, nor perceive the perceiver of per- 
ception, nor know the knower of knowledge. This 
is thy Self, who is within all. Everything also is of — 
evil.’ After that Ushasta Kakrayaza held his peace. 

'"FirrrH. BRAHMANA !. 

1L. Then Kahola Kaushitakeya asked. ‘ YagZa- 
valkya,’ he said, ‘tell me the Brahman which is visible, 
not invisible, the Self (&tman), who is within all.’ 

YagZavalkya replied: ‘This, thy Self, who is 
within all.’ 

‘Which Self, O YagZavalkya, is within all ?' 

Yag£iavalkya replied: * He who overcomes hunger 
and thirst, sorrow, passion, old age, and death. 
When Brahmazas know that Self, and have risen 
above the desire for sons?, wealth, and (new) worlds 3, 
they wander about as mendicants. For a desire for 
sons is desire for wealth, a desire for wealth is desire 
for worlds. Both these are indeed desires. There- 
fore let a Brahmaza, after he has done with learning, 

a Madhyandina text, p. 107 1, standing before the fourth Brahmaza. 

3 See Brzh. Ar. Up. IV, 4, 22. 
* Life in the world of the Fathers, or in the world of the Gods. 

[15] K | 

130 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

wish to stand by real strength?; after he has done 
with that strength and learning, he becomes a Muni 
(a Yogin); and after he has done with what is not 
the knowledge of a Muni, and with what is the 
knowledge of a Muni, he is a Brahmaza. By what- 
ever means he has become a Brahmaza, he is such 
indeed? Everything else is of evil.’ After that 
Kahola Kaushitakeya held his peace. 

SixrH BRAHMANA?. 

I. Then Gargt VaZaknavi asked. ' YagZavalkya,' 
she said, ‘everything here is woven, like warp and 
woof, in water. What then is that in which water is 
woven, like warp and woof ?' 

‘In air, O Gargi,' he replied. 

‘In what then is air woven, like warp and woof ?' 

‘In the worlds of the sky, O Gargt,' he replied. 

‘In what then are the worlds of the sky woven, 
like warp and woof ?' 

‘In the worlds of the Gandharvas, O Gargi, he 
replied. 

. 1 Knowledge of the Self, which enables us to dispense with all 
other knowledge. 

* Mr. Gough proposes as an alternative rendering: ‘Let a 
Br&hmaza renounce learning and become as a child; and after 
renouncing learning and a childlike mind, let him become a 
quietist; and when he has made an end of quietism and non- 
quietism, he shall become a Brahmaza, a Brahmaza indeed.’ 
Deussen takes a similar view, but I doubt whether ‘the knowledge 
of babes' is not a Christian rather than an Indian idea, in spite of 
Sankara’s remarks on Ved. Satra, III, 4, 5o, which are strangely at 
variance with his commentary here. Possibly the text may be cor- 
rupt, for tish/Z&set too is a very peculiar form. We might conjecture 
balyena, as we have abalyam, in IV, 4,1. In Kaush. Up. III, 3, 
&balyam stands for 4balyam, possibly for $balyam. The construc- 
tion of kena syad yena syat tenedrzsa eva, however, is well known. 

? Madhyandina text, p. 1072. 

III ADHYAYA, 6 BRAHMANA, I. I3Ir 

‘In what then are the worlds of the Gandharvas 
woven, like warp and woof ?’ 

‘In the worlds of Aditya (sun), O Gargt,' he replied. 
. ‘In what then are the worlds of Aditya (sun) 
woven, like warp and woof ?’ 

‘In the worlds of a (moon), O Gargi, he 
replied. | 

' In what then are the worlds of X'andra (moon) 
woven, like warp and woof ?’ ! 

‘In the worlds of the Nakshatras (stars), O Gargt,' 
he replied. 

‘In what then are the worlds of the Nakshatras 
(stars) woven, like warp and woof ?' B 

‘In the worlds of the Devas (gods), O Gargi,' he 
replied. 

‘In what then are the worlds of the Devas (gods) 
woven, like warp and woof?’ 

— ‘In the worlds of Indra, O Gargt,' he replied. 

* [n what then are the worlds of Indra woven, like 
warp and woof ?’ 

‘In the worlds of Pragapati, O Gargt, he replied. 

' In what then are the worlds of Pragapati woven, 
like warp and woof ?' 

‘In the worlds of Brahman, O Gargt, he replied. 

‘In what then are the worlds of Brahman woven, 
like warp and woof ?' 

YagMavalkya said: ‘O Gargi, Do not ask too 
much, lest thy head should fall off. Thou askest 
too much about a deity about which we are not to 
ask too much’, Do not ask too much, O Gargt.' 
After that Gargi Va£aknavt held her peace. 

1 According to the commentator questions about Brahman are 
to be answered from the Scriptures only, and not to be settled by 
argument. 

K 2 

132 BRIiTADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

SEVENTH BRAHMANA }, 

1. Then Uddalaka Aruzi? asked. ‘ YAg#avalkya,’ 
he said, * we dwelt among the Madras in the houses 
of Pata#kala Kapya, studying the sacrifice. His 
wife was possessed of a Gandharva, and we asked 
him: “Who art thou?" He answered: “I am 
Kabandha Atharvaza." And he said to Pata#eala 

Kapya and to (us) students : “ Dost thou know, K4pya,. 

that thread by which this world and the other world, 
and all beings are strung together?” And PataZZala 
Kapya replied: “Ido not know it, Sir" He said 
again to Pata#kala Kapya and to (us) students: 
“Dost thou know, Kapya, that puller (ruler) within 
(antaryamin), who within pulls (rules) this world and 
the other world and all beings?” And PataZZala 
Kapya replied: “I do not know it, Sir." He said 
again to Pata#sala Kapya.and to (us) students: 
“He, O Kapya, who knows that thread and him who 
pulls (it) within, he knows Brahman, he knows the 
worlds, he knows the Devas, he knows the Vedas, 
he knows the Bhautas (creatures), he knows the Self, 
he knows everything." Thus did he (the Gandharva) 
say to them, and I know it. If thou, O YagZavalkya, 
without knowing that string and the puller within, 

drivest away those Brahma-cows (the cows offered 

as a prize to him who best knows Brahman), thy 
head will fall off.’ | 

| A Yagfiiavalkya said: ‘O Gautama, I believe I know 

that thread and the puller within.’ 

1 Madhyandina text, p. 1072. 
2 Afterwards addressed as Gautama; see before, p. 1, note. 

III ADHYAYA, 7 BRAHMANA, 7. 133 

The other said: ‘Anybody may say, I know, I 
know. Tell what thou knowest.’ 

2. Yageavalkya said: 'Vayu (air) is that thread, 
O Gautama. By air, as by a thread, O Gautama, 
this world and the other world, and all creatures are 
strung together. "Therefore, O Gautama, people say 
of a dead person that his limbs have become unstrung; 
for by air, as by a thread, O Gautama, they were 
strung together.' 

The other said: ‘So it is, O YagZavalkya. Tell 
now (who is) the puller within.' 
= 3. YAgiiavalkya said : ‘He who dwells in the earth, 
and within the earth!, whom the earth does not 
know, whose body the earth is, and who pulls (rules) 
the earth within, he is thy Self, the puller (ruler) 
within, the immortal.’ 

4. ‘He who dwells in the water, and within the 
water, whom the water does not know, whose body 
the water is, and who pulls (rules) the water within, 
he is thy Self, the puller (ruler) within, the immortal.’ 

5. ‘He who dwells in the fire, and within the frre, 
-© whom the fire does not know, whose body the fire 
is, and who pulls (rules) the fire within, he is thy 
Self, the puller (ruler) within, the immortal. 

6. ‘He who dwells in the sky, and within the 
sky, whom the sky does not know, whose body the 
sky is, and who pulls (rules) the sky within, he is thy 
Self, the puller (ruler) within, the immortal.’ 

7. ' He who dwells in the air (vayu), and within the 
air, whom the air does not know, whose body the 

! I translate antara by ‘within,’ according to the commentator, 
who explains it by abhyantara, but I must confess that I should 
prefer to translate it by ‘ different from,’ as Deussen does, 1. c. p. 160, 
particularly as it governs an ablative. 

134 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

air is, and who pulls (rules) the air within, he is thy 
Self, the puller (ruler) within, the immortal.’ 

8. ‘ He who dwells in the heaven (dyu), and within 
the heaven, whom the heaven does not know, whose 
body the heaven is,and who pulls (rules) the heaven 
within, he is thy Self, the puller (ruler) within, the 
— 

‘He who dwells in the sun (Aditya), and within 
"ba sun, whom the sun does not know, whose body 
the sun is, and who pulls (rules) the sun within, he 
is thy Self, the puller (ruler) within, the immortal.’ 

10. ‘He who dwells in the space (disaZ), and 
within the space, whom the space does not know, 
whose body the space is, and who pulls (rules) the 
space within, he is thy Self, the — Ue) within, 
the immortal.’ 

11. ‘He who dwells in the moon and stars (ene 
dra-tarakam), and within the moon and stars, whom 
the moon and stars do not know, whose body the 
moon and stars are, and who pulls (rules) the moon 
and stars within, he is thy Self, the puller (ruler) 
within, the immortal.’ 

12. ‘He who dwells in the ether (Akasa), and 
within the ether, whom the ether does not know, 
whose body the ether is,and who pulls (rules) the 
ether within, he is thy Self, the puller (ruler) within, 
the immortal.’ 

13. ‘He who dwells in the darkness (tamas), and 
within the darkness, whom the darkness does not 
know, whose body the darkness is, and who pulls 
(rules) the darkness within, he is thy Self, the puller 
(ruler) within, the immortal.’ 

14. ‘He who dwells in the light (tegas), and within 
the light, whom the light does not know, whose 

III ADHYAYA, 7 BRAHMANA, 21. 135 

body the light is, and who pulls (rules) the light 
within, he is thy Self, the puller (ruler) within, the 
immortal.’ 

So far with respect to the gods (adhidaivatam) ; 
now with respect to beings (adhibhutam). 

15. Yag£avalkya said: ‘He who dwells in all 
beings, and within all beings, whom all beings do 
not know, whose body all beings are, and who pulls 
(rules) all beings within, he is thy Self, the puller 
(ruler) within, the immortal.’ 

16. ‘He who dwells in the breath (praza), and 
within the breath, whom the breath does not know, 
whose body the breath is, and who pulls (rules) the 
breath within, he is thy Self, the puller (ruler) within, 
the immortal.’ 

17. ‘He who dwells in the tongue (va£), and 
within the tongue, whom the tongue does not know, 
whose body the tongue is, and who pulls (rules) the 
tongue within, he is thy Self, the puller (ruler) within, 
the immortal.’ 

18. ‘He who dwells in the eye, and within the 
eye, whom the eye does not know, whose hody the 
eye is, and who pulls (rules) the eye within, he is thy 
Self, the puller (ruler) within, the immortal,’ 

19. ‘He who dwells in the ear, and within the 
ear, whom the ear does not know, whose body the 
ear is, and who pulls (rules) the ear within, he is thy 
Self, the puller (ruler) within, the immortal.’ 

20. ‘He who dwells in the mind, and within the 
mind, whom the mind does not know, whose body 
the mind is, and who pulls (rules) the mind within, 
he is thy Self, the puller (ruler) within, the immortal.’ 

21. ‘He who dwells in the skin, and within the 
skin, whom the: skin does not know, whose body the 

136 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. ° 

skin is, and who pulls (rules) the skin within, he is 
thy Self, the puller (ruler) within, the immortal.’ 

22. ‘He who dwells in knowledge !, and within 
knowledge, whom knowledge does not know, whose 
body knowledge is, and who pulls (rules) knowledge 
within, he is thy Self, the puller (ruler) within, the 
immortal.’ 

23. ‘He who dwells in the seed, and within 
the seed, whom the seed does not know, whose 
‘body the seed is, and who pulls (rules) the seed 
within, he is thy Self, the puller (ruler) within, 
the immortal; unseen, but seeing; unheard, but 
hearing ; unperceived, but perceiving ; unknown, but 
knowing. There is no other seer but he, there 
is no other hearer but he, there is no other per- 
ceiver but he, there is no other knower but he. 
This is thy Self, the ruler within, the immortal. 
Everything else is of evil? After that Uddalaka 
Aruni held his peace. 

E1GHTH BRAHMANA ?. 

I. Then VaZaknavi ? said: ‘Venerable Brahmazas, 
I shall ask him two questions. If he will answer 
them, none of you, I think, will defeat him in any 
argument concerning Brahman,’ 

. Yagiavalkya said: ‘ Ask, O Gargt' 

2. She said: ‘O YagZavalkya, as the son of a 
warrior from the Kasis or Videhas might string his 
loosened bow, take two pointed foe-piercing arrows 
in his hand and rise to do battle, I have risen to 

! Self, i.e. the individual Self, according to the Madhyandina 
school; see Deussen, p. 161. 

3 Madhyandina text, p. 1075. 
. 3 Gargi, not the wife of Yagfiavalkya. 

III ADHYAYA, 8 BRAHMANA, 8. 137 

fight thee with two questions. Answer me these 
questions.' 

Yagf£avalkya said: ‘Ask, O Gargt. 

3. She said: ‘O YagZavalkya, that of which they 
say that it is above the heavens, beneath the earth, 
embracing heaven and earth !, past, present, and future, 
tell me in what is it woven, like warp and woof ?’ 

4. YagZavalkya said: ‘That of which they say 
that it is above the heavens, beneath the earth, 
embracing heaven and earth, past, present, and 
future, that is woven, like warp and woof, in the 
ether (akasa).' 

5. She said: ‘I bow to thee, O YagZavalkya, who 
hast solved me that question. Get thee ready for 
the second. 

Yagfiavalkya said? : ‘ Ask, O Gargt.' 

6. She said: ‘O YagZavalkya, that of which they 
say that it is above the heavens, beneath the earth, 
embracing heaven and earth, past, present, and future, 
tell me in what is it woven, like warp and woof?’ 

7. Yagnavalkya said: ‘That of which they say 
that it is above the heavens, beneath the earth, 
embracing heaven and earth, past, present, and future, 
that is woven, like warp and woof, in the ether.' 

Gargt said : ‘In what then is the ether woven, like 
warp and woof?’ | 

8. He said: ‘O Gargt, the Brahmazas call this 
the Akshara (the imperishable). It is neither coarse 
nor fine, neither short nor long, neither red (like fire) 
nor fluid (like water); it is without shadow, with- 
out darkness, without air, without ether, without 

. ! Deussen, p. 143, translates, * between heaven and earth,' but 
that would be the antariksha. 
? This repetition does not occur in the Madhyandina text. 

138 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

attachment!, without taste, without smell, without 
eyes, without ears, without speech, without mind, 
without light (vigour), without breath, without a 
mouth (or door), without measure, having no within 
and no without, it devours nothing, and no one 
devours it.’ 

9. ‘By the command of that Akshara (the im- 
perishable), O Gargt, sun and moon stand apart? 
By the command of that Akshara, O Gargt, 
heaven and earth stand apart. By the command of 
that Akshara, O Gargi, what are called moments 
(nimesha), hours (muhurta), days and nights, half- 
months, months, seasons, years, all stand apart. 
By the command of that Akshara, O Gargt, some 
rivers flow to the East from the white mountains, 
others to the West, or to any other quarter. By 
the command of that Akshara, O Gargt, men praise 
those who give, the gods follow the sacrificer, the 
fathers the Darvi-offering.’ 

10. ‘Whosoever, O Gargt, without knowing that 
Akshara (the imperishable), offers oblations in this 
world, sacrifices, and performs penance for a thou- 
sand years, his work will have an end. Whosoever, 
O Gargt, without knowing this Akshara, departs this 
world, he is miserable (like a slave)’. But he, O 
Gargt, who departs this world, mowing this Akshara, 
he is a Brahmaza. 

1I. ‘That Brahman, O Gargi, is unseen, but 
seeing; unheard, but hearing; unperceived, but per- 
ceiving; unknown, but knowing. There is nothing 

1 Not adhering to anything, like lac or gum. 

2 Fach follows its own course. 

* * He stores up the effects from work, like a miser his riches,’ 
Roer. ‘Hei is helpless; Gough. 

III ADHYAYA, 9 BRAHMANA, I. 139 

that sees but it, nothing that hears but it, nothing 
that perceives but it, nothing that knows but it. In 
that Akshara then, O Gargt, the ether is woven, 
like warp and woof.’ ) 

12. Then said Gargt: ‘Venerable Brahmans, you 
may consider it a great thing, if you get off by bowing 
before him. No one, I believe, will defeat him in 
any argument concerning Brahman.’ After that 

VaZaknavt held her peace. 

NINTH BRAHMANA . 

1. Then Vidagdha Sakalya asked him?: ‘How many 
gods are there, O YagZavalkya?' He replied with 
this very Nivid?: ‘As many as are mentioned in the 
Nivid of the hymn of praise addressed to the Vis- 
vedevas, viz. three and three hundred, three and 
three thousand £, 

‘Yes,’ he said, and asked again: ‘ How many gods 
are there really, O YagZavalkya ?' 

‘Thirty-three,’ he said. 

1 Madhyandina text, p. 1076. 

2 This disputation between YAagfavalkya and Vidagdha Sakalya 
occurs in a simpler form in the Satapatha-brahmaza, XI, p. 873. 
He is here represented as the first who defies Yag#avalkya, and 
whom Yagfiavalkya asks at once, whether the other Brahmans 
had made him the ulmukavakshayaza, the cat's paw, literally one 
who has to take a burning piece of wood out of the fire (ardha- 
dagdhakash/zam ulmukam; tasya vahirnirasanam avakshayazam 
vinasah). The end, however, is different, for on asking the nature 
of the one god, the Praza, he is told by Yagfavalkya that he has 
asked for what he ought not to ask, and that therefore he will die 
and thieves will carry away his bones. 
- $ Nivid, old and short invocations of the gods ; devatasankhya&- 
vakak4ni mantrapadani kanifid vaisvadeve sastre sasyante. Sankara 
and Dvivedagahga. | 

* This would make 3306 devatas. 

140 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

‘Yes,’ he said, and asked again : ‘ How many gods 
are there really, O Yag#avalkya ?' 

‘Six, he said. 

' Yes, he said, and asked again : ' How many gods 
are there really, O YagZavalkya ?' 

‘Three,’ he said. 

‘Yes,’ he said, and asked again: ‘ How many gods 
are there really, O YagZavalkya ?' 

‘Two,’ he said. 

‘Yes,’ he said, and asked again : * How many gods 
are there really, O YagZavalkya ?' 

‘One and a half (adhyardha), he said. 

‘Yes,’ he said, and asked again : ‘How many gods 
are there really, O YagZavalkya ?' 

* One, he said. 

“Yes, he said, and asked: ‘Who are these three 
and three hundred, three and three thousand?’ 

2. Yag£avalkya replied: ‘They are only the 
various powers of them, in reality there are only 
thirty-three gods 1? 

He asked: ‘ Who are those thirty-three?’ 

YagZavalkya replied : ‘The eight Vasus,the eleven 
Rudras, the twelve Adityas. They make thirty-one, 
and Indra and Pragapati make the thirty-three ?.' 

3. He asked: ‘Who are the Vasus.' 

Yag£avalkya replied: ‘Agni (fire), Pvzthivi 
(earth), VAyu (air), Antariksha (sky), Aditya (sun), 
Dyu (heaven), Kandramas (moon), the Nakshatras 
(stars), these are the Vasus, for in them all that 
dwells (this world)? rests; and therefore they are 
called Vasus.' 

! *'The glories of these are three and thirty. Gough, p. 172. 
? "Trayastrizzsau, i. e. trayastrimsatahk purazau. 
* The etymological explanation of Vasu is not quite clear, and 

III ADHYAYA, 9 BRAHMANA, 8. 

4. He asked : ‘Who are the Rudras ?' 

Yagiavalkya replied : ‘These ten vital breaths 
(prazas, the senses, i.e. the five gZanendriyas, and 
the five karmendriyas), and Atman}, as the eleventh. 
When they depart from this mortal body, they make 
us cry (rodayanti), and because they make us cry, — 
they are called Rudras.' 

5. He asked: ‘Who are the Adityas?' 

YagZavalkya replied: ‘The twelve months of the 
year, and they are Adityas, because they move along 
(yanti), taking up everything? (&dadanaZ). Because 
they move along, taking up everything, therefore 
they are called Adityas.' 

6. He asked: *And who is Indra, and who is 
Prazapati ?' | | 

YagZiavalkya replied: * Indra is thunder, Pragapati 
is the sacrifice.’ 

He asked: ‘And what is the thunder ?' 

Yagfiavalkya replied : ‘The thunderbolt.’ 

He asked : ‘And what is the sacrifice?’ 

YagZavalkya replied : * The (sacrificial) animals,’ 

7. He asked: ‘Who are the six ?' 

Yagfiavalkya replied : ‘Agni (fire), Pzzthivt (earth), 
Vayu (air) Antariksha (sky), Aditya (sun) Dyu 
(heaven), they are the six, for they are all? this, 
the six.' 

8. He asked: ‘Who are the three gods?’ 

the commentator hardly explains our text. Perhaps vasu is meant 
for the world or the dwellers therein. The more usual explanation 
occurs in the Satap. Brah. p. 1077, ete hidam sarvam vasayante 
tadyad idam sarvam vasayante tasmad vasava iti; or on p. 874, 
where we read te yad idaz sarvam &c. 

! Atman is here explained as manas, the common sensory. 

2 The life of men, and the fruits of their work. 

* They are the thirty-three gods.. 

142 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

YagZavalkya replied: "These three worlds, for in 
them all these gods exist.’ 

- He asked: ‘Who are the two gods?” 

Yagnavalkya replied : ‘Food and breath.’ 

He asked : ‘Who is the one god and a half?’ 

Yagfiavalkya replied : ‘ He that blows.’ 

9. Here they say: ‘How is it that he who blows 
like one only, should be called one and a half (adhyar- 
dha)?’ And the answer is : ' Because, when the wind 
was blowing, everything grew (adhyardhnot),’ 

- He asked: ‘Who is the one god?’ 

Yagflavalkya replied: ‘Breath (praza), and he is 

Brahman (the Sutratman), and they call him That 

(tyad). 

IO. Sakalya said?: AVbosoever knows that person 
(or god) whose dwelling (body) is the earth, whose 
sight (world) is fire?, whose mind is light, —the prin- 

1 I prefer to attribute this to Sakalya, who is still the questioner, 
and not Yaefiavalkya; but I am not quite satisfied that I am right 
in this, or in the subsequent distribution of the parts, assigned to 
each speaker. If Sakalya is the questioner, then the sentence, veda 
va aham tam purusham sarvasyatmanaZ par&yazam yam attha, must 
belong to Yagnavalkya, because he refers to the words of another 
speaker. Lastly, the sentence vadaiva has to be taken as addressed 
to Sakalya. The commentator remarks that, he being the ques- 
` tioner, one expects przkkha instead of vada. But Yagfiavalkya 
may also be supposed to turn round on Sakalya and ask him a 
question in turn, more difficult than the question addressed: by 
Sakalya to Yagfavalkya, and in that case the last sentence must 
be taken as an answer, though an imperfect one, of Sakalya’s. 
The commentator seems to think that after Yagfavalkya told 
Sakalya to ask this question, Sakalya was frightened and asked 
it, and that then Yag#avalkya answered in turn. 

2 The Madhyandina text varies considerably. It has the first 
time, Aashur loka% for agnir loka7. I keep to the same construc- 
tion throughout, taking mano eyotiZ, not as a compound, but like 
agnir loko yasya, as a sentence, i. e. mano gyotir yasya. 

III ADHYAYA, 9 BRAHMANA, f 3. 143 

ciple of every (living) self, he indeed is a teacher, 
O Yagiiavalkya.’ 

YagZavalkya said: ‘I know that person, the prin- 
ciple of every self, of whom thou speakest. This 
corporeal (material, earthy) person, “heis he." But 
tell me!, .Sakalya, who is his devata ? (deity) ?’ 

SAkalya replied: ‘The Immortal.’ 

11. Sakalya said : ‘Whosoever knows that person 
whose dwelling is love (a body capable of sensual 
love), whose sight is the heart, whose mind is light,— 
the principle of every self, he indeed is a teacher, 
O YagZavalkya.' 

YagZavalkya replied: ‘I know that person, the 
principle of every self, of whom thou speakest. This 
love-made (loving) person, “he is he.” But tell me, 
SAkalya, who is his devata ?’ 

Sakalya replied: ‘The women *' 

12. SAkalya said : ‘Whosoever knows that person 
whose dwelling are the colours, whose sight is the 
eye, whose mind is light, —the principle of every self, 
he indeed is a teacher, O YagZavalkya.' 

YagZavalkya replied: ‘I know that person, the 
principle of every self, of whom thou speakest. That 
person in the sun, “he is he.” But tell me, .Sakalya, 
who is his devata ?” 

SAkalya replied: ‘The True 5, . 

13. .Sakalya said : ‘Whosoever knows that person 

! Ask me. Comm. 

2 That from which he is produced, that is his devata. Comm. 

3 According to the commentator, the essence of food, which 
produces blood, from which the germ receives life and becomes an 
embryo and a living being. 

* Because they excite the fire of love. Comm. 

5 'The commentator explains satya, the true, by the eye, because 
the sun owes its origin to the eye. 

144 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

whose dwelling is ether, whose sight is the ear, whose 
mind is light,—the principle of every self, he indeed 
is a teacher, O YagZavalkya. 

Yagwavalkya replied: ‘I know that person, the 
principle of every self, of whom thou speakest. The 
person who hears! and answers, “he is he.” But 
tell me, SAkalya, who is his devata?' 

Sakalya replied : ‘Space.’ 

14. Sakalya said: ‘Whosoever knows that person 
whose dwelling is darkness, whose sight is the heart, 
whose mind is light,—the principle of every self, he 
indeed is a teacher, O YagZavalkya.' 

YagZavalkya replied: ‘I know that person, the 
principle of every self, of whom thou speakest. The 
shadowy” person, “he is he.” But tell me, .Sakalya, 
who is his devate ?’ 

Sakalya replied: ‘Death.’ 

15. Sakalya said: ‘Whosoever knows that person 
whose dwelling are (bright) colours, whose sight is 
the eye, whose mind is light,—the principle of every 
self, he indeed is a teacher, O YagZavalkya.' 

Yagfavalkya replied: ‘I know that person, the 
principle of every self, of whom thou speakest. The 
person in the looking-glass, “he is he.” But tell 
me, Sakalya, who is his devata ?' 

Sakalya replied: ‘Vital breath’ (asu). 

16. Sakalya said : ‘Whosoever knows that person 
whose dwelling is water, whose sight is the heart, 
whose mind is light,—the principle of every self, he 
indeed is a teacher, O YagZavalkya. 

1 Read srautra instead of srotra; see Brih. Ar. Up. II, 5, 6. 
2 Shadow, A#aya, is explained here by agnrana, ignorance, not 
by gnnana, knowledge. 

III ADHYAYA, 9 BRAHMANA, I9. I45 

YagZavalkya replied: ‘I know that person, the 
principle of every self, of whom thou speakest. The 
person in the water, “he is he.” But tell me, .Sakalya, 
who is his devata?"' 

Sakalya replied: * Varuza.' 

17. SAkalya said: ‘Whosoever knows that person 
whose dwelling is seed, whose sight is the heart, 
whose mind is light,—the principle of every self, he 
indeed is a teacher, O YagZavalkya.' 

YagMiavalkya replied: ‘I know that person, the 
principle of every self, of whom thou speakest. The 
filial person, “he is he." But tell me, .Sakalya, who 
is his devata ?' 

Sakalya replied : * Pragapati.' 

18. Yag/avalkya said: '.Sakalya, did those Brah- 
mazas (who themselves shrank from the contest) 
make thee the victim! ?' 

SSakalya said: ‘YAg#avalkya, because thou hast 
decried the Brahmazas of the Kuru-Pazi£Alas, what ? 
Brahman dost thou know ?' 

19. YagZavalkya said: ‘I know the quarters with 
their deities and their abodes.’ 

! Angaravakshayama is explained as a vessel in which coals are 
extinguished, and Anandagiri adds that Yaefiavalkya, in saying that 
Sakalya was made an angaravakshayaza by his fellow Brahmans, 
meant that he was given up by them as a victim, in fact that 
he was being burnt or consumed by Yaefiavalkya. I should prefer 
to take ahngaravakshayaza in the sense of ulmukavakshayaza, an 
instrument with which one takes burning coals from the fire to 
extinguish them, a pair of tongs. Read sandamsa instead of sandesa. 
Kshi with ava means to remove, to take away. We should call 
an ahgaravakshayaza a cat's paw. The Brahmazas used Sakalya 
as a cat's paw. 

* [t seems better to take kim as the interrogative pronoun than 
as an interrogative particle. 

[5] L 

146 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

,Sakalya said: ‘If thou knowest the quarters with 
their deities and their abodes, 

20. ‘Which is thy deity in the Eastern quarter?’ 

Yagfiavalkya said: ‘ Aditya (the sun). | 

Sakalya said: ‘In what does that Aditya abide ?' 

Yagnavalkya said: ‘In the eye.’ 

Sakalya said: ‘In what does the eye abide?’ 

YagZavalkya said: ‘In the colours, for with the 
eye he sees the colours.’ 

Sakalya said: ‘And in what then do the colours 
abide?’ 

Yagfavalkya said: ‘In the heart}, for we know 
colours by the heart, for colours abide in the heart?.’ 
Sakalya said: ‘So it is indeed, O YagZavalkya.' 

21. Sakalya said: ‘Which is thy deity in the 
Southern quarter ?' 

Yagiavalkya said: ‘ Yama.’ 

Sakalya said: ‘In what does that Yama abide?’ 

Yagavalkya said: ‘In the sacrifice.’ 

Sakalya said: ‘In what does the sacrifice abide?’ 

YagZavalkya said: ‘In the Dakshiza (the gifts to 
be given to the priests).' 

Sakalya said : ‘In what does the Dakshiza abide ?’ 

Yagsavalkya said: ‘In Sraddha (faith), for if a 
man believes, then he gives Dakshiza, and Dakshina 
truly abides in faith.’ 

,Sakalya said: ‘And in what then does faith abide?’ 

YagZavalkya said: ‘In the heart, for by the heart 
faith knows, and therefore faith abides in the heart.’ 

,Sakalya said : ‘So it is indeed, O YagZavalkya.' 

! Heart stands here for buddhi and manas together. Comm. 

2 [n the text, published by Dr. Roer in the Bibliotheca Indica, a 
sentence is left out, viz. hrzdaya ity uva£a, hridayena hi rupasi 
ganati, hrzdaye hy eva rupazi pratish/Aitani bhavantity. 

III ADHYAYA, 9 BRAHMANA, 24. 147 

22. Sakalya said: ‘Which is thy deity in the 
Western quarter ?' 

Yagsiavalkya said : ‘Varuma,’ 

Sakalya said: ‘In what does that Varuza abide?’ 

. Yagsiavalkya said: ‘In the water.’ | 

SAkalya said: ‘In what does the water abide ?' 

Yagsiavalkya said : ‘In the seed.’ 

Sakalya said: ‘And in what does the seed abide?’ 

Yagnavalkya said: *In the heart. And therefore 
also they say of a son who is like his father, that he 
seems as if slipt from his heart, or made from his 
heart; for the seed abides in the heart.’ 

Sakalya said: ‘So it is indeed, O Yagiavalkya!. 

23. .Sakalya said: ‘Which is thy deity in the 
Northern quarter ?' 

Yagnavalkya said: ‘Soma.’ 

Sakalya said: ‘In what does that Soma abide?’ 

Yagfiavalkya said: ‘In the Diksha 1’ 

Sakalya said : ‘In what does the Diksha abide?’ 

Yagnavalkya said: ‘In the True; and therefore 
they say to one who has performed the Diksha, 
Speak what is true, for in the True indeed the 
Diksha abides.’ | 

Sakalya said : ‘And in what does the True abide?’ 

Yagsiavalkya said : ‘In the heart, for with the heart 
do we know what is true, and in the heart indeed 
the True abides.’ | 

SAkalya said : ‘So it is indeed, O YagZavalkya.' 

24. Sakalya said: ‘Which is thy deity in the 
zenith ?' 

1 Diksha is the initiatory rite for the Soma sacrifice. Having 
sacrificed with Soma which has to be bought, the sacrificer becomes 
endowed with wisdom, and wanders to the North, which is the 
quarter of Soma. 

L 2 

148 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

Yagnavalkya said: ‘Agni.’ 

Sakalya said : ‘In what does that Agni abide.’ 

Yagsiavalkya said : ‘In speech.’ 

Sakalya said: ‘And in what does speech abide ?’ 

Yagsiavalkya said: ‘In the heart.’ 

Sakalya said: ‘And in what does the heart abide?’ 

25. Yag#avalkya said: ʻO Ahallika!, when you 
think the heart could be anywhere else away from 
us, if it were away from us, the dogs might eat it, 
or the birds tear it. 

26. Sakalya said: ‘And in what dost thou (thy 
body) and the Self (thy heart) abide?’ — 

Yagnavalkya said : ‘In the Praza (breath). 

Sakalya said: ‘In what does the Praza abide ?' 

YagZavalkya said: ‘In the Apana (down- 
breathing)? 

Sakalya said: ‘In what does the Apana abide?’ 

YAgaavalkya said: ‘In theV yana(back-breathing)*- 

Sakalya said: ‘In what does the Vy4na abide ?' 

Yagnavalkya said: ‘In the Udana (the out-breath- 
ing)*.' 

Sakalya said : ‘In what does the Udana abide ?' 

YagAavalkya said: ‘In the Samana* That Self 

1 A term of reproach, it may be a ghost or preta, because ahani 
liyate, it disappears by day. 

? Because the praza would run away, if it were not held back by 
the apana. 

3 Because the apana would run down, and the praza up, if they 
were not held back by the vyana. 

* Because all three, the praza, apana, and vyana, would run 
away in all directions, if they were not fastened to the udana. 

5 The Samana can hardly be meant here for one of the five 
prazas, generally mentioned before the udana, but, as explained by 
Dvivedaganga, stands for the Sutratman. This Sutratman abides 
in the Antaryamin, and this in the Brahman (Ka/astha), which is 

III ADHYAVA, 9 BRAHMANA, 28, | 149 

(&tman) is to be described by No, no!! Hle is in- 
comprehensible, for he cannot be (is not) compre- 
hended ; he is imperishable, for he cannot perish; he’ 
is unattached, for he does not attach himself; unfet- 
tered, he does not suffer, he does not fail.’ 

‘These are the eight abodes (the earth, &c.), the 
eight worlds (fire, &c.), the eight gods (the immortal 
food, &c.), the eight persons (the corporeal, &c.) 
He who after dividing and uniting these persons ?, 
went beyond (the Samana), that person, taught in 
the Upanishads, I now ask thee (to teach me). 
If thou shalt not explain him to me, thy head 
will fall.’ 

Sakalya did not know him, and his head fell, nay, 
thieves took away his bones, mistaking them for 
something else. 

27. Then Yag£avalkya said: ‘Reverend Brah- 
mazas, whosoever among you desires to do so, may 
now question me. Or question me, all of you. Or 
whosoever among you desires it, I shall question 
him, or I shall question all of you. 

But those Brahmazas durst not (say anything). 

28. Then YagZavalkya questioned them with 
these Slokas: - 

I. 'As a mighty tree in the forest, so in truth is 
man, his hairs are the leaves, his outer skin is 
the bark. 

2. 'From his skin flows forth blood, sap from 
the skin (of the tree); and thus from the wounded 

therefore described next. Could Samana be here the same as in 
IV, 5, 7? 

1 See before, II, 3, 6; also IV, 2, 4; IV, 4, 22; IV, 5, 15. 

? Dividing them according to the different abodes, worlds, and 
persons, and uniting them at last in the heart. 

150 - BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

man! comes forth blood, as from a tree that is 
struck, 

3. ‘The lumps of his flesh are (in the tree) the 
layers of wood, the fibre is strong like the ten- 
dons?. The bones are the (hard) wood within, the 
marrow is made like the marrow of the tree. 

4. ‘But, while the tree, when felled, grows up 
again more young from the root, from what root, 
tell me, does a mortal grow up, after he has been 
felled by death ? 

5. ‘Do not say, “from seed,” for seed is produced - 
from the living?; but a tree, springing from a grain, 
clearly * rises again after death *. 

6. ‘If a tree is pulled up with the root, it will not 
grow again; from what root then, tell me, does a. 
mortal grow up, after he has been felled by death ? 

7. ‘Once born, he is not born (again); for who 
should create him again®?’ 

1 In the Madhyandina-sakha, p. 1080, tasmat tadatunnat, instead 
of tasmat tadatrznat. 

? Sankara seems to have read snavavat, instead of snava tat 
sthiram, as we read in both .Sakhas. 

$ Here the Madhyandinas (p. 1080) add, gata eva na gayate, ko 
^ nv enam ganayet punaZ, which the Kazvas place later. 
* Instead of afigasa, the Madhyandinas have anyataZ. 
5 The Madhyandinas have dhanaruha u vai, which is better than 
. iva vai, the iva being, according to Sankara’s own confession, use- 
less. The thread of the argument does not seem to have been 
clearly perceived by the commentators. What the poet wants to 
say is, that a man, struck down by death, does not come to life 
again from seed, because human seed comes from the living only, 
while trees, springing from grain, are seen to. come to life after the 
tree (which yielded the grain or the seed) is dead.  Pretya-sam- 
bhava, like pretya-bhava, means life after death, and pretyasam- 
bhava, as an adjective, means coming to life after death. 

* This line too is taken in a different sense by the commentator. 
According to him, it would mean: *If you say, He has been born 

III ADHYAYA, 9 BRAHMANA, 28. ISI 

‘Brahman, who is knowledge and bliss, he is the 
principle, both to him who gives gifts!, and also to 
him who stands firm, and knows.’ 

(and there is an end of all questioning), I say, No; he is born 
again, and the question is, How?’ "This is much too artificial. The 
order of the verses in the Madhyandina-sakha is better on the 
whole, leading up more naturally to the question, * From what root 
then does a mortal grow up, after he has been felled by death ?' 
When the Brahmans cannot answer, Yagfavalkya answers, or the 
Sruti declares, that the root from whence a mortal springs again, 
after death, is Brahman. 

1 Sankara explains ratir datuZ as rater datuZ, a reading adopted 
by the Madhyandinas. He then arrives at the statement that 
Brahman is the principle or the last source, also the root of a new 
life, both for those who practise works and for those who, having 
relinquished works, stand firm in knowledge. Regnaud (II, p. 138) 
translates: ‘C’est Brahma (qui est) l'intelligence, le bonheur, la 
richesse, le but supreme de celui qui offre (des sacrifices), et de 
celui qui reside (en lui), de celui qui connait, 

152 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

FOURTH ADHYAYA. ; 

: First BRAHMANA. 

I. When Ganaka Vaideha was sitting (to give 
audience), YagZavalkya approached, and Ganaka 
Vaideha said: 'YagZavalkya, for what object did 

. you come, wishing for cattle, or for subtle ques- 
tions ! ?' 

Yag/avalkya replied: ‘For both, Your Majesty ; 

2. ‘Let us hear what anybody may have told you.’ 

Ganaka Vaideha replied : * Gitvan .Sailini told me 
that speech (va) is Brahman.’ 

Yag£avalkya said: ‘As one who had (the benefit 
of a good) father, mother, and teacher might tell, so 
did Sailini? tell you, that speech is Brahman; for 
what is the use of a dumb person? But did he tell 
you the body (Ayatana) and the resting-place (pra- 
tishZZa) of that Brahman?’ 

Ganaka Vaideha said: ‘ He did not tell me.’ 

Yagvavalkya said : ‘ Your Majesty, this (Brahman) 
stands on one leg only?.' 

Ganaka Vaideha said: ‘Then tell me, Yag#avalkya.’ 

1 Azv-anta, formed like Sfitranta, Siddhanta, and probably Ve- 
danta, means subtle questions. 

2 Roer and Poley give here Sailina; Weber also (pp. 1080 and 
1081) has twice Sailina (Silinasyapatyam). 

3 This seems to mean that Gitvan’s explanation of Brahman is 
lame or imperfect, because there are four padas of that Brahman, 
and he taught one only. The other three are its body, its place, 
and its form of worship (prag£etiyam upanishad brahmazas fatur- 
tha% padaZ). See also Maitr. Up. VII, p. 221. 

IV ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, 3. 153 

YAguavalkya said: ‘The tongue is its body, ether 
its place, and one should worship it as knowledge.’ | 
Ganaka Vaideha said: ‘ What is the nature of that 

knowledge ?’ 

YAgiavalkya replied: ‘Your Majesty, speech itself ~ 
(is knowledge). For through speech, Your Majesty, 
a friend is known (to be a friend), and likewise the 
Rig-veda, Yagur-veda, Sama-veda, the Atharvangi- 
rasas, the Itihasa (tradition), Puraza-vidya (know- 
ledge of the past), the Upanishads, Slokas (verses), 
Sutras (rules), Anuvyakhyanas and Vyakhyanas 
(commentaries!, &c.); what is sacrificed, what is 
poured out, what is (to be) eaten and drunk, this 
world and the other world, and all creatures. By 
speech alone, Your Majesty, Brahman is known, speech 
indeed, O King, is the Highest Brahman. Speech 
does not desert him who worships that (Brahman) 
with such knowledge, all creatures approach him, 
and having become a god, he goes to the gods.’ 

Ganaka Vaideha said: 'I shall give you (for 
this) a thousand cows with a bull as big as an 
elephant.' 

YagZavalkya said: ‘My father was of opinion that 
one should not accept a reward without having fully 
instructed a pupil.’ 

3. YagZavalkya said: * Let us hear what anybody 
may have told you. 

Ganaka Vaideha replied: ‘Udanka .Saulbayana 
told me that life (praza)? is Brahman. xs 
Yagf£avalkya said: ‘As one who had (the benefit of 

a good) father, mother, and teacher might tell, so did 

! See before, II, 4, 10; and afterwards, IV, 5, 11. 
2 See Taitt. Up. III, 3. 

154 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

Udanka .Saulbayana tell you that life is Brahman ; 
for what is the use of a person without life? But 
did he tell you the body and the resting-place of 
that Brahman?’ 
Ganaka Vaideha said: ‘ He did not tell me.’ 
Yagnavalkya said: * Your Majesty, this (Brahman) 
stands on one leg only.’ 
Ganaka Vaideha said; ‘Then tell me, YazgZa- 
valkya.' 
Yagfavalkya said: ‘Breath is its body, ether its 
loue and one should worship it as what is dear.’ 
Ganaka Vaideha said: ‘What is the nature of that 
which is dear ?’ 
Yagfavalkya replied: ‘Your Majesty, life itself 
(is that which is dear);’ because for the sake of life, 
Your Majesty, a man sacrifices even for him who is 
unworthy of sacrifice, he accepts presents from him 
who is not worthy to bestow presents, nay, he goes 
to a country, even when there is fear of being hurt}, 
for the sake of life. Life, O King, is the Highest 
Brahman. Life does not desert him who worships 
that (Brahman) with such knowledge, all creatures 
approach him, and having become a god, he goes to 
the gods.’ 
Ganaka Vaideha said: ‘I shall give you (for this) 
a thousand cows with a bull as big as an elephant.’ 
Yagnavalkya said: ‘My father was of opinion that 
. one should not accept a reward without having fully 
instructed a pupil.’ 
4. YagZavalkya said: ‘ Let us hear what anybody 
may have told you.’ 

? Or it may mean, he is afraid of being hurt, to whatever country 
he goes, for the sake of a livelihood. 

IV ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, 5. 155 

Ganaka Vaideha replied; ‘Barku Varshza told me 
that sight (£akshus) is Brahman.’ 

Yaegfiavalkya said: ‘As one who had (the benefit 
of a good) father, mother, and teacher might tell, so 
did Barku Varshza tell you that sight is Brahman; 
for what is the use of a person who cannot see? 
But did he tell you the body and the resting-place 
of that Brahman ?’ 

Ganaka Vaideha said: ‘ He did not tell me.’ 

Yagnavalkya said: ‘ Your Majesty, this (Brahman) 
stands on one leg only.’ 

Ganaka Vaideha said: ‘Then tell me, YagZa- 
valkya.' 

Yagiiavalkya said: ‘The eye is its body, ether its _ 
place, and one should worship it as what is true.' 

Ganaka Vaideha said: * What is the nature of that 
which is true ?’ 

YAgvavalkya replied: ‘Your Majesty, sight itself 
(is that. which is true); for if they say to a man who 
sees with his eye, “‘ Didst thou see ?” and he says, “I 
saw, then it is true. Sight, O King, is the Highest 
Brahman, Sight does not desert him who worships 
that (Brahman) with such knowledge, all creatures 
approach him, and having become a god, he goes to 
the gods.’ 

Ganaka Vaideha said: ‘I shall give you (for this) 
a thousand cows with a bull as big as an elephant.’ 

Yagfavalkya said: ‘My father was of opinion that 
one should not accept a reward without having fully 
instructed a pupil.’ | 

5. YagMiavalkya said: ‘Let us hear what anybody 
may have told you.’ 

Ganaka Vaideha replied: ‘Gardabhivibhita Bha- 
radvaga told me that hearing (srotra) is Brahman.’ 

156 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD, 

Yagvavalkya said: ‘As one who had (the benefit 
of a good) father, mother, and teacher might tell, so 
did Gardabhivibhita Bharadvaga tell you that hear- 
ing is Brahman; for what is the use of a person who 
cannot hear? But did he tell you the body and the 
resting-place of that Brahman ?' 

Ganaka Vaideha said: ‘ He did not tell me.’ 

Yagnavalkya said : ' Your Majesty, this (Brahman) 
stands on one leg only.’ 

Ganaka Vaideha said: ‘Then tell me, YAgea- 
valkya,’ 

` Yagsiavalkya said: ‘The ear is its body, ether its 
place, and we should worship it as what is endless.’ 

Ganaka Vaideha said: ‘What is the nature of that 
which is endless ?’ 

YagZavalkya replied: ‘Your Majesty, space 
(disaZ) itself (is that which 1s endless), and therefore 
to whatever space (quarter) he goes, he never comes 
to the end of it. For space is endless. Space indeed, 
O King, is hearing !, and hearing indeed, O King, is 
the Highest Brahman. Hearing does not desert 
him who worships that (Brahman) with such know- 
ledge, all creatures approach him, and having become 
a god, he goes to the gods.’ 

Ganaka Vaideha said: ‘I shall give you (for this) 
a thousand cows with a bull as big as an elephant.’ 

Yag£avalkya said: ‘My father was of opinion that 
one should not accept a reward without having fully 
instructed a pupil.’ 

6. Yag#avalkya said : ‘Let us hear what anybody 
may have told you.’ 

1 Dvivedagahga states, digbhago hi parthivadhish/2anavakshin- 
na% srotram ity ufyate, atas tayor ekatvam. 

IV ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, 7. 157 

-  Ganaka Vaideha replied: *Satyakama Gabala told 
me that mind! (manas) is Brahman.’ 

Y&gZavalkya said: ‘As one who had (the benefit 
of a good) father, mother, and teacher might tell, so 
did Satyakama Gabala tell you that mind is Brah- 
man ; for what is the use of a person without mind ? 
But did he tell you the body and the resting-place of 
that Brahman ?' 

Ganaka Vaideha said: ‘ He did not tell me.’ 

Yag#avalkya said : ‘Your Majesty, this (Brahman) 
stands on one leg only.’ 

Ganaka Vaideha said: ‘Then tell me, YAag#avalkya.’ 

Yagnavalkya said: ‘ Mind itself is its body, ether 
its place, and we should worship it as bliss.’ 

Ganaka Vaideha said: ‘What is the nature of bliss ?’ 

YagZavalkya replied: ‘ Your Majesty, mind itself; 
for with the mind does a man desire a woman, and 
a like son is born of her, and he is bliss. Mind 
indeed, O King, is the Highest Brahman. Mind 
does not desert him who worships that (Brahman) 
with such knowledge, all creatures approach him, and 
having become a god, he goes to the gods.’ 

Ganaka Vaideha said: ‘I shall give you (for this) 
a thousand cows with a bull as big as an elephant.’ 

Yagiiavalkya said: ‘My father was of opinion that 
one should not accept a reward without having fully 
instructed a pupil.’ 

7. Yagdavalkya said: ‘ Let us hear what anybody 
may have told you.’ 

Ganaka Vaideha replied: ‘Vidagdha Sakalya told 
me that the heart (hzzdaya) is Brahman.’ 

YagZavalkya said: ‘As one who had (the benefit 

! See also Taitt. Up. III, 4. 

158 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

of a good) father, mother, and teacher might tell, so 
did Vidagdha .Sakalya tell you that the heart is 
Brahman ; for what is the use of a person without a 
heart? But did he tell you the body and the resting- 
place of that Brahman ?’ 

Ganaka Vaideha said: ‘ He did not tell me.’ 

YAgfavalkya said: * Your Majesty, this (Brahman) 
stands on one leg only.’ 

Ganaka Vaideha said: ‘Then tell me, Yag#avalkya.’ 

YagZavalkya said: ‘The heart itself is its body, 
ether its place, and we should worship it as certainty 
(sthiti).’ 

Ganaka Vaideha said: ‘What is the nature of 
certainty ?’ | | | 

Yagfavalkya replied: ‘Your Majesty, the heart 
itself; for the heart indeed, O King, is the body of 
all things, the heart is the resting-place of all things, 
for in the heart, O King, all things rest. The heart 
indeed, O King, is the Highest Brahman. The 
heart does not desert him who worships that (Brah- 
man) with such knowledge, all creatures approach 

| . him, and having become a god, he goes to the gods.’ 

Ganaka Vaideha said: ‘I shall give you (for this) 
a thousand cows with a bull as big as an elephant.’ 

Yag£avalkya said: ‘My father was of opinion 
that one should not accept a reward without having 
fully instructed a pupil.’ 

SECOND BRAHMANA, 
I. Ganaka Vaideha, descending from his throne, 
said: ‘I bow to you, O Yag#avalkya, teach me.’ 
Yagsiavalkya said: ‘Your Majesty, as a man who 
wishes to make a long journey, would furnish him- 
self with a chariot or a ship, thus is your mind well 

IV ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, 3. 159 

furnished by these Upanishadst. You are honour- 
able, and wealthy, you have learnt the Vedas and 
been told the Upanishads. Whither then will you 
go when departing hence ?’ | 

Ganaka Vaideha said: *Sir, I do not know whither 
I shall go.’ 

YagZavalkya said: ‘Then I shall tell you this, 
whither you will go.’ 

Ganaka Vaideha said: ‘ Tell it, Sir.’ 

2. YagZavalkya said: ‘ That person who is in the 
right eye ?, he is called Indha, and him who is Indha 
they call indeed? Indra mysteriously, for the gods love 
what is mysterious, and dislike what is evident. 

3. ‘ Now that which in the shape of a person is in 
the right eye, is his wife, Virag*. Their meeting- 
place ® is the ether within the heart, and their food 
the red lump within the heart. Again, their 
covering * is that which is like net-work within the 
heart, and the road on which they move (from sleep 
to waking) is the artery that rises upwards from the 
heart. Like a hair divided into a thousand parts, so 
are the veins of it, which are called Hita’, placed 

' This refers to the preceding doctrines which had been commu- 
nicated to Ganaka by other teachers, and particularly to the upasanas 
of Brahman as knowledge, dear, true, endless, bliss, and iem 

2 See also Maitr. Up. VII, p. 216. 

? The Madhyandinas read parokshezeva, but the commentator 
explains iva by eva. See also Ait. Up. I, 3, 14. 

t Indra is called by the commentator Vaisvanara, and his wife 
Virag. This couple, in a waking state, is Visva ; in sleep, Taigasa. 

5 Samstava, lit. the place where they sing praises together, that 
is, where they meet. $ 

6 Pravaraza may also mean hiding-place, retreat. 

” Hita, a name frequently given to these nadis; see IV, 3, 20; 
Khand. Up. VI, 5, 3, comm.; Kaush. Up. IV, 20. See also Kasha 
Up. VI, 16. 

160 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

firmly within the heart. Through these indeed that 
(food) flows on flowing, and he (the Taigasa) receives 
as it were purer food! than the corporeal Self (the 
Vaisvanara). 

4. ‘His (the Taigasa’s) Eastern quarter are the 
prazas (breath) which go to the East; 

‘His Southern quarter are the prazas which go 
to the South ; | 

‘His Western quarter are the prazas which go to 
the West ; 

' His Northern quarter are the prazas which go to 
the North ; 

‘His Upper (Zenith) quarter are the prazas which 
go upward; 

‘His Lower (Nadir) quarter are the prazas which 
go downward ; 

‘All the quarters are all the prazas. And he (the 
Atman in that state) can only be described by No?, 
no! He is incomprehensible, for he cannot be com- 
prehended; he is undecaying, for he cannot decay; 
he is not attached, for he does not attach himself; 
he is unbound, he does not suffer, he does not perish. 
O Ganaka, you have indeed reached fearlessness, — 
thus said YagZavalkya. 

Then Ganaka said: ' May that fearlessness come 
to you also who teachest us fearlessness. I bow to 
you. Here are the Videhas, and here am I (thy 
slave). 

.! Dvivedaganga explains that food, when it is eaten, is first of 
all changed in$o the coarse food, which goes away downward, and 
into the subtler food. "This subtler food is again divided into the 
middle juice that feeds the body, and the finest, which is called 
the red lump. 

? See Brzh. Up. II, 3, 6; IV, 9, 26. 

IV ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, I. 

or. 

I. YagZavalkya came to Ganaka Vaideha, and he 
did not mean to speak with him'. But when formerly 

Turm p BRAHMANA. 

! The introduction to this Brahmaza has a very peculiar interest, - 
as showing the close coherence of the different portions which 
together form the historical groundwork of the Upanishads. Ganaka 
Vaideha and Yagnavalkya are leading characters in the Brrhada- 
razyaka-upanishad, and whenever they meet they seem to converse 
quite freely, though each retains his own character, and Yagna- 
valkya honours Ganaka as king quite as much as Ganaka honours 
Yagnavalkya as a Brahmaza. Now in our chapter we read that 
Yagnavalkya did not wish to enter on a discussion, but that Ganaka 
was the first to address him (purvam papraksha). This was evi- 
dently considered not quite correct, and an explanation is given, 
that Ganaka took this liberty because on a former occasion Yagiia- 
valkya had granted him permission to address questions to him, 
whenever he liked. It might be objected that such an explanation 
: looks very much like an after-thought, and we find indeed that in 
India itself some of the later commentators tried to avoid the diffi- 
culty by dividing the words sa mene na vadishya iti, into sam enena 
vadishya iti, so that we should have to translate, * Yaesiavalkya came 
to Ganaka intending to speak with him.’ (See Dvivedaganga's 
Comm. p. r141.) This is, no doubt, a very ingenious conjecture, 
which might well rouse the envy of European scholars. But it is 
no more. The accents decide nothing, because they are changed 
by different writers, according to their different views of what the 
Pada text ought to be. What made me prefer the reading which 
is supported by Sankara and Dvivedaganga, though the latter 
alludes to the other padakkheda, is that the tmesis, sam enena 
vadishye, does not occur again, while sa mene is a common phrase. 
But the most interesting point, as I remarked before, is that this 
former disputation between Ganaka and Yagnavalkya and the per- 
mission granted to the King to ask any question he liked, is not a 
mere invention to account for the apparent rudeness by which 
Yagnavalkya is forced to enter on a discussion against his will, 
but actually occurs in a former chapter. In Satap. Br. XI, 6, 2, 10, 
we read: tasmai ha Yagfiavalkyo varam dadau; sa hova£a, kama- 

[15] | M 

162 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

Ganaka Vaideha and YagZavalkya had a disputation 
on the Agnihotra, YagZavalkya had granted him a 
boon, and he chose (for a boon) that he might be 
free to ask him any question he liked. YagZa- 
valkya granted it, and thus the King was the first to 
ask him a question. 

2. ‘ Yagsiavalkya, he said, ‘what is the light of 
man!?'. 

YagZavalkya replied: ‘The sun, O King; for, 
having the sun alone for his light, man sits, moves 
about, does his work, and returns.’ 

Ganaka Vaideha said: ' So indeed it is, O YagZa- 
valkya.' 

3. Ganaka Vaideha said: ‘When the sun has set, 
O Yae£avalkya, what is then the light of man?’ 

YagAavalkya replied: ‘The moon indeed is his 
light; for, having the moon alone for his light, man 
sits, moves about, does his work, and returns.’ 

Ganaka Vaideha said: ‘So indeed it is, O YagZa- 
valkya.’ 

4. Ganaka Vaideha said: ‘When the sun has set, 
O Yag#avalkya, and the moon has set, what is the 
light of man ?' 

Yag£avalkya replied: ‘Fire indeed is his light; 

prasza eva me tvayi Yaegfiavalkyasad iti, tato brahma Ganaka asa. 
This would show that Ganaka was considered almost like a Brah- 
maza, or at all events enjoyed certain privileges which were sup- 
posed to belong to the first caste only. See, for a different view, 
Deussen, Vedanta, p. 203; Regnaud (Materiaux pour servir a lhis- 
toire de la philosophie de l'Inde), Errata; and Sacred Books of 
the East, vol. i, p. lxxiii. 

! Read kimgyotir as a Bahuvrihi. Purusha is difficult to trans- 
late. It means man, but also the true essence of man, the soul, 
as we should say, or something more abstract still, the person, as 
I generally translate it, though a person beyond the Ego. 

IV ADHYAYA, 3 BR4HMANA, 8. 163 

for, having fire alone for his light, man sits, moves 
about, does his work, and returns.’ 

5. Ganaka Vaideha said: ‘When the sun has set, 
O Yag£avalkya, and the moon has set, and the fire 
is gone out, what is then the light of man?’ 

YAgzavalkya replied: ‘Sound indeed is his light; 
for, having sound alone for his light, man sits, moves 
about, does his work, and returns. Therefore, O 
King, when one cannot see even one’s own hand, 
yet when a sound is raised, one goes towards it.’ 

Ganaka Vaideha said: ‘So indeed it is, O YagZa- 
valkya.’ 

6. Ganaka Vaideha said: ‘ When the sun has set, 
O Yagsavalkya, and the moon has set, and the fire 
is gone out, and the sound hushed, what is then the 
light of man ?' 

Yagnavalkya said: ‘The Self indeed is his light; 
for, having the Self alone as his light, man sits, 

_moves about, does his work, and returns.’ 

7. Ganaka Vaideha said: * Who is that Self?’ 

Yag£avalkya replied: ‘He who is within the 
heart, surrounded by the Prazas! (senses), the person 
of light, consisting of knowledge. He, remaining the 
same, wanders along the two worlds?, as if? thinking, 
as if moving. During sleep (in dream) he tran- 
scends this world and all the forms of death (all that 
falls under the sway of death, all that is perishable). 

8. ‘On being born that person, assuming his body, 

1 Samipyalakshaza saptami, Dvivedaganga. See Brzh. Up. IV, 
4, 22. | 

? In this world, while awake or dreaming; in the other wo ld, 
while in deep sleep. 

3 The world thinks that he thinks, but in reality he does not, he 
only witnesses the acts of buddhi, or thought. 

M 2 

Je 

164 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

becomes united with all evils; when he departs and 

dies, he leaves all evils behind. 

9. ‘And there are two states for that person, the 
one here in this world, the other in the other world, 
and as a third! an intermediate state, the state of 
sleep. When in that intermediate state, he sees 
both those states together, the one here in this 

world, and the other in the other world. Now what- 

ever his admission to the other world may be, 
having gained that admission, he sees both the evils 

;. and the blessings ?. 

'And when he falls asleep, then after having 

taken away with him the material from the whole 

world, destroying? and building it up again, he 
sleeps (dreams) by his own light. In that state the 
person is self-illuminated. 

IO. ‘ There are no (real) chariots in that state, no 
horses, no roads, but he himself sends forth (creates) 
chariots, horses, and roads. There are no blessings 
there, no happiness, no joys, but he himself sends 

forth (creates) blessings, happiness, and joys. There 

! There are really two sthanas or states only; the place where 
they meet, like the place where two villages meet, belongs to both, 
but it may be distinguished as a third. Dvivedaganga (p. 1141) 
uses a curious argument in support of the existence of another 
world. In early childhood, he says, our dreams consist of the 
impressions of a former world, later on they are filled with the 
impressions of our senses, and in old age they contain visions of a 
world to come. 

? By works, by knowledge, and by remembrance of former 
things; see Brzh. Up. IV, 4, 2. 

> Dividing and separating the material, i. e. the impressions 
received from this world. The commentator explains matra as a 
portion of the impressions which are taken away into sleep. 
‘ Destroying’ he refers to the body, which in sleep becomes sense- 
Jess, and ‘building up’ to the imaginations of dreams. 

IV ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, I4. 165 

are no tanks there, no lakes, no rivers, but he him- 
self sends forth (creates) tanks, lakes, and rivers. 
He indeed is the maker. 

11. ‘On this there are these verses: 

‘After having subdued by sleep all that belongs 
to the body, he, not asleep himself, looks down 
upon the sleeping (senses). Having assumed light, 
he goes again to his place, the golden person}, the 
lonely bird. (1) 

12. ‘Guarding with the breath (praza, life) the 
lower nest, the immortal moves away from the nest ; 
that immortal one goes wherever he likes, the golden 
person, the lonely bird. (2) 

13. ‘Going up and down in his dream, the god 
makes manifold shapes for himself, either rejoicing ` 
together with women, or laughing (with his friends), 
or seeing terrible sights. (3) 

14. ‘People may see his playground ?, but himself 
no one ever sees. Therefore they say, * Let no one 
wake a man suddenly, for it is not easy to remedy, 
if he does not get back (rightly to his body)." 

‘Here some people (object and) say: “ No, this 
(sleep) is the same as the place of waking, for what 
he sees while awake, that only he sees when asleep?." 

1 The Madhyandinas read paurusha, as an adjective to ekahamsa, 
but Dvivedaganga explains paurusha as a synonym of purusha, 
which is the reading of the Kazvas. 

2 Cf. Susruta III, 7, 1. 

3 I have translated this according to the commentator, who says : 
‘Therefore the Self is self-illuminated during sleep. But others 
say the state of waking is indeed the same for him as sleep; there 
is no other intermediate place, different from this and from the 
other world. .. . And if sleep is the same as the state of waking, 
then is this Self not separate, not cause and effect, but mixed with 
them, and the Self therefore not self-illuminated. What he means 

166 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

No, here (in sleep) the person is self-illuminated (as 
we explained before).' 

Ganaka Vaideha said: ‘I give you, Sir, a thousand. 
Speak on for the sake of (my) emancipation.’ 

15. YaagZavalkya said: ‘ That (person) having en- 
joyed himself in that state of bliss (samprasada, deep 
sleep), having moved about and seen both good and 
evil, hastens back again as he came, to the place 
from which he started (the place of sleep), to dream !. 
And whatever he may have seen there, he is not 
followed (affected) by it, for that person is not 

attached to anything. 
Ganaka Vaideha said: ‘So it is indeed, YAg%a- 

is that others, in order to disprove the self-illumination, say that this 
sleep is the same as the state of waking, giving as their reason that 
we see in sleep or in dreams exactly what we see in waking. But 
this is wrong, because the senses have stopped, and only when the 
senses have stopped does one see dreams. ‘Therefore there is no 
necessity for admitting another light in sleep, but only the light 
inherent in the Self. This has been proved by all that went before.’ 
Dr. Roer takes the same view in his translation, but Deussen (Ve- 
danta, p. 205) takes an independent view, and translates: * There- 
fore it is said: It (sleep) is to him a place of waking only, for 
what he sees waking, the same he sees in sleep. Thus this spirit 
serves there for his own light? Though the interpretations of 
Sankara and Dvivedaganga sound artificial, still Dr. Deussen's 
version does not remove all difficulties. If the purusha saw in 
sleep no more than what he had seen before in waking, then the 
whole argument in favour of the independent action, or the inde- 
pendent light of the purusha, would go; anyhow it would be no 
argument on Yagnavalkya’s side. See also note to paragraph 9, 
before. 

1 The Madhyandinas speak only of his return from svapnanta 
to buddhanta, from sleep to waking, instead of his going from 
samprasada (deep sleep) to svapna (dream), from svapna to bud- 
dhanta, and from buddhanta again to svapnanta, as the Kazvas 
have it. In § 18 the Kazvas also mention svapnanta and buddhanta 
only, but the next paragraph refers to sushupti. 

IV ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, 20. 167 

valkya. I give you, Sir, a thousand. Speak on for 
the sake of emancipation.’ 

16. Yag£avalkya said: ‘ That (person) having en- 
joyed himself in that sleep (dream), having moved 
about and seen both good and evil, hastens back 
again as he came, to the place from which he started, 
to be awake. And whatever he may have seen 
there, he is not followed (affected) by it, for that 
person is not attached to anything.’ 

Ganaka Vaideha said: ‘So it is indeed, YaeZa- 
valkya. I give you, Sir, a thousand. Speak on for 
the sake of emancipation.’ 

17. Yag#avalkya said: ‘That (person) having en- 

joyed himself in that state of waking, having moved 
about and seen both good and evil, hastens back 
again as he came, to the place from which he started, 
to the state of sleeping (dream). 
_ I8. ‘In fact, as a large fish moves along the two 
' banks of a river, the right and the left, so does that 
person move along these two states, the state of 
sleeping and the state of waking. 

19. ‘And as a falcon, or any other (swift) bird, 
after he has roamed about here in the air, becomes 
tired, and folding his wings is carried to his nest, so 
does that person hasten to that state where, when 
asleep, he desires no more desires, and dreams no 
more dreams. 

20. ‘ There are in his body the veins called Hita, 
which are as small as a hair divided a thousandfold, 
full of white, blue, yellow, green, and red'. Now 

! Dvivedaganga explains that if phlegm predominates, qualified 
by wind and bile, the juice in the veins is white; if wind predomi- 
nates, qualified by phlegm and bile, it is blue; if bile predominates, 
qualified by wind and phlegm, it is yellow; if wind and phlegm 

168 BRIHADARANVAKA-UPANISHAD, 

when, as it were, they kill him, when, as it were, 
they overcome him, when, as it were, an elephant 
chases him, when, as it were, he falls into a well, 
he fancies, through ignorance, that danger which he 
(commonly) sees in waking. But when he fancies 
that he is, as it were, a god, or that he is, as it 
were, a king?, or “I am this altogether,” that is his 
highest world 2. 

21. ‘This indeed is his (true) form, free from 
desires, free from evil, free from fear?, Now asa 
man, when embraced by a beloved wife, knows 
nothing that is without, nothing that is within, thus 
this person, when embraced by the intelligent (pragza) 
Self, knows nothing that is without, nothing that is 
within. This indeed is his (true) form, in which 
his wishes are fulfilled, in which the Self (only) is 

predominate, with little bile only, it is green; and if the three ele- 
ments are equal, it is red. See also Anandagiri’s gloss, where 
Susruta is quoted. Why this should be inserted here, is not quite 
clear, except that in sleep the purusha is supposed to move about 
in the veins. 

1 Here, again, the commentator seems to be right, but his inter- 
pretation does violence to the context. The dangers which a man 
sees in his sleep are represented as mere imaginations, so is his 
idea of being of god or a king, while the idea that he is all this 
(aham evedam sarvaZ, i. e. idam sarvam, see Sankara, p. 873, l. 11) 
is represented as the highest and real state. But it is impossible to 
begin a new sentence with aham evedam sarvam, and though it is 
true that all the preceding fancies are qualified by iva, I prefer to 
take deva and ragan as steps leading to the sarvatmatva. 

* The Madhyandinas repeat here the sentence from yatra supto 
to pasyati, from the end of $ 19. 

3 The Kazva text reads ati££Aanda apahatapapma. Sankara 
explains ati#&handa by atikkłandam, and excuses it as svadhyaya- 
dharma pathah. The Madhyandinas read ati££Zando, but place 

the whole sentence where the Kazvas put aptakamam &c., at the 
end of $ 21. 

IV ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, 23. 169 

his wish, in which no wish is left,—free from any 
sorrow !, 

22. ‘Then a father is not a father, a mother not 
a mother, the worlds not worlds, the gods not gods, 
the Vedas not Vedas. Then a thief is not a thief, a 
murderer not a murderer?, a EfjazzAla? not a RAndala, 
a Paulkasa * not a Paulkasa, a .Sramaza^ not a Sra- 
maza, a Tapasa* not a Tapasa. He is not followed 
by good, not followed by evil, for he has then over- 
come all the sorrows of the heart". 

23. ‘And when (it is said that) there (in the 
Sushupti) he does not see, yet he is seeing, though 
he does not see?. For sight is inseparable from the 

! 'The Kazvas read sokantaram, the Madhyandinas asokantaram, 
but the commentators arrive at the same result, namely, that it 
means sokasunyam, free from grief. Sankara says: sokantaram 
sokakkhidram sokasunyam ityetak, khokamadhyaman iti va; sar- 
vathapy asokam. Dvivedaganga says: na vidyate soko 'ntare 
madhye yasya tad asokantaram (ra, Weber) sokasunyam. 

? Bhruzahan, varish/Zabrahmahanta. 

3 The son of a Sfidra father and a Brahmaza mother. 

* The son of a .Sudra father and a Kshatriya mother. 

5 A mendicant. 

€ A Vanaprastha, who performs penances. 

7 I have translated as if the text were ananvagatah pumyena 
ananvagatah papena. We find anvagata used in a similar way in 
$$ 15, 16, &c. But the Kazvas read ananvagatam pumyena anan- 
vagatam papena, and Sankara explains the neuter by referring it 
to rupam (rupaparatvan napumsakalingam). The Madhyandinas, if 
we may trust Weber's edition, read ananvagata? puzyenanvaga- 
tah papena. The second anvagataA may be a mere misprint, but 
Dvivedaganga seems to have read ananvagatam, like the Kazvas, 
for he says: ananvagatam iti rupavishayo napuzzsakanirdesaZ. 

* This is the old Upanishad argument that the true sense is the 
Self, and not the eye. Although therefore in the state of profound 
sleep, where the eye and the other senses rest, it might be said 
that the purusha does not see, yet he is a seer all the time, though 
he does not see with the eye. The seer cannot lose his character 

NT 
Jon" 

170 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD.: 

seer, because it cannot perish. But there is then 
no second, nothing else different from him that he 
could see. 

24. ‘And when (it is said that) there (in the 
Sushupti) he does not smell, yet he is smelling, though 
he does not smell. For smelling is inseparable from 
the smeller, because it cannot perish. But there is 
then no second, nothing else different from him that 
he could smell. 

25. ‘And when (it is said that) there (in the 
Sushupti) he does not taste, yet he is tasting, though 
he does not taste. For tasting is inseparable from 
the taster, because it cannot perish. But there is 
then no second, nothing else different from him that 
he could taste. 

26. ‘And when (it is said that) there (in the 
Sushupti) he does not speak, yet he is speaking, 
though he does not speak. For speaking is inse- 
parable from the speaker, because it cannot perish. 
But there is then no second, nothing else different 
from him that he could speak. 

27. ‘And when (it is said that) there (in the 
Sushupti) he does not hear, yet he is hearing, though 
he does not hear. For hearing is inseparable from 
the hearer, because it cannot perish. But there is 
then no second, nothing else different from him that 
he could hear. 

28. ‘And when (it is said that) there (in the 
Sushupti) he does not think, yet he is thinking, 
though he does not think. For thinking is inse- 
parable from the thinker, because it cannot perish. 

of seeing, as little as the fire can lose its character of burning, so | 
long as it is fire. The Self sees by its own light, like the sun, even 
where there is no second, no object but the Self, that could be seen. 

IV ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, 33. 17! 

But there is then no second, nothing else different 
from him that he could think. 

29. ‘And when (it is said that) there (in the 
Sushupti) he does not touch, yet he is touching, 
though he does not touch. For touching is inse- 
parable from the toucher, because it cannot perish. 
But there is then no second, nothing else different 
from him that he could think. 

30. ‘And when (it is said that) there (in the 
Sushupti) he does not know, yet he is knowing, 
though he does not know. For knowing is inse- 
parable from the knower, because it cannot perish. 
But there is then no second, nothing else different 
from him that he could know. 

31. ‘When (in waking and dreaming) there is, as 
it were, another, then can one see the other, then 
can one smell the other, then can one speak to the 
‘other, then can one hear the other, then can one 
think the other, then can one touch the other, then 
can one know the other. - 

32. 'An ocean! is that one seer, without any 
duality; this is the Brahma-world ?, O King. Thus 
did YagZavalkya teach him. This is his highest 
goal, this is his highest success, this is his highest 
world, this is his highest bliss. All other creatures 
live on a small portion of that bliss. 

33. 'If a man is healthy, wealthy, and lord of 
others, surrounded by all human enjoyments, that 

! Salila is explained as salilavat, like the ocean, the seer being 
one like the ocean, which is one only. Dr. Deussen takes salila as 
a locative, and translates it ‘In dem Gewoge,’ referring to Sveta- 
svatara-upanishad VI, 15. 

? Or this seer is the Brahma-world, dwells in Brahman, or is 
Brahman. 

172 BRIHADARANYVAKA-UPANISHAD. 

is the highest blessing of men. Now a hundred 
of these human blessings make one blessing of the 
fathers who have conquered the world (of the fathers). 
A hundred blessings of the fathers who have con- 
quered this world make one blessing in the Gan- 
dharva world. A hundred blessings in the Gandharva 
world make one blessing of the Devas by merit 
(work, sacrifice), who obtain their godhead by merit. 
A hundred blessings of the Devas by merit make 
one blessing of the Devas by birth, also (of) a 
Srotriya! who is without sin, and not overcome by 
desire. A hundred blessings of the Devas by birth 
make one blessing in the world of Pragapati, also 
(of) a Srotriya who is without sin, and not overcome 
by desire. A hundred blessings in the world of 
Pragapati make one blessing in the world of Brah- 
man, also (of) a Srotriya who is without sin, and 
not overcome by desire. And this is the highest 
blessing ?. 

‘This is the Brahma-world, O king,’ thus spake 
YagZiavalkya. 

Ganaka Vaideha said: ‘I give you, Sir, a thousand. 
Speak on for the sake of (my) emancipation.' 

Then YagZavalkya was afraid lest the King, 
having become full of understanding, should drive 
him from all his positions ?. 

34. And Yagsiavalkya said: ‘That (person), having 

enjoyed himself in that state of sleeping (dream), 

! An accomplished student of the Veda. 

2 See Taitt. Up. II, 8, p. 59; AAand. Up. VIII, 2, 1-10; Kaush.- 
Up. I, 3-5; Regnaud, II, p. 33 seq. 

3 Sankara explains that Yagfiavalkya was not afraid that his 
own knowledge might prove imperfect, but that the king, having 
the right to ask him any question he liked, might get all his know- 
ledge from him. 

t C 3 

IV ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, I. 173 

having moved about and seen both good and bad, 
hastens back again as he came, to the place from 
which he started, to the state of waking !. 

35. ' Now as a heavy-laden carriage moves along 
groaning, thus does this corporeal Self, mounted by 
the intelligent .Self, move along groaning, when a 
man is thus going to expire ?. 

36. 'And when (the body) grows weak through 
old age, or becomes weak through illness, at that 
time that person, after separating himself from his 
members, as an Amra (mango), or Udumbara (fig), 
or Pippala-fruit is separated from the stalk, hastens 
back again as he came, to the place from which he 
started, to (new) life. 

37. 'And as policemen, magistrates, equerries, 
and governors wait for a king who is coming back, 
with food and drink, saying, * He comes back, he 
approaches," thus do all the elements wait on him 
who knows this, saying, * That Brahman comes, that 
Brahman approaches." 

38. ‘And as policemen, magistrates, equerries, and 
governors gather round a king who is departing, 
thus do all the senses (prazas) gather round the Self 
at the time of death, when a man is thus going to 
expire.’ 

ane 

I. YagZavalkya continued: ‘ Now when that Self, 
having sunk into weakness ?, sinks, as it were, into 

FourtH BRAHMANA. 

1 See § 17, before. 

2 Sankara seems to take ukkkvasi as a noun. He writes: 
yatraitad bhavati; etad iti kriyaviseshazam QrdhvOZAAv8si yatror- 
dhvoskAvasitvam asya bhavatityarthah. 

3 In the Kaush. Up. III, 3, we read yatraitat purusha arto 

174 . BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

unconsciousness, then gather those senses (prazas) 
around him, and he, taking with him those elements 
of light, descends into the heart. When that person 
in the eye! turns away, then he ceases to know any 
forms. 

2. ‘“ He has become one,’ they say, “he does not 
see?" “He has become one,’ they say, “he does 
not smell.” “He has become one,” they say, “he 
does not taste.” “He has become one,” they say, 
“he does not speak.” “He has become one,” they 
say, “he does not hear." * He has become one,” they 
say, “he does not think.” “He has become one,” 
they say, “he does not touch.” “He has become 
one," they say, “he does not know." The point of his 
heart® becomes lighted up, and by that light the Self 
departs, either through the eye‘, or through the 
skull e, or through other places of the body. And 
when he thus departs, life (the chief praza) departs 
after him, and when life thus departs, all the other 

marishyan abalyam etya sammohati. Here abalyam should cer- 
tainly be abalyam, as in the commentary; but should it not be 
abalyam, as here. See also Brzh. Up. III, 5, 1, note. 

1 Kakshusha purusha is explained as that portion of the sun 
which is in the eye, while it is active, but which, at the time of 
death, returns to the sun. 

? Ekibhavati is probably a familiar expression for dying, but it 
is here explained by Sankara, and probably was so intended, as 
meaning that the organs of the body have become one with the 
Self (lihgatman). The same thoughts are found in the Kaush. Up. 
III, 5, praza ekadha bhavati. | 

3 The point where the nadis or veins go out from the heart. 

* When his knowledge and deeds qualify him to proceed to the 
sun. Sankara. 

* When his knowledge and deeds qualify him to proceed to the 
Brahma-world. 

IV ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, 4. 175 

vital spirits (prazas) depart after it. He is conscious, 
and being conscious he follows! and departs. 

‘Then both his knowledge and his work take hold - 
of him, and his acquaintance with former things ?.' 

3. ‘And as a caterpillar, after having reached the 
end of a blade of grass, and after having made another 
approach (to another blade)?, draws itself together 
towards it, thus does this Self, after having thrown 
off this body * and dispelled all ignorance, and after 
making another approach (to another body), draw, 
himself together towards it. 

. 4. ‘And as a goldsmith, taking a piece of gold, 
turns it into another, newer and more beautiful shape, 
so does this Self, after having thrown off this body 

. 1 This is an obscure passage, and the different text of the 

Madhyandinas shows that the obscurity was felt at an early time. 
The Madhyandinas read: Sazgfianam anvavakramati sa esha għa% 
savignano bhavati. This would mean, ‘Consciousness departs 
after. He the knowing (Self) is self-conscious.’ The Kazvas read: 
Savigfiano bhavati, savigfianam evanvavakramati. Roer translates: 
‘It is endowed with knowledge, endowed with knowledge it departs ;’ 
and he explains, with Sankara, that the knowledge here intended is 
such knowledge as one has in a dream, a knowledge of impressions 
referring to their respective objects, a knowledge which is the 
effect of actions, and not inherent in the self. Deussen translates: 
*Sie (die Seele) ist von Erkenntnissart, und was von Erkenntnissart 
ist, ziehet ihr nach.’ The Persian translator evidently thought that 
self-consciousness was implied, for he writes : * Cum quovis corpore 
addictionem sumat . .. . in illo corpore aham est, id est, ego sum,’ 

2 This acquaintance with former things is necessary to explain 
the peculiar talents or deficiencies which we observe in children. 
The three words vidya, karman, and purvaprag&a often go toge- 
ther (see Sankara on Brzh. Up. IV, 3, 9). Deussen's conjecture, 
apurvapragna, is not called for. 

3 See Brzh. Up. IV, 5, 9, a passage which shows how „difficult 
it would be always to translate the same Sanskrit words by the 
same words in English ; see also Brahmopanishad, p. 245. 

* See Brzh. Up. IV, 3, 9, and IV, 3, 13. 

176 BRIHADARANVAKA-UPANISHAD. 

and dispelled all ignorance, make unto himself an- 
other, newer and more beautiful shape, whether it be 
like the Fathers, or like the Gandharvas, or like the 
Devas, or like Pragapati, or like Brahman, or like 
other beings. 

5. ‘That Self is indeed Beihan, consisting of 
knowledge, mind, life, sight, hearing, earth, water, 
wind, ether, light and no light, desire and no desire, 
anger and no anger, right or wrong, and all things. 
Now as a man is like this or like that 1, according as 
he acts and according as he behaves, so will he be :— 
a man of good acts will become good, a man of bad 
acts, bad. He pecomics pure by pure deeds, bad by 
bad deeds. 

‘And here they say that a person consists of 
desires. And as is his desire, so is his will; and as is 
his will, so is his deed; and whatever deed he does, 
that he will reap. 

6. ‘And here there is this verse: “To whatever 
object a man’s own mind is attached, to that he goes 
strenuously together with his deed; and having 
obtained the end (the last results) of whatever deed 
he does here on earth, he returns again from that 
world (which is the temporary reward of his deed) to 
this world of action.” 

‘So much for the man who desires. But as to 
the man who does not desire, who, not desiring, 
freed from desires, is satisfied in his desires, or 
desires the Self only, his vital spirits do not depart 
elsewhere,— being Brahman, he goes to Brahman. 

7. ‘On this there is this verse: “When all desires 

1 The iti after adomaya is not clear to me, but it is quite clear 
that a new sentence begins with tadyadetat, which Regnaud, II, 
p. 101 and p. 139, has not observed. 

IV ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, II. 177 

which once entered his heart are undone, then does 
the mortal become immortal, then he obtains Brah- 
man." 

‘And as the slough of a snake lies on an ant-hill, 
dead and cast away, thus lies this body ; but that dis- 
embodied immortal spirit (praza, life) is Brahman 
only, is only light.’ 

iere Vaideha said: ‘Sir, I give you a heal 

1, * On this there are these verses : 

"Dh small, old path stretching far away? has been 
found by me. On it sages who know Brahman move 
on to the Svarga-loka (heaven), and thence higher 
on, as entirely free 5. 

9. ‘On that path they say that there is white, or 
blue, or yellow, or green, or red *; that path was found 
by Brahman, and on it goes whoever knows Brahman, 
and who has done good, and obtained splendour. 

IO. 'All who worship what is not knowledge 
(avidya) enter into blind darkness: those who delight 
in knowledge, enter, as it were, into greater darkness*. 

II. ‘There are? indeed those unblessed worlds, 

1 This may be independent matter, or may be placed again into 
the mouth of Yagfiavalkya. 

2 Instead of vitataZ, which perhaps seemed to be in contradiction 
with azu, there is a Madhyandina reading vitara, probably intended 
originally to mean leading across. The other adjective mam- 
sprish/a I cannot explain. Sankara explains it by maz spr/zsh/aZ, 
maya labdhaZ. 

3 That this is the true meaning, is indicated by the various 
readings of the Madhyandinas, tena dhira apiyanti brahmavida 
utkramya svargam lokam ito vimuktaA. The road is not to lead 
to Svarga only, but beyond. 

i. See the colours of the veins as given before, IV, 3, 20. | 

5 See Vag. Up. 9. Sankara in our place explains avidya by 
works, and vidya by the Veda, excepting the Upanishads. 

€ See Vag. Up. 3; Kasha Up. I, 3. 

[15] N 

178 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD, 

covered with blind darkness. Men who are ignorant 
and not enlightened go after death to those worlds. 

12. ‘Ifa man understands the Self, saying, “I am 
He," what could he wish or desire that he should 
pine after the body !. 

13. ‘Whoever has found and understood the Self 
that has entered into this patched-together hiding- 
place?, he indeed is the creator, for he is the maker 
of everything, his is the world, and he is the world 
itself 3. 

14. ‘While we are here, we may know this; if not, 
I am ignorant*, and there is great destruction. Those 
who know it, become immortal, but others suffer pain 
indeed. 

15. ‘If a man clearly beholds this Self as God, 
and as the lord of all that is and will be, then he is 
no more afraid. 

16. ‘He behind whom the year revolves with the 
days, him the gods worship as the light of lights, as 
immortal time. | 

17. ‘He in whom the five beings 5 and the ether 
rest, him alone I believe to be the Self, ——I who 

1 That he should be willing to suffer once more the pains 

inherent in the body. The Madhyandinas read sariram anu 
SsamKaret, instead of safigvaret. 
"* 2 The body is meant, and is called deha from the root dih, to 
knead together. Roer gives samdehye gahane, which Sankara 
explains by sazdehe. Poley has samdeghe, which is the right 
Kazva reading. The Madhyandinas read sazdehe. Gahane might 
be taken as an adjective also, referring to samdehe. 

3 Sankara takes loka, world, for atma, self. 

* I have followed Sankara in translating avediZ by ignorant but 
the text seems corrupt. 

5 The five ganas, i. e. the Gandharvas, Pitr7s, Devas, Asuras, and 
Rakshas; or the four castes with the Nishadas ; or breath, eye, 
ear, food, and mind. 

IV ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, 22. 179 

know, believe him to be Brahman; I who am im- 
mortal, believe him to be immortal. 

18. ‘They who know the life of life, the eye of the 
eye, the ear of the ear, the mind of the mind, they 
have comprehended the ancient, primeval Brahman". 

19. ‘By the mind alone it is to be perceived ?, 
there is in it no diversity. He who perceives therein 
any diversity, goes from death to death. 

20. ‘ This eternal being that can never be proved, 
is to be perceived in one way only; it is spotless, 
beyond the ether, the unborn Self, great and eternal. 

21. ‘Let a wise Brahmaza, after he has discovered 
him, practise wisdom’, Let him not seek after many 
words, for that is mere weariness of the tongue. 

22. ‘And he is that great unborn Self, who consists 
of knowledge, is surrounded by the Prazas, the ether 
within the heart‘, In it there reposes the ruler of all, - 
the lord of all, the king of all. He does not become 
greater by good works, nor smaller by evil works. 
He is the lord of all, the king of all things, the pro- - 
tector of all things. He is a bank® and a boundary, 
so that these worlds may not be confounded. Brah- 
maxas seek to know him by the study of the Veda, by 
sacrifice, by gifts, by penance, by fasting, and he who 
knows him, becomes a Muni. Wishing for that 
world (for Brahman) only, mendicants leave their 
homes. 

_ ‘Knowing this, the people of old did not wish for 
offspring. What shall we do with offspring, they said, 

! See Talavak. Up. I, 2. 
.. 3 See Kasha Up. IV, 10-11. 

? Let him practise abstinence, patience, &c., which are the means 
of knowledge. 

* See Brih. Up. IV, 3, 7. * See Khand. Up. VIII, 4. 

180 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

we who have this Self and this world (of Brahman)! ? 
And they, having risen above the desire for sons, 
wealth, and new worlds, wander about as mendicants. 
For desire for sons is desire for wealth, and desire 
for wealth is desire for worlds. Both these are indeed 
desires only. He, the Self, is to be described by No, 
no?! He is incomprehensible, for he cannot be com- 
prehended; he is imperishable, for he cannot perish ; 
he is unattached, for he does not attach himself; 
unfettered, he does not suffer, he does not fail. Him 
(who knows), these two do not overcome, whether 
he says that for some reason he has done evil, or for 
some reason he has done good—he overcomes both, 
and neither what he has done, nor what he has 
omitted to do, burns (affects) him. 

23. ‘This has been told by a verse (Rik): “ This 
eternal greatness of the Brahmaza does not grow 
larger by work, nor does it grow smaller. Let man 
try to find (know) its trace, for having found (known) 
it, he is not sullied by any evil deed." 

‘He therefore that knows it, after having become 
quiet, subdued, satisfied, patient, and collected e, sees 
self in Self, sees all as Self. Evil does not overcome 
him, he overcomes all evil. Evil does not burn him, 
he burns all evil. Free from evil, free from spots, 
free from doubt, he becomes a (true) Brahmaza ; this 
is the Brahma-world, O King, —thus spoke YagZa- 
valkya. | 

Ganaka Vaideha said : ‘ Sir, I give you the Videhas, 
and also myself, to be together your slaves.’ 

24. This * indeed is the great, the unborn Self, the 

1 Cf. Brih. Up.III,5,:. — ? See Breh. Up. III, 9, 26; IV, 2, 4. 
3 See Deussen, Vedanta, p. 85. 
* As described in the dialogue between Ganaka and Yagfiavalkya. 

IV ADHYAYA, 5 BRAHMANA, 5. 181 

strong !, the giver of wealth. He who knows this 
obtains wealth. | 

25. This great, unborn Self, undecaying, undying, 
immortal, fearless, is indeed Brahman. Fearless is 
. Brahman, and he who knows this becomes verily the 
fearless Brahman. | 

FirtH BRAHMANA 2. 

I. YagZavalkya had two wives, Maitreyit and 
Katyayant. Of these Maitreyt was conversant with 
Brahman, but Katyayant possessed such knowledge 
only as women possess. And Yagsavalkya, when 
he wished to get ready for another state of life (when 
he wished to give up the state of a householder, and 
retire into the forest), 

2. Said, 'Maitreyt, verily I am going away from 
this my house (into the forest). Forsooth, let me 
make a settlement between thee and that Katyayant.' 

3. Maitreyi said: ‘My Lord, if this whole earth, 
full of wealth, belonged to me, tell me, should I be 
immortal by it, or no ?' 

‘No, replied YagZavalkya, ‘like the life of rich 

people will be thy life. But there is no hope of 

E ERR ERE 

immortality by wealth.’ 
4. And Maitreyt said: ‘What should I do with 
that by which I do not become immortal? What 

my Lord knoweth ? (of immortality), tell that clearly - 

to me.’ 
s. Yag#avalkya replied: ‘Thou who art truly dear 
to me, thou hast increased what is dear (to me in 

! Annada is here explained as * dwelling in all beings, and eating 
all food which they eat.’ 

? See before, II, 4. 

3 The Kazva text has vettha instead of veda. 

182 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD., 

thee). Therefore, if you like, Lady, I will explain it 
to thee, and mark well what I say.’ 

^ 6. And he said: ‘Verily, a husband is not dear, 
that you may love the husband; but that you may 
love the Self, therefore a husband is dear. 

‘Verily, a wife is not dear, that you may love the 
wife; but that you may love the Self, therefore a 
wife is dear. 

‘Verily, sons are not dear, that you may love the 
sons; but that you may love the Self, therefore sons 
are dear. 

‘Verily, wealth is not dear, that you may love 
wealth; but that you may love the Self, therefore 
wealth is dear. 

- * Verily, cattle? are not dear, that you may love 
cattle; but that you may love the Self, therefore 
cattle are dear. 

‘Verily, the Brahman-class is not dear, that you 
may love the Brahman-class; but that you may love 
the Self, therefore the Brahman-class is dear. 

‘Verily, the Kshatra-class is not dear, that you 
may love the Kshatra-class; but that you may love 
the Self, therefore the Kshatra-class is dear. 

‘Verily, the worlds are not dear, that you may 
love the worlds; but that you may love the Self, 
therefore the worlds are dear. 

' Verily, the Devas are not dear, that you may 
love the Devas; but that you may love the Self, 
therefore the Devas are dear. 

! The Kazva text has avzzdhat, which Sankara explains by 
vardhitavat? nirdharitavaty asi. The Madhyandinas read avr'tat, 
which the commentator explains by avartayat, vartitavaty asi. 

* Though this is added here, it is not included in the summing 
up in $ 6. 

IV ADHYAYA, 5 BRAHMANA, 8. 183 

‘Verily, the Vedas are not dear, that you may / 
love the Vedas; but that you may love the Self, | 

therefore the Vedas are dear. 

‘Verily, creatures are not dear, that you may love 
. the creatures; but that you may love the Self, there- 
fore are creatures dear. 

‘Verily, everything is not dear, that you may love 
everything; but that you may love the Self, there- 
fore everything is dear. 

‘Verily, the Self is to be seen, to be heard, to be. 
perceived, to be marked, O Maitreyi! When the 

Self has been seen, heard, perceived, and known, 
then all this is known: 

7. ‘Whosoever looks for the Brahman-class else- 
where than in the Self, was abandoned by the 

Brahman-class. Whosoever looks for the Kshatra- 

class elsewhere than in the Self, was abandoned by 
the Kshatra-class. Whosoever looks for the worlds 
elsewhere than in the Self, was abandoned by the 
worlds. Whosoever looks for the Devas elsewhere 
than in the Self, was abandoned by the Devas. 
Whosoever looks for the Vedas elsewhere than in 
the Self, was abandoned by the Vedas. Whosoever 
looks for the creatures elsewhere than in the Self, 
was abandoned by the creatures. Whosoever looks 
for anything elsewhere than in the Self, was aban- 
doned by anything. 

‘This Brahman-class, this Kshatra-class, these 
worlds, these Devas, these Vedas, all these beings, 
this everything, all is that Self. 

8. ‘Now as the sounds of a drum, when beaten, 
cannot be seized externally (by themselves), but the 
sound is seized, when the drum is seized, or the 
beater of the drum; 

Teme 

184 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

9. ‘And as the sounds of a conch-shell, when blown, 
cannot be seized externally (by themselves), but the 
sound is seized, when the shell is seized, or the blower 
of the shell; 

10. ‘And as the sounds of a lute, when played, 
cannot be seized externally (by themselves), but the 
sound is seized, when the lute is seized, or the player 
of the lute; 

11. ‘As clouds of smoke proceed by themselves 
out of lighted fire kindled with damp fuel, thus 
verily, O Maitreyi, has been breathed forth from 
this great Being what we have as Azg-veda, Yagur- 
‘veda, Sama-veda, Atharvaugirasas, Itihasa, Puraza, 
Vidya, the Upanishads, Slokas, Sutras, Anuvya- 
khyanas, Vyakhyanas, what is sacrificed, what is 
poured out, food, drink!, this world and the other 
world, and all creatures. From him alone all these 
were breathed forth. | 

I2. ‘As all waters find their centre in the sea, 
` all touches in the skin, all tastes in the tongue, all 
smells in the nose, all colours in the eye, all sounds 
in the ear, all percepts in the mind, all knowledge in 
the heart, all actions in the hands, all movements in 
the feet, and all the Vedas in speech,— 

13. ‘As a mass of salt has neither inside nor 
outside, but is altogether a mass of taste, thus indeed 
has that Self neither inside nor outside, but is alto- 
gether a mass of knowledge; and having risen from 
out these elements, vanishes again in them. When 
he has departed, there is no more knowledge (name), 
I say, O Maitreyt, —thus spoke YagZavalkya. 

! Explained by annadananimittam and peyadananimittaz dhar- 
magatam. See before, IV, 1, 2. 

IV ADHYAYA, 6 BRAHMANA, I. 185 

I4. Then Maitreyi said: ‘Here, Sir, thou hast 
landed me in utter bewilderment. Indeed, I do not 
understand him. 

But he replied: ‘O Maitreyt, I say nothing that is 
bewildering. Verily, beloved, that Self is imperish- 
able, and of an indestructible nature. 

15. ‘For when there is as it were duality, then 
one sees the other, one smells the other, one tastes 
the other, one salutes the other, one hears the other, 
one perceives the other, one touches the other, one 
knows the other; but when the Self only is all this, 
how should he see another, how should he smell 
another, how should he taste another, how should 
he salute another, how should he hear another, how 
should he touch another, how should he know 
another? How should he know Him by whom he 
knows all this? That Self is to be described by No, 
no?! He is incomprehensible, for he cannot be 
comprehended; he is imperishable, for he cannot 
perish; he is unattached, for he does not attach 
himself; unfettered, he does not suffer, he does not 
fail. How, O beloved, should he know the Knower ? 
Thus, O Maitreyt, thou hast been instructed. ‘Thus 
far goes immortality.’ Having said so, Yag#avalkya 
went away (into the forest). 

SixtH BRAHMANA. 

I. Now follows the stem ?: 
I. (We) from Pautimashya, 
2. Pautimashya from Gaupavana, 
3. Gaupavana from Pautimashya, 

1 See Brzh. Up. III, 9, 26; IV, 2, 4; IV, 4, 22. 
2 The line of teachers and pupils by whom the Yagfiavalkya- 

186 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

Pautimashya from Gaupavana, 
Gaupavana from Kausika, 
Kausika from Kauzdinya, 
Kauzdinya from Sandilya, 
Sazdilya from Kausika and Gautama, 
9. Gautama 
2. from Agnivesya, 
10. Agnivesya from Gargya, 
II. Gargya from Gargya, 
I2. Gargya from Gautama, 
I3. Gautama from Saitava, 
I4. Saitava from Parasaryayaza, 
I5. Parasaryayaza from Gargyayaxa, 
I6. Gargyayaza from Uddalakayana, 
17. Uddalakayana from Gabalayana, 
18. Gabalayana from Madhyandinayana, 
19. Madhyandinayana from Saukarayaza, 
20. Saukarayaza from Kashayaxa, 
21. Kashayaza from Sayakayana, 
22. Sayakayana from Kausikayani !, 
23. Kausikayani 
3. from Ghzztakausika, 
24. Ghvztakausika from Parasaryayaza, 

oo VU S 

kanda was handed down. From 1-10 the Vamsa agrees with the 
Vamsa at the end of II, 6. 

The Madhyandina text begins with vayam, we, and proceeds to 
I. Saurpazayya, 2. Gautama, 3. Vatsya, 4. Parasarya, &c., as in the 
Madhukaza, p. 118, except in 10, where it gives Gaivantayana for 
Atreya. Then after 12. Kauzdinyayana, it gives 13. 14. the two 
Kauzdinyas, 15. the Aurzavabhas, 16. Kaumdinya, 17. Kauzdinya, 
18. Kauzdinya and Agnivesya, 19. Saitava, 20. Parasarya, 21. Gatu- 
karnya, 22. Bharadvaga, 23. Bharadvaga, Asurayaza, and Gautama, 
24. Bharadvaga, 25. Valakakausika, 26. Kashayasa, 27. Saukara- 
yana, 28. Traivami, 29. Aupagandhani, 30. Sayakayana, 31. Kausi- 
kayani, &c., as in the Kazva text, from No. 22 to Brahman. 

1 From here the Vamsa agrees again with that given at the end 
of II, 6. 

IV ADHYAYA, 6 BRAHMANA, 3. 187 

25. Parasaryayaza from Parasarya, 

26. Parasarya from Gatukarzya, 

27. Gatukarzya from Asurayaza and YAska}, 

28. Asurayaza from Travazi, 

29. Travazi from Aupagandhani, 

30. Aupagandhani from Asuri, 

31. Asuri from Bharadvaga, 

32. Bharadvaga from Atreya, 

33. Atreya from Maxz/i, 

34. Mazzi from Gautama, 

35. Gautama from Gautama, 

36. Gautama from Vatsya, 

37. Vatsya from SAzdilya, 

38. Sandilya from Kaisorya Kapya, 

39. Kaisorya Kapya from Kumaraharita, 

40. Kumaraharita from Galava, 

41. Galava from Vidarbht-kauzainya, 

42. Vidarbhi-kauzdinya from  Vatsanapat Ba- 
bhrava, 

43. Vatsanapat Babhrava from Pathi Saubhara, 

44. Pathi Saubhara from Ayasya Angirasa, 

45. Ayasya Angirasa from Abhati Tvash/ra, 

46. Abhuti Tvash/ra from Visvarupa Tvash/ra, 

47. Visvarupa Tvash/ra from Asvinau, 

48. Asvinau from Dadhyae Atharvaza, 

49. Dadhya£ Atharvaza from Atharvan Daiva, 

50. Atharvan Daiva from Mztyu Pradhvamsana, 

51. Mvztyu Pradhvamsana from Pradhvamsana, 

52. Pradhvamsana from Ekarshi, 

53. Ekarshi from VipraZitti ?, 

54. VipraZitti from V yash/i, 

1 The Madhyandina text has, 1. Bharadvaga, 2. Bharadvaga, 
Asurayaza, and Yaska. 
2 Vipragitti, M&dhyandina text. 

BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

. Vyash/i from Sanaru, 

. Sanaru from Sanatana, 

. Sanatana from Sanaga, 

. Sanaga from Paramesh/Zin, | 
. Paramesh/Zin from Brahman, 
60. 

Brahman is Svayambhu, self-existent. 

Adoration to Brahman. 

V ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, 2. 189 

-FIFTH ADHYAYA. 

First BrAuManal, 

I. That (the invisible Brahman) is full, this (the 
visible Brahman) is full?. This full (visible Brah- 
man) proceeds from that full (invisible Brahman). 
On grasping the fulness of this full (visible Brah- 
man) there is left that full (invisible Brahman)?. 

Om (is) ether, (is) Brahman‘. ‘There is the old 
ether (the invisible), and the (visible) ether of the 
atmosphere, thus said Kauravyayaziputra. This 
(the Om) is the Veda (the means of knowledge), 
thus the Brahmazas know. One knows through it 
all that has to be known. 

SECOND BRAHMANA. 

I. The threefold descendants of Pragdpati, gods, 
men, and Asuras (evil spirits), dwelt as BrahmaZa- 
rins (students) with their father Pragapati. Having 
finished their studentship the gods said: ' Tell us 
(something), Sir. He told them the syllable Da. 
Then he said: ‘Did you understand?’ They said: 
‘We did understand. You told us * Damyata," Be 
subdued.’ ‘Yes,’ he said, ‘you have understood.’ 

2. Then the men said to him: ‘Tell us something, 

1 This is called a Khila, or supplementary chapter, treating of 
various auxiliary means of arriving at a knowledge of Brahman. 

? Full and filling, infinite. 

3 On perceiving the true nature of the visible world, there remains, 
i.e. there is perceived at once, as underlying it, or as being it, the 
invisible world or Brahman. This and the following paragraph 
are called Mantras. | 

* This is explained by Sankara as meaning, Brahman is Kha, the 
ether, and called Om, i.e. Om and Kha are predicates of Brahman. 

190 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

Sir” He told them the same syllable Da. Then he 
said: ‘Did you understand?’ They said: ‘We did 
understand. You told us, “ Datta,” Give.’ ‘Yes,’ he 
said, ‘you have understood.’ 

3. Then the Asuras said to him: ‘ Tell us some- 
thing, Sir.’ He told them the same syllable Da. 
Then he said: ‘ Did you understand ? They said: 
‘We did understand. You told us, " Dayadham," Be 
merciful.’ ‘Yes,’ he said, ‘ you have understood.’ 

The divine voice of thunder repeats the same, 
Da Da Da, that is, Be subdued, Give, Be merciful. 
Therefore let that triad be taught, Subduing, Giving, 
and Mercy. 

THIRD BRAHMANA. 

I. Pragapati is the heart, is this Brahman, is all this. 
The heart, hzzdaya, consists of three syllables. One 
syllable is hzZ, and to him who knows this, his own 
people and others bring offerings!. One syllable is 
da, and to him who knows this, his own people and 
others bring gifts. One syllable is yam, and he who 
knows this, goes to heaven (svarga) as his world. 

FourTH BRAHMANA. 

I. This (heart) indeed is even that; it was indeed 
the true? (Brahman). And whosoever knows this 
great glorious first-born as the true Brahman, he 
conquers these worlds, and conquered likewise may 
that (enemy) be?! yes, whosoever knows this great 

! Sankara explains that with regard to the heart, i.e. buddhi, the 
senses are ‘its own people,’ and the objects of the senses ‘the others.’ 

? The true, not the truth; the truly existing. The commentator 
explains it as it was explained in II, 3, 1, as sat and tya, containing 
both sides of the Brahman. 

? An elliptical expression, as explained by the commentator: 
‘May that one (his enemy) be conquered, just as that one was 

V ADHYAYA, 5 BRAHMANA, 2. IQI 

glorious first-born as the true Brahman; for Brahman 
is the true. 

FıFru BRAHMANA. 

. In the beginning this (world) was water. 
Water produced the true’, and the true is Brahman. _ 
rahman produced Pragapati?, Pragapati the Devas 
(gods). The Devas adore the true (satyam) alone. 
This satyam consists of three syllables. One syl- 
lable is sa, another t(i), the third? yam. The first 
and last syllables are true, in the middle there is the 
untrue‘, This untrue is on both sides enclosed by 
the true, and thus the true preponderates. The 
untrue does not hurt him who knows this. 

2. Now what is the true, that is the Aditya (the 
sun), the person that dwells in yonder orb, and the 
person in the right eye. These two rest on each 
other, the former resting with his rays in the latter, 
the latter with his prazas (senses) in the former. 
When the latter is on the point of departing this life, 
he sees that orb as white only, and those rays (of the 
sun) do not return to him. 

conquered by Brahman. If he conquers the world, how much 
more his enemy!’ It would be better, however, if we could take 
gita in the sense of vasikrzta or danta, because we could then go 
on with ya evam veda. 

1 Here explained by the commentatoras Putratmaka Hiranyagarbha. 

2 Here explained as Virag. 

* Satyam is often pronounced satiam, as trisyllabic. Sankara, how- 
ever, takes the second syllable as t only, and explains the i after it as 
ananubandha. The Kazva text gives the three syllables as sa, ti, am, 
which seems preferable; cf. KAand. Up.VIII, 3, 5; Taitt. Up. I, 6. 

4 This is explained by a mere play on the letters, sa and ya 
having nothing in common with mr:;tyu, death, whereas t occurs in 
mrityu and anvita. Dvivedaganga takes sa and am as true, be- 
cause they occur in satya and amrtta, and not in mrityu, while ti 
is untrue, because the t occurs in mzityu and anr'ta. 

192 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

3. Now of the person in that (solar) orb BhaZ is 
the head, for the head is one, and that syllable is 
one; BhuvaZ the two arms, for the arms are two, 
and these syllables are two; Svar the foot, for the 
feet are two, and these syllables are twol. Its 
secret name is Ahar (day), and he who knows this, 
destroys (hanti) evil and leaves (gahati) it. 

4. Of the person in the right eye Bhdz is the head, 
for the head is one, and that syllable is one; BhuvaZ 
the two arms, for the arms are two, and these sylla- 
bles are two; Svar the foot, for the feet are two, and 
these syllables are two. Its secret name is Aham 
(ego), and he who knows this, destroys (hanti) evil 
and leaves (gahati) it. 

SixTH BRAHMANA. 

I. That person, under the form of mind (manas), 
being light indeed ?, is within the heart, small like a 
grain of rice or barley. He is the ruler of all, the 
lord of all—he rules all this, whatsoever exists. 

SEVENTH BRAHMANA. 

I. They say that lightning is Brahman, because 
lightning (vidyut) is called so from cutting off 
(vidanat) Whosoever knows this, that lightning 
is Brahman, him (that Brahman) cuts off from evil, 
for lightning indeed is Brahman. 

1 Svar has to be pronounced suvar. 

2 BhaZsatya must be taken as one word, as the commentator 
says, bha eva satyam sadbhavaA svarfipam yasya so 'yam bhaZsatyo 
bhasvaraZ. 

° From do, avakhazdane, to cut ; the lightning cutting through the 
darkness of the clouds, as Brahman, when known, cuts through 
the darkness of ignorance. 

V ADHYAYA, IO BRAHMANA, I. 193 

EIGHTH BRAHMANA. 

1. Let him meditate on speech as a cow. Her 
four udders are the words Svaha, Vasha/, Hanta, 
and Svadha!. The gods live on two of her udders, 
the Sv4ha and the Vasha/, men on the Hanta, the 
fathers on the Svadha. The bull of that cow is 
breath (praza), the calf the mind. 

NiNTH BRAHMANA. 

I. Agni Vaisvanara is the fire within man by 
which the food that is eaten is cooked, i.e. digested. 
Its noise is that which one hears, if one covers one's 
ears. When he is on the point of departing this 
life, he does not hear that noise. 

2 TENTH BRAHMANA. 

^r. When the person goes away from this world, 
he comes to the wind. Then the wind makes room 
for him, like the hole of a carriage wheel, and 
through it he mounts higher. He comes to the sun. 
Then the sun makes room for him, like the hole 
of a Lambara ?, and through it he mounts higher. 

: He comes to the moon. Then the moon makes 
room for him, like the hole of a drum, and through 
it he mounts higher, and arrives at the world where 
there is no sorrow, no snow?*. There he dwells 
eternal years. 

1 There are two udders, the Svaha and Vasha/, on which the 
gods feed, i.e. words with which oblations are given to the gods. 
With Hanta they are given to men, with Svadha to the fathers. 

2 A musical instrument. : 

? The commentator explains hima by bodily pain, but snow is 
much more characteristic. 

[15] O 

194 BRIHADARANYVAKA-UPANISHAD. 

ELEVENTH BRAHMANA. 

1. This is indeed the highest penance, if a man, 
laid up with sickness, suffers pain'. He who knows 
this, conquers the highest world. 

This is indeed the highest penance, if they carry 
a dead person into the forest?; He who knows this, 
conquers the highest world. 

This is indeed the highest penance, if they place a 
dead person on the fire’. He who knows this, con- 
quers the highest world. 

TWELFTH BRAHMANA. 

I. Some say that food is Brahman, but this is not 
so, for food decays without life (praza). Others say 
that life (praza) is Brahman, but this is not so, for life 
dries up without food. Then these two deities (food 
and life), when they have become one, reach that 
highest state (i.e. are Brahman). Thereupon Pra- 
tvida said to his father: ‘Shall I be able to do any 
good to one who knows this, or shall I be able to do 
him any harm*?' The father said to him, beckoning 
with his hand: ‘Not so, O Pratzzda; for who could 
reach the highest state, if he has only got to the 
oneness of these two?’ He then said to him: ‘Vi; 

1 The meaning is that, while he is suffering pain from illness, he 
should think that he was performing penance. If he does that, 
he obtains the same reward for his sickness which he would have 
obtained for similar pain inflicted on himself for the sake of per- 
forming penance. | 

? 'This is like the penance of leaving the village and living in 
the forest. 

? This is like the penance of entering into the fire. 

* That is, is he not so perfect in knowledge that nothing can 
harm him? 

V ADHYAYA, I3 BRAHMANA, 4. 195 

verily, food is Vi, for all these beings rest (vish/ani) 
on food.’ He then said: ‘Ram; verily, life is Ram, 
for all these beings delight (ramante) in life. All 
beings rest on him, all beings delight in him who 
knows this.’ Oey, 

THIRTEENTH BRAHMANA. N 

I. Next follows the Uktha!. Verily, breat 
is Uktha, for breath raises up (utthapayati) all this. 
From him who knows this, there is raised a wise son, 
knowing the Uktha; he obtains union and oneness 
with the Uktha. 

.2. Next follows the Yagus. Verily, breath is 
Yagus, for all these beings are joined in breath?. 
For him who knows this, all beings are joined to 
procure his excellence; he obtains union and one- 
ness with the Yagus. 

3. Next follows the Saman. Verily, breath is the 
Saman, for all these beings meet in breath. For him 
who knows this, all beings meet to procure his excel- 
lence ; he obtains union and oneness with the Saman. 

4. Next follows the Kshatra. Verily, breath is 
the Kshatra, for breath is Kshatra, i.e. breath pro- 
tects (trayate) him from being hurt (kshazitoZ). 
He who knows this, obtains Kshatra (power), which 
requires no protection; he obtains union and one- 
ness with Kshatra’, 

1 Meditation on the hymn called uktha. On the uktha, as the 
principal part in the Mahavrata, see Kaush. Up. III, 3; Ait. Ar. IL, 1,2. 
The uktha, yagus, saman, &c. are here represented as forms under 
which praza or life, and indirectly Brahman, is to be meditated on. 

? Without life or breath nothing can join anything else; there- 
fore life is called yagus, as it were yugus. 

* Instead of Kshatram atram, another Sakha, i. e. the Madhyan- 
dina, reads Kshatramatram, which Dvivedaganga explains as, he 

O2 

196 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

FOURTEENTH BRAHMANA. 

I. The words Bhumi (earth), Antariksha (sky), and 
Dyu! (heaven) form eight syllables. One foot of the 
Gayatri consists of eight syllables. This (one foot) 
of it is that (i.e. the three worlds). And he who thus 
knows that foot of it, conquers as far as the three 
worlds extend. - 

2. The Azkas, the Yagdmshi, and the Samani form 
eight syllables. One foot (the second) of the Gayatrt 
consists of eight syllables. This (one foot) of it is 
that (i.e. the three Vedas, the Azg-veda, Yagur-veda, 
and Sama-veda). And he who thus knows that foot 
of it, conquers as far as that threefold knowledge 
extends. 

3. The Praza (the up-breathing), the Apana (the 
down-breathing), and the V yana (the back-breathing) 
form eight syllables. One foot (the third) of the 
Gayatri consists of eight syllables. This (one foot) 
of it is that (i.e. the three vital breaths). And he who 
thus knows that foot of it, conquers as far as there 
is anything that breathes. And of that (Gayatri, 
or speech) this indeed is the fourth (turtya), the 
bright (darsata) foot, shining high above the skies’. 
What is here called turtya (the fourth) is meant for 
£aturtha (the fourth); what is called darsatam 
padam (the bright foot) is meant for him who is 
as it were seen (the person in the sun); and what 
is called paroragas (he who shines high above the 

obtains the nature of the Kshatra, or he obtains the Kshatra which 
protects (Kshatram atram). 

! Dyu, nom. Dyaus, must be pronounced Diyaus. 

2 Paroragas, masc., should be taken as one word, like paroksha, 
viz. he who is beyond all ragas, all visible skies. 

N 

V ADHYAYA, 14 BRAHMANA, 5. 197 

skies) is meant for him who shines higher and higher 
above every sky. And he who thus knows that foot 
of the Gayatri, shines thus himself also with hap- 
piness and glory. 

4. That Gayatri (as described before with its three 
feet) rests on that fourth foot, the bright one, high 
above the sky. Andthatagain rests on the True (sa- 
tyam), and the True is the eye, for the eye is (known 
to be) true. And therefore even now, if two persons 
come disputing, the one saying, I saw, the other, 
I heard, then we should trust the one who says, I 
saw. And the True again rests on force (balam), 
and force is life (praza), and that (the True) rests on 
life’. Therefore they say, force is stronger than the 
True. Thus does that Gayatri rest with respect to 
the self (as life) That Gayatrt protects (tatre) the 
vital breaths (gayas); the gayas are the prazas 
(vital breaths), and it protects them. And because 
it protects (tatre) the vital breaths (gayas), therefore 
it is called Gayatri. And that Savitri verse which 
the teacher teaches?, that is it (the life, the praza, and 
indirectly the Gayatri) ; and whomsoever he teaches, 
he protects his vital breaths. 

5. Some teach that Savitri as an Anush/ubh? verse, 
saying that speech is Anush¢ubh, and that we teach 

1 Sankara understood the True (satyam) by tad, not the balam, 
the force. 

? The teacher teaches his pupil, who is brought to him when 
eight years old, the Savitri verse, making him repeat each word, 
and each half verse, till he knows the whole, and by teaching him 
that Savitri, he is supposed to teach him really the prama, the life, 
as the self of the world. 

? The verse would be, Rig-veda V, 82, 1: 

Tat savitur vzzzimahe vayam devasya bhoganam 
Sresh/ham sarvadhatamaz turam bhagasya dhimahi. 

198 BRIHADARANVAKA-UPANISHAD: 

that speech. Let no one do this, but let him teach 
the Gayatri as Savitri!, And even if one who knows 
this receives what seems to be much as his reward 
(as a teacher), yet this is not equal to one foot of the 
Gayatri. | 

6. If a man (a teacher) were to receive as his fee 
these three worlds full of all things, he would obtain 
that first foot of the Gayatrt. And if a man were to 
receive as his fee everything as far as this threefold 
knowledge extends, he would obtain that second 
foot of the Gayatri. And if a man were to receive 
as his fee everything whatsoever breathes, he would 
obtain that third foot of the Gayatri. But ‘that fourth 
bright foot, shining high above the skies?', cannot 
be obtained by anybody— whence then could one 
receive such a fee? 

7. The adoration? of that (Gayatri) : 

‘O Gayatri, thou hast one foot, two feet, three 
feet, four feet*. Thou art footless, for thou art not 
known. Worship to thy fourth bright foot above 
the skies. If* one (who knows this) hates some 

1 Because Gayatr represents life, and the pupil receives life when 
he learns the Gayatri. 

? See before, $ 2. 

$ Upasthana is the act of approaching the gods, mpooexovgo:s, 
Angehen, with a view ofobtaining a request. Here the application 
is of two kinds, abhi&arika, imprecatory against another, and, 
abhyudayika, auspicious for oneself. The former has two formulas, 
the latter one. An upasthana is here represented as effective, if 
connected with the Gayatri. 

* Consisting of the three worlds, the threefold knowledge, the 
threefold vital breaths, and the fourth foot, as described before. 

* I have translated this paragraph very freely, and differently 
from Sankara. The question is, whether dvishyat with iti can be 
used in the sense of abhi&ara, or imprecation. If not, I do not see 
how the words should be construed. The expression yasma upa- 

V ADHYAYA, I5 BRAHMANA, 2. 199 

one and says, ‘ May he not obtain this,’ or ‘ May this 
wish not be accomplished to him, then that wish is 
not accomplished to him against whom he thus prays, 
or if he says, ‘ May I obtain this.’ 

8. And thus Ganaka Vaideha spoke on this point 
to Budila Asvatarasvi!: ‘How is it that thou who 
spokest thus as knowing the Gayatri, hast become 
an elephant and carriest me?’ He answered: ‘Your 
Majesty, I did. not know its mouth. Agni, fire, is 
indeed its mouth ; and if people pile even what seems 
much (wood) on the fire, it consumes it all. And 
thus a man who knows this, even if he commits what 
seems much evil, consumes it all and becomes pure, 
clean, and free from decay and death.’ 

FIFTEENTH BRAHMANA. 

1. ? The face of the True (the Brahman) is covered 
with a golden disk?. Open that, O Pushan*, that we 
may see the nature of the Truet. 

2. O Pushan, only seer, Yama (judge), Surya (sun), 
son of Pragapati*, spread thy rays and gather them! 

tish‘kate is rightly explained by Dvivedaganga, yadartham evam 
upatish/Zate. 

! Asvatarasyasvasyapatyam, Sankara. 

2 These verses, which are omitted here in the Madhyandina 
text, are found at the end of the Vagasaneyi-upanishad 15-18. 
They are supposed to be a prayer addressed to Aditya by a dying 
person. 

® Mahidhara on verse 17: ‘The face of the true (purusha in the 
sun) is covered by a golden disk.’ Sankara explains here mukha, 
face, by mukhyaz svarupam, the principal form or nature. 

t Pushan is here explained as a name of Savitzz, the sun; like- 
wise all the names in the next verse. 

5 Cf. Maitr. Up. VI, 35. 

* Of Isvara or Hiranyagarbha. 

200 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

The light which is thy fairest form, I see it. I am 
what he is (viz. the person in the sun). 

3. Breath to air and to the immortal! Then this 
my body ends in ashes. Om! Mind, remember! 
Remember thy deeds! Mind, remember! Remem- 
ber thy deeds?! 

4. Agni, lead us on to wealth (beatitude) by a good 
path’, thou, O God, who knowest all things! Keep 
far from us crooked evil, and we shall offer thee the 
fullest praise! (Rv. I, 189, 1.) 

1 The Vagasaneyi-samhite reads: Om, krato smara, k/Z/be smara, 
kritam smara. Uva/a holds that Agni, fire, who has been wor- 
shipped in youth and manhood, is here invoked in the form of 
mind, or that kratu is meant for sacrifice. ‘Agni, remember me. 
Think of the world! Remember my deeds!’ KZbe is explained 
by Mahidhara as a dative of kZzp, kZzp meaning loka, world, what 
is made to be enjoyed (kalpyate bhogaya). 

? Not by the Southern path, the dark, from which there is a 
fresh return to life. 

VI ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, 5. 201 

SIXTH ADHYAYA. 

First BRAHMANA}, 

I. Harik, Om. He who knows the first and 
the best, becomes himself the first and the best 
among his people. Breath is indeed the first and 
the best. He who knows this, becomes the first 
and the best among his people, and among whom- 
soever he wishes to be so. 

2. He who knows the richest?, becomes himself 
the richest among his people. Speech is the richest. 
He who knows this, becomes the richest among his 
people, and among whomsoever he wishes to be so. 

3. He who knows the firm rest, becomes himself 
firm on even and uneven ground. The eye indeed 
. is the firm rest, for by means of the eye a man 
stands firm on even and uneven ground. He who 
knows this, stands firm on even and uneven ground. 

4. He who knows success, whatever desire he 
desires, it succeeds to him. The ear indeed is suc- 
cess. For in the ear are all these Vedas successful. 
= He who knows this, whatever desire he desires, it 
succeeds to him. 

5. He who knows the home, becomes a home 
of his own people, a home of all men. The mind 

! This Brahmaza, also called a Khila (p. roro, |. 8; p. 1029, 
l. 8), occurs in the Madhyandina-sakha XIV, 9, 2. It should be 
compared with the AKAandogya-upanishad V, 1 (Sacred Books of 
the East, vol. i, p. 72); also with the Ait. Ar. IL, 4; Kaush. Up. 
III, 3; and the Pras£ia Up. II, 3. 

* Here used as a feminine, while in the Aand. Up. V, 1, it is 
vasish/Za. 

202 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

indeed is the home. He who knows this, becomes 
a home of his own people and a home of all men. 

6. He who knows generation!, becomes rich in 
offspring and cattle. Seed indeed is generation. He 
who knows this, becomes rich in offspring and cattle. 

7. These Prazas (senses), when quarrelling toge- 
ther as to who was the best, went to Brahman? 
and said: ‘ Who is the richest of us?’ He replied: 
‘He by whose departure this body seems worst, he 
is the richest.’ 

8. The tongue TT departed, and having 
been absent for a year, it came back and said: 
‘How have you been able to live without me?’ 
They replied : * Like unto people, not speaking with 
the tongue, but breathing with breath, seeing with 
the eye, hearing with the ear, knowing with the 
mind, generating with seed. Thus we have lived.’ 
Then speech entered in. 

9. The eye (sight) departed, and having been 
absent for a year, it came back and said: ' How 
have you been able to live without me?’ They re- 
plied: *Like blind people, not seeing with the eye, 
but breathing with the breath, speaking with the 
tongue, hearing with the ear, knowing with the 
mind, generating with seed. Thus we have lived.’ 
Then the eye entered in. 

IO. The ear (hearing) departed, and paving Been 
absent for a year, it came back and said: ‘How 
have you been able to live without me?’ They re- 
plied: ‘Like deaf people, not hearing with the ear, 

! This is wanting in the XAand.Up. Roer and Poley read Pragapati 
for pragati. MS. I. O. 375 has pragati, MS. I. O. 1973 pragapati. 

? Here we have Pragapati, instead of Brahman, in the AAand. 
Up.; also sresh/Za instead of vasish/ha. 

VI ADHYAYA, I BRAHMANA, I4. 203 

but breathing with the breath, speaking with the 
tongue, seeing with the eye, knowing with the mind, 
generating with seed. Thus we have lived.’ Then 
the ear entered in. 

11. The mind departed, and having been absent 
for a year, it came back and said: ‘ How have you 
been able to live without me ?' They replied: ‘Like 
fools, not knowing with their mind, but breathing 
with the breath, seeing with the eye, hearing with 
the ear, generating with seed. Thus we have lived.’ 
Then the mind entered in. 

12. The seed departed, and having been absent 
for a year, it came back and said: ‘ How have you 
been able to live without me?’ They replied: 
‘Like impotent people, not generating with seed, 
but breathing with the breath, seeing with the eye, 
hearing with the ear, knowing with the mind. Thus 
we have lived.’ Then the seed entered in. 

13. The (vital) breath, when on the point of de- 
parting, tore up these senses, as a great, excellent 
horse of the Sindhu country might tare up the pegs 
to which he is tethered. They said to him: ‘Sir, 
do not depart. We shall not be able to live without 
thee. He said: ‘Then make me an offering.’ 
They said: ‘Let it be so.’ 

14. Then the tongue said: ‘If I am the richest, 
then thou art the richest by it? The eye said: 
‘If I am the firm rest, then thou art possessed of 
firm rest by it. The ear said: ‘If I am success, 
then thou art possessed of success by it. The mind 
said: ‘If I am the home, thou art the home by 
it. The seed said: ‘If I am generation, thou art 
possessed of generation by it.’ He said: ‘ What shall 
be food, what shall be dress for me ?’ 

204 BRIHADAARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

They replied: ‘ Whatever there is, even unto dogs, 
worms, insects, and birds!, that is thy food, and water 
thy dress. He who thus knows the food of Ana (the 
breath)?, by him nothing is eaten that is not (proper) 
food, nothing is received that is not (proper) food. 
Srotriyas (Vedic theologians) who know this, rinse 
the mouth with water when they are going to eat, and 
rinse the mouth with water after they have eaten, 
thinking that thereby they make the breath dressed 
(with water).' 

SECOND BRAHMANA*. 

1. Svetaketu Aruzeya went to the settlement of 
the PazZalas. He came near to Pravahaxa Gai- 
valit, who was walking about (surrounded by his 
men) As soon as he (the king) saw him, he said : 
‘My boy!’ Svetaketu replied: ‘Sir!’ | 

Then the king said: ‘ Have you been taught by 
your father!’ ‘Yes,’ he replied. 

2. The king said: ‘Do you know how men, when 
they depart from here, separate from each other ?' 
‘No,’ he replied. 

‘Do you know how they come back to this 
world?’ ‘No, he replied’. 

! It may mean, every kind of food, such as is eaten by dogs, 
worms, insects, and birds. 

2 We must read, with MS. I.O. 375, anasyannam, not annasyan- 
nam, as MS. I.O. 1975, Roer, and Poley read. Weber has the right 
reading, which is clearly suggested by AKAand. Up. V, 2, 1. 

* See KAand. Up. V, 3 ; Muir, Original Sanskrit Texts, I, 433; 
Deussen, Vedanta, p. 390. The commentator treats this chapter as 
a supplement, to explain the ways that lead to the pitzzloka and 
the devaloka. 

* The MSS. I. O. 375 and 1973 give Gaivali, others Gaibali. 
He is a Kshatriya sage, who appears also in KZand. Up. I, 8, r, as 
silencing Brahmamas. | 

* The same question is repeated in Roer's edition, only substi- 

VI ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, 4. 205 

‘Do you know how that world does never become 
full with the many who again and again depart 
` thither?’ ‘No,’ he replied. 

‘Do you know at the offering of which libation 
the waters become endowed with a human voice 
and rise and speak ?’ ‘No,’ he replied. 

‘Do you know the access to the path leading to 
the Devas and to the path leading to the Fathers, 
i.e. by what deeds men gain access to the path lead- 
ing to the Devas or to that leading to the Fathers ? 
For we have heard even the saying of a Azshi: “I 
heard of two paths for men, one leading to the 
Fathers, the other leading to the Devas. On those 
paths all that lives moves on, whatever there is be- 
tween father (sky) and mother (earth).”’ 

Svetaketu said: ‘I do not know even one of all 
these questions.’ 

3. Then the king invited him to stay and accept 
his hospitality. But the boy, not caring for hospi- 
tality, ran away, went back to his father, and said: 
‘Thus then you called me formerly well-instructed !' 
The father said : * What then, you sage?' The son 
replied: ‘That fellow of a Raganya asked me five 
questions, and I did not know one of them.’ 

‘What were they ?’ said the father. 

‘These were they, the son replied, mentioning 
the different heads. 

4. The father said: ‘You know me, child, that 
whatever I know, I told you. But come, we shall 
go thither, and dwell there as students.’ | 

‘You may go, Sir, the son replied. 

tuting sampadyante for apadyante. The MSS. I. O. 375 and 1973 
do not support this. 

206 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

Then Gautama went where (the place of) Prava- 
haza Gaivali was, and the king offered him a seat, 
ordered water for him, and gave him the proper 
offerings. Then he said to him: ‘Sir, we offer a 
boon to Gautama. | 

5. Gautama said: ‘That boon is promised to 
me; tell me the same speech which you made in 
the presence of my boy.’ 

6. He said: ‘That belongs to divine boons, name 
one of the human boons.' 

7. He said : * You know well that I have plenty of 
gold, plenty of cows, horses, slaves, attendants, and 
apparel; do not heap on me! what I have already in 
plenty, in abundance, and superabundance.’ 

The king said: ‘Gautama, do you wish (for in- 
struction from me) in the proper way ?’ 

Gautama replied : ‘I come to you as a pupil.’ 

In word only have former sages (though Brah- 
mans) come as pupils (to people of lower rank), but 
Gautama actually dwelt as a pupil (of Pravahaza, 
who was a Raganya) in order to obtain the fame of 
having respectfully served his master ?. 

! Abhyavadanya is explained as niggardly, or unwilling to give, 
and derived from vadanya, liberal, a-vadanya, illiberal, and abhi, 
towards. This, however, is an impossible form in Sanskrit. 
Vadanya means liberal and stands for avadanya, this being 
derived from avadana, lit. what is cut off, then a morsel, a gift. In 
abhyavadanya the original a reappears, so that abhyavadanya 
means, not niggardly, but on the contrary, liberal, i.e. giving more 
than is required. Avadanya has never been met with in the sense 
of niggardly, and though a rule of Pazini sanctions the formation of 
a-vadanya, it does not say in what sense. Abhyavada in the sense 
of cutting off in addition occurs in Satap. Br. II, 5, 2, 40; avadanam 
karoti, in the sense of making a present, occurs Maitr. Up.VI, 33. 

2 The commentator takes the opposite view. In times of 
distress, he says, former sages, belonging to a higher caste, have 

VI ADHYAYA, 2 BRAHMANA, II. 207 

8. The king said: ‘Do not be offended with us, 
neither you nor your forefathers, because this know- 
ledge has before now never dwelt with any Brah- 
maza!, But I shall tell it to you, for who could 
refuse you when you speak thus ? 

9. ‘ The altar (fire), O Gautama, is that world 
(heaven)?; the fuel is the sun itself, the smoke his 
rays, the light the day, the coals the quarters, the 

sparks the intermediate quarters. On that altar 
the Devas offer the sraddha libation (consisting of 
water?) From that oblation rises Soma, the king 
(the moon). 

IO. * The altar, O Gautama, is Parganya (the god 
of rain); the fuel is the year itself, the smoke the 
clouds, the light the lightning, the coals the thunder- 
bolt, the sparks the thunderings. On that altar the 
Devas offer Soma, the king (the moon). From that 
oblation rises rain. 

1I. ‘The altar, O Gautama, is this world*; the 
fuel is the earth itself, the smoke the fire, the light 
the night, the coals the moon, the sparks the stars. 
On that altar the Devas offer rain. From that 
oblation rises food. 

submitted to become pupils to teachers of a lower caste, not, how- 
ever, in order to learn, but simply in order to live. "Therefore 
Gautama also becomes a pupil in name only, for it would be 
against all law to act otherwise. See Gautama, Dharma-sutras 
VII, 1, ed. Stenzler; translated by Buhler, p. 209. 

s Here, too, my. translation is hypothetical, and differs widely 
from Sankara. 

2 Cf. Khand. Up. V, 4. 

? Deussen translates : *In diesem Feuer opfern die Gotter den 
Glauben. 

t Here a distinction is made between ayam loka, this world, and 
przthivi, earth, while in the .KZ&nd. Up. ayam loka is the earth, 
asau loka the heaven. 

208 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

I2. ‘The altar, O Gautama, is man; the fuel the 
opened mouth, the smoke the breath, the light the 
tongue, the coals the eye, the sparks the ear. On 
that altar the Devas offer food. From that oblation 
rises seed. 

13. ‘The altar, O Gautama, is woman!. On that 
altar the Devas offer seed. From that oblation 
rises man. He lives so long as he lives, and then 
when he dies, 

14. ' They take him to the fire (the funeral pile), 
and then the altar-fire is indeed fire, the fuel fuel, 
the smoke smoke, the light light, the coals coals, the 
sparks sparks. In that very altar-fire the Devas 
offer man, and from that oblation man rises, brilliant 
in colour. 

15. ‘ Those who thus know this (even Gvzhasthas), 
and those who in the forest worship faith and the 
True? (Brahman Hirazyagarbha), go to light (ar- 
kis), from light to day, from day to the increasing 
half, from the increasing half to the six months 
when the sun goes to the north, from those six 
months to the world of the Devas (Devaloka), from 
the world of the Devas to the sun, from the sun to the 
place of lightning. When they have thus reached the 
place of lightning a spirit? comes near them, and leads 
them to the worlds of the (conditioned) Brahman. 
In these worlds of Brahman they dwell exalted for 
ages. There is no returning for them. 

1 Tasy& upastha eva samil, lomani dhumo, yonir arkir, yad 
antaAkaroti te 'hgara, abhinanda visphulingaZ. 

? Sankara translates, ‘those who with faith worship the True,’ 
and this seems better. 

> * A person living in the Brahma-world, sent forth, i.e. created, 
by Brahman, by the mind, Sankara. ‘Der ist nicht wie ein 
Mensch,’ Deussen, p. 392. 

VI ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, I. 209 

16. ‘But they who conquer the worlds (future ~ 
states) by means of sacrifice, charity, and austerity, 
go to smoke, from smoke to night, from night to the 
decreasing half of the moon, from the decreasing 
half of the moon to the six months when the sun 
goes to the south, from these months to the world 
of the fathers, from the world of the fathers to the - 
moon. Having reached the moon, they become food, 
and then the Devas feed on them there, as sacrificers 
feed on Soma, as it increases and decreases}. But 
when this (the result of their good works on earth) 
ceases, they return again to that ether, from ether 
to the air, from the air to rain, from rain to the 
earth. And when they have reached the earth, they 
become food, they are offered again in the altar-fire, 
which is man (see ) 11), and thence are born in the 
fire of woman. Thus they rise up towards the worlds, 
and go the same round as before. 

‘Those, however, who know neither of these two 
paths, become worms, birds, and creeping things.' 

Tuirp BRAHMANA 2, 

1. If a man wishes to reach greatness (wealth for 
performing sacrifices), he performs the upasad rule 
during twelve days? (i. e. he lives on small quantities 
of milk), beginning on an auspicious day of the light 
half of the moon during the northern progress of the 
sun, collecting at the same time in a cup or a dish 

1 See note 4 on AAand. Up. V, 10, and Deussen, Vedanta, p. 393. 
Sankara guards against taking 4pyayasvapakshiyasva as a Mantra. 
A similar construction is gayasva mrzyasva, see Khand. Up. V, 1o, 8. 

2 Madhyandina text, p. 1103; cf. KZand. Up. V, 2, 4-8; Kaush. 
Up. II, 3. 

* Yasmin puzye'nukule ’hni karma Aikirshati tata prak pusya- 
ham evarabhya dvadasaham upasadvrati. 

[15] P 

210 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD., 

made of Udumbara wood all sorts of herbs, includ- 
ing fruits. He sweeps the floor (near the house- 

altar, Avasathya), sprinkles it, lays the fire, spreads - 

grass round it according to rule!, prepares the clari- 
fied butter (Agya), and on a day, presided over by a 
male star (nakshatra), after having properly mixed 
the Mantha? (the herbs, fruits, milk, honey, &c.), 
he sacrifices (he pours agya into the fire), saying ?: 
‘O Gatavedas, whatever adverse gods there are in 
thee, who defeat the desires of men, to them I offer 
this portion; may they, being pleased, please me 
with all desires! | Svaha! 

‘That cross deity who lies down‘, thinking that 
all things are kept asunder by her, I worship thee 
as propitious with this stream of ghee.’ Svaha! 

2. He then says, Svaha to the First, Svaha to 
the Best, pours ghee into the fire, and throws what 
remains into the Mantha (mortar). 

He then says, Svaha to Breath, Svaha to her who 
is the richest, pours ghee into the fire, and throws 
what remains into the Mantha (mortar). 

He then says, Svaha to Speech, Svaha to the 
Support, pours ghee into the fire, and throws what 
remains into the Mantha (mortar). 

He then says, Svaha to the Eye, Svaha to Success, 
pours ghee into the fire, and throws what temen 
into the Mantha (mortar). 

He then says, Svaha to the Ear, Svaha to the 

1 As the whole act is considered smarta, not srauta, the order to 
be observed (avrzt) is that of the sthalipaka. 

? Dravadravye prakshipta mathita? saktavaA is the explanation 
of Mantha, given in Gaimin. N. M. V. p. 406. 

3 These verses are not explained by Sankara, and they are 
absent in the AZand. Up. V, 2, 6, 4. 

* The Madhyandinas read nipadyase. 

VI ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, 3. 211 

- Home, pours ghee into the fire, and throws what 
remains into the Mantha (mortar). 

He then says, Svaha to the Mind, Svaha to Off- 
spring, pours ghee into the fire, and throws what 
remains into the Mantha (mortar). 

He then says, Svahato Seed, pours ghee into the fire, 
and throws what.remains into the Mantha (mortar). 

3. He then says, Svaha to Agni (fire), pours ghee 
into the fire, and throws what remains into the 
Mantha (mortar). 

He then says, Svaha to Soma, pours ghee into 
the fire, and throws what remains into the Mantha 
(mortar). 

He then says, BhaZ (earth), Svaha, pours ghee 
into the fire, and throws what remains into the 
Mantha (mortar). 

He then says, BhuvaZ (sky), Svaha, pours ghee 
into the fire, and throws what remains into the 
Mantha (mortar). 

He then says, SvaZ (heaven), Svaha, pours ghee 
into the fire, and throws what remains into the 
Mantha (mortar). 

He then says, Bhar, BhuvaZ, SvaZ, Svaha, pours 
ghee into the fire, and throws what remains into the 
Mantha (mortar). 

He then says, Svaha to Brahman (the priesthood), 
pours ghee into the fire, and throws what remains 
into the Mantha (mortar). 

He then says, Svaha to Kshatra (the knighthood), 
pours ghee into the fire, and throws what remains 
into the Mantha (mortar). 

He then says, Svaha to the Past, pours ghee into 
the fire, and throws what remains into the Mantha 
(mortar). 

P 2 

212 BRIIIADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

He then says, Svaha to the Future, pours ghee 
into the fire, and throws what remains into the 
Mantha (mortar). 

He then says, Svaha to the Universe, pours ghee 
into the fire, and throws what remains into the 
Mantha (mortar). 

He then says, Svaha to all things, pours ghee into 
the fire, and throws what remains into the Mantha 
(mortar). 

He then says, Svaha to Pragapati, pours ghee 
into the fire, and throws what remains into the 
Mantha (mortar). 

4. Then he touches it (the Mantha, which is dedi- - 
cated to Praza, breath), saying: ‘Thou art fleet (as 
breath). Thou art burning (as fire). Thou art full 
(as Brahman). Thou art firm (as the sky). Thou 
art the abode of all (as the earth). Thou hast been 
saluted with Hin (at the beginning of the sacrifice 
by the prastotvz). Thou art saluted with Hin (in 
the middle of the sacrifice by the prastotzz). Thou 
hast been sung (by the udgatzz at the beginning of 
the sacrifice). Thou art sung (by the udgatzz in the 
middle of the sacrifice). Thou hast been celebrated 
(by the adhvaryu at the beginning of the sacrifice). 
Thou art celebrated again (by the agnidhra in the 
middle of the sacrifice), Thou art bright in the wet 
(cloud). Thou art great. Thou art powerful. Thou 
art food (as Soma). Thou art light (as Agni, fire, 
the eater) Thou art the end. Thou art the ab- 
sorption (of all things).' 

5. Then he holds it (the Mantha) forth, saying : 
‘Thou? knowest all, we know thy greatness. He is 

A 

. * These curious words a mamsi 4 mamhi te mahi are not 
explained by Sankara. Anandagiri explains them as I have trans- 

VI ADHYAYA, 3 BRAHMANA, 7. 213 

indeed a king, a ruler, the highest lord. May that 
king, that ruler make me the highest lord.’ 

6. Then he eats it, saying: ‘Tat savitur vare- 
nyam! (We meditate on that adorable light)—The 
-winds drop honey for the righteous, the rivers drop 
honey, may our plants be sweet as honey! BhuZ 
(earth) Svaha! 

‘Bhargo devasya dhimahi (of the divine 
Savit7z)—May the night be honey in the morning, 
may the air above the earth, may heaven, our father, 
be honey! BhuvaZ (sky) Svaha! 

'Dhiyo yo naZ pro£odayat (who should rouse 
our thoughts)—May the tree be full of honey, may 
the sun be full of honey, may our cows be sweet like 
honey! Sva% (heaven) Svaha!’ 

He repeats the whole Savitri verse, and all the 
verses about the honey, thinking, May I be all this! : 
Bhur, Bhuva, Sva, Svaha! Having thus swal- 
lowed all, he washes his hands, and sits down behind 
the altar, turning his head to the East. In the 
morning he worships Aditya (the sun), with the 
hymn, ' Thou art the best lotus of the four quarters, 
may I become the best lotus among men. Then 
returning as he came, he sits down behind the altar 
and recites the genealogical list?. 

7. Uddalaka Aruzi told this (Mantha-doctrine) to 
his pupil Vagasaneya YagZavalkya, and said: 'If 
a man were to pour it on a dry stick, branches would 
grow, and leaves spring forth. 

lated them. They correspond to *amo namasy ama hi te sarvam 
idam’ in the AKZand. Up. V, 2, 6,6. The Madhyandinas read: 
Amo ’sy 4mam hi te mayi, sa hi raga, &c. Dvivedaganga translates: 
‘thou art the knower, thy knowledge extends to me.’ 

1 Rv. III, 62, 10. 

? This probably refers to the list immediately following. 

214 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

8. Vagasaneya YAgzavalkya told the same to his 
pupil Madhuka Paingya, and said: ‘If a man were to 
pour it on a dry stick, branches would grow, and 
leaves spring forth.’ 

9. Madhuka Paingya told the same to his pupil 
Kila Bhagavitti, and said: ‘If a man were to pour 
it on a dry stick, branches would grow, and leaves 
spring forth.’ 

IO. Afila Bhagavitti told the same to his pupil 
Ganaki Ayasthuza, and said: ‘If a man were to 
pour it on a dry stick, branches would grow, and 
leaves spring forth.' 

11. Ganaki Ayasthuza told the same.to his pupil 
Satyakama Gabala, and said: 'If a man were to 
pour it on a dry stick, branches would grow, and 
leaves spring forth.' 

12. Satyakama Gabala told the same to his pupils, 
and said: ‘If a man were to pour it on a dry stick, 
branches would grow, and leaves spring forth.’ 

Let no one tell this! to any one, except to a son 
or to a pupil ?. 

I3. Four things are made of the wood of the 
Udumbara tree, the sacrificial ladle (sruva), the cup 
(&amasa), the fuel, and the two churning sticks. 

There are ten kinds of village (cultivated) seeds, 
viz. rice and barley (brihiyavas), sesamum and kidney- 
beans (tilamashas), millet and panic seed (azupriyan- 
gavas), wheat (godhumas), lentils (masuras), pulse 
(khalvas) and vetches (khalakulas?) After having 

1 The Mantha-doctrine with the prazadarsana. Comm. 

2 It probably means to no one except to one's own son and 
to one's own disciple. Cf. Svet. Up. VI, 22. 

3 I have given the English names after Roer, who, living in India, 
had the best opportunity of identifying the various kinds of plants 
here mentioned. The commentators do not help us much. Sankara 

VI ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, 2. 215 

ground these he sprinkles them with curds (dadhi), 
honey, and ghee, and then offers (the proper por- 
tions) of clarified butter! (Agya). 

FourtH BrRAHMANA?, 

1. The earth is the essence of all these things, 
water is the essence of the earth, plants of water, 
flowers of plants, fruits of flowers, man of fruits, 
seed of man. 

2. And Pragapati thought, let me make an abode 
for him, and he created a woman (.Satarupa). 

Tam? srish¢tvadha upasta, tasmat striyam adha 
upasita. Sa etam prazkam gravanam atmana eva 
samudaparayat, tenaindm abhyasvzgat, 

says that in some places Priyangu (panic seed or millet) is called 
Kangu; that Khalva, pulse, is also called Nishpava and Valla, and 
Khalakula, vetches, commonly Kulattha. Dvivedaganga adds that 
Amu is called in Guzerat Moriya, Priyangu Kangu, Khalva, as 
nishpava, Valla, and Khalakula Kulattha. 

1 According to the rules laid down in the proper Gzzhya-sutras. 

2 This Br&ahmaza is inserted here because there is supposed 
to be some similarity between the preparation of the Srimantha 
and the Putramantha, or because a person who has performed the 
Srimantha is fit to perform the Putramantha. Thus Sankara 
says: Prazadarsina& srimanthaz karma kritavatak putramanthe 
'dhikara4. Yada putramantham &ikirshati tada srtmantham kritva 
ritukalam patnyahk (brahmaAaryeza) pratikshata iti. 

? I have given those portions of the text which did not admit of 
translation into English, in Sanskrit. It was not easy, however, to 
determine always the text of the Kazva-sakha. Poley’s text is not 
always correct, and Roer seems simply to repeat it. Sankara’s com- 
mentary, which is meant for the Kazva text, becomes very short 
towards the end of the Upanishad. It is quite sufficient for the pur- 
pose of a translation, but by no means always for restoring a correct 
tex. MS. Wilson 369, which has been assigned to the Kazva-sakha, 
and which our Catalogue attributes to the same school, gives the 
Madhyandina text, and so does MS. Mill 108. Ihave therefore col- 
lated two MSS. of the India Office, which Dr. Rost had the kindness 
to select for me, MS. 375 and MS. 1973, which I call A. and B. 

216 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

3. Tasya vedir upastho, lomani barhis, &arma- 
dhishavaze, samiddho! madhyatas, tau mushkau. 
Sa yavan ha vai vagapeyena yagamanasya loko 
bhavati tavan asya loko bhavati ya evam vidvan 
adhopahdsam £araty a sa? strizaze sukrztam vrznkte 
tha ya idam avidvan adhopahdsam  Z4araty Asya 
striyak sukvztam vrengate. 

4. Etad dha sma vai tadvidvan Uddalaka Arunir 
ahaitad dha sma vai tadvidvan Nako Maudgalya ahai- 
tad dha sma vai tadvidvan Kumaraharita Aha, bahavo 
marya brahmazayan4? nirindriya visukzzto'smal lokat 
prayanti* ya idam avidvamso 'dhopahasazz Zarantiti. 
Bahu va? ida7 suptasya va gagrato va reta% skandati, 

5. Tad abhimvzsed anu va mantrayeta yan me 
'dya reta% przthivim askantsid yad oshadhir apy 
asarad yad apa, idam aha% tad reta adade punar 
mam aitv indriyam punas tega% punar bhagaZ, punar 
agnayo® dhishzya yathdsthanam kalpantam, ity 
anamikangush¢sabhy4m  adayantareza stanau va 
bhruvau va nim7?Zgyat ". 

6. If a man see himself in the water ?, he should 

1 Roer reads samidho, but Sankara and Dvivedaganga clearly 
presuppose samiddho, which is in A. and B. 

? Roer has &saz sa striv4m, Poley, A. and B. have asaz strizam. 
Sankara (MS. Mill 64) read 4 sa striz4m, and later on asya striyaZ, 
though both Roer and Poley leave out the 4 here too (4 asyeti &hedah). 

? BrahmazayanaZ, the same as brahmabandhavaZ, i. e. Brahmans 
by descent only, not by knowledge. 

* Narakam gakkhantityarthak. | Dvivedaganga. 

5 Bahu va svalpaz va. 

$ 'The Madhyandina text has agnayo, and Dvivedaganga explains 
it by dhishzy& agnayaA sarfrasthita#z. Poley and Roer have punar 
agnir dhishzya, and so have A. and B. 

7 Nirmzzgyat, A.; nimr/figyat, B. 

* Dvivedaganga adds, retoyonav udake retaZsi£as tatra svakkha- 
yadarsane prayas£ittam Aha. 

VI ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, IO. 217 

recite the following verse: ‘May there be in me 
splendour, strength, glory, wealth, virtue.' 

She is the best of women whose garments are 
.pure!. Therefore let him approach a woman whose 
garments are pure, and whose fame is pure, and 
address her. 

7. If she do not give in?, let him, as he likes, bribe 
her(with presents). And if she then do not give in, 
let him, as he likes, beat her with a stick or with his 
hand, and overcome her?, saying: 'With manly 
strength and glory I take away thy glory, —and 
thus she becomes unglorious *. 

8. If she give in, he says: * With manly strength 
and glory I give thee glory, —and thus they both 
become glorious. 

9. Sa yam iket kamayeta meti tasyam artham 
nish/aya e mukhena mukham sandhayopastham asya 
abhimvzsya gaped angadangat sambhavasi hzedayad 
adhi gayase, sa tvam angakashayo* 'si digdhavid- 
dham" iva madayemam amum mayiti 5. 

10. Atha yam i£eZen na garbham dadhiteti® tas- 
yam artha nish/aya mukhena mukham sandhaya- 
bhiprazyapanyad indriyeza te retasa reta adada ity 
areta!? eva bhavati. 

! Triratravratam kritva Aaturtha 'hni snatam. 

? Instead of connecting kamam with dadyat, Dvivedaganga 
explains it by yathasakti. 

3 Atikram, scil. maithunaya. t Bandhya durbhaga. 

5 Nish/aya, A. B.; nish/Zaya, Roer, Poley; the same in $ 10. 

€ Sa tvam anganam kashayo raso 'si. 

7 Vishaliptasaraviddham mrzgim iva. 

e Madayeti is the reading of the Madhyandina text. Poley, Roer, 
A. and B. read madayemam amum mayiti. Anandagiri has mzzgim 
ivamum madiyaz striyam me madaya madvas&m kurv ityarthah. 
Dvivedaganga explains madayeti. 

® Rfipabhramsayauvanahanibhayat. 10 Agarbhiai. 

218 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

11. Atha yam iZ££Zed garbham dadhiteti tasyim 
artham nish/aya mukhena mukha% sandhayapa- 
nyabhiprazyad indriyeza te retasa reta adadhamtti 
garbhizy eva bhavati. 

12. Now again, if a man's wife has a lover and 
the husband hates ‘him, let him (according to rule)! 
place fire by an unbaked jar, spread a layer of arrows 
in inverse order?, anoint these three arrow-heads e 
with butter in inverse order, and sacrifice, saying : 
‘Thou hast sacrificed in my fire, I take away thy up 
and down breathing, I here *.' 

‘Thou hast sacrificed in my fire, I take away thy 
sons and cattle, I here.’ 

‘Thou hast sacrificed in my fire, I take away thy 
sacred and thy good works, I here.’ 

‘Thou hast sacrificed in my fire, I take away thy 
hope and expectation, I here.’ 

He whom a Brahmaza who knows this curses, de- 
parts from this world without strength and without 
good works. Therefore let no one wish even for 
sport with the wife of a Srotriya® who knows this, for 
he who knows this, is a dangerous enemy. 

13. When the monthly illness seizes his wife, she 

x: Avasathy4gnim eva pragvalya. 

? Paskimagram dakshizagraz va yatha syat tatha. 

? Tisra% is left out by Roer and Poley, by A. and B. 

* I have translated according to the Kazva text, as far as it could 
be made out. As there are four imprecations, it is but natural that 
tisra should be left out in the Kazva text. It is found in the 
Madhyandina text, because there the imprecations are only three in 
number, viz. the taking away of hope and expectation, of sons and 
cattle, and of up and down breathing. Instead of asav iti, which is 
sufficient, the Madhyandina text has asav iti nama grzhzati, and both 
Anandagiri and Dvivedaganga allow the alternative, atmanaZ satror 

va nama grzhzati, though asau can really refer to the speaker only. 
e Roer reads dvareza? Poley, A. and B. dareza; the Madhyan- 

VI ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, 18. 219 

should for three days not drink from a metal vessel, 
and wear a fresh dress. Let no Vzzshala or Vvzshali 
(a Sfidra man or woman) touch her. At the end of 
the three days, when she has bathed, the husband 
should make her pound rice !. 

I4. And if a man wishes that a white son should 
be born to him, and that he should know one Veda, 
and live to his full age, then, after having prepared 
boiled rice with milk and butter, they should both 
eat, being fit to have offspring. 

I5. And if a man wishes that a reddish? son with 
tawny eyes should be born to him, and that he 
should know two Vedas, and live to his full age, 
then, after having prepared boiled rice with coagu- 
lated milk and butter, they should both eat, being 
fit to have offspring. | 

16. And if a man wishes that a dark son should 
be born to him with red eyes, and that he should 
know three Vedas, and live to his full age, then, after 
having prepared boiled rice with water and butter, 
they should both eat, being fit to have offspring. 

17. And if a man wishes that a learned daughter 
should be born to him, and that she should live to 
her full age, then, after having prepared boiled rice 
with sesamum and butter, they should both eat, 
. being fit to have offspring. 

18. And if a man wishes that a learned son should 
be born to him, famous, a public man, a popular 
speaker, that he should know all the Vedas, and that 

dinas gayaya. Sankara, according to Roer, interprets dvareza, but 
it seems that dareza is used here in the singular, instead of the 
plural See Paraskara Grzhya-sfitras I, 11. 

! To be used for the ceremony described in § 14 seq. 

2 Kapilo varzataZ pingalahk pihgakshaA. 

220 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

he should live to his full age, then, after having pre- 
pared boiled rice with meat and butter, they should 
both eat, being fit to have offspring. The meat 
should be of a young or of an old bull. 

19. And then toward morning, after having, ac- 
cording to the rule of the Sthalipaka (pot-boiling), 
performed the preparation of the Agya (clarified 
butter’), he sacrifices from the Sthalipaka bit by bit, 
saying : ‘ This is for Agni, Svaha! This is for Anu- 
mati, Svaha! This is for the divine Savitz, the true 
creator, Svaha! Having sacrificed, he takes out the 
rest of the rice and eats it, and after having eaten, 
he gives it to his wife. Then he washes his hands, 
fills a water-jar, and sprinkles her thrice with it, 
saying : ‘Rise hence, O Visvavasu?, seek another 
blooming girl, a wife with her husband.’ 

20. Then he embraces her, and says: ‘I am Ama 
(breath), thou art SA (speech)?. Thou art Sa (speech), 
I am Ama (breath). I am the Saman, thou art the 
Rik*, I am the sky, thou art the earth. Come, let 
us strive together, that a male child may be 
begotten 5,’ 

! Karum srapayitva. 

? Name of a Gandharva, as god of love. See Rig-veda X, 85, 22. 
Dvivedaganga explains the verse differently, so that the last words 
imply, I come together with my own wife. 

3 Because speech is dependent on breath, as the wife is on the 
husband. See A/and.Up. I, 6, 1. 

* Because the Sama-veda rests on the Rig-veda. 

5 This is a verse which is often quoted and explained. It occurs 
in the Atharva-veda XIV, 71, as ‘amo 'ham asmi sa tvazz, sama&- 
ham asmy rik tvam, dyaur aham przthivi tvam; tav iha sam 
bhavava pragam 4 ganayavahai.' 

Here we have the opposition between ama% and sa, while in 
the Ait. Brahmaza VIII, 27, we have amo 'ham asmi sa tvam, 
giving ama% in opposition to sa. It seems not unlikely that this 

VI ADHYAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, 23. 221 

21. Athasya arf vihapayati, vigihithaze dyavapzz- 
thivi iti tasyam artham nishzaya mukhena mukham 
sandhaya trir enam anulomam ! anumarsh/i, Vishzur 
yoni kalpayatu, Tvash/& rupazi pizesatu, asiZZatu 
Pragapatir Dhate garbha dadhatu te. Garbham 
dhehi Sinivali, garbham dhehi pvzthush¢uke, garbham 
te Asvinau devav adhattem pushkarasragau. 

22. Hirazmayt arant yabhyam nirmanthatam? asvi- 
nau?, tam te garbham havamahe* dasame masi 
sutave. Yathagnigarbha pvzthivi, yatha dyaur in- 
dreza garbhixi, vayur disaz yatha garbha evam 
garbham dadhami te ‘sav iti 5. 

23. Soshyantim*adbhir abhyukshati. Yatha vayuh’ 
pushkarizizz sami£gayati sarvataZ, eva te garbha 
egatu sahavaitu garayuza. Indrasydyam vraga% 
kzzta£ sarga/aE? saparisraya£?, tam indra nirgahi 
garbheza savaram '° saheti. 

was an old proverbial formula, and that it meant originally no more 
than ‘I am he, and thou art she? But this meaning was soon for- 
gotten. In the Xhand. Up. I, 6,1, we find si explained as earth, 
ama as fire (Sacred Books of the East, vol. i, p.13). In the Ait. 
Brahmaza sa is explained as zk, ama as Saman. I have therefore 
in our passage also followed the interpretation of the commentary, 
instead of rendering it, *I am he, and thou art she; thou art she, 
and I am he.’ 

1 Anulomam, murdhanam arabhya padantam. 

? Nirmathitavantau. 3 Asvinau devau, Madhyandina text. 

* Dadhamahe, Madhyandina text. Instead of sutave, A. has 
suyate, B. sfitaye. 

5 Iti nama grzhzati, Madhyandina text. Sankara says, asav iti 
tasya&. Anandagiri says, asav iti patyur va nirdesah ; tasya nama 
grihnatiti purveza sambandhaZ. Dvivedaganga says, ante bharta- 
sav aham iti svatmano nama grzhzati, bharyaya va. 

° See Paraskara Grrhya-sutra I, 16 seq. 7 Vatah, M. 

8€ Argadaya nirodhena saha vartamana/Z sargadah, Dvivedaganga. 

° Saparisrayah, parisrayesa parivesh/anena gar&yuza sahitaZ, 
Dvivedaganga. 

10 Savaram is the reading given by Poley, Roer, A. and B. 

EM 

222 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

241. When the child is born, he prepares the fire, 
places the child on his lap, and having poured prt- 
shadazya, i. e. dadhi (thick milk) mixed with ghvzta 
(clarified butter) into a metal jug, he sacrifices bit by 
bit of that pzzshadagya, saying: ‘ May I, as I in- 
crease in this my house, nourish a thousand! May 
fortune never fail in his race, with offspring and 
cattle, Svaha !' 

‘I offer to thee in my mind the vital breaths which 
are in me, Svaha!’ 

‘Whatever? in my work I have done too much, 
or whatever I have here done too little, may the wise 
Agni Svishzakzzt make Eus right and -proper for us, 
Svaha !’ 

25. Then putting his mouth near the child's 
right ear, he says thrice, Speech, speech?! After 

Anandagiri explains: garbhaniZsarazanantaram ya mamsapesi 
nirgakkhati savara, tam ka nirgamayety arthak. Dvivedaganga (ed. 
Weber) writes: nirgamyamanamamsapest sa-avarasabdavaAy8, tam 
sAvaram ka nirgamaya. 

* These as well as the preceding rules refer to matters generally 
treated in the Gzzhya-sutras; see Asvalayana, Grzhya-sutras I, 
13 seq.; Paraskara, Gzzhya-sutras I, 11 seq. ; Sankhayana, Grihya- 
sutras I, 19 seq. It is curious, however, that Asvalayana I, 13, I, 
refers distinctly to the Upanishad as the place where the pumsavana 
and similar matters were treated. This shows that the Upanishads 
were known before the composition of the Grzhya-sutras, and 
explains perhaps, at least partially, why the Upanishads were con- 
sidered as rahasya. Asvaldyana says, ‘ Conception, begetting of a 
boy, and guarding the embryo are to be found in the Upanishad. 
But if a man does not read the Upanishad, let him know that he 
should feed his wife,’ &c. Narayaza explains that Asvalayana here 
refers to an Upanishad which does not exist in his own Sakh4, but . 
he objects to the conclusion that therefore the garbhadhana and 
other ceremonies need not be performed, and adds that some hold 
it should be performed, as prescribed by Saunaka and others. 

? Asvalayana, Grihya-sutra I, 10, 23. 

* Trayilakshaza vak tvayi pravisatv iti gapato 'bhiprayaZ. 

VI ADHYAAYA, 4 BRAHMANA, 28. 223 

that he pours together thick milk, honey, and clari- 
fied butter, and feeds the child with (a ladle of) 
pure gold', saying: ‘I give thee BhaZ, I give thee 
BhuvaZ, I give thee SvaZ?, Bhar, BhuvaZ, SvaZ, I 
give thee all 3, 

264, Then he gives him his name, saying: ‘Thou 
art Veda;’ but this is his secret name*. 

27. Then he hands the boy to his mother and 
gives him her breast, saying: ‘O Sarasvati, that 
breast of thine which is inexhaustible, delightful, 
abundant, wealthy, generous, by which thou cherish- 
est all blessings, make that to flow here *.' 

287. Then he addresses the mother of the boy: 

1 Cf. Paraskara Grzhya-sitras I, 16, 4, anamikay& suvarzantar- 
hitaya ; Sankhayana, Grzhya-sutras I, 24, prasayeg gatarupena. 

? Bhar bhuva/ sva% are explained by Dvivedaganga as the Rig- 
veda, Yagur-veda, and Sama-veda. They might also be earth, air, 
and heaven. See Sankhayana, Gr?hya-sutras I, 24; Bhur rigvedam 
tvayi dadhami, &c. 

° The Madhyandinas add here another verse, which the father 
recites while he strokes his boy: ‘ Be a stone, be an axe, be pure 
gold. Thou art my Self, called my son; live a hundred harvests.’ 
The same verse occurs in the Asvalayana Grihya-sutras I, 15, 3 

* The two ceremonies, here described, are the ASR M 
and the medhaganana. They are here treated rather confusedly. 
Paraskara (Grzhya-sutras I, 16, 3) distinguishes the medhaganana 
and the ayushya. He treats the medhaganana first, which consists 
in feeding the boy with honey and clarified butter, and saying to 
him bhius tvayi dadhami, &c. The 4yushya consists in repeating 
certain verses in the boy’s ear, wishing him a long life, &c. In 
Asvalayana’s Grthya-sitras, I, 15, 1 contains the ayushya, I, 15, 2 
the medhaganana. SAnkh4yana also (I, 24) treats the ayushya first, 
and the medhaganana afterwards, and the same order prevails in 
the Madhyandina text of the Brzhadaramyaka-upanishad. 

5 In the Madhyandina text these acts are differently arranged. 

* Rig-veda I, 164, 49. 

? These verses are differently explained by various commentators. 
Anandagiri explains i/A as stutya, bhogya. He derives Maitravaruzi 

224 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

‘Thou art 14 Maitravaruzi: thou strong woman 
hast born a strong boy. Be thou blessed with 
strong children thou who hast blessed me with a 
strong child.’ 

And they say of such a boy : ‘Ah, thou art better 
than thy father; ah, thou art better than thy grand- 
father. Truly he has reached the highest point in 
happiness, praise, and Vedic glory who is born as 
the son of a Brahmaza that knows this.’ 

FirtH BRAHMANA. 

I. Now follows the stem! : 
1, Pautimashiputra from Katyayaniputra, 

from Maitravaruza, i.e. Vasisheha, the son of Mitravaruzau, and 
identifies her with Arundhati. Dvivedaganga takes ida as bhogya, 
or idapatri, or przthivirupa, and admits that she may be called 
Maitravaruzi, because born of Mitravaruzau. "Vire is rightly taken 
as a vocative by Dvivedaganga, while Anandagiri explains it as a 
locative, mayi nimittabhute. One expects agiganaA instead of 
agiganat, which is the reading of A. and B. The reading of the 
Madhyandinas, agiganathaA, is right grammatically, but it offends 
against the metre, and is a theoretical rather than a real form. 
If we read agiganaA, we must also read akara, unless we are 
prepared to follow the commentator, who supplies bhavati. 

1 The Madhyandinas begin with vayam, we, then 1. Bharadvaei- 

putra, 2. Vatsimazdaviputra, 3. Parasariputra, 4. Gargiputra, 5. Pa- 
rasari-kauzdiniputra, 6. Gargiputra, 7. Gargiputra, 8. Badeyiputra, 
9. Maushikiputra, 10. Harikarziputra, 11. Bharadvagiputra, r2. 
Paingiputra, 13. Saunakiputra, 14. Kasyapi-balakya-ma/Aariputra, 
15. Kautsiputra, 16. Baudhiputra, 17. Salank&yaniputra, 18. Varsha- 
ganiputra, 19. Gautamiputra, 20. Atreyiputra, 21. Gautamiputra, 
22. Vatsiputra, 23. Bharadvagiputra, 24. Parasariputra, 25. Varka- 
ruziputra; then from No. 20 as in the Kazva text. 
. This stem is called by Sankara, Samastapravakanavamsah, and 
Anandagiri adds, purvau vassau purushaviseshitau, tzztiyas tu 
striviseshitaZ, stripradhanyat. Dvivedaganga writes, putramantha- 
karmanah strisamskararthatvenoktatvat tatsannidhanad ayam vamsaA 
stripradhanyeno4yate. 

r 
: , 
— 

VI ADHYAYA, 5 BRAHMANA, 2. 225 

N 

. Katyayantputra from Gotamtputra, 

. Gotamiputra from Bharadvaziputra, 

. Bharadvagtputra from Parasariputra, 

. Parasariputra from Aupasvatiputra, 

. Aupasvatiputra from Parasariputra, 

Parasariputra from Katyayaniputra, 

. Katyayaniputra from Kausikiputra, 

. Kausiktputra from Alambiputra and Vaiya- 
ghrapadiputra, 

. Alambiputra and Vaiy4ghrapadtputra from 
Kazviputra, 

11. Kazviputra from Kapiputra, 

12. Kapiputra 

O ON Op 4$ o0 9 

[n 
O 

. from Atreytputra, 

13. Atreytputra from Gautamtputra, 

14. Gautamiputra from Bharadvariputra, 
15. Bharadvagtputra from Parasariputra, 
I6. Parasariputra from Vatsiputra, 

17. Vatsiputra from Parasariputra, 

181, Parasariputra from Varkaruziputra, 
I9. Varkaruziputra from Varkaruziputra, 
20. Varkaruziputra from Artabhagiputra, 
21. Artabhagtputra from .Sauugtputra, 

22. Saungtputra from Sankzztiputra, 

23%, Sankzitiputra from Alambayantputra, 
24. Alambayantputra from Alambiputra, 
25. Alambtputra from Gayantiputra, 

26. Gayantiputra from Mazgukayaniputra, 
27. Mazdukayaniputra from Mazaukiputra, 
28. Manduktputra from SAzdiliputra, 

29. SAxdiliputra from Rathitartputra, 

30?. Rathitariputra from Bhalukiputra, 

! M. has only one. 2 M. inverts 23 and 24. 
5 Deest in M. 

[15] Q 

226 BRIHADARANYAKA-UPANISHAD. 

31. Bhalukiputra from KrauZZikiputrau, 
32. KrauZZikiputrau from VaiZ/abhatiputra }, 
33. VaiZfabhattputra from Karsakeyiputra ?, 
34. Karsakeyiputra from PraZinayogiputra, 
35. Pra£inayogiputra from Saigiviputra?, 
36. Sagiviputra from Prasziputra Asurivasin, 
37. Pras#iputra Asurivasin from Asurayaza, 
38. Asurayana from Asuri, 
39. Asuri 

3. from YagZavalkya, 
40. Yagfiavalkya from Uddalaka, 
41. Uddalaka from Aruza, 
42. Aruza from Upavesi, 
43. Upavesi from Kusri, 
44. Kusri from Vagasravas, 
45. Vagasravas from Gihvavat Vadhyoga, 
46. Gihvavat Vadhyoga from Asita Varshagaza, 
47. Asita Varshagaza from Harita Kasyapa, 
48. Harita Kasyapa from .Silpa Kasyapa, 
49. Silpa Kasyapa from Kasyapa Naidhruvi, 
50. Kasyapa Naidhruvi from VaZ, 
51. Vas from Ambhizi, 
52. Ambhizi from Aditya, the Sun. 

As coming from Aditya, the Sun, these pure‘ 
Yagus verses have been proclaimed by YAagea- 
valkya Vagasaneya. 

1 Vaidabhrittputra, M. 2 Bhalukiputra, M. 

* Karsakeyiputra after 35 in M. 

* They are called suklani, white or pure, because they are not 
mixed with Brahmazas, avyamisrazi brahmazena (doshair asankir- 
nani, paurusheyatvadoshadvarabha vad ityarthaA). Or they are aya- 
tayamani, unimpaired. Anandagiri adds, Pragapatim arabhya 
Savgiviputraparyantam (No. 36) Vagasaneyisakhasu sarvasv eko 
vamsa ityaha samanam iti. Dvivedagahga says: Vagis&khava£AAin- 

VI ADHYAYA, 5 BRAHMANA, 4. 227 

4'. The same as far as SaZigiviputra (No. 36), then 

36. 

46. 
47- 
48. 

Saavgiviputra from Maz4ukayani, 
Mazdukayani from MazZavya, 

. Mazdavya from Kautsa, 

. Kautsa from Mahitthi, 

. Mahitthi from Vamakakshayaza, 

. Vamakakshayaza from SAzdilya, 

. Sandilya from Vatsya, 

. Vatsya from Kusri, | 

. Kusri from Yag#avakas Ragastambayana, 

. YagZava£&as | Ragastambayana from Tura 

Kavasheya, 
Tura Kavasheya from Pragapati, 
Pragapati from Brahman, 
Brahman is Svayambhu, self-existent. 

Adoration to Brahman! 

nanam yagusham Sfiryenopadish/atvam Yagnavalkyena praptatvam 
ka purazeshu prasiddham. 

1 This last paragraph is wanting in the Madhyandina text, but a 
very similar paragraph occurs in Satapatha-brahmama X, 6, 5, 9, 
where, however, Vatsya comes before Sazdilya.


# SVETASVATARA-UPANISHAD

SVETASVATARA- 
UPANISHAD. 

pana » Google 

SVETASVATARA- 
UPANISHAD. 

Fi FIRST ADHYAYA. 

V I. The Brahma-students say: Is Brahman the 
cause!? Whence are we born? Whereby do we 
live, and whither do we go? O ye who know 
Brahman, (tell us) at whose command we abide, 
whether in pain or in pleasure ? 

1 This translation seems the one which -Sankara himself prefers, 
for on p. 277, when recapitulating, he says, kim brahma karazam 
ahosvit kaladi. In comparing former translations, whether by 
Weber, Roer, Gough, and others, it will be seen that my own differs 
considerably from every one of them, and differs equally from 
Sankara's interpretation. It would occupy too much space to criti- 
cise former translations, nor would it seem fair, considering how 
long ago they were made, and how imperfect were the materials 
which were then accessible. All I wish my readers to understand 
is that, if I differ from my predecessors, I do so after having care- 
fully examined their renderings. Unfortunately, Roer's edition of 
both the text and the commentary is often far from correct. 
Thus in the very first verse of the Svetasvatara-upanishad, I think 
we ought to read sampratish/h4h, instead of sampratish/Zita2. In 
the commentary the reading is right. Vyavasyam is a misprint for 
vyavastham. In the second verse we must separate kala2 and 
svabhavaZ. Yadrzkkha, no very unusual word, meaning chance, 
was formerly taken for a name of the moon! Instead of na tvatma- 
bhavat, both sense and metre require that we should read 
anatmabhavat, though the commentators take a different view. 
They say, because there is a self, and then go on to say that even 
that would not suffice. Such matters, however, belong to a critical 
commentary on the Upanishads rather than to a translation, and I 
can refer to them in cases of absolute necessity only, and where the 
readings of the two MSS., A. and B, seem to offer some help. 

232 SVETASVATARA-UPANISHAD. 

2. Should time, or nature’, or necessity, or chance, 
or the elements be considered as the cause, or he 
who is called the person (purusha, vigranatma)? It 
cannot be their union either, because that is not self- 
dependent?, and the self also is powerless, because 
there is (independent of him) a cause of good and 
evil 3. 

3. The sages, devoted to meditation and concen- 
tration, have seen the power belonging to God 
himself‘, hidden in its own qualities (guza). He, 
being one, superintends all those causes, time, self, 
and the rest*. | 

4°, We meditate on him who (like a wheel) has 
one felly with three tires, sixteen ends, fifty spokes, 
with twenty counter-spokes, and six sets of eight ; 

! Svabhava, their own nature or independent character. 

* Union presupposes a uniter. 

s Atma is explained by Sankara as the givah, the living self, and 
as that living self is in his present state determined by karman, 
work belonging to a former existence, it cannot be thought of as 
an independent cause. 

* Devatmasakti is a very important term, differently explained 
by the commentators, but meaning a power belonging to the Deva, 
the fsvara, the Lord, not independent of him, as the Sankhyas 
represent Prakrzti or nature. Herein lies the important distinction 
between Vedanta and Sankhya. 

5 Kalatmabhyaz yuktani, kalapurushasazyuktani svabhavadini. 
Atman is here taken as synonymous with purusha in verse 2. 

* It is difficult to say whether this verse was written as a summing 
up of certain technicalities recognised in systems of philosophy exist- 
ing at the time, or whether it is a mere play of fancy. I prefer the 
former view, and subjoin the explanation given by Sankara, though 
it is quite possible that on certain points he may be mistaken. The 
fsvara or deva is represented as a wheel with one felly, which 
would seem to be the phenomenal world. It is called trivrzt, three- 
fold, or rather having three tires, three bands or hoops to bind the 
felly, these tires being intended for the three guzas of the prakriti, 
the Sattva, Ragas, and Tamas. In the Brahmopanishad (Bibl. Ind. 

I ADHYAYA, 4. 233 

whose one rope is manifold, who proceeds on three 
different roads, and whose illusion arises from two 
causes. 

p. 251) the trivzzt sutram is mentioned. Next follows shodasantam, 
ending in the sixteen. These sixteen are differently explained. 
They may be meant for the five elements and the eleven indriyas 
or organs (the five receptive and the five active senses, together with 
manas, the common sensory) ; or for the sixteen kalas, mentioned 
in the Pras&opanishad, VI, 1, p. 283. Then follows a new inter- 
pretation, The one felly may be meant for the chaos, the unde- 
veloped state of things, and the sixteen would then be the two 
products in a general form, the Virag and the Sutratman, while the 
remaining fourteen would be the individual products, the bhuvanas 
or worlds beginning with BhuZ. 

Next follows satardharam, having fifty spokes. These fifty 
spokes are supposed to produce the motion of the mundane wheel, 
and are explained by Sankara as follows: 

I. The five Viparyayas, misconceptions, different kinds of igno- 
rance or doubt, viz. Tamas, Moha, Mahamoha, Tamisra, Andhata- 
misra, or, according to Pataigali, ignorance, self-love, love, hatred, 
and fear (Yoga-sutras I, 8; II, 2; Sankhya-sftras III, 37). 

2. Thetwenty-eight Asaktis, disabilities, causes of misconception. 
| (See Sankhya-satras III, 38.) 

3. The nine inversions of the Tush/is, satisfactions. (Sankhya- 
sutras III, 39.) 

4. The eight inversions of the Siddhis, perfections. (Sankhya- 
sutras III, 40.) 

These are afterwards explained singly. There are 8 kinds of 
Tamas, 8 kinds of Moha, ro kinds of Mahamoha, 18 kinds of 
TAmisra, and 18 kinds of Andhatamisra, making 62 in all. More 
informatign on the Asaktis, the Tush/is, and Siddhis may be found 
in the Sankhya-sutras III, 37-45; Sankhya-karika 47 seq.; Yoga- 
sutras II, 2 seq. 

Then follow the 20 pratyaras, the counter-spokes, or wedges to 
strengthen the spokes, viz. the ro senses and their 10 objects. 

The six ash/akas or ogdoads are explained as the ogdoads of 
Prakriti, of substances (dhatu), of powers (aisvarya), of states 
(bhava), of gods (deva), of virtues (atmaguza). 

The one, though manifold cord, is love or desire, Kama, whether 
of food, children, heaven or anything else. 

The three paths are explained as righteousness, unrighteousness, 

234 SVETASVATARA-UPANISHAD. 

51. We meditate on the river whose water con- 
sists of the five streams, which is wild and winding 
with its five springs, whose waves are the five vital 
breaths, whose fountain head is the mind, the course 
of the five kinds of perceptions. It has five whirl- 
pools, its rapids are the five pains; it has fifty kinds 
of suffering, and five branches. 

6. In that vast Brahma-wheel, in which all things 
live and rest, the bird flutters about, so long as he 
thinks that the self (in him) is different from the 
mover (the god, the lord). When he has been 
blessed by him, then he gains immortality ?. 

7. But what is praised (in the Upanishads) is the 

and knowledge, and the one deception arising from two causes is 
ignorance of self, produced by good or bad works. 

! Here again, where the fsvara is likened to a stream, the 
minute coincidences are explained by Sankara in accordance with 
certain systems of philosophy. The five streams are the five recep- 
tive organs, the five springs are the five elements, the five waves 
are the five active organs. The head is the manas, the mind, or . 
common sensory, from which the perceptions of the five senses 
spring. The five whirlpools are the objects of the five senses, the 
five rapids are the five pains of being in the womb, being born, 
growing old, growing ill, and dying. "The next adjective panka- 
sadbhedam is not fully explained by Sankara. He only mentions 
the five divisions of the klesa (see Yoga-sfitras II, 2), but does not 
show how their number is raised to fifty. Dr. Roer proposes to 
read pafizaklesa-bhed4m, but that would not agree with the metre. 
The five parvans or branches are not explained, and may refer to 
the fifty kinds of suffering (klesa). The whole river, like the 
. Wheel in the preceding verse, is meant for the Brahman as karya- 
karazatmaka, in the form of cause and effect, as the Pn a 
not the absolutely real world. 

2 If he has been blessed by the Isvara, i.e. when he has = 
accepted by the Lord, when he has discovered his own true self in 
the Lord. It must be remembered, however, that both the Isvara, the 
Lord, and the purusha, the individual soul, are phenomenal only, 
and that the Brahma-wheel is meant for the prapanka, the manifest, 
but unreal world. 

I ADHYAYA, IO. 235 

Highest Brahman, and in it there is the triad'. The 
Highest Brahman is the safe support, it is imperish- 
able. The Brahma-students?, when they have known 
what is within this (world), are devoted and merged 
in the Brahman, free from birth °. 

8. The Lord (isa) supports all this together, the 
perishable and the imperishable, the developed and 
the undeveloped. The (living) self, not being a lord, 
is bound*, because he has to enjoy (the fruits of 
works); but when he has known the god (deva), he 
is freed from all fetters. __ 

9. There are two, one knowing (isvara), the other 
not-knowing (giva) both unborn, one strong, the 
other weak*; there is she, the unborn, through 
whom each man receives the recompense of his 
works*; and there is the infinite Self (appearing) 
under all forms, but himself inactive. When a man 
finds out these three, that is Brahma’. 

IO. That which is perishable? is the Pradhana? 
(the first), the immortal and imperishable is Hara", 

! The subject (bhoktzz), the object (bhogya), and the mover 
(preritzz), see verse 12. 

? B. has Vedavido, those who know the Vedas. 

3 Tasmin praliyate tv atma samadhi/ sa udahrz:taZ. 

* Read badhyate for budhyate. 

5 The form isanisau is explained as AZandasa ; likewise brah- 
mam for brahma. 

* Cf. Svet. Up. IV, 5, bhuktabhogyam. 

? The three are (1) the lord, the personal god, the creator and 
ruler ; (2) the individual soul or souls ; and (3) the power of creation, 
the devatmasakti of verse 3. All three are contained in Brahman ; 
see verses 7,12. So 'pi mayi paramesvaro mayopadhisannidhes 
tadvan iva. 

8 See verse 8. 

® The recognised name for Prakriti, or here Devatmasakti, in 
the later Sankhya philosophy. 

10 Hara, one of the names of Siva or Rudra, is here explained as 

236 SVETASVATARA-UPANISHAD. 

The one god rules the perishable (the pradhana) and 
the (living) self!. From meditating on him, from 
joining him, from becoming one with him there is 
further cessation of all illusion in the end. 

II. When that god is known, all fetters fall off, 
sufferings are destroyed, and birth and death cease. 
From meditating on him there arises, on the disso- 
lution of the body, the third state, that of universal 
lordship?; but he only who is alone, is satisfied*. 

12. This, which rests eternally within the self, 
should be known ; and beyond this not anything has 
to be known. By knowing the enjoyer‘, the enjoyed, 
and the ruler, everything has been declared to be 
threefold, and this is Brahman. | 

I3. As the form of fire, while it exists in the 
under-wood 5, is not seen, nor is its seed destroyed, 

avidyader harazat, taking away ignorance. He would seem to be 
meant for the fsvara or deva, the one god, though immediately after- 
wards he is taken for the true Brahman, and not for its phenomenal 
divine personification only. 

1 The self, atman, used here, as before, for purusha, the indi- 
vidual soul, or rather the individual souls. 

? A blissful state in the Brahma-world, which, however, is not 
yet perfect freedom, but may lead on to it. "Thus it is said in the 
Sivadharmottara : 

Dhyanad aisvaryam atulam aisvaryat sukham uttamam, 
Ganena tat parityagya videho muktim apnuyat. 

3 This alone-ness, kevalatvam, is produced by the knowledge 
that the individual self is one with the divine self, and that both the 
individual and the divine self are only phenomenal forms of the 
true Self, the Brahman. 

t Bhokta, possibly for bhoktra, unless it is a A7andasa form. 
It was quoted before, Bibl. Ind. p. 292, 1. 5. The enjoyer is the 
purusha, the individual soul, the subject; the enjoyed is prakti, 
nature, the object; and the ruler is the fsvara, that is, Brahman, as 
god. Itake brahmam etat in the same sense here as in verse 9. 

5 This metaphor, like most philosophical metaphors in Sanskrit, 

I ADHYAYA, 16. 237 

but it has to be seized again and again by means of 
the stick and the under-wood, so it is in both cases, 
and the Self has to be seized in the body by means 
of the prazava (the syllable Om). 

14. By making his body the under-wood, and the 
syllable Om the upper-wood, man, after repeating 
the drill of meditation, will perceive the bright god, 
like the spark hidden in the wood !. 

I5. As oil in seeds, as butter in cream, as water 
in (dry) river-beds?, as fire in wood, so is the Self 
seized within the self, if man looks for him by truth- 
fulness and penance?; . 

16. (If he looks) for the Self that pervades every- 
thing, as butter is contained in milk, and the roots 
whereof are self-knowledge and penance. That is 
the Brahman taught by the Upanishad. 

is rather obscure at first sight, but very exact when once under- 
stood. Fire,as produced by a fire drill, is compared to the Self. 
It is not seen at first, yet it must be there all the time; its linga 
or subtle body cannot have been destroyed, because as soon as the 
stick, the indhana, is drilled in the under-wood, the yoni, the fire 
becomes visible. In the same way the Self, though invisible during 
a state of ignorance, is there all the time, and is perceived when 
the body has been drilled by the Prazava, that is, after, by a con- 
stant repetition of the sacred syllable Om, the body has been sub- 
dued, and the ecstatic vision of the Self has been achieved. 

Indhana, the stick used for drilling, and yoni, the under-wood, in 
which the stick is drilled, are the two aramis, the fire-sticks used for 
kindling fire. See Tylor, Anthropology, p. 260. 

1 Cf. Dhyanavindupan. verse 20; Brahmopanishad, p. 256. 

? Srotas, a stream, seems to mean here the dry bed of a stream, 
which, if dug into, will yield water. 

3 The construction is correct, if we remember that he who is 
seized is the same as he who looks for the hidden Self. But the 
metre would be much improved if we accepted the reading of the 
Brahmopanishad, evam atma 4tmani gzzhyate 'sau, which is con- 
firmed by B. The last line would be improved by reading, satye- 
nainam ye ’nupasyanti dhira/. 

238 SVETASVATARA-UPANISHAD. 

SECOND ADHYAYA. 

11, Savitvz (the sun), having first collected his 
mind and expanded his thoughts, brought Agni (fire), 
when he had discovered his light, above the earth. 

2?, With collected minds we are at the command of 
the divine Savitzz, that we may obtain blessedness. . 

1 The seven introductory verses are taken from hymns addressed 
to Savitz? as the rising sun. They have been so twisted by Sankara, 
in order to make them applicable to the teachings of the Yoga 
philosophy, as to become almost nonsensical. I have given a few 
specimens of Sankara’s renderings in the notes, but have translated 
the verses, as much as possible, in their original character. As 
they are merely introductory, I do not understand why the collector 
of the Upanishad should have seen in them anything but an invo- 
cation of Savitrz. 

These verses are taken from various Samhitas. The first yufiganaZ 
prathamam is from Taitt. Samh. IV, 1,1, 1,1; Vag. Samh. XI, 1; 
see also Sat. Br. VI, 3, 1, 12. The Taittiriya-text agrees with the 
Upanishad, the Vagasaneyi-text has dhiyam for dhiyaZ, and agne% 
for agnim. Both texts take tatvaya as a participle of tan, while the 
Upanishad reads tattvaya, as a dative of tattva, truth. I have 
translated the verse in its natural sense. Sankara, in explaining 
the Upanishad, translates: ‘At the beginning of our meditation, 
joining the mind with the Highest Self, also the other prazas, or 
the knowledge of outward things, for the sake of truth, Savitrz, 
out of the knowledge of outward things, brought Agni, after 
having discovered his brightness, above the earth, in this body.’ He 
explains it: * May Savitzz, taking our thoughts away from outward 
things, in order to concentrate them on the Highest Self, produce 
in our speech and in our other senses that power which can lighten 
all objects, which proceeds from Agni and from the other favour- 
able deities.’ He adds that ‘by the favour of Savitrz, Yoga may 
be obtained.’ 

2 The second verse is from Taitt. Samh. IV, 1, 1, 1,3; Vag. Samh. 
XI,2. The Vagasaneyi-text has svargyaya for svargeyaya, and saktya 
for saktyai. Sankara explains: ‘With a mind that has been joined 

II ADHYAYA, 4. 239 

31. May Savitri, after he has reached with his 
mind the gods as they rise up to the sky, and with 
his thoughts (has reached) heaven, grant these gods 
to make a great light to shine. 

4°, The wise sages of the great sage collect their 
mind and collect their thoughts. He who alone 
knows the law (Savitzz) has ordered the invocations ; 
great is the praise of the divine Savitz. 

by Savitrz to the Highest Self, we, with the sanction of that Savitr7, 
devote ourselves to the work of meditation, which leads to the 
obtainment of Svarga, according to our power.’ He explains 
Svarga by Paramatman. Sayaza in his commentary on the Taitti- 
riya-samhita explains svargeyaya by svargaloke giyamanasyagneA 
sampadanaya; Sankara, by svargapraptihetubhutaya dhyanakar- 
maze. Saktyai is explained by Sankara by yathasamarthyam ; by 
Sayana, by sakta bhuyasma. Mahfdhara explains saktya by svasa- 
marthyena. I believe that the original reading was svargyaya 
saktyai, and that we must take saktyai as an infinitive, like ityai, 
construed with a dative, like dzzsaye suryaya, for the seeing of the 
sun. The two attracted datives would be governed by save, ‘we 
are under the command of Savitz; svargyaya saktyai, ‘that we 
may obtain svargya, life in Svarga or blessedness.’ 

1 The third verse is from Taitt. Samh. IV, 1,1,1,2; Vag. Samh. 
XI,3. The Taittiriyas read yuktvaya manasa; the Vagasaneyins, 
yuktvaya savita. Sankara translates: ‘Again he prays that Savitz, 
having directed the devas, i. e. the senses, which are moving towards 
Brahman, and which by knowledge are going to brighten up the 
heavenly light of Brahman, may order them to do so; that is, he 
prays that, by the favour of Savitzz, our senses should be turned 
away from outward things to Brahman or the Self? "Taking the 
hymn as addressed to Savitrz, I have translated deva by gods, not 
by senses, suvaryatah by rising to the sky, namely, in the morning. 
The opposition between manasa and dhiya is the same here as in 
verse I, and again in verse 4. 

2 This verse is from Taitt. Samh. IV, 1, I, 1, 4; 1, 2, 13, 1,13 
Vag. Samh. V, 14; XI, 4; XXXVII, 2; Rig-veda V, 81, 1; Sat. 
Br. III, 5,3, 11; VI, 3, 1, 16. Sankara explains this verse again in 
the same manner as he did the former verses, while the Satapatha- 
brahmaza supplies two different ritual explanations. 

240 SVETASVATARA-UPANISHAD. 

51. Your old prayer has to be joined? with praises. 
Let my song go forth like the path of the sun! May 
all the sons of the Immortal listen, they who have 
reached their heavenly homes. 

6. Where the fire is rubbed ?, where the wind is 
checked, where the Soma flows over, there the mind 
is born. 

1 For this verse, see Taitt. Samh. IV, 1,1, 2, 1; Vag. Samh. XI, 5; 
Atharva-veda XVIII, 3, 39; Rig-veda X, 13, 1. The Vagasaneyins 
read vi sloka etu for vi sloka yanti; sure% for suraA ; srznvantu for 
srinvanti; and the Rig-veda agrees with them. ‘The dual vam is 
accounted for by the verse belonging to a hymn celebrating the 
two sakatas, carts, bearing the offerings (havirdhane) ; most likely, 
however, the dual referred originally to the dual deities of heaven 
and earth. I prefer the text of the Rig-veda and the Vagasaneyins 
to that of the Taittirlyas, and have translated the verse accordingly. 
In the Atharva-veda XVIII, 39, if we may trust the edition, the 
verse begins with svasasthe bhavatam indave naZ, which is really 
the end of the next verse (Rv. X, 13, 2), while the second line is, 
vi sloka eti pathyeva suriA srzmvantu visve amrztasa etat. I see no 
sense in pathyeva suraZ, Sankara explains pathyeva by pathi san- 
marge, athava pathya kirtil, while his later commentary, giving 
srinvantu and putraA suratmano hirazyagarbhasya, leads one to sup- 
pose that he read sure srzmvantu. Sdyana (Taitt. Samh. IV, 1, 1, 
2) explains pathy& sura iva by girvazamarga antarikshe suryara- 
smayo yatha prasaranti tadvat. The same, when commenting on 
the Rig-veda (X, 13, 1), says: pathya-iva sureA, yatha stotu% sva- 
bhuta pathya parizamasukhavahahutir visvan devan prati vividham 
gakkhati tadvat. Mahfdhara (Vag. Samh. XI, 5) refers sureZ 
(pazditasya) to slokah, and explains pathyeva by patho 'napeta 
pathya yagsiamargapravzzttahutiA. 

2 Yuge cannot stand for yugge, as all commentators and trans- 
lators suppose, but is a datival infinitive. Neither can yusigate in 
the following verse stand for yunkte (see Boehtlingk, s. v.), or be 
explained as a subjunctive form. A. reads adhirudhyate, B. abhi- 
rudhyate, with a marginal note abhinudyate. It is difficult to say 
whether in lighting the fire the wind should be directed towards it, 
or kept from it. 

8 That is, at the Soma sacrifice, after the fire has been kindled 
and stirred by the wind, the poets, on partaking of the juice, are 

II ADHYAYA, IO. 241 

7. Let us love the old Brahman by the grace of 
Savit/z; if thou make thy dwelling there, the path 
will not hurt thee !. 

8. If a wise man hold his body with its three erect 
parts (chest, neck, and head) even?, and turn his 
senses with the mind towards the heart, he will then 
in the boat of Brahman? cross all the torrents which 
cause fear. 

9. Compressing his breathings let him, who has 
subdued all motions, breathe forth through the nose 
with gentle breath *. Let the wise man without fail 
restrain his mind, that chariot yoked with vicious 
horses e. 

IO. Let him perform his exercises in a place? 

inspirited for new songs. Sankara, however, suggests another expla- 
nation as more appropriate for the Upanishad, namely, *Where the 
fire, i.e. the Highest Self, which burns all ignorance, has been kindled 
(in the body, where it has been rubbed with the syllable Om), and 
where the breath has acted, i. e. has made the sound peculiar to the 
initial stages of Yoga, there Brahman is produced. In fact, what 
was intended to be taught was this, that we must begin with sacri- 
ficial acts, then practise yoga, then reach samadhi, perfect know- 
ledge, and lastly bliss. 

! We must read krizavase, in the sense of ‘do this and nothing 
will hurt thee,’ or, if thou do this, thy former deeds will no longer 
hurt thee. 

2 Cf. Bhagavadgite VI, 13. Samam kayasirogrivazm dharayan. 
Sankara says: trizy unnatany urogrivasiramsy unnatani yasmin 
sarire. 

3 Explained by Sankara as the syllable Om. 

t Cf. Bhagavadgita V, 27. Prazapanau samau kz7tva nasabhyan- 
tara £arizau. See Telang’s notes, Sacred Books of the East, vol. viii, 
p. 68 seq. 

5 A similar metaphor in Kazh. Up. III, 4-6; Sacred Books of 
the East, vol. xv, p. 13. 

€ The question is whether sabdagalasrayadibhiZ should be referred 
to mano "nukiule, as I have translated it, or to vivargite, as Sankara 
seems to take it, because he renders sabda, sound, by noise, and 

[15] R 

242 SVETASVATARA-UPANISHAD. 

level, pure, free from pebbles, fire, and dust, delightful 
by its sounds, its water, and bowers, not painful to 
the eye, and full of shelters and caves. 

11. When Yoga is being performed, the forms 
which come first, producing apparitions in Brahman, 
are those of misty smoke, sun, fire, wind, fire-flies, 
lightnings, and a crystal moon}. 

12. When, as earth, water, light, heat, and ether 
arise, the fivefold quality of Yoga takes place?, 
then there is no longer illness, old age, or pain? for 
him who has obtained a body, produced by the fire 
of Yoga. 

13. The first results of Yoga they call lightness, 
healthiness, steadiness, a good complexion, an easy 
pronunciation, a sweet odour, and slight excretions. 

I4. As a metal disk (mirror), tarnished by dust, 
shines bright again after it has been cleaned, so 
is the one incarnate person satisfied and free from 
grief, after he has seen the real nature of the 
self *, 

asraya by mandapa, a booth. See Bhagavadgita VI, 11. In the 
Maitr. Up. VI, 30, Ramatirtha explains suau dese by girinadi- 
pulinaguhadisuddhasthane. See also Asv. Grzhya-sutras III, 2, 2. 

1 Or, it may be, a crystal and the moon. 

* The Yogaguza is described as the quality of each element, 
i.e. smell of the earth, taste of water, &c. It seems that the per- 
ception of these guzas is called yogapravzztti. Thus by fixing the 
thought on the tip of the nose, a perception of heavenly scent is 
produced; by fixing it on the tip of the tongue, a perception of 
heavenly taste; by fixing it on the point of the palate, a heavenly 
colour; by fixing it on the middle of the tongue, a heavenly touch ; 
by fixing it on the roof of the tongue, a heavenly sound. By means 
of these perceptions the mind is supposed to be steadied, because 
it is no longer attracted by the outward objects themselves. See 
Yoga-sutras I, 35. 

* Or no death, na mrztyuA, B. 

* Paresham pa/Ze tadvat sa tattvam prasamikshya dehiti. 

II ADHYAYA, I7. 243 

15. And when by means of the real nature of his 
self he sees, as by a lamp, the real nature of Brah- 
man, then having known the unborn, eternal god, 
who is beyond all natures', he is freed from all 
fetters. 

16. He indeed is the god who pervades all regions: 
he is the first-born (as Hirazyagarbha), and he is in 
the womb. He has been born, and he will be born?. 
He stands behind all persons, looking everywhere. 

17. The god? who is in the fire, the god who is 
in the water, the god who has entered into the whole 
world, the god who is in plants, the god who is in 
trees, adoration be to that god, adoration! 

1 Sarvatattvair avidyatatkaryair visuddham asazzsprzsh/am. 

2 This verse is found in the Vag. Samh. XXXII, 4; Taitt. Ar. X, 
I, 3, With slight modifications. The Vagasaneyins read esho ha (so 
do A. B.) for esha hi; sa eva gata (A. B.) for sa vigata^; ganas 
(A.B.) for ganams. The Aranyaka has sa vigayamanad for sa vigdtah, 
pratyanmukhas for pratyasigan&zs, and visvatomukhaZ for sarvato- 
mukhaZ. Colebrooke (Essays, I, 57) gives a translation of it. 
If we read gana, we must take it as a vocative. 

3 B. (not A.) reads yo rudro yo ’gnau. 

244 SVETASVATARA-UPANISHAD. 

THIRD ADHYAYA} 

I. The snarer? who rules alone by his powers, 
who rules all the worlds by his powers, who is one 
and the same, while things arise and exist?,—they 
who know this are immortal. 

2. For there is one Rudra only, they do not.allow 
a second, who rules all the worlds by his powers. 
He stands behind all persons*, and after having 
created all worlds he, the protector, rolls it up® at 
the end of time. 

3% That one god, having his eyes, his face, his 
arms, and his feet in every place, when producing 
heaven and earth, forges them together with his 
arms and his wings’, | 

! This Adhyaya represents the Highest Self as the personified 
deity, as the lord, fsa, or Rudra, under the sway of his own creative 
power, prakrzti or maya. 

? Sankara explains gala, snare, by maya. The verse must be 
corrected, according to Sankara’s commentary: 

ya eko galavan fata isanibhiA 
sarvan llokan fsata isanibhi/. 

? Sambhava, in the sense of Vergehen, perishing, rests on no 
authority. 

* Here again the MSS. A. B. read ganas, as a vocative. 

5 I prefer samkukoka to samkukopa, which gives us the meaning 
that Rudra, after having created all things, draws together, i. e. 
takes them all back into himself, at the end of time. I have trans- 
lated samsrigya by having created, because Boehtlingk and Roth 
give other instances of samsrzg with that sense. Otherwise, ‘ having 
mixed them together again, would seem more appropriate. A. and 
B. read sazukoZa. 

* 'This is a very popular verse, and occurs Rig-veda X, 8r, 3; 
Vag. Samh. XVII, 19; Ath.-veda XIII, 2, 26; Taitt. Samh. IV, 6, 
2,4; Taitt. Ar. A, 1,3. 

7 Sankara takes dhamati in the sense of samyogayati, i.e. he - 
joins men with arms, birds with wings. 

III ADHYAYA, 9. 245 

4. He!, the creator and supporter of the gods, 
Rudra, the great seer, the lord of all, he who 
formerly gave birth to Hirazyagarbha, may he 
endow us with good thoughts. 

52, O Rudra, thou dweller in the mountains, look 
upon us with that most blessed form of thine which 
is auspicious, not terrible, and reveals no evil! 

6?.. O lord of the mountains, make lucky that arrow 
which thou, a dweller in the mountains, holdest in 
thy hand to shoot. Do not hurt man or beast! 

7. Those who know beyond this the High Brah- 
man, the vast, hidden in the bodies of all creatures, 
and alone enveloping Everythung, as the Lord, they 
become immortal ^. 

85, I know that great person (purusha) of sunlike 
lustre beyond the darkness*. A man who knows him 
truly, passes over death ; there is no other path 
to go’. : 

9. This whole universe is filled by this person 
(purusha), to whom there is nothing superior, from 
whom there is nothing different, than whom there is 

1 See IV, 12. 

2 See Vag. Samh. XVI, 2; Taitt. Samh. IV, 5, I, I. 

3 See Vag. Samh. XVI, 3; Taitt. Samh. IV, 5, 1, 1; Nilarudropan. 
P. 274. 

* The knowledge consists in knowing either that Brahman is 
fsa or that fsa is Brahman. But in either case the gender of the 
adjectives is difficult, The Svetasvatara-upanishad seems to use brz- 
hanta as an adjective, instead of brzhat. I should prefer to translate : 
Beyond this is the High Brahman, the vast. Those who know 15a, 
the Lord, hidden in all things and embracing all things to be this 
(Brahman), become immortal. See also Muir, Metrical Transla- 
tions, p. 196, whose translation of these verses I have adopted with 
few exceptions. 

5 Cf. Vag. Samh. XXX, 18; Taitt. Ar. III, r2, 7; III, 13, 1. 

* Cf. Bhagavadgita VIII, 9. 7 Cf. Svet. Up. V], 15. 

246 SVETASVATARA-UPANISHAD. 

nothing smaller or larger, who stands alone, fixed 
like a tree in the sky. 

10. That which is beyond this world is without 
form and without suffering. They who know it, 
become immortal, but others suffer pain indeed? 

r1. That Bhagavat ? exists in the faces, the heads, 
the necks of all, he dwells in the cave (of the heart) 
of all beings, he is "aw" therefore he is the 
omnipresent Siva. 

12, That person Meanie is the great lord; he 
is the mover of existence‘, he possesses that purest 
power of reaching everything®, he is light, he is 
undecaying. 

13%. The person (purusha), not larger than a thumb, 

1 Divi, the sky, is explained by Sankara as dyotanatmani sva- 
mahimni. 

2 The pain of sazsara, or transmigration. See Brzhad. Up. IV, 
3, 20 (p. 178). 

* I feel doubtful whether the two names Bhagavat and Siva should 
here be preserved, or whether the former should be rendered by 
holy, the latter by happy. The commentator explains Bhagavat by 

aisvaryasya samagrasya viryasya yasasa% sriyaA 

Gfianavairagyayos kaiva shamnim bhaga itiraza. 
Wilson, in his Essay on the Religious Sects of the Hindus, 
published in 1828, in the Asiatic Researches, XVI, p. 11, pointed 
out that this verse and another (Svet. Up. II, 2) were cited by the 
Saivas as Vedic authorities for their teaching. He remarked that 
these citations would scarcely have been made, if not authentic, and 
that they probably did occur in the Vedas. In the new edition of 
this Essay by Dr. Rost, 1862, the references should have been added. 

t Sankara explains sattvasya by antaZkarazasya. 

5 I take prapti, like other terms occurring in this Upanishad, in 
its technical sense. Prapti is one of the vibhatis or aisvaryas, viz. 
the power of touching anything at will, as touching the moon with 
the tip of one's finger. See Yoga-sutras, ed. Rajendralal Mitra, 
p. 121. 

* Cf. Taitt, Ar. X, 71 (Anuv. 38, p. 858). Kazh. Up. IV, 12-13; 
above, p. 16. 

III ADHYAYA, 18. 247 

dwelling within, always dwelling in the heart of man, 
is perceived by the heart, the thought!, the mind; 
they who know it become immortal. 

14?. The person (purusha) with a thousand heads, 

a thousand eyes, a thousand feet, having compassed ^ "^ 

the earth on every side, extends beyond it by ten 
fingers’ breadth. 

15. That person alone (purusha) is all this, what 
has been and what will be; he is also the lord of 
immortality; he is whatever grows by food *. 

16. Its* hands and feet are everywhere, its eyes 
and head are everywhere, its ears are everywhere, 
it stands encompassing all in the world*. 

17. Separate from all the senses, yet reflecting 
the qualities of all the senses, it is the lord and ruler 
of all, it is the great refuge of all. 

18. The embodied spirit within the town with 
nine gates®, the bird, flutters outwards, the ruler of 

1 The text has manvisa, which Sankara explains by gnanesa. 
But Weber has conjectured rightly, I believe, that the original text 
must have been manisha. ‘The difficulty is to understand how so 
common a word as manisha could have been changed into so un- 
usual a word as manvisa. See IV, 20. 

2 This is a famous verse of the Rig-veda, X, 90, 1; repeated in 
the Atharva-veda, XIX, 6, 1; Vag. Samh. XXXI, 1; Taitt. Ar. III, 
I2,I. Sankara explains ten fingers’ breadth by endless; or, he 
says, it may be meant for the heart, which is ten fingers above 
the navel. 

* Sayaza, in his commentary on the Rig-veda and the Taitt. Ar., 
gives another explanation, viz. he is also the lord of all the im- 
mortals, i.e. the gods, because they grow to their exceeding state 
- by means of food, or for the sake of food. 

* The gender changes frequently, according as the author thinks 
either of the Brahman, or of its impersonation as fsa, Lord. 

5 Sankara explains loka by nikaya, body. 

€ Cf. Kash. Up. V, 1. 

248 SVETASVATARA-UPANISHAD. 

the whole world, of all that rests and of all that 
moves. 

19. Grasping without hands, hasting without feet, 
he sees without eyes, he hears without ears. He 
knows what can be known, but no one knows him; 
they call him the first, the great person (purusha). 

201. The Self, smaller than small, greater than 
great, is hidden in the heart of the creature. A man 
who has left all grief behind, sees the ‘majesty, the 
Lord, the passionless, by the grace of the creator 
(the Lord). 

21?, I know? this undecaying, ancient one, the self 
of all things, being infinite and omnipresent. They 
declare that in him all birth is stopped, for the 
Brahma-students proclaim him to be eternal*. 

1 Cf, Taitt. Ar. X, 12 (10), p. 800; Kazh. Up. II, 20; above, 
p. 11. The translation had to be slightly altered, because the 
Svetasvataras, as Taittiriyas, read akratum for akratuZ, and isam 
for atmanaZ. 

2 Cf. Taitt. Ar. III, 13, 1; III, 12, 7. 

* A. reads vedarug/am, not B. 

* A. and B. read brahmavadino hi pravadanti. 

IV ADHYAYA, 4. 249 

FOURTH ADHYAYA. 

1. He, the sun, without any colour, who with set 
purpose! by means of his power (sakti) produces 
endless colours?, in whom all this comes together in 
the beginning, and comes asunder in the end—may 
he, the god, endow us with good thoughts °. 

2. That (Self) indeed is Agni (fire), it is Aditya 
(sun), it is Vayu (wind), it is Aandramas (moon); the 
same also is the starry firmament‘, it is Brahman 
(Hirazyagarbha), it is water, it is Pragapati (Virag). 

3. Thou art woman, thou art man; thou art youth, | 
thou art maiden; thou, as an old. man, totterest 5 
along on thy staff ; thou art born with thy face turned 
everywhere. 

4. Thou art the dark-blue bee, thou art the green 

1 Nihitartha, explained by Sankara as g7zhitaprayoganaZ svartha- 
nirapekshaZ. This may mean with set purpose, but if we read 
agzzhitaprayoganaA it would mean the contrary, namely, without 
any definite object, irrespective of his own objects. This is pos- 
sible, and perhaps more in accordance with the idea of creation as 
propounded by those to whom the devatmasakti is maya. Nihita 
would then mean hidden. 

*3 Colour is intended for qualities, differences, &c. 

® This verse has been translated very freely. As it stands, vi 
kaiti Kante visvam &dau sa deva/, it does not construe, in spite of 
all attempts to the contrary, made by Sankara. What is intended 
is yasminn idam sam ka vi aiti sarvam (IV, 11); but how so 
simple a line should have been changed into what we read now, is 
difficult to say. 

* This is the explanation of Sankara, and probably that of the 
Yoga schools in India at his time. But to take sukram for dip- 
timan nakshatradi, brahma for Hirazyagarbha, and Pragapati for 
Virag seems suggested by this verse only. 

5 Vafikayasi, an exceptional form, instead of vafi&asi (A. B.) 

250 SVETASVATARA-UPANISHAD. 

parrot with red eyes, thou art the thunder-cloud, the 
seasons, the seas. Thou art without beginning}, 
because thou art infinite, thou from whom all worlds 
are born. 

5?. There is one unborn being (female), red, white, 
and black, uniform, but producing manifold offspring. 
There is one unborn being (male) who loves her 
and lies by her; there is another who leaves her, 
while she is eating what has to be eaten. 

! We see throughout the constant change from the masculine 
to the neuter gender, in addressing either the lord or his true 
essence. 

4 This is again one of the famous verses of our Upanishad, 
because it formed for a long time a bone of contention between 
Vedanta and Sankhya philosophers. The Sankhyas admit two 
principles, the Purusha, the absolute subject, and the Prakriti, 
generally translated by nature. The Vedanta philosophers admit 
nothing but the one absolute subject, and look upon nature as due 
to a power inherent in that subject. The later Sankhyas therefore, 
who are as anxious as the Vedantins to find authoritative passages 
in the Veda, confirming their opinions, appeal to this and other 
passages, to show that their view of Prakrzti, as an independent 
power, is supported by the Veda. The whole question is fully 
discussed in the Vedanta-sutras I, 4, 8. Here we read rohita- 
kzzshza-suklam, which seems preferable to lohita-krzshza-varzam, 
at least from a Vedanta point of view, for the three colours, red, 
black, and white, are explained as signifying either the three gunas, 
ragas, sattva, and tamas, or better (KZand. Up. VI, 3, 1), the three 
elements, tegas (fire), ap (water), and anna (earth). A. reads 
rohitasuklakzzshzam ; B. lohitasuklakrishza (sic) We also find 
in A. and B. bhuktabhogam for bhuktabhogyam, but the latter 
seems technically the more correct reading. It would be quite 
wrong to imagine that aga and aga are meant here for he-goat 
and she-goat. These words, in the sense of unborn, are recognised 
as early as the hymns of the Rig-veda, and they occurred in our 
Upanishad I, 9, where the two agas are mentioned in the same 
sense as here. But there is, no doubt, a play on the words, and 
the poet wished to convey the second meaning of he-goat and 
she-goat, only not as the primary, but as the secondary intention. 

IV ADHYAYA, 9. 251 

61, Two birds, inseparable friends, cling to the 
same tree. One of them eats the sweet fruit, the 
other looks on without eating. 

7. On the same tree man sits grieving, immersed, 
bewildered, by his own impotence (an-isa) But 
when he sees the other lord (isa) contented, and 
knows his glory, then his grief passes away. 

82, He who does not know that indestructible 
being of the Azg-veda, that highest ether-like (Self) 
wherein all the gods reside, of what use is the 
kig-veda to him? Those only who know it, rest 
contented. 

9. That from which the maker (mayin?) sends 
forth all this—the sacred verses, the offerings, the 
sacrifices, the panaceas, the past, the future, and all 

1 The same verses occur in the Muzdaka Up. III, r. 

2 It is difficult to see how this verse comes in here. In the 
Taitt. Ar. II, 11, 6, it is quoted in connection with the syllable Om, 
the Akshara, in which all the Vedas are comprehended. It is 
similarly used in the Nresimha-pfirva-tapant, IV, 2; V, 2. In our 
passage, however, akshara is referred by Sankara to the paramat- 
man, and I have translated it accordingly. kah is explained as 
a genitive singular, but it may also be taken as a nom. plur., and in 
that case both the verses of the Veda and the gods are said to 
reside in the Akshara, whether we take it for the Paramatman or 
for the Om. In the latter case, parame vyoman is explained by 
utkr¢sh/e and rakshake. | 

3 [t is impossible to find terms corresponding to maya and 
mayin. Maya means making, or art, but as all making or creat- 
ing, so far as the Supreme Self is concerned, is phenomenal only 
or mere illusion, maya conveys at the same time the sense of 
illusion. In the same manner mayin is the maker, the artist, but 
also the magician or juggler. What seems intended by our verse is 
that from the akshara, which corresponds to brahman, all proceeds, 
whatever exists or seems to exist, but that the actual creator or the 
author of all emanations is fsa, the Lord, who, as creator, is acting 
through maya or devatmasakti. Possibly, however, anya, the other, 
may be meant for the individual purusha. 

252 SVETASVATARA-UPANISHAD. 

that the Vedas declare—in that the other is bound 
up through that maya. 

10. Know then Prakzzti (nature) is Maya (art), and 
the great Lord the Mayin (maker) ; the whole world 
is filled with what are his members. 

II. If a man has discerned him, who being one 
only, rules over every germ (cause), in whom all 
this comes together and comes asunder again, who 
is the lord, the bestower of blessing, the adorable 
god, then he passes for ever into that peace. 

121, He, the creator and supporter of the gods, 
Rudra, the great seer, the lord of all, who saw? 
Hirazyagarbha being born, may he endow us with 
good thoughts. 

13. He who is the sovereign of the gods, he in 
whom all the worlds rest, he who rules over all two- 
footed and four-footed beings, to that god‘ let us 
sacrifice an oblation. 

14. He who has known him who is more subtile | 
than subtile, in the midst of chaos, creating all things, 
having many forms, alone enveloping everything 5, 
the happy one (Siva), passes into peace for ever. 

! See before, III, 4. 

* Sankara does not explain this verse again, though it differs 
from III, 4. Vigianatman explains pasyata by apasyata, and quali- 
fies the Atmanepada as irregular. 

° B. reads yasmin devaA, not A. 

* I read tasmai instead of kasmai, a various reading mentioned 
by Viefianatman. It was easy to change tasmai into kasmai, 
because of the well-known line in the Rig-veda, kasmai devaya 
havisha vidhema. Those who read kasmai, explain it as a dative 
of Ka, a name of Pragapati, which in the dative should be kaya, 
and not kasmai. It would be better to take kasmai as the dative 
of the interrogative pronoun. See M. M., History of Ancient 
Sanskrit Literature, p. 433; and Vitana-sutras IV, 22. 

5 Cf. III, 7. 

IV ADHYAYA, 20. 253 

15. He also was in time’ the guardian of this 
world, the lord of all, hidden in all beings. In him 
the Brahmarshis and the deities are united?, and he 
who knows him cuts the fetters of death asunder. 

16. He who knows Siva (the blessed) hidden in 
all beings, like the subtile film that rises from out 
the clarified butter’, alone enveloping everything, — 
he who knows the god, is freed from all fetters. 

17. That god, the maker of all things, the great 
Self*, always dwelling in the heart of man, is per- 
ceived by the heart, the soul, the mind® ;—they who 
know it become immortal. 

18. When the light has risen®, there is no day, no 
night, neither existence nor non-existence’; Siva 
(the blessed) alone is there. That is the eternal, 
the adorable light of Savitzz?*,—and the ancient 
wisdom proceeded thence. 

19. No one has grasped him above, or across, or 
in the middle’. There is no image of him whose 
name is Great Glory. 

20. His form cannot be seen, no one perceives 
him with the eye. Those! who through heart and 

! [n former ages, Sankara. 

? Because both the Brahmarshis, the holy seers, and the deities 
find their true essence in Brahman. 

* We should say, like cream from milk. 

* Or the high-minded, 

5 See III, 13. 

* Atamas, no darkness, i.e. light of knowledge. 

T See on the difficulty of translating sat and asat, ro dv and ro un 
ðv, the remarks in the Preface. 

* Referring to the Gayatri, Rig-veda III, 62, 10; see also Svet. 
Up. V, 4. | 

? See Muir, Metrical Translations, p. 198; Maitr. Up. VI, 17. 

10 B. reads hrzda manisha manasabhikZpto, yat tad vidur; 
A. hrzdi hrzdistham manasaya enam evam vidur. 

254 SVETASVATARA-UPANISHAD. 

mind know him thus abiding in the heart, become 
immortal. 

21. ‘Thou art unborn, with these words some 
one comes near to thee, trembling. O Rudra, let 
thy gracious! face protect me for ever! 

22%, O Rudra! hurt us not in our offspring and 
descendants, hurt us not in our own lives, nor in our 
cows, nor in our horses! Do not slay our men in 
thy wrath, for, holding oblations, we call on thee 
always. 

! Dakshiza is explained either as inygorating, exhilarating, or 
turned towards the south. 

2 See Colebrooke, Miscellaneous Essays, I, p. 141; Rig-veda I, 
114, 8; Taitt. Samh. IV, 5, r0, 3; Vag. Samh. XVI, 16. The 
various readings are curious. Ayushi in the Svet. Up., instead of 
ayau in the Rig-veda, is supported by the Taitt. Samh. and the 
Vag. Samh.; but Vigfianatman reads ayau. As to bhamito, it seems 
the right reading, being supported by the Rig-veda, the Taitt. Samh., 
and the Svet. Up., while bhavito in Roer’s edition is a misprint. 
The Vag. Samh. alone reads bhamino, which Mahidhara refers to 
viran. The last verse in the Rig-veda and Vag. Samh. is havishman- 
tah sadam it tva havamahe ; in the Taitt. Samh. havishmanto namasa 
vidhema te. In the Svet. Up. havishmantaZ sadasi tva havamahe, as 
printed by Roer, seems to rest on Sankara’s authority only. The 
other commentators, Sankarananda and Vig#dnatman, read and 
interpret sadam it. 

V ADHYAYA, 3. 255 

FIFTH ADHYAYA. 

1. In the imperishable and infinite Highest 
Brahman}, wherein the two, knowledge and ignorance, 
are hidden ?, the one, ignorance, perishes?, the other, 
knowledge, is immortal; but he who controls both, 
knowledge and ignorance, is another‘. 

2. It is he who, being one only, rules over every 
germ (cause), over all forms, and over all germs; it 
is he who, in the beginning, bears? in his thoughts 
the wise son, the fiery, whom he wishes to look on* 
while he is born". 

3*. In that field? in which the god, after spreading 
out one net after another!? in various ways, draws it 
together again, the Lord, the great Self", having 

! Sankara explains Brahmapare by brahmazo hirazyagarbhat 
pare, or by parasmin brahmari, which comes to the same. Vigna- 
natman adds £Zandasa/ paranipatak. As the termination e may 
belong to the locative singular or to the nom. dual, commentators 
vary in referring some of the adjectives either to brahman or to 
vidyavidye. 

2 Gudhe, lokair g£iiatum asakye, Sankarananda. 

3 Sankara explains ksharam by samsritikaranam, amritam by 
mokshahetuZ. 

* Sankara explains that he is different from them, being only the 
sakshin, or witness. .Sankarananda seems to have read Somya, 
i. e. Somavatpriyadarsana, as if Svetasvatvara addressed his pupil. 

5 Like a mother, see I, 9. € Like a father. 

T See on this verse the remarks made in the Introduction. 

® The MSS. read yasmin for asmin, and patayas for yatayas, 
which the commentator explains by pattn. 

? The world, or the malaprakz:ti, the net being the sazzsara. 

10 Sankara explains ekaikam by pratyekam, i.e. for every crea- 
ture, such as gods, men, beasts, &c. 

u I doubt whether mahatma should be translated by the great 

256 SVETASVATARA-UPANISHAD. 

further created the lords!, thus carries on his lord- 
ship over all. 

4. As the car (of the sun) shines, lighting up all 
quarters, above, below, and across, thus does that 
god, the holy, the adorable, being one, rule over all 
that has the nature of a germ’. 

s. He, being one, rules over all and everything, 
so that the universal germ ripens its nature, diversi- 
fies all natures that can be ripened?, and determines 
all qualities‘. 

6°, Brahma (Hirazyagarbha) knows this, which 
is hidden in the Upanishads, which are hidden in 
the Vedas, as the Brahma-germ. The ancient gods 

Self, or whether great would not be sufficient. The whole verse is 
extremely difficult. 

1 From Hirazyagarbha to insects; or beginning with MariZi. 

2 Cf. IV, rr; VSA 

* MS. B. has pra£yan, and explains it by purvotpannan. 

* This is again a very difficult verse. I have taken visvayoniZ 
as a name for Brahman, possessed of that devatmasakti which was 
mentioned before, but I feel by no means satisfied. The com- 
mentators do not help, because they do not see the difficulty of the 
construction. If one might conjecture, I should prefer paket for 
pa4ati, and should write parizamayed yat, and viniyogayed yat, 
unless we changed yakka into yas ka. 

5 This verse admits of various translations, and requires also 
some metrical emendations. Thus Vigfianatman explains vedagu- 
hyopanishatsu very ingeniously by the Veda, i.e. that part of it 
which teaches sacrifices and their rewards; the Guhya, i.e. the 
Aranyaka, which teaches the worship of Brahman under various 
legendary aspects; and theUpanishads, which teach the knowledge 
of Brahman without qualities. These three divisions would corre- 
spond to the karmakazda, yogakazda, and gfianakazda (Gaimini, 
Patafigali, Badar&yaza) See Deussen, Vedanta, p. 20. Mr. Gough 
and Dr. Roer take Brahmayoni as * the source of the Veda,' or as 
the source of Hirazyagarbha. "The irregular form vedate may be 
due to a corruption of vedante. 

V ADHYAYA, II. 257 

and poets who knew it, they became it and were 
immortal. 

71, But he who is endowed with qualities, and 
performs works that are to bear fruit, and enjoys 
the reward of whatever he has done, migrates 
through his own works, the lord of life, assuming 
all forms, led by the three Guzas, and following the 
three paths?. 

83, That lower one also, not larger than a thumb, 
but brilliant like the sun, who is endowed with per- 
sonality and thoughts, with the quality of mind and 
the quality of body, is seen small even like the point 
of a goad. 

9. That living soul is to be known as part of the 
hundredth part of the point of a hair*, divided a 
hundred times, and yet it is to be infinite. 

IO. It is not woman, it is not man, nor is it 
neuter; whatever body it takes, with that it is 
joined* (only). 

119. By means of thoughts, touching, seeing, and 

1 Here begins the description of what is called the tvam (thou), 
as opposed to the tat (that), i. e. the living soul, as opposed to the 
Highest Brahman. A 

? The paths of vice, virtue, and knowledge. 

> Both MSS. (A. and B.) read aragramatro hy avaro ’pi dri- 
sh/ah. 

* An expression of frequent occurrence in Buddhist literature. 

5 A. and B. read yugyate. A. explains yugyate by sambadh- 
yate. B. explains adyate bhakshyate tirobhutaZ kriyate. Sankara 
explains rakshyate, samrakshyate, tattaddharman atmany adhyasya- 
bhimanyate. 

* The MSS. vary considerably. Instead of mohair, A. and B. 
read homair, They read grasambuvzzsh/ya £atma. A. reads 
atmavivzrzddhiganma, B. atmanivrzddhaganma. A. has abhisam- 
prapadye, B. abhisamprapadyate. My translation follows Sankara, 
who seems to have read atmavivzzddhiganma, taking the whole line 

L5] S 

258 SVETASVATARA-UPANISHAD. 

passions the incarnate Self assumes successively in 
various places various forms’, in accordance with his 
deeds, just as the body grows when food and drink 
are poured into it. 

12. That incarnate Self, according to his own 
qualities, chooses (assumes) many shapes, coarse or 
subtile, and having himself caused his union with 
them, he is seen as another and another?, through 
the qualities of his acts, and through the qualities of 
his body. 

13%. He who knows him who has no beginning 
and no end, in the midst of chaos, creating all things, 
having many forms, alone enveloping everything, is 
freed from all fetters. 

14. Those who know him who is to be grasped 
by the mind, who is not to be called the nest (the 
body*), who makes existence and non-existence, the 

A A 

as a simile and in an adverbial form. Vigiianatman, however, differs 
considerably. He reads homai/Z, and explains homa as the act of 
throwing oblations into the fire, as in the Agnihotra. This action 
of the hands, he thinks, stands for all actions of the various mem- 
bers of the body. Grasambuvrzshei he takes to mean free distri- 
bution of food and drink, and then explains the whole sentence by 
‘he whose self is born unto some states or declines from them 
again, namely, according as he has showered food and drink, and 
has used his hands, eyes, feelings, and thoughts.’ .Sankarananda 
takes a similar view, only he construes sankalpanam and sparsanam 
as two drishiis, te eva drzsh/i, tayor atmagnau prakshepa homa/; 
and then goes on, na kevalam etai, kim tv asmin sthane sarire 
grasambuvrzsh/ya za. He seems to read atmavivrzddhaganma, but 
afterwards explains vivrzddhi by vividha vrzddhiZ. 

! Forms as high as Hirazyagarbha or as low as beasts. 

? Instead of aparo, B. reads avaro, but explains aparo. 

* Cf. III, 7; IV, 14, 16. 

* Nida is explained as the body, but Sankarananda reads anila- 
khyam, who is called the wind, as being prazasya prazam, the 
breath of the breath. 

V ADHYAYA, I4. | 259 

happy one (Siva), who also creates the elements!, 
they have left the body. 

1 Sankara explains kalasargakaram by he who creates the sixteen 
kalas, mentioned by the Atharvazikas, beginning with praza, and 
ending with naman; see Prasra Up. VI, 4. Vigfianatman suggests 
two other explanations, ‘he who creates by means of the kala, 
i.e. his inherent power ;’ or ‘he who creates the Vedas and other 
sciences. The sixteen kalas are, according to Sankardnanda, 
praza, sraddha, kha, vayu, gyoti£, ap, przthivi, indriya, manaZ, anna, 
virya, tapaA, mantra, karman, kala (?), naman. See also before, I, 4. 

260 SVETASVATARA-UPANISHAD. 

SIXTH ADHYAYA. 

1!, Some wise men, deluded, speak of Nature, and 
others of Time (as the cause of everything’); but it 
is the greatness of God by which this Brahma-wheel 
is made to turn. 

2. It is at the command of him who always 
covers this world, the knower, the time of time, 
who assumes qualities and all knowledge‘, it is at 
his command that this work (creation) unfolds itself, 
which is called earth, water, fire, air, and ether ; 

35. He who, after he has done that work and 
rested again, and after he has brought together one 
essence (the self) with the other (matter), with one, 
two, three, or eight, with time also and with the 
subtile qualities of the mind, y 

4. Who, after starting * the works endowed with 
(the three) qualities, can order all things, yet when, 
in the absence of all these, he has caused the de- 
struction of the work, goes on, being in truth’ 
different (from all he has produced); 

1 See Muir, Metrical Translations, p. 198. 

? See before, I, 2. 

3 The destroyer of time. Vigfianatman reads kalakalo, and ex- 
plains it by kalasya niyanta, upaharta. Sankarananda explains kalah 
sarvavinasakari, tasy&api vindsakarah, See also verse 16. 

t Or sarvavid yah. 

- 5 Instead of vinivartya, Viefianatman and Sankarananda read 
vinivr:tya. 

e Aruhya for arabhya, Sankar4nanda. 

7 These two verses are again extremely obscure, and the expla- 
nations of the commentators throw little light on their real, original 
meaning. To begin with Sankara, he assumes the subject to be the 
same as he at whose command this work unfolds itself, and explains 

VI ADHYAYA, 5. 261 

5. He is the beginning, producing the causes 
which unite (the soul with the body), and, being 

tattvasya tattvena sametya yogam by atmano bhumyadina yogam 
samgamayya. As the eight Tattvas he gives earth, water, fire, air, 
ether, mind, thought, personality, while the Atmaguzas are, according 
to him, the affections of the mind, love, anger, &c. In the second verse, 
however, Sankara seems to assume a different subject. ‘If a man,’ 
he says, ‘having done works, infected by qualities, should transfer 
them on Isvara, the Lord, there would be destruction of the works 
formerly done by him, because there would be no more connection 
with the self? Something is left out, but that this is Sankara’s idea, 
appears from the verses which he quotes in support, and which are. 
intended to show that Yogins, transferring all their acts, good, 
bad, or indifferent, on Brahman, are no longer affected by them. 
‘That person,’ Sankara continues, ‘ his works being destroyed and 
his nature purified, moves on, different from all things (tattva), from 
all the results of ignorance, knowing himself to be Brahman.’ 
‘Or,’ he adds, ‘if we read anyad, it means, he goes to that Brahman 
which is different from all things.’ 

Sankarananda takes a different view. He says: ‘If a man has 
performed sacrifices, and has finished them, or, has turned away 
from them again as vain, and if he has obtained union with that 
which is the real of the (apparently) real, &c.’ The commentator 
then asks what is that with which he obtains union, and replies, 
‘the one, i.e. ignorance ; the two, i.e. right and wrong; the three, 
i.e. the three colours, red, white, and black ; and the eight, i. e. the five 
elements, with mind, thought, and personality; also with time, and 
with the subtile affections of the mind. He then goes on, ‘ If that 
man, after having begun qualified works, should take on himself 
all states (resulting from ignorance), yet, when these states cease, 
there would be an end of the work, good or bad, done by him, and 
when his work has come to an end, he abides in truth (according to 
the Veda); while the other, who differs from the Veda, is wrong.’ 
Sankarananda, however, evidently feels that this is a doubtful inter- 
pretation, and he suggests another, viz. ‘If the Lord himself,’ he says, 
* determined these states (bhava), it would seem that there would 
be no end of samsira. He therefore says, that when these states, 
ignorance &c., cease, the work done by man ceases; and when the 
work done ceases, the living soul gets free of samsara, being in 
truth another, i. e. different from ignorance and its products.’ 

Vieftan&tman says: ‘If a man, having done work, turns away 

262 SVETASVATARA-UPANISHAD. 

above the three kinds of time (past, present, future), 
he is seen as without parts !, after we have first wor- 
shipped that adorable god, who has many forms, 
and who is the true source (of all things), as dwelling 
in our own mind. 

6. He is beyond all the forms of the tree? (of the 
world) and of time, he is the other, from whom this 
world moves round, when? one has known him who 

from it, and obtains union of one tattva (the tvam, or self) with the 
real tattva (the tat, or the Lord) ;—and how? By means of the one, 
i.e. the teaching of the Guru ; the two, i.e. love of the Guru and of the 
Lord; the three, i.e. hearing, remembering, and meditating ; the eight, 
i. e. restraint, penance, postures, regulation of the breath, abstrac- 
tion, devotion, contemplation, and meditation (Yoga-sutras II, 29); 
by time, i. e. the right time for work; by the qualities of the self, i. e. 
pity, &c.; by the subtile ones, i.e. the good dispositions for know- 
ledge, then (we must supply) he becomes free.’ And this he ex- 
plains more fully in the next verse. ‘If, after having done qualified 
works, i.e. works to please the Lord, a Yati discards all things, 
and recognises the phenomenal character of all, states, and traces 
them back to their real source in M@laprakriti and, in the end, 
in the Saf&idananda, he becomes free. If they (the states) cease, 
i. e. are known in their real source, the work done ceases also in its 
effects, and when the work has been annihilated, he goes to free- 
dom, being another in truth; or, if we read anyat, he goes to what 
is different from all these things, namely, to the Lord; or, he goes 
to a state of perfect lordship in truth, having discovered the highest 
truth, the oneness of the self with the Highest Self.’ 

I think that, judging from the context, the subject is really the same 
in both verses, viz. the Lord, as passing through different states, and 
at last knowing himself to be above them all. Yet, the other explana- 
tions may be defended, and if the subject were taken to be different 
in each verse, some difficulties would disappear. 

* Vigrianatman and Sankarananda read akalo 'pi, without parts, 
and Sankara, too, presupposes that reading, though the text is 
corrupt in Roer’s edition. | 

2 Explained as samsaravriksha, the world-tree, as described in 
the Kazka Up. VI, r. 

° It seems possible to translate this verse in analogy with the 
former, and without supplying the verb either from yati, in verse 4, 

VI ADHYAYA, II. 263 

brings good and removes evil, the lord of bliss, as 
dwelling within the self, the immortal, the support 
of all. 

7. Let us know that highest great lord of lords’, 
the highest deity of deities, the master of masters, 
the highest above, as god, the lord of the world, the 
adorable. 

8. There is no effect and no cause known of him, 
no one is seen like unto him or better; his high 
power is revealed as manifold, as inherent, acting 
as force and knowledge. 

9. There is no master of his in the world, no ruler 
of his, not even a sign of him?. He is the cause, 
the lord of the lords of the organs ?, and there is of 
him neither parent nor lord. 

10. That only god who spontaneously covered 
himself, like a spider, with threads drawn from 
the first cause (pradhana), grant us entrance into 
Brahman 4. 

11. He is the one God, hidden in all beings, all- 

or from vidama, in verse 7. The poet seems to have said, he is 
that, he is seen as that, when one has worshipped him, or when 
one has known him within oneself. ` 

.1 Sankara thinks that the lords are Vaivasvata &c.; the deities, 
Indra &c.; the masters, the Pragapatis. Vignanatman explains the 
lords as Brahman, Vishzu, Rudra, &c.; the deities as Indra, &c.; 
the masters as Hirazyagarbha, &c. Sankarananda sees in the lords 
Hirazyagarbha &c., in the deities Agni &c. in the masters the 
Pragapatis, such as Kasyapa. 

2 If he could be inferred from a sign, there would be no neces- 
sity for the Veda to reveal him. 

3 Karama, instrument, is explained as organ of sense. The lords 
of such organs would be all living beings, and their lord the true 
Lord. 

* Besides brahmapyayam, i.e. brahmazy apyayam, ekibhavam, 
another reading is brahmavyayam, i. e. brahma Aavyayam ka. 

264 SVETASVATARA-UPANISHAD. 

pervading, the self within all beings, watching over 
all works, dwelling in all beings, the witness, the 
perceiver’, the only one, free from qualities. 

12%, He is the one ruler of many who (seem to 
act, but really do) not act?; he makes the one seed 
manifold. The wise who perceive him within their 
self, to them belongs eternal happiness, not to others. 

134. He is the eternal among eternals, the thinker 
among thinkers, who, though one, fulfils the desires 
of many. He who has known that cause which is 
to be apprehended by .Sankhya (philosophy) and 
Yoga (religious discipline), he is freed from all 
fetters. 

1 All the MSS. seem to read eta, not fetta. 

2 See Ka/sha-upanishad V, 12-15. 

° Sankara explains that the acts of living beings are due to their 
organs, but do not affect the Highest Self, which always remains 
passive (nishkriya). 

* T have formerly translated this verse, according to the reading 
nityo 'nityanaz ketanas &etananam, the eternal thinker of non- 
eternal thoughts. This would be a true description of the Highest 
Self who, though himself eternal and passive, has to think (givat- 
man) non-eternal thoughts. I took the first etana% in the sense 
of &etta, the second in the sense of etanam. The commentators, 
however, take a different, and it may be, from their point, a more 
correct view. Sankara says: ‘He is the eternal of the eternals, 
i.e. as he possesses eternity among living souls (givas), these living 
souls also may claim eternity. Or the eternals may be meant for 
earth, water, &c. And in the same way he is the thinker among 
thinkers.' 

Sankarananda says : *He is eternal, imperishable, among eternal, 
imperishable things, such as the ether, &c. He is thinking among 
thinkers,’ 

Vignanatman says: ‘ The Highest Lord is the cause of eternity 
in eternal things on earth, and the cause of thought in the thinkers 
on earth.’ But he allows another construction, namely, that he is 
the eternal thinker of those who on earth are endowed with eter- 
nity and thought. In the end all these interpretations come to 

VI ADHYAYA, 18. 265 

I4. The! sun does not shine there, nor the moon 
and the stars, nor these lightnings, and much less 
this fire. When he shines, everything shines after 
him; by his light all this is lightened. 

I5. He is the one bird? in the midst of the world ; 
he is also (like) the fire (of the sun) that has set in 
the ocean. A man who knows him truly, passes 
over death ?; there is no other path to go. 

I6. He makes all, he knows all, the self-caused, 
the knower *, the time of time (destroyer of time), 
who. assumes qualities and knows everything, the 
master of nature and of man ^, the lord of the three 
qualities (guza), the cause of the bondage, the exist- 
ence, and the liberation of the world $. 

I7. He who has become that’, he is the immortal, 
remaining the lord, the knower, the ever-present 
guardian of this world, who rules this world for ever, 
for no one else is able to rule it. 

I8. Seeking for freedom I go for refuge to that 
God who is the light of his own thoughts?, he who 

the same, viz. that there is only one eternal, and only one thinker, 
from whom all that is (or seems to be) eternal and all that is 
thought on earth is derived. 

1 See Kath. Up. V, 15; Mund. Up. II, 2, 10; Bhagavadgita XV, 6. 

? Hamsa, frequently used for the Highest Self, is explained here 
as hanty avidyadibandhakarazam iti hamsah. 

3 Cf. III, 8. 

* Again the MSS. read kalakalo, as in verse 2. They also agree 
in putting gnah before kalakalo, as in verse 2. 

? Pradhanam avyaktam, kshetrag io vigiianatma. 

* He binds, sustains, and dissolves worldly existence. 

7 He who seems to exist for a time in the form of kshetragna 
and pradhana. 

8 The MSS. vary between atmabuddhiprakasam and atmabuddhi- 
prasadam. The former reading is here explained by Sankarananda 
as svabuddhisakshizam. 

266 SVETASVATARA-UPANISHAD., 

first creates Brahman (m.)! and delivers the Vedas 
to him; 

19. Who is without parts, without actions, tran- 
quil, without fault, without taint?, the highest bridge 
to immortality—like a fire that has consumed its 
fuel. 

20. Only when men shall roll up the sky like 
a hide, will there be an end of misery, unless God 
has first been known’, 

21. Through the power of his penance and 
through the grace of God* has the wise Svetasva- 
tara truly® proclaimed Brahman, the highest and 
holiest, to the best of ascetics?*, as approved by 
the company of A?shis. 

! Explained as Hirazyagarbha. 

2 Niraiganaz nirlepam. - 

* Sahkarananda reads tada sivam avigfiaya duZkhasyanto bhavi- 
shyati; Viesianatman retains devam, but mentions sivam as a various 
reading. Both have anto, not antam, like Roer. Sankara seems 
to have found na before bhavishyati, or to have read duZkhanto na 
bhavishyati, for he explains that there will be no end of misery, 
unless God has first been known. It is possible, however, that the 
same idea may be expressed in the text as we read it, so that it 
should mean, Only when the impossible shall happen, such as the 
sky being rolled up by men, will misery cease, unless God has been 
discovered in the heart. 

* The MSS. read devaprasadat, which is more in keeping with 
the character of this Upanishad. 

5 Samyak may be both adverb and adjective in this sentence, 
kakakshinyayena. 

€ Atyasramin is explained by Sankara as atyantam puegyatama- 
sramibhyaZ ; and he adds, Zaturvidha bhikshavas 4a bahudakaku/i- 
kakau, Hamsah paramahamsas ka yo yah paskat sa uttamaZ. Weber 
(Indische Studien, II, 109) has himself corrected his mistake of 
reading antyasramibhyaA, and translating it by neighbouring 
hermits. 

These four stages in the life of a Sannyasin are the same to-day as 
they were in the time of the Upanishads, and Dayananda Sarasvati 

VI ADHYAYA, 23. 267 

22. This highest mystery in the Vedanta, delivered __ 
in a former age, should not be given to one b Ca 
passions have not been subdued, nor to one who is saint 
not a son, or who is not a pupil! i 

23. If these truths have been told to a high-minded 
man, who feels the highest devotion for God, and for. 
his Guru as for God, then they will shine forth,—then 
they will shine forth indeed. 

describes them in his autobiography, though in a different order: 
1. Ku/tkaka, living in a hut, or in a desolate place, and wearing a 
red-ochre coloured garment, carrying a three-knotted bamboo rod, 
and wearing the hair in the centre of the crown of the head, having 
the sacred thread, and devoting oneself to the contemplation of 
Parabrahma. 2. Bahfidaka, one who lives quite apart from his family 
and the world, maintains himself on alms collected at seven houses, 
and wears the same kind of reddish garment. 3. Hamsa, the same 
as in the preceding case, except the carrying of only a one-knotted 
bamboo. 4. Paramahamsa, the same as the others; but the ascetic 
wears the sacred thread, and his hair and. beard are quite long. 
This is the highest of all orders. A Paramahamsa who shows him- 
self worthy is on the very threshold of becoming a Dikshita. 
1 Cf. Brzh. Up. VI, 3, 12; Maitr. Up. VI, 29. 

Naa » Google


# PRASNA-UPANISHAD

PRASWA-U PANISHAD. 

RNS » Google 

PRASWVA-UPANISHAD. 

First QUESTION. 

Adoration to the Highest Self! HariZ, Om! 

I. Sukesas! Bharadvaga ?, and Saivya Satyakama, 
and Sauryayazin? Gargya, and Kausalya* Asvala- 
yana, and Bhargava Vaidarbhi®, and Kabandhin 
Katyayana, these were devoted to Brahman, firm in 
Brahman, seeking for the Highest Brahman. They 
thought that the venerable Pippalada could tell them 
all that, and they therefore took fuel in their hands 
(like pupils), and approached him. 

2. That Azshi said to them: ‘Stay here a year 
longer, with penance, abstinence, and faith; then 
you may ask questions according to your pleasure, 
and if we know them, we shall tell you all.’ 

3. Then * Kabandhin Katyayana approached him 
and asked: ‘Sir, from whence may these creatures 
be born ?' 

1 Sukesas seems better than Sukesan, and he is so called in the 
sixth Prasfia, in MS. Mill 74. 

? Bharadvaga, Saivya, Gargya, Asvalayana, Bhargava, and Katya- 
yana are, according to Sankara, names of gotras or families. 

? Suryasyapatyazm Sauryah, tadapatyam SauryayaniZ. Dirghah 
sulopas 4a khandasa iti sa eva Sauryayazi. 

t Kausalyo n&mataZ, kosalay&m bhavo va. 

5 Vaidarbhi is explained as vidarbhe/ prabhavaZ, or Vidarbheshu 
prabhavah. Vidarbha, a country, south of the Vindhya mountains, 
with Kuzdina as its capital. Vaidarbha, a king of the Vidarbhas, is 
mentioned in the Ait. Brahm. VII, 34. Vaidarbhi is a patronymic 
of Vidarbha. See B. R. s. v. 

$ After the year was over. 

272 PRASNA-UPANISHAD. 

4. He replied: 'Pragapati (the lord of creatures) 
was desirous of creatures (pragaZ). He performed 
penance, and having performed penance, he pro- 
duces a pair, matter (rayi) and spirit (praza), think- 
ing that they together should produce creatures for 
him in many ways. 

5%, The sun is spirit, matter is the moon. All 
this, what has body and what has no body, is matter, 
and therefore body indeed is matter. 

6. Now Aditya, the sun, when he rises, goes 
toward the East, and thus receives the Eastern 
spirits into his rays. And when he illuminates the 
South, the West, the North, the Zenith, the Nadir, 
the intermediate quarters, and everything, he thus 
receives all spirits into his rays. 

7. Thus he rises, as Vaisvanara, (belonging to all 
men,) assuming all forms, as spirit, as fire. This 
has been said in the following verse: 

83. (They knew) him who assumes all forms, the 
golden *, who knows all things, who ascends highest, 
alone in his splendour, and warms us; the thousand- 
rayed, who abides in a hundred places, the spirit of 
all creatures, the Sun, rises. 

9. The year indeed is Pragapati, and there are 
two paths thereof, the Southern and the Northern. 
Now those who here believe in sacrifices and pious 
gifts as work done, gain the moon only as their 

! Or he meditated; see Upanishads, vol. i, p. 238, n. 3. 

2 Sankara explains, or rather obscures, this by saying that the 
sun is breath, or the eater, or Agni, while matter is the food, 
namely, Soma. 

3 Cf. Maitr. Up. VI, 8. 

* Harizam is explained as rasmimantam, or as harati sarvesham 
prazinam ayfimshi bhauman va rasan iti harixa. I prefer to take 
it in the sense of yellow, or golden. 

I QUESTION, I5. 273 

(future) world, and return again. Therefore the 
Rishis who desire offspring, go to the South, and 
that path of the Fathers is matter (rayi). 

10. But those who have sought the Self by 
penance, abstinence, faith, and knowledge, gain by 
the Northern path Aditya, the sun. This is the 
home of the spirits, the immortal, free from danger, 
the highest. From thence they do not return, for 
itis the end. Thus says the Sloka! : 

11. Some call him the father with five feet (the 
five seasons), and with twelve shapes (the twelve 
months), the giver of rain in the highest half of 
heaven; others again say that the sage is placed in 
the lower half, in the chariot? with seven wheels 
and six spokes, 

I2. The month is Pragapati; its dark half is 
matter, its bright half spirit. Therefore some Rishis 
perform sacrifice in the bright half, others in the 
other half. 

13. Day and Night? are Pragapati; its day is 
spirit, its night matter. Those who unite in love 
by day waste their spirit, but to unite in love by 
night is right. 

I4. Food is Pragapati. Hence proceeds seed, 
and from it these creatures are born. o 

15. Those therefore who observe this rule of 
Pragapati (as laid down in § 13), produce a pair, 
and to them belongs this Brahma-world here* But 

1 Rig-veda I, 164,12. We ought to read upare vi£akshasam. 

2 Sapta£akre, i.e. rathe. The seven wheels are explained as the 
rays or horses of the sun ; or as half-years, seasons, months, half- 
months, days, nights, and muhfirtas. 

* Taken as one, as a Nychthemeron. 

* In the moon, reached by the path of the Fathers. 

[15] T 

274 PRASNA-UPANISHAD. 

those in whom dwell penance, abstinence, and 
truth, 

16. To them belongs that pure Brahma-world, 
to them, namely, in whom there is nothing crooked, 
nothing false, and no guile.’ 

SECOND QUESTION. 

1. Then Bhargava Vaidarbhi asked him: ‘Sir, 
How many gods! keep what has thus been created, 
how many manifest this?, and who is the best of 
them ?’ 

2. He replied: ‘The ether is that god, the wind, 
fire, water, earth, speech, mind, eye, and ear. These, 
when they have manifested (their power), contend 
and say: We (each of us) support this body and 
keep it *. | 

3* Then Praza (breath, spirit, life), as the best, 
said to them: Be not deceived, I alone, dividing 
myself fivefold, support this body and keep it. 

4. They were incredulous; so he, from pride, did 
as if he were going out from above. Thereupon, 

! Devah, powers, organs, senses. 

? "Their respective power. 

3 "This is Sankara’s explanation, in which baza is taken to mean 
the same as sarira, body. But there seems to be no authority for 
such a meaning, and Anandagiri tries in vain to find an etymological 
excuse for it. Baza or Vaza generally means an arrow, or, parti- 
cularly in Brahmaza writings, a harp with many strings. I do not 
see how an arrow could be used as an appropriate simile here, but 
a harp might, if we take avash/abhya in the sense of holding the 
frame of the instrument, and vidharayamaZ in the sense of stretch- 
ing and thereby modulating it. 

* On this dispute of the organs of sense, see Brzh. Up. VI, 1, 
P. 201; Khand. Up. V, 1 (S. B. E., vol. i, p. 72). 

lat 

INE E SITY S 

II QUESTION, IO. \ SA lg 

as he went out, all the others went out, and as he^ ^. 
returned, all the others returned. As bees go out 
when their queen! goes out, and return when she 
returns, thus (did) speech, mind, eye, and ear; and, 

. being satisfied, they praise Praza, saying : 

5. He is Agni (fire), he shines as Surya (sun), 
he is Parganya (rain), the powerful (Indra), he is 
Vayu (wind), he is the earth, he is matter, he is 
God—he is what is and what is not, and what 
is immortal. 

6. As spokes in the nave of a wheel, everything 
is fixed in Praza, the verses of the Azg-veda, Yagur- 
veda, Sama-veda, the sacrifice, the Kshatriyas, and 
the Brahmans. 

7. As Pragapati (lord of creatures) thou movest 
about in the womb, thou indeed art born again. 
To thee, the Praza, these creatures bring offerings, 
to thee who dwellest with the other prazas (the 
organs of sense). 

8. Thou art the best carrier for the Gods, thou 
art the first offering? to the Fathers. Thou art the 
true work of the A'?shis?, of the Atharvangiras. 

9. O Praza, thou art Indra by thy light, thou art 
Rudra, as a protector; thou movest in the sky, thou 
art the sun, the lord of lights. 

10. When thou showerest down rain, then, O Praza, 
these creatures of thine are delighted‘, hoping that 
there will be ion as much as they desire. 

! [n Sanskrit it is madhukararaga, king of the bees. 

? When a sraddha is offered to the Pitrzs. 

8 Explained as the eye and the other organs of sense which the 
chief Praza supports; but it is probably an old verse, here applied 
to a special purpose. 

* Another reading is prazate, they breathe. 

T 2 

276 PRASNA-UPANISHAD. 

II. Thou art a Vratya !, O Praza, the only Aeshi 2, 
the consumer of everything, the good lord. We are 
the givers of what thou hast to consume, thou, O 
Matarisva ?, art our father. 

. 12. Make propitious that body of thine which 
dwells in speech, in the ear, in the eye, and which 
pervades the mind ; do not go away! 

I3. All this is in the power of Praza, whatever 
exists in the three heavens. Protect us like a 
mother her sons, and give us happiness and wisdom.’ 

THIRD QUESTION. 

I. Then Kausalya Asvalayana asked: ‘Sir, whence 
is that Praza (spirit) born? How does it come 
into this body? And how does it abide, after it 
has divided itself? How does it go out? How 
does it support what is without‘, and how what is 
within ?’ | 

2. He replied: ‘ You ask questions more difficult, 
but you are very fond of Brahman, therefore I shall 

tell it you. 
3. This Praza (spirit) is born of the Self. Like 

the shadow thrown on a man, this (the praza) is 

! A person for whom the samskAras, the sacramental and initiatory 
rites, have not been performed. Sankara says that, as he was the 
first born, there was no one to perform them for him, and that he 
is called Vratya, because he was pure by nature. This is all very 
doubtful. 

2 Agni is said to be the Jezshi of the Atharvamas. 

* Instead of the irregular vocative Matarisva, there is another 
reading, MatarisvanaA, i.e. thou art the father of Matarisvan, the 
wind, and therefore of the whole world. 

* All creatures and the gods. 

III QUESTION, 6. 277 

spread out over it (the Brahman)}. By the work of 
the mind ? does it come into this body. 

4. As a king commands officials, saying to them: 
Rule these villages or those, so does that Praza 
(spirit) dispose the other prazas, each for their 
separate work. 

5. The Apana (the down-breathing) in the organs 
of excretion and generation; the Prazxa himself 
dwells in eye and ear, passing through mouth and 
nose. In the middle is the Samana? (the on- 
breathing); it carries what has been sacrificed as 
food equally (over the body), and the seven lights 
proceed from it. 

6. The Self* is in the heart. There are the 101 
arteries, and in each of them there are a hundred 
(smaller veins) and for each of these branches 
there are 72,0005. In these the Vyana (the back- 
breathing) moves. 

1 Over Brahman, i. e. the Self, the parama purusha, the akshara, - 
the satya. The praza being called a shadow, is thereby implied to ~. 
be unreal (anz;ta). Sankara. p 

23 Manokzzta is explained as an arsha sandhi. It means the good ^ 
or evil deeds, which are the work of the mind. 

3 I keep to the usual translation of Samana by on-breathing, though 
it is here explained in a different sense. Samana is here supposed 
to be between praza and apana, and to distribute the food equally, 
samam, over the body. The seven lights are explained as the two 
eyes, the two ears, the two nostrils, and the mouth. 

* Here the Lingatma or Givatma. 

5 A hundred times ror would give us 10,100, and each multiplied 
by 72,000 would give us a sum total of 727,200,000 veins, or, if we 
add the principal veins, 727,210,201. Anandagiri makes the sum 
total 72 Ao/is, 72 lakshas, six thousands, two hundred and one, 
where the six of the thousands seems to be a mistake for dasasa- 
hasram. In the Brzhadar. Upanishad IT, 1,19, we read of 72,000 
arteries, likewise in Yagfiavalkya IIl, #68. See also Brih. Up. IV, 

278 PRASNA-UPANISHAD. 

7. Through one of them, the Udana (the out- 
breathing) leads (us) upwards to the good world by 
good work, to the bad world by bad work, to the 
world of men by both. 

8. The sun rises as the external Praza, for it 
assists the Praza in the eye!. The deity that exists 
in the earth, is there in support of man's Apana 
(down-breathing). The ether between (sun and 
earth) is the Samana (on-breathing), the air is Vyana 
(back-breathing). 

9. Light is the Udana (out-breathing), and there- 
fore he whose light has gone out comes to a new 
birth with his senses absorbed in the mind. 

10. Whatever his thought (at the time of death) 
with that he goes back to Praza, and the Praza, 
united with light?, together with the self (the givatm4) 
leads on to the world, as deserved. 

11, He who, thus knowing, knows Praza, his 
offspring does not perish, and he becomes immortal. 
Thus says the Sloka: 

12. He who has known the origin?, the entry, 
the place, the fivefold distribution, and the internal 
state * of the Praza, obtains immortality, yes, obtains 
immortality.' | 

3, 20; Khand. Up. VI, 5, 3, comm.; Kaush. Up. IV, 20; Kasha 
Up. VI, 16. 

1 Without the sun the eye could not see. 

2 With Udana, the out-brehthing. 

* This refers to the questions asked in verse 1, and answered in 
the verses which follow. 

* The adhyatma, as opposed to the vahya, mentioned in verse 1. 
Ayati instead of ayati is explained by £44ndasam hrasvatvam. 

IV QUESTION, 3. 279 

FourTH QUESTION. 

I. Then Saury4yazin Gargya asked: ‘Sir, What 
are they that sleep in this man, and what are they 
that are awake in him? What power (deva) is it 
that sees dreams? Whose is the happiness? On 
what do all these depend ?’ 

2. He replied: ‘O Gargya, As all the rays of the 
sun, when it sets, are gathered up in that disc of 
light, and as they, when the sun rises again and 
again, come forth, so is all this (all the senses) 
gathered up in the highest faculty (deva)!, the mind. 
Therefore at that time that man does not hear, see, 
smell, taste, touch, he does not speak, he does not 
take, does not enjoy, does not evacuate, does not 
move about. He sleeps, that is what people say. 

__-3. The fires of the prazas are, as it were?, awake 
in that town (the body). The Apana is the Garha- 
patya fire, the Vyana the AnvaharyapaZana fire ; and 
because it is taken out of the Garhapatya fire, which 
is fire for taking out’, therefore the Praza is the 
Ahavantya fire *. 

! See note to verse 5. ? We ought to read agnaya iva. 

3 Pramayana, praziiyate 'smad iti prazayano garhapatyo 'gniZ. 

* The comparison between the prazas and the fires or altars is 
not very clear. As to the fires or altars, there is the Garhapatya, 
placed in the South-west, the household fire, which is always kept 
burning, from which the fire is taken to the other altars. The 
Anvaharyapa£ana, commonly called the Dakshiza fire, placed in 
the South, used chiefly for oblations to the forefathers. The 
Ahavaniya, fire, placed in the East, and used for sacrifices to the 
gods. 

Now the Apana is identified with the Garhapatya fire, no reason 
being given except afterwards, when it is said that the Praza is 
the Ahavaniya fire, being taken out of the Garhapatya, here called 

280 PRASNA-UPANISHAD. 

4. Because it carries equally these two oblations, 
the out-breathing and the in-breathing, the Samana 
is he (the Hotzz priest). The mind is the sacri- 
ficer, the Udana is the reward of the sacrifice, and 
it leads the sacrificer every day (in deep sleep) to 
Brahman. 

5. There that god? (the mind) enjoys in sleep 
greatness, What has been seen, he? sees again; 
what has been heard, he hears again; what has been 
enjoyed in different countries and quarters, he enjoys 
again; what has been seen and not seen, heard and 
not heard, enjoyed and not enjoyed, he sees it all ; 
he, being all, sees. 

6. And when he is overpowered by light?, then 
that god sees no dreams, and at that time that 
happiness arises in his body. 

7. And, O friend, as birds go to a tree to roost, 
thus all this rests in the Highest Atman,— 

8. The earth and its subtile elements, the water 
and its subtile elements, the light and its subtile 
elements, the air and its subtile elements, the ether 
and its subtile elements; the eye and what can be 

prasayana, in the same manner as the pra#a proceeds in sleep 
from the apana. The Vyana is identified with the Dakshisagni, 
the Southern fire, because it issues from the heart through an 
aperture on the right. 

' The name of the Hotr? priest must be supplied. He is sup- 
posed to carry two oblations equally to the Ahavanfya, and in the 
same way the Vyana combines the two breathings, the in and out 
breathings. 

3 The givatman under the guise of manas. The Sanskrit word 
is deva, god, used in the sense of an invisible power, but as a 
masculine. The commentator uses manodevaZ, p. 212, 1.5. I 
generally translate deva, if used in this sense, by faculty, but the 
context required a masculine. See verse 2. 

* In the state of profound sleep or sushupti. 

V QUESTION, 2. 281 

seen, the ear and what can be heard, the nose and 
what can be smelled, the taste and what can be 
tasted, the skin and what can be touched, the voice 
and what can be spoken, the hands and what can 
be grasped, the feet and what can be walked, the 
mind and what can be perceived, intellect (buddhi) 
and what can be conceived, personality and what 
can be personified, thought and what can be thought, 
light and what can be lighted up, the Praza and 
what is to be supported by it. 

9. For he it is who sees, hears, smells, tastes, 
perceives, conceives, acts, he whose essence is know- 
ledge?, the person, and he dwells in the highest, 
indestructible Self,— 

10. He who knows that indestructible being, obtains 
(what is) the highest and indestructible, he without 
a shadow, without a body, without colour, bright,— 
yes, O friend, he who knows it, becomes all-knowing, 
becomes all. On this there is this Sloka : 

11. He, O friend, who knows that indestructible 
being wherein the true knower, the vital spirits 
(prazas), together with all the powers (deva), and 
the elements rest, he, being all-knowing, has pene- 
trated all.’ 

FIFTH QUESTION. 

I. Then Saivya Satyakama asked him: ‘Sir, if some 
one among men should meditate here until death 
on the syllable Om, what would he obtain by it ?’ 

2. He replied: *O Satyakama, the syllable Om 
(AUM) is the highest and also the other Brahman ; 

! Buddhi and the rest are the instruments of knowledge, but 
there is the knower, the person, in the Highest Self. 

282 PRASNA-UPANISHAD. 

therefore he who knows it arrives by the same 
means ! at one of the two. 

3. If he meditate on one Matra (the A)?, then, 
being enlightened by that only, he arrives quickly 
at the earth?, The Aze-verses lead him to the 
world of men, and being endowed there with penance, 
abstinence, and faith, he enjoys greatness. 

4. If he meditate with* two Matras (A 4- U) he 
arrives at the Manas‘, and is led up by the Yagus- 
verses to the sky, to the Soma-world. Having enjoyed 
greatness in the Soma-world, he returns again. 

5. Again, he who meditates with this syllable 
AUM of three Matras, on the Highest Person, he 
comes to light and to the sun. And as a snake is 
freed from its skin, so is he freed from evil. He 
is led up by the Saman-verses to the Brahma- 
world®; and from him, full of life (Hirazyagarbha, 
the lord of the Satya-loka "), he learns? to see the 
all-pervading, the Highest Person. And there are 
these two Slokas: | 

6. The three Matras (A+ U +M), if employed 
separate, and only joined one to another, are mortal?; 

1 Ayatanena, alambanena. 

2 Dipikayam V4kaspatinaivakaeramatram ityeva vy&akhyatam. 

3 Sampadyate prapnoti ganmeti seshaZ. 

t Srutau tritiya dvittyarthe. 

5 Literally the mind, but here meant for the moon, as before. 
It is clear that manasi belongs to sampadyate, not, as the Dipika 
and Roer think, to dhyayita. Some take it for svapnabhimani 
HirazyagarbhaZ. 

8 The world of HirazyagarbhaZ, called the Satyaloka. 

7 On a later addition, bringing in the Om as consisting of three 
Matras and a half, see Weber, Ind. Stud. I, p. 453; Roer, p. 138. 

8 Tadupadeseneti yavat. 

? Because in their separate form, A, U, M, they do not mean 
the Highest Brahman. 

VI QUESTION, 4. 283 

but in acts, external, internal, or intermediate, if 
well performed, the sage trembles not !. 

7. Through the &zk-verses he arrives at this 
world, through the Yagus-verses at the sky, through 
the Saman-verses at that which the poets teach,—he 
arrives at this by means of the Onkara; the wise 
arrives at that which is at rest, free from decay, from 
death, from fear,——the Highest,’ 

SIXTH QUESTION. 

I. Then Sukesas Bharadvaga asked him, saying : 
‘Sir, Hirazyanabha, the prince of Kosala?, came to 
me and asked this question: Do you know the 
person of sixteen parts, O Bharadvaga? I said to 
the prince: I do not know him; if I knew him, 
how should I not tell you? Surely, he who speaks 
what is untrue withers away to the very root; 
therefore I will not say what is untrue. Then he 
mounted his chariot and went away silently. Now 
I ask you, where is that person ?' 

2. He replied: ‘Friend, that person is here within 
the body, he in whom these sixteen parts arise. 

3. He reflected : What is it by whose departure 
I shall depart, and by whose staying I shall stay ? 

4. He sent forth (created) Praza (spirit)?; from 

! The three acts are explained as waking, slumbering, and deep 
sleep; or as three kinds of pronunciation, tara-mandra-madhyama. 
They are probably meant for Yoga exercises in which the three 
Matras of Om are used as one word, and as an emblem of the 
Highest Brahman. " 

? Sankara explains Kausalya by Kosalayam bhava. Ananda- 
tirtha gives the same explanation. Kosala is the capital, generally 
called Ayodhya. There is no authority for the palatal s. 

s Sankara explains praza by sarvapramo Hiranyagarbha (sarva- 
prazikarazadharam antar&tmanam). 

284 PRASNA-UPANISHAD. 

Praza SraddhA (faith) !, ether, air, light, water, earth, 
sense, mind, food; from food came vigour, penance, 
hymns, sacrifice, the worlds, and in the worlds the 
name ? also. 

s. As these flowing rivers? that go towards the 
ocean, when they have reached the ocean, sink into 
it, their name and form are broken, and people speak 
of the ocean only, exactly thus these sixteen parts of 
the spectator that go towards the person (purusha), 
when they have reached the person, sink into him, 
their name and form are broken, and people speak 
of the person only, and he becomes without parts 
and immortal. On this there is this verse: 

6. That person who is to be known, he in whom 
these parts rest, like spokes in the nave of a wheel, 
you know him, lest death should hurt you.’ 

7. Then he (Pippalada) said to them: ‘So far do 
I know this Highest Brahman, there is nothing 
higher than it.’ 

8. And they praising him, said: ‘ You, indeed, are 
our father, you who carry us from our ignorance to 
the other shore.’ 

Adoration to the highest Æzshis ! 

Adoration to the highest Æzshis ! 

Tat sat. Harik, Om! 

! Faith is supposed to make all beings act rightly. 

* Nama stands here for namarupe, name (concept) and form. 
See before, p. 259. 

* Cf. Mund. Up. IV, 2, 8; Kand. Up. VIII, 1o.


# MAITRAYANA-BRAHMANA-UPANISHAD

MAITRAYANA-BRAHMANA- 
UPANISHAD. 

* 

RNS » Google 

MAITRAYAWVA-BRAH MAJA- 
UPANISHAD. 

First PRAPATHAKA., 

1. The laying of the formerly-described sacrificial 
fires! is indeed the sacrifice of Brahman. Therefore 
let the sacrificer, after he has laid those fires, medi- 
tate on the Self. Thus only does the sacrificer 
become complete and faultless. 

But who is to be meditated on? He who is 
called Praza (breath). Of him there is this story : 

2. A King, named Brzhadratha, having established 
his son in his sovereignty ?, went into the forest, 
because he considered this body as transient, and 
had obtained freedom from all desires. Having 
performed the highest penance, he stands there, with 
uplifted arms, looking up to the sun. At the end 
of a thousand (days) *, the Saint Sakayanya t, who 
knew the Self, came near ®, burning with splendour, 

1 The performance of all the sacrifices, described in the Maitra- 
yaza-brahmaza, is to lead up in the end to a knowledge of Brahman, 
by rendering a man fit for receiving the highest knowledge. See 
Manu VI, 82: ‘All that has been declared (above) depends on medi- 
tation; for he who is not proficient in the knowledge of the Self 
reaps not the full reward of the performance of rites." 

2 Instead of viragye, a doubtful word, and occurring nowhere 
else, m. reads vairagye. 

8 Or years, if we read sahasrasya instead of sahasrahasya. 

* The descendant of Sakayana. Saint is perhaps too strong; it 
means a holy, venerable man, and is frequently applied to a Buddha. 

5 Both M. and m. add muneZ before antikam, whereas the com- 
mentary has ragiiah. 

288 MAITRAYANA-BRAHMANA-UPANISHAD. 

like a fire without smoke. He said to the King: 
‘Rise, rise! Choose a boon!’ 

The King, bowing before him, said: ‘O Saint, I 
know not the Self, thou knowest the essence (of the 
Self). We have heard so. Teach it us.’ 

Sakayanya replied: ‘This was achieved of yore; 
but what thou askest is difficult to obtain. O 
Aikshvaka, choose other pleasures.’ 

The King, touching the Saint’s feet with his head, 
recited this Gatha: 

3. ‘O Saint, What is the use of the enjoyment of 
pleasures in this offensive, pithless body—a mere 
mass of bones, skin, sinews, marrow ?, flesh, seed, 
blood, mucus, tears, phlegm, ordure, water?, bile, 
and slime! What is the use of the enjoyment of 
pleasures in this body which is assailed by lust, 
hatred, greed, delusion, fear, anguish, jealousy, sepa- 
ration from what is loved, union with what is not 
loved *, hunger, thirst, old age, death, illness, grief, 
and other evils! 

4. And we see that all this is perishable, as these 
flies, gnats, and other insects, as herbs and trees 5, 

* Though the commentator must have read etad vrittam purastad 
duZsakyam etat prasiam, yet praszam as a neuter is very strange. 
M. reads etad vrittam purastat, dussakama pri&£Aa prasfam ; 
m. reads etad vratam purastad asakyam ma pr?&Za prasfiam 
aikshvaka, &c. This suggests the reading, etad vrzttam purastad 
dufsakam ma przkkha prasram, i.e. this was settled formerly, do 
not ask a difficult or an impossible question. 

3 Read magga. * M. adds vata before pitta ; not m. 

* An expression that often occurs in Buddhist literature. See 
also Manu VI, 62: ‘On their separation from those whom they 
love, and their union with those whom they hate; on their strength 
overpowered by old age, and their bodies racked with disease.’ 

5 The Sandhi vanaspatayodbhuta for vanaspataya udbhfta is 
anomalous. M. reads vanaspatayo bhfitapradhvamsinah. 

I PRAPATHAKA, 4. 289 

growing and decaying. And what of these? There 
are other great ones, mighty wielders of bows, rulers 
of empires, Sudyumna, Bhuridyumna, Indradyumna, 
Kuvalayasva, Yauvanasva, Vadhryasva, Asvapati !, 
Sasabindu, Harisfandra, Ambarisha?, Nahusha, 
Ananata, Saryati, Yayati, Anarazya ?, Ukshasena‘, 
&c., and kings such as Marutta, Bharata (Daush- 
yanti), and others, who before the eyes of their whole 
family surrendered the greatest happiness, and 
passed on from this world to that. And what of 
these? There are other great ones. We see the 
destruction > of Gandharvas, Asuras*, Yakshas, Ra- 
kshasas, Bhutas, Gazas, Pisaeas, snakes, and vam- 
pires. And what of these? There is the drying 
up of other great oceans, the falling of mountains, 
the moving of the pole-star, the cutting of the wind- 
ropes (that hold the stars), the submergence of the 
earth, and the departure of the gods (suras) from 
their place. In such a world as this, what is the 
use of the enjoyment of pleasures, if he who has 
fed" on them is seen? to return (to this world) again 

! M. carries on asvapatisasabinduharis£andrambarisha. 

2 After Ambarisha, M. reads Nabhushananutusayyatiyayatyanara- 
zyakshasenadayo. Nahusha (Naghusha?) is the father of Saryati ; 
Nabhaga, the father of Ambarisha. These names are so care- 
lessly written that even the commentator says that the text is 
either £Aandasa or pramadika.  Ananata is a mere conjecture. It 
occurs as the name of a A'/shi in Rig-veda IX, 111. 

5 Anarazya, mentioned in the Mahabharata, I, 230. 

* M. reads anarazyakshasena. 

5 M. and m. read nirodhanam. * M. adds Apsarasas. 
7 M. and m. read asritasya, but the commentator explains asi- 
tasya. 

? Here we have the Maitrayaza Sandhi, dresyata iti, instead 
of drisyata iti; see von Schroeder, Maitrayazi Samhita, p. xxviii. 
M. and m. read dr¢syata. 

[15] U 

290 MAITRAYANA-BRAHMANA-UPANISHAD. 

and again! Deign therefore to take me out! In 
this world I am like a frog in a dry well. O Saint, 
thou art my way, thou art my way.’ 

SECOND PRAPATHAKA. 

I. Then the Saint .Sakayanya, well pleased, said 
to the King: ‘Great King Bzzhadratha, thou banner 
of the race of Ikshvaku, quickly obtaining a know- 
ledge of Self, thou art happy, and art renowned by 
the name of Marut, the wind?. This indeed is thy 
Self 2’ 

‘Which ?, O Saint,’ said the King. 

Then the Saint said to him: 

2. 'He* who, without stopping the out-breathing®, 
proceeds upwards (from the sthula to the sukshma 
sarira), and who, modified (by impressions), and yet 
not modified e, drives away the darkness (of error), 
he is the Self. Thus said the Saint Maitri”? And 
SSakayanya said to the King Bzzhadratha: ‘ He who 
in perfect rest, rising from this body (both from 
the sthula and sukshma), and reaching the highest 

1 Prishadasva in the Veda is another name of the Maruts, the 
storm gods. Afterwards the king is called Marut, VI, 30. 

? This sentence is called a Sfitra by the commentator to VI, 32. 

* M. reads Kathaya me katamo bhavan iti. 

* M. leaves out atha. 

5 One might read avish/ambhanena, in the sense of while pre- 
venting the departure of the vital breath, as in the Brzh. Ar. VI, 3, 
prazena rakshann avaram kulayam. 

* M. reads vyathamano 'vyathamanas. 

7 M. leaves out MaitriZ-ity evam hyaha. The commentator ex- 
plains Maitrir by mitraya apatyam zzshir maitrir maitreya. In a later 
passage (II, 3) M. reads Bhagavata Maitreza, likewise the Anubhati- 
prakasa. 

II PRAPATHAKA, 4. 291 

light!, comes forth in his own form, he is the Self? 
(thus said .Sakayanya); this is the immortal, the 
fearless, this is Brahman.’ 

3. ‘ Now then this is the science of Brahman, and 
the science of all Upanishads, O King, which was 
told us by the Saint Maitri*. I shall tell it to thee: 

* We hear (in the sacred records) that there were 
once the Valakhilyas *, who had left off all evil, who 
were vigorous and passionless. They said to the Pra- 
gapati Kratu: “O Saint, this body is without intel- 
ligence, like a cart. To what supernatural being 
belongs this great power by which such a body has 
been made intelligent? Or who is the driver? 
What thou knowest, O Saint, tell us that 5,"' Praga- 
pati answered and said : 

4. ‘He who in the Sruti is called “Standing 
above," like passionless ascetics e amidst the objects 
of the world, he, indeed, the pure, clean, undeveloped, 
tranquil, breathless, bodiless ", endless, imperishable, 
firm, everlasting, unborn, independent one, stands in 
his own greatness, and by him has this body been 
made intelligent, and he is also the driver of it.’ 

! M. adds svayam gyotir upasampadya. 

? M. reads esha for ity esha, which seems better. 

* M. reads Maitreza vyakhyata. 

t M. M., Translation of Rig-veda, Preface, p. xxxiv. 

5 M. adds: bruhiti te hofur Bhagavan katham anena vasyaz yat 
Bhagavan vetsy etad asmakam bruhiti tan hovaZeti. 

$ The commentator allows firdhvaretasasak to be taken as a 
vocative also. 

T Niratma is explained by the commentator as thoughtless, with- 
out volition, &c. But atma is frequently used for body also, and 
this seems more appropriate here. M., however, reads anisatma, 
and this is the reading explained in the Anubhatiprakasa, p. 228, 
ver. 6o. This might mean the Atman which has not yet assumed 
the quality of a personal god. See VI, 28; VI, 31. 

v2 

292 MAITRAYANA-BRAHMANA-UPANISHAD. 

They said: ‘O Saint, How has this been made 
intelligent by such a being as this which has no 
desires 1, and how is he its driver?’ He answered 
them and said: 

5. ‘That Self which is very small, invisible, in- 
comprehensible, called Purusha, dwells of his own 
will here in part?; just as a man who is fast asleep 
awakes of his own will*. And this part (of the Self) 
which is entirely intelligent, reflected in man (as the 
sun in different vessels of water), knowing the body 
(kshetragZa), attested by his conceiving, willing, and 
believing‘, is Pragapati (lord of creatures), called 
Visva. By him, the intelligent, is this body made 
intelligent, and he is the driver thereof.’ 

They said to him: ‘O Saint‘, if this has been 
made intelligent by such a being as this, which has 
no desires, and if he is the driver thereof, how was 
it?’ He answered them and said: 

6. ‘In the beginning PragApati (ihe lord of 
creatures) stood alone. He had no happiness, when 
alone. Meditating* on himself, he created many 

1 The reading anishZZena is explained by the commentator as free 
from any local habitation or attachment. He also mentions the 
various readings anish/ena, free from wishes, and azish/Zena, the 
smallest. M. reads ani&£Aena, and this seems better than anish/ena, 
The Anubhatiprakasa reads likewise anikkhasya. | 

* I read buddhipurvam, and again with M. suptasyeva buddhi- 
purvam. Ialso read amsena without iti, asin M. The simile seems 
to be that a man, if he likes, can wake himself at any time of 
night, and this *if he likes' is expressed by buddhipurvam. See 
Anubhatiprakasa, vv. 67, 68. 

* M.reads vibodhayati, atha. 

t See Maitr. Up. V, 2; Cowell’s Translation, pp. 246, 256; 
Vedantaparibhasha, ed. A. Venis, in the Pandit, IV, p. 110. 

* M. adds: bhagavann idrdsasya katham amsena vartanam iti tan 
hova£a. 

* M. reads abhidhyayan. 

II PRAPATHAKA, 6. 293 

creatures. He looked on them and saw they were, 
like a stone, without understanding, and standing 
like a lifeless post. He had no happiness He 
thought, I shall enter! within, that they may awake. 
Making himself like air (vayu)? he entered within. 
Being one, he could not do it. Then dividing him- 
self fivefold, he is called Praxa, Apana, Samana, 
Udana, Vyana. Now that? air which rises up- 
wards, is Praza. That which moves downwards, 
is Apana. That by which these two are supposed 
to be held, is Vyana. That‘ which carries the 
grosser material of food to the Apana, and brings 
the subtler material to each limb, has the name 
Samana. [After these (Praza, Apana, Samana) comes 
the work of the Vyana, and between them (the Praza, 
Apana, and Samana on one side and the Vyana on 
the other) comes the rising of the Udana.] That 
which brings up or carries down® what has been 
drunk and eaten, is the Udana *. 

Now the Upaszsu-vessel (or prasa) depends on 
the Antaryama-vessel (apana) and the Antaryama- 

1 [t is better to read with M. visaniti.. 

? M. vayum iva. | 5 M. Atha yo 'yam. 

4 M.reads: yo ’yam sthavish/zam annam dhatum annasyapane 
sthapayaty azishtham kange 'hge samnayati esha vava sa samano . 
"tha yo 'yam. Leaving out annam, this seems the right reading. 
The whole sentence from uttaram to udanasya is left out in M. 

5 M. nigirati kaisho vava sa udano 'tha yenaitas sira anuvyapta 
esha vava sa vyanaZ. 

€ The views of these five kinds of wind differ considerably. 
Here the commentator explains that the praza and apana, the up- 
breathing and down-breathing, keep the bodily warmth alive, as 
bellows keep up a fire. The food cooked in it is distributed by 
the Samana, so that the coarse material becomes ordure, the middle 
flesh, the subtle material mind (manas) The udana brings up 
phlegm, &c., while the Vyana gives strength to the whole body. 

ae 

204 MAITRAYANA-BRAHMANA-UPANISHAD. 

vessel (apana) on the Updmesu-vessel} (praza), and 
between these two the self-resplendent (Self) pro- 
duced heat?. This heat is the purusha (person), 
and this purusha is Agni Vaisvanara. And thus 
it is said elsewhere?: “ Agni Vaisvanara is the fire 
within man by which the food that is eaten is cooked, 
i.e. digested. Its noise is that which one hears, if 
one covers one's ears. When a man is on the point 
of departing this life, he does not hear that noise." 
Now he*, having divided himself fivefold, is 
hidden in a secret place (buddhi) assuming the 
nature of mind, having the prazas as his body, re- 
splendent, having true concepts, and free like ether *. 
Feeling even thus that he has not attained his object, 
he thinks from within the interior of the heart $, 
"Let me enjoy objects." Therefore, having first 
broken open these five apertures (of the senses), he 
enjoys the objects by means of the five reins. This 
means that these perceptive organs (ear, skin, 
eye, tongue, nose) are his reins; the active organs 
(tongue (for speaking), hands, feet, anus, generative 
organ) his horses; the body his chariot, the mind 
the charioteer, the whip being the temperament. 
Driven by that whip, this body goes round like the 

1 Two sacrificial vessels (graha) placed on either side of the stone 
on which the Soma is squeezed, and here compared to the Praza 
and Apana, between which the Self (&aitanyatma) assumes heat. _ 

? M. reads tayor antara/e Zaushzyam prasuvat. 

* See Brzhacarazyaka Up. V, 9; hand. Up. III, 13, 8. 

* The Vaisvanara or purusha, according to the commentator, but 
originally the Pragapati, who had made himself like air, and divided 
himself into five vital airs. 

5 Thus the atma, with his own qualities and those which he 
assumes, becomes a living being. 

° M. reads esho ’sya hrzdantare tish/Zann. 

III PRAPATHAKA, I. — 295 

wheel driven by the potter. This body is made 
intelligent, and he is the driver thereof. 

This! is indeed the Self, who seeming to be filled 
with desires, and seeming to be overcome? by bright 
or dark fruits of action, wanders about in every 
body (himself remaining free). Because he is not 
manifest, because he is infinitely small, because he 
is invisible, because he cannot be grasped, because 
he is attached to nothing, therefore he, seeming to 
be changing, an agent in that which is not (prakzzti), 
is in reality not an agent and unchanging. He is 
pure, firm, stable, undefiled?, unmoved, free from 
desire, remaining a spectator, resting in himself. 
Having concealed himself in the cloak of the three 
qualities he appears as the enjoyer of vzta, as the 
enjoyer of vzta (of his good works). 

TuigD PRAPATHAKA. 

I. The Valakhilyas said to Pragapati Kratu: 
‘O Saint, if thou thus showest the greatness of that 
Self, then who is that other different one, also called 
Self *, who really overcome by bright and dark 
fruits of action, enters on a good or bad birth? 

1 M. reads: Sa va esha atmeti hosann iva sitasitaiz, This seems 
better than usanti kavayaZ, which hardly construes. 

? M. reads abhibhuyamanay iva, which again is better than ana- 
bhibhata iva, for he seems to be overcome, but is not, just as he 
seems to be an agent, but is not. See also III, rz. 

3 M. has alepo. 

t The pure Self, called atma, brahma, Ainmatram, pragnanagha- 
nam, &c., after entering what he had himself created, and no longer 
distinguishing himself from the created things (bhuta), is called 
Bhatatma. : 

[Y 

296 MAITRAYANA-BRAHMANA-UPANISHAD. 

Downward or upward is his course!, and overcome 
by the pairs (distinction between hot and cold, plea- 
sure and pain, &c.) he roams about?.’ 

2. Pragapati Kratu replied: ‘There is indeed that 
other? different one, called the elemental Self (Bha- 
tatma), who, overcome by bright and dark fruits of 
action, enters on a good or bad birth: downward or 
upward is his course, and overcome by the pairs he 
roams about. And this is his explanation: The five 
Tanmatras* (sound, touch, form, taste, smell) are 
called Bhuta ; also the five Mahabhutas (gross ele- 
ments) are called Bhuta. Then the aggregate? of all 
these is called sartra, body*. And lastly he of whom 
it was said that he dwelt in the body’, he is called 
Bhutatma, the elemental Self. Thus his immortal 
Self? is like a drop of water on a lotus leaf?, and 
he himself is overcome by the qualities of nature. 
Then”, because he is thus overcome, he becomes 
bewildered, and because he is bewildered, he saw 
not the creator, the holy Lord, abiding within 
himself. Carried along by the waves of the quali- 
ties, darkened in his imaginations, unstable, fickle, 

1 M. reads here and afterwards avakam firdhvam va gatidvandvaif. 

2 M.adds at the end, paribhramatiti katama esha iti, tan hovaZeti, 
and leaves it out at the end of $ 2. 

3 M. here reads avara. — * M. reads tanmatrazi. 

5 M. reads tesham samudayas ta&£Aariram. 

* The commentator distinguishes between linga-sarira, consisting 
of pramas, indriyas, the antaZkaraza, and the sukshmabhutas ; and 
the sthula-sarira, consisting of the five Mahabhatas. 

7 M. reads sariram ity uktam. 

* M. reads athasti tasyaA bindur iva. 

? It sticks to it, yet it can easily run off again. 

? M. reads Ato, and the commentator explains atho by ata% 
karazat, adding sandhifZ £ZandasaZ. 

? See VI, 30. 

III PRAPATHAKA, 2. 207 

crippled, full of desires, vacillating, he enters into 
belief, believing “I am he,” “this is mine! ;" he binds 
his Self by his Self, as a bird with a net, and over- 
come afterwards by the fruits of what he has done, 
he enters on a good and bad birth; downward or 
upward is his course, and overcome by the pairs he 
roams about.’ 

They asked: ‘Which is it? And he answered 
them: | 

3. ‘This also has elsewhere been said: He who 
acts, is the elemental Self; he who causes to act by 
means of the organs?, is the inner man (antaZpuru- 
sha). Now as even a ball of iron, pervaded (over- 
come) by fire, and hammered by smiths, becomes 
manifold (assumes different forms, such as crooked, 
round, large, small?), thus the elemental Self, per- 
vaded (overcome) by the inner man, and hammered 
by the qualities, becomes manifold*. And the four 
tribes (mammals, birds, &c.) the fourteen worlds 
(Bhar, &c.), with all the number of beings, multi- 
plied eighty-four times®, all this appears as manifold- 
ness. And those multiplied things are impelled by 
man (purusha) as the wheel by the potter*. And as 
when the ball of iron is hammered, the fire is not 
overcome, so the (inner) man is not overcome, but 
the elemental Self is overcome, because it has united 
itself (with the elements). 

1 M. reads aham so mamedam. ? M. antaZkarazaiA. 

3 See commentary, p. 48, |. 7. 

* M. reads upety atha triguzaz &aturgalam. 

* M. reads aturasitilakshayoniparizatam. See also Anubhuti- 
prakasa, ver. 118. 

€ Mrityava seems an impossible word, though the commentator 
twice explains it as kulala, potter. M. reads 4akrizeti, which seems 
preferable. Weber conjectures mritpafa, - 

298 MAITRAYANA-BRAHMANA-UPANISHAD. 

4. And it has been said elsewhere! : This body 
produced from marriage, and endowed with growth? 
in darkness, came forth by the urinary passage, was 
built up with bones, bedaubed with flesh, thatched 
with skin, filled with ordure, urine, bile, slime, mar- 
row, fat, oil?, and many impurities besides, like a 
treasury full of treasures*. 

s. And it has been said elsewhere: Bewilder- 
ment, fear, grief, sleep, sloth, carelessness, decay, 
sorrow, hunger, thirst, niggardliness, wrath, infi- 
delity, ignorance, envy, cruelty?, folly, shameless- 
ness, meanness*, pride, changeability ", these are the 
results of the quality of darkness (tamaZ)*. 

! Part of this passage has been before the mind of the author of 
the Manava-dharmasastra, when writing, VI, 76,77: asthisthuzam 
snayuyutam mamsasonitalepanam, &armavanaddham durgandhi pur- 
nam miutrapurishayoZ, garasokasamavish/az rogayatanam aturam 
ragasvalam anityaz £a bhutavasam imam tyaget. The same verses 
occur in the Mahabharata XII, 12463—4, only with tyaga at the 
end, instead of tyaget. The rendering of asthibhis kitam by asthi- 
sthuzam shows that ita was understood to mean piled or built up, 
i. e. supported by bones. 

2 Instead of samvriddhyupetam M. reads samviddhyapetam. 

s M. adds snayu after vasa, and instead of amayai/ reads malai/. 
This reading, malaiZ, would seem preferable, though Manu's roga- 
yatanam might be quoted in support of amayaiL. The exact 
meaning of vasa is given in the Aryavidyasudhakara, p. 82, l. 9. 

* Therefore should wise people not identify their true Self with 
the body. M. reads vasuneti. 

5 M. reads vaikaruzyam. 

* Instead of nirakzztitvam M. reads nikretatvam, which is de- 
cidedly preferable. We may take it to mean either meanness, as 
opposed to uddhatatvam, overbearing, or knavery, the usual 
meaning of nikr:ti. 

T M.reads asatvam, possibly for asattvam. 

3 M. reads tamasanvitai4, and afterwards ragasanvitai^; also 
trishza instead of antastrzshza. 

IV PRAPATHAKA, 2. _ 299 

Inward thirst, fondness, passion, covetousness, 
unkindness, love, hatred, deceit!, jealousy, vain rest- 
lessness, fickleness?, unstableness, emulation, greed, 
patronising of friends, family pride, aversion to dis- 
agreeable objects, devotion to agreeable objects, 
whispering?, prodigality, these are the results of the 
quality of passion (ragas). 

By these he is filled, by these he is overcome, 
and therefore this elemental Self assumes manifold 
forms, yes, manifold forms.’ 

FourTH PRAPATHAKA. 

I. The Valakhilyas, whose passions were subdued, 
approached him full of amazement and said: ‘O 
Saint, we bow before thee; teach thou, for thou 
art the way, and there is no other for us. What 
process is there for the elemental Self, by which, 
after leaving this (identity with the elemental body), 
he obtains union* with the (true) Self?’ Pragapati 
Kratu said to them: 

2. ‘It has been said elsewhere: Like the waves 
in large rivers, that which has been done before, can- 
not be turned back, and, like the tide of the sea, the 
approach of death is hard to stem. Bound® by the 
fetters of the fruits of good and evil, like a cripple ; 
without freedom, like a man in prison; beset by many 
fears, like one standing before Yama (the judge of 

! M. reads vyavartatvam. 2 It should be kankalatvam. 

* M. reads mattasvaro. 

t Instead of the irregular sayogyam, M. always reads sayugyam. 

5 ]t is not quite clear what is the subject to which all these ad- 
jectives refer. M. reads baddho for baddham, but afterwards 
agrees with the text as published by Cowell. 

300 MAITRAYANA-BRAHMANA-UPANISHAD. 

the dead); intoxicated by the wine of illusion, like 
one intoxicated by wine; rushing about, like one 
possessed by an evil spirit; bitten by the world, like 
one bitten by a great serpent; darkened by passion, 
like the night; illusory, like magic; false, like a 
dream; pithless, like the inside of the Kadalt; 
changing its dress in a moment, like an actor?; fair 
in appearance, like a painted wall, thus they call 
him; and therefore it is said: 

Sound?, touch, and other things are like nothings ; 
if the elemental Self is attached to them, it will not 
remember the Highest Place?. 

3. This is indeed the remedy for the elemental 
Self: Acquirement of the knowledge of the Veda, 
performance of one's own duty, therefore conformity 
on the part of each man to the order to which he 
happens to belong. This‘ is indeed the rule for 
ones own duty, other performances are like the 
mere branches ofa steme. Through it one obtains 
the Highest above, otherwise one falls downward*. 
Thus is one's own duty declared, which is to be found 
in the Vedas. No one belongs truly to an order (4sra- 
ma) who transgresses his own law". And if people 
say, that a man does not belong to any of the orders, 
and that he is an ascetic?, this is wrong, though, on 

! M. reads na/avat. 

* M. reads ye 'rtha anartha iva te sthita#, esham. 

3 M. reads na smaret paramam padam. 

* M. reads svadharma eva sarvam dhatte, stambhasakhevetarari. 

5 The commentator considers the other sacrificial performances 
as hurtful, and to be avoided. 

* M. reads anyathadhaZ pataty, esha. 

* The rules of the order to which he belongs. 

* A Tapasvin is free from the restrictions of the preceding 4sra- 

IV PRAPATHAKA, 4. 301 

the other hand, no one who is not an ascetic brings 
his sacrificial works to perfection or obtains know- 
ledge of the Highest Self!. For thus it is said: 

By ascetic penance goodness is obtained, from 
goodness understanding is reached, from understand- 
ing the Self is obtained, and he who has obtained 
that, does not return" ; 

4. “ Brahman is," thus said one sho Kaew the 
science of Brahman; and this penance is the door 
to Brahman, thus said one who by penance had- 
cast off all sin. The syllable Om is the mani- 
fest greatness of Brahman, thus said one who 
well grounded (in Brahman) always meditates on 
it. Therefore by knowledge, by penance, and by 
meditation is Brahman gained. Thus one goes 
beyond? Brahman (Hirazyagarbha), and to a divinity 
higher than the gods; nay, he who knows this, and 
worships Brahman by these three (by knowledge, 
penance, and meditation), obtains bliss imperishable, 
infinite, and unchangeable. Then freed from those 
things (the senses of the body, &c.) by which he 
was filled and overcome, a mere charioteer*, he: 
obtains union with the Self.’ 

mas, but he must have obeyed them first, before he can become a 
real Tapasvin. 

1 M. reads asrameshv evavasthitas tapasvi kety uyata ity, etad apy 
uktam, &c. This would mean, ‘For it is said that he only who has 
dwelt in the asramas is also called a Tapasvin, a real ascetic; and 
this also has been said, that no one obtains self-knowledge except 
an ascetic.’ This is not impossible, but the commentator follows 
the text as printed by Cowell. M. reads atmagianen&dhigamaZ, 
karmasuddhi. 

2 M. reads manasa prapyate tv atma hy atmaptya na nivartata iti. 

3 M. reads pura eta, which may be right. 

t RathitaZ is a very strange word, but, like everything else, it is 

302 MAITRAYANA-BRAHMANA-UPANISHAD. 

5. The Valakhilyas said: ‘O Saint, thou art the 
teacher, thou art the teacher. What thou hast said, 
has been properly laid up in our mind. Now answer 
us a further question: Agni, Vayu, Aditya, Time 
(kala) which is Breath (praza?), Food (anna), Brahm’, 
Rudra, Vishzu, thus do some meditate on one, some 
on another. Say which of these is the best for us.' 
He said to them: 

6. ‘ These are but the chief manifestations of the 
highest, the immortal, the incorporeal Brahman. He 
who is devoted to one, rejoices here in his world 
(presence), thus he said. Brahman indeed is all this, 
and a man may meditate on, worship, or discard also 
those which * are its chief manifestations. With these 
(deities) he proceeds to higher and higher worlds, 
and when all things perish, he becomes one with the 
Purusha, yes, with the Purusha.’ 

explained by the commentator, viz. as ratham prapito rathitvam ka 
prapita iti yavat. Nevertheless the reading of M. seems to me pre- 
ferable, viz. atha yaik paripurzo 'bhibhuto ’yam tathaitais ka, tai% 
sarvair vimukta svatmany eva sayugyam upaiti. I should prefer 
vimuktas tv atmany eva, and translate, ‘But then, freed from all 
those things by which he was filled and likewise was overcome by 
them, he obtains union with the Self. 

1 M. reads the second time abhivady asmiti, which is no improve- 
ment. It might have been ativadyasiti. 

? M. reads YamaZ prazo. 

° This is, of course, the personal Brahma of the Hindu triad. To 
distinguish this personal Brahma from the impersonal, I sometimes 
give his name in the nom. masc., Brahma, and not the grammatical 
base, Brahman. 

t M. reads ya va asya. The commentator explains ya vasyaA by 
vasayogyak; or ya va yah by kaskit, admitting a Vedic irregularity 
which is not quite clear. 

V PRAPATHAKA, 2. 303 

FirtH PRAPATHAKA !. 

I. Next follows Kutsayana's hymn of praise : 

‘Thou art Brahma, and thou art Vishzu, thou 
art Rudra, thou Pragapati?, thou art Agni, Varuza, 
Vayu, thou art Indra, thou the Moon. 

Thou art Anna ? (the food or the eater), thou art 
Yama, thou art the Earth, thou art All, thou art 
the Imperishable. In thee all things exist in many 
forms, whether for their natural or for their own 
(higher) ends. 

Lord of the Universe, glory to thee! Thou art 
the Self of All, thou art the maker of All, the 
enjoyer of All; thou art all life, and the lord of all 
pleasure and joy * Glory to thee, the tranquil, the 
deeply hidden, the incomprehensible, the immeasur- 
able, without beginning and without end.' 

2. ‘In the beginning? darkness (tamas) alone was 
this. It was in the Highest, and, moved by the High- 
est, it becomes uneven. Thus it becomes obscurity 

1 At the beginning of the fifth Prapa/Zaka my MS. gives the 
Slokas which in the printed edition are found in VI, 34, p. 178, 
Atreme sloka bhavanti, yatha nirindhano vahnir, &c., to nirvishayam 
smrztam. Then follows as $ 2, Atha yathedam Kautsyayanistutis, 
tvam, &c. 

? The commentator explains Brahma by Hirazyagarbha and 
Pragapati by Virag. 

* M. reads tvam Manus, tvam Yamas £a tvam, przthivi tvam atha- 
kyutah, which is so clearly the right reading that it is difficult to 
understand how the mistakes arose which are presupposed by the 
commentary. See Taitt. Up. II, 2. 

t M. reads visvakridarati4 prabhuZ, which seems better. 

. * M.reads tamo va idam ekam Asta tat paro syat tat parezeritam. 
It may have been tat pare ’sthat. 

304 MAITRAYANA-BRAHMANA-UPANISHAD. 

(ragas)!. Then this obscurity, being moved, becomes 
uneven. Thus it becomes goodness (sattva). Then 
this goodness, being moved, the essence flowed forth?. 
This is that part (or state of Self) which is entirely 
intelligent, reflected in man (as the sun is in different 
vessels of water) knowing the body (kshetrag7a), 
attested by his conceiving, willing, and believing, it is 
Pragapati, called Visva. His manifestations have 
been declared before?. Now that part of him which 
belongs to darkness, that, O students *, is he who is 
called Rudra. That part of him which belongs to 
obscurity, that, O students, is he who is called 
Brahma. That part of him which belongs to good- 
ness, that, O students, is he who is called Vishzu. 
He being one, becomes three, becomes eight 5, be- 
comes eleven*, becomes twelve, becomes infinite. 
Because’ he thus came to be, he is the Being (neut.), 
he moves about, having entered all beings, he has 
become the Lord of all beings. He is the Self 

within and without, yes, within and without.’ 

! M. reads etad vai ragaso rupam, which is better, or, at least, 
more in accordance with what follows. 

2 M. reads sattvam everitarasas sam prasrevat. 

3 A reference to Maitr. Up. II, 5, would have saved the com- 
mentator much trouble. M. has a better text. It leaves out visveti 
or visvakhyas after pragapati, which may be wrong, but then goes 
on: tasya prokta agryas tanavo brahma rudro vishzur iti. In enu- 
merating the three agryas tanavah, however, M. is less consistent, 
for it begins with ragas or Brahma, then goes on to tamas or 
Rudra, and ends with sattva or Vishzu. The Anubhatiprakasa, 
verse 142, has the right succession. 

t This vocative, brahma/arino, is always left out in M. 

5 The five prazas, the sun, moon, and asterisms. 

€ The eleven organs of sense and action, which, by dividing 
manas and buddhi, become twelve. 

7 M. reads aparimitadha £odbhutatvad bhuteshu arati pravish/a/ 
sarvabhutanam. 

VI PRAPATHAKA, I. 305 

SixtH PRAPATHAKA}, 

I. He (the Self) bears the Self in two ways ?, as 
he who is Praza (breath), and as he who is Aditya 
(the sun). Therefore there are two paths for him °, 
within and without, and they both turn back in a 
day and night. The Sun is the outer Self, the inner 
Self is Breath. Hence the motion of the inner Self 
is inferred from the motion of the outer Self*. For 
thus it is said: 

‘He who knows, and has thrown off all evil, the 
overseer of the senses5, the pure-minded, firmly 

1 The commentator describes the sixth and seventh chapters as 
Khila, supplementary, and does not think that they are closely con- 
nected with the chief object of the Upanishad. This chief object was 
to show that there is only one thinking Self (4idatm4) to be known, 
and that the same is to be meditated on as manifested in the different 
forms of Rudra, Brahma, Vishzu, &c. Thus the highest object of 
those who wish for final liberation has been explained before, as 
well as the proper means of obtaining that liberation. What 
follows are statements of the greatness of the various manifestations 
of the Atman, and advice how to worship them. My MS. gives the 
beginning of the sixth Prap4/haka, but ends with the end of the 
eighth paragraph. The verses in paragraph 34, as mentioned before, 
are given in my MS. at the end of the fourth PrapazAaka. My 
translation deviates considerably from the commentary. The text 
is obscure and not always correct. My rule has been throughout 
to begin a new sentence with evam hy aha, ‘for thus it is said,’ 
which introduces proofs of what has been said before. The passages 
thus quoted as proofs from the Veda are often difficult to under- 
stand, nor do they always consist of a complete sentence. My 
translation therefore is often purely tentative. 

2 M. reads dvitiya for dvidha. 

3 M. reads dvau va etav asya pafi&adha namantar bahis kahoratre 
tau vyavartete. 

* While the sun goes round Meru in a day and a night, the 
breath performs 21,000 breathings, or, more exactly, 21,600. M. 
reads bahiratmagatya. 

5 M. reads adhyaksha, not akshadhyaksha. 

[15] X 

306 MAITRAYANA-BRAHMANA-UPANISHAD. 

grounded (in the Self) and looking away (from 
all earthly objects) he is the same. Likewise the 
motion of the outer Self is inferred from the motion 
of the inner Self. For thus it is said: 

‘He who within the sun is the golden person, who 
looks upon this earth from his golden place, he is the 
same who, after entering the inner lotus of the heart?, 
devours food (perceives sensuous objects, &c.)’ 

2. And he who having entered the inner lotus of 
the heart, devours food, the same, having gone to 
the sky as the fire of the sun, called Time, and being 
invisible, devours all beings as his food. 

What is that lotus and of what is it made? (the 
Valakhilyas ask ?.) 

That lotus is the same as the ether; the four 
quarters, and the four intermediate points are its 
leaves ?. 

These two, Breath and the Sun, move on near 
to each other (in the heart and in the ether). Let 
him worship these two, with the syllable Om, with 
the Vyahzzti words (bhaZ, bhuvaZ, svar), and with 
the SAvitri hymn. 

3. There are two forms of Brahman 5, the material 
(effect) and the immaterial (cause), The material 
is false, the immaterial is true. That which is true 
is Brahman, that which is Brahman is light, and that 
which is light is the Sun*. And this Sun became 
the Self of that Om. 

1 M. reads sa esho 'ntaZ pushkare hrztpushkare vasrito. 
.? The commentator ascribes the dialogue still to the Valakhilyas 
and Pragapati Kratu. 
3 M. reads dalasamstha asur vagniA parata etai prazadityav eta. 
* See Brzh. Up. II, 3, 1. 
* Professor Cowell, after giving the various readings of his MSS., 
says, ‘the true reading would seem to be yat satyam tad brahma, 

VI PRAPATHAKA, 4, 307 

He divided himself threefold, for Om consists of 
three letters,a+u+m. Through them all this! is con- 
tained in him as warp and woof. For thus itis said: 
. ‘Meditate on that Sun as Om, join your Self (the 

breath) with the (Self of the) Sun.’ 

4. And thus it has been said elsewhere: The 
Udgitha (of the Sama-veda) is the Prazava? (of the 
Rig-veda), and the Prazava is the Udgitha, and thus 
the Sun is Udgitha, and he is Prazava or Om. For 
thus it is said?: | 

"The Udgitha, called Prazava, the leader (in the 
performance of sacrifices), the bright*, the sleepless, 
free from old age and death, three-footed®, consisting 
of three letters (a +u +m), and likewise to be known 
as fivefold (five prazas) placed in the cave.’ And it 
is also said: | 

‘The three-footed Brahman has its root upward $, 
the branches are ether, wind, fire, water, earth, &c. 
This one Asvattha? by name, the world, is Brahman, 
and of it that is the light which is called the Sun, 
and it is also the light of that syllable Om. There- 
fore let him for ever worship that (breath and sun, 
as manifestations of Brahman) with the syllable Om.' 

He alone enlightens us. For thus it is said: 

yad brahma tag gyotir, yad gyotis sa adityak.’ This is exactly the 
reading of my own MS. 

! M. reads Zaivasminn ity evam hyaha. 

2 The mystic syllable Om. 

$ See KAAndogyopanishad I, 5; Maitr. Up. VI, 25. 

* M. reads namarupam. 

5 'The three feet of the praza are waking, slumber, and deep 
sleep; the three feet of the sun, the three worlds, bhaZ, bhuvaZ, 
svar, as in VII, 11. See also AAand. Up. III, 12. 

* Cf. Ka/4. Up. VI, x. 

7 Asvattha, lit. fig-tree, then frequently used metaphorically as a 
name ofthe world. Here explained as ‘it will not stand till to-morrow.’ 

X 2 

308 MAITRAYANA-BRAHMANA-UPANISHAD. 

‘This alone is the pure syllable, this alone is the 
highest syllable; he who knows that syllable only, 
whatever he desires, is his!.' 

s. And thus it has been said elsewhere: This Om? 
is the sound-endowed body of him (Prazadityatman). 
This is his gender-endowed body, viz. feminine, 
masculine, neuter. This is his light-endowed body, 
viz. Agni, Vayu, Aditya. This is his lord-endowed 
body, viz. Brahma, Rudra, Vishzu. This is his mouth- 
endowed body, viz. Garhapatya, Dakshizagni, Ahava- 
niya?. This is his knowledge-endowed body, viz. Rif, 
Yagus, SAman. This is his world-endowed body, viz. 
BhdZ, BhuvaZ, Svar. This is his time-endowed body, 
viz. Past, Present, Future. This is his heat-endowed 
body, viz. Breath, Fire, Sun. This is his growth- 
endowed body, viz. Food, Water, Moon. This is 
his thought-endowed body, viz. intellect, mind, per- 
sonality. This is his breath-endowed body, viz. Praza, 
Apana, Vyana. Therefore by the aforesaid syllable 
Om are all these here enumerated bodies praised and 
identified (with the Prazadityatman) For thus it 
is said*: 

‘O Satyakama, the syllable Om is the high and 
the low Brahman.’ 

6. This® (world) was unuttered*. Then forsooth 
Pragapati, having brooded, uttered it in the words 
BhaZ, BhuvaZ, Svar. This is the grossest body of 
that Pragapati, consisting of the three worlds’. Of 
that body Svar is the head, BhuvaZ the navel, Bh0Z 

* Kazh. Up. II, 16. 2 M. reads tanar yom iti. 
3 The fires on the three altars. 
t Prasfia Up. V, 2. 5 M. reads atha vyattam. 

* So far the prazava or Om has been explained; now follows 
the explanation of the Vyahr:tis; cf. VI, 2. Vyahrzzti is derived 
from vyahar, and means an utterance. 

TERV B: 

VI PRAPATHAKA, 7. 309 

the feet, the sun the eye. For in the eye is fixed 
man’s great measure, because with the eye he makes 
all measurements. The eye is truth (satyam), for 
the person (purusha) dwelling in the eye proceeds to 
all things (knows all objects with certainty). There- 
fore let a man worship with the Vyahzztis, BhaZ, 
BhuvaZ, Svar, for thus Pragapati, the Self of All, is 
worshipped as the (sun, the) Eye of All. For 
thus it is said: 

‘ This (the sun)is Prazapati's all-supporting body, for 
in it this all? is hid (by the light of the sun); and in this 
all it (the light) is hid. Therefore this is worshipped?.' 

7. (The Savitri begins*:) Tat Savitur varezyam, 
i.e. ‘this of Savitzz, to be chosen.’ Here the Aditya 
(sun) is Savitzz, and the same is to be chosen by the 
love(r) of Self, thus say the Brahma-teachers. 

(Then follows the next foot in the Savitri): Bhargo 
devasya dhimahi, i.e. ‘the splendour of the god we 
meditate on.’ Here the god is Savitzz, and therefore 
he who is called his splendour, him I meditate on, 
thus say the Brahma-teachers. s 

1 M. reads visvataskakshur. 

? Pragapati, according to the commentator, is identified with 
Satya, the true, because sat means the three worlds, and these (bhai, 
bhuvaZ, svar) are said to be his body. Hence probably the inser- 
tion of Satyam before Pragapati at the beginning of the paragraph. 
Then he argues, as the eye has been called satya, and as the eye 
is Aditya, therefore PragApati also, being Satya, is Aditya, the sun. 
And again, if the sun is worshipped (by the vyahzztis) then, like the 
sun, the eye of all, Pragapati also, the self of all, is worshipped. 

? Eshopasita is impossible. We must either read, with the com- 
mentator, etam upasita, or with M. eshopasiteti. 

* He now proceeds to explain the worship of the Savitri verse, 
which had been mentioned in VI, 2, after the Om and the Vyahritis, 
as the third mode of worshipping Praza (breath) and Aditya (sun), 
these being two correlative embodiments of the Self. The Savitri 
is found in Rig-veda III, 62, 1o, but it is here explained in a purely 
philosophical sense. See also Brzh. Up. VI, 3, 6 

310 MAITRAYANA-BRAHMANA-UPANISHAD. 

(Then follows the last foot): Dhiyo yo naZ prako- 
dayat, i.e. ‘who should stir up our thoughts.’ Here 
the dhiyaZ are thoughts, and he should stir these up 
for us, thus say the Brahma-teachers. 

(He now explains the word bhargas) Now he 
who is called bhargas is he who is placed in yonder 
Aditya (sun) or he who is the pupil in the eye’. 
And he is so called, because his going (gati) is by 
rays (bhabhiZ); or because he parches (bhargayati) 
and makes the world to shrivel up. Rudra is‘called 
Bhargas, thus say the Brahma-teachers. Or bha 
means that he lights up these worlds; ra, that he 
delights these beings, ga that these creatures go to 
him and come from him ; therefore being a bha-ra-ga, 
he is called Bhargas. 

Surya? (sun) is so called, because Soma is con- 
tinually squeezed out (su). Savitz? (sun) is so called, 
because he brings forth (su) Aditya (sun) is so 
called, because he takes up (Ada, scil. vapour, or 
the life of man). Pavana?is so called, because he 
purifies (pu). Apas, water, is so called, because it 
nourishes (pya). 

And it is said: 

‘Surely the Self (absorbed in Praza, breath), which 
is called Immortal‘, is the thinker, the perceiver, the 
goer, the evacuator®, the delighter, the doer, the 
speaker, the taster, the smeller, the seer, the hearer, 
and he touches. He is Vibhu (the pervader), who 
has entered into the body.’ And it is said: 

1 M. reads tarake 'kshzi. 

2 Sfirya is considered as the daily performer of the PrataZsavana, 
&c., the sacrifice at which Soma is squeezed out as an offering. 

3 M. reads pavamanat pavamana/Z. 

* M. reads amrzztakhyas £etakhyas &eta. 

5 M. reads ganta szzsh/a. 

VI PRAPATHAKA, 8, 411 

‘When the knowledge is twofold (subjective and ob- 
jective), then he hears, sees, smells, tastes, and touches 
(something), for it is the Self that knows everything.’ 

But when the knowledge is not twofold (subjective 
only) without effect, cause, and action!, without a 
name, without a comparison, without a predicate ?— 
what is that? It cannot be told?. 

8. And the same Self is also called Isana (lord), 
Sambhu, Bhava, Rudra (tamasa); Pragapati (lord 
of creatures) Visvasvzg (creator of all) Hirazya- 
garbha, Satyam (truth) Praxa (breath) Hamsa 
(ragasa); SAstvz (ruler), Vishzu, Narayaza (sat- 
tvika); Arka, Savitzz, Dhatzz (supporter), Vidha- 
tvz* (creator), Samrag (king), Indra, Indu (moon). 
He is also he who warms, the Sun, hidden by the 
thousand-eyed golden egg, as one fire by another. 
He is to be thought after, he is to be sought after. 
Having said farewell to all living beings, having 
gone to the forest, and having renounced all sen- 
suous objects, let man perceive the Self* from his 
own body. 

‘(See him)* who assumes all forms, the golden, 
who knows all things, who ascends highest, alone in 
his splendour, and warms us; the thousand-rayed, 

! M. reads karyakarazakarmavinirmuktam. 

2 Nirupakhyam, rightly translated by Cowell by ‘without a 
predicate, and rendered by the commentator by apramaya, i. e. not 
to be measured, not to be classed, i. e. without a predicate. 

3 I have translated this in accordance with a well-known passage, 
quoted by the commentator from the Brzhadaramyaka, rather than 
in accordance with his own interpretation. 

t M. leaves out vidhata. 

5 Instead of the peculiar Maitrayazi reading, svaf& sarirad, M. 
reads svas AAarirad. 

6 The oneness of the Sun and the Breath is proclaimed in the 
following verse of the Prasra Upanishad I, 8. 

312 MAITRAYANA-BRAHMANA-UPANISHAD. 

who abides in a hundred places, the spirit of all 
creatures, the Sun, rises !.' 

9. Therefore he who by knowing this has become 
the Self of both Breath and Sun, meditates (while 
meditating on them) on his Self, sacrifices (while sacri- 
ficing to them) to his Self—this meditation, the mind 
thus absorbed in these acts, is praised by the wise. 

Then let him purify the contamination of the mind 
by the verse UZZZish/opahatam, &c?: ‘Be it food 
left, or food defiled by left food, be it food given by 
a sinner, food coming from a dead person, or from 
one impure from childbirth, may the purifying power 
of Vasu, may Agni, and the rays of Savitvz, purify 
it, and all my sin*.' 

First (before eating) he surrounds (the offered 
food) with water (in rincing his mouth*) Then 
saying, Svaha to Praza, Svaha to Apana, Svaha 
to Vyana, Svaha to Samana, Svaha to Udana, he 
offers (the food) with five invocations (in the fire 
of the mouth). What is over, he eats in silence, 
and then he surrounds (the food) once more after- 
wards with water (rincing the mouth after his meal). 
Having washed let him, after sacrificing to himself, 
meditate on his Self with these two verses, Prazo 
'gni£ and Visvo 'si, viz. ‘May the Highest Self as 
breath, as fire (digestive heat), as consisting of the 

^ Here ends the M. manuscript, with the following title: iti 
sriyaguss&akhayam Maitrayaziyabrahmazopanishadi shash/ZaA pra- 
pathakah. Samapta. 

? In the following paragraphs the taking of food is represented 
as a sacrifice offered by the Self to the Self (&tmayaganarupam 
bhoganam, p. 106, l. 13). 

? Several words have been inserted in this verse, spoiling the 
metre. 

* See Khand. Up. V, 2. 

VI PRAPATHAKA, IO. 313 

five vital airs, having entered (the body), himself 
satisfied, satisfy all, he who protects all? ‘Thou 
art Visva (all), thou art Vaisvanara (fire), all that is 
born is upheld by thee; may all offerings enter into 
thee ; creatures live where thou grantest immortality 
to all? He who eats according to this rule, does 
not in turn become food for others. 

IO. There is something else to be known. There 
is a further modification of this Self-sacrifice (the 
eating), namely, the food and the eater thereof. This 
is the explanation. The thinking Purusha (person), 
when he abides within the Pradhana (nature), is the 
feeder who feeds on the food supplied by Prakzzti 
(nature). The elemental Self! is truly his food, his 
maker being Pradhana (nature?) Therefore what 
is composed of the three qualities (guzas) is the food, 
but the person within is the feeder. And for this the 
evidence is supplied by the senses. For animals 
spring from seed, and as the seed 1s the food, there- 
fore it is clear that what is food is Pradhana (the 
seed or cause of everything) Therefore, as has 
been said, the Purusha (person) is the eater, Pra- 
krzti, the food; and abiding within it he feeds. All 
that begins with the Mahat? (power of intellect) and 
ends with the Viseshas (elements*), being developed 
from the distinction of nature with its three qualities, 
is the sign (that there must be a Purusha, an intel- 

1 See before, III, 3. 

? This is very doubtful, in fact, unintelligible. The ccmmentator 
says, asya bhutatmanaA karta pradhanaZ pfirvokta, so 'pi bhogya 
ity artha’. 

5 Technical terms, afterwards adopted by the Sankhya philo- 
sophers. 

* Professor Cowell observes that the term visesha, as here applied 
to the five gross elements, occurs in the Sankhya-karika, ver. 38. 

514 MAITRAYANA-BRAHMANA-UPANISHAD. 

ligent subject) And in this manner the way with 
its fourteen steps has been explained’. (This is 
comprehended in the following verse): ‘This world 
is indeed the food, called pleasure, pain, and error 
(the result of the three qualities); there is no laying 
hold of the taste of the seed (cause), so long as there 
is no development (in the shape of effect). And in 
its three stages also it has the character of food, as 
childhood, youth, and old age; for, because these 
are developed, therefore there is in them the cha- 
racter of food?. 

And in the following manner does the perception 
of Pradhana (nature) take place, after it has become 
manifest :—Intellect and the rest, such as determina- 
tion, conception, consciousness, are for the tasting (of 
the effects of Pradhana). Then there are the five 
(perceptive organs) intended for the (five) objects of 
senses, for to taste them. And thus are all acts of 
the five active organs, and the acts of the five Prazas 
or vital airs (for the tasting of their corresponding 
objects). Thus what is manifest (of nature) is food, 
and what is not manifest is food. The enjoyer of it 
is without qualities, but because he has the quality 
of being an enjoyer, it follows that he possesses 
intelligence. 

As Agni (fire) is the food-eater among the gods, 
and Soma the food, so he who knows this eats food 
by Agni (is not defiled by food, as little as Agni, the 
sacrificial fire). This elemental Self, called Soma 
(food), is also called Agni, as having undeveloped 
nature for its mouth (as enjoying through nature, 
and being independent of it), because it is said, ‘ The 

! Five receptive, five active organs, and four kinds of consciousness. 
? Its very development proves it to be food. Cowell. 

VI PRAPATHAKA, 13. 515 

Purusha (person) enjoys nature with its three quali- 
ties, by the mouth of undeveloped nature. He who 
knows this, is an ascetic, a yogin, he is a performer 
of the Self-sacrifice (see before). And he who does 
not touch the objects of the senses when they intrude 
on him, as no one would touch women intruding into 
an empty house, he is an ascetic, a yogin, a performer 
of the Self-sacrifice. 

II. This is the highest form of Self, viz. food, for 
this Praza (this body) subsists on food. If it eats 
not, it cannot perceive, hear, touch, see, smell, taste, 
and it loses the vital airs! For thus it is said: 

‘If it eats, then in full possession of the vital airs, 
it can perceive, hear, touch, speak, taste, smell, see.’ 
And thus it is said: 

‘From food are born all creatures that live on 
earth; afterwards they live on food, and in the end 
(when they die) they return to it?’ 

12. And thus it is said elsewhere: Surely all these 
creatures run about day and night, wishing to catch 
food. The sun takes food with his rays, and by it 
he shines. These vital airs digest, when sprinkled 
with food. Fire flares up by food, and by Brahma 
(Pragapati), desirous of food, has all this been made. 
Therefore let a man worship food as his Self. For 
thus it is said: | 

‘From food creatures are born, by food they grow 
when born; because it is eaten and because it eats 
creatures, therefore it is called food (annam). 

I3. And thus it is said elsewhere: This food is 
the body of the blessed Vishzu, called Visvabhzzt 
(all-sustaining). Breath is the essence of food, mind 
of breath, knowledge of mind, joy of knowledge. He 

1 Khand. Up. VII, 9, 1. ? Taitt. Up. II, 2. 

316 MAITRAYANA-BRAHMANA-UPANISHAD, 

who knows this is possessed of food, breath, mind, 
knowledge, and joy. Whatever creatures here on 
earth eat food, abiding in them he, who knows this, 
eats food. Food has been called undecaying, food has 
been called worshipful; food is the breath of animals, 
food is the oldest, food has been called the physician. 

14. And thus it has been said elsewhere: Food 
is the cause of all this, time of food, and the sun is 
the cause of time’. The (visible) form of time is 
the year, consisting of twelve months, made up of 
Nimeshas (twinklings) and other measures. Of the 
year one half (when the sun moves northward) 
belongs to Agni, the other to Varuza (when the 
sun moves southward). That which belongs to 
Agni begins with the asterism of Magha and ends 
with half of the asterism of .Sravish/Za, the sun 
stepping down northward. That which belongs to 
Soma (instead of Varuza) begins with the asterism 
(of Aslesha), sacred to the Serpents, and ends with 
half of the asterism of .SSravish/Zaa, the sun stepping 
up southward. And then there (are the months) 
one by one, belonging to the year, each consisting 
of nine-fourths of asterisms (two asterisms and a 
quarter being the twelfth part of the passage of the 
sun through the twenty-seven Nakshatras), each 
determined by the sun moving together with the 
asterisms. Because time is imperceptible by sense, 
therefore this (the progress of the sun, &c.) is its 
evidence, and by it alone is time proved to exist. 
Without proof there is no apprehension of what is 
to be proved; but even what is to be proved can 
become proof, for the sake of making itself known, 

* As food depends on time, therefore time is praised, which again 
depends on the sun, which is a form of the Self. 

VI PRAPATHAKA, 16. 317 

if the parts (the twinklings, &c.) can be distinguished 
from the whole (time!). For thus it is said: 

'As many portions of time as there are, through 
them the sun proceeds: he who worships time as 
Brahman, from him time moves away very far. And 
thus it is said : 

‘From time all beings flow, from time they grow ; 
in time they obtain rest; time is visible (sun) and 
invisible (moments). 

15. There are two forms of Brahman, time and 
non-time. That which was before the (existence of 
the) sun is non-time and has no parts. That which 
had its beginning from the sun is time and has 
parts. Of that which has parts, the year is the 
form, and from the year are born all creatures; 
when produced by the year they grow, and go again 
to rest in the year. Therefore the year is Praga- 
pati, is time, is food, is the nest of Brahman, is Self. 
Thus it ts said : 

‘Time ripens and dissolves all beings in the great 
Self, but he who knows into what time itself is dis- 
solved, he is the knower of the Veda.’ 

16. This manifest time is the great ocean of 
creatures. He who is called Savitz? (the sun, as be- 
getter) dwells in it, from whence the moon, stars, 
planets, the year, and the rest are begotten. From 
them again comes all this, and thus, whatever of 
good or evil is seen in this world, comes from them. 
Therefore Brahman is the Self of the sun, and a 
man should worship the sun under the name of time. 
Some say the sun is Brahman, and thus it is said : 

1 Thus, the commentator says, the existence of the lamp can be 
proved by the light of the lamp, as the existence of time is proved 
by what we see, the rising of the sun. ll this is very obscure. 

318 MAITRAYANA-BRAHMANA-UPANISHAD. 

* The sacrificer, the deity that enjoys the sacrifice, 
the oblation, the hymn, the sacrifice, Vishzu, Praga- 
pati, all this is the Lord, the witness, that shines in 
yonder orb.' 

17. In the beginning Brahman was all this. He 
was one, and infinite ; infinite in the East, infinite in 
the South, infinite in the West, infinite in the North, 
above and below and everywhere infinite. East and 
the other regions do not exist for him, nor across, nor 
below, nor above. The Highest Self is not to be 
fixed, he is unlimited, unborn, not to be reasoned 
about, not to be conceived. He is like the ether 
(everywhere), and at the destruction of the universe, 
he alone isawake. Thus from that ether he wakes 
all this world, which consists of thought only, and 
by him alone is all this meditated on, and in him it 
is dissolved. His is that luminous form which 
shines in the sun, and the manifold light in the 
smokeless fire, and the heat which in the stomach 
digests the food. Thus it is said: 

‘He who is in the fire, and he who is in the heart, 
and he who is in the sun, they are one and the 
same.’ 

He who knows this becomes one with the one. 

18. This is the rule for achieving it (viz. concen- 
tration of the mind on the object of meditation): 
restraint of the breath, restraint of the senses, medi- 
tation, fixed attention, investigation, absorption, these 
are called the sixfold Yoga?. When beholding by 

1 Brahman used as neuter, but immediately followed by eko 
'nantaZ, &c. 

2 After having explained the form of what is to be meditated on 
and the mode of meditation, the Upanishad now teaches the Yoga 
which serves to keep our thoughts in. subjection, and to fix our 
thoughts on the object of meditation. See Yoga-Sfitras II, 29. 

VI PRAPATHAKA, 20. 319 

this Yoga, he beholds the gold-coloured maker, the 
lord, the person, Brahman, the cause, then the sage, 
leaving behind good and evil, makes everything 
(breath, organs of sense, body, &c.) to be one in 
the Highest Indestructible (in the pratyagatman or 
Brahman). And thus it is said: 

‘As birds and deer do not approach a burning 
mountain, so sins never approach those who know 
Brahman.’ 

19. And thus it is said elsewhere: When he who 
knows has, while he is still Praza (breath), restrained 
his mind, and placed all objects of the senses far 
away from himself, then let him remain without any 
conceptions. And because the living person, called 
Praxa (breath), has been produced here on earth 
from that which is not Praza (the thinking Self), 
therefore let this Praza merge the Praza (himself) 
in what is called the fourth’. And thus it is said: 

* What is without thought, though placed in the 
centre of thought, what cannot be thought, the 
hidden, the highest—let a man merge his thought 
there: then will this living being (linga) be without 
attachment *,’ 

20. And thus it has been said elsewhere: There 
is the superior fixed attention (dharaza) for him, 
viz. if he presses the tip of the tongue down the 
palate and restrains voice, mind, and breath, he sees 

1 The fourth stage is meant for the thinking Self, the earlier 
stages being waking, slumbering, and sleep. 

? Professor Cowell offers two renderings of this difficult passage: 
‘This which is called praza, i.e. the individual soul as characterised 
by the subtil body, will thus no longer appear in its separate indi- 
viduality from the absence of any conscious subject; or, this subtil 
body bearing the name of intellect will thus become void of all 
objects.’ 

320 MAITRAYANA-BRAHMANA-UPANISHAD. 

Brahman by discrimination (tarka). And when, 
after the cessation of mind’, he sees his own Self, 
smaller than small, and shining, as the Highest Self?, 
then having seen his Self as the Self, he becomes 
Self-less, and because he is Self-less, he is without 
limit, without cause, absorbed in thought. This is 
the highest mystery, viz. final liberation. And thus 
it is said: 

‘Through the serenity of the thought he kills all 
actions, good or bad; his Self serene, abiding in the 
Self, obtains imperishable bliss.’ 

21. And thus it has been said elsewhere: The 
artery, called Sushumna, going upwards (from the 
heart to the Brahmarandhra), serving as the passage 
of the Praza, is divided within the palate. Through 
that artery, when it has been joined by the breath 
(held in subjection), by the sacred syllable Om, and 
by the mind (absorbed in the contemplation of Brah- 
man), let him proceed upwards?, and after turning 
the tip of the tongue to the palate, without* using 
any of the organs of sense, let greatness perceive 
greatness". From thence he goes to selflessness, 
and through selflessness he ceases to be an enjoyer 
of pleasure and pain, he obtains aloneness (kevalatva, 
final deliverance). And thus it is said: 

! The commentator remarks that this process is called Lambika- 
yoga, and the state produced by it Unmant or Unmanibhava ; see 
amanibhava, in VI, 34, ver. 7. 

2 I should have preferred to translate atmanam 4tmana pasyati 
by ‘he sees his Self by his Self,’ but the commentator takes a slightly 
different view, and says: itthambhave tritiya ; paramatmaruperza 
pasyati. 

3 Cf. Katha Up. VI, 16; Prasfia Up. III, 6 (p. 277). 

* If we read samyogya we must follow the commentator in trans- 
lating by ‘uniting the senses with the praza and the manas.’ 

5 Let the Self perceive the Self. 

VI PRAPATHAKA, 22. 321 

' Having successively fixed the breath, after it had 
been restrained, in the palate, thence having crossed 
the limit (the life), let him join himself afterwards 
to the limitless (Brahman) in the crown of the 
head.’ | 

22. And thus it has been said elsewhere: Two 
Brahmans have to be meditated on, the word and 
the non-word. By the word alone is the non-word 
revealed. Now there is the word Om. Moving 
upward by it (where all words and all what is meant 
by them ceases), he arrives at absorption in the 
non-word (Brahman). This is the way, this is the 
immortal, this is union, and this is bliss. And as 
the spider, moving upward by the thread, gains free 
space, thus also he who meditates, moving upward 
by the syllable Om, gains independence. 

Other teachers of the word (as Brahman) think 
otherwise. They listen to the sound of the ether 
within the heart while they stop the ears with the 
thumbs. They compare it to seven noises, like 
rivers, like a bell, like a brazen vessel, like the. 
wheels of a carriage, like the croaking of frogs, like 
rain, and as if a man speaks in a cavern. Having 
passed beyond this variously apprehended sound, and 
having settled in the supreme, soundless (non-word), 
unmanifested Brahman, they become undistinguished 
and undistinguishable, as various flavours of the 
flowers are lost in the taste of honey. And thus - 
it is said« | | 

‘Two Brahmans are to be known, the word-Brah- 
man and the highest Brahman; he who is perfect in 
the word-Brahman attains the highest Brahman?’ 

1 Cf. Mahabharata XII, 8540; Sarvadarsana-sangraha, p. 147; 
Cowell’s Translation, p. 271. 

[15] Y 

322 MAITRAYANA-BRAHMANA-UPANISHAD. 

23. And thus it has been said elsewhere: The 
syllable Om is what is called the word. And its end 
is the silent, the soundless, fearless, sorrowless, joy- 
ful, satisfied, firm, unwavering, immortal, immovable, 
certain (Brahman), called Vishzu. Let him worship 
these two, that he may obtain what is higher than 
everything (final deliverance). For thus it is said: 

‘He who is the high and the highest god’, by 
name Om-kara, he is soundless and free from all 
distinctions : therefore let a man dwell on him in 
the crown of his head.’ 

24. And thus it has been said elsewhere: The 
body is the bow, the syllable Om is the arrow, its 
point is the mind. Having cut through the dark- 
ness, which consists of ignorance?, it approaches that 
which is not covered by darkness?*. Then having 
cut through that which was covered (the personal 
soul), he saw Brahman, flashing like a wheel on fre, 
bright like the sun, vigorous, beyond all darkness, 
that which shines forth in yonder sun, in the moon, 
in the fire, in the lightning* And having seen 
him, he obtains mone And thus it has been 
said: | | 

‘Meditation | is directed to the highest Being 
(Brahman) within, and (before) to the objects (body, 
Om, mind) ; thence the indistinct understanding be- 
comes distinct. 

And when the works of the mind are dissolved, 

1 The commentator takes deva as devaZ, though the accent is 
against it ; see Schroeder, Uber die Maitrayant Sazhita, p. 9, l. 11. 

3 Should it not be, ‘darkness is the mark?’ 

3 Atamavish/a, explained as an irregular compound, atama-&vish- 
fam, tama-Avesanarahitam. — 

* Cf. Bhagavadgita XV, 12. 

VI PRAPATHAKA, 26. 323 

then that bliss which requires no other witness, that 
is Brahman (Atman), the immortal, the brilliant, that 
is the way, that is the (true) world.’ 

25. And thus it has been said elsewhere: He 
who has his senses hidden as in sleep, and who, 
while in the cavern of his senses (his body), but no 
longer ruled by them, sees, as in a dream, with the 
purest intellect, Him who is called Pranava (Om), 
the leader}, the bright, the sleepless, free from old 
age, from death, and sorrow, he. is himself also 
called Prazava, and becomes a leader, bright, sleep- 
less, free from old age, Eom death, and sorrow. 
And thus it is said: 

‘Because in this manner fis joins ches Prana 
(breath), the Om, and this Universe in its manifold 
forms, or because they join themselves (to him), 
therefore this poe of meditation) is called Yoga 
(joining). 

The oneness of breath, T and senses, and 
then the surrendering of all E that is 
called Yoga.’ 

26. And thus it has also been said elsewhere : 
As a sportsman, after drawing out the denizens of 
the waters with a net, offers them (as a sacrifice) 
in the fire of his stomach, thus are these Prazas 
(vital airs), after they have been drawn out with the 
syllable Om, offered in the faultless fire (Brahman) 2. 

Hence he is like a heated vessel (full of clarified 
butter); for as the clarified butter in the heated 
vessel lights up, when touched with grass and sticks, 
thus does this being which is called Not-breath 
(Atman) light up, when touched by the Prazas (the 

3 Cf. VI, 4. ? Cf, Svetasvatara-upanishad III, ro. 
Y 2 

324 MAITRAYANA-BRAHMANA-UPANISHAD. 

vital airs). And that which flares up, that is the 
manifest form of Brahman, that is the highest place 
' of Vishzu?, that is the essence of Rudra. And this, 
dividing his Self in endless: ways, fills all these 
worlds. And thus it is said: 

' As the sparks from the fire, and as the rays from 
the sun, thus do his Prazas and the rest in proper order 
again and again proceed from him here on earth?.' 

27. And thus it has also been said elsewhere: 
This is the heat of the highest, the immortal, the 
_ incorporeal Brahman, viz. the warmth of the body. 

And this body is the clarified butter (poured on it, 
by which the heat of Brahman, otherwise invisible, is 
lighted up). Then, being manifest, it is placed in 
the ether (of the heart). Then by concentration they 
thus remove that ether which is within the heart, so 
that its light appears, as it were*. Therefore the 
worshipper becomes identified with that light with- 
out much delay. As a ball of iron, if placed in the 
earth, becomes earth without much delay, and as, 
when it has once become a clod of earth, fire and 
smiths have nothing more to do with that ball of 
iron, thus does thought (without delay) disappear, 
together with its support5. And thus it is said: 

! As the fire which exists invisibly in'a heated vessel becomes 
visible when the heated vessel is touched with sticks dipped in 
butter, thus the Atman in the body appears only when the Prazas 
are diffused in it. Or, as the clarified butter, heated together with 
the vessel, lights up grass that comes in contact with it, so does this 
Atman (called Not-breath), by heating its two bodies which are 
pervaded by the reflections of the thinker, light up everything 
brought in contact with it, viz. the world. 

2 See Katha Up. III, 9. * See VI, 31; Brih. Up. II, 1, 1o. 

* The light was always there, but it seems then only to appear. 

? The commentator explains this differently. He says that the 

VI PRAPATHAKA, 28. 

‘The shrine which consists of the ether in the 
heart, the blissful, the highest retreat, that is our 
own, that is our goal, and that is the heat and bright- 
ness of the fire and the sun.’ 

28. And thus it has been said elsewhere: After 
having left behind the body, the organs of sense, and 
the objects of sense (as no longer belonging to us), 
and having seized the bow whose stick is fortitude 
and whose ‘string is asceticism, having struck down 
also with the arrow, which consists in freedom from 
egotism, the first guardian of the door of Brahman— 
(for if man looks at the world egotistically, then, 
taking the diadem of passion, the earrings of greed 
and envy, and the staff of sloth, sleep; and sin, and 
having seized the bow whose string is anger, and 
whose stick is lust, he destroys with the arrow 
which consists of wishes, all beings)—having there- 
fore killed that guardian, he crosses by means of the 
boat Om to the other side of the ether within the 
heart, and when the ether becomes revealed (as 
Brahman), he enters slowly, as a miner seeking 
minerals in a mine, into the Hall of Brahman. 
After that let him, by means of the doctrine of his 
teacher, break through the shrine of Brahman, which 
consists of the four nets (of food, breath, mind, know- 
ledge, till he reaches the last shrine, that of blessed- 
ness and identity with Brahman). Thenceforth pure, 

similes are intended to show how, as soon as the impediment is 
removed, the worshipper obtains his true form, i.e. becomes Brah- 
man. Afterwards he explains Aittam, thought, by the individual 
thinker, and declares that he vanishes together with the thought, 
which forms the asraya, the place, or the upadhi, the outward form. 
Or again, he says that the Zitta, the mind, vanishes with its outward 
sign, viz. the thoughts and imaginations. 

326 MAITRAYANA-BRAHMANA-UPANISHAD. 

clean, undeveloped, tranquil, breathless, bodiless, 
endless, imperishable, firm, everlasting, unborn and 
independent, he stands on his own greatness!, and 
having seen (the Self), standing in his own greatness, 
he looks on the wheel of the world as one (who has 
alighted from a chariot) looks on its revolving wheel. 
And thus it is said : 

‘If a man practises Yoga for six months and is 
thoroughly free (from the outer world), then the 
perfect Yoga (union), which is endless, high, and 
hidden, is accomplished. 

But if a man, though well enlightened (by instruc- 
tion), is still pierced by (the guzas of) passion and 
darkness, and attached to his children, wife, and 
house, then perfect Yoga is never accomplished2.’ 

29. After he had thus spoken (to Brzhadratha), 
Sakayanya, absorbed in thought, bowed before him, 
and said: ‘O King, by means of this Brahma-know- 
ledge have the sons of Pragapati (the Valakhilyas) 
gone to the road of Brahman. Through the practice 
of Yoga a man obtains contentment, power to endure 
good and evil, and tranquillity. Let no man preach 
this most secret doctrine to any one who is not his 
son or his pupil’, and who is not of a serene mind. 
To him alone who is devoted to his teacher only, 
and endowed with all necessary qualities, may he 
communicate it*, 

1 See Maitr. Up. II, 4; VI, 31. | 

? This would seem to have been the end of the dogue between 
Pragapati and the Valakhilyas, which, as related by Sakayanya to 
King Brzhadratha, began in II, 3. See, however, VII, 8. 

3 Svet. Up. VI, 22 (p. 267); Brih. Up. VI, 3, 12. 

* Here may have been the end of a chapter, but the story of 
Sakayanya and Brzhadratha is continued to VI, 30. 

VI PRAPATHAKA, 30. ao 

30. Om! Having settled down in a pure place 
let him, being pure himself, and firm in goodness, 
study the truth, speak the truth, think the truth, 
and offer sacrifice to the truth’. Henceforth he has 
become another; by obtaining the reward of Brah- 
man his fetters are cut asunder, he knows no hope, 
no fear from others as little as from himself, he 
knows no desires ; and having attained imperishable, 
infinite happiness, he stands blessed in the true 
Brahman, who longs for a true man*% Freedom 
from desires is, as it were, the highest prize to be 
taken from the best treasure (Brahman). For a 
man full of all desires, being possessed of will, 
imagination, and belief, is a slave; but he who is 
the opposite, is free. 

. Here some say, it is the Guza? (i. e. the so-called 
Mahat, the principle of intellect which, according to 
the Sankhyas, is the result of the Guzas or qualities), 
which, through the differences of nature (acquired in 
the former states of existence), goes into bondage to 
the will, and that deliverance takes place (for the Guza) 
when the fault of the will has been removed. (Butthis 
is not our view), because (call it guza, intellect, buddhi, 
manas, mind, ahankara, egotism, it is not the mind 
that acts, but) he sees by the mind (as his instru- 
ment), he hears by the mind; and all that we call 

1 The truth or the true are explained by, (1) the book which 
teaches the Highest Self; (2) by Brahman, who is to be spoken 
about ; (3) by Brahman, who is to be meditated on; (4) by Brah- 
man, who is to be worshipped in thought. . 

2 I have translated this according to the commentary, but I should 
prefer to read satyabhilashizi. 

3 The passages within brackets had to be added from the com- 
mentary in order to make the text intelligible, at least according to 
Ramatirtha's views. 

328 MAITRAYANA-BRAHMANA-UPANISHAD. 

desire, imagination, doubt, belief, unbelief, certainty, 
uncertainty, shame, thought, fear, all that is but 
mind (manas). Carried along by the waves of the 
qualities, darkened in his imaginations, unstable, 
fickle, crippled, full of desires, vacillating, he enters 
into belief, believing I am he, this is mine, and he 
binds his Self by his Self, as a bird with a net! 
Therefore a man, being possessed of will, imagina- 
tion, and belief, is a slave, but he who is the oppo- 
site is free. For this reason let a man stand free 
from will, imagination, and belief—this is the sign of 
liberty, this is the path that leads to Brahman, this 
is the opening of the door, and through it he will go 
to the other shore of darkness. Alldesires are there 
fulfilled. And for this they quote a verse: 

* When the five instruments of knowledge stand 
still together with the mind, and when the intellect 
does not move, that is called the highest state?."' 

Having thus said, Sakayanya became absorbed in 
thought. Then Marut (i. e. the King Bzzhadratha);, 
having bowed before him and duly worshipped him, 
went full of contentment to the Northern Path, for 
there is no way thither by any side-road. This is 
the path to Brahman. Having burst open the 
solar door, he rose on high and went away. And 
here they quote : 

‘There are endless rays (arteries) for the Self 
who, like a lamp, dwells in the heart: white and 
black, brown and blue, tawny and reddish‘. 

! See III, 2. ? See the same verse in Ka/Za Up. VI, 10. 
* See before, II, 1. 
t See Prasfia Up. I, 10,‘ But those who have sought the Self by 

penance, abstinence, faith, and knowledge, gain by the Northern 
Path Aditya, the sun.’ 

5 See KAand. Up. VIII, 6, 1. 

VI PRAPATHAKA, 31. 329 

One of them (the Sushumna) leads upwards, 
piercing the solar orb: by it, having stepped beyond 
the world of Brahman, they go to the highest path. 

The other hundred rays! rise upwards also, and 
on them the worshipper reaches the mansions be- 
longing to the different bodies of gods. 

But the manifest rays of dim colour which lead 
downwards, by them ‘a man travels on and on help- 
lessly, to enjoy the fruits of his actions here.’ 

Therefore it is said that the holy Aditya (sun) is 
the cause of new births (to those who do not worship 
him), of heaven (to those who worship him as a god), 
of liberty (to those who worship him as Brahman)?. 

31. Some one asks: 'Of what nature are those 
organs of sense that go forth (towards their ob- 
jects)? Who sends them out here, or who holds 
them back ?' 

Another answers: ‘ Their nature is the Self; the 
Self sends them out, or holds them back; also the 
Apsaras (enticing objects of sense), and the solar 
rays (and other deities presiding over the senses). 

Now the Self devours the objects by the five rays 
(the organs of sense); then who is the Self? 

He who has been defined by the terms pure, clean, 
undeveloped, tranquil?, &c., who is to be apprehended 
independently by his own peculiar signs. That sign 
of him who has no signs, is like what the pervading 

1 A similar verse, but with characteristic variations, occurs in the 
Khand. Up. VIII, 6, 6, and in the Kasha Up. VI, 16. 

? Here ends the story of Sakayanya, which began I, 2, and was 
carried on through chap. VI, though that chapter and the seventh 
are called Khilas, or supplements, and though the MS. M. also ends, 
as we saw, with the eighth paragraph of the sixth chapter. 

3 See before, II, 4 VI:1? 

320 MAITRAYANA-BRAHMANA-UPANISHAD. 

heat is of fire, the purest taste of water; thus say 
some! It is speech, hearing, sight, mind, breath ; 
thus say others? It is intellect, retention, remem- 
bering, knowledge; thus say others?*. Now all these 
are signs of the Self in the same sense in which here 
on earth shoots are the signs of seed, or smoke, light, 
and sparks of fire. And for this they quote*: 

' As the sparks from the fire, and as the rays from 
the sun, thus do his Prazas and the rest in proper 
order again and aud proceed from him here. on 
earth.’ 

32. From this very Self, Eid s akhi his Self, 
come forth all Prazas (speech, &c.), all worlds, all 
Vedas, all gods, and all beings ; its Upanishad (revela- 
tion) is that it is ‘the true of the true.’ Now as froma 
fire of green wood, when kindled, clouds of smoke come 
forth by themselves (though belonging to the fire), 
thus from that great Being has been breathed forth 
all this which is the Azg-veda, the Yagur-veda, the 
S4ma-veda, the Atharvaugirasas (Atharva-veda), the 
Itihasa (legendary stories), the Puraza (accounts of 
the creation, &c.), Vidya (ceremonial doctrines), the 
Upanishads, the .Slokas (verses interspersed in the 
Upanishads, &c.), the Sutras (compendious state- 
ments), the Anuvyakhyanas (explanatory notes), the 
V yakhyanas (elucidations)*—all these things are his. 

1 See Svet. Up. VI, 13. 2 See Ken. Up. 2. 

? See Ait. Up. III, 2. Here we find dhr#ti (holding), smriti 
(remembering), prag£anam (knowledge), but not buddhi. Pra- 
gfianam seems the right reading, and is supported by M. 

* See before, VI, 26. 

5 Revelation is here the rendering of Upanishad, upanigama- 
yitrztvat sakshadrahasyam, and the true (sattya) is explained first by 
the five elements, and then by that which is their real essence. 

* See KZand. Up. VI, 1. The explanations given of these literary 

VI PRAPATHAKA, 33. 331 

33. This fire (the Garhapatya-fire) with five 
bricks is the year. And its five bricks are spring, 
summer, rainy season, autumn, winter; and by them 
the fire has a head, two sides, a centre, and a tail. 
This earth (the Garhapatya-fire) here is the first 
sacrificial pile for Pragapati, who knows the Purusha 
(the Virag). It presented the sacrificer to Vayu 
(the wind) by lifting him with the hands to the sky. 
That Vayu is Praza (Hirazyagarbha). 

Praza is Agni (the Dakshizagni-fire), and its bricks 
are the five vital breaths, Praxa, Vyana, Apana, 
Samana, Udana; and by them the fire has a head, 
two sides, a centre, and a tail. This sky (the 
Dakshizagni-fhre) here is the second sacrificial pile 
for Pragapati, who knows the Purusha. It pre- 
sented the sacrificer to Indra, by lifting him with 
the hands to heaven. That Indra is Aditya, the 
sun. EOS y : 7 
That (Indra) is the Agni (the Ahavantya-fire), 
and its bricks are the A77, the Yagush, the Saman, 
the Atharvangirasas, the Itihasa, and the Puraza; 
and by them the fire has a head, two sides, a tail, 
and a centre. This heaven (Ahavantya-fire) is the 
third sacrificial pile for Pragapati, who knows the 

titles are on the whole the same as those we had before in similar 
passages. What is peculiar to Ramatirtha is that he explains 
Upanishad by such passages as we had just now, viz. its Upanishad 
is that it is the true of the true. The Slokas are explained as 
verses like those in VI, 19, akittam fittamadhyastham. The 
Sutras are explained as comprehensive sentences, such as II, 2, 
ayam vava khalv atma te. Anuvyakhyanas are taken as explana- 
tions following on the Sftra in II, 2, beginning with atha ya 
esho&AAvasavishzambhanena. The Vyakhyanas are taken as fuller 
statements of the meaning contained in the Sftra, such as the 
dialogue between the Valakhilyas and Kratu. 

332 MAITRAYANA-BRAHMANA-UPANISHAD. 

Purusha. With the hands it makes a present of 
the sacrificer to the Knower of the Self (Pragapati) ; 
then the Knower of the Self, lifting him up, pre- 
sented him to Brahman. In him he becemes full 
of happiness and joy. | 

34. The earth is the Garhapatya-fire, the sky the 
Dakshiza-fire, the heaven the Ahavantya-fire; and 
therefore they are also the Pavamana (pure), the 
Pavaka (purifying), and the Su4i (bright)!. By this 
(by the three deities, Pavamana, Pavaka, and Sufi) 
the sacrifice (of the three fires, the Garhapatya, 
Dakshiwa, and Ahavantya) is manifested. And be- 
cause the digestive fire also is a compound of the 
Pavamana, Pavaka, and SuAi, therefore that fire is 
to receive oblations, is to be laid with bricks, is to 
be praised, and to be meditated on. The sacrificer, 
when he has seized the oblation, wishes? to perform 
his meditation of the deity: 

‘The gold-coloured bird abides in the heart, and 
in the sun—a diver bird, a swan, strong in splendour ; 
him we worship in the fire.’ 

Having recited the verse, he discovers its mean- 
ing, viz. the adorable splendour of Savitzz (sun) is to 
be meditated on by him who, abiding within his 
mind, meditates thereon. Here he attains the place 
of rest for the mind, he holds it within his own Self. 
On this there are the following verses: 

(1) As a fire without fuel becomes quiet in its 

1 Epithets of Agni, the sacrificial-fire, pavamaza applying o 
the Garhapatya-fire, pavaka to the Dakshiza-fire, and sufi to the 
Ahavaniya-fire. The construction of the sentence, however, is 
imperfect. 

? This means, he ought to perform it. 

VI PRAPATHAKA, 34. 333 

place!, thus do the thoughts, when all activity ceases, 
become quiet? in their place. 

(2) Even ina mind which loves the truth® and has 
gone to rest in itself there arise, when it is deluded 
by the objects of sense, wrongs resulting from former 
acts*, 

(3) For thoughts alone cause the round of births*; 
let a man strive to purify his thoughts. What a man 
thinks, that he is: this is the old secret*. 

(4) By the serenity of his thoughts a man blots out 
all actions, whether good or bad.. Dwelling within 
his Self with serene thoughts, he obtains imperish- 
able happiness. 

(5) If the thoughts of a man were so fixed on 
Brahman as they are on the things of this world, 
who would not then be freed from bondage? 

(6) The mind, it is said, is of two kinds, pure or 
impure; impure from the contact with lust, pure 
when free from lust". 

(7) When a man, having freed his mind from 
sloth, distraction, and vacillation, becomes as it were 
delivered from his mind?, that is the highest point. 

(8) The mind must be restrained in the heart till 
it comes to an end;—that is knowledge, that is 
liberty: all the rest are extensions of the ties? (which 
bind us to this life). 

! Dies in the fireplace. 2 M. read$ upasamyati twice. 

* M. reads satyakaminaZ. 

* The commentator inserts a negative. 

5 M. reads samsarah. 

€ This is very like the teaching of the Huanoa I,1. 

7 Cf. Ind. Stud. II, 60. Brahmavindu Up. v. 1, where we read 
kamasankalpam, as in MS. M. 

8 See note to VI, 20. 

° M. reads mokshasea and seshas tu. The commentator says that 

334 MAITRAYANA-BRAHMANA-UPANISHAD. 

(9) That happiness which belongs to a mind which 
by deep meditation has been washed! clean from all 
impurity and has entered within the Self, cannot be 
described here by words ; it can be felt by the inward 
power only?. | 

(10) Water in water, Rei in fire, ee in Bier no 
one can distinguish them; likewise a man whose 
mind has entered (till it cannot be distinguished 
from the Self), attains liberty. 

(11) Mind alone is the cause of bondage and 
liberty for men; if attached to the world, it becomes 
bound; if free from the world, that is liberty °. 

Therefore those who do not offer the Agnihotra 
(as described above), who do not lay the fires (with 
the bricks, as described above), who are ignorant (of 
the mind being the cause of the round of births), who 
do not meditate (on the Self in the solar orb) are 
debarred from remembering the ethereal place of 
Brahman. Therefore that fire is to receive obla- 
tions, is to be laid with bricks, is to be ELE to 
be meditated on. 

35*. Adoration to Agni, the dweller on earth, who 
remembers his world. Cran that Wong to this m 

worshipper ! | 

Adoration to Vayu, the dweller in the sky, ulis 
remembers his world. Grant that world to this thy 
worshipper ! 

this line is easy, but itis so by no means. Professor Cowell translates 
granthavistaraZ by book-prolixity, but this sounds very strange in an 
Upanishad. I am not satisfied with my own translation, but it may 
stand till a better one is found. M. reads grzndhavistaraZ. The 
granthis are mentioned in AAand. Up. VII, 26 ; Kazh. Up. VI, 15. 
1 M. reads nirdhuta. 2 M. reads karameti. 
3 M. reads vishayasaktam muktyai. 
* Next follow invocations to be addressed to the deities. 

VI PRAPATHAKA, 35. 335 

Adoration to Aditya, the dweller in heaven, who 
remembers his world. Grant that world to this thy 
worshipper ! 

Adoration to Brahman, who dwells yea hens: 
who remembers all. Grant all to this thy wor- 
shipper ! 

The mouth of the true (Brahman) is covered with 
a golden lid ; open that, O Pushan (sun), that we may 
go to the true one, who pervades all (Vishzu)'. 

He who is the person in the sun, I am he2. 

And what is meant by the true one is the essence 
of the sun, that which is bright, personal, sexless?; 
a portion (only) of the light which pervades the 
ether; which is, as it were, in the midst of the sun, 
and in the eye, and in the fire. That is Brahman, 
that is immortal, that is splendour. 

That is the true one, a portion (only) of the light 
which pervades the ether, which is in the midst of 
the sun, the immortal, of which Soma (the moon) 
and the vital breaths also are offshoots: that is 
Brahman, that is immortal, that is splendour. 

That is the true one, a portion (only) of the light 
which pervades the ether, which in the midst of the 
sun shines as Yagus, viz. as Om, as water, light, 
essence, immortal, Brahman, BhuZ, BhuvaZ, Svar, 
Om. 

‘The ieod the bright, the swan, bound 

1 The verse occurs in a more original form in Tal. Up. 15. 

2 The commentator adds iti after aham. 

* Khand. Up. I, 6,6; Svet. Up. V, 10. 

t The eight feet are explained as the eight regions, or aroga and 
the rest. The swan is the sun. -The three threads are the three 
Vedas; see Al. Up. I, r; Ind. Stud. IX, 11—ashfapadam sukir 
hamsam trisutram mazim avyayam, dvivartamanam taigasaiddham 

336 MAITRAYANA-BRAHMANA-UPANISHAD. 

with three threads, the infinitely small, the imperish- 
able, blind for good and evil, kindled with gat ne 
who sees him, sees everything.’ 

A portion (only) of the light which pervades the 
ether, are the two rays rising in the midst of the 
sun. That is the knower! (the Sun), the true one. 
_ That is the Yagus, that is the heat, that is Agni 
(fire), that is Vayu (wind), that is breath, that is 
water, that is the moon, that is bright, that is im- 
mortal, that is the place of Brahman, that is the ocean 
of light. In that ocean the sacrificers are dissolved? 
like salt, and that is oneness with Brahman, for all 
. desires are there fulfilled. And here they quote: 

‘Like a lamp, moved by a gentle wind, he who 
dwells within the gods shines forth. He who knows 
this, he is the knower, he knows the difference (be- 
tween the high and the highest Brahman); having 
obtained unity, he becomes identified with it. 

They who rise up in endless number, like spray 
drops (from the sea), like lightnings from the light 
within the clouds in the highest heaven, they, when 
they have entered into the light of glory (Brahman), 
appear like so many flame-crests in the track of fire.’ 

36. There are two manifestations of the Brahma- 
light : one is tranquil, the other lively. Of that which 
is tranquil, the ether is the support; of that which is 
lively, food. Therefore (to the former) sacrifice must 
be offered on the house-altar with hymns, herbs, 
ghee, meat, cakes, sthalipaka, and other things; to 
the latter, with meat and drinks (belonging to the 
great sacrifices) thrown into the mouth, for the mouth 

sarvah pasyan na pasyati. Here-the eight feet are explained as the 
five elements, manas, buddhi, and ahankara. 
! Savit for savitzz, ? Viiyante for viliyante. 

VI PRAPATHAKA, 37. 337 

is the Ahavantya-fire ; and this is done to increase 
our bodily vigour, to gain the world of purity, and 
for the sake of immortality. And here they quote: 

‘Let him who longs for heaven, offer an Agni- 
hotra. By an Agnish/oma he wins the kingdom 
of Yama; by Uktha, the kingdom of Soma; by 
a Shodasin-sacrifice, the kingdom of Surya; by an 
Atiratra-sacrifice, the kingdom of Indra; by the 
sacrifices beginning with the twelve-night sacrifice 
and ending with the thousand years' sacrifice, the 
world of Pragapati. 

As a lamp burns so long as the vessel that holds 
the wick is filled with oil, these two, the Self and the 
bright Sun, remain so long as the egg (of the world) 
and he who dwells within it hold together.’ 

37. Therefore let a man perform all these cere- 
monies with the syllable Om (at the beginning) Its 
splendour is endless, and it is declared to be three- 
fold, in the fire (of the altar), in the sun (the deity), 
in the breath (the sacrificer). Now this is the channel 
to increase the food, which makes what is offered in 
the fire ascend to the sun. The sap which flows 
from thence, rains down as with the sound of a 
hymn. By it there are vital breaths, from them 
there is offspring. And here they quote: 

‘The offering which is offered in the fire, goes to 
the sun; the sun rains it down by his rays; thus food 
comes, and from food the birth of living beings.' 

And thus he said: 

‘The oblation which is properly thrown on the 
fire, goes toward the sun; from the sun comes rain, 
from rain food, from food living beings!.' 

| ' ! See Manu III, 76. 
[15] Z 

338 MAITRAYANA-BRAHMANA-UPANISHAD. 

38. He who offers the Agnthotra breaks through the 
net of desire. Then, cutting through bewilderment, 
never approving of anger, meditating on one desire 
(that of liberty), he breaks through the shrine of 
Brahman with its four nets, and proceeds thence to 
the ether. For having there broken through the 
(four) spheres of the Sun, the Moon, the Fire, and : 
Goodness, he then, being purified himself, beholds 
dwelling in goodness, immovable, immortal, inde- 
structible, firm, bearing the name of Vishzu, the 
highest abode, endowed with love of truth and om- 
niscience, the self-dependent Intelligence (Brahman), 
standing in its own greatness. And here they quote: 

‘In the midst of the sun stands the moon, in 
the midst of the moon the fire, in the midst of fire 
goodness, in the midst of goodness the Eternal.’ 

Having meditated on him who has the breadth 
of a thumb within the span (of the heart) in the 
body, who is smaller than small, he obtains the 
nature of the Highest ; there all desires are fulfilled. 
And on this they quote: | 

' Having the breadth of a thumb within the span 
(of the heart) in the body, like the flame of a lamp, 
burning twofold or threefold, that glorified Brahman, 
the great God, has entered into all the worlds. Om! 
Adoration to Brahman! Adoration!’ 

SEVENTH PRAPATHAKA. 

I. Agni, the Gayatra (metre), the Trivzzt (hymn), 
the Rathantara (song), the spring, the upward breath 
(praza), the Nakshatras, the Vasus (deities)—these 
rise in the East; they warm, they rain, they praise! 

! Other MSS. read sruvanti, which seems better. 

VII PRAPATHAKA, 4. 339 

(the sun), they enter again into him (the sun), they 
look out from him (the sun). He (the sun) is incon- 
ceivable, without form, deep, covered, blameless, 
solid, unfathomable, without qualities, pure, brilliant, 
enjoying the play of the three qualities, awful, not 
caused, a master-magician!, the omniscient, the 
mighty, immeasurable, without beginning or end, 
blissful, unborn, wise, indescribable, the creator of 
all things, the self of all things, the enjoyer of all 
things, the ruler of all things, the centre of the centre 
of all things. 

2. Indra, the Trishzubh (metre), the Paz£adasa 
(hymn), the Bzzhat (song), the summer, the through- 
going breath (V yana), Soma, the Rudras—these rise 
in the South ; they warm, they rain, they praise, they 
enter again into him, they look out from him. He 
(the sun) is without end or beginning, unmeasured, 
unlimited, not to be moved by another, self-depend- 
ent, without sign, without form, of endless power, 
the creator, the maker of light. : 

3. The Maruts, the Gagatt (metre), the Saptadasa 
(hymn), the Vairupa (song) the rainy season, the 
downward breath (apana), Sukra, the Adityas—these 
rise in the West; they warm, they rain, they praise, 
they enter again into him, they look out from him. 
That is the tranquil, the soundless, fearless, sorrow- 
less, joyful, satisfied, firm, immovable, immortal, 
eternal, true, the highest abode, bearing the name 
of Vishzu. | 

4. The Visve Devas, the Anush/ubh (metre), the 
Ekavizsa (hymn), the Vairaga (song), the autumn, 
the equal breath (samana), Varuza, the Sadhyas— 
these rise in the North; they warm, they rain, they 

! See VII, 11, abhidhyatur vistzztir iva. 
Z2 

340 MAITRAYANA-BRAHMANA-UPANISHAD. 

praise, they enter again into him, they look out from 
him. ` He is pure within, purifying, undeveloped, 
tranquil, breathless, selfless, endless. 

s. Mitra-Varuzau, the Pankti (metre), the Triza- 
vatrayastriesa (hymns), the .Sakvara-raivata (songs), 
the snowy and dewy seasons, the out-going breath 
(udana), the Angiras, the Moon—these rise above ; 
they warm, they rain, they praise, they enter again 
into him, they look out from him—who is called 
Prazava (Om), the leader, consisting of light, without 
sleep, old age, death, and sorrow. 

6. Sani (Saturn), Rahu and Ketu (the ascending 
and descending nodes), the serpents, Rakshas, Yak- 
shas, men, birds, sarabhas, elephants, &c.—these rise 
below ; they warm, they rain, they praise, they enter 
again into him, they look out from him—he who is 
wise, who keeps things in their right place, the centre 
of all, the imperishable, the pure, the purifier, the 
bright, the patient, the tranquil. 

7. And he is indeed the Self, smaller (than small) 
within the heart, kindled like fire, endowed with 
all forms. Of him is all this food, within him all 
creatures are woven, That Self is free from sin!, 
free from old age, from death and grief, from hunger 
and thirst, imagining nothing but what it ought to 
imagine, and desiring nothing but what it ought 
to desire. He is the highest lord, he is the supreme 
master of all beings, the guardian of all beings, a 
boundary keeping all things apart in their right 
places?, He the Self, the lord, is indeed Sambhu, 
Bhava, Rudra, Pragapati, the creator of all, Hirazya- 

! See KAand. Up. VIII, 7, 1. 
2 See Khand. Up. VIII, 4, 1, where we find setur vidhritir esham 
lokanam. 

VII PRAPATHAKA, 8. 341 

garbha, the true, breath, the swan, the ruler, the 
eternal, Vishzu, Narayaza. And he who abides in 
the fire,and he who abides in the heart, and he who 
abides in the sun, they are one and the same. To 
thee who art this, endowed with all forms, settled in 
the true ether, be adoration ! 

8. Now follow the impediments in the way of know- 
ledge, O King?! This is indeed the origin of the net 
of bewilderment, that one who is worthy of heaven 
lives with those who are not worthy of heaven. That 
is it. Though they have been told that there is a 
grove before them, they cling to a small shrub. And 
others also who are always merry, always abroad, 
always begging, always making a living by handi- 
work; and others who are begging in towns, per- 
forming sacrifices for those who are not allowed to 
offer sacrifices, who make themselves the pupils of 
Sudras, and .Sudras who know the sacred books; 
and others who are malignant, who use bad language, 
dancers, prize-fighters, travelling mendicants, actors, 
those who have been degraded in the king's service ; 
and others who for money pretend that they can lay 
(the evil influences) of Yakshas, Rakshasas, ghosts, 
goblins, devils, serpents, imps, &c.; and others who 
falsely wear red dresses?, earrings, and skulls; and 
others who wish to entice by the jugglery of false 
arguments, mere comparisons and paralogisms, the 
believers in the Veda—with all these he should not 

1 This king is not meant for Brzhadratha. 

? 'This refers to people who claim the privileges and licence of 
Sannyasins without having passed through the discipline of the 
preceding asramas. As this was one of the chief complaints made 
against the followers of Sakyamuni, it might refer to Buddhists, 
but it ought to be borne in mind that there were Buddhists before 
Buddha. 

342 MAITRAYANA-BRAHMANA-UPANISHAD. 

live together. They are clearly thieves, and unworthy 
of heaven. And thus it is said: 

‘The world unsettled by the paralogisms of the 
denial of Self, by false comparisons and arguments, 
does not know what is the difference between Veda 
and philosophy’.’ 

9. Brzhaspati, having become Sukra, brought forth 
that false knowledge for the safety of Indra and for 
the destruction of the Asuras. By it they show that 
good is evil, and that evil is good. They say that we 
ought to ponder on the (new) law, which upsets the 
Veda and the other sacred books?. Therefore let no 
one ponder on that false knowledge: it is wrong, it 
is, as it were, barren. Its reward lasts only as long 
as the pleasure lasts, as with one who has fallen from 
his caste. Let that false science not be attempted, 
for thus it is said : 

(1) Widely opposed and divergent are these two, 
the one known as false knowledge, the other as 
knowledge. I (Yama) believe NaZiketas to be 
possessed by a desire of knowledge; even many 
pleasures do not move thee °. 

(2) He who knows at the same time both the 
imperfect (sacrifice, &c.) and the perfect knowledge 
(of the Self), he crosses death by means of the 
imperfect, and obtains immortality by means of the 
perfect knowledge‘. 

(3) Those who are wrapped up5 in the midst of 

1 If we translate thus, the use of vidya for vrzthA vidya is 
unusual; if we follow the commentary, we should have to trans- 
late, he does not know the Veda and the other knowledge. 

* All this may refer to Buddhists, but not by necessity, for there 
were heretics, such as Bz7haspati, long before Sakyamuni. 

3 See Kash. Up. II, 4. * See Vag. Up. 11. 

* Vesh/yamanaZ, instead of vartamanaA. 

VII PRAPATHAKA, II. 343 

imperfect knowledge, fancying themselves alone wise 
and learned, they wander about floundering and de- 
ceived, like the blind led by the blind?. 

IO. The gods and the demons, wishing to know 
the Self, went into the presence of Brahman (their 
father, Pragapati)*. Having bowed before him, they 
said: ‘O blessed one, we wish to know the Self, 
do thou tell us. Then, after having pondered a 
long while, he thought, these demons are not yet 
self-subdued?; therefore a very different Self was 
told to them (from what was told to the gods). On 
that Self these deluded demons take their stand, 
clinging to it, destroying the true means of salva- 
tion (the Veda), preaching untruth. What is untrue 
they see as true, as in jugglery. Therefore, what is 
taught in the Vedas, that is true. What is said in 
the Vedas, on that the wise keep their stand. 
Therefore let a Brahman not read what is not of 
the Veda, or this will be the result. 

II. This is indeed the nature of it (the Veda), the 
supreme light of the ether which is within the heart. 
This is taught as threefold, in the fire, in the sum, 
in the breath. This is indeed the nature of it, the 
syllable Om, of the ether which is within the heart. 
By it (by the Om) that (light) starts, rises, breathes 
forth, becomes for ever the means of the worship and 
knowledge of Brahman. That (light, in the shape of 

1 See Ka/7. Up. II, 5. 

2 Cf. Khand. Up. VIII, 8. 

* I prefer ayatatmanaZ, though it is the easier (sugama) reading, 
as compared with anyatatmanaZ, those who seek for the Self else- 
where, namely, in the body. It seems to me to refer to those who, 
without having subdued the passions of their body, wish to obtain 
the knowledge of the Highest Self. Possibly, however, the author 
may have intended a climax from anyatatmana/ to anyatamam. 

344 MAITRAYANA-BRAHMANA-UPANISHAD. 

Om), when there is breathing, takes the place of the 
internal heat, free from all brightness'. This is like 
the action of smoke; for when there is a breath of 
air, the smoke, first rising to the sky in one column, 
follows afterwards every bough, envelopes it and takes 
its shape. It is like throwing salt (into water), like 
heating ghee*, The Veda comes and goes like the 
dissolving view of a master-magician*. And here 
they quote: 

‘Why then is it called “like lightning ?" Because 
as soon as it comes forth (as Om) it lights up the 
whole body. Therefore let a man worship that 
boundless light by the syllable Om. 

(1) The man in the eye who abides in the right eye, 
he is Indra, and his wife abides in the left eye’. 

(2) The union of these two takes place in the cavity 
within the heart, and the ball of blood which is there, 
that is indeed the vigour and life of these two. 

(3) There is a channel going from the heart so far, 
and fixed in that eye; that is the artery for both of 
them, being one, divided into two. 

1 This seems to be the meaning adopted by the commentator ; 
but may it not be, sending forth brightness? 

? The simile is not very clear. The light of Brahman is below 
the sphere of fire in the body. That sphere of fire becoming 
heated, the light of Brahman becomes manifest. When the fire 
has been fanned by the wind of sonant breath, then the light of 
Brahman, embodying itself in the wind and the fire, manifests itself 
first in the mere sound of Om, but afterwards, checked by throat, 
palate, &c., it assumes the form of articulate letters, and ends by 
becoming the Veda in its many branches. 

? As these are outwardly changed, without losing their nature, 
thus the light of Brahman, though assuming the different forms of 
the Veda, remains itself. 

* See before, VII, 1. 

5 See Brzh. Up. IV, 2, 2, 3, where Indra is explained as Indha. 

VII PRAPATHAKA, II. 345 

(4) The mind excites the fire of the body, that fire 
stirs the breath, and the breath, moving in the chest, 
produces the low sound. 
(5) Brought forth by the touch of the fire, as with 
a churning-stick, it is at first a minim, from the 
minim it becomes in the throat a double minim; 
on the tip of the tongue know that it is a treble 
minim, and, when PA they call it the alphabet 
(e'rotxeta) t}. 
(6) He who sees this, does not see death, nor dis- 
ease, nor misery, for seeing he sees all (objectively, 
not as affecting him subjectively); he becomes all 
everywhere (he becomes Brahman). 
(7) There is the person in the eye, there is he 
who walks as in sleep, he who is sound asleep, and 
he who is above the sleeper: these are the four 
conditions (of the Self), and the fourth is greater 
than all ?. 
(8) Brahman with one foot moves in the three, 
and Brahman with three feet is in the last. 
1 A comparison of this verse with Aand. Up. VII, 26, shows 
the great freedom with which the wording of these ancient verses 
was treated. Instead of— | 
Na pasyan mrztyum pasyati na rogam nota duZkhatam, 
Sarvam hi pasyan pasyati sarvim apnoti sarvasaZ, 

the Ahandogya Up. reads: 
Na pasyo mrityum pasyati na rogam nota duZkhatam, 
Sarvam ha pasya pasyati sarvam &pnoti sarvasah. 

2 The conditions here described are sometimes called the Visva 
(Vaisvanara), Taigasa, Pragna, and Turiya. In the first state the 
Self is awake, and enjoys the world; in the second he sees every- 
thing as in a dream; in the third the two former states cease, and 
he is absorbed in sleep; in the fourth he becomes again the pure 
Self. In the first state the Self has the disguise of a coarse material 
body; in the second of a subtle material body ; in the third its 

disguise is potential only; in the fourth it has no disguise, either 
potential or realised. 

346 MAITRAYANA-BRAHMANA-UPANISHAD, 

It is that both the true (in the fourth condition) 
and the untrue (in the three conditions) may have 
their desert, that the Great Self (seems to) become 
two, yes, that he (seems to) become two}. 

! * By reason of the experience of the false and the true, the great 
Soul appears possessed of duality.’ Cowell.