AN ENaUSH lEANSLATION

01 '

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA

Vol. 11.

NIDANA-STHANA TO KALPA-STHANA.

AN ENGLISH TEANSUTION

OF

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA

WITH

A I TLI, AND fT)MPRrJll':NS]\ K fN'l RODUC'I'JON, A DDITIONAL 1'EXTS,
Dlin’l'.RlLN'l' IUlXDINOs, NOTRS, COMI’ARATIVE VIEWS,

INDEX, DI.DSSARY AND PLATES

IN THREE VOLUMES

KDITKD l;Y

KAVIRAJ KUNJALAL BHISHAGRATNA, M.R.A.S.

Vol. II.

NTOANA-sTIIANA, S'AK1RA*sTI 1ANA, CIIIKITSITA-
STIIANA AND KALAl'A-STI lANA.

CALCUTTA :

I’ni'iLISllEl) BY 'I'JIK AUTHOR,

NO. 10, KASin GHOSE'S LANE

191 1

Rtilh/s Kcscrvcti

PRINTED BY M. BIIATTACHARYYA, AT THE BHARAT MIHIR PRESS,
25, ROY BAG AN STREET, CALCUTTA.

PREFACE.

It is " with mingled feelings of pain and
pleasure that we now place before the public the
Second Volume of our English Translation of
the Susruta Samhita. The arduous task of com-
piling a connected and succint history of any
part whatever, of the ancient Hindu System
of Medicine — requires greater leisure and more
extensive reading than we 'can lay any pre-
tension to. Years of patient study and constant
discourse with our sainted preceptor the late
lamented Mahamahopadhyaya Kaviraj Dwaraka
Nath Sen, Kaviratna, that refulgent link of the
golden chain of the Dlianvantaric succession,
have enabled us, however, to grasp the leading
facts, and during the last few years we have
worked continuously, in moments snatched from
the practice of an anxious profession that knows
no respite, to arrange these facts in their present
form. It breaks our heart to record the sad
departure of our venerable Acharyya from this
sublunary sphere to a land “from whose bourne
no traveller e’er returns.’^

It is hardly necessary for us to reply to those
critics who, through their ignorance of the original

( 2 )

Sanskrit works, persist in describing Ayurveda
as an empirical system destitute of Anatomy,
Physiology or Pathology in any scientific sepse.

It behoves us, however, in this preface to meet
some of the charges which have been brought
against us.

Exception has been taken to our n6t includ-
ing in the opening stanza the usual invocation
to the Supreme Self (for a successful completion
of the work) although it has found its way into
almost all the printed editions of the work extant.

Now the stanza referred to finds no place in
the various manuscript copies of the original
work which are in our possession, or on which
we have been able to lay our hands. The work
was first put into print by the late Dr, Madhu-
sudan Gupta and we believe that it was only
in this printed edition that the benedictory
address in question appeared for the first time,
and that it has since crept, by the process of
circulation, into subsequent printed editions.

In this opinion we are supported by the fact,
that in none of the various commentaries and anno-
tations on the Susruta Samhita is any mention
made of the line in question, whereas, had it been
the opefning stanza of the original work, it would
certainly have received at least a passing notice
at the hands of the commentators, however easy
or simple it might have been. Further, were it
composed by Susruta himself, it would not have

(’ 3 ) ’

been in the form in which we find it in the printed
editions. The ancient sages used invariably
the auspicious expression “ ^Tcl* ” or
and fhe like, when commencing a work and
never invoked any particular deity for a happy
termination of their undertaking.* These are
the lieaspns which have led us to omit the
passage in our present translation.

Another objection raised by a certain section
of tHe community is that we should not have at
all undertaken to translate the work into the
English language. Their contention is that the
Ayurveda, being an integral portion of the
Eternal V edas, should, op no account, be
rendered into a Mlechchha Bhdshd and thus made
accessible to the public at large, irrespective
of caste or creed.

Such an objection, at this time of the day, is,
to say the least, most puerile ! Truth is truth, and
latitudes and longitudes are not its boundary
lines. The V edas themselves have been trans-
lated into many European languages. To keep
the truths promulgated by our ancient sages con-
fined within the coio.rie of the privileged classes
and thus to deprive the educated public of the

* Thus

^i) sgngrrenH:”— Charaka Samhita

— Kandda Vaiseshika Sutra
(r) Vedanta Sutra.

( 4 )

benefit of such truths would certainly be a
sacrilege. In giving preference to English as
the medium of translation we have been actuated
by more reasons than one. *

It cannot be gainsaid that English has now
become almost the lingua franca of the world,
and to disseminate the ancient wisdom, pf 'India
throughout the world, we could not have seiectfed
a medium better than the English language.

Besides this, we have been actuated by the
hope of drawing the direct attention of our be-
nign Government to the scientific value of our
system of Medicine by the adoption of such a
procedure.

Here we must not stop without e.xpressing
our sincere and hearty thanks to our learned and
valued friends Kaviraj Jogindranath Sen, M.A.,
Vidyabhusana, Kaviraj Jnanendranath Sen, B.A.,
Kaviratna and Professor Satyendranath Sen,
M. A., Vidyavagisa, who have rendered us material
help in the publication of this volume. We must
freely admit that but for the active and continued
co-operation of the above-named gentlemen wc
could not have brought out this volume so
promptly and successfully. Our thanks are also
due to Dr, S. Sanyal, B.Sc., L.M.S. for his kind
H'elp, to Dr. S. N. Goswami, B.A., L.M.S. for
his kindly supplying us with materials for writing
the I Introduction, and to our readers for their
kind encouragement.

C 5 )

In conclusion, we implore our readers to
excuse the errors of omission and commission
which are inevitable in the execution of such a
huge work, more especially when the author is
encumbered with the responsible duties of his
profession involving, as they do, the life and
death of persons entrusted to his care.

lo, Kashi Giiosue’s Lane,^

Calcutta. KuNjA Lal Biiisii.aGRATNA.

NovemheVi JQii. '

INTRODUCTION.

In tiie introduction of the first volume of our translation
of the Susruta-Samhita we have attempt-
ed to place before the public a correct
interpretation of Vayu, Pitta and Kapha,
the falsely so-called humours of the
body* and it is a great pleasure to us,
that our pronouncement has been very kindly accepted. In
the introduction of the present volume we would draw the
attention of the readers to the fact that Ayurveda is not at
all an encyclopaedic work, — an Ency^clopcedia of the Indian

* Berdoe says: — “What is known as the Humoral Pathology formed
the most essential part of the system of the Dogmatics. Humoral
Pathology explains all diseases as caused by the mixture of the four
cardinal humours, vh.y the blood, bile, mucus or phlegm and water. Hip-
pocrates first leaned towards it, but it was Plato who developed it. The
stomach is the common source of all these humours. When diseases
develop, they attract humours. The source of the bile is the liver, of the
mucus the head, of the water the spleen. Bile causes catarrhs and rheu-
matism, dropsy depends on the spleen.*^

Be it observe 1 that among the humours of Hippocrates there is no
place for Vala although in point of fact both his Physiology and Patho-
logy are to be traced to the “Tri-dhdtu” of Ayurveda. The secret of
this anomaly is that the theory of Vata was found to be a complicated one
and Ilipprocates, not being able to comprehend its original import, left
it out and cautiously introduced, in its stead, his own theory of “water”.
Sowe firiil “Humoral Pathology is not of Indian origin ; neUher it is the
same which the Indian Rishis of Rigveda developed under the name of
Tri-dhatu.” It is simply an imitation of Susruta who introduced blood
( fourth factor in the genesis of diseases. But the bor-

rower, in his interpretation of Susruta, had made a mess of it. He retain-
ed blood, but substituted “water’’ in place of Vdta, the most important
of the tbree» for reasons best known to him«

'Ayurveda is not
an Encyclopfledia
of ancient medical
works, but a Trea
tise on Biology.

n

INTRODUcl'ION.

system of Medicine in all its departments, but it is the
Science of Life entire.

Though it is customary and convenient to group apart
such phenomena as are termed mental and such ofchem as
are exhibited by rpen in society, under the heads of Psycho-
logy and Sociology, yet it must be allowed that there are no
absolute demarcations in Nature, corresponding to them,
and so in the entire Science of Life, psychology ?nd sociology
are inseparably linked with Anatomy and Physiology, i.ay,
more, with Pathology and Hygiene and above all with
Treatment. In short the Biological Sciences must deal with
whatever phenomena are manifested by living matter in
whatever condition it is placed. Life in health ( ) as

well as Life in disease ( ), therefore, fall within the

scope of Biology— even life exhibited by man in Society
( ) is not exempted from it.

m ^ ii i

In calling Ayurveda, therefore, the entire Science of Life,

Ayurveda, the prejudice

entire Science of of our own, but we rely solely on

facts and figures, and these, when
closely studied, will lead any one to arrive at the same
conclusion, not unlike our own and to interpret Ayurveda
as a collection of Biological Sciences in all departments.
In the first place, for the guidance of our readers, we will
mention that the name Ayurveda itself is a strong evidence
• T» sA favour of its being called the Science

ce^tfereof:— Life. Secondly, we will refer to

self the arrangement of the subject-matter

« in the Sarira-sthdna which is popu-

larly belived to be the anatomical portion of the book, as

tending to the same conclusion. In
II. The arrange- , iv/r -j r

ment of the sub- this section, chapters on Midwifery

ject*matters. Management of Infants follow

close to the heels of those on Anatomy and Physiology, and

IN-ftiODUCTION.

these latter again are immediately preceded by chapters
on Psychology. This intermixture is certainly an anomaly

and can in no wise be satisfactorily explained unless we

have tg look upon these as general truths of Biology,
elucidated by the Introduction of special truths exclu-
sively collected from the science of medicine —

To call it Descriptive Anatomy or Physiology,

in the modern sense of the term is simply ridiculous. The

• •

absence of any reference to brain and

want of Descrip* spinal cord, to pancreas and heart, in
tive Anatomy and ^ ^ ^ ‘

Physiology in the a book of Anatomy and Physiology is
sthanaitself^—^^^ unpardonable and in the Sarira-sthana
we feel this absence almost to despon-
dency. Moreover, in western medical science, Grey’s Ana
tony and Kirke’s Physiology, for instance, in their bulk,
exceeds, each, more than a thousand of pages and to present
to the public, under the same nartie less than half a dozen
of pages, as the result of Indian wisdom, is certainly a very
miserable contrast — a contrast that is calculated to inspire
no admiration, but, on the contrary, to generate in scientific
minds an universal apathy, at least an apathy towards all that
is connected with the system of Indian Medicine In order
to save our venerable Rishis from this disastrous plight, we
announce here foremost of all, that our beloved Science
of Ayurveda is by no means an Encyclopaedic work, but
distinctly possesses every characteristic
Eviden- marks the Science of Biology.

I The definition The very name Ayurvada indicates
^^Same as Life as ibat it is actually a science of Ayus

defined by Mr. Her- j^^d the word Ayus is used here in the
bert Spencer.

same sense as Mr. Herbert Spencer
understands by his remarkable definition of Life.

In his masterly classification Mr. Herbert Spencer has,
in his Biology, given, indeed, the first place to Anatomy and
Physiology, but still it is divested of any elaborate chapters
dealing with the subjects.

B

Positive Eviden-
ces.

I The definition
of Ayus.

Same as Life as
defined by Mr. Her-
bert Spencer.

iv

INTRODUCflON.

In the science of Life a short reference to the structures
of the body or its functions is quite sufficient to illustrate
its principles, and if we fail to find therein any discourse on
the descriptive Anatomy and Physiology, we still ^consider
that there is nothing amiss.

But unfortunately the fate of Ayurveda is otherwise.
Though the very name indicates that it is Biology pure and
simple, still it is denounced for its dificiencies in Anatomy

r •

and Physiology, and doomed for ever. , ^

Sanskrit words are notorious for their confusion of
meanings, but, as regards Ayurveda there exists no difference
of opinion, at least, so far as the first word is concerned.
Ayus is Ayus everywhere in Ayurveda and it is the only fault
our venerable Rishis may be reasonably charged with, that
they did not put themselves into any great trouble to
explain Ayus^ but, on the contrary, unlike scientific men,
misspent their energy !o ascertain the significance of the
insignificant portion of Ayurveda, that is the meanings of the
root in the light of Grammar.

The scientific ear, ever unsatisfied with these grammati-
cal eruditions, has ultimately thrust an Encyclopaedic value
upon what is properly speaking, a book of Biology. Of course,
there is a marked difference between the two. An ordinary
treatise on Biology deals with the general truths of life,
and does not represent, by way of illustrations, all its special
truths, nor their practical sides, but so far as Ayurveda is
concerned, the general truths of Biology are thrown into the
background and the special truths, gleaned exclusively from
the science of medicine, are given great prominence

), so much so, that it is now regarded
as a systgm of Medicine and Surgery which has neither
Biology, nor Anatomy, nor Physiology, nor Pathology — but
is a systematised Empiricism or Quackery. This is certainly
a great misfortune. Apart from the name, the arrangement
of the subject, to which we have just referred, at least, in
the section of Sarira-sthana (the falsely so-called Anatomy of

INTIODUCTION.

V

the Hindus), — is a direct contradiction to its bieng considered
as an Encyclopaedic work. The existence of the chapters on
midwifery and management of infants in the same, following
* immediately the chapters on Anatomy, serves as a. strong
additional evidence thereof. It is an anomaly no doubt,
that Midwifery has been offered a place in the section of
• Anatomy, but the confusion does not

poratingJMidwifery get at all confounded, if we are led to

into this Aitartomi- believe that the science of generation
cal stcticxn*

of a superior race (if we are at all
permitted to use the term) forms, indeed, an important depart*
ment of Practical Biology.

From whatever standpoint we look to the question, we
find there are grounds to lead any one to pronounce in
our favour and to come to the conclusion at which we
now venture to arrive. Besides these two important facts,
we now cite the following passage as
a strong internal evidence in favour of
our view. Maharshi Punarvasu, after giving us a short table
of the principal structures of the human body, remarks that
even this reference is considered by many as superfluous,

Reasons for omit- ground, that an acquaintance

ting Descriptive with the molecular construction of an
Anatomy. organism is qui^e sufficient to help us

as a reliable guide to treatment.

The passage referred to is quoted below : —

Iff T

Internal evidence-

Now we ask the reader if this is not a sufficient evidence,
proving to the hilt, that Ayurveda is nothing but Biology
and that we run no risk of committing a grave omission if
the chapter on Anatomy is wholesale dispensed with from
Ayurveda. For the improvement of this awkward position —
that in the section of Anatomy there should be no Anatomy
—the entire credit is due to Susruta, as he has very wisely
made the suggestion, that a knowledge of the anatomical
structures of the body is of great value, at least so far as it

"INTRODUCIION.

yi

helps the Surgeons and the Surgeons only in their operations.*
But so far as Biology is concerned with medicine, Susruta
does not forget to lay particular stress on the knowledge of
the molecular construction of the body. The fallowing 4
memorable passages actually preached by this renowned
Surgeon, some three hundred centuries ago, still stands as a
model from which modern Science, even in its present ad-
vancement, can draw inspirations.

He says : — • *

1. ^ 1

^ 11

vitIt ^ 1

Tmt It

2. 1

That is, the protean work of the protoplasm in which the
great Self resides cannot be detected t)y the body’s eye ; to
know its work, mind’s eye is necessary, along with the body’s
eye. For acquiring efficiency in Surgery alone, the dissection

* Susruta recommends dissection on dead human bodies and suggests
that it is only required of those who will practise surgery and that students
of medicine can do without it. Herophilus practised dissection on
living bodies and with the object of practising medicine successfully,
but it soon fell into disrepute and did not at all influence the art of
Medicine, He was condemined even hy his own pupil Philinus of cos
who declared that all the Anatomy his vivisecting master had taught him
had not helped him in the least in the cure of his patients. Such
indeed was the fate of vivisection for which Europe now takes pride.

But Susrula’s, Avagharshana is now considered by many as the only
perfect mode of dissection ever known. It is with the help of this
method of*dissection that the layers of epidermis and dermis could be
discovered and blood-vessels with their minute branches could he counted
to be as many as thirty millions. Not only this, but also in the opinion of
several European savants, Susruta still stands as a model of surgery and
European surgery has borrowed many things from Susruta and has yet
many things to karn.

iNTflODUCTION.

vii

of dead body (not of living body as proclaimed by
Herophilus), nay, the Avcigharshana which brings into view

The , knowledge epidermis and the

of the Molecular dermis, the number and branches of
Constriction of the ,, , , , , ,0

body is all that is blood-vessels and nerves that lie embed-

wanted. muscles, etc , is only necessary.

Professor* Michael Foster’s remarks in his article on
Physiology in the Encyclopedia Britannica, to all appearnces,
are^just in the same line, if not identical with our extract,
when he says “that the problem of Physiology, in the future,
is largely concerned in arriving by experiment and infer-
ence, by the mind's eye, and not by the body’s eye alone,
assisted, as that may be, by lenses yet to be introduced
at a knowledge of the molecular construction of the protean
protoplasm ; of the laws according to which it is built up
and the laws according to which it breaks down ; for these
laws when ascertained will clear i!p the mysteries of the
protean work which the protoplasm does.”

In short the knowledge of the molecular construction of
the body is just the thing with which Biology is concerned,
and such is the unanimous verdict both in the East as well as
in the West, in the most ancient and in the most modern
Sciences of the world. Now, if the ‘knowledge of the molecular
construction of the protoplasm, of the laws according to which
it is built up, and the laws according to which it breaks down,’
is all that is necessary for an accurate knowledge of Anatomy
and Physiology, our Ayurveda is pre-eminently the Science
we want.

The following extracts, from Charaka Samhita, are cited
here to prove that we are quite justified in our contention.

I I

2. 'aTTlTHIIIT ^ 1

^ ^ II

That is, the body is composed of molecules and these are
said to be numberless, because no body can count them up.

Viii

INTRODUCTfON.

By their union, they build up the body, and this union is
governed by three Laws, viz., the Laws of Vdyu, Karma and
Swabhava (which are almost equivalent to the three Biological
Laws, i the law of heredity, the law of external relations and
the law of molecular motion caused by Ethereal vibrations
compared witli which nerve-impulses — akin to electric force, —
are grosser and coarser shocks). So far we think *we have
proved that Ayurveda, as a Biology is not defective, if it
contains no descriptive Anatomy and Physiology — des^criptive
in the same sense as Grey’s Anatomy or Kirke’s Physiology is.
Its Histiolrtgy is molecular; its Pathology is molecular ; its
Physiology is molecular. Molecular in every sense is
the Biology of the Hindus. Viilually speaking, Ayurveda is
our Science of Life, and we will presently shew that Lije
and Ayus are identical,

The continuous adjustment of molecules, their successive
breaking down and builefing up within an organised living
body, without destroying its identity, is the definition of Ayus
as suggested by Maharshi Punarvasu.

He says

In another place the same definition is repeated with a
slight modification and in this he enumerates

(consciousness) as the most distinctive
of^yu characteristic of According to this

definition, and

re'er to an organised living body ; and are

identical with processes of breaking down and building up of
the organism without destroying its identity. The idea of
continuous,adjustment is included also in these two words.

So we find, the definition of Ayus, as sugessted by Punarvasu,
includes more than what is proposed in
Mr. Herbert Spencer’s definition o\ Life.
The words ’euft and as explained by the great annotator

Chakrapani, represent two more distinct phases of Life, the

The same as Life.

INTRODUCTION.

IX

first bearing upon the existence in the system of a preven

tive factor of putrefaction, the second

hensivtf than Life pointing to the agent or agents that

as deflyd by Mr. adjust the internal relations by deli-
Herberf Spencer. ■' . , ,

cate touche?, which professor Michael

Foster speaks of as “continuously passing from protoplasm to

protoplasm and compared with which the nervous impulses

^ , (which are perhaps electrical in nature)

Prof. Michael it- /

Foslier gn the The- are grosser and coarser shocks. Now
ory of Sensation. epithet, viz.^ as ex-

plained by Chakrnpani — — furnishes us
with a clue to determine what A\us ( ) actually means.

Our Sacred U[)anishads now come for-

the UpfuSad^s®

place, flinr;/' i e . Ayu and Prana

are one and the same princi[)le. In the second place, “sf: hTw:

^ i.e , Prana and Vayu are identical. In the third place,

rrq xmjii /.e., Vayu is not unlike Ether.

In the fourth place, ^rijT t#”, the primitive fluid

vaccording to Lord Kelvin) is divided into two parts, m., one

without motion, another endued with motion. In the fifth

place, t\e., everything in this world are

waves of this Ether endued with motion. In the sixth place,

Vayu is the universal

store of energy ; in the Physical world it is known by the

name of Vayu ; in the Living world it is called under a

different name and that name is Prana (m^;)

From the above short table we come to know that the

agent that adjusts the internal relations to external relations,

is Aytis and that Ayus is Life, and that Life is a motion of the

great etherial fluid which is known in Sanskrit as ' and that

is the sum of all the various

mitive fluid as de- energies-biological and abiological -

^ed by Lord which under the name of heat, light,
Kelvin. ...

electricity or consciousness, etc., manifest

themselves both in the Physical as well as in the Metaphysical

X

INTRODUCtlON.

world, and that Prana (irm:) is another name of the same force
that, in acting on an aggregated living b('dy, divides itself
into five distinct force?, viz., Prdna, Apdna, Samdna, Uddna,
and Vydna^ and subserves the functions of correlatior^ ( )

and sustentation ( ) and controls oxidation So

Prana continuously helps to adjust, like the main-spring of a
watch, the internal relations to the external relations*. VVe are

indebted to the master mind of Sankara for his able exposi-
tion of the functions of this ma^n-spjjing,

vJ^and^Ether. etherial vibrations

as transformed into the vital force in
an organised body. We quote below what he says about it
in his celeberated commentary on the VedJinta Darsana.

The five divisions
of Vatyu in its ac-
tion on a living
aggregate.

^

That is, the primitive fluid that is endued with motion in its
evolution of Life gets knotted into five divisions, viz, Prdna,
Apdna, Samdna, Uddna and Vydna, and this acting on any
aggregated living matter is called Prana. So what we call
PrAna is not the Vdyu itself, but a particular mode of its
motion. Hence the question of identity and non-identity is a
matter of choice. Shortly speaking, this is the Biology of
the Hindus. This too is the sum and substance into which
(as a department of Biology), Physiology unfolds itself.

This too evidently serves as the line of

Biology forms the

basis Medical

Science developed
as so much col-
lateral branches.

demarcation between and

and From this too

Health and Disease. Hygiene and
Treatment, Psychology and Sociology

have all their origin and start. In fact, Biology forms the basis

upon which the great
Oonclusion.

edifice of the Indian Medical Science, as
a collateral branch, has been developed.
The general truths of Biology a e all

there in the Ayurveda ; but the special truths from medicine

ii4troWction.

XI

have been given so great a prominence that the real character
of the book has been over shadowed and it has been trans-
formed into a Science of Medicine.

* ***

Hydropathy.

With a view to convey to the minds of our readers
an idea of the different branches of the Medical Science
which developed as a'collateral branch of this Rreat Science of
Life, we would Jiere touch upon a few of them in passing.

IVJagnptism had formed its way into the therapeutics of
the ancient Hindus and animal magne-
Magnetism. extensively practised in

India long before they were recognised by Mesmer in Germany
and subsequently by John Elliotson in England.

The Indian writers on Medical Science of the good
old days have described in length the
Hydropathy. medicinal properties of the waters of

the principal rivers, lakes, water falls a"hd mineral springs of
the country that were known at the time and their respec-
tive curative powers as applied to various ailments that
human flesh is heir to. This goes a long way to establish
the fact that Hydropathy was known in India long before
it was even dreamt of in the Western world.

The ancient Hindu sages from time immemorial had
been cognizant of the benefits of

Idassase.

massage and shampooing and taken
to practising them. Whereas, it is but of late that the
advantages of these methods have begun to be appreciated
by the Western Medical School and it no longer hesitates
to acknowledge them as efficacious therapeutic agents.

The Science of begetting healthy and beautiful children,
which is just beginning to receiye atten-
Geneslology. other countries was not un-

Massage.

Genesiology.

known to the ancient Hindus, and Manu in his Mdnava-
dharma-Sdstra has laid down special injunctions which still
form an integral part of the domestic life of the orthodox
section of the community. As a matter of fact, they knew

C

Xll

INTRODUCTION.

that mental impressions of the parents at the time of con-
ception exercise a great influence over the future destiny
of the child in embryo.

Thus we read in the Sastras : — “A woman, though at a
distance, conceives a child of the shape of the person she
loves ardently and thinks of at the time. Just as a tree that
grows is not different from the parent tree whether we plant
a branch or sow ca seed, so the main features of the child
partake of the features of its father, though there^mi^U be
slight changes due to the soil.’*

The subtle soul co-operates with the Manas (the mind) ;
the mind co-operates with the senses ; the senses perceive
objects ; all this takes place in little or no time. The above
is the connection between the soul and objects around us.
What is there which the mind cannot comprehend ? There-

fore, wherever the mind enters, the soul follows it.

‘‘The soul being subtle, whenever it enters another soul,
requires some time and an effort of the mind to know the
latter. The soul, which intensely meditates on an object,
assumes the shape of that object.’’ etc, etc.

In a book entitled Bhoja-Prabandha being a collection
of the anecdotes realating to the reign
Ansesthetics. Bhoja Raja, by Pandita Ballala

there is narrated the detail of an interesting surgical opera-
tion which had been performed on the Raja, who was suf-
fering from an excruciating pain in the head. All the
medical aid obtaining at the same time was availed of, but
in vain and his condition became quite critical when two
brother physicians accidentally arrived in Dhar, who were
duly called in. These physicians, after carefully examining
the patient, held that unless surgically treated no relief
could possibly be afforded to the Royal patient. Accordingly
they administered an anesthetic called Sammohini with

* Baraha Mihir’s Brihat Samhit^ Book, II. Chapter Ixxv-

Verses 1-3.

INTRDDUCTION.

a view to render him insensible and, when completely
under the influence of the drug, they trephined his skull,
removed the malignant portion of the brain, the actual seat
• of the c^omplaint, closed and stitched up the opening and
applied a healing balm to the wound. Then they adminis-
tered a restoration known as Sanjivanl to the patient,
who, thereupon, regained consciousness and felt quite at
ease. This incident (as narrated by Thakur Saheb of
Gondal in hfs Short History of Aryan Medical Science)
goes^to prove that the attendant physician of Buddha, is
^ likewise recorded to have practised cranial surgery writh the
greatest success. Instances of successful cases of abdominal
section are also not rare. Thus it will appear that the ancient
Indians knew and successfully practised surgical operations
which are regarded now-a-days as the greatest triumphs of
modern surgery. T{)e purpose of chloroform in the palmy
days of yore was used to be served by SAmmohini, but
there is hardly a drug known to modern Pharmacopa^ias,
corresponding whith Sanjivani which certainly lessens the
chances of deaths that at present sometimes occur under
aucesthetics.

Let them, who allege that the Hiudu system of the heal-
ing Art is unscientific, now pause and reflect ere they make
such an unwarranted and irresponsible assertion. How can a
system which contains so accurate an account of the unions of
bones and ligaments, anastomoses of nerves, veins and
arteries, etc , and which assures the world of tne existence of
three crores and a lialf of veins and arteries in the human
body giving facts and figures thereof with such mathe-
matical precision, be regarded as being unscientific ?

It is certainly an undeniable fact that one of the^ colossal
achievements of modern Western Medical Science is its
Anatomy; but the point at issue is whether the process of
laying open the structures of the body
Dissection- lancets, is at all a satisfactory

method. For, is it not a fact that the finest and tlie

XIV

' INTRODUq^lON.

minutest arteries of the skin are never disclosed, if the scalpel
is used 80 recklessly to remove the skin all at once and
not allowed to go deeper into the muscles to expose the
minute branches of blood vessels and nerves that maV happe \
to lie embedded therein ? But, on the contrary, look at the
process promulgated by Susruta for demonstrating practical
Anatomy 1 Its originality and perfection beats* hollow all
the known methods, although it was discovered in almost the
pre-historic age. The process prescribed by the Hindu
system is as follows : — Cover a dead body with kusa grass
and place it at the edge of the water of a rivulet. After
three days take it out carefully, and gradually take off
the succsesive layers of the epidermis and dermis and
of the muscles beneath by gently and lightly rubbing it over
with a soft brush. Thus the smallest and the thinnest
arteries, which have by this time swelled and obtained a
distinct existence ar<j made palpable everywhere even to
the minutest.

The process is termed, as we have pointed before, Ava-
gharsbana by Susruta. The Western method might be an
easier and a more off-hand one, but by no means precise.

Though tlie merit of discovering this mode
Avagbarsbana. dissection is due lo Susruta, we are all

blind to it and call Hippocrates the father of Medicine ! It is
generally believed that with a view to further his researches
and perfect his knowledge, it is Hippocrates who inaugurated
the system of dissection of dead human bodies and he did
the work secretly. Credulous people may lend a willing ear
to such assertions but the fact is, that it was not till a century
later that Hirophilus openly resorted to dissection of
human bodies and thereby earned an undying fame in
Europe ^obliterating Susruta’s name for ever, though, virtually
speaking, he (Susruta) was the pioneer of dissection and
figured in the world more than a millenium before the
advent of Hippocrates and over eleven centuries prior lo the
age of Herophilus,

INTRODUCTION.

XV

It would not, perhaps, be out of place here to mention
that Dr. A. F. R. Hoernle, M. A , F. R. S , C. I. E., Ph. D.,
in his recent publication on Hindu Osteology, has proved it
to the^hilt, how systematic, scientific, unerring and exact were
the researches of the ancient Hindus and what a mine of
resplendent truths lay imbedded in them ! We, in our Intro-
duction (5f the first volume of this work, have tried to prove
how very superb, salutary and supremely happy was the theory

of Vayu, f*i\ta, and Kapha promulgated by Susruta. There

• •

we have incidentally mentioned that the Science of Embryo-
logy was not unknown to the Hindu sages. In the present
volume we mean to prove to a point that the main principles
promulgated in the Anatomy, the Physiology and the Patho-
logy of Susruta yield in no way to the principles on those
subjects included by the modern Western Scientists and
investigators. On the other hand, we boldly affirm that in the
theories propounded by Susruta some two thousand years
back there lies a fund of truths which might well throw a flood
of light on tiie field of labour of the modern scientific men of
the West. For is it not a fact that the theories of Vamana
(causing to eject the contents of the stomach by mouth),
Virechana (causing the evacuation of the intestines), Nasya
(causing to inhale through the nose), Afiuvdsana and Asihd-
pana which, in ancient India, had earned the appellation of
Pancha-Karma, and had gained universal prevalence, and were
extensively practised by oriental physicians from time im-
memorial, have, of late, been hailed by the medical authorities
of the day as the most approved and commended mode of
treatment.

Sceptics who care nor to examine and weigh solid facts,

bluntly allege that the Ayurvedic system is not based

«

upon experiment and observation — the key stone of all
true Science, and such being the case its Anatomy, Physio-
logy, Pathology and Therapeutics are all erroneous. 7'he
suggestion, cruel and baseless as it is, originally emanated
from an eminent Indian physician who has earned an qq-

xvi

INTRODUCTION.

enviable reputation by writing a Treatise on Hindu Materia
Medica. He says : — ‘‘It (the Ayurvedic system) is built not
so much upon experiment and observation as upon an
erroneous system of Pathology and Therapeutics. ’ BiSt such
an expression would not stand the light of day. Indeed
none but the ancient Hindu sages did set a high value on
experiment and observation, and where they did flot claim
some occult knowledge or intuition, it is upon these two that
they mainly based all their knowledge.

• •

The Materia Medica of the Hindus is really a marvel.
Its description of the properties of drugs belonging to the
animal, vegetable and mineral kingdoms, and of the articles
of food essential to the maintenance of health and strength,
its selection of the specific dietaries and elimination of what
are prohibited in particular ailments are every day being
found correct. The European preparations of Indian drugs
and diets are corroborative evidence thereof. The theory
adopted by the ancient Hindus as the basis of their investiga-
tion is that every substance, whether regitable or animal,
possesses five properties namely, — Rasa, Guna, Viryya, Vipaka
and Prabhava which lenses alone cannot reveal, nor the body’s
eye after observation and experiment made upon rats and
rabbits. And those who have opportunities of studying and
practising both the Eastern and Western Medical Science
assert that the ancient Medical Science of the Hindus once
reached the highest standard of excellence and perfection in
Materia Medica, Therapeutics and Hygiene and was simply
unrivalled and unapproachable, as it blended Philosophy with
Science— the mind’s eye with the body’s eye.

A dispassionate examination of these facts (and such as
can be multiplied to any extent), will convince an impartial
reader tha*t Ayurveda, as we find it described in Charaka
Samhita and Susruta Samhita, if approached in a spirit of
fairness and enquiry, might reveal the germs of not a few
of the marvellous achievement of the present age in the
domain of Medical Science and afford to the assiduous

INTRODUCTION,

XVll

Student a vast scope and varied materials for comparision

between the Eastern and the Western systems, and render

material help in improving upon the one with the aid of

the othV, and this to the benefit of the suffering humanity at
«

large.

Lastly it is our prayer, that if Western Medical Science
was ever* anywise, directly or indirectly, benefited by the
ancient Medical Science of the Hindus, it is but meet
and fair thal Ihe former should come forward to render all
possible aid to her parent Science, and that as it is almost
dying now for want of aid and succour we look hopefully to
our present benign Government in whose power lies the
means of its complete regeneration.

Vital points (Marmas) in the arm Vital points (Mannas) in the atiu
(inner side). : (outer side),

indicates the points recog:niscd in Juijutsu.

Seti ChajHer VI, S'aiira-S'tiuina.

CONTENTS

NIDANA STHANA.

(Section on Pathology).

CHAPTPR L

Diseases of the Nervous System, etc The action of the VKyu
in its normal state. — The Pr^na Vayu — The Udana Vayu — The Samdna
Vayu — The Vyana Vdyu — The Apana Vdyn. — Descriptions of the nature
of the diseases — When they are localised in the different parts of the system.
— Pathology of Vstta-rakta — Its premonitory symptoms — Its prognosis.
— Spasms — Convulsions — Epilepsy without Convulsions — Epilepsy with
Convulsions. — Hemiplegia — Its Prognosis. — \^ry-neck or Torticollis- —
Facial Paralysis — Its Premonitory .Symptoms — Its Prognosis. — Sciatica.—
Erb\s Paralysis. — Synovitis of the Knee-joints. — Lameness. — V^ta-Kantaka.
— Pada-D^ha — Pada-IIarsha. — Ams'a-s'oshaka. — Ear-ache. — Deafness. —
Nasal voice. — Indistinct Speech. — Tuni — Prati-tuni. — Tympanites. — Vdta-
shthiH. — Pratyashthilii. ... ... ... Pages i — 17,

CHAPTER II.

Haemorrhoids -.—Classifications — Pathology— .Premonitory Symptoms.
— VatajaType — Pittaja Type — Kaphaja Type — Raklaja Type — Sannip^laja
Type — Congenital Type. — Figwarts or condyloinatous growths about the
genitals.— Prognosis. ... ... ... ... 18—24.

CHAPTER III.

Urinary Oalculii t— General /Etiology-.— Premonitory Symptoms. —
Leading Indications. — S'leshmaja As'mari — Pittaja As'mari — Vdtaja As'mari.
— Seminal Concretions. — Supervening Symptoms. — Situation of the Blad-
der. — Plow stones are formed in the Bladder. ... ... 25 30.

ii

CHAPTER IV.

Fistula-'in-ano jvnd Fistular Ulcers : — Classifications — Premonitory
Symptoms.— Derivation of the term Bhagandara.— V^taja Type— Pittaja
Type — Kaphaja Type — Sannipalika Type — Traumatic Type— S'ata-ponaka
Type— Ushtra-griva Type— Parisr^vi Type— S’ambukavarla T^pc— Un- v/
mdrgi Type. — Fistulous Pustules, — Prognosis. ... .<• 3^ 34*

CHAPTER V.

Cutaneous Affections in general Premonitory sjmp'jpms—
.Etiology — Classifications. — -Aruna-Kushtha — Audumbara — Kishya-jihva
— Kapdla Kushtha (Macula). — Kakanaka — Pundarika — Dadru (ring-worm)
— Sthul^rushka — Eka-Kushtha (Ichthyosis) — Charma-dala (Hypertrophy of
the skin) — Visarpa-Kushtha — I’arisarpa-Kushlha— Sidhma— Vicharchika
(Psoriasis) — Vip^dika — Kitima (Keloid) — Pamd (Eczema) — Kachchhu—
Kakasa (Dry Erythema) — Kilasa. — Congenital cause of Kushtha. —
I'rognosis. — How Kushtha becomes contageous. — Some other contagious
diseases enumerated. ... ... ... ... 35 — 42*

CHAPTER VI.

Diseases of the Urinary tracts Pathology— Premonitory Symp-
toms.— General characteristics. — Kaphaja Type — Pittaja Type — Vataja
Type. — Karnes and Symptoms of Kaphaja Meha — Sura-meha — Lavana-
meha — Pishta-meha — Sandra-meha — S'ukra-meha. — Names and Symptoms
of Pittaja Meha — Nila-Meha — Haiidrd-meha — Amla-meha — Ksh^ra-Meha
— Manjishtha-mcha — Uakta-ineha. — Names and Symptoms of Vj^taja Meha
— Sarpir-meha— Vasa-nieha — Kshaiidra-mcha — Hasli-meha. — Supervening
Symptoms.— Kaphaja Types— Pittaja Types — Vataja Types. —Abscesses. —
Carbuncles. — Pimples. — Pustules, etc., due to Prameha. — Prognosis. —
Symptoms of MadhU'Meha. ... ... ... — 49.

CHAPTER VII.

Dropsy with an abnormal condition of the abdomen:— Classifications.—
PredistX)sing causes,— Premonitory Symptoms.— Vdtaj a, Pittaja and
Kaphaja Types — Tridoshaja Type. —Enlargement of the Spleen and the
Liver with dropsy of the Alxlomen.— Vaddha-gudodara— Parisravi-Udara.—
Jalodara (Ascites). — General Characterstics of Dropsy. — Prognosis. 50 — 54.

ili

CHAPTER VIIL

False Presentations and Difficult Labour -.—Causes.— Definition.
— Classifications and Symptoms. — Abortion. — Miscarriage. — Prognosis.
Csesari^ Section. . • ■ . . 55—60.

CHAPTER IX

Vidradhi (Abscess, etc.) : — Definition and Classification — Vataja,
Pitlaja and Kaph<ija Types — Sdnnip^tika Type — Traumatic Type — Raktaja
Type-#- Incurable type of External Abscess. — Internal Abscesses — Their
localities. — Differentiating diagnosis of Gulma and Vidradhi. — Incurable
Type . ... ... ... ... ... 61 — 66,

CHAPTER X.

Erysipelas* Sinus and Diseases affecting the mammary glands
of women -.—Definition of Erysipelas —Vataja, Pittaja and Kaphaja Types
— Sannipatika Type — Kshataja Type. — Progn^is. — Naidi-Vrana (Sinus),
— Classification — Vataja, Kaphaja and Pittaja Type's— Dvandvaj a and
Tri-doshaja Types— S'alyaja Type.— Stana*roga.— Breast-milk— Its
character — Its normal and abnormal traits, — Stana- Vidradhi (Inflammation
of mammary glands). ... ... ... ... 67 — 71,

CHAPTER XI.

Glands, Scrofula, Tumours and Goitre Dosha-origened Glands
— Sirdja gland (aneurysm or Varicose Veins). — Apachi (Scrofula, OtC-) — Its
symptoms. — Tumour — Its symptom.s — Blood-origincd Tumour. — Mdmsa-
Arvuda. — Prognosis. — Adhyarvuda. — Dvirarvuda. — Cause of its not being
suppurated. — Definition of Goitre— Its specific Symptoms — Vataja
Goitre — Kaphaja Goitre — Medoja Goitre. — ProgiK>sis. — General shape of
Goitre. — ... ... ... ... ... 73 — 78.

CHAPTER XII.

Hydrocele, Hernia, Scrotal Tumours, Upadamsa (disease of the
gmital organ) and Elephantiasis: — Classification of Vriddhi — Definition
and Premonitory Symptoms of Vriddhi. — Symptoms of Dosha-origined
Vriddhi. — Medoja Vriddhi — Raktaja Vriddhi — Hydrocele. — Inguinal

IV •

Hernia. — XJpadams'a — Symptoms of different Dosha-origined types of
Upadams'a. — Raktaja Upadams'a. — Definition of Elephantiasis. — Causes
and Symptoms of different kinds of Elephantiasis. — Prognosis of Elephan-
tiasis. — Localisation of Elephantiasis. ... ... *••^ 79 — ^ 4 *

CHAPTER XIII.

Diseases known by the general name of Kshudra-'feoga (minor

ailments): — The Names and Symptoms of the diseases included therein. —
Ajagallika — Yava-prakhya — Andhalaji — Vivritc^— KachcWiApikd — Valmika
— Indra-vriddh£ — Panasikd — Pashdna-Gardabha — Jdla-Gaiddstbha-^ Kak-
shd — Vishphota — Agni-Rohini — Chippa — Kunakha — Anus'ayi — Vidarika —
S'arkardrbuda — Pdma — Vicharchikd — Rakasa — Pdda-diSrika — Kadara —
Alasa — Indra-lupta (Alopecia) — D. 4 runaka — Arumshikd — Palita — Masurika
etc. — Tila-kdlaka — Nyachchha — Charma-kila — Vyanga — Parivartika — Ava-
pdtika — Niriiddha-Prakas'a — Niruddha-guda — Ahi-putana — Vrishana-
kachchhu— Guda-Bhrams'a. ... ... ... 85 — 93.

CHAPTER XIV.

^uka'dosha: — its classification. — Symptoms of different Types. —
Progonsis. ... ... ... ... ... 94 —

CHAPTER XV.

Fracture and Dislocation, etc -Th.ir Cans :s.-— General features
of Sandhi-mukta (Dislocation). — Diagnostic Symptons of Dislocation. —
Different kinds of Kanda-bhagna (Fracture) — General symptoms of Kanda-
bhagna. — Curable and incurable Types. ... ... ... 97—100.

CHAPTER XVI.

Mukha^Roga (Diseases which affect the cavity of the mouth in
general): — General Classification and Localisation. — Diseases of the lips. —
Do.sha-origjned Types. — Raktaja Type — Mdngsaja Type — Medoja Type
— Diseases of the roots of the teeth. — Their Names and specific Symp-
toms.— Danta-Nabdi (Sinus at the root of a tooth).— Diseases of the tooth
proper. — Their Names and specific Sym))toms.— Diseases of the tongue —
Their Names and specific Symptoms. — Diseases of the Palate— Their
Names and specific Symptoms.— Diseases of the Throat and Larnyx

r V

— Their Names and specific Symptoms. — The different Kinds and Symp-
toms of Rohini,— 'Diseases in the entire cavity, ... ... loi — ill.

End of the contents of Sutra-sthana.

SARIRA STHANA.

(ShCTION ON ANA'rOMV).

CHAl I'ER 1.

The Science of Being in General -.—The Twenty-four Tattwas or
first Principles, — ThePurusha or the Ihimordial I’eing or the Self-conscious
Reality.— The Prakriti or the External Nature personified or the non-
conscious Eternity — Trait.s of Commonalty and Diversity. — Comparison of
the Philosophy of A'yurveda with that of Samkhya as well as with the
other branches of Philosophy. — Prakriti and Purusha how undcr.stood in
the A'yurveda— Different kinds of Manas tniind). — The five Primary
Element.s of Creation — Their specific function — Their mutual co-operation
in creation. ... ... ... ... — I2i.

CHAPTER II.

Purification of Semen and Oataminal fiuid etc. Derange-
ment of Semen.— Stiecific treatment. — Derangement of Cataminal Iluid. —
Specific treatment. — Traits of [mre and healthy Semen and Cataminal tluid.
— Menorrhagia. — Amenorrhoea, — Their treatment. — Regimen to be ob-
served dining Menses. — Conduct of hu.sband during the period. — Prohibited
period. —Conception — Subsequent Conduct. — Causes of different Colours
in the child. — About twins — Caiise.s of the child being of Defective Organ
—Fecundation without sexual intercourse — Causes of Deformity in the child
—State of the FaHus — Its activity while in the womb, ... 122—133,

CHAPTER III.

Pregnancy, etc* : — Combination of Self with the Impregnated
Matter. — Factors which determine Sex. — Period and Signs of Menstruation.
—Signs of Pregnancy. — Prohibited conducts during Gestation. —Develop-

vi*^

ment of the Foetus. — Longings and its effects during pregnancy.— Develop-
ment of the Foetus from the Sixth to the Eighth month. — Time of Delivery,
— Different opinions on the formation of the Foetal body. — The Solution-
Factors respectively supplied by the Paternal and Maternal Elem^ts, etc,—
External Signs of Male, Female and Twin conception. ... • 134'*"M3*

CHAPTER IV.

The development of Factors in the womb as well ns the
Factors which contribute to the growths of its different brflily organs and
principles; — Different folds of skin over the foetus. — The definJfion of
Kalas and their varieties.— Seat of the semen. —Why and how semen is
discharged. — Placenta. — Formation of different limbs and organs of the
Fa?tal body. — Sleep and its effect. — Heart and its action. — Effects of day-
sleep. — Somnolence. — Effect of Sleep on an Enciente woman — Onawing.
—The temperaments. — Symptoms of Vataja, Pittaja and Kafaja tempera-
ments - Symptoms of Dvandvaja and Sannnipatika temperaments. — Saltvika,
Rajasika and Tamasika features. ... ... ... 144 —

chapter V.

The Anatomy of the Human body -.—Definition of fcTetus.—
Enumeration of the dfferent Limbs and Mcmbois of body. — Their Numbers —
The Cavities or Viscera. — Channels. — Kandara. — ^Jdla or Plexuses. — Kurcha
or Cluster. — Sevan! or Sutures. — Asthi-Sangh4ta. — Simanta. — Bones of
the four Extremeties. — Bones of the Trunk. — Bones .above the Cavicle^^^ —
Different kinds of Bones and their situation — Sandhi or Joint.s. —
Joints of the four Extremities. — Sandhis of the Koshtha and Clavicles. —
Their forms, distinctions and locations. — The Snayu or Ligaments. —
Their Number and Situation.s. — Muscles. — Museks in the extremities in
the Koshtha — Of the Head and Neck. — Extra Muscles in Women. — The
Vaginal Canal — The Uterus — The Womb. — Superiority of Surgery —
Preparations of dead body — Mode of dissection. ... .. — 172,

CHAPTER VI.

The Mamas or Vital parts of the body;— Classifications of
Mannas— Their different Numbers. — Their Locations.— Their Names and
Distributions.— The different Heads of Marma.s.— Qualitative Cliisse.s.—
Different opinions on Marmas.— Mannas of the Extremitie.s.— Marmas of
the Thorax, etc.- Marmas in the Back.— Marma.s in the Clavicular region.
—Their s pecific Symptoms when injured. ... ... 17^

CHAPTER VII.

The Description and Glassification of Sird or the Vascular

System*. — Their Numbers and action. — Names and Classification of the
j^rincipal Siras. — Their specific Locations. — The Pitta, Kapha, Vayu and
Rakta-carrying Slrds.— Specific Colours of Sir^s. — The specific Sirds not to
be punctured. — Siras of the four Extremeties, Trunk and the region above
the Clavicles and their roots. ... ... ... 191 — 197,

• • CHAPTER VIII.

e •

The method of Venesection Perhons unfit for Venesection
Preliminary Rules. — The Jantra-Vidhi or how the patient should be placed
in cas2s of Venesection.— Venesection in the Pkxtrcmcties. — Venesection on
the different parts of the body. — Proper and Defective Venesection — Cla.ssi-
fication and definition of Defective Venesection. ... ... 198 — 208.

CHAPTER IX.

The Description of the Arteries, Nerves and Ducts .—Region
and Number of Dhamanis. — Functions of the up-coursing Dhamanis. —
Functions of the down-coursing Dhamanis. - Functions of the lateral cours-
ing Dhamanis. — The Situation of the Srotas and the specific Symptoms
when pierced at the roots. ... ... ... 209 — 215.

CHAPTER X.

Nursing and Management, etc. of Pregnant Women from the
day of conception till parturition General rules. — Especial Regimen
during the period of Gestation. — Sign of imminent Parturition — PTfects of
premature Urging — Preliminary Measures. — Post-parturient Measures.—
Natal Rites. — Diet for Children. — Treatment of the Mother — ISIakkalla pain
and its treatment. — Management of the Child.— Lactation. — Selection of
Wet-nurses. — Examination, etc. of Breast-milk. — Treatment of Wet-nurses.
— Infantile Diseases and their Diagonosis — Treatment of Infants. — I ifant-
ile Elixirs. — Nursing of child. — Symptoms when malignant stars, etc.
strike the child.— *Eductation and Marriage.— Defective IVegftancy— Its
Symptoms an I Medical treatment.— Miscarriage — Its treahnent. — IVfanagc-
ment of Pregnancy and special Recipe for Pregnant Women according to
c months of Gestation. .. ... ••• •' 216 — 238.

End of the contents of l^akrira Sthaina.

viif

CHIKITSITA STHANA

(Section on TiiERArEuncs).

CHAPTER L

The two kinds of inflamed Ulcers:— -The Causes, Symptoms and
Classification of Ulcers. — Idiopathic and Traumatic ulcers. — General and
specific Symptoms. — Symptoms of different Dosha-origine*l ^.ilccrs. — Symp-
toms of BlooJ-origincd ulcers. — Symptoms of Buddha Vrana.-r-Therapeu-
tics. — The sixty different Factors of medical treatment of ulcers. — Upadrava
or the Supervening Symptoms of ulcers. ... ... 269 — 264.

CHAPTER 11.

The medical treatmant of Tranmitic Wounds or Sores:—

DifGrent Shapes an 1 Cias.sification.s of Sore.s. — Their (hTinition.s — Their
specific Symptoms — Their ^ treatment. — Treatment of Cuts or Incised
Wounds. — Treatment of Kxci.sed Wounds. — Treatment of Viscera when
perforated. — Subsequent treatment. — Treatment of Diabetic Ulcers. —
Treatment of Ulcers due to Kushtha or malignant Ulcers. ... 265 — 278.

CHAPTER III.

The medical treatment of Fractures and Dislocations

Symi^oms of incurable fractures. — Bandage. — Diet. — Defective Bandaging
— Washing. — Prrgnosis. — Treatment of fractures in lenticular lir.tbs. —
Gandha-Taila. — Suppuration of fractured Bones — Symt)toms of Complete
union of fractured Joint.^. ... ... ... 279 — 288,

CHAPTER IV.

The medical treatment of Vatta-VysCdhi or Nervous disorders :

— Nervousnsiffection of the A'mds'aya — Nervous affections of the Pakv^s'aya
— S'alvana-upanaha. — General Measures beneficial to Vata-Vyadhi. — The
Tilvaka-Ghrita,— The Anu-Taila.— The S'ata-paka and Sahasra-paka Taila.
— The Patra-lavana.— The Kanda or Sneha-lavana.— The Kalyanaka-
lavana. ••• ... ... 289 — 296.

CHAPTER V.

The medical treatment of MahsL-Vata-Vyadhi :—Causcs of

Vata-Rakta. — Its definition —Premonitory symptoms — Speeific features of
^Vata-Raktti — Prognosis. — Preliminary remedial measures, — Plasters etc. —
Treatment t)f Vata-Rakta with a preponderance of different Doshas. — The
five Praclchas — Guda-ifaritaki and I’ippali-Vardhamana Yogas. — Diet. —
Regimen of conduct. — The Medical Treatment of Aj^atdnaka. — Traivrila
Glirita. — Treatment of Pakshaghata. — Treatment of Manya-stambha. —
Treatment of A]^atantraka. — Treatment of Ardita. — Kshira-Taila, —
Tympanites etc:.-^IIingvadi-vati. — Symptoms and Treatment of Uru-
stambfia. — Therapeutic properties of Guggulu. ... ... 297 — 315.

CHAPTER VI.

The medical treatment of Arsas (Haemorrhoids) -.—General

remedial measures. — Application ol Kshara (Alkali). — Symptoms of
satisfactory, excessive and defective Cauterisation. — Diet — Rectal Speculum.
— Plasters. — Treatment of Internal ])iles. — Dantyarishta. — Ahhayarishta. —
Phalbitaka-yoga. — Other forms of Phallataka*yoga. — Regimen of diet and
conduct. ... ... ... ... ... 316-328,

CHAPTER VII.

The medical treatment of Asmari (Urinary Calculus, etc) :~

Different modes of treatment in As'mari. — Treatment of Vdtaja, Pittaja
and Kaphaja As'mari. — Alkaline treatments. — Modes of Surgical operations,
— Prognosis. — Lithotomic operations. — i’ost -surgical measures. — Surgical
treatment in Seminal Concretions.— Diet. — Parts to be guarded in Litho-
tomic operations. ... ,« ... 329-337,

CHAPTER VIll.

The medical treatment of Bhagandara (Fistula-in-ano, etc)

Classification. — General treatment. — Specific measure.s. — Different Forms
and Aames of incision. — Treatment of Ushtra-griva. — Tieatment of
Parisravi. — Phagandara in infants — Treatment. — Treatment of traumatic
type.— Treatment of Tri-doshaja type.— Syandaria Taila.— Description of
instrument. — Regimen of diet. ... ... ... 338-345.

X *

CHAPTER IX.

The medica] treatment of Kushtha (Outaneous Affections in

general): — Pathology.— Conduct of diet and regimen. — Regulation oi
diet and conduct. — Preliminary treatment. — Treatment of Dosha^i types. — ^
Maha-tikta Chrita. — Tikta-Sar])ih. — Medicinal plasters. — All^^line treat-
ment. — Treatment of S'vitra. — Nila-Clirita. — Maha-nila Clhrita. — Tn atment
by Bleeding, Panel ics and Purgatives. — Vajraka Taila. — Maha-Vajraka
Taila. — Treatment by Khadira. — Diet. ... ... ... 34^-361.

CHAPTER X. •

The medical treatment of Mah£i-Kushtha (Major Cutaneous

Affections). — Manlha-Kalpas. — Diet. — Medicated Arishtas, As.avas, .Suras
(Wine) and Powders. — Medicinal Ayas-kriti. — Aushadha Ayas-krili.
— Mahaushadha Ayas-kriti. — Khadira prcjwations. ...Khadira-Snra pre-
parations. ... ... ... ►... . . 3^2-371.

(:hapter XI.

The medical treatment of Prameha (Diseases of tiu Urinary
tracts): — Two-fold Classifications, Causes and Symptoms. — l-’orbiddeii
articles of food and drink. — Arlich'S of diet. — P'reliminary treatment. — I'he
five medicinal remedies. — Specific Ireatmenl of Raphaja Meha — S])t‘cific
treatment of Piltaja Meha. — Sjiccific Irealment of Valaja Meha. —Palli-
ative mea.sures— Medicinal Arishtas, Asavas, Yavagus, etc.— Mode of treal-
ing a poor Pvameha-patient. ... ... ... ... 372-37S.

CHAPTER XII.

The medical treatment of Prameha-Pidak^ (the Al )scesses or
Irruptions which mark the secpicl of a case of Pramcha) : — Curable cases of
Pramcha-Pidaka. — Treatment. — Dhanvanlara-Ghrita. — p'ornentations for-
bidden in cases pf Madhu-meha. — S'ala-.saradi Avalcha.— Isavayasa Churna.
— Loh^rishta.^ — Traits of cure. ... ... 470.

CHAPTER XIII.

The medical treatment of Madhu-meha S'iia-j.itu- its origin,
properties an.^ use.— The Makshika-Kalpa.— The Tuvaraka-Kalpa. 2SC-391.

XI

CHAPTER XIV.

The medical treatment of Udara (Dropsy with an abnormal
condition of the Abdomen) ; — Symptoms of curable and incurable types. —
Diet Si articles forbidden. — Treatment of Valaja, Tittaja and Kaphaja
lypcs.—^Trcatment of Dushyodara. — General treatment of Udara. — Ilaritaki
Ghrila. — Maha-vriksha Ghiitd. — Cbavya Ghrita. — Anaha-Vartis. — Treat-
ment of Plihodara. — Shat-palaka Ghrita. — Treatment by Venesection. —
Treatment of Baddha-Gudodara. — Treatment of Parisravi Udara.— Treat-
ment of Udakodara. —Treatment by tapping. — Diet. ... 392-403.

• •

CHAPTER XV.

The medical treatment of Mndha-Garbha (Difficult and mab
presentation of the Feetus and Difficult Labour) : — Varieties of Mudha-
Garbba. — Incantations. — Postures uf the Feetus. — Operations involving
destruction of the b'oetus. — Craniotomy. — After-measures. — Diet and regi-
men of conduct. —The Bald Taila. — The Bala-Kalpa. ... 404-411,

CHAPTER XVI.

The medical treatment of Vidradhi (Abscesses) and Tumours:—

Classifications. — Treatment of Vdtaja, Pittaja and Kaphaja Vidradlii. —
Xaranjadya Ghrita. — Treatment of traumatic and blood-origined types. —
Treatment of internal Vidradhi. — Treatment of Vidradhi. — Treatment of
Majja-jata Vidradhi. ■ ... ... ... ... 412-417.

CHAPTER XVII.

The medical treatment of Erysipelas etc. , Sinus and Diseases
of the Mammary Glands ; — classifications of curable and incurable
types of Visarpa (Erysipelas)— Treatment of Vdtaja and Pittaja Visarpa. —
Gauryddi Ghrita. — Treatment of Kaphaja Visarpa. — Trealnn nt of JNadi-
Vrana (Sinus). — Treatment of Vdtaja, Pittaja, Kaphaja and S'alyaja Nridi
(Sinus).— Alkaline treatment— Treatment by Plug-stick— Bhallatakddya
Taila— Treatment of Stana-Roga— Purification of brcast-milk— Surgical
treatment of Stana-Koga. ... ... ... a. 418-426.

CHAPTER XVIIL

The medical treatment of Granthi ((dlanduiar Swellings),
ApachKScarvi)* ArVUda (Tumour) and Gala*ganda (Goitre) General

XU

treatment of Granthi — Treatment ofVataja, Pitta ja, Kaphaja and Medoja
Grantlii.— Medical treatment of Apaclli-— Surgical treatment of Apachi.—
Arvuda— Treatment of Vataja, Fittaja, Kaphaja and Medoja type.s of
Arvuda (Tumour).— Gala-ganda—Treatmenl of Vataja, Kaphrja and
Medoja types ol Gala-ganda (Goitre). ... ... ... ; 427-43^^*

CHAPTER XIX.

The medical treatment of Vriddhi (Hernia, Hydrocele, Scrotal
Tumour, etc.), Upadamsa (Diseabcs of the Genital Organ) an(l S^linada
(Elephantiasis) Trcalmcnt of Vataja, Fittaja, Eaktaja, Kaphaja,
Medoja and Mutraja Vriddhi. — Treatment of Antra-Vriddhi.— Treat-
ment of UpadamBa — General treatment — Treatment of Vataja, I’ittaja,
Kaphaja, Tridoshaja and Raktaja types ol Upadams'a. — Treatment ot
^Upada — (icneral treatment — Treatment of Vataja, Fittaja and Kaj)hnja
types of S'lipada — Alkaline remedies. ... ... ... 439 — 449.

Chapter xx

The medical treatment of Kshudra-Roga (Minor Ailments)
Treatment of Aja-gallika and Yava-prakhya. — Treatment of Vivrita, etc. —
Treatment of S'arkararvuda, etc. -"Treatment of Ikida-Llaii, ete. — Treat-
ment of Alasa and Kadara. — Treatment of FaldncsSs and Alot)ecia, etc. —
Trcalinenl of Darunaka, etc. — Treatment of Jatu-n^ani, etc — Treatment of
Yuvana-]udaka — Treatment of the Rclroflexion of the l’re})uce. — Tieatnient
of the Constriction or Stricture of the Urethra — Its surgical treatment. —
Treatment of the Striaurc of the Anus, etc. — t reatment of Valmika, Ahi-
[iutana and the Frola[)Sus of the Anus. 450-458.

CHAPTER XXL

The medical treatment of the Sores on the Penis produced

bythel^uka: — The specific treatment of the different types of S'uka-
dosha—Gencral treatment.— Frognosis. ... ... ... 459-461.

CHAPTER XXII.

The medical treatment of the Affections of the Mouth

Treatment of Vataja, Fittaja, Kaphaja and Mrdoja types of Oshtha*

X411

kopa — Trealnieiit of the diseases of the Danta-mula* — Treatment of
Danta-Veshta etc. — Paridara — S'aushira — U pakiis'a — Danla*Vaidarbha —
Adhimamsa. — Treatment of Danta-nadi. — Treatment of the diseases of the
different types of Tootll proper.— Treatment of Tongue-diseaseS—
Tfeatiuent of Valaja, Pittaja and Kaphaja types of tongue-diseases —
Treatment of the different types of Tcllu-gata diseases — Treatment of
Throat -diseases. — Treatment of Valaja, idttaja, Iva[jhaja and Raktaja
types of Rohini. — Treatment of the different types of the Sarva-sara
Mukha-Roga. — Incurable tyi)es of Mukha-Roga. ... ... 462-474.

CHAPTER XXIII.

The medical treatment of Sopha* (dwellings).— ciassifieaiions of
general S'o[jha — Its causes. — The specific s)m[>loms of Doshu-origined
ly[K‘sol S'opha. — Symptom 0! Vishaja S'oplia — Complications — Prognosis. —
Thj S])ociat treatment ol the different types ol S'oplia. — General remedies.
—Diet. ... . . ... ... ... 475 - 477 -

CHAPTEE XXIV.

The Rules of Hygiene and the Prophilactic Measures

Tooth-brushing- -Cases where tooth -brushing is forbidden. — Eye and IMoutli-
washing. — Collyrium. — S'iro’bhjanga. — Combing. — Anointing. — Parisheka.
— Affusion. — Elfu.'^ion. — Anointinent.s. — Prohibitions of Anointments, etc. —
Physical Exercise. — Rubbing and Friction. — Massage. — Bathing. — Prohibi-
tion of Bathing. — Anule})ana. — A'lepa. — Pood. — Praviita and Nivata.—
Sleep — General Rules of Conduct. — Rules lor Drinking Water, etc. — Curd
(Dadhi) — When and How to be taken. — Women uafit to visit. — Evil
Effects of the foregoing Abuses, ... 480-502,

CHAPTER XXV.

The medical treatment of a Variety of Diseases piseascs of
the Ear-lobes — Classification — Causes and Sym[)toms — Geneial treatment —
Specific treatment. — Treatment of Palita. — Treatment ofVyanga, etc.

503-50F

XIV

CHAPTER XXVI.

The medical treatment for inc ing the Strength and the
Virile Power of weak persons : — Definition of Vaji-Karana — I\lcanh of
Vnji-karana. — Causes an<l Symptoms of the six Forms of SexuSll incapacity.
— Incurable types. — Remedies — Utkarika — Pupalika. — Cake^etc. 510-514*

CHAPTER XXVII.

The Recipes and Modes of using Elixirs and^Rejuvenators

The Human Organi.sm — Which will make it invulnerable to the igroads of
any Disease and Decay. — Time of using Kasayana. — Ra.sayana for Menial
and riiysical maladies. — Vidanga-Rasayana — Vidanga-kaljui — Kas'marya*
kal[)a. — liala-kal])a. — Aii-bala, Naga-bala, Vidari and S'atavari-kalpa. —
Varahi-kalpa — Use of S'ana (-seeds). ... .. ... 515-52I.

CHAPTER XXVIII.

The Elixirs and Remedial Agents which tend to improve the
Memory an<l invigorate the Mental Faculties as well as to increase the
Duration of Human Life .S'vetavalguju Rasayana — Krishnavalguja-
Rasayana — Manduka-parni-Rasayana — Ihahmi-Rasayana — Ikahmid llirita
— Vacha-Rasayana — S'ata-paka-Vacha-Ghrita. — Measures lor prolonging
life. — Uses of Gold. ... ... ... ... 522-523.

chapter XXIX.

The Restorative and the Constructive Agents whicli arre.st

innate morbific tendencies and decays : — Classifications of Soma. — Mode of
using the Soma.-— Regimen of Diet and Conduct after taking .Soma. — Its
Therapeutic effects. — Di.slinctivc features of the Soma-plants — Their des-
criptions — Their Habitats. ... ... ... ... 530-538.

CHAPTPR XXX.

The Tonic Remedies which remove Mental and Physical

Distres# ‘."-Persons unfit for the use of Rasayna — Names of the healing
drugs. — The Mode of their use. — Regimen of Diet and Conduct — Dosage —
Therapeutic effects. — Differentiating traits. — Mode of Culling the above
drugs. — ^Thcir Habitats. — The common Habitat of all the Oshadhis.

S39'S4S*

CHAPTER XXXI.

The medicinal uses of Sneha, etc, Classifications of Sncha—
Description of Sncha — The sjiecific uses. — Measures of drugs. — The
J'Lashaya-p'Ska-Ivalpa —The .Sneha^paka-Kalpa. — Alternative methods. —
AiiplicatiorTof Sncha according to specific Dosha and Season. — Degrees of
Cooking a Sncha -Distinctive traits of the complete cooking of a Sneha. —
Process of Inteufnal Use of Sncha — The Specific Uses of Clarified butler —
The Dosage. — K\ il Teffects of over-dosage — Sadyah- Sneha. — Forbidden cases
of Sneha-pana. — Uuod Effects of Sneha-pana. ... ... 54 ^* 557 *

CHAPTER XXXII.

The medical treatment by measures of Sveda (Fomentations,
Diaiihorelic measures etc. ): — Classifications of Sveda. — Its Specific Appli-
cations. — Effects of Sveda — Prohibited cases of Sveda. — Symptoms of jicr*
feet and imi)erfert Sveda. — Measures to be followed after Sveda. 55S-564.

CHAPTER XXXIII.

Tho Distresses which prove amenable to the use of Purga-
tives and Emetics Importance of Purgatives and Emetics.— Mode of
atiidicaticm of Eiiu'lics. — Symptoms of excessive, .satisfactory and deficient
Emetics. —Effects of satisfactory Emetics. — Cases where I'hncsis is forbid-
den.— Casc-s where Ihne.sis is recomniemled. — Mode of administering
I’urgatives. — Classifications of Ko.shtha. —Diet. — P>eiuTits of jiroper Purga-
tion. — Pmsons who should not be purged. — Persons who should be purged.
— Necessity of ajvpiying Sneha licforc Itho administration of Purgative or
Ibnetic. ... . ... ... 505- 589-

CHAPTER XXXLV.

The treatment of the Disorders resulting from an Injudici-
ous Use of Emetics or Purgatives Theii Classes.— Cau.ses and treat-
ment. — kivils of nn Unpurged Residue of a Purgative or Emetic. — Kvils of a
Digested Purgative, etc. — Ixvils of insufficient or excessive e.xpulsion of the
Doshas. — Flatulent Colic. — Partial and Deficient Medication (Ayoga). —
Over-drugging with purgatives, etc. (Ati-yoga).— ILx'iiiorrhagc due to
excessive Vomiting or excessive Purging (Jivddana). — ^Jiva-s'onita, how
to be known. — Flatulent distention of the Abdomen (Adhmana). — Cutting

xvr

pain in the Anus, etc. — Dysenteric stools (Parisrava). — Diarrhoea
(Pravahika). — Ovei whelming the heart. — Retention (Vibanciha) of flaliis,
stool and urine. ... ... ... ... 577 — 5 ^ 9 *

t

«

chapter XXXV.

The Dimensions and Classifications of a Netra and a Vasti
with their therapentic applications :-~Thc importance of Vasti-
Karma. — The application ol Vasti in different diseases. — J^yiiensions of the
Pipe. — Materials of the Pipe. — Construction of the Vasti. —Cla.^^sifici^ ions of
the Vasti. — Nomenclature of the Vasti. — Application of Niruha-Vasti and
Asthapana-Vasti. — Their therapeutic Effects — The different Defects of a
Va.sti. ... ... ... ... ... 590 — 598

CHAPTER XXXVI.

The medical treatment of the mishaps which are consequent
on the Injudicious Application of the Pipe and the Vasti :~

Reinedics for the injudicious application of the Ihpe. — Di.sorders resulting
from a defective Vasti (bladder) and its contents. — Disorders resulting
from the defective Positioq of the Patient. — Remeilies for the Complications
of the defective po.sition of Niruha-Vasti and Sneha-Va.sti. — Intervals for
the application of Purgative, Panel ic, Asthapana-Vasti and Anuv^sana-
Vasli. . . ... ... ... ... 599 — 607,

CHAPTER XXXVII.

The treatment with Anuvaisana- Vasti and Uttara- Vasti —The

Process of Anuvasana-Vasti — The process of preparing several medicated
Oils and Sneha.s. — Proper tiine lor the application of Sneha-Vasti. — The
mode of applying a Sneha-Vasti. — Symptoms ol insufficient, excessive, and
satisfactory application of Anuva.sana-Va.sti. — Diet after the aj)plication of
a Vasti. — 'The Successive Actions of a Vasti. — Distresses from Injudicious
AppUcatfon of Sneha-Vasti. — Specific Symptoms, — Th(;ir remedies. —
Uttara-VastiS — Dimensions of the Pipe of the Vasti for a Mate and for
a Female patient. — Mode of application. — Vaginal IJttara- Vasti. — Disease.s
?imenable to Uttara-Vasti. ... ... ... 608 — 626,

XVll

CHAPTER XXXVllL

The mode of applying, as well as the treatment with a
Nirudha-Vasti : — The mode of Preparing a Vasti. — The mode oi Apply*
hig a Vasti. — Symptoms of a satisfactory application of a Vasti. — Subsequent
treatment and Diet — Drugs to be used in a Niruha-Vasti. — The Formula of
a Niruha-Vasti. — The process of preparation. — The Dvadasa-Prasriti. —
Classifications of Vastis according to the range of their therapeutic appli-
cations. — Corrective V astis. — Lekhana-V asti. — Vaj i-Karana- Vasti. — V rim-
h.ana-Vasti. — P^chchhila-Vasli. — Crahi-Vasti. — Sneha-Vasti. — Utkles'ana-
Vasti. -^)obha-hara-Vasti. — Soothing Vasti. — \hikta-ratha-Vasti. — Siddha-
Vasti. — Mustddika-Vasti. — Variations in the com[)osition of Vastis in cases
of persons of different Temperaments. — Nomenclature of different Vastis
and their Sjiecific Uses. ... ... ... 637 — 646.

CHAPTER XXXIX.

The treatment of distre.gsing Symptoms which are manifest-
ed in a patient The quantity of diet to be taken after the exhibition
of a Niruha-Vasti. — Internal aj)plicution of .Sneha after Blood-letting. —
Preparations of different diets. — Diet to be taken according to the Do.sha
and to the Strength of the patient. — Kcgimen of conduct. — Articles of diet.

647-652.

CHAPTER XL.

The treatment which consists in employing the Bhuma
(Fumes), Nasya (SnufU) and Kavala (C.argles) Classifications of
Dhuma — Materials ol difi'erent Dhuma-V’’arti. — Formation of the Pipe used
in Dhunia -1 kina— -Mode of inhalation of different Dhumas— Prohibitive cases
— Time of Dhuma-piina (Smoking) — The therapeutic effects of Dhuma-

Ikina— Mode of Smoking.— Snuffs ami Errhines (Nasya)— The Nomen-
clature of the term “Nasya”— Classific.aiions of Nasya— S'iro-Virechana— Its
application — Dosage of Sneha -Nasya — Ktfccts of proper, excessive and defi-
cient application of a Snclia-Na.sya — Avapida-Nasya — Forbidden cases. —
Prati-marsha Nasya when to be used— Its effecls. — Specific use of Sneha-
Nasya. — KAVala-graha (Cargles) — Classification — Mode of application —
Their uses— Kavala and Candusha distinguished — How loil^ Kavala
should be retained — Symptoms of satisfactory, deficient and excessive
Gargling.— Prati-sarana— Its classification and effects. ... 653—671.

End of the Contents of the Ohikitsita Sthana.

c

KALPASTHANA,

(Section on Toxicology),

CHAPTER I.

r

The mode of Preserving Pood and Drink from the effects of

Poison * — The necessary qualifications of a Superintendent of the Royal
Kitchen — The necessary features of a Royal Kitchen.— Characteristic^,fealures
of a Poisoner. — Indications of poisoned food and drink, etc. — General
treatment.— The mode of preparing Soup, etc. ... ... 673—684.

CHAPTER II.

The Indications (Eifects, Nature and Operations) of Sthavara
Poisons : — Sthavara Poison — Its sourcf*. — Names of the different W’gelable
and Mineral poisons. — Effects of poison on the 1 1 uinan organism. — Effects
of Bulb-poisons — Specific f#ro])erties and actions of Bulb-poisons — Definition
of Dushi-visha — Symptoms of weak and slow poisoning— Derivative
meaning of Dushi-visha — Symptoms of the different stages of Slhd\ara
Poisoning— The medical treatment.— Keshatakyadi-Vavagu — Ajcya-Ghiita
— Vishi^ri Agada. — Treatment of the supervening Symptoms of Poisonii;g.—
Prognosis. ... ... ... ... ... 685—694.

CHAPTER III,

The Subject of (the nature, virtue, etc. of) Animal Poisons:—
Different locations— Characteristic features and purifications ol poisoned
Water.— Poisons in the Atmosphere and its purification.— Mythological
origin of Poison.— Properties of Poison — Nature and Location of Snake-
poison— General treatment of poisoning— Symptoms of taking poison
internally.— Fatal biles.— Prognosis, ... ... ...

. CHAPTER iV.

The Specific Features of the Poison of a Snake-bite *— Clasifica-

tions of Snakes — Classifications of Snake-bites — Their sjiccific Symptoms —
Characteristic features of the diffeient species of Snakes.— Features of the
different Castes amongst Snakes. — Particular Habits of the different kinds of
Snakes.— Names of the different species of Darvi-kara Snakes— Names of

• ,

XIX

the different species of Mandali Snakes — Names of the different species of
Rdjiman Snakes— Names of the different species of Nirvisha Snakes— Names
and Origin of the different species of Vaikaranja Snakes — Sub-families of
J;hc Vaikaftinja Snakes. — Characteristic features of Male and Female Snakes —
Features ol*1heir bites— General and specific symptoms of a bite by a Darvi-
kara Snake— Specific symptoms of a bite by a Mandali Snake— Specific
symptoms of a bite by a Rdjimdn Snake — Specific symptoms of bites by
Snakes of different Sexes and Ages, etc. — Symptoms of the different stages
of poisoning from the liites of a Uarvi-kara Snake — Different stages of
poisoning from the bite of a Mandali Snake — Different stages of poisoning
from tlfe bit^s of a Rajiman Snake.— The Vegdniara (or the intervening)
• Stages. — Different Stages of poisoning in cases of Lower Animals. —
Different stages of poisoning in cases of Birds. ... ... 703 — 714.

CHAPTER V.

The medical treatment of Snake bites i—General treatment
of Snake-bites. — Mantras (Incantations) — Blood-letting in Snake-bites —
Specific treaternent of the bite by a Hooded (Dafvi-kara) Snake, a Mandail
Snake and a R.^jiinan Snake. — Contra-indication to blood-letting in cases of
Snake-bites. — Dosage of Collyrium, etc., to be resorted to in cases of
different Beasts and Birds. — General dosage of medicines in cases of Snake-
bites — Specific treatment of poisoning according to the Physical Symptoms
— Specific treatment of the different Supervening Symptoms. — Remedy for
the .aggravated Do.'shas due to Poison — Medical treatment of persons made
unconscious from the effects of a Fall or Suspended Animation. Symptoms
of wounds from Poisoned Darts, etc. — Treatment of a Poisoned Wound —
Recipe of different Agadas— Mahagada — Ajitagada— Tarkshy^gada — Ri&ha-
bhdgada — Sanjivana Agada — Darvi-kara Rdjila-visha-hara-Agada — Man-
dali-vi.sha-hara Agada— Vam.s'a-tvagadi Agada— Pancha-s'irisha Agada—
Sarva-Kamika Agada— Ekasara Agada. ... y 1^—727.

CHAPTER VI.

Oases of Rat-poisoning : — Different Varieties of RatSg-General
Symptoms of Rat-poisoning— Specific symptoms and treatment of Rat-
poisoning— General Ireatment. — Causes of Rabies— Symptoms of Hydro-
phobia — Prognosis.— Symptoms of Jala-trasa— Its treatment— Treatment of
bites by rabid-dogs — Treatment of teeth and nail-scratching. 728— 73C.

XX

CHAPTER VII.

Treatment with the Sounds of a (vnedicated) Drum> etc.,
possessed of Anti-venomous Virtues : — Kshai^gada— Itp Uses and

Therapjutic Effects — Kalyinaka-Ghrita — Amrita-Ghrita — Ma^a-sugandhi
Agadi — Rules of Diet and Conduct. — Symptoms of Elimination of Poison.

737-74i‘

CHAPTER VIIL

t''

On insects, i.e., the measures, etc. to be adopted in cases of
Insect-bites, etc. *. — The Germination and Classification of Insects —
Insects of Vdtaja, Pittaja, Kaphaja and Sdnnipdtika temperaments. —
Symptoms of their Bites — The Kanabha class of Insects — The Gaudheyaka
class of Insects — S'ata-padi — Manduka (Frogs) — Pipilika (Ants) — Makshikd
(Stinging Flies) — Mas'akas (Mosquitoes). — Incurable classes — Treatment of
a bite by strong and acute-poisoned Insects — Recipes of Remedies in
different cases. — Origin and Classification of Scorpions — Specific traits and
characteristics of Mild-pokx)ned Scorpions, Madhya-visha Scorpions and
Tikshna-visha Scorpions — Treatment of Scorpion-bites.— Spiiler-bites. —
Development of Luta-poison — Its Potency — Location. — Characteristics of
Poison according to its seat in the body of a Spider — Mythological Account
of the Origin of Lutd^> — The different names of Spiders and the general
Symptoms of their Bodies — Specific Symptoms of Spider-bites and their
Treatment — General Remedies — Specific symptoms of the Incurable cases of
Spider-bites — Their treatment. — Surgical Treatment— Treatment of Ulcers
incidental to the Bites by Insects or Snakes. ... ... 742—7t)2.

End of the Contents of the Kalpa Sthana-

SUSHRUTA SAMHITA

NIDANA STHANAM.

CHAPTER 1.

Now We shall discourse on the Vjttavyadhi-
(diseascs of the nervous system) Nidaaam*.

Metrical text: — Having clasped the feet of
the holy Dhanvantari, who hacf arisen out of the
primordial ocean with the pitcher of ambrosia on his
head, and who was the foremost of all knowers of truth,
Sus'hruta interrogated him as follows : — 'Tell me,0 thou,
the foremost of discoursers, all about the different
locations and functions of the bodily Vayu (nerve force),
both in its normal and agitated conditions, (as well as
when it changes its natural seat through a concourse of
disturbing or aggravating causes). Instruct me on the
nature of distempers, which result from its deranged
condition.” 2 .

The holy Dhanvantari, the greatest of all healers,
having listened to the foregoing words of Sus'hruta, replied
as follows: — This vital Vayu (nerve force), which courses
through the body, is .self-begotten in its origin, and

* The term Nidanam, usually translated as Pathology, is meant to
include factors, which fall within the respective provinces of Pathology,
.Etiology, Symplomology and Pathognomy as well. For the meaning and
functions of Vdyu see Introduction vol. 1. pp. xli.'-xlii.

2

THK SUSIlRUTk ^JAMlIlTA,

[Chap. I

is regarded as identical with the divine energy of eternal
life (God), inasmuch as it is unconditional and absolute
in its actions and effects, eternal and self-origined,
and is subtile and all-pervading (like the sky ^iand the’
atoms). It is the primary factor, which determines the
principle of cause and effect in all forms of created
things, whether mobile or immobile. It is so called
(Vdyu) from the fact of its coursing (skr. V.d — to move)
throughout the universe. It determines the growth,
origin and disintegration of all animated organisms, and '
as such, it receives the homage of all created beings.
Although invisible in itself, yet its works arc patent or
manifest. It is cold, light, mobile, dry and piercing, and
follows a transvcr.se course^ It is characterised by the
two attributes (propcixscnsiblcs or Gunas) of sound and
touch. It abounds f-in the fundamental quality of Rajas
(principle of cohesion and action), is of inconceivable
prowess, propels all the deranged or obstructing prinicples
(Uoshas) in the organism, (or in other words, is primarily
concerned with the deranged principles of the body
which arc pathogenic in their actions). It is instantaneous
in its action, and radiates or courses through the organ-
ism in constant currents. It has its primary field of
action in the intestinal tract (Pakvadhana) and the
rectum (Guda). In its deranged state, it is the principal
factor, which, (in combination with the deranged Pittam
and Kapham), lies at the root of all diseases, and is
accordingly termed the king of diseases (Rogardt), 3.

The action of Vdyu in its normal

State* — Now, hear me describe the symptoms, which
mark the Vayu, as it courses through the organism.
The Vdyu, in its normal or undisturbed condition, main-
tains a state of equilibrium between the different Doshas
and the root principles of the body (Dhdtu) ; it further

Chap. L]

KIDANA STHANAM.

3

tends to maintain uniform state In the metabolism of
the body, (protoplasmic, Agni*) and helps the organs
of sense-perception in discharging their specific functions.
* The bojjily Vjiyu, like the Pittam in the organism, is
grouped under five different subheads according to the
difference^in its functions and locations, and is classified
as the Prina, Uddna, Samana, Vyana and Apdna.-j*
These five* r.l asses of Vayu, located in their specific
rcgi<fns, • contribute towards the integration and main-
tenance of the body. 4 — 6

The Prana VsCyu : — The Vayu, that courses in
(govcrns)the cavity of the mouth,]* is called the Prana, its
function being to force down the food into the cavity of
the stomach, and to assist the different vitalising principles
of the body (such as the internal heat or fire etc ) in dis-
charging their functions in life, and to contribute to the
general sustenance of the body. A deranged condition of
this particular kind of Vayu (Prana) is usually followed
by hic-cough,dyspiKjea and other kindred distempers. 7.

The Udana. v^iyu : -—The most important of the
vital Vdyus, which courses (sends its vibrations) upward,
is called the Uddna. It produces speech, song, etc. In
its deranged state it brings on diseases which arc speci-
fically confined to regions lying above the clavicles. 8,
The Samana Vayu The Samina Vayu
courses in (governs) the stomach (Amashaya) and in the

* See Inlrotluclion "Vol. I. p.p XLVIII—XLIX MahAmahopadhyaya
Dvatkti Natha Kavlratna interprets this Agni ns digestive heat [/athardgni),
t The Prana Vaju i.s identical with the energy of the nerve centre
in the medulla ; the Udana with that of the one which is situated in the
speech centre. The Samdna is same as the energy of the epigastric
plexus, the Uddna is same as the energy of the Motor-Sensory Nerves, and
the Apdna is identical with the force of the Hypogastric plexus.

t The field of its action includes the regions of the heart, throat, head
(ind the nose.

'4

THE SUSIIRUT.^ SAMHITA.

EChap* I.

re:yion of intestines (PakvAshaya). Its functions consist in
digesting the chyme brought down into the intestines in
unison with the digestive ferment (Agni), and especially
in disintegrating its essence from its refuse or excreted*
matter. A deranged or aggravated condition of the
Samdna V^yii causes dysentery, Gulma, and^ impaired
digestion, etc. 9.

The Vyana Vsiyu : —The Vhyu known as the
Vyana courses (acts) through the whole organism, aftd its
functions consist in sending the lymph chyle etc. all
through the body and in helping the out-flow of blood
(Asrik^ and perspiration. Five kinds of muscular move-
ments* arc ascribed to the action of the Vyana Vayu,
a deranged condition of which is generally attended
with diseases which are not confined to any particular
region, member, or 6Tgan of the bod>', but arc found to
affect the whoT' organism (such as, fever, etc). 10.

The Apana Vdyu : — The Vayu known as the
Apana acts in the lower region of the intestines
(Fakvadhana). Its functions consist in bearing down the
foetus and the feces and in evacuating the urine, semen
and catamenial blood. An enraged condition of this Vdyu
tends to bring on serious dLscascs, which arc peculiar to
the urinary bladder and the distal portion of the large
intestine (Guda). An aggravated condition of both the
Vyana and Apina Vayus may produce Pramcha and
disorders of the seminal fluid, while a .simultaneous
excitement of the five vital Vayus leads to a sure and
speedy termination of life. 11-12.

NovV^we shall describe the nature of diseases, brought
about by the localization of the variously aggravated
Vayus in the different parts of the body. — In the cavity

* Such as expansion, flexion, lowering down and lining up or Ij^ter^l
tlirusting of any part of the body.

Chap. I.]

nidanI stiianam.

5

of the stomach (Amashaya) the deranged or aggra-
vated V/iyu gives rise to vomiting, vertigo, epileptic fits,
thirst anjd pain at the sides (Pars'va Sula) and about
fhc regiqji of the heart (Hridgraha). In the intestines
(Pakvdshaya) the enraged or disturbed Vriyu gives rise
to a rumbling in the intestines, a piercing pain about the
region of the umbilicus, scanty and painful urination
and stool, ar their entire suppression (Anaha), and pain
about^thoregion of the coccyx (Trika). 13 — 15. Similar-
ly, incarcerated in the sense-organs, such as the cars, etc.
it tends to deprive them of their respective faculties.
In the skin (lymph chyle) it produces a discolouring of the
complexion, parchedness and twitching in the skin, and
causes a complete local anaesthesia, giving rise to a
tingling, piercing pain in the skin, which spontane-
ously bursts, or becomes marked with cracks and fissures.
Similarly, the aggravated Vayu interfering with the
principle of bk)od gives rise to ulcers. In the flesh, it
produces painful nodes and tumours (Granthi). while in
the principle of fat it brings on almost painless tumours
(Granthij unattended with any kind of ulcer. Incar-
cerated in the veins &c. (Sira') it produces a stiffening or
painful contraction, or a varicose or neuralgic condition ;
in a ligament (SnAyu),it produces numbness (auieslhcsia),
palsy, aching pain and convulsive jerks ; in a long joint,
it tends to deprive it of its contractibility and produces
a painful inflammatory swelling (about the affected
part). In the bones it produces a wasting (atrophy) of
the bones which crack and begin to spontaneously burst,
attended with the characteristic bone-ache. A^ain in
that important principle of life, the marrow, it tends to
dry it up and produces a sort of pain, extending all over
the body which knows no re.spite or abatement. Similarly,
in the principle of semen it tends to produce a scanty,

6 THE SUSHRUTA*SAMHITA. [Chap. I.

defective, or excessive emission of that vital fluid, or a
complete stoppage thereof, 16—23.

The VAyu, thus disturbed and agitated, a^ects in
succession the lower and the upper extremities of th^
body, and the head, or extends all over the body and
deranges all its root-principles (Dhdtu). The .symptoms,
which mark such conditions of the body, are numbness
(paralysis), convulsive contortions of thelinabe (Akshepa),
anaesthesia, and various kinds of pain (Sula), and swelling
(Sopha) of the body. The deranged Vdyu, having enter- *
ed the natural seats of the Pittam or Kapham, develops
symptoms, which are peculiar to either of them, and
gives rise to numerous diseases. 24 — 25.

The symptoms, which characterise the union of the
deranged Vdyu with the Pittam (in its particular seat)
are a burning sensaSon, heat, thirst, and loss of conscious-
ness, in addition to the symptoms of the VAtaja disease
so generated in that particular part of the body, while
a similar unison with the Kapham develops coldness,
swelling and heaviness (of the affected part). The
disturbed or agitated Viyu in unison with the principle
of blood gives rise to a sort of pricking pain (pins and
needles in the affected locality), which can not bear the
least touch, or is marked by complete anaesthesia, and
symptoms, peculiar to the deranged Pittam, follow
in its train. 26 — 28.

Vomiting, and a burning sensation, etc. in the body,
mark the instance when the Prftna VAyu is surchaiged
(Avrita) with the Pittam ; while weakness, lassitude,
somnolence and a general discolouring of the com-
plexion ( D. R,, — loss of taste ) characterise a case
when it is surcharged with the deranged Kapham A
burning sensation in the body, loss of consciousness or
epileptic fits, and n sense of giddiness (vertigo) and

Chap. 1.]

nidanI STHANAM.

7

physical languor arc the indications, which distinguish
a case of the Udana Vdyu being surcharged with the
Pittam ^ while a stoppage or absence of perspiration,
'appearance of goose-flesh on the skin, impaired diges-
tion, coldness and numbness of the affected part
characterise a case of the same being surcharged with
the Kapham. 29—32.

Copious- flow of perspiration, heat with a burning
scnsa¥iom in the body, and epileptic fits indicate a case
’ when the Samdna Vayu has become united with the
Pittam ; while a copious flow of stool and urine, and
an excess of mucous secretion (Kapham) from the nose
(fluent coryza) etc. and horripilation mark a case, where
it has become saturated with the Kapham. 33 — 34.

Heat and a burning sensation in the affected part
and a profuse menorrhagia markka case when the
ApAna V^yu becomes surcharged with the Pittam, where-
as a sense of heaviness in the lower limbs characterises
a case when it becomes overcharged with the Kapham,

35-36.

[Symptoms such as,] burning and jerking in the
limbs, and a sense of physical languor become manifest
in the event of the Vyana V^yu being surcharged with
the Pittam, while a general heaviness of the limbs, stiff-
ness or numbness of the bone-joints, and an incapability
of locomotion indicate the fact of its being surcharged
with the Kapham. 37— -38.

The Nidsinam of Vdta RUktam :~

An over-indulgence in grief, excessive sexual inter-
course, inordinate physical exercise, drinking^ large
quantities of wine, observance of a regimen of diet and
conduct in a particular season of the year which is im-
proper to it, use of articles of food which are not con-
genial to one’s own temperament and an improper or

8 THE SUSHRuA SAMHITA. tCliftp. f.

baneful use of such oles^inoiis substances (as oil, clari-
fied butter etc.) are the factors, which vitiate in common
the blood and Pittam of a person. The fjpregoing
causes especially tend to vitiate or agitate tfce VdyU
and blood in persons of delicate constitutions, or in
corpulent persons, or in those who observe form of
perfect continence. 39.

The vital VAyu becomes enraged or agitated by exces-
sive riding on horses, camels or elephants, or tflrough
the lifting or carrying of great weights, etc., or by an in-*^
ordinate indulgence in things which arc possessed of the
specific virtue of enraging or aggravating that vital
principle. On the other hand, an over-indulgence in
such articles of food as arc heat-making in their potency,
or a surfeit of edibles largely composed of sharp, acid or
alkaline substancesf as well as a large consumption of
potherbs etc., or an exposure to heat tends to vitiate
the blood of the organism, and which, on account of such
contamination, tends to speedily obstruct the passage of
the fleet-coursing Vdyu. The Vayu, thus impeded in its
coursc,lbecomes more and more agitated each moment,
and is prone to speedily agitate the blood in a similar
way. The antecedence of the term ‘*Vata” or “V^iyu"’
in the nomenclature of the disease (Vata-Rakta) is owing
to the precedence accorded to the action of the deranged
Vayu in bringing about the malady, although it effects
this in concert with the vitiated blood of the
organism. 40.

Similarly, the disease brought about by the agitated
Pittaifl, in conjunction with the vitiated or agitated blood,
is called the Fitta-'Eaktam, while the one incidental
to the combination of the deranged Kapham with
the vitiated blood is called Kapha-Eaktam. In a case
of Vl&a-Eaktam, the legs, or the lower extremities can

Cha^ L]

inDANA%THANAM^

9

not heax the least touch (H}rperaesthesia) and a sort of
pricking, {aercing pain (pins and needles) is experienced
in those regions. The legs become withered or
Strophie^ and lose all sensibility to touch. In a case
of PUdtt-BalEtam, the legs become extremely red, hot,
soft and swollen, characterised by a sort of indescribable
burning sensation. In a case of Kapha-Kaktam, the
l^s become.s^ollen and numbed . The swelling assumes
a whitish hue and feels cold to the touch, and is
•accompanied by excessive itching. In the Sdnnipitika
or Tridoshaja form of Dashta-Baktam, the legs exhibit
symptoms, which are respectively peculiar to all the
three preceding types. 41 — ^43.

Premonitory Symptoms:— In the incuba-
tive stage of the disease the legs perspire and become
cold and flabby, or (on the contrary^, the local perspira-
tion is stopped and the legs become hot and hard. More-
over, a pricking pain is experienced in the affected parts
which are marked by complete anaesthesia, heaviness, or
heat, and discolouring of the skin . The disease creeps
in either from the lower extremities, or in some cases,
first affects the upper ones and gradually extends dl
over the body like an enraged rat-poison.

Prog^nosls: — Theform of the disease in which the
skin of the part lying between the instep and the knee-
joint becomes abraded or spontaneously bursts open,
exuding pus and blood, attended with loss of strength
(Prdna) and flesh, curvature of the fingers, and eruptions
of nodules, should be regarded as incurable ; while a
case of one year’s standing admits only of pa 41 iative
measures. 44.

The ejnrs^ed or agitated Vdyu, while coursing swiftly
through the Dharaanis (nerves) of the body, shakes it in
quick succession, ahd a disease, (exhibiting such

3

lo THE SU3HRUTA*^SAMHITA [Chap. I.

Symptoms as shaking or convulsive jerks), is originated
which is called Akshepaka* (spasms, convulsions). The
form of the disease, iii which the patient falls to the
ground, at intervals, is called Apatitnaka (Epilepsy
without convulsions). The aggravated or agitated VAyu,
charged with an abnormal quantity of Kapham, some-
times affects and stuffs the entire nervous system, and
gives rise to a form of disease, which is palled Dands[-
patdaakami' (Epilepsy with convulsions), inasmuch as it
deprives the body of its power of movement and flexibility,®
making it stiff and rigid like a rod (Danda). 45 — 46.

The disease but rarely yields to medicine and, is
cured in rare instances only with the greatest difficulty ;
its characteristic symptom being a paralysis of the jaw-
bone, which makes deglutition extremely difficult. The
disease in which the enraged VAyu bends the body like
a bow is called Dhannshtambha (Tetanus). The disease
admits of being divided into two distinct types accord-
ingly as the body of the patient is curved internally
(Antari[yi(lQa, lit:— inwardly or forwardly extended,
emprosthotonos), or externally (7ahiri(yi(ma, lit ; — ex-
tended or bent on the back, resting on his heels and
occiput — Opisthotonos). When the extremely enraged
and powerful bodily Vdyu (nerve-force), accumulated in

* The patient suffers from vanishings [(dmyai^) and loss of con*
ftciousness through the instrumentality of the enraged and aggravated
Vdyu, hence the disease is so Gayactdsa,

t Jejjada holds that the enraged VUyu, in unison with the deranged
Kapham, gives rise to another kind of convulsions (Akshepaka) which he
has deminciinated as Dandi*pat^nakh which, exhibits such symptoms as
coldness, swelling and heaviness of the body on account of its being
brought about by a concerted action of the deranged Pittam and Kapham*
Several authorities aver that there are four distinct types of Akshepakah,
sbch as DaDd&*patd.fiakh, Anlar&ydmah, Vahirlylmah, and Akshepakh
of traumatic ( Abhigbitaja) origin.

Chap. t«]

NIDANJI STHANAM.

II

the regions of the fingers, insteps, abdomen, chest, heart
and throat, forcibly draws in the local ligaments (Sndyu),
the body becomes contracted and bent forward, bringing
about a* curvature of the inner trunk. The disease
in this form is called Ant ars^ys^ma Dhanushtambha.
The movements of the eyes become impossible, which
become fixed in their sockets ; the jaw-bones become
paralysed, Jhe sides are broken, and the patient ejects
(at i»ter\ials quantities oQ slimy mucous (Kapham).

•These arc the features which mark the first type
(Antar^yama Dhanushtambha). On the contrary, when
the same enraged Vdyu, centred or lodged in ligaments
which traverse the posterior side of the body, attracts
them violently, the body is naturally bent backward.
The patient experiences a sort of breaking pain at
the chest, waist and thighs, (which are ultimately
broken). The disease is called Vahiralya^ma, and should
be looked upon as beyond the pale of all medicinal
treatment. 47 — 50.

Four types of Akshepaka are usually recognised
in practice such as, the (i) one incidental to the
concerted action of the enraged bodily Vdyu and
Kapham (2), the one brought about through the union
of the enraged Vdyu with the deranged Pittam, (3),
the one due to the single action of the agitated Vayu
(4) and the one due to any external injury or blow
(Abhighdtaja).* An attack of Apatdnkah due to excessive
haemorrhage, or following closely upQn an abortion or
miscarriage at pregnancy (difficult labour), or which is
incidental to an external blow or injury (traumatic),
should be regarded as incurable. 51 — 52.

* Brahma Deva designated the four types of the disease, as Apat^nakah,
^amsrtBhta Akshepakab, simple Akshepakah and the Abhigbdtaja
(traamatic)»

13

THE SUSHRUTII 6AMH1TA.

The ditease, in which the extremely agitated
aififects the nerve chains (Dhamanis) which spread either
in the left or in the right side of the body, whether in
the upward, downward, or lateral direction, making them
lax and vigourless, and in which the joints of the other
side of the body become useless and inoperative, is called
Pakshligluita (Hemiplegia) by eminent 'physicians.
The patient, the whole or half of whose body has
become (almost) inoperative and lost all sensibility, but
who retains his consciousness so long as there remainso
the least vestige of vitality in the affected part, suddenly
falls down and expires, 53 — 54,

Prog'nosfs: — A case of Pakshdghdta (Hemi-
pl^ia), brought about through the single action of the
enr^ed or agitated V^yu of the body, can be cured
only with the greatest care and difficulty. A case of
the same disease, engendered by the ^gravated Vdyu
in conjunction with the deranged Pittam or Kapham,
proves amenable to medicine (Sddhya), It becomes in-
curable when caused through the waste of the root prin-
ciples (Dhitu) of the body. 55.

Apatantrakah (Convulsions) : — The Viyu,
aggravated (by its specifically exciting factors and
principles) and dislodged from its natural seat or recep-
tacle in the body in consequence thereof, courses upwards
and finds lodgment in the regions of the head, heart and
‘temples. It presses upon those parts and gives rise to
convulsive movements of hands and legs, or at times
bends them down.*

^KimptomS The patient lies with hk eyes
closely shut, or stares with a sort of fixed or vacant
gaze, the eyes remaining fixed or immovable. The
patimit loses all perception, and groans. Respiration
becpines difficult, or symptoms of temporary asphyxia

Quip. L]

NIDAKA StHANAM.

13

and unconsciousness set in. Consciousness and a normal
condition of the organism return with the passage
of the enraged V 4 yu from the heart, while on the
• other fiand the patient relapses into unconsciousness
simultaneously with the envelopment of the heart with
that enraged and Kapha-saturated Vdyu. This disease
is called Apatantrakah and is ascribed to the action
of the engaged Vdyu surcharged with the deranged
Kapham. 56.

* Manysfstambha:— The local Vdyu, agitated

through such causes as sleep in the day time, reclining
with the neck on an uneven place or pillow, gazing
upward for a considerable length of time, or looking
aside in a contorted way, and enveloped in the deranged
Kapham, gives rise to the disease known as Manyd-
stambha (wry neck or torticollis). *57.

Arditam (Facial Paralysis):— ^Pregnant women,
mothers immediately after parturition (^utikd), infants,
old and enfeebled persons are most prone to fall victims
to this disease*. It has been also known to result from
excessive haemorrhage or loss of blood. The local VAyu,
extremely enraged or aggravated by continuous talking
in an extremely loud voice, chewing of hard substances,
loud laughter, yawning, carrying extremely heavy loads,
and lying down in an uneven position on the ground,
finds lodgment in the regions of the head, nose, upper lip,
chin, forehead and the joints (inner cornea) of the eye,
and produces the disease called by distorting

the face. •>

Symptoms The neck and half of 4he face
Icmgitudinally suffer distortion and are bent. The head
shakes ; the power of articulating speech is lost, and the

* t1i« p^ion ot the text included within astetiaks baa been rejected
hy I^nddchirnr* » ipuftdus.

14 THE SUSHRUTAiSAMHlTA. [Chap.!.

feyes are distorted into a variety of shapes. The portions
of the neck and the chin, as well as the teeth on the
affected side become painful.

Premonitory Symptoms s— The^'^disease^

generally commences with shivering, horripilation,
cloudiness of vision, upcoursing of the bodily Vdyu and
anaesthesia, a pricking pain in the affected locality,
numbness or paralysis of the jaw-bone, or of the cervical
muscles of the neck. Physicians, conversant jviA the
^Etiology of diseases, call it Arditam (Facial paralysis). <
Prognosis A case of Arditam, appearing in an ex-
tremely enfeebled or emaciated patient, or exhibiting
such symptoms as a winkless vision, inarticulate speech
which hardly seems to come out of the throat, excessive
palsy of the face, as well as the one of more than three
years’ standing, shouid be deemed as incurable. 58.

GridhrES'i (Sciatica): — The disease in which the
two great nerve-trunks (Kandara), which emanating from
below the lower extremity of the thigh reach down to
the bottom of the insteps and toes, and become stuffed or
pressed with the enraged Vayu, thus depriving the lower
extremities of their power of locomotion, is called
Gridhrasi. 59.

VfS^V&Chi (Elbe’s paralysis or Bracial neuralgia): —
The disease in which the enraged V&yu affecting the
nerve-trunks (Kandar^) which run to the tips of fingers
from behind the roots of the upper arms, making them
incapable of movement and depriving them of their
p6wer of flexion or expansion is called Visvachi.* 60.

KfQShtukasirsha (Synovitis of the knee-
joints) An extrimely painful swelling in the knee-

^ When the aforesaid nerve of a sirgle arm is afTectd the disease is
re#tilot«d to H alona, while it attacks the both when both their nerves are
alieote4»

Chap. 1.}

nidanI STHANAM,

15

joints, which is originated through the concerted action
of the deranged Vdyu and the vitiated blood is called
Kroshtukasirsha from the fact of its resembling the
•head of ^ jackal (Kroshtuka) in shape. 61.

Khanja (Lameness): — The disease proceeds from
the drawing up of the nerve trunks (Kandard) of a leg
by the deranged Vdyu lying about the region of the
waist. Wheij both the legs are similarly affected, the
patiefit is called a Pangu. He, whose legs tremble before
starting for a walk and who afterwards manages to go
on limping is called a KaWya Khanja one in whom the
bone-joints become loose. 62 — 63.

V^ta Kantaka : —The local Vdyu, enraged by
making a false step on an uneven ground, finds lodg-
ment in the region of the ankle (Khudaka, instep
according to others), thus givings rise to a disease
which is called Vdta Kantaka. The burning sensation
in the soles of the feet caused by the enraged local
Vdyu, in conjunction with the deranged Pittam and
blood, is called Pfiida-dfiiha, which is generally seen to
afflict persons of pedestrian habits. When the legs are
deprived of all sensibility of touch, and a sort of tingling
pain is experienced in them it is termed Pstdaharsha,
which is due to the deranged action of the Vdyu and
Kapham. The disease in which the enraged local Vdyu
dries up the normal Kapham lying about the shoulder-
joints is called Ansa-shoshaka. The form in which the
aggravated local Vdyu contracts the nerves of the arms
is called Avav^huka^. 64—67.

V^d h I ryayam (deafness) : —The disease occurs
only when the deranged VAyu, either singly or sur-

* The Ansa-shosha is due to the single action of the enraged V^yu,
while Ava-v&huka is d«e\6 the concerted action of the deranged V&yu

and Kapham.

I6 THE SUSHRUTA’SAMHITA. CChap. I.

c^rged with the Kapham, stuffs the sound-carrying
channels (Srota) of the ears. 68.

Kama S'ulam S— The disease in which the
deranged Vdyu causing a piercing pain in the r^ions of
the cheekbones, head, temples and neck, gives rise to a
sort of aching pain in the tympanum, is called Kama-
s'ulam (otitis). The local VAyu, deranged and saturated
with the Kapham stuffing the nerves (Dhaipani) which
conduct of the sound of speech, produces complete (in
some cases partial) loss of the power of speech — eg.
Mnka (dumbness', M jnmin a (nasal voice) and Gad-g^ada
(indistinct speech). 69 — 70

A sort of pain, which (rising from the bowels or the
urinary bladder and ranging downward) gives rise to
a bursting sensation in the regions of the anus and the
genitals, is called Zhini, whereas the one, rising upward
from the preceding parts and extending up to the region
of the intestines, is called Prati-tuni. A distension
of the abdomen (Udara), attended with the incarceration
of flatus (Vdyu) and an intense pain and rumbling in its
inside, is called Adhmdaam (Tympanites). When it first
affects the stomach (Amdsdya) and is unattended with an
oppressive feeling about the heart and pain at the sides'
it is called Fratygdhnufnam. The Vdyu saturated with
the deranged Kapham causes the preceding type of
distemper. 71— 74.

A knotty stone-like tumour (Granthi) of consider-
able density, whether fixed or mobile, and appearing
below the umbilicus, and havii^ an elevated shape which
is alWajiB found to be extended in an upward direction, is
called a Viftgsthilg, (which) as its name implies, is due
to the action of the local deranged Vdyu. The tumour,
thus formed, obstructs the emission of flatus and impedes
the evacuation of faeces. A tumour of similar shape,

Chap. I.] NIt)ANi!f STHANAM. 1 7

appearing laterally or across the region of the abdomen
(Jathara) and obstructing the passage of stool, urine

and flatus (Vdta) is called a Pratyashthilsi. 75—76.

•

Thus enSs the first Chapter of the Nid^na Slhanam in the Sushruta
Samhita. which treats of the Nidanam of the diseases of the nervous
system. •

CHAPTER II.

f/

Now we shall discourse on the (tf

Ars'as ( Haemorrhoids), i .

Haemorrhoids may be divided into six c(jasses vis : —

(i) Vataja (due to the action of the deranged V^yu),

(ii) Pittaja (due to the action of deranged.Pittam), (iii)
Kaphaja (due to the action of deranged Kaphato), (iv)
Raktaja (due to the action of the vitiated blood), (v)
SannipAtaja (due to the concerted action of the deranged
Viyu, Pittam and Kaphami and (vi) Sahaja (congenital).

Pathology The deranged VAyu, Pittam, etc.
enraged by their specific aggravating causes, or by such
acts or conduct as partaking of food composed of in-
compatible substatfees, eating before the previous meal
has been digested, inordinate sexual intercourse, sitting on
the haunches, excessive riding, and the voluntary suppres-
•sion of any natural urging of the body, either severally
or in combination of two or three Doshas, or vitiating
the blood of a person, who observes no moderation in
food and drink &c., become dislodged from their natural
seats in the body [according to the law of Prasdranara
(expansion and change of place by a deranged organic
principle)] and are carried down through the large
intestine (Pradhdna Dhamani) into the descending colon
and getting lodged therein, give rise to growths of
polypi or fleshy condylomata, which are known as pilei.
These growths chiefly appear in persons suffering from
impa#ed digestion (Agni), and gain in size through
friction with the wearing apparel, weeds, wood, lumps
Ctf clay or stone, or by contact with cold water. 5.

The lower end of the large intestine, which passes
into the flejcute of the rectum and measures four and

Chap, ri]

NIDANA«STHANAM.

19

a half fingers in length, is called the Gudam (lit —
the channel of fecal matter), the interior of which is
provided with three spiral grooves. Each of^hese grooves
c» ring-li&e muscles lie a finger and a half apart, and
are respectively known as Pravdhini, Visarjani and
Samvarani, or the grooves of out-flow, defecation and
closure of the anus (sphincter ani), covering a space of
four fingers ,and having laterally an elevation of one
finger’d width. 4,

• Metrical Texts : — These grooves arc like the
involuted indentures of a conch shell, situated one above
the other, coloured like the palate of an elephant. A
part of the channel, half a finger’s width in length as it
is usually measured from the outer hairy orifice of the
rectum, is called the anus (Gudoushtha), 5 — 6.

The first of the aforesaid grooves^r rings lies about
a finger’s width apart from the orifice of the anus.

Premonitory Symptoms A non-relish
for food, a tardy and difficult digestion of food (brought
into the stomach), acid eructations, a sense of weakness
in the thighs, a rumbling sound in the intestines, emacia-
tion of the body, frequent eructations, swellings around
the eyes, a croaking sound in the intestines, cutting
pain in the rectum (Guda), apparent indications of an
attack of phthisis, jaundice, dysentery, cough, dyspnoea,
vertigo, somnolence, excessive sleep, weakness of the
organs (Indriya), are indications which predict the
advent of this disease, and which b^ome more marked
with its progress. 7,

The Vsftaja Type: — Piles, due to the action
of the j^ravated Vdyu, are non-exuding, rose-coloured,
and uneven in their surface. They resemble the Kadamba
flowers in structure!, and are either tubular or sharp-
pointed like a needle, sonjetimes assuming the shape of

20

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. 11.

the wild Tundikeri flo\vcr. The stool of a hsemorrhoid
patient of this type becomes excessively hard, and can
be evacuated anly in a sitting posture, with the greatest
pain and difficulty. An excruciating painjs expert
enced in the regions of the waist, back, sides,
anus, umbilicus and the genitals. Symptoms peculiar
to Gulma, Ashthild, enlarged spleen and abdominal
dropsy add to the distress of the patient, ^whose skin,
nails, eyes, teeth, face, urine and stool alsq, assume a
dark black colour. 8.

The Pittaja Type : —Piles, brought on
through the action of the deranged Pittam, are slender,
blue-topped, shifting in their nature, yellowish in their
hue, or are coloured like shreds of liver, resembling in
shape the tongue of the Suka bird. They are thick at
middle, like barlgy' grains, or resemble the mouth of
leeches and secrete a sort of slimy exudation. The
stool is marked with blood, and the patient complains of
a painful, burning sensation (in the rectum) at the
time of defecation. Fever, with a burning sensation and
thirst, and epileptic fits, supervene. The skin, nails,
eyes, face, teeth, stool, and urine of the patient assume
a yellow hue. 9.

The Kaphaja Type Piles, due to the action
of the deranged Kapham, become white, are sunk
about their roots, and are hard, round and glossy. They
assume a greyish hue and resemble the teats of a cow or
the stones of the Karira, or of a Panasa fruit. These
piles do not burst, nor do they exude any sort of secretion.
The jjiatient feels an irresistible tendency to scratch the
excrescences. The stools become copious in quantity
and are chai-ged with mucous (Sleshmi), resembling
the “washings of meat Indigestion, fever with shivering
(^ita-jvara), and heaviness of the head and oedema

Chap. II.]

NIDANjt STHANAM.

21

with a non-relish for food arc the symptoms which be-
come manifest with the progress of the disease. The
skin, finger nails, eyes, teeth, face, stool and urine of the
patient also assume a white colour. lo.

The Raktaja Type : -Piles (haemorrhoids),
having their origin in the vitiated condition of the blood
resemble the sprouts of the Vata tree in shape and are
of the colour of red coral, or the seeds (dark red)
of ftunja berry. They exhibit all the symptoms,
which arc peculiar to the Pittaja type of this disease.
Pressed hard by the constricted feces in their
passage through the anus, they suddenly give rise to a
hjemorrhage of vitiated (venous) blood, and symptoms
characteristic of excessive bleeding arc found to
supervene, il.

The Sannipa'ta TypetS-ln a case of

hiumorrhoids due to the concerted action of the
deranged Vdyu, Pittam and Kapham, symptoms
characteristic of each of these types manifest themselves
in unison, 12.

The Congenital Type Congenital haemor-
rhoids (Sahaja Arsas) are usually ascribed to defects in
the semen and ovum of one’s parents and should be
medicinally treated with an eye to the special deranged
Doshas involved in the case. The polypi (in this type)
are hardly visible and are rough and yellowish, with their
faces turned inward. They are extremely painful, A
person suffering from this type of piffcs gets thinner and
thinner eveiy day and cats but very little. Large veins
(SirA) appear on the surface of the body. Th^ patient
becomes irritable, the semen decreases in quantity,
making the procreation of a small number of children
possible only by hi n. The voice becomes feeble, the
digestion is impaired, and disorde]i*s jiffccting the head

22 the SUSHRUTA*SAMHITA, t Chap. II.

nose, ears and eyes follow. A croaking sound is
heard in the intestines, attended with a rumbling in the
abdomen. All relish for food vanishes and the region
of the heart seems to be smeared with a kind sticky*
paste (of mucous), etc. 13.

Auhoritative verse on the subject

A qualified physician should undertake the medical treat-
ment of haemorrhoids which occur either, about the
outer or the middle groove of the rectum, (in as.murii as
they prove amenable to medicine). A polypus, appear- •
ing 'about the innermost ring or groove of the rectum,
should be treated without holding out any definite hope
of cure to the patient. 14.

LingiCrs'as (Fig warts or condylomatous growths
about the genitals) : —The deranged and aggravated
Viyu etc., findings lodgment in the genitals, vitiate
the local flesh and blood, giving rise to an itching sensa-
tion in the affected localities. The parts become ulcerat-
ed (through constant scratching) and the ulcers become
studded with sprout-like vegetations of flesh(warts), which
exude a kind of slimy, bloody discharge. These growths,
or excrescences generally appear on the inner margin, or
on the surface of the glans penis, in the form of soft,
slender vegetations of skin, resembling the hairs of a
small brush (Kurchaka). These vegetations ultimately
tend to destroy the penis and the reproductive faculty
of the patient.

Bhagstrs'as: — The deranged Vdyu etc. of the
body, lodged in the vaginal region of a woman, gives rise
to sim^r crops of soft polypi in the passage. They
may isolated at the outset, and (by coalescing)

may a^ume the shape of a mushroom or an umbrella,
secieliiaf ® slimy, foul-smelling blood.

. the deranged Vdyu, etc. may further take an

Chap, It]

midanA STHANAM,

23

upward course, and finding a lodgment in the ears, nose,
mouth and eyes may produce similar warts in those
localities. Warts, which crop up inside the cavities of
^ the ear^ may bring on earache, dumbness, and a foul dis-
charge from those organs, while those (cysts) cropping up
in the eyes will obstruct the movement of the eye-lids,
giving rise to pain and a local secretion and ultimately
destroy the eye-sight. Similarly, such growths in the
nostt'ils produce catarrh, excessive sneezing, shortness
of breath, headache, nasal speech and the complaint
known as Putinasya. Such vegetations cropping up in
and about the lips, palate or the larynx, tend to make the
speech confused and indistinct. When appearing in the
mouth, they impair the faculty of taste, and diseases
which affect the cavity of the mouth follow. The ex-
cited Vyana Vdyu, united with the aggravated Kapham,
produces a kind of hard papillomatous growths on the
skin (about the anus) which are called the Charmakilas
(papillomata).* 1 5.

Authoritative verses on the subject :

— These Charmakilas may be attended with a kind of
pricking pain through an excess of the deranged Vdyu,
whereas those which have their origin in the deranged
Kapham (lymphatics) assume a knotty shape and be-
come of the same colour as the surrounding skin. On
the other hand, they become drj^, black or white, and
extremely hard through an exuberance of the deranged
local blood and Pittam. 16. f

The symptoms of polypi, appearing in the neighbour-
hood of the anus, have been described in full, \^ hile the
general characteristics of those, which are found to
crop up around the genitals, have been briefly discoursed

• According to otiliers, ChnrmakiUs may crop up on the skin of any
part of the b dy.

THE SUSHRUlIV SAMHITA.

tChap. II.

i4

upon. An intelligent physician should ponder over
the two groups of symptoms while engaged in treating
a case of piles. A case of piles exhibiting symptoms
peculiar to the two deranged Doshas is cayed the*
Samsargajam. Six distinct types of bio^Doshaja piles
are known in practice * 1 7. ^

Prognosis : — A case of piles due to the con-
certed action of the three deranged Doshas of the body,
(with its characteristic symptoms) but partially.defelop-
ed, may be temporarily checked (Yapya). Cases, which •
are of more than a year’s standing, as well as those in
which the haemorrhoids arc due to the concerted action
of tbe two Doshas (Samsargaja), or are situated in the
middle groove of the rectum, may be cured but with
the greatest difficulty. Cases of the vSanniptitika or
congenital (Sahaja^^ types should be given up as
incurable. The ApAna VAyu, in a person whose rectum
is overrun with such polypus growths, tries to pass out
through the anus, but is driven back upward, being
obstructed in its passage by the vegetations, and then
mixes with his Vyana VAyu, thus imparing (the five-
functioned) fire (Pittam) in his body. 18-19.

* Such cs (0 the one due to the concerted action of the deranged
Pittam and Kapham, (2) the one incidental to the simultaneous derange-
ment of the Vkyu and the Kapham, (3) the one brought about through the
disordered condition of the Vdyu and blood, (4) the one due to the
combination of the deranged Pittam and Kapham, ($) the one produced
by the concerted action of the deranged Pittam and blood, (6) the one
which results from the combined action of the deranged Kttpham
and blood.

■ 4

Thus ends the second Chapter of the NidS.naslh^nam in the Sus'ruta
Samhiti which deals with the Nidinam of piles.

CHAPTER in.

• Now* we shall discourse on the NidtCnam of AS'«*
marl (urinary calculi), i.

The disease admits of being divided into four several
types, such’as the Vdtaja, the Pittaja, the Kaphaja and
the ^ukraja ^(Seminal) concretions. An exuberance or
prepo»der,p.nce of the deranged Kapham should be under-
stood as the underlying cause of all invasions of this
disease. 2.

General aetiology : — The ^aphah of a man,
who neglects to cleanse (Sams'odhana) the internal
channels of his organism, or is in the habit of taking
unwholesome food, enrs^ed and aggravated by its own
exciting causes, is carried into thg urinary bladder.
Here it becomes saturated with the urine, and gives rise
to the formation of concretions or gravels in its cavity. 3.

Premonitory Symptoms:— An aching
pain in the bladder, with a non-relish for food, difficulty
in urination, an excruciating pain in the scrotum, penis,
and the neck of the bladder, febrile symptoms, physical
lassitude, and a goat-like smell in the urine are the
symptoms, which indicate the formation of gravel in
the bladder. 4.

Metrical Text : —The deranged Doshas involv-
ed in a particular case respectively impart their specific
colour to the urine, and determine th# character of the
accompanying pain. The urine becomes thick, turbid,
and vitiated with the action of the aggravated Doshas,
and micturition becomes extremely painful. $.

Leading Indications i — a sort of excru-
ciating pain is experienced either about the umbilicus,
or in the bladder, or at the median rape of the

4

26 THE SUSHRUfH SAMHITA. tChap. IH.

perineum, or about the penis, during micturition when
gravel is forming in the bladder. The urine is
stopped at intervals in its out-flow, or becomes charged
with blood, or flows out twisted and scattered like
spray, leaving a sediment of clear, sandy, red or yellow
particles of stone, which resembles a Gom^ha gem in
colour. Moreover a pain is experienced in the bladder
at the time of running or jumping or in shimming, or
while riding on horseback, or after a long journey. 6.

The ^leShmsCs'marl t—Stone or gravel, ork
ginated through the action of the deranged Kapham,
saturated with an excessive quantity of that Dosha by
the constant ingestion of phlegm-generating (Slesh-
mala) substances, increases in size at the lower orifice of
the bladder and ultimately obstructs the passage of -the
urine. The pressui^ and recoil of that incarcerated fluid
on the walls of the urinary badder gives rise to a kind of
crushing, bursting, pricking pain in that organ, which
becomes cold and heavy. A Kapha-origined stone or
gravel is white and glossy, attains to a large size, to
that of a hen’s egg, and has the colour of the Madhuka
flower. This type is called S’leshmds’mari. 7.

The PIttaJa As'marl The Kapham
charged (dried) with the deranged Pittam becomes hard
(condensed) and large in the aforesaid way, and lying at
the mouth of the bladder obstructs the passage of the
urine. The bladder, on account of the flowing back of
the obstructed urine into its cavity, seems as if it has
been exposed to the heat of an adjacent fire, boiling
Widt 4the energy of an alkaline solution. A kind of
sucking, drawing and burning pain is experienced in the
organ. This type of AaTmari is further marked by
symptoms which characterise Ushna-vAta (stricture).
The concretion is found to be of a reddish, yellowish

Chap. IILI

NIDANA iSCHANAM.

27

black colour like the stone of the BhallAtaka fruit, or it
is coloured like honey. This type is called Pittaja
As'mari. 8.

• The* VcCti^'inari The deranged Kaphara
(mucusl fnordinately saturated with the bodily Vdyu,
acquires hardness and gains in dimensions, and these
lying at thh mouth of the bladder obstructs the passage
of the urine. The incarcerated fluid causes extreme
pain i% the organ. The patient constantly under severe
^)ain gnashes his teeth or presses his umbilical region,
or rubs his penis, or fingers his rectum (PAyu) and
loudly screams. A burning sensation is experienced
in the penis, and urination, belching and defecation
become difficult and painful.* The concretions in this
type of As'mari are found to be of a dusky colour,
rough, uneven in shape, hard, facetted^and nodular like
aKadamva flower. This type is called Vdt As'mari. 9.

Infants are more susceptible to an attack of any of
the three preceding types of As'mari, inasmuch as they
are fond of day sleep or of food composed of both whole-
some and unwholesome ingredients, and are in the habit
of eating before the digestion of a previous meal, or of
taking heavy, sweet, emollient and demulcent food. In
children the bladder is of diminished size and poor in
muscular structure. These facts contribute to the easy
possibility of the organ being grappled (with a surgical
instrument) and of the stone* being extracted with
the greatest ease in cases of infantile ^sfmari. K).

The l^'Ukjnts'marl :~^ukrdsmaris or seminal
concretions are usually formed in adults owing Jo the
germination of semen in their organisms. A sudden or
abrupt stoppage of a sexual act, or excessive coition
tends to dislodge the^semen from its natural receptacle
• Stool aod Mine can fce voided onli! with the gieatest sttaining.

28 THE SySHRUTA SAMHITA- [Chap. IIL

in the body. The fluid thus dislodged, but not emitted,
finds a wrong passage. The Vdyu gathers up the fluid
(semen), thus led astray, and deposits it (in a round or
oval shape) at a place lying about the junctmn of the
penis and the scrotum and dries up the humidity with
which it is charged. The matter, thus formed, condensed,
and hardened, is called the seminal stone (Sukrdsmari),
which then obstructs the passage of the urine, giving
rise to pain in the bladder, painful micturjtiow, and
swelling of the scrotum. The stone vanishes under
pressure in its seat*, ii — 12.

Authoritative verses on the sub-
ject Concretions, sands and sediments found to be
deposited in the urine in a case of Bhashma-meha are but
the modifications, or attendant symptoms of a case of
stone in the bladder (Asmari). The same group of
symptoms and the same kind of pain are exhibited and
experienced in a case of gravel (S^arkard) as in a
case of stone (Asmari) in the bladder. The local
Vdyu coursing in its natural direction helps the dis-
charge of calculi (As'mari) with the urine in the
event of they being extremely attenuated in structure.
Particles of a stone broken by the Vdyu are called
urinary calculi {S'arkard). A pain about the cardiac
region, a sense of weakness and lassitude in the thighs,
a griping pain in the regions of the spleen and liver
(Kukshi-sula), a shivering sensation, thirst, hiccough or
eructations, darkness or sallowness of complexion,
weakness, emaciation with a non-relish for food and

t We CAD not but contemplate with admiration the fact that Suahruta
waa Awaie of the formation of seminal or spermatic concretions in the
seminal vesicles through degenerative changes of spermatozoa and other
secretions and their subsequent calcification as lately discovered by the
aavn^s of the West.—

Chap. IIM

NIDAN.^ STHANAM.

29

impaired digestion are the symptoms which are
manifest in a gravel-patient. A gravel {S'arkard)
obstructed at the mouth of the urinary channel is
rfietected* by the following indications ; — vis., weakness,
lassitud^, emaciation, cachectic condition of the body,
pain over the hepatic region (Kukshi-s'ula), a
non-relish Tor food, sallowness of complexion, hot and
high coloured urine, thirst, pressing pain at the cardiac
rcgiog and vomiting. 13.

, The bladder is situated in the pelvic cavity, sur-
rounded on its different sides by the back, loin (Kati),
umbilicus, scrotum, rectum (Guda), groins and penis.
This organ is provided with a single aperture or
opening and lies with its mouth downward, covered with
nets of nerves (Sird) and ligaments (Sn^yu), in the
shape of a gourd. The organ is^ extremely thin in
structure ; and thus situated within the pelvic cavity, it
is connected, through its mouth or external orifice, with
the rectum, the penis, and the testes. It is also known
by the name of Malddhdra (the receptacle of impure
matter) and forms (one of) the primary seats of vital
energy (Prdna)*. The ut inary ducts (ureters) pass close J
by the large intestines (Pakv^saya) and constantly
replenish the bladder and keep it moist with that waste
product of the System in the same manner as rivers
carry their contributions of water into the ocean.
These passages or ducts (which are two) are found to
take their origin from hundred# of branches (or
mouths tubuH uriniferi), which are not visible to the
naked eyes, on account of their extremely attenuated
structures and carry, whether in a state of sleep or
wakening, the urine from below the region of the

• The text hft* Frdmfyatanamt which means that an injury to the
urinary bladder may be attended with ^tal result.

30 ' THE SUSHRUm SAMHItA. tOwp. III.

itOmachf (Amdsfaya) into the bladder keeping it filled
with this important fluid of the body, just as a new
pitcher, immersed up to its neck in a vessel full of water,
is filled by transudation through its lateral poreS. 14.

In the same way the Vdyu, Kapham and Pittam are
carried into the bladder (through their respective ducts
or channels), and in unison with the retained' urine, give
rise to the formation of stone, on account of the slimy
character of the deposit produced . Stone is foriged in
the same way in the bladder as sediments are ultimately i
deposited from clear and transparent water at the bottom
of a new pitcher which contains it. As the wind
and lightning jointly condense the rainwater into
hailstones, so the bodily VAyu and Pittam (heat) jointly
contribute to the condensation of the Kapham in the
bladder and transfjjrm it into stone.

The V4yu in the bladder, coursing in its natural
downward direction, helps the full and complete
emission of urine ; while coursing in a contrary direction,
it gives rise to various forms of maladies such as,
Prameha, strangury, as well as seminal disorders ; in
short, it produces any urinary trouble to which the
bladder may be subjected, i $.

t From the kidneys.

Thu* ends the third Chapter of the Niddna Sthinam in the Sushruta
Samhili which treat* of the Nid^nam of urinary calcuti.

CHAPTER IV.

Now^we shall discourse on the NidlCiiam of Bhag"
andaram (fistula in ano and fistular ulcers), i.

The deranged Vdyu, Pittam, Kaphah and Sannipdtah
(a simultaneous derangement of the three bodily Doshas)
and extraneous causes (such as a blow etc.) give rise
to th# types of Bhagandaram known as Sataponaka,

' Ushtragriva, Parisrdvi, ^amvukdvarta and Unmargi.
The disease is so named from the fact that it bursts
the rectum, the perineum, the bladder and the place
adjoning to them (thus setting up a mutual communica-
tion between them). The pustules, which appear in this
regions are called as Pidakds in their unsuppurated
stage, while they are called Bhagancfcram when they are
in a stage of suppuration. A pain about the sacral
bone and an itching about the anus, accompanied by a
swelling and burning sensation, are the premonitory
symptoms of this disease. 3.

The ^ataponakah Type The Viyu,

excited, condensed, and rendered motionless by a course
of unwholesome food, gives rise to a pustule within
one or two fingers’ length from the rectum (anal
region, — Guda), by vitiating the flesh (areolar tissue)
and blood (of the locality). It assumes a vermilion
colour and is characterised by a variety of pricking,
piercing pain. If neglected at the oufeet, the pustule runs
into suppuration. Owing to its vicinity to the bladder,
the abscess or the suppurated pustule exudes a Jtind of
slimy secretion and becomes covered with hundreds

small Mcve-like holes, through which a constant frothy
discharge is secreted in lai^e quantities. The ulcer, thus
formed, seems as ifit is being thrashed with a rod, pierced

32 THE SUSHRUTX SAMHITA. [Chap, IV.

with a sharp instrument, cut with a knife, and pricked by
needles. The region of the anus cracks and bursts, and
jets of urine, fecal matter, flatus (Vdta) and semen
are emitted through these sieve-like holes, lliis type
of fistula is called Sataponakah (Sieve-like fistula
in ano). 3.

The Ushtra-grivah Type : -Tfie enraged
Pittam, carried down by the Vdyu (into the rectum) finds
lodgmeit therein, and there gives rise to a sm^Il, mised,
red pustule, which resembles the neck of a camel in^
shape, and is characterised by a varied kind of pain,
such as sucking etc. The pustule, not medicinally treated
at the beginning, runs into suppuration. The incidental
ulcer seems as if it is being burnt with fire or alkali, and
emits a hot, fetid discharge. Jets of urine, flatus (Vita),
fecal matter and soimen flow out of the ulcer in the
event of it not being healed up with proper medicinal
remedies. This type is called Ushtragrivah. 4.

The ParlsrsCvi Type ; —The enraged Kaphah,
carried down by the Vdyu (into the rectum) and lodged
therein, gives rise to a white, hard, itching pustule in that
locality, characterised by a variety of itching pains, etc.
If neglected at the outset, it soon runs into suppura-
tion. The incidental ulcer becomes hard and swollen,
marked by excessive itching , and a constant secretion of
slimy fluid. Jets of urine, fecal matter, flatus and semen
are emitted through the ulcer in the event of it not
being well cared for at the outset. This type is called
Parisrdvi. 5.

The SamvuksCvartah Type : — The en-
raged Vdyu, in conjunction with the aggravated Pittam
and Kapham, is carried down, and finds lodgment (in
the region of the rectum), giving rise to a pustule of the
sisje of tbe first toe, and characterised by a piercin f '

Chap. IV.] NIDANA^STHANAM. ^3

pain, and burning, itching sensations etc. Such a pustule,
neglected at the outset, speedily suppurates, and the
incidental ulcer exudes secretions of diverse colours,
characterised by a kind of whirling pain, which
revolves about, in the direction of the involuted
indentures (within the grooves of the rectum) such as
are found * within the body of a river or fresh water
mollusc. This is called SamvukAvartah. 6.

Tke .Unmstrg^l Type Particles of bones,
teaten with (cooked) meat by an imprudent, greedy, glut-
tonous person, may be carried down with the hard and
constipated stool by the Apdna Y&yu (into the rectum),
thus scratching or abrading the margin of the anus, or
burrowing into the rectum in the event of their being
evacuated in improper directions through (transverse or
horizontal postures). The scratch o% abrasion is soon
transformed into a fetid and putrid ulcer, infested with
worms and parasites, as a plot of miry ground
will soon swarm with a spontaneous germination of
similar parasites. These worms and parasites eat away
the sides of, or largely burrow into, the region of the
anus, and jets of urine, fecal matter, and flatus (Vdyu)
are found to gush out of these holes. This type of
Bhagandaram is called Unmdrgi. 7.

Authoritative verses on the suh--

Ject : — A pustule, appearing about the region of the
anus and characterised by a slight pain and swelling,
and spontaneously subsiding, shoufe be regarded as a
simple pustule, which is of a quite different nature
from a fistula in ano, which has contrary features (f.^.,
invariably found to be attended with a violent pain
and swelling etc., and takes a long time to heal).
A Fistula-pustule ^crops up within a space of two
firtgers' width of the Pdfu proper (distal end of the

5

34 ' the SUSHRUTH SAMHITA. [Chap. IV.

rectum), is sunk at its root, and attended with pain
and febrile symptoms. Pain, itching and burning
sensations are experienced about the anus after a ride
in a carriage, or after defecation. The anus "becomer
swollen, and the waist painful in the premonitory stages
of Bhagandaram. 8—9.

Prog^nOSiS Almost all the types of this
disease (Fistula in ano) yield to medicine after a
prolonged course of treatment, and are hard^ tqj cure,
except the Sannip^tah and traumatic ones, which arct
incurable. lo.

Thus ends the fourth Chapter of the Nidana Sth^nam in the Sushruta
Samhit^, which treats of the Niddnam of Fistula in ano (Bhagandaram).

CHAPTER V.

Now we shall discourse on the Nidl^am of Kush-
tham (cutaneous affections in general), i.

Improper diet or conduct; especially ingestion of
improper, unwholesome, indigestible, or inconge-
nial food; physical exercise or sexual intercourse
immediately, after partaking of any oleaginous subs-
tance, m sifter vomiting ; constant use of milk in com-
fcination with the meat of any domestic, aquatic
or amphibious animal ; a cold water bath after an
exposure to heat ; and repression of any natural urging
for vomiting etc. are the factors which tend to derange
and aggravate the fundamental principle of Viyu in a
person. The enraged or E^gravated V4yu, in combina-
tion with the E^itated Pittam and Kaf ham, enters into
the vessels or ducts fSird), which transversely spread
over the surface of the body. Thus the enraged Vdyu
deposits the Pittam and Kapham on the skin through the
medium of their channels and spreads them over the
entire surface of the body. The regions of the skin in
which the aforesaid morbific diatheses are deposited
become marked with circular rings or patches. The mor-
bific diatheses (Doshas), thus lodged in the skin, continue
to aggravate, and having been neglected at the outset,
tend to enter into the deeper tissues and thus contaminate
the fundamental principles (Dh^tus) of the body. 2.

Premonitory Symptomd^ :~A roughness
of the skin, sudden horripilation, an itching sensation in
the surface of the body, excess or absence of perspiwtion,
anaethesia of the parts, a black colour of the blood, and
a rapid growth and expansion of any ulcer (appearing on
the body) are the symptoms which mark the premoni-
tory stages of Kushtham. 3 .

36 tItE SUSHRUm samhitA.

Classification [Diseases, falling under the
group of Kushtham, may be divided into two broad
subdivisions], viz ., — Mahdkushthas (major) and Kshudra
(minor) Kushtkas^ the first consisting of seventandth®
second of eleven different types, aggregating eighteen
in all. The Mahdkushthas are classified as, Aruna,
Audumvara,Rishya-Jihva, Kapala, Kdkanaka,*Pundarika,
and Dadru. The minor or Kshudra-kushthas (Lichen and
Dermatitis) are Sthuldrushkam, Mahdkushtham,# Eka-
kushtham, Charmadalam, Visarpah, Parisarpah, Sidhma,i‘
Vicharchikd, Kitima, Pdmd, and Rakasa. All the types
of Kushtham, whether major or minor, involve the action
of the deranged Vdyu, Pittam or Kapham, and are con-
nected with the presence of parasites in those localities *
The preponderance of any particular morbific diathesis
(Dosha) in any case^^of Kushtham should be looked upon
as its originating cause. The type, known as Aruna
Kushtha, is due to the action of the preponderant Vayu ;
Audumvara, together with Rishya-Jihva, Kapdla and
Kdkanaka, to a preponderance of the deranged Pittam ;
while Pundarika and Dadru owe their origin to an
excess of the deranged Kapham. These types of major
or minor Kushthas are successively more extensive in
their action and more incurable on account of their
respectively invading a greater number of the bodily
elements (Dhdtus). 4 — 6,

]Vlah£^ku8hthas Arnna-knslitha owes its
origin to an exuberance of the deranged Vdyu. It is
slightly vermilion-coloured, thin and spreading in its
' #

* Geitain auiborities hold that, all types of Kushtham (cutaneous
a0‘^cUons} to be of paradtic origin. The Garuda Puranatn avers that, the
paiasites, which infest the external principles of the body, are the primary
catsses of cutaneous JCu5hthaika*he(av0niafjdh ihlemshajd

vdkya'mft^havdh. Cb* CLXIXV. 4,

Chap. V.]

tJlDANA^ STHANAM.

37

nature. A sort of pricking, piercing pain (is experienced
in the affected locality) which loses all sensibility to
the touch. The type known as Audumbara is coloured
and shaged like a ripe or mature Audumbara fruit
and has its origin in the deranged Pittam. The type
called Rishyajihva is rough and resembles the tongue
of a Rishya (Deer) in shape and colour. The type
known as ^apaila (Macula caerulae) resembles a black
(deep t blue) Kharpara ( baked clay ). The Es^kanaka
•type is characterised by a dark red and black colour
like the seed of the Gunja berry. A sort of sucking
and burning pain is experienced in the affected
locality in all the four preceding types of the disease
which are the outcome of the deranged Pittam. The
whole diseased surface seems as if burning with fire,
and emitting hot fumes. They are speedy in their
origin and rapidly suppurate and break. All these
types soon become infested with parasites. These
are the general features of these forms of Kushthas. 7.

Pundarika: —The patches resemble the petals
of a (full blown) lotus flower in colour, and Dadru
(Ringworm) assumes the colour (faint blue) of an
Atasi flower, or of copper. They are spreading in their
nature and are found to be overspread with pustules.
Both the Dadru and Pundarika types are raised, circular,
and characterised by itching and take a considerable
time to be fully patent. These are the general charac-
teristics of Dadru and Pundarika. 8/

Kshudra Kushthas We shall now des-
cribe (the features of the diseases known as) Esltadra-
knshthas (M.Text): — The type known as SthuUrnshka
appears about the joints. It is extremely thick at its
base, is cured withithe greatest difficulty, and is strewn
over with hard pustules (Arungshi). In the type known

3^ THE SOSHRtiTA SaMHITA. t CJhkp. V.

as of Hahiflnishtham the skin contracts, and with the
bursting of the skin (a piercing pain is felt in the affec*
ted part), which loses all sensibilityto the touch, accom-
panied hy a general sense of lassitude in the Hhnbs. Ik
the Ekaknshtham (Ichthyosis) type the skin assumes a
reddish black colour. It is incurable. In the form known
as Charmadalam (Hypertrophy of the skin) a burning,
sucking, drawing pain is experienced in the palms of the
hands and in the soles of the feet which become cha-
racterised with an itching sensation. The disease, which-
affects in succession the (organic principles of) skin,
blood and flesh, and speedily extends all over the body,
like Erysipelas, and is attended with a burning sensation
(Vidaha), restlessness, suppuration and a piercing pain
and loss of consciousness (epileptic fits), is called Visarpa
Kashtham. The form in which a number of exuding
pustules gradually extend over the surface of the body
is called Parisarpa Kushtham. The type of the disease
which is white and thin, and is characterised by itching
and does not create any disturbance (in the patient), is
called Sidhma (Maculae atrophicae). This form is generally
found to restrict itself to the upper part of the body.
Vicharohik^ (Psoriasis) is characterised by excessive pain
and itching and gives rise to extremely dry crack-like
marks on the body [hands and feet]. The same form of
malady attended with pain, burning and itching, and
restricting itself solely to the, lower extremities, is called
VipitdiksL The type in which the eruptions exude (a
kind of slimy secretion) and w’hich are circular, thick,
excessjfely itching, glossy and black-coloured is called
Kitiitta (Keloid tumours). Small pustules or pimples
cbftt^terised by an itching, burning secretion and
ai^k^ring on the surface of the body are called
lEczjtna). The preceding kinds of pimples attended

NIDANA*STHANAM.

39

0«p.‘v.]

wfth burning vesicles, are called Eacbcbns and are
found to be chiefly confined to the legs, hands and
buttocks. A sort of dry and non-exuding pimples
aharactensed by excessive itching and appearing all
over the body, is called Bakasi^ (dry Erythema). 9-10.

The forms known as Sthuldrushka, Sidhma, Rakasd,
Mahdkushtham and Ekakushtham should be considered
as offspring ^of the deranged Kapham. Parisarpa-kush-
tham iionp is due to the action of the deranged Vdyu,
while the remaining types (of minor Kushtham) owe
their origin to the action of the deranged Pittam. ii.

Kll^Sdin : — The disease knowr^ as Kildsam is
but another form of Kushtham. It may be divided into
three types according as it is brought about through
the action of the deranged Viyu, Pittam or Kapham.
The difference between Kildsam and Kushtham is that
the former confines itself only to theTvaka (the skin)and
is marked by the absence of any secretion * A case of
KilAsam caused by the action of the deranged Yiyu is
circular, vermilion-coloured and rough to the touch. The
affected part when rubbed peals off scales of morbid skin.
A case of KilAsam, due to the action of the deranged
Pittam, is marked by eruptions, resembling the petals
of a lotus flower (in shape and colour), and are attended
with an extremely burning sensation. In the type
originated through the action of the deranged Kapham,
the affected part (skin) assumes a glossy, white colour,
becomes thick and is marked by an ftching sensation.
The form in which the eruptions or patches extend and
become confluent, invading even the soles of the* feet,

* A case of Kushtham has its primary seat in the blood and skin (of the
patient), in which it lies confined during the period of incubation, after
which it attacks the skin and Secretes the characteristic secretion of the
deranged Dosha involved in tb

40 THE S^RUTA SA-MHITA.

the palms of the hands and the region of the anus, a:^in
which the local hairs assume a red colour shouli^ be
regarded as incurable. A case of Kildsham, wh h is
the outcome of a bum (cicatri:^) should be likewise'co»-
sidered as incurable. 12.

A preponderance of the deranged Vdyu in a case of
Kushtham (leprosy) is indicated by a contraction of the
skin, local anaesthesia, a copious flow of perspiration,
swelling, and piercing or cutting pain in the afl[pct«d part,
together with a deformity of the limbs and hoarseness*'
Similarly, an excess of the deranged Pittam in a case of ■
Kushtham, should be presumed from the suppuration of
the affected part, from the breaking of the local skin,
from the falling off of the fingers, from the sinking of
the nose and ears, from the redness of the eyes and from
the germination of parasites in the incidental ulcer. An
excessive action of the deranged Kapham, in a case of
Kushtham, gives rise to itching, discolouring and swelling
of the affected paij which becomes heavy and exudes
the characteristic secretion. The types, Pundarika and
Kdkanam, which are due to the germinal defect of
the patient, are incurable, inasmuch as they involve
(according to Dallana) the concerted action of the
three simultaneously deranged Doshas from the very
outset. 13.

Memorial verses As a tree, full grown in the
course of time, has driven its roots, which derive their
nourishment from the rain water, deeper and deeper
into the successive strata of the soil, so this disease
(Kushtham), first affecting and confining itself to the
upper layers of the skin, will invade the deeper tissues
and organs etc. of the patient, if unchecked until al-
most all the fundamental principles or elements Dhdtus
are attacked its virus in the course of time. 14.

' tifijXNA' STI ^AM. ‘ 4t-

- The symptoms of a case-pl; Kj^slrtbai^ confined only
to ;®*! serous (Tvaka) fluid of rlw skin are the loss of the
petioeption of touch, a scanty pei^piration,' itching and dis-^
•ofOTatinli and roughness f the affected part The symp-
toms whlch'manifest themselves when the disease is con*
fined to the blood are complete anaesthesia, horripilation,
absence of perspiration, itching and excessive accumu-
lation, of pus in the affected parts, The symptoms of
Kushtjham affecting only the flesh are thickness of the
patches, dryness of the mouth, roughness and hardness
of the patches which become covered with pustular
eruptions and vesicles, and an excruciating pricking pain
in, aifd numbness of, the affected part. The symptoms
of (Kushtham) invading the principle of fat only are a
fetid smell and an excessive accumulation of pus in the
iffected part and a breaking of the skin, exposing deep
gashing wounds which soon become infested with para-
sites. The body seems as if covered with a plaster.
Symptoms of (Kushtham) affecting pnly the bones and
the marrow are a sinking (lit : breaking) of the nose, a
redness of the eyes, loss of voice and the germination
of parasites in the incidental ulcers. Symptoms of the
disease restricting itself only to the principle of semen
are a crippled state of the hands and distortion of the
limbs, loss of the power of locomotion, spreading of
ulcers and all the other symptoms peculiar to the pre-
ceding types of the disease. 15—20.

A child, which is the offspring of the contaminated
semen and ovum of its parents afflicted with Kushtham,
should be likewise regarded as a Kushthi. ii*

Prognosis.— A case of Kushtham appearing
in a person of prudence and discretion and confined
only to the serum (Tvaka), flesh and blood of his orga-
nism should be regarded as curable. A palliative treat-

^ ^ 6

42 THE SOSHRUTA SAlitHlTA. tChup. V.

trient'isthe only remedy in cases where the disease is
found to invade the principle of fat ; whereas a case
where the poison is found to have penetrated into
any of the remaining organic principles should*be given
up as incurable. 22.

Wise men hold that, for killing a Brdhmana, or a wo-
man, or one of his own relations, for theft, as well as for
doing acts of impiety, a man is sometimes^ cursed with
this foul disease by way of divine retribution. Xhe disease
reattacki a man even in his next rebirth in the event oft*
his dying with It Uncurcd Kushtham (leprosy) is the
most painful, and most troublesome of all diseases. 23 — 24.

A Kushthi (leper), getting rid of this foul malady by
observing the proper regimen of diet and conduct and
by practising expiatorj'^ penances ^nd by resorting to
proper medicinal measures, gets an elevated status after
death. 25.

Kushtham (Leprosy) is a highly contagious disease ;
the contagion beyig usually communicated through
sexual intercourse with a leper (Kushthi), or by his touch
or breath, or through partaking of the same bed, and
eating and drinking out of the same vessel with him, or
through using the wearing apparel, unguents and
garlands of flowers previously used by a person afflicted
with this dreadful disease. Kushtham (Leprosy), fever,
pulmonaty consumption, ophthalmia and other Aupasar-
gika disease (incidental to the influences of malignant
planets or due to the effects of impious deeds) are
communicated from one person to another. 26.

Thu* ends the fifth Chapter of the Nldinaslhknam in the Sushruta
Samhiti which treats of the Nidinam of cutaneous affections (Kushiham^.

CHAPTER- VI.

Now ^ we shall discourse on the Niddnam of PrE*<
mcha (diseases of the urinary tracts), i.

It ma); be prognosticated that an idle man, who
indulges in day sleep, or follows sedentary pursuits or
is in the habit of taking sweet liquids, or cold and
fat-mjking or emollient food, will ere long fall an easy
* victim to this disease. 2.

Pathology : —The bodily principles of Vdyu,
Pittam and Kaphah of such a person get mixed with
improperly formed chyle of the organism. Thus deranged,
they carry down through the urinary ducts the de-
ranged fat, etc.^ of the body and find lodgment at the
mouth (neck) of the bladder, whence they are emitted
through the urethrai", causing diseases, known by the
(generic) name of Prameha. 3

Premonitory symptoms: -A burning
sensation in the palms of the hands and of the soles of
the feet, a heaviness of the body, coldness or sliminess
of the skin and limbs, sweetness and whiteness of
the urine, somnolence, lassitude, thirst, a bad-smelling
breath, a shortness of breath, slimy mucous deposit on the
tongue, palate, pharyx and teeth, clotted hair and an in-
ordinate growth of the finger and toe nails are the
indications which mark the advent of the disease. 4.

General Characteristics :--A copious flow
of cloudy or turbid urine characterises all the types of
the disease, which, together with the abscesSfes and
eruptions (Pidakd) which mark its sequel, should be

* The particle "cha” in the leal denotes other virus or niorbilie
matter. Datluia. * ,

t Kemain incarcerated therein accoriieg to 6}her«.

44 the 3USHRUTA SAMHXtA. IChajj. VI*

regarded as Involving the concerted action of the de-
ranged Doshas (Vdyu, Pittam and Kaphah). 5.

The Kaphaja Types Cases of Prameha,
which are caused by an exuberance of the ^eranged
Kapham, may be grouped under ten subheads such as,
Udaka-fmha, Ikshu-meha, Sur^-meha, Sikatd.‘fmha^ S'a-
nai’-mehai Lavanna-meha^ Pishiormefia, Sdndra-meha, S'uk^
ra-fmha BXid Phena-meha. The ten aforesaid, types are
curable, inasmuch as the medicines which tend to nmedy
the deranged Kapham (Dosha), the cause of the disease,^
prove also remedial to the other principles of the body
(flesh, marrow, blood, semen etc) deranged (Dushya)
from the same causes. 6.

The Pittaja Types : — The types, which arc
brought about through an exuberance of the deranged
Pittam, are named as Nila-meha, Hariclrd-meha, Amla-^
meka, Kshdra^-meha, Manjiskthd-meha^ and S* onita-meha*
Palliation is all that can be effected in these types,
inasmuch as the medicines which tend to correct the de-
ranged Pittam, which has brought on the disease, fail
to exert similar virtues on the organic principles
(Dushyas) deranged by it. 7.

The Vettaja Types The types of Prameha
which are produced by an aggravated condition of
the bodily VAyu are divided into four subgroups, such as
Sarpi-meha, Vasd-tmha, Kshoudrortmha and HasH-tneka.
Th^e should be regarded as most incurable inasmuch as
no kind' of medicine can restore the fleet-coursing, deep
diving {ie. invading the bones and the marrow) Vdyu,
which the same time also augments the Pittam, to its
normal, state and thus advances (unchecked) in its work
of di^tegration. 8, / -

‘The deranged Kaphah; in conjunction with the
^inOfl»d).Pitt»n, Viyn and fat, gives rise to all Knphaja

Chap, VI. NIDANA STHANAM. 45

types of Prameha. The deranged Pittara, in conjunc-
tion with the deranged V4yu, Wood, fat and Kapham,
produces the Pittaja ones ; while the deranged in

uhison wil^ the deranged Kapham, Pittam, fat, marrow
and VasA (myosin), engenders the types of VAtaja
Prameha.

Symptoms Of Kaphaja-Mehas : — The

urine* of a person suffering from an attack of TJdaka-
meha Becomes white and water-like and is passed without
fhe least pain. In a case of Ikshximeha the urine
resembles the expressed juice of sugarcane. It has the
colour of wine in a case of Surtimeha.- The urine in a
case of Sikats^aieha is passed with pain and is found
to leave a sediment of extremely fine and sand-like
concretions {Sikata's). In a case' of Sanaimeha the
urine gushes out at intervals in jets and is charged
with a slimy mucous (kaphah). The urine in a case of
Lavauameha becomes limpid (norr-viscid) and acquires
a saline taste. There is horripilation at the time of
micturition in a case of Pishtameha (Chyluria), the
urine resembling a stream of water, charged with a
.solution of pasted rice (Pishtam).

In a case of Sitndrameha, the urine becomes
thick and turbid, while in a case of Sukramelia
the urine resembles semen (or the urine is found to
be charged with semen MAdhaba). In a case of

* Tl e Sanskrit term Meha literally means to micturate. The verbal
noun Mefaanam signifies urination as well as the act of passing any morbid
jiieibMl secre'tion. Hence the urine in most of ihesh cases dCnftrs the
fact of its being charged with pus or any other morbid secretion of the
ntinaty oigani such as Ojah (albumen), marrow, etc., which imparts ihcit
eharacterittic colours to the fluid, —a lisct which deteroiines the nomen-
clk(ttte of the disease antf 'forms the keynole of its diagnosis in the

'' ...

46 THE SUSHfeUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. I.

Phenamelia the patient passes frothy urine in broken
jets. 10. ^

Symptoms of PIttaJa Mehas Now we

shall describe the characteristic features ofuthe typ^s
of Prameha, which are due to the action of the deranged
Pittam. The urine in a case of Nilai)iei];ia becomes
frothy, transparent and bluish* The urine in a case of
Haridri^msha becomes deep yellow like turmeric
(Haridrd) and is passed with a burning paiif. The
urine in a case of Amlameha acquires an acid taste and
smell* The urine in a case of Kshairameha* resembles
an alkaline solution filtered (through a piece of linen).
The urine in a case of Manjisthaimeha resembles the
washing of the Manjisthd, while in a case of Baktameha,
the urine is found to be of blood-colour ;or charged with
blood - Mddhava). 1 1 .

Symptoms of V^taja- Mehas Now we

shall describe the characteristics of the different types of
Prameha, which are due to an exuberance of the
deranged Vdyu. In a case of Sarpimeha, the urine
looks like a stream of clarified butter, while in one of
VassCtneha it resembles the washings of Vasd. In a case
of Kshaudrameha, the urine looks like honey and
acquires a sweet taste. In one of Hastimeha, the
patient passes a copious quantity of urine, like an
excited elephant, at a time, and in one unbroken stream,
(the organ becoming steady immediately after the act
of micturition). 12.

Supervening symptoms :-The fact of

the ferine being assailed by a swarm of flies, lassitude,
growth of flesh (obesity), catarrh, looseness of the limbs, a

^ ^ Th« winc.acquiteii a distiact alkaline taste, mcll, colout and touch.

, f (pataka has included It witbm K^haudra Meha and Madhtt Ue a*

cup. VL] SiDANA STHANAM. 4}^

non-relish for food, indigestion, expectoration of mucous,
vomiting, excessive sleep, cough and laboured breathing
(^visa) are the supervening traits (Upadrava) of the
Eaphaja* -Frameha. A piercing pain in the testes, a
pricking fveda) pain in the bladder, a shooting pain
(Tuda) in the penis, a griping pain at the heart, acid
eructations,* fever, dysentery, a non-relish for food,
vomiting, a^ sensation as if the entire body is emitting
fumes^ , a burning sensation in the skin, thirst,
•epileptic fits, insomnia, jaundice (Pdndu) and a yellow
colour of the stool and urine are the supervening
symptoms which mark the Pittaja tjpes of Prameha.
An oppressive feeling at the heart (Hridgraha), eager
longings for foods of all tastes, insomnia, numbness
of the body, fits of shivering, colic pain and constipation
.of the bowels are the supervening symptoms, which
specifically mark the Va'taja types. Thus we have
described the nature of the twenty different types of
Meha with their supervening evils as well. 13-16.

The ten different types of Pidaki (abscess, carbun-
cles, pimples, pustules etc.) arc found to crop up on the
bodies of patients, suffering from Prameha, and abounding
in fat and Vas^, and whose fundamental principles have
been affected by the simultaneous derangement of
the Vdyu, Pittam and Kapham. They are named as
Sirslviksl, Sarshapiktf, Eachchapiksl, Jsllini, Vinatff,
Futriui, Masurik^, Alaji, Vid^rikif and Vidradhikif. 17.

Metrica.! Texts l — An al^cess which is raised
at the margin and dipped in its centre, so as to resemble
an Indian saucer in its shape is called SarsCviki •IMmp-
les or pustules of the shape and size of white mustard
seeds are called Sarshlfpikif. An abscess, resembling
(the back of) a tortoise in shape and attended with a
burning sensation, is called Kaohehapikd by the wise.

" 'J'Hfi SOSHRl)TA SAMaiTAi' Vt.

An abscess studded with slender ^Kgolti^tions of fftsh aod ^
attended with an intolerable burning sensation is called
jJfUini* A large blue-coloured ' access (carbuncl^,,

appearing on the back or the abdomtiri, andn.&uding^^

slinsy secretion and attended with a deep-seated pdin is
called Vinattt A thin and extensive absces%<studdM
withslender pustules -D.R.) is called Phtrinf. Pimples t^
the size of lentil seeds are called Masnriklt ,, A dreadful
abscess which is of a red and white colour, staidded over
with blisters or exuding vesicles is called Alaji> A hai<£j
and round abscess as large as a (full-grown) gourd is
called VidrfrikA An abscess of the Vidradhi type is
called Vidradhikit (carbuncle) by the wise. An incidental
abscess in a case of Prameha should be regarded as
having its origin in the same morbific principle (Dosha)
as that which has produced the disease (Prameha) i8-28.

Prognosis A PidakA.or an absce.ss, appearing
about the region of the heart, anus, head, shoulder, back
or at any of the vital joints (Marma) of the body, and
attended with other supervening symptoms producing
extreme prostration [impaired digestion— D. R.] in
the patient should be abandoned as incurable. In
a case of Vdtaja meha, the deranged Viyu presses
all the fundamental principles out of the body through
the urethra and rages rampant in the lower part of the
body, united with the deranged fat, marrow and Vasi.
Hence a case of VAtaja meha, (or its accompanying
' abscess), is held as incurable. 29-30.

A person in whom the premonitory symptoms tPur-
varufiiam of Prameha) have apj^red and who passes
a little larger quantity of urine than usual, should be
iSOpsideibd as already afflicted with it. A person
afflifcted with all or half of the premonitory symptoms
of the disease arid pa;^ng a copious quantity of urine

v’ ?'

Chap. VI. HIBAN^ STHANAM. 49

3h0ul<I%e consl^l^rcil: as 6 ne suffering from an attack

* Prameha. *3 1 — ^32.

; ' A Prameha P ient afflicted with deep-seated absces-
^ and ftther dfetressing symptoms, which are usually
fotfnd to supervene in the disease, should be pronounc-
ed as suf ?ring from Madhumeha and adjudged incurable.
A Madhumeha patient seeks a halting place while walk-
ing, wants a place to sit on while halting, lies down if he
finds a#sitting place, and sleeps if he lies down. 33 — 34.

• As five mixed colours such as grey, brown, Kapila
(bluish yellow), Kapota (blackish grey), Mechaka
(light-green) may be produced by combination of the
five primary colours in definite proportions (such as
white, green, black, yellow and red), so a diversity of
causes, through the relative preponderance of the parti-
cular kinds of food, and of the deranged Doshas, root
principles (Dhdtu) and excretions of the body (Mala),
may be attributed to the origin of Prameha. 35.

Memorial verses All types of Prameha,
not properly treated and attended to at the outset,
may ultimately develop into those of Hadhumeha
types, which are incurable. 36

For English eqaiv»lent8 of the different types of Prameha compare
Cystitis (Acute Infective) — Frequent, painful micturition, small quantity
of urine voided with pain and urgency. Urine— slightly acid or alkaline in
reaction, cloudy, containing blood corpusclet. Cystitis (Chronic Infective)
--Great and frequent pain, in the lumbar region, rigor. Urine— thick,
ofTenaive and alkaline, containing ropy mucous and blood. Cystitis (Non*
Infective)— Symptoms like those of acute inilsiftmatory type. Urine-
acid and cloudy with mucous. Blood is generally present in
considerable quantity. Neuralgia of the bladder, compare Albuminuria,
Albumosuria, Hcemoglobinuria, Hoematuria, Peptonuria, pyuria,
Spermatorrbcea and Diabetes, Proteuria and Polyuria.

Thus endi the sixth Chapter of the Nidftna Sth&nam in the Sushruta
SamhitI, which treats of t ie Nidknam of Prameha*

7

CHAPTER Vn.

No\y we shall discourse on the Nidstnam of Uda.ra
(dropsy with an abnormal condition of the aj^domen). i.

Metrical Text The royal sage Dhanvan-
tari, the foremost of all pious men who equalled
in splendour and glory the lord of the celestial, thus
blissfully discoursed on the Niddnam of Udara t6'
Susruta, the son of the holy Visvdmitra, who devoutly
approached him for that purpose. 2.

Classification : — This disease may be divided
into eight different types, of which four are prbduced
by the several actions of the three deranged Doshas of
the body and their concerted action as well. Of the re-
maining types, two being known as Plihodara (including
Yakritodara), and Vaddha-Gudodara (tympanites due to
the constriction of the anus), the seventh Agantuka
{traumatic or of extraneous origin), and the eighth
Dakodara (Ascites proper), 3.

Predisposing Causes The deranged

* Doshas of a person of extremely impaired digestion,
addicted to the habit of taking unwholesome food, or
of eating dry, putrid food, or of violating the rules of

' conduct to be observed in connection with oleaginous
measures etc.,* are aggravated and find lodgment in the

* abdomen; Thus appearing in the shape of an abdomi-
f iial tumour (Gulma), they give riseto thisdreadful disease,
' ■^tcfbded with all its characteristic symptoms. The lymph

chyle formed out of the assimilated food gets vitiated,

* impelled by the aggravated Vdyii, it percolates

♦ These include purgative, cmitic, and AhMva'sannm

Vll.] Nl'DANA StHANAM. ^ f

througli the peritoneum In the same manner as a quantity
of oil or clarified butter kept in a new earthen pot will
transude through the pores of its sides. It thus gradually
distends the skin (Tvak) of the abdomen. The process
becomes general all through the abdominal region and'
the disease (iJdara) is produced in consequence. 4 — 5, '
Premonitory sypmtoms : — The precursory
symptoms of the disease are loss of strength, complexion'
and appetite, emaciation of the muscles of the abdomen,
Sppearance of veins on its surface, acid reaction of food
closely following upon its digestion (Viddha\ pain
in the bladder, and swelling of the lower extremities.
The patient cannot ascertain whether his meal has been
digested or not. 6.

The VsCtaJa, Pittaja, and Kaphaja
Types: — A case of Udara in which the abdomen en-
larges on its sides and posterior part, and is over-
spread with nets of black veins should be ascribed to the
action of the deranged Vdyu. A pain(Sula), suppression
of the stool and urine (Andha) and a cutting and piercing
pain and flatulent rumbling in the intestines are the symp-
toms which likewise characterise this Vsitaja form of
Udara. A sucking pain in the abdomen, thirst, fever with
a burning sensation, yellow colour of the swollen skin of
the abdomen, on the surface of which yellow veins
•appear, yellow colour of the eyes, nails, face, stool and
urine and the rapid increase of the drpysical swelling, are
the characteristics of the Pittaja U^ra. In a case pf
Eaphaja type the dropsical swelling is cold to the touch
and becomes overspread with white-coloured Veins.
The abdomen seems heavy , hard, glossy and is extreme-
ly distended. The swelling slowly increases, and the finger-
•nails and face of ‘^the patient become white, and he
complains of a general lassitude. /-rp , . .

52

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHlTA

IChtp, VII.

The Tridoshaja Type Evil-natured wo-
men (with a view to win the affections of their husbands
or lovers sometimes) mix with their food and drink such
refuse matters of their bodies as nails, hair, fEe(jes, uriife,
catamenial blood etc. (which are supposed to be possessed
oftalismanic virtues). The three Doshas of tl^e body, vitia-
ted by such food or drink, or through imbibing any sort of
chemical poison (Gara) administered by one’s enemy, or
by taking poisonous waters, or Dushi-Visha (slov^ poison
whose active properties have been destroyed by fire dr
any antipoisonous medicine), will vitiate the blood and
give rise to a kind of dreadful dropsical swelling of the
abdomen, marked by the specific symptoms of each
of them The disease is aggravated in cold and cloudy
days and a burning sensation is felt (,in the inside of
the abdomen). The patient becomes pale, yellow and
emaciated, and is afflicted with thirst and dryness in the
mouth, and loses consciousness at short intervals. This
disease is also known as the dreadful Dnshyodaram. lo.

Pllhodaram. — (Spleen with dropsy of the abdo-
men) : — Now hear me describe the symptoms of Pliho-
daram. The blood and the Kapham of a person, derang-
ed and J^gravated through the ingestion of phlegma-
gogic food, or of those which is followed by an acid
digestionary reaction (Vidiha), often enlarge the spleen,
(which gives rise to a swelling of the abdomen). This
disease is called Flihodara by the experts. Plihodaram
protrudes on the left side of the abdomen, its characteristic
s)rmptoms being lassitude, low fever, impaired digestion,
lossibf strength, jaundice, weakness, and other distress-
ing symptoms peculiar to the deranged Pittam and
Kaphani. A similar enlargement of the liver through
similar causes on the right side of the abdomen is
called IdkftcUbAyfldftrajft ii— le.

Chip. VILI

KIDANA StHANAk,

53

Vaddha-gudodaram* :~The fecal matter,
mixed with the deranged Vdyu, Pittam etc. of the
body, lies stuffed in the rectum of a person \vhose in-
testines have been stuffed with slimy food (as pot herbs)
or with stones and hair (enteritis). They give rise to
a sort of abdominal dropsy by swelling the part between
the heart and the umbilicus which is called Vaddha
Gudodaram. Scanty stools are evacuated with the great-
est p^n and difficulty and the patient vomits a pe-
^culiar kind of matter with a distinctly fecal smell
(scyabalous ?). 1 3.

Parisr^Vi-Udaram : — Now hear me describe
the causes and symptoms of the type of Udaram which
is called Parisrs^vi-udaraxn. Thorny or sharp-pointed
substances (such as fish-bones etc.), carried down with
the food in a slanting way from the stomach into the
abdomen, sometimes scratch or burrow into the intes-
tines. Causes other than the preceding ones, (such as
a long yawn or over-eating etc.) may contribute to the
perforation of the intestines, giving rise to a copious
flow of a watery exudation which constantly oozes out
of the anus and to a distension of the lower part of the
abdomen situated below the umbilicus. This is called
Parisrdvyudaram which is marked by a cutting pain and
a burning sensation. 14.

Dakodaram : — Now hear me describe the
causes and symptoms of the type known as Dakodaram
(ascites). The drinking of cold water immediately after
the application of an Aunvdsanam or AsthApanam
enema, or closely following upon the exhibition V any
purgative or emetic medicine, or just after the taking of
a medicated oil or clarified butter, etc. tends to derange

* Dtopiicil swelling of the abdomen with tympanites due to the oont.
iiiatioii df the feettam koowQ at iateitiaal dbittueliom

54 '

THE -SUSHRUTA SAMHlTA. tChap. VII.

the water-carrying channels of the ;bod:y;' The same result
may be produced by the drinking of oil, etc. in inordi-
nate quantities The water, by percolating or transud-
ing through the walls of these channels, as before des-
cribed, inordinately enlarges the abdomen, which be-
comes glossy on the surface and is full of w^ter, being
rounded about the umbilicus and raised like a full-
bloated water-drum. The simile is complete as it
fluctuates under pressure, oscillates, and makes, a ‘pecu-
liar sound like a water-drum under percussion. 15.

Distension of the stomach, incapacity of locomotion,
weakness, impaired digestion, cedematous swelling of
the limbs, a general sense of lassitude and looseness in
the limbs, suppression of flatus and stool, and a burning
sensation and thirst are among the general characteris-
tics of the disease in its various forms. 16.

Prog'noSiS All cases of Udaram after the
lapse of considerable time develop into those of ascites,
and a case arriving at such a stage should be given up aa
incurable. 16 — 17.

. Thus ends the seventh Chapter of the Nidina Sihknam in the Sus'ruta
Samhitd which treats of the Niddnam of Udaram.

CHAPTER ym.

* Now* we shall discourse on the Niddnam of
Mudhag^arbham (false presentations and difficult
-labour), i. ^

Causes of Mudha-g'arbham : -Sexual
intercourse /luring pregnancy, riding on horseback, etc,
or in Sny «ort of conveyance, a long walk, a false step, a
*fall, pressure on the womb, running, a blow, sitting or
lying down on an uneven ground, or in an uneven
posture, fasting, voluntary repression of any natural
urging of the body, partaking of extremely bitter,
pungent, parchifying articles, eating in inordinate quan-
tities of ^dkas and alkaline substances, dysentery
(Atisdra), use of emetics or purgatives, swinging in a
swing or hammock, indigestion, and use of medicines
which induce the labour pain or bring about abortions,
and such like causes tend to expel the faetus from its
fixture. These causes tend to sever the child from the
uterine wall with its placental attachment owing to *a
kind of Abhighdtam (uterine contraction) just as a blow
tends to sever a fruit from its pedicel. 2.

Definition: — The fetus, thus severed and
dislodged from its seat, excites peristalsis not only in
the uterus, but induces a sort of constant, spasmodic
contraction of the intestinal cavities (Koshthas), pro-
ducing pain in the liver, spleen, etc.' The Apdna Vdyu,
thus obstructed through the spasmodic contraction
of her abdomen, produces any of the following* symp-
toms, viz. a sort of spasmodic pain in the sides, or
in the neck of the bladder, or in the pelvic cavity,

“ or in the abdomen, or in the vagina, or Andha (tymp-
anites with obstruction, etc A or retention of Mrine,

56 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. ICh*P- VIII.

and destroys the faetus, if immature, attended with
bleeding. In case the faetus continues to develop
and is brought in an inverted posture at the entrance
to the vaginal canal, and is impacted at tHht place,
or if the Apdna Vdyu gets disordered and conse-
quently cannot help the expulsion of the same, such
an obstructed faetus is called Hadha-garbhah. 3 .

Classification and Symptoms: -Cases
of Mudha-garbha may be roughly divided int© four
different classes such as, the Kilah, the Pratikhuraht
the Vijakah and the Parighah. The sort of false
presentation in which the child comes with its hands,
legs and head turned upward and with its back firmly
obstructed at the entrance to the vagina, like a stake
or a kila, is called Kilah. The sort of presentation, in
which the hands, feet and head of the child come
out, with its body impacted at the entrance to the
vagina, is called Frathikharah- The type in which only
a single hand and the head of the child come out
(with the rest of its body obstructed at the same
^lace), is called the Vijakah. The type in which the
child remains obstructing the head of the passage in
a horizontal position, like a bolt, is called the Parighah.
Certain authorities aver that, these are the only four
kinds of Mudhagarbha. But we can not subscribe to
the opinion (which recognises only four kinds of false
presentations), inasmuch as the deranged VAyu (Ap4na)
can. present the faetus in various different postures
at the head of the vaginal canal. Sometimes, the two
thigh* of the child are first presented, and sometimes it
comes with a single leg flexed up. Sometimes the
child comes with its body, bent double, and thighs
drawn up, so that only breech is obliquely presented.
Sometimes the ehild is presented, impacted at the head

Chap. VIII.J

NIDANA STHANAM.

57

of the passage with its chest, or sides, or back. Some-
times the child is presented with its arm around its head,
resting on the side, and the hand coming out first
Sdmctimesj, only the two hands are first presented, the
head leaning on one side; sometimes the two hands, legs
and the head of the child, the rest of the body being
impacted at the exit in a doubled up posture. Some-
times one leg. is presented, the other thigh being impacted
at the passage (Pdyu). I have briefly described these
e!ght sorts of presentation of which the last two
are irremediable. The rest should be given up as
hopeless if these are attended with the following compli-
cations viz.y deranged sense-perception of the mother,
convulsions, displacement or contraction of the repro-
ductive organ (yoni) a peculiar pain like the after-pain of
child birth, cough, difficult respiration, or vertigo. 4,
Memorial verses : — As a fruit, fully matured,
is naturally severed from its pedicel and falls to the
ground and not otherwise, so the cord, which binds
the feetus to its maternal part, is severed in course
of time, and the child comes out of the uterus ( into*
this world of action ). On the other hand, as a fruit,
worm-eaten or shaken by the wind or a blow, untimely
falls to the ground, so will a foetus be expelled out of its
mother’s womb, before its time. For four months
after the date of fecundation, the faetus remains in a
liquid state, and hence its destruction or coming
but of the womb goes by the name of'abortion- In the
course of the fifth and sixth months the limbs of the foetus
gain in firmness and density, and hence, its coming out
at such a time is called miscarriage. 5-7.

Prognosis • — The enceinte who violently tosses
her head in agonj^ (at the time of parturition) and
the surface of whose body becomes cold, compelling

8

58

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. VIII.

her to forego all natural modesty, and whose sides
and abdomen are covered with nets of large blue-
coloured veins, invariably dies with the dead child

locked in her womb. The death of the foefus in the

c

womb may be ascertained by the absence of movements
of the foetus (in the womb) or of any pain of child-birth,

I.

by a brown or yellow complexion of the enccinta^ cade-
verous smell in her breath, and colic pain in the abdomen
and its distension owing to the continuance of,the<^wollen
and decomposed child in the womb. 8-9. ‘

The death of a child in the womb may result from
some emotional disturbance of its mother, (such as
caused by bereavement or by loss of fortune during
pregnancy) ; while an external blow or injury (to the
womb) or any serious disease of the mother may also
produce the like result. A child, moving in the womb
of a dead mother, who had just expired (from convulsions
etc.) during parturition at term, like a goat (Vastdmeira)
should be removed immediately by the Surgeon from the
womb (by Caesarean Section) as a delay in extract-
ing the child may leads to its death. 10-: i.

* Csecsarean Section means incision of the uterus through the abdomi-
nal walls and extrication of the foetus therefrom. Operation like this upon
a dead subject requires no skill of a surgeon. Any one can do it without
the help of any anatomical knowledge. In modern times, when the
mother’s life is in peril, and the expulsion of the foetus becomes nearly
impossible, by the natural passage, owing to an existence of deformity
either in the parturient canal or in the forms and structures of the foetus,
to save both mother and child this operation is principally undertaken.

The evidence of similar attempts, in ancient India, is found recorded
in parages like what we have just translated and that the operation was
practised on living subjects, there is not the least doubt about it. This
custom is still preserved in Central Africa, and it is possible that the Egyp«
tians like Hindu philosophy and religion learnt this also from the Hindus.
‘‘Fclkin,*' says “Baas in his History of Medicine p. 70 * ‘saw a case of the
O^arean operation in Central Af»ca performed by a man, At oue stroke

chap. VllLj

NIDANA STHANAM.

59

Additional Text The bladder is ruptured, the dead child lies
like a weight upon the placenta and is pressed upward on the spleen, liver
and gall bladder. The mother shivers and is oppressed with tremor,
dryness of t]}e tongue, dyspncea and perspiration. She complains of
a ‘cadaverous smell in her breath and stands in danger of imminent
death. By these symptoms a physician shall know the death of the
child in the womb. This portion is partly recognised by Brahmadeva
and is totally rejelcted by Jejjaddchirya as spurious.

an incision was made through both the abdominal walls and the uterus*
The opening in the latter organ was then enlarged, the haemorrhage
checked by thd actual cautery, and the child removed. While an assis*
tant compressed the abdomen, the operator then removed the placenta.
The bleeding from the abdominal walls was then checked. No sutures
were placed on the walls of the uterus but the abdominal parietes were
fastened together by seven figure-of-eight sutures, formed with polished
iron needles and threads of bark. The wound was then dressed with a
paste prepared from various roots, the woman placed quietly upon her
abdomen, in order to favour perfect drainage, and the task of the African
Spencer Wells was finished. It appears that the patient was first rendered
half unconscious with banana wine. One houf after the operation the
patient was doing well. And her temperature never rose above loi F.
nor her pulse above io8. On the eleventh day the wound was completely
healed, and the woman apparently as well as usual.”

When we read this evidence of Felkin, we are reminded of the opera-
tive steps as described in our own ancient book of Surgery from which
modern surgeons have been able to borrow the operation of rhinoplasty.
It is a great pity that while in Africa the same practice is still retained
intact, we in India by spurious attempts and disgraceful contortions, subs-
titutions of false readings and dismal knowledge of grammar and rhetoric
try to prove in the face of strong evidence that in ancient India Gesarean
Section was attempted only on cases where one “might not perspire.”

If we take fsfqwni: in the sense of “a woman whose life is in great
danger” and not exactly in the sense of “a womsitj who is dead” as recom-
mended by Dalian and Arundulta (and which might have been the
meaning if instead of fqqn a word like aqiqn had been used in the text),
we find at once that Weber’s remark in his History of Indian Liltirature
p, 270 “that in Surgery they (the Hindus) attained to high proficiency”
is not based on the solitary evidence of rhinoplasty alone.

In performing obstetric operations with success examples like this are
not rare. If the two different readings and be taken con-

jointly into consideration we are impressed with the idea that in ancient

6o

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. VIlL

India Csesarean operations were very frequently undertaken in cases of
puerperal eclampsia, where the mother had been in the deplorable condi-
tion of a goat suffering from cramps and convulsions as well as in cases
of an accidental death notunlike that which fell to the lot of the poor
mother of him in whose name the operation is called. agoat ^\Xmc

V

destroyer (See Monier William’s Dictionary) hence a goat -destroyer = a
tiger or wolO or in cases where the presence of deformity in the parturient
canal or of malformation of the foetus prevented the nrlural delivery of a
living child. The incision is not to be made anywhere else but exactly
in the place where Felkin saw the illiterate Negro successfully apply his
knife, the selection of as suggested by some cofiamentators

being a tempest on a tea pot especially when the subject is beyond t^.e
grave. In a living subject the selection of a proper site for the o[:eration
is of course very commendable. Hence we venture to suggest that
extraction of the living foetus from the womb by making incision through
this part of the pelvis was also attempted later on. W^e extract here the
two different readings and leave our readers to judge whether we are
correct to draw the above inferences. — Ed.

gif«f : nf? sinHiiS An: jfiti

I B^gabhata S'drira Sthdnam. ch. 11. slo. 53 .

fwi

Thus ends the eighth Chapter of the Nid^na Sth^nam in the Sus'ruta
Samhitd, which treats of Nidanam of difficult labour and false presenta-
tions.

CHAPTER IX.

NoW^ we shall discourse on ' the Niddnam of
Vidra&hi (abscess etc.). I.

The blessed Dhanvantari, the honoured of the gods,
who for tile promulgation of the knowledge of the
Ayurveda ^ and for administering proper medicines
(to the sick), took his birth at KAsi, (Benares) as a
» king, thus fully discoursed on the symptoms of Vidradhi
(abscess etc.) to his disciple, SusTuta. 2.

Definition and classification The
extremely deranged and aggravated. Vayu, Pittam
and Kapham, resorting to the bone and vitiating
the Tvaka ( skin ), blood, flesh, and fat of a person
(with their own specific properties), gradually give
rise to a deep-seated, painful, round or extended
swelling which is called Vidradhi by the wise. The
disease admits of being divided into six types such as
the Vataja type, the Pittaja type, the Kaphaja type,
the Sdnnipdtika type, the Kshataja type (traumatic),
and the Asrija (which has its seat in the vitiated blood).
Now wc shall describe their specific symptoms. 3-4.

The VsCtEja. Type : — This abscess assumes a
black Or vermilion colour, is felt rough to the touch and
is characterised by a sort of excruciating pain. The
growth and suppuration of the abscess are brought
about in a variety of forms (owfng to the variable
and irregular action of the deranged Vdyu inolved in
these cases). 5. ♦

The Pittaja Type : — This abscess assumes a
blackish yellow colour or one like that of a ripe Audum-
vara fruit. It is attended with fever and a burning
sensation, aind is of rapid growth and suppuration. 6.

62

NIDANA STHANAM.

Chap. IX,]

The Kaphaja. Type : — This abscess is shaped
like an Indian saucer (s'ardva) and seems cold to the
touch. It assumes a light yellow colour and is character-
ised by numbness, itching and little pain. The growth
and suppuration of this abscess is very slow. The
secretions from a Vdtaja abscess are thin, those from
a Pittaja type are yellow, while the exudations from a
Kaphaja abscess are white. 7.

The Ssinnip^tika Type:— An abscess of
the Sdnnipitika type is of varied colour, and is attended**
with a varied sort of pain (sucking, drawing, turning
etc.) and exudes secretions of various colours (white,
yellow, etc.). It is little raised or elevated at its top,
large and irregular in its shape and does not uniformly
suppurate in all its parts. 8.

Agantuja or Kshataja Type The local
or inherent heat of an ulcer, (caused by a blow or a
dirt) in a person, addicted to unwholesome regimen, is
augmented and conducted by the deranged V^yu and
vitiates the blood and Pittam, thus giving rise to a kind
of abscess which is known as the Agantuja Vidradhi
(traumatic abscess). Symptoms of the Pittaja type like-
wise mark this type of abscess and fever, thirst and a
burning sensation attend it from the very beginning. 9.

The Raktaja Type: — This abscess assumes
a black or tawny colour, covered with a large number
of black vesicles, and fever and an intolerable burning
and pain attended with all the symptoms peculiar to
the Pittaja type, mark the present form of the disease.

It is Called Raktaja Vidradhi. Of external Vidradhis
or abscesses, those of the Sdnnipdtika type should be
regarded as incurable. 10 — 1 1.

Afltara^Vfdradhi Now we shall describe
the characteristic features of internal abscesses (Antara-

[Chap. IX. the SUSHRUTA SAMHITA . 63

Vidradhi). The Vdyu, Pittam and Kaphah of the body,
deranged through eating heavy, incompatible and in-
congenial (to the physical temperament of the eater)
articles <jf food or of dry, putrid and decomposed sub-
stances, or by excessive coition and fatiguing physical
exercise, or by voluntary repression of any natural
utging of the body or through the eating of food which
is followed by an acid reaction, either severally or
coIlecfiveLy give rise to a tumour-like (Gulma), raised,
'^or elevated abscess in the interior of the organism, which
is often felt to be shaped like an ant-hill. 12-13.

Localities : — They are generally found to be
seated at the mouth (neck) of the bladder, or about the
umbilicus, or in the sides, or in the Kukshi (inguinal
regions), or on the Vrikkas, or on the liver, or in the
heart, or on the Kloma, or on the spleen, or in the
rectum. Their general characteristics are identical with
those of the several types of external abscess. The
symptoms of their suppurated or unsuppurated stages
should be determined in the light of the chapter on
Amapakvaishanyiam (Ch XVII Sutra.). 14-15.

Their specific symptoms Now hear
me describe the symptoms which specifically mark these
internal abscesses according to their seats in the differ-
ent regions of the organism. An abscess appearing
in the rectum (Guda) is marked by the suppression
of the flatus (VAta). Seated in the j^ladder, it gives rise
to difficulty of urination and scantiness of urine.
Appearing about the umbilicus it produces a distressing
htc-cough and a rumbling sound (Atopa) in the^ intes-
tines. Seated in either of the sides (Kukshi) it tends to
aggravate inordinately the vdyu of the body. Appear-
ing in the inguilfal region it gives rise to an extreme
catching pain at the back and wai^t. Seated ip either

64

NIDANA STHANAM

[Chap, IX.

of the Vrikkas it brings about a contraction of the sides.
Appearing on the spleen, it produces symptoms of
difficult and obstructed respiration. Seated on the heart
it gives rise to an excruciating and piercing pa^n within
its cavity and a drawing pain (Graha) extending all over
the body (D. R. — cough). Seated in the Liver its
characteristic indications are thirst and difficult
breathing (D. R. — hic-cough) whereas a sort of unquen-
chable thirst is the symptom which marks its ^at on
theEloma. 16-17.

Prog^nosis An ab.scess appearing on any
vital part (Marma) of the organism, whether large
or small in size, suppurated or unsuppurated, should be
deemed as extremely hard to cure. Discharge from an
abscess formed in the region of the organism above the
umbilicus and (spontaneously bursting), will flow out
through the mouth whereas similar secretions from down
the umbilical region of (the abdomen), naturally find
an outlet through the fissure of the anus. The case
in which the secretions (pus etc.) find a down-
ward channel and outlet may end in recovery of the
patient; whereas the one in which the secretions take an
upward course invariably proves fatal. An incision
made by surgeon from the outside into an internal
abscess, other than the one situated on the heart, or on
the bladder or on the umbilicus may occasionally, prove
successful, but the one, seated on any of the preceding
vulnerable visceras (heart, bladder etc.) of the body and
surgically opened invariably ends in death. 18-19.

. AVoman, who has miscarried or has been even
Safely delivered of a child at term, may be afflicted with
a dreadful abscess in the event of her taking injudi-
cious and unhwholesome food after parturition, The
aigseess in suck a case, which is attended with extreme

Chtp. IX. J

NIBANA StHANAM.

65

hyper-pyrexia (Dihajvarft) should be considered as
having had its origin to the vitiated blood (Raktaja
Vidradhi) accumulated in the organism. The abscess,
which appears in the Kukshi (in the iliac region) of
a safely delivered woman owing to the presence of the
unexpelled blood-clots in those regions after child-
birth, should be also diagnosed as a case of Raktaja
abscess.^ The unexpelled blood is called Makkalla.
Such an abscess, if not absorbed in the course of a week,
is sure to suppurate. 20—21.

Differentiating diagnosis of Quima
and Vidradhi* ** : — Now I shall discuss the features
which distinguish a Gulma (internal tumour) from a
Vidradhi (internal abscess). It may be asked, how is
it that Gulma, (internal tumour) though caused by,
and involving the co-operation of the same deranged
Doshas as an internal abscess, docs not suppurate, while
the latter (Vidradhi) does run to suppuration ? 22—23.

The answer is that a Gulma (internal tumour), though
caused by the same deranged Doshas as a Vidradhi
(internal abscess), does not resort to any deranged
organic matter, such as flesh, blood, etc., while, on the
contrary, in a case of Vidradhi, the diseased flesh and
blood of a locality are in themselves transformed into
an abscess. An internal tumour (Gulma) is like a
water bubble floating and moving about within a cavity-

* A Gulmft according to Sus'ruta does not suppurate, but the term

**Api” (also) contemplates instances in which a Gulma may suppurate
as in the case where it has got its basis in the deranged flesh ctc»^f the
locality. Charaka asserts that retarded digestion of the ingested foca^
followed by digestionary acid reaction, colic pain, insomnia with fever
and 1 non>reUsh for food and a sense of oppression, etc. are the symp-
toms which indicate that suppuration has set in a Gulma, and he edvtses
that it (Gulma) should be 4reat<5d wUh poultices, etc.

9

66

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. IX.

of the body etc. without any fixed root of its own.
Hence, it Is that a Gulma (internal tumour) does not
suppurate at all. Suppuration sets in in an ab cess only
because it largely contains flesh and bloods unlike a
Gulma (internal tumour) which is not formed of any
such organic matter, and depends only on tlje aggravated
Doshas giving birth to it. Hence, a Gulma does not
suppurate at all- 24.

Incurable Types A case of* an mternal

C'

abscess suppurating about the heart, bladder or
umbilicus as well as one of the Tridosha type (appearing
in any part of the organism) should be given up as in-
curable. The abscess in which the marrow suppurates
(generally) becomes fatal. The suppurating process in
an internal abscess, which generally affects the under-
lying bone, is sometimes found to affect the marrow.
The suppurated marrow, failing to find an outlet on
account of the compactness of the local flesh and bone,
produces a sort of burning sensation in the locality
which consumes the body like a blazing fire. The
disease confined to the bone, like a piercing dirt,
torments the patient for a considerable length of time.
An incision (made into the affected bone) is followed
by the secretion of a fat-like, glossy, white, cold and
thick pus. Men, learned in the knowledge of the
Medicinal SAstras, designate such an abscess as an
AsthighAta-Vidradhi (abscess of the bone) which
involves all the three kinds of deranged Doshas, and is
attended with various kinds of pain which mark them
irespectively. 25-26.

Tinis end* the ninth Chapter of the Niddnaatbdntm in the Suk'ittU
which ite^ts of the setiology of abteess*

CHAPTER X.

Now we shall discourse on the Niddnam of VISS.!*-
pa (erysipelas), N^Cdi (sinus) and Stana-rogfa
(diseases affecting the mammae of a woman), i.

Definition of Visarpa r—The deranged and
aggravated Doshas, (Vdyu, Pittam and Kapham) having
recourse to, and affecting the Tvaka (Skin), flesh and
blood, speedily give rise to a sort of shifting, elevated
swelling (Sotha) marked by the characteristic symptoms
of any of them involved in the case. This swelling tends
to extend all over the body. The disease is called
Visarpa from the fact of its extending or swiftly shifting
character (Skr. srip —to go, to extend). 2.

The VflCtaJa Type The swelling (Sotha) is
soft and rough and assumes a black colour attended with
an aching pain in the limbs and a cutting or piercing
pain (in the affected locality). It is further marked by
(all the usual) symptoms of the Vdtika fever. A case of
this type in which uneven flame coloured vesicles or
bulbs appear on the affected part through the extreme
vitiation (of the Vdyu and Pittam) should be given up
as incurable. 3.

The Pittaja and Kaphaja Types The

Pittaja Visarpa (erysipelas) rapidly extends (over the
body), attended with severe fever, d' burning sensation,
suppuration and cracking (of the skin'. A large
number of vesicles appears on the spot whi^h as-
sume a blood-red colour. A case of this type,
characterised by the destruction of the local flesh and
veins owing to the excessively aggravated condition of
the deranged Doshas (Kaphha and Pittam) and a

68

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHlTA.

tCbap. X.

collyrium-Iike black colour (of the swelling), should be
regarded as incurable. The Kaphaja Visarpa extends
slowly and the process of suppuration is tardy. The
affected part becomes white, glossy and swollen, and
is marked by a slight pain and excessive itcHing. 4-5.

^ The SsCnnipsttika Type The Visarpa of
the Tridoshaja type is deep-seated and*' the affected
part assumes all colours and is attended with all sorts
of pain which are peculiar to the three aforesaid types
The local flesh and veins are destroyed in the suppurating
stage of this disease and hence, it shouldbe looked
upoti as incurable. 6.

The Kshataja Type (Erysipelas due to a
wound or an ulcer) : —The Pittam of a person with a
temperament marked by the extreme aggravation of all
the three Doshas, in conjunction with the blood, resorts
to a wound* in his body and immediately gives rise to
Erysipelas (Sopha— lit rash) which assumes a reddish-
brown colour, with high fever with a burning sensation,
and suppuration in its train, and it is found to be
covered with black vesicles to the size of Kulattha
pulse. 7 .

PrOg'nOSiS : — The VAtaja, Pittaja and Kaphaja
Visarpas are curable; the SAnnipitika and Khataja
ones being incurable. The symptoms, which indicate
an unfavourable prognosis in a case of Vitaja or
Pittaja Erysipelas, have been described before. Those,
which attack the vital parts (Marmas) of the body, can
be cured only with the greatest difficulty .f 8.

♦

* Ot (hiough the extreme sugmentaiion of all the three doshas in
the nicer (Sadyah*kshata*Vfana) according to others*

t Golden coloured (yellow) Erysipelas due to the action of ihe
(dcrfuiged) Pittam is incurable {Pittiimi iCknchana^va^uscha fafH m
R.

.Cl»p.x.j , NlDANA STHaKaMj 69

The NsTdi-Vrana ! — The pus of an abscess or
swelling burrows into the affected part if a person
n^lects it in its fully suppurated stage, dubious of its
being so*conditioned, or not, or even neglects to open a
fully suppurated abscess. An abscess or swelling is
called a Gati Vrana owing to an excessive infiltration
of pus, and it is also called a Ns^di-vrana owing to the
presence of a large number of recesses or cavities in
its inside.^ There are five different types of Nddi-vrana
• (sinuses) such as the Vdtaja, Pittaja Kaphaja, Tridoshaja
and Salyaja. 9—10.

The Vdtaja, Kaphaja and Pittaja
Types The Vsftaja Sinus is rough and short-
mouthed, characterised by an aching pain (in its inside).
It exudes a sort of frothy secretion which becomes
greater at night and is attended with an aching pain.
Thirst, lassitude, heat and a piercing pain(in the affected
locality) are the usual accompaniments of the Pittaja
types. Fever is present from the beginning and the Sinus
exudes a large quantity of hot and yellow coloured
secretion which is more by day than by night. The
Kaphaja Sinus becomes hard and is characterised by
itching and a slight pain (numbed ?). It is found to
secrete a copious quantity of thick, shiny, white-coloured
pus which becomes greater at night. 1 1-13.

Dvandaja and Tridoshaja Types

A case of Nddi-Vrana involving l^e concerted action
of any two of the deranged Doshas (V 4 yu, Pittam
and Kapham) and exhibiting symptoms peculiar to
both, is called a Dvandaja* one. There are ' three

* Giyadiftft does not read the symptoms of DaUdothaja due
to two morbific prliid >le8) types of sinus a gvtn in the text which
be hai rejeeted as spurious

70

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA^

(Chap* X*

types of this class of disease, (such as the V hta-pittaja,
Vdta-kaphaja and Pitta-kaphajd) A case of Kl^i*
vraua, exhibiting symptoms of the three aforesaid types,
and attended with fever and a burning sensation, diffi-
cult breathing, dryness of the mouth and syncope, is
called Tridoshaja. An attack of this type should
be regarded as dreadful and fatal, casting around the
gloom of death. 14-15.

The ^alyaja Nsidi-Vrana A <breign

matter (such as dirt, bone, splinter etc.), lodged withim
the body and invisible to the eye, tends to burst open
the skin, etc, of the locality along its channel of inser-
tion and gives rise to a type of Sinus. It is character-
ised by a constant pain, and suddenly and rapidly
exudes a sort of hot, blood-tinged, agitated, frothy secre-
tion. This type is called Salyaja. i6.

TheStana^Roga: — These may be divided into
as many types as the aforesaid Nddi-Vrana and are
caused by the same exciting factors as the last named
malady. The milk-carrying ducts remain closed in the
breast of a nullipera thus barring the possibility of the
descent of the Doshas through them and of an attack
of any disease at that part of the body. On the
contrary, such ducts in the breast of a primipara open
and expand of their own accord, thus making the
advent of diseases possible that are peculiar to the
mamma. 17-19.

The breast- milk : —The sweet essence of the
Rasa (lymph chyle) drawn from the digested food
courses through the whole body and is ultimately con-
centrated ill the breast of a mother or a woman (big
with child) which is called milk. 20.

Its character : — The breast-milk, lilce semen,
lies hidden and invisible in the organism^ though

Chap. X4 NIPANA STHANAM. 71

permeating it in a subtle or essential form. The charac-
teristic features of the breast-milk bear analogy to those
of semei\ The breast milk is secreted, and flows
but at the touch, sight or thought of the child in the
same manner as the semen is dislodged and emitted
at the sights touch or recollection etc. of a beloved
woman. As the strong and unclouded affections of a
man are the cause of the emission of semen, so the fondest
love o? a mother for her children brings about the secre-

o

tion of her breast-milk Both semen and breast-milk are
the product of the essence of digested food, this essence
being converted into milk in women. 21 — 22.

Its abnormal and normal Traits:—

The milk of a mother vitiated by the deranged Ykyu
of her system has an astringent taste and floats on
water. The milk of a mother vitiated by the deranged
Pittam has an acid and pungent taste and becemes
marked with a yellow hue,* if left to float on water. The
milk of a mother vitiated by the deranged Kapham
is thick and slimy and sinks in water. The milk of a
mother vitiated by the concerted and simultaneous
derangement of the three Doshas of the body is marked
by the combination of all the preceding symptoms. An
external blow or hurt too (AbhighAta) sometimes pro-
duces vitiation of the mother^s milk. 23.

The milk (of a mother), which instantly mixes with
water, tastes sw'cct and retains its lihtura! greyish tint,
should be regarded as pure. 24.

The bodily Doshas having recourse to the breasts of
a woman whether filled with milk or not and vitiating
the local flesh and blood give rise to mammary diseases,

♦ The, particle “Chi” in the text indicates that the colour may turn
blue or pink tD some cases,

n

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chip. X.

(Stana-roga). All the types of abscess (Vidradhi)
excepting the one called the Raktaja out of the six
types described before are found to attack thejiiamm 3 e>
and their symptoms should be understood asc identical
with those of external abscesses. 25.

Thus ends the tenth Chapter of the Nid^nam Sthinam in the Sus'ruta
SamhilA w ich treats of the oeliology and symptoms of Erysipelas, Sinus
and mammary abscesses.

CHAPTER XL

Now we shall discourse on the Nid^inam of Granthi
(Glands etc.), Apachi (Scrofula etc.), Arvuda (Tumours)
and Oalaganda (Goitre), i.

The deranged and unusually aggravated Vdyu etc,
(Pittam^nd Kapham), by vitiating the flesh, blood and
fcit mixed with the Kapham (of any part of the or-
ganism), give rise to the formation of round, knotty,
elevated swellings which are called Granthi (Glandular
inflammation). 2.

The Dosha-Orig^ined Types The swell-
ing (Sopha) of the Vsftaija type seems as if it were
drawn into and elevated or as if severed or pricked
with a needle, cleft in two or drawn asunder or as if
cut in two or pierced. The knotty growth assumes a
black colour, and is rough and elongated like a bladder.
On bursting a granthi of this type exudes clear bright
red blood. The Fittaja Granthi is characterised by
heat and an excessive burning sensation (in its inside),
A pain, like that of being boiled by an alkali or by
fire, is felt in the inside. The knotty formation assumes
a red or yellowish colour and exudes a flow of extremely
hot blood on bursting. The Kaphaja Granthi is slightly
discoloured and cold to the touch. I : is characterised
by a slight pain and excessive itching, and feels hard
and compact as a stone It is slow or tardy in its
growth and exudes a secretion of thick white-coloured
pus when it bursts. 3-5.

The Medlaja Type The fat origined Gran-
thi is large and glossy and gains or loses in size with
the gain or loss of flesh by the patient. It is marked

10

74

THE SXJSHRUTA SaMHITA.

tChap. XI.

by a little pain and an excessive itching sensation and
exudes a secretion of fat resembling clarified butter or
a gruel, in colour and consistency, made of the levigated
paste of sesamum on bursting. 6, ^

dir£L"-Granthi — (aneurism or varicose veins) : —
The bodily V^yu in weak and enfeebled, persons, de-
ranged by over-fatiguing physical exercises, straining or
exertion or by pressure, presses on, contracts, dries or
draws up the ramifications of veins (Sir^i) or*arteries
(of the affected locality), and speedily gives rise to S
raised knotty formation which is called a Sird-Granthi,
In the event of its being shifting and slightly painful,
it can be cured only with the greatest difficulty.
Whereas a case in which the knotty formation is pain-
less, fixed, large and situated at any of the vital parts of
the body (Marmas), should be deemed incurable.^ 7.

Apachl — (Scrofula etc.) : — The augmented and
accumulated fat and Kapham give rise to string of hard
glossy, painless, nodular, or elongated granthi swellings)
about the joints of the jawbones, at the waist, joint,
about the tendons of the neck, about the throat or about
the region of the arm-pits. These glands (Granthis) re-
sembling the stones of the Amalaka fruit or the spawn
of fish in shape or like some other shape, are of the same
colour as the surrounding skin ; and a string or a large
crop of such glandular knots, gradually growing is
called Apachif on account of the extensive nature of
their, growth. 8-9.

% In several editions an additional line is to be found running as men
well conversant with symptoms (of Gtanihii) recognise a type of Granthi
due to the action of the deranged desl) and blood, which exhibits symp-
toms identical with those of a tumour {MantjfC^ srayam chdrvuda
latkkafHna ittfyam hi driihtafmih lakihamjanth)* But Jejjata baa
rejected it as of questionable authority.

+ These glandular formations appear about the root of the penis, about
the ddes, in the arm-pits and about the throat and the tendons of the neck.

CKap. XI,] . NIDANA STHANAM. 7 75

These knotty formations are characterised by itching
and a slight pain. Some of them spontaneously burst
exuding secretions while others are observed to vanish
and re-apj?ear (in succession). Such vanishings, re-
appearances, or fresh formations continue for a consider-
able time. The disease undoubtedly owes its origin to
the deranged fat and Kapham, and may only be made
amenable (to medicine) with the greatest difficulty
lasting Tor years at a time. lo,

• ArVUda— (tumour etc.) : — The large vegetation
of flesh which appears at any part of the body, becomes
slightly painful, rounded, immovable and deep-seated,
and has its root sunk considerably deep in the affected
part, and which is due to the vitiation of the flesh
and blood by the deranged and aggravated Doshas
(VAyu, Pittam and Kapham) is called an Arvuda
(tumour) by the learned physicians*. The growth of
an Arvuda is often found to be slow, and it seldom
suppurates. The characteristic symptoms of an Arvuda
which owes its origin to the deranged condition of the
Vciyu, Pittam, Kapham, flesh or fat, are respectively
identical with those, which mark the cases of Granthis,
brought about by the same deranged principles of the
body. 1 1 .

Raktaja— Arvuda The deranged Doshas

(Viyu, Pittam and Kapham) contracting, compressing

i- /

They resemble spawns of fish in shape and size and are due to the action
of the deranged V^yu, Pittam and Kapham, The appearance ol such
glands in the upper part of the body should be aitribuied to the aciicn
of the deranged and aggravated V^yu. They are extremely hard cuie
in as much as their growth (formation) involves the concerted action
of the morbific principles (Doshas) of the body.— i-Blloja*

Charaka, .who designates this disease as GandamAlA^ describes its
location in regions about the jawbones alone.

*That they having recourse to the flesh, produce t^eep-scaud
vegetations (of flesh) is the reading adopted by (jay^dtisa and^ot^hers.

76

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. XI.

and drawing the vessels (^iri) and blood (of the affec-
ted part), raise a slightly suppurated and exuding
tuipour which is covered with small warts and fleshy
tubercles and is called a Ritktstrvada. Thij tumour is
rapid in its growth and exudes a constant flow of
(vitiated) blood. The complexion of the patient owing
to depictive actions and other concomitant evils of
haemorrhage becomes pale and yellow* The type
should be considered incurable on account of itf having
its origin in the blood.^ I2 — 13. •

MsCnSiCrvuda : — The flesh of any part of the
body hurt by an external blow etc. (hurting it with a
log of wood— D.R.) and vitiated in consequence, gives
rise to a sort of swelling (tumour) which is called
Minsdrvuda, which originates through the action of
the deranged Vdyu, It is glossy, painless, non-sup-
purating, hard as a stone, immobile, and of the same
colour as the surrounding skin. Such a tumour
appearing in a person addicted to meat diet becomes
deep seated owing to the consequent vitiation of the
bodily flesh and soon lapses into one of an incurable
type. 14.

Prognosis Even of the aforesaid curable
types (such as the Vitaja, etc.), the following types of
Arvudam (tumours) should be likewise regarded as incur-
able, those which appear in the cavity of a Srota , chan-
nel or an artery , or any vulnerable joint of the body and
are characterised by any sort of secretion and also im-
mO pable, should be deemed incurable. An Arvudam
(tumour) cropping up on one existing from before is

* Altbougb all types of Arvuda have their origin in the deranged flesh
and blood, (weponderant action of the deranged blood is found in RaktA*
while a dominant action of the deranged flesh marks the
M4n$&rvHd» type.

Cb»p. XI.

NIDANA STHANAM.

77

called Adhyarvndam, which should be likewise deemed
as incurable. A couple of contiguous Arvudam (tumours)
cropping up simultaneously or one after another is called
Dviarvadam, which should be held as equally incurable

if

(with one of the foregoing types). An Arvuda (tumour)
of whatsoever type, never suppurates owing to the
exuberance of the deranged Kapham and fat as well
as in consequence of the immobility, condensation and
compafctness of the deranged Doshas (VAyu, Pittam and
•Kapham involved in the case, or out of a specific trait
of its own nature. 15-16.

Definition of Caiaganda (Goitre;:— The
deranged and aggravated Viyu in combination with the
deranged and augmented Kapham and fat of the loca-
lity affects the two tendons of tne neck (Manyds) and
gradually gives rise to a swelling about that part of the
neck characterised by the specific symptoms of the
deranged Doshas (V^iyu or Kapham) and principles in-
volved in the case. The swelling is called Galganda
(Goitre). 17.

Symptoms of the Dosha-origined

Types ’The swelling or tumour in the Vlitajit goitre
is characterised by a pricking pain (in its inside) marked
by the appearance of blue or dark coloured veins ^^iri)
on its surface. It assumes a vermilion or tawny brown
hue. The goitre becomes united with the local fat
in course of time, and gains in si:ze, giving rise to a
sense of burning in the throat, or is characterised by
the absence of any pain at all. A Veitaja goitre is rough
to the touch, slow in its growth, and never or bufe^rarely
suppurates. A sense of dryness in the throat and the
palate as well as a bad taste in the mouth likewise
marks this type. ’ The swelling in the Kaphaja Type
assumes a large shape and becomes hard, firm, cold

75 the SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [C^ap, xl

and of the same colour (white). There is but slight pain
and the patient feels an irresistible inclination to scratch
the part. It is slow in its progress and suppuration is
rare and tardy. A sweet taste is felt in the rnouth and
the throat and the palate seem as if smeared with a sort
of sticky mucous. 18-20.

Symptoms of the Medaja* Type:—

The swelling is glossy, soft (heavy — D.R) ^ and pale»-
coloured. It emits a fetid smell and is chara9terifeed by
excessive itching and an absence of pain. It is short at**
its root and hangs down from the neck in the shape of a
pumpkin (Aldvu), gradually gaining its full rotundity at
the top. The size of the goitre is proportionate to the
growth or loss of flesh of the body. The face of the
patient looks as if it has been anointed with oil and a
peculiar rumbling sound is constantly heard in the
throat. 2 1 .

Prognosis : •* A case of goitre attended with
difficult respiration, a softening of the whole body,
weakness, a nonrelish for food, loss of voice as well as
the one which is more than of a year’s standing should
be abandoned by the physician as incurable. 22.

Metrical Text : — A pendent swelling whether
large or small and occurring about the region of the
throat and resembling the scrotum in shape is called
a Gala-Ganda. 23.

Thus ends the eleventh Chapter of the Niddna Sthdnam in the
.Susrula Samhitd which treats of the Niddnam of Granthi, Scrofula, etc.

CHAPTER XII

Now we shall discourse on the Niddnamof Vriddhl
(hydrocele, hernia, scrotal tumours etc), Upadaiisa.
(disease of the genital organ, and ^'lipada (ele-
phantiasis). I .

C1&SS6S : - There are seven different types of
^’riddhi such as the Vitaja, Pittaja, Kaphaja, Raktaja,
Medaja, Mutraja and the Antra-vriddhi. Of these both
the Mutraja-vriddhi (hydrocele or extravagation of the
urine), and Antra-vriddhi types, though owing their ori-
gin to the deranged condition of the bodily Vayu, have
been so named after the organic matters or anatomical
parts (urine, iliac colon etc.) involved in them. 2.

Definition and Premonitory symp-
toms ;—Any of the deranged Doshas (Velyu, Pittam,
etc ) lying in the nether regions of the body may resort
to the spermatic cords (Dhamani) and give rise to a
swelling and inflammation of Phalacosha (scrotal sac)
which is called Vriddhi ^scrotal tumour etc.). A pain
in the bladder, scrotum, penis and the waist (Kati)
incarceration of the Vayu and the swelling of the
scrotum, are the premonitory symptoms of the
disease. 3 — 4,

The Dosha-orlgined Types The type

in which the scrotum becomes distended with V^yu
like an inflated air-drum, marked by roughness of
(its surface) and the presence of a varied sort of Vitaja
pain (in its interior) without any apparent cause is called
Vataja Vriddhi. The swollen scrotum, of the
Pittaja Vriddhi) assumes the colour of a ripe

%) tat SOSHRUTA 6AMHltv r

Ai^umt^ara tmlt ditid Is attended with fever* a burning
sensation and heat in the affected part. It is of a
marked rapid growth and speedy suppuration (of the
scrotum). The swollen organ in the Kaphaja Vriddhi
becomes hard and cold to the touch accompanied by
little pain, and itching (in the affected part'. In the
Eaktaja type the swollen scrotum is covereS over with
black vesicles, all other symptoms of the type being
identical with those of the Pittaja one. In the Medaja
type the swollen scrotum looks like a ripe Tdla fruit*
and becomes soft, glossy and slightly painful. The
patient feels a constant inclination to scratch the part.
The Mutraj a- vriddhi (hydrocele) owes its origin to
a habit of voluntary retention of urine, its characteristic
symptoms being softness and fluctuation on the surface
of the swollen scrotum like a skin-bladder filled with
water, painful urination, pain in the testes and swelling
of the scrotum. 5 .

Antra-vriddhi (Inguinal hernia);— The local
Viyu enraged and unusually aggravated by lifting a
great load, wrestling with a stronger person, violent
physical strain or a fall from a tree and such like
physical labour doubles up a part of the small intestine
and presses it down into the inguinal regions lying
there strangulated in the form of a knot (Granthi)
which is known as Antra-vriddhi (inguinal hernia).
The part not properly attended to at the outset
descends into the scrotum which becomes ultimately
elongated and intensely swollen and looks like an
inflatid air-bladder. It (hernia) ascends upwards under
pressure, making a peculiar sound, (gurgling) ; while let
free it comes down and again gives rise to the swelling
of the scrotum. This disease is called Antra-vriddhi
and is incurable. 6.

CHAP. Xtt]

NIDANA STHANAM.

ThcUpacIdn^a.in: — An inflammatoiy swelling
of the genital, whether ulcerated or not is called
Upadanfia*. The disease owes its origin to the
action of^ the local Doshas, aggravated by promiscuous
and excessive sexual intercourse, or by entire absti-
nence in sexual matter ; or by visiting a woman, who
had observed a vow of lifelong continence or one who has
not long known a man, or one in her menses or one with
an extremely narrow or spacious vulva, or with rough or
^arsh or large pubic hairs ; or by going unto a woman
whose partturient canal is studded with hairs along its
entire length ; or by visiting a woman not amorously
disposed towards the visitor and vice versa ; or by know-
ing a woman who washes her private parts with foul
water or neglects the cleanliness of those parts, or suffers
from any of the vaginal diseases, or one whose vagina
is naturally foul ; or by going unto a woman in any of
the natural fissures of her body other than the organ of
copulation (Vi yoni) ; or by pricking the genital with
finger nails, or biting it with the teeth, or through poison-
ous contact, or through practice of getting the (penis
abnormally elongated by pricking the) bristles of a
water parasite (S ukd) into its body ; or by practising

* Upadans'a is not syphilis whole to whole. Certain types of
Upadans'a such as the Raktaja and Sknnipdtika types which entail the
destruction of the organs concerned exhibit certain symptoms which are
common to syphilis as well. The secohdary eruptions and tertiary
symptoms of syphilis are not mentioned by the A'yurvedic RIshis who
used to treat it only with vegetable medicines and this fact intimates
the probability that the secondary and tertiary symptoms of ^philis
might not arise by their efficient and able treatment from the very
beginning, preventing the absorption of the poison into the system.
The practice of ablution, so common among the Hindus, might be
taken into consideration as one of the important preventive factors.
Maharshi Charaka has comprised it within the chapter on ‘Senile
Impotency*.— fid.

II

82

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

IChap. XU.

masturbation, or any unnatural offence with female
quadrupeds ; or by washing the genitals with filthy or
poisonous water ; or through neglect to wash the parts
after coition, or voluntary suppression of a natural flow
of semen or urine or through any hurt or pressure
on the organ etc. The inflammation o^ the genital
thus engendered is called Upadans'a. The disease
admits of being divided into five distinct .types, such
as, the Vcitaja, Pittaja, Kaphaja, Tridoshajgi slid the
Raktaja. ^ — 8 . *

The symptoms of different Types:—

The roughness of the genitals, the bursting or cracking
of the integuments of the penis and prepuce etc., numb-
ness and swelling of the affected part which is perceived
rough to the touch and the presence of a varied sort of
pain peculiar to the deranged Viyuarc the characteristic
indications of the V^taja type. In the Pittaja type
fever sets in (from the very beginning), the penis becomes
swollen and assumes the colour of a ripe Indian fig
(reddish-yellow), attended with a sort of intolerable
burning sensation The process of suppuration is rapid
and a variety of pain peculiar to the deranged Pittam,
(distinguishes it from the other forms of the disease).
The penis becomes swollen, hard and glossy in the
Kaphaja type marked by itching and a variety of
pain characteristic of the deranged Kapham. In the
blood-origined type (Raktaja) the organ bleeds heavily
and is covered with the eruptions of large black vesicles.
Fev^r, thirst, (Sosha), burning sensations and other
characteristic symptoms of the deranged Pittam are also
present. Palliation is all that can be occasionally effected
in these cases. Symptoms specifically betraying to each
of the Vdtaja, Pittaja and Kaphaja types concurrently
manifest themselves in the Sinnipiftika type of Upa-

Chap. XII.]

NIDANA STHANAM.

83

dans'a. The organ cracks, the ulcers or cancers become
infested with parasites and death comes in to put a stop
to the suffering of its wretched victim. 9—13.

^lipadam (Elephantiasis) : - The disease in which
the deranged VAyu, Pittam and Kapham, taking a down-
ward course, are lodged in the thighs, knee-joints, legs
and the inguinal regions and spread to the feet in course
of time and gradually give rise to a swelling therein,
is ca^d §lipadam. There are three types of ^lipada
• severally due to the actions of the deranged Viyu,
Pittam and Kapham. 14—15.

The symptoms of the different

Types: — The swollen parts assume a black colour in
the Vittaja type and are felt rough and uneven to the
touch. A sort of spasmodic pain without any apparent
reason is felt (at intervals in the seat of the disease),
which largely begins to crack or burst. The Fittaja
type is characterised by a little softness and yellowish
hue (of the diseased localities) and often attended with
fever, and a burning sensation. In the Kapbaja type the
affected localities become white, glossy, slightly painful,
heavy, contain large nodules (Granthis) and are studded
over with crops of papillae. 16.

Prognosis : — A case of elephantiasis of a year’s
growth as well as the one which is characterised by
excessive swelling (of the affected parts), exudation and
vegetation of knotty excrescences resembling the sum-
mits of an ant-hill should be given up as incur-
able. 1 7.

Memorable Verses : —A preponderance of
the deranged Kapham marks the three types of the
disease, in as much as, the heaviness and lai^eness (of
the swelling) can not be brought about by any other
factor than Kapham. The disease is peculiar to countries

?4

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA,

tChtp. Xlt.

in which large quantities of old rain-water remain
stagnant during the greater part (lit.— all seasons)
of the year making them damp and humid in all
seasons. 18-91

The disease is usually found to be confined t8 the legs
and hands of men but cases are on record in which it
has extended to the ear, nose, lips and the r^ions of the
eyes. (Penis — Mddhaba-Niddnam). 20.

«

Thus ends the twelfth Chapter of the Nid^nasthdnam in.the %us'ruta
Samhitd which treats of the Niddnam of scrotal tumours, hernia, Upa-
dans'am and elephantiasis.

CHAPTEK XIIL

Now we shall discourse on the Nidinam of
Kshudrarog^am (diseases which are known by
the general na^ne of minor ailments), i.

These diseases are generally divided into forty-
four distinct* varieties or types such as — AjagallikA,
YavaprakshyA, Andhdlaji, Vivritd, Kachchapika,
’^almika, Indravriddhd, PanasikA, Pdshdna-garddabha,
Jdla-garddabha, Kakshd, Vishphota, Agni-rohini,
Chippam, Kunakha, Anusaye, Viddrikd, Sarkard-
Arbudam, Pdmd, Vicharchikd. Rakasd, Pddaddrikd,
Kadara, Alasa, Indralupta, Ddrunaka, Arunsbikd,
Palitam, Masurikd, Yauvana-pidakd, Padmini-kantaka,
Yatumani, Masaka, Charmakila,Tilakdlaka, Nyachchya,
Vyanga, Parivartikd, Avapdtikd, Niruddha-prakdsa,
Niruddha-guda, Ahiputanam, Vrishana-kachchu, and
Guda-bhransa * 2.

Metrics.! Texts : —The species of pimples or
eruptions which are shaped like the Mud^a pulse and
are glossy, knotty and painless is called Ajagalliki
They are of the same colour (as the surrounding
skin) and their origin is usually ascribed to the action
of the deranged Kapham and Vdyu. The disease is
peculiar to infants.f Ysfvitpraksliyif : — The eruptions

• BrnhmadeTa comprising Garddavika^ IfDeliika^ Gandhapidikd and
TilakAlaka in the list reads it as consisting of thirty-four different species.
Jejjata does not hold the four forms of disease commencing with Gardda-
vikay etc. as included within the list. Gay^disa, finding them included in
all the recensions reads Garddabhikdy etc. as included within the list of
JCshudra Roga^ and etc. as included within the list of Kshudra

Kushtham.

t They afflict certain infanti— Dallana*

86

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. XIII.

which are shaped like the barley-corns, extremely hard,
thick at the middle, knotty and affect (lit— confined to)
the flesh are called YavaprakshyA. They are due to the
action of the deranged Vdyu and Kapham. ^ndhltlaji :
— The dense, raised, slender-topped eruptions which
appear in circular patches and exude ^ a slight pus
are called Andhdlaji. They are due to the action of
the deranged V^yu and Kapham. Vivriti:— Pustules
or eruptions, which are coloured like a ripe fig. fruit and
are flat-topped and appear in circular patches with dh
intolerable burning sensation, are called Vivrlta They
are due to the action of the deranged Pittam. 3 6.

KachchapiksC A group of five or six hard,
elevated, nodular eruptions (Granthis), arranged in the
shape of a tortoise (which may appear on the sur-
face of any part of the body), arc called KachchapikA.
They are due to the action of the deranged Kapham
and VAyu. Valmika : — The knotty undurated erup-
tions (Granthis) which gradually appear on the soles,
palms, joints, neck and on the regions above clavicles
and resemble an ant-hill in shape, slowly gaining in size
are called Valmika Ulcers attended with pricking
pain, burning, itching sensations and exuding mucopu-
rulent discharges appear around the aforesaid eruptions
(Granthis). The disease is due to the action of the
deranged Kapham, Pittam and Vi(yu, 7 — 8.

IndravridCfhl^ Pimples or eruptions (PidakA)
arising (on the surface of the body), arranged in the same
circular array as marks the distribution of the seed (sacks)
in a lotus flower are called Indravriddhl( by the
physicians. The disease is caused by the action of the
deranged VAyu and Pittam. Panasika Eruptions
(PidakA) of a sort of extremely painful pustules all
over the back or the ears' Urhich resemble • the

Cbsp. XIII.]

NIDANA STHANAM.

87

Kumuda bulb in shape, are called Fanasik^ They
are due to the action of the deranged Kapham and
Vkyu. PstsWna-Garddabha •• — A slightly painful and
non-shifting hard swelling, which appears on the joint
of the jawbones, (Hanu-sandhiy is called Fdshina-
Garddabha. The disease is the effect of the deranged
Kapham and* Vdyu. Jdla-Garddabha : — A thin and
superficial swelling, which like erysipelas is of a
shifting*or progressive character and is further attended
with fever and a burning sensation and which is but
rarely found to suppurate, is called J 41 a-Garddabha *
The disease results from the deranged Pittam.
Eaksbd — The disease characterised by the eruptions of
black and painful vesicles ^Shphotaj on the back, sides,
and on the region about the arm-pits, is called Kaksha.
The disease is likewise attributed to the action of the
aggravated Pittam, Vishphotaka —The disease in
which eruptions of burnlike vesicles (Shphota) crop up
on the whole surface of the body, or on that of any
particular locality, attended with fever, is called Vish-
photaka. The disease is the effect of vitiated blood
and Pittam, 9 — 14.

Ag^ni^-Rohinif : — Vesicles (Shphota) having the
appearance of burns and cropping up about the waist

* The circular raised spots studded with vesicles are called Gardda-
bha. They are reddish and painful and produced by the action of Vdyu
and Pittam. Gay^dksa reads it so.

t Dallana quotes from another Tantram that the morbific principles
in men, aggravated through the action of the enraged and augmented
Pittam and blood, give rise to vesicles (blisters) like red-hot charcoal by
breaking open the ilesh at the waist, attended with extreme pain, high
fever and an insufferable burning sensation which, if not properly remedied,
bring on death within a fortnight, or ten days of their first appearance.
These (vesicles) ate called VahnURohinL And again from another work
he cites that a case of Vahm-Rohtni due to the action of the derajiged

88

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. Xltl.

(KakshA) by bursting the local flesh, and whieh
is attended with fever and a sensation as if a blazing
fire is burning in the inside (of the affected part), are
called Agni-Rohini. The disease is caused by the
concerted action of the three deranged Doshas (Viyu,
Pittam and Kapham). It is incurable and ends in the
death of the patient either on the seventh*, tenth or
fifteenth day (of its first appearance •. 15.^

Chippam : — The deranged VAyu and*Pittam
vitiating the flesh of the finger-nails, give rise to a
disease which is characterised by pain, burning and
suppuration. The disease called Chippam, is also
denominated Upanakha and Kshataroga. Kuna-
kham : — The nails of fingers becoming rough, dry,
black, and injured through the action of the Doshas
enraged through the effect of a blow, are called Kunakha
(bad nails). It is also called Kulinam, Anusayi
A small swelling (on the surface of the body) which is
of the' same colour (as the surrounding skin), but is
deep-seated, and suppurates in its deeper strata, is called
Anusayi by the physicians. The disease is the effect
of the deranged Kapham. Vidatriki : — A round reddish
swelling rising either on the auxiliary or inguinal regions
in the shape of a gourd ( V iddrikanda) is known as
Vidirikd. The disease is due to the concerted action
of the deranged Vdyu, Pittam and Kapham and
is characterised by symptoms peculiar to each of
them. 16- 19,

Kapham proves fatal within a fortnight, that due to the deranged Pittam,
within ten days, and that due to the deranged Vdyu, within a week.

* The patient dies on the seventh day in a case of disease marked by
the dominant Vdyu, on the tenth day in a case marked by the dominant
Pittam and on the fifteenth day in a case of dominant deranged Kapham.

Ctap. Xin.J nidana sthanam. 89

* ^arkarsCrbudam The derknged V^iyu and
Kapham having recourse to and affecting the flesh, veins
(^ir 4 ), ligaments (Sndyu) and fat give rise to a sort of
cyst (Gra^jthi) which when it bursts exudes a copious
secretion in its nature somewhat like honey, clarified
butter or Vasd. The aforesaid Vdyu, when aggravated
through excessive secretion, dries and gathers the flesh
up again in,the shape of (a large number of) gravel-like
concrefions (Sarkard) known accordingly as Sarkardrbu-
^am. A fetid secretion of varied colour is secreted from
the veins (Sird) in these Granthis which are sometimes
found to bleed suddenly. The three varieties of the skin
disease called Pskmai (Eczema), Vicharchika^ (Psoriasis)
and Bakasflf have already been discussed under the head
of Kushtham (Chapter. V.). 20 — 21.

P^dad^riksC ; — The soles and feet of a person
of extremely pedestrian habits become dry (and lose
their natural serous moisture). The local Vdyu thus
aggravated gives rise to peculiar painful cracks
(Ddri in the affected parts) which are called Pdda-
darikd. Eadara : — The knotty (Granthi), a painful,
hard growth raised at the middle or sunk at the sides,
which exudes a secretion and resembles an Indian
plum (Kola — in shape), and appearing at the soles
(palms according to — Bhoja) of a person as an outcome
of the vitiated condition of the ^ local blood and fat
produced by the deranged Doshas incidental to the
pricking of a thorn etc. or of gravel is called a Kadara
(corns). Alasa : — An affection, caused by contact of
poisonous mire and appearing between the toes, which
is characterised by pains, burning, itching and exuda-
tion, is called Alasa. 22 — 25.

Indralupta: — The deranged Vayu and Pittam
having recourse to the roots of the hairs bring about their

12

go THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. tCh^P-

gradual falling off, while the deranged blood and
Kapham of the localit}^ fill up those pores or holes, thus
barring their fresh growth and recrudescence. The
disease is called Indralupta,* Rujya or Khsilitya (Alo-
pecia). Dstrunaka:-— The disease in which the hairy
parts of the body (roots of hairs) become hard, dry and
characterised by an itching sensation is called Ddru-
naka. The disease is due to the action of the deranged
Kapham and Vdyu. Arunshiki: — Ulcers (Arunshi) at-
tended with mucopurulent discharges and furnished with
a number of mouths or outlets and appearing on the
scalps of men as the result of the action of local
parasites and of the deranged blood and Kapham (of
the locality) are called Arunshika. Palitam : — The
heat and Pittam of the body having recourse to the
region of the head owing to overwork, fatigue, and ex-
cessive grief or anger, tend to make the hair prema-
turely grey, and such silvering of the hair (before the
natural period of senile decay) is called Palitam.
Masurikfii (variola) : — The yellow or copper-coloured
pustules or eruptions attended with pain, fever and burn-
ing and appearing all over the body, on (the skin of) the
face and inside the f.'ivity of the mouth, are called
Masurikl Tauvana-pidakat— (Mukhadushiki) :~-The
pimples like the thorns of a Sdlmali tree, which arefound
on the face of young men through the deranged condition
of the blood, Vdyu and Kapham, are called Yauvana-
pidakd or pimples of youth. Padmini-Kantaka :
— ^Tlie circular, greyish patches or rash-like eruptions

* Women are generally proof against this disease owing to their
delicate constitution and to their being subjected to the monthly discharge
of vitiated blood and at the same time to their undergoing no physical
exercise, and hence there is little chance of the bodily Pittam being
deranged and bringing on this disease.

Chap. Xm,]

NIDANA STHANAM,#

91

studded over with thorny papilla of the skin resembling
the thorns on the stem of the lotus marked by itching
are called Padmini-kantaka. The disease is due to the
deranged condition of the Vdyu and Kapham. Yatu-
maui (mole) : — The reddish, glossy, circular, and pain-
less, congenital marks fSahajam) or moles on the body not
more elevated* (than the surrounding skin) are called
Yatumani. The disease is due to the deranged condition
of the Vloocf and Pittam. 26 — 33.

^ Masaka (Lichen) : —The hard, painless,
black and elevated eruptions on the body (skin) re-
sembling the Mdsha pulse in shape, caused by the
aggravated condition of the bodily Vayu are called
Masaka Tilakalaka: — The black painless spots on
the skin about the size of r, sesamum seed and
level with the skin are called Tilakalaka. This
disease is caused through the aggravated condition of
theVdyu, Pittam ana Kapham.f Nyachcham: — The
congenital, painless, circular, white or brown (Sydva)
patches on the skin, which are found to be resj :icted
to a small or comparatively diffused area of the skin,
are called Nyachcham, Charmakila (hypertrophy of
the skin) : — The causes and symptoms of the disease
known as Charmakila have been already described
(under the head of the Arsa-Niddnam). Vyanga : —
The Vdyu being aggravated through wrath and over-
fatiguing physical exercise, and surcharged with Pittam,
and suddenly appearing on the face of a person, causes
thin, circular, painless and brown-coloured patches or
stains. They are known by the name of Vyanga * 34-38.

* According to certain authorities it is due to the absorption of blood
by Vdyu and Pittam.

t According to others the spot goes by the name of Nilikam^ If it
is bIack*eoloured and appears anywhere other than on the face*

92

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Clup. XIII

The Parivartikd!;— The vital Vdyu (VyAna)
aggravated by such causes as excessive massage (mastur-
bation), pressure, or local trauma, attacks the integuments
of the penis (prepuce) which being thus affected by
the deranged Vdyu forms into a knot-like structure and
hangs down from the glans penis. The disease known
as ParivartikA or Phymosis is due to the action of the
deranged VAyu aggravated by any extraneous factor.
It is marked by pain and burning sensation; and* some-
times suppurates. When the knotty growth becomes#
hard and is accompanied by itching, then it is caused by
the aggravated Kapham. 39.

Avap^tik^l : — When the integuments of the
prepuce is abnormally and forcibly turned back by such
causes as coition under excitement, with a girl (before
menstruation and before the rupture of the hymen and
consequently with a narrow external orifice of the vagina)
or masturbation or pressure or a blow on the penis,
or a voluntary retention of a flow of semen or forcible
opening of the prepuce, the disease is called AvapAtikA
or paraphymosis. Niruddha-prakis'a The prepuce
affected by the deranged VAyu entirely covers up the
glans penis and thus obstructs and covers up the orifice
of the urethra. In cases of partial obstruction a thin
jet of urine is emitted with a slight pain. In cases
of complete closing the emission of urine is stopped
without causing any crack or fissure in the glans penis
in consequence. The disease is called Niruddha-prakAs'a
which is due to the deranged VAyu and is marked by
pain pn the glans penis). 39-41.

Niruddhaguda ;-The VAyu (ApAna) obstruct-
ed by the repression of a natural urging towards de-
fecation stuffs the rectum, thus producing constriction
of its passage and consequent difficulty of defeea-

Chap. XIII.]

NIDANA STHANAM.

93

tion. This dreadful disease is known as Niruddha-
gudam (stricture of the rectum) which is extremely
difficult to cure. Ahiputana : — A sort of itch-like
eruptions appearing about the anus of a child owing
to a deposit of urine, perspiration, feces etc conse-
quent on the neglect in cleansing that part. The
eruptions which are the effects of the deranged blood
and Kapham soon assume an Eczematous character
and exade a purulent discharge on account of constant
scratching. The Eczema (Vrana) soon spreads, and
coalesces and proves very obstinate in the end. The
disease is called Ahiputana. Vrishana-kachchu: — When
the filth}' matter, deposited in the scrotal integuments
of a person who is negligent in washing the parts or
in the habit of taking dail}^ ablutions, is moistend
by the local perspiration, it gives rise to an itching
sensation in the skin of the scrotum, which is speedily
turned into running Eczema by constant scratching
of the parts. The disease is called Vrishana-kachchu
and is due to the aggravated condition of the Kapham
and blood. Guda-Bhransa : — A prolapse or falling out
of the anus (due to the Vdyu) in a weak and lean patient
through straining, urging or flow of stool as in dysentery
is called Guda-Bhransa or prolapsus ani, 42 — 45.

Thus ends the thirteenth Chapter of the Nidana Sthinam in (he
Sus'ruta Samhita which treats of the Nidanam of minor ailments.

CHAPTER XIV.

Now we shall discourse on the Niddnam of the
disease known as ^ukadlOSha. i.

Any of the eighteen different types cff the disease
may affect the genital (penis) of a man who foolishly
resorts to the practice of getting it abnormalfy el(ingated
and swollen by plastering it with Suka *(a kind ot
irritating water insect) and not in the usual officinal way.

CJ&SSification : — Diseases, which result from

such malpractices, are knonwn as,— Sarshapikd, Ashthi-

likd, Grathitam, Kumbhika, Alaji, Mriditam, Sammudha-

pidakd, Avamantha, Pushkarikd, Sparsahdni, Uttamd,

/ /

Satoponaka, Tvakapaka, Sonitdrvudam, Mansarvudam,
Mdnsapdka, Vidradhi and Tilakdlak. 2.

Metrical Texts : — The tiny herpetic eruptions
(Pidakd) which resemble the seeds of white mustard in
shape and size, (and are found to crop up on the male
organ of geiieration) on account of a deranged condition
of the blood and Kapham, as the result of an injudicious
application of Suka plasters are called Sarshapiklf
by the wise. Eruptions of hard stone-like pimples,
(Pidakd) irregular at their sides or edges and which are
caused by the aggravation of the local Vdyu by the use
of a plaster of the poisonous Suka, are called Ashthilika'.
The knotty Granthis (nodules) on the penis owing
to its being frequently stuffed with the bristles of a
^ukaP insect are called Grathitam. This type is caused
by the deranged action of the Kapham. A black wart
resembling the stone or seed of a jambolin fruit in
shape is called Katubhika^- This type is due to the
deranged condition of the blood and Pittam. 3 — 5.

Chap. XIV.]

NIDANA STHANAM.

95

An AIa,ji (incidental to an injudicious application
of Suka on the penis) exhibits symptoms, which are
identical with those manifested by a case of Alaji
in Prameha (Ch. vi). A wart (papilloma) attended
with swelling of the part and caused by the aggravated
Vdyu on the hard and inflamed penis causing pressure
(on the urethra) is called Mriditam. The pustule or
eruption appearing on the penis on account of its being
extremely pressed by the hand i^for the insertion of the
flairs of the Suka) in its dorsum is called Sammudlia*’
pidaksk. (It is the outcome of the aggravated Vdyu*).
A large number of elongated pustules on the penis (in-
cidental to an application of Suka to the part) which
burst at the middle, causing pain and shivering, is called
Avamantha (epitheliomas 6— lo.

The PushkarikSL type of the disease is marked
by the eruptions of small pimples around the principal
one The type has its origin in the deranged condition
of the blood and Pittam, and is so called from the part
of the excrescenses being arranged in rings or circles like
the petals of a lotus flower in shape. A complete anes-
thesia (of the affected organ) owing to the vitiated blood
by the injudicious application of a Suka is called Sparsa-
hstni. Pustules appearing on the penis through the
vitiation of the local blood and Pittam by such con-
stant applications are called XJttaDast. A suppuration of
the prepuce under the circumstance is called Tvakapitkh.
There is fever with a burning sensation in the affected
organ. The disease is due to the vitiated condition
of the blood and Pittam. ii — 15.

The type of the disease in which the penis is marked
by the eruption of black vesicles and is covered over
with a large number of red pimples or pustules with

According to DalUna it is due to the action of Vayu and blood.

96 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHlTA. [Chap. XIV.

an excruciating pain in the ulcerated region of the organ
is called ^onitltrvadam. The vegetation of a fleshy
tumour on the penis (incidental to a blow on the organ
to alleviate the pain of inserting the hairs of the Suka
insect into its body), is called Msfnss^rvndam. A sup-
puration as well as sloughing of the penis attended with
different kinds of pain which severally mark the de-
ranged Vdyu, Pittam and Kapham is called Ms^nsa-
p&a. This type is caused by the concerted* action
of the deranged Vdyu, Pittam and Kapham. 15-18. * *

The specific symptoms of a Tridoshaja Vidradhi
as described before (Chap.ix.) mark the one which affects
the penis (owing to an injudicious application of the
highly poisonous irritant Suka to the organs). The
disease is called Vidradhi. A process of general sup-
puration and sloughing of the organ marks the type
which is produced by the application of a blapk Suka or
one of a variegated coloured insect of the same species.
The type is called Tilakldaka^ and should be regarded
as Tridoshaja one. 19 — 21.

Prognosis : — Of the above enumerated malig-
nant diseases of the penis, those known as Mansdrvuda,
Mdnsapdka, Vidradhi and Tilakdlak shoulda be deemed
as incurable. 22.

Thus ends the fourteenth Chapter of the Niddna Sthdnam in the
Sus'ruta Samhitd which treats of Nidanani of different types of S'ukadohsa.

CHAPTER XV.

Now we shall discourse on the Nid^nam of Bha.g'*"
na.lTI (fractures and dislocations etc. of bones), i

Various kinds of fracture may be caused from a
variety of causes, such as by a fall, pressure, blow,
violent jerking or by the bites of ferocious beasts etc.
These cases may be grouped under the two main sub-
divisions such as Sandhi-Muktam (dislocation) and
Ksinda-Bliagnain (fracture of a kanda). 2.

Cases of Sandhi-muktam (dislocation) maybe divided
into six different types, such as the Utplishta^n, Vis'-
lishtam, Vivartitam, Adhah-Kshiptam, Ati-kshiptam and
Tiryak-kshiptam, 3 .

General features of a dislocation

Incapability of extension, flexion, movement, circum-
duction and rotation (immobility, considered in respect
of the natural movements of the joint), of the dislocated
limb, which becomes extremely painful and cannot
bear the least touch. These are said to be the general
symptoms of a dislocation. 4.

Diagnostic symptoms of a disioca-

tion : — 'In case of a friction of a joint by two articular
extremeties (Utplishtam) a swelling is found to appear
on either side of the articulation attended with a variety
of pain at night. A little swelling accompanied by
a constant pain and disordered function of the dislocated
joint, marks the case of simple-looseness (Vislishtam)
of the articulation ; while pain and unevenness of the
joint owing to the displacement of the connected bones
distinguish a case of Vivartitam (lateral displacement).
An excruciating pain, and looseness of the dislocated

13

98 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Ch*P- XV.

bone are the symptoms which characterise a case in
which a dislodged bone is seen to drop or hang down
from its joint (Adhah-kshiptam). In a case of abnor-
mal projection (Ati-kshiptam), the dislocate< , bone is
removed away from its joint which becomes extremely
painful. A case of oblique dislocation (Tiry^^skiptam)
is marked by the projection or displacement of the
bone on one side' accompanied by a sort of intolerable
pain. 5. . *

Different kinds of KsCnda Bha^f-

nam : — Now we shall describe the Kdnda-Bhagnam
(fracture etc.). Fractures may be divided into twelve
different kinds which are known as, Karkatakam, A^va-
kamam,Churnitam,Pichchitam,Asthi-chchalitam, Kdnda-
bhagnam, Majjdgatam, Atip^titam, Vakram, ChcMnnam,
Pdtitam and Sphutitam. 6.

General symptoms of Kstnda-bfiag-

nam : — A violent swelling (about the seat of fracture)
with throbbings or pulsations, abnormality in the position
(of the fractured limb), which cannot bear the least
touch, crepitus under pressure, a looseness or dropping of
the limb, the presence of a variety of pain and a sense of
discomfort in all positions are the indications which
generally mark all kinds of fracture (Kinda-bhagnam). 7.

Diagnostic symptoms:— The case where a
fractured bone, pressed or bent down at its two articular
extremities, bulges out at the middle so as to resemble
the shape of a knot (Granthi), is called Earkatam.
The (ase where the fractured bone projects upward
like the ear of a horse is called Aflvakarnam. This
fractured bone is found to be shattered into fragdlents
in a case of the Ghuruitam or comminuted kind which
can be detected both by palpation and crepitation.
A smashed condition of the fractured bone marks a

Chap. XV.]

NIDANA STHANAM.

99

case of the Pichohifcam kind which is often found to
be marked by a great swelling. The case where the
covering or skin of the bone (periosteum) is cast or
splintered off is called the Asthi-chohallitam. The
case where the completely broken or severed bones are
found to project through the local skin, is called Etfada*
bhagnam (compound). The case where a fragment of
the fractured or broken bone is found to pierce into the
bone*and dig out the marrow, is called MajaJiatlgatain,
(Impacted fracture). The case where the fractured bone
droops or hangs down is called Ati-piltitam. The case
where the unloosened bone (from its position) is bent
down in the form of an arch is called Vakram The
case where only one articular extremity of the bone is
severed is called Chhianam. The case where the bone
is slightly fractured and pierced with a large number
of holes, is called Filtitam, an excruciating pain being
the leading indication. The case where the bone largely
cracked and swollen becomes painful as if stuffed with
the bristles of a ^uka insect is called Sphutitam (Green-
stick fracture). Of the several kinds of fracture, cures
are effected with extreme difficulty in a case of the ,
Churnitam, Chhinnam, Ati-pdtitam or Majjdnugatam
kind. A case of displacement or laxation occurring
in a child or in an old or weak patient or in one suffer-
ing from asthma (^vasa) or from any cutaneous affec-
tion (Kushtha) or Kshata-Kshiha disease is difficult to
cure. 8.

Memorable verses : —The following cases
are to be given up as hopeless— m. fracture "bf the
pelvic bone (or of bones that are of this description,
wherever they may be situated) ; dislocation of the
pelvic joints ; compound fracture of the thigh bone or
of the flat bones) ; fracture into small pieces of the

. too • THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. X7^

frontal bone or its dislocation ; simple fracture of the
breast-bones, back-bone and temporal and cranial bones.
If the dislocations and fractures be improperly set
from the outset (Adito)’’* or if the union be anyhow
disturbed there is no hope for recovery. 9 — i i.*

If fractures happen at any time of the first three
stages of adult life which has been desft'ibed before
(vide Sutrasthdna Chap. XXXV.) and if they are set up
by an able surgeon they have a great chance* of ibeing
united. 12.

A bending of a gristle or cartilage (Taruna) is
called its fracture. A Nalaka (long bone) bone is
usually found to be severed. A Kapada bone is found
to be cracked, while a Ruohakai“ (tooth) is found to be
splintered off. 13.

* The word AM/o may be taken into the sense of congenital mal-
formation which is beyond remedy.

t The presence of the particle ‘cha’ denotes Valya- asthi-

Thus ends the fifteenth Chapter of the Niddna Sthdnam in the Sus'ruta
amhitd which treats of the Niddnam of dislocations and fractures.

CHAPTER XVL

Now we shall discourse on the Niddnam of
Mukharogam (diseases which afifect the cavity of
the mouth in general), i.

General Classifications:— Sixty five* dif-
ferent f(frms of mouth disease are known in practice.
They are found to attack seven different localities viz.
the lips, the gums of the teeth, tongue, palate, throat and
the entire cavity ; of these eight are peculiar to the lips ;
fifteen, to the roots of the teeth; eight to the teeth;
five to the tongue ; nine to the palate ; seventeen to
the throat; and three to the entire cavity. 2 — 3.

Diseases of the lips : — The eight forms which
affect the lips, are either Vdtaja, Pittaja, Kaphaja, Sdnni-
pdtika, Raktaja, Mdnsaja, Medaja or Abhighdtaja
(Traumatic). 4.

The V^taja Type The lips become dry,
rough,numbed, black, extremely painful and the affected
part seems as if it were smashed and pulled out or
cracked by the action of the aggravated VaJyu. In the
Pittaja type — the lips become blue or yellow-coloured
and studded with (a large number of small) mustard-
seed-like eruptions, which suppurate and exude a puru-
lent discharge attended with a burning sensation (in
the locality). In the Kaphaja type — the affected lips
are covered with small eruptions, which are of the same
colour as the surrounding part, and become slimy, heSvy
or thick, cold and swollen. Pain is absent in this type
and the patient feels an irresistible inclination to scratch
the parts. In the Sshinipittaja type, the lips change

* According to others sixty^seven-^but Dalian does not support this.

102

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Ch»p. XVI.

colour, becoming black, yellow, or ash-coloured (white)
at intervals and are found to be studded with various
sorts of eruptions. 5—8.

The Raktaja type : —(Produced by^the vitiated
condition of the blood) the affected lips look as red as
blood and profusely bleed and crops of date coloured
(chocolate-coloured) eruptions appear on tl^eir surface. In
the type (due to the vitiated condition of the

local flesh), the lips become heavy, thick and. gathered up
in the form of a lump of flesh. The angles of the
mouth - become infested with parasites which germi-
nate and spread themselves in the affected parts. In
the ]ledaja(fat-origined) type the lips become numbed,
soft, heavy and marked by an itching sensation. The
skin of the inflamed surface becomes glossy and looks
like the surface layer of clarified butter exuding a thin
crystal-like (transparent) watery discharge. In the
▲bhigluitaja (Traumatic) type, the lips become red,
knotty and marked by an itching sensation and seem as
if ipierced into or cut open with an axe and (become
cracked and fissured). 9 — 12.

Disease of the roots of the teeth

Diseases which are peculiar to the roots of the teeth, are
known as l^itdda, Danta-pupputaka, Danta-veshtaka,
^ushira, Mdha-Saushira, Paridara, Upakus'a, Danta-
vaidarbha, Vardhana, Adhimdnsa and the five sorts of
Nidi (sinus). 13.

Sltrfda (Scurvy); — The gums of the teeth suddenly
blged and become putrified, black, slimy and emit a fetid
smell. They become soft and gradually slough off.
The disease has its origin in the deranged conditiop
of the local blood and Kapham. Danta-pupputaka
^«tm boil):— The disease in which the roots of two or
thite teeth at a time is marked by a violent swelling and

C%lith XV!.] NIDAWA STHAMAM* 10$

pAin is (Ailed Danta<^pputaka. The disease is doe
to the vitiated condition of the blood and Kapham.
Bftttta'Veslitftka: — The teeth become loose in the ^uns,
which exudg a discharge of Wood and pus. This disease
is due to the vitiated blood of the locality. ^Oflhira: —
The disease in which an itching painful swelling appears
about the gums attended with copious flow of saliva is
called ^uslyra (Alveolar abscess). It is caused by the
deranged blood and Kapham of the locality. Kahli-
Siaiilltira The disease in which the teeth beccnne loose,
the palate marked by sinuses or fissures, the gams patri-
fied, and the whole cavity of the mouth inflamed, is
called Mah^s'aushira, the outcome of the concerted action
of the deranged Doshas of the body. 14 — 18.

Parldara : — The disease in which the gums be-
come putrified, wear off and bleed is called Paridara
(bleeding gums\ The disease has its origin in the
deranged condition of the blood, Kapham and Piftam.
Upaku^a : — The disease in which the gums become
marked by a burning sensation and suppuration and
the teeth become loose and shaky (in their gum^ in
consequence and bleed at the least shaking, is called
Upakus'a. There is a slight pain, and the entire cavity
of the mouth becomes swollen and emits a fetid smell ;
this disease is due to the vitiated condition of the
blood and Pittam. 19. ^

E>ai¥ta-Vaklarbha The disease which is
conseqtient upon the friction of the gums marked by the
appearance of a violent swelling about the portion (so
rubbed and in which) the teeth beeome loose and can*be
moved about, is called Danta-vaidarbha which is due to
Bit extraneous cause such as a blow etc. VKPdhana
the disease which is marked by ,the advent of an
; additional tooth (the last molar) throi^h the action

 04 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHIfA- tChap. XVI.

of the deranged Viyu with a specific excruciating pain
of its own, is called Vardhana or eruption <jf the Wisdom
tooth. The pain subsides with the cutting of the tooth,
Adhimifnsa : — The disease in which a ^iolent and
extremely painful tumour appears about the root of the
tooth, and is situated in the farthest end of the cavity of
the cheek-bone accompanied by a copious flow of saliva
is called Adhiminsa or Epulis, It is, due to the
deranged Kapham. The five sorts of Nsfdl (sinus)
which affect the roots of the teeth (are either Vdtaja,
Pittaja, Kaphaja, Sdnnipdtaja or Abhigh^ltaja), their
symptoms being respectively identical with those of the
types of NAdi-vrana. 20 -24.

Diseases to the teeth proper:— Diseases
which are restricted to the teeth proper are named as,
DAlana, Krimi-dantaka, Danta-harsha, Bhanjaka, ^arkarA,
KapAlika, ^Ava-dantaka and Hanu-moksha. 2 $.

D^Clana : — The disease in which the teeth seem
as if being cleft asunder with a violent pain is called
DAlana or toothache, the origin of which is ascribed
to the action of the aggravated state of the bodily VAyu.
Krimi-dantaka : — The disease in which the teeth are
eaten into by worms, is called Krimi-dantaka (caries\
The teeth become loose and perforated by black holes
accompanied by a copious flow of saliva. The appear-
ance of an extremely diffused swelling (about the roots of
decayed teeth) with a sudden aggravation of the accom-
panying pain without any apparent cause is also one
of its specific features. Danta-harsha : — The disease
In which the teeth cannot bear the heat, cold or touch is
called Danta-harsha. It is due to the deranged condi-
tion of VAyu. Bhanjaka : — The disease in which the
■face is distorted, the teeth break, and the accompanying
pain is severe^l is called Bhanjaka (degeneration of the

Chap. XVjf ] ^

NIDANA STHANAM,

105

teeth). The disease is due to the deranged condition of
the Vdyu and Kapham. Sarkaisf : — The disease, in
which sordes, formed on the teeth and hardened (by the
action o^ the deranged Vdyu), lie in a crystallised form
at the roots of the teeth, is called Sarkard (Tartar).
Such deposit^ tend to destroy the healthy growth and
functions of the teeth. Kapaliksi : — The disease in which
the preceding crystallised deposits get cemented together
and afterwards separate from the teeth taking away a part
of their coating (enamel) is called Kapalikd (calcareous
deposit) which naturally makes an erosion into and
destroys the teeth Sya£va-dantaka :-~The disease, in
which the teeth variously scorched by the action of the
deranged Pittam assumes a blackish or blue colour, is
named as Syava-dantaka (black teeth). Hanu-moksha : —
The disease in which the YAyu aggravated (by such
causes, as by loud talking, chewing of hard substances,
or immoderate yawning) produces the dislocation of the
jawbones is called Hanu-moksha It is identical with
Ardditam as regards its symptoms. 26 ~ 33.

Diseases of the tongue The five kinds
of diseases which affect the organ of taste are the
three sorts of Kantakas due to the three deranged
Doshas (Vdtaja Pittaja and Kaphaja), Aldsa and
Upa-jihvikd. 34.

The three Kantaks 5— In the VaitajaKan-

taka type the tongue becomes cracked, loses the
sense of taste and becomes rough like a teak leaf
(giving the organ a warty appearance). In the Pijtaja
Kan taka form the tongue is coloured yellow and studded
over with furred blood-coloured papillae with the burning
sensation (of the Pittam in them). In the Kaphaja
Kantaka type the tongue becomes heavy, thick and
grown over with vegetation of slender fleshy warts in the

I06 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XVI.

shape oi S^dlmali thorns. AWsa The severe inflam-
matory swelling about the under surface o£ the tongue
is called Aldsa, which if allowed to grow on unchecked
gives rise to numbness and immobility of the organ
and tends to a process of rapid suppuration at its base.
The disease is caused by the deranged blood and
Kapham. The Upa-jihv^: -The disease in which a
(cystic) swelling shaped like the tip of the tongue
appears about the under-surface of that organ by raising
it a little is called Upa-jihvikd (Ranula). The accom-
panying symptoms are salivation, burning and itching
sensations in the affected organ ; these are due to the
deranged Kapham and blood (of the locality). 35 — 37*

Disease of the palate Diseases which arc
peculiar to the part of the palate are named Gala-sundiki,
Tundikeri, Adhrusha, Minsa-kachchapa, Arvuda, Mansa-
sangh^ta, Tdlu-sosha and Tdlu-pdka. 38 .

Gala-SUndik^ ; — The diffused and elongated
swelling, caused by the deranged blood and Kapham,
which first appears about the root of the palate and
goes on extending till it looks like an inflated skin-
bladder is called Gala-sundikd (tonsilitis) by physicians.
Thirst, cough, difficult breathing are the indications of
the disease. Tundikeri : — A thick swelling resembling
the fruit of the Tundikeri plant in shape and appearing
about the root of the palate attended with a burning,
piercing or. pricking pain and suppuration is called
Tundikeri (abscess of the tonsil). Adhrusha A red,
numbed swelling appearing about the same region, as
the effect of the vitiated blood of the locality, attended
with severe fever and pain, is known by the name of
Adhrusha. Hs(ni ^-kachchapa : — A brownish and slightly
painful swelling somewhat shaped like the back of a
toitoi^ (and appearing about the region of the soft

Chap. XVI.]

NIDANA STHANAM.

to;

palate"! is called Mdnsa-kachchhapa. The xlisease * is
slow in its growth or development and is due to the
deranged Kapham. Arvnda: — A swelling shaped like
the petal of the lotus lily and appearing in the region
of the soft palate as an outcome of the aggravated con-
dition of the local blood is called Arvudam. The
swelling is Identical with the Raktarvuda described
before. Mansa-Sanghfiilta A vegetation of morbid
flesh %t the edge or extremity of the soft palate
through the action of tlic deranged Kapham is called
Minsa-Sangh^.ta. It is painless. Talll-pupputa A
painless permanent swelling to the shape of the Kola
fruit (plum) cau.sed by the deranged fat and Kapham
at the region of the soft palate is called TAlu-pupputa.
Ta[lU“SOSha The disease of the soft palate in which
the patient feels a sort of parched sensation with
dyspncea and a severe piercing pain in the affected
part is called TAlu-sosha, which has its origin in the
aggravated condition of the bodily Vdyu acting in
concert with the deranged Pittam. Talu-patka — The
disease in which the deranged Pittam sets up a very
severe suppurative process in the soft palate is called
Tdlu-pdka. 39-47.

The diseases of the throat and
larynx The diseases peculiar to the throat and the
larynx are seventeen in number and are known as
the five types of Rohini, Kantha-Sdluka, Adhijihva,
Valaya, Valdsa, Eka^vrinda, Vrinda, Sataghni, Gilayu,
Gala-vidradhi, Galaugha, Svaraghna, Mdnsatdna, and
.Viddri. 48.

General features of Rohinis :~Thc

aggravated Vdyu, Pittam, Kapham, either severally or
, in combination, or blood may affect" the mucous of
the throat and give rise to vegetations of fleshy papillae,

Io8 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Ch«P- XVI.

which gradually obstruct the channel of the throat
and bring on death. The disease is called Rohini
(Diphtheria’*. 49.

The V^taja Rohini: -A vegetation of ex-
tremely painful fleshy Ankuras (nodules), crops up all over
the tongue which tend to obstruct the passage of the
throat and are usually accompanied by other distressing
symptoms characteristic of the deranged Vayij. Pittaja-
Rohinit— The Ankuras (nodules) in the present ty^e are
marked by speedy growth and suppuration, and arc
accompanied by a burning sensation and high fever.
Kaphaja Rohini : —The Ankuras (nodules) become
heavy, hard and characterised by slow suppuration
gradually obstructing the passage of the throat. 50-52.

The Sannip£(tika Type Suppuration
takes place in the deeper strata of the membrane ac-
companied by all the dangerous symptoms peculiar to
the three aforesaid types of the disease. It is rarely
amenable to treatment. Raktaj% Type : -Symptoms
characteristic of the Pittaja type of the disease arc
present and the fleshy outgrowth formed in the throat,
is found to be covered with small vesicles. This type
is incurable,’’^ 53 “'54

Ka.ntha.-^2Llukam : —The disease in which a
hard rough nodular growth (Granthi) in the shape of a
plum-stone crops up in the throat, which seems as if it
has been si^^uffed with the bristle of a S'uka insect or
been pricked by thorn.s is called Kantha-Sdlukam. The
disease is due to the action of the deranged Kapham.
It is amenable to surgical treatment only. Adhijihva : —
A small swelling like the tip of the tongue caused by the

* The reading Sddhya (curable) which is to be met with in the several
printed editions of Mddhab’s Nidanatn in lieu of the reading As^dhya
(incurable) is not to our mind oorreot

Chap. XVL]

NIDANA STHANAM.

109

deranged blood and Kapham over the root of the tongue
is called Adhijihva, which should be given up as soon as
suppuration sets in. Valaya A circular or ring-shaped
raised swelling obstructing or closing up the upper end of
the cesophagus (structure of oesophagus) is called Valaya.
It cannot be cured and hence should be given up. It is
due to the deranged action of the Kapham in the
locality. VaWsa : —The disease in which the unusually
aggravated Vayii and Kapham give rise to a swelling
in the throat, which is extremely painful and causes a
difficulty of respiration, ultimately producing symptoms
of complete asphyxia is called Valasa by learned
physicians and is very difficult to cure. 55^58.

Eka-vrinda and Vrinda’^:— The disease in
which a circular, raised, heavy and slightly soft swelling
appears in the throat attended with itching, a slightly
burning sensation and a slight suppuration is called
Eka-vrinda. The disease is due to the effect of vitiated
blood and Kapham. The disease in which a round
elevated swelling attended with high fever and a slightly
burning sensation is formed in the throat through the
aggravated condition of the blood and Pittam is called
Vrinda. A piercing pain in the swelling points to its
Vdtaja origin. 59—60.

^ataghnl 'The disease in which, through the
concerted action of the deranged Vayu, Pittam and
Kapham, a hard throat obstructing Varti (jagged mem-
brane ) edged like a Sataghni*)* and densely beset with
fleshy excrescences is formed along the inner lining of

* The diseases of the throat are 17 in number. Taking Vrinda as a
separate disease they amount to 18 ; but Vrinda, affecting similar place
and being similar in appearance with but a slight distinction of symptoms,
is only a particular state of £ka«vrinda, and not a separate disease.

t Sataghni is a kind of weapon used in ancient warfare.

iro

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA

[Chap. XVL

that pipe IS denominated as ^ataghni. Various kinds
of pains, (characteristics of each of the deranged Vdyu,
Pittam and Kapham) are present in this type which
should be necessarily considered as irremediaj^le. 6i.

Gil 2 (yu : — The disease in which the aggravated
Kapham and blood give rise to a hard and slightly
painful (D. R extremely painful^ glandular swelling
in the throat to the size of the stone of the Amalaka
fruit is called Giliyu. A sensation as if a mSrsel or
bolus of food is stuck in the throat is experienced which
by its very nature is a surgical case. 62 .

Gala-Vidradhi: —The disease in which an exten-
sive swelling occurs along the whole inner lining of the
throat, owing to the concerted action of the deranged
Vciyu, Pittam and Kapham is called Gala-vidradhi which
exhibits all the features present in a Vidradhi of the
Sdnipatika type. Galaugha : — The disease in which a
large swelling occurs in the throat so as to completely
obstruct the passage of any solid or liquid food and also
that of Udema-vAyu (choking the pharynx, larynx and
the mouth of the esophagus), attended with a high fever
is called Galaugha, the origin of which should be as-
cribed to the action of the deranged blood and Kapham.
Svaraglina’ — The disease in which the patient faints
owing to the choking of the larynx by the deranged
Kapham which is marked by stertorous breathing, hoarse-
ness, dryness and paralysed condition of the throat is
called Svaraghna which has its origin in the deranged
V^ii. 63—65.

MsCnSat^na : —The disease in which a pendent,
spreading and extremely painful swelling appears in
the throat which gradually obstructs the pipe is called
MinsatAna. It invariably praves fatal and is caused
by the deranged VAyu, Pittam and Kapham : 66

Chap. XVI.] NIDANA STHANAM. Ill

Vidari ; -The disease in which a copper-coloured
swelling occurs in the throat, marked by a pricking and
burning sensation, and the flesh of the throat gets
putrefied and sloughs off (and emits a fetid smell) is
called Viddri. The disease is of a Pittaja origin and is
found to attack that side of the throat on which the
patient is in the habit of lying. 67.

The disease in the entire cavity: —

Cases wtich are found to invade the entire cavity of
the mouth (without being restricted to any particular
part thereof) may be either due to Vataja, Pittaja,
Kaphaja or Raktaja type and are known by the general
name— Savra-Sara. 68.

In the Vsttaja type the entire cavity of the mouth
is studded with vesicles attended with a pricking
sensation in their inside. In the Pittaja type a large
number of small yellow or red-coloured vesicles attended
with a burning sensation crops up on the entire (mucous
membrane lining the cavity of the mouth. In the Kaphaja
variety a similar crop of slightly painful, itching vesicles
of the same colour as the skin (is found on the entire
inner surface of the mouth.) The blood-origined Kaktaja
type is nothing but a modification of the Pittaja one
(giving rise to similar .symptoms) ; it is also by others
called Mukha-pi(ka. 69-72.

Thus ends the sixteenth Chapter of the Nidana Sthanam in the Sus'ruta
Samhitil which treats of the Niddnam of the diseases of the mouth.

Here ends the Niddna Sthdnam.

THE

SUgRUTA SAMHITA

SARIRA STHANAM.

• * (Section on Anatomy),

CHAPTER 1.

Now we shall discourse on the Siriram which treats
of the science of Being in general (Sa.rV£l-Bhuta.
Chint£( dsCriram). i.

The latent (lit : unmanifest) supreme nature (Prakriti)
is the progenitor of all created things. She is self-
begotten and connotes the three fundamental or primary
virtues of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, She is imaged or
embodied in the eightfold categories of Avyakta (un-
manifest), Mah^n (intellection), Ahamkdra (Egoism) and
the five Tanmdtras or elementals (proper sensibles) and
is the sole and primary factor in working out the evo-
lution of the universe. The one absolute and original
nature is the fundamental stone house of materials out
of which the bodies of all self-conscious (Karma-Purusha)
working agents (agents who come into being through the
dynamical energy of their acts or Karmas) have been
evolved in the same manner as all water, whether con-
fined in a tank or a reservoir, or coursing free through
the channels of streams and of mighty rivers, have been
welled up from the one and shoreless primordial ocean. 2.

Out of that latent unmanifest (Avyakta) or original
nature (impregnated by the atoms or elemental units of

15

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. !•

1 14

consciousness or Purushas) Intellection or Mahdn has
been evolved, and out of Mahdn egoism. This Mahdn or
intellection should be likewise considered as partaking
of the three fundamental attributes (Sattva, Rajas, and
Tamas) of the latent (Avyakta) or original nature.*
Ahamkcira or egoism in its turn may be grouped under
three subheads as the Vaikdrika Taijasa (operative) or
RAjasika, and Bhutadi (illusive or Tamasika). 3.

The eleven organs of cognition, communication or
sense perception have emanated from the co-operation
of the aforesaid Vaikarika AhamkAra with the Taijasa
or Rajasa. They are the ears, skin, eyes, tongue, nose,
speech, hands, genitals, anus, feet and the mind (Manah).
Of these foregoing organs the first five arc intellectual
or sense organs (Vuddhi lndriya) ; the next five being
operative (Karma-Indriya\ The mind (Manah) par-
takes of the character of both the intellectual and
operative organs alike. 4-5.

The five TanmAtras or clemcntals (or the five proper
sensiblcs of hearing, touch, sight, taste, and smell) charac-
terised by the Nescience, etc. have been evolved out of the
BhutAdi etc. (or TAmasa AhamkAra) concerted with the
Taijasa AhamkAra through the instrumentality of the
VaikArikam. The gross or perceptible modifications of
these five Tanmitras arc sound, touch, taste, sight and
smell. From the combination of the aforesaid five
TanmAtras (BhutAdi) taken one at a time, have succes-
sively emanated the five gross matters of space such as

C Sattva, Rajas and Tamas Adhesion, cohesion and disintegration
in the Physical plane ; affection, love and hate in the moral ; emancipa.
tion, spiritual afhnity and sin in the Psychic.

Simply phenomenal or the simple outcome of the phenomenal evolution
without being by other specific attributes of matter and hence S^tvika or
illuminaiing or quasi-spirituaL

Chap. I.]

SARIRA STHANAM.

115

ether, air, heat, (fire,) fluid (water), and earth (solid).
These twenty four categories combinedly form what is
technically known as the twenty four elements
(Tattvas). *Thus wc have discoursed on the twenty four
fundamental principles (Chaturvins'ati-tattvam). 6.

Hearing, tou^h, sight, taste and smell respectively
form the subjects of the five intellectual (Vuddhi)
organs of mail, whereas the faculty of speech, handling,
pleasure, ejections or evacutation, locomotion successively
belong to the (remaining) five operative (Karma-Indriya)
ones. The original nature (Avyakta), Mahdn* (intellec-
tion), Egoism (Ahamkdra),the five sensiblcs (Tanmatras),
and the five gross material principles in their nascent
stage in evolution form what is included within the eight
categories of Nature (Prakriti), the remaining sixteen
categories being her modifications (Vikara). The objects
of intellection (Mahan) and Egoism (AhamkdrA) as well
as of the sense organs of knowledge and actions arc the
material principles (Adibhautika) though they are spiri-
tual in themselves and in their nature.

The tutelary god of intellection (Buddhi)is Brahma.
The god Isvara is the presiding deity of the sense of
egoism (AhamkAra) ; the moon god is that of the mind
(Manah) ; the quarters of the heaven, of the ears ; the
wind god is that of the skin ; the sun is that of the
eyes ; the water is that of the taste the earth is that of
the smell ; the fire is that of the speech ; Indra is that of
the hands ; Vishnu is that of the legs ; Mitra is that of
the anus and Prajdpati is that of the organs -of
generations. 7.

* Mah^n, Ahamkam and the five Tanmdlras, though but modifications
of the original Nature in themselves, have been included within the
category of Nature (Prakriti) in asmuch as they form the immediately prior
or antecedent conditions of the evolution of the phenomenal universe.

Il6 THE StiSHktJtA SAMHITA. [Chftp. 1.

All the aforesaid (twenty-four) categories or
elementals (Chaturvinsati-Tanmdtras) are devoid of
consciousness. Similarly the modifications of the
primal cause of Prakriti such as the Mahat etc. are
all bereft of consciousness in as much as *the cause
itself, the Avyakta or the original nature is devoid of
it. The Purusha or the self-conscious subjectivity,
enters into the primal cause (Mula-Prakriti or original
Nature) and its necessary eflfect (the evolvfd out
phenomena) and makes them endued with his own
essence or self-consciousness. The preceptors and holy
sages explain the proposition by an analogy that as
the milk in the breast of a mother, though unconscious
in itself, originates and flows out for the growth and
sustenance of her child ; (as the semen in the organism
of an adult male though devoid of consciousness, flows
out during an act of sexual intercourse) ; so these
twenty-four primaiy material principles (elementals),
though unconscious in themselves, tend to contribute
towards the making of the self-conscious self or the
universal individual (the aggregate of limited or condi-
tional selves) for the purpose of working out his final
liberation or emancipation attainment of the stage of
pure consciousness or perfect knowledge. 8.

Now we shall describe the tracts which the Purusha
(subjective or self-conscious reality) and Prakriti or
nature (passive non-conscious eternity) pass in com-
mon as well as those wherein they differ from each
other. 9‘

irralts of commonalty Both the Purusha
and Prakriti are eternal realities, both of them are un-
manifest, disembodied, without a beginning or origin,
eternal, without a second, all— pervading and omni-
present.

Chap, t]

SAKIRA StHAKAM.

117

^ Traits of diversity Of the Purusha and
the Prakriti, only the latter is non-conscious and
possesses the three fundamental qualities of Sattva,
Rajas and Tamas. Prakriti performs the function
of the see 3 or in otherwords she lies inherent as the
seed or the primary cause in the latter phenomenal
evolution of the Mahat etc. and contributes the maternal
clement in the conception, development and birth of
the prftnordial cosmic matter (phenomenal universe\
fecundated by the Purusha (self-conscious subjectivity)
in its different stages of evolution. These stages are
called Mahat, Ahamkara etc. ; and Prakriti is not indif-
ferent, as the Purusha is to the pleasures and misery of
life. But the Purusha (units or atoms of consciousness),
devoid of the threefold virtues of Sattva etc. arc non-
concerning hence non-producing and bereft of the seed-
attributes of lying inherent in all as the primary
cause of evolution. They arc mere witnesses to the
joys and miseries of life, and do not participate in their
enjoyment though imprisoned in the human or-
ganism. 10

Since an effect is uniform in virtue to its producing
cause, the evolutionised effects or products of the Pra-
kriti such as the Mahat, Ahamkdra etc. must needs par-
take of the three fundamental qualities (Sattva, Rajas
and Tamas) which are predicated of the Prakriti. In
other words, these Mahat, Ahamkara, etc, are but the
modifications of the three fundamental qualities of
Sattva, Rajas and Tamas. Moreover, certain authorities
hold that the Purushas are units of self-consciousness,
possessed of the three aforesaid qualities owing to their
antecedent conditions or causes (the gross material
universe) being permeated with and characterised by
them. II.

Il8 THE SasHRUTA SAMHITA. tChap. L

Metrical Text (Vaidyake.) : — it is asserted in
the Ayurveda that it is only the gross-sighted ones
and men capable of observing only the superficial
appearances, who confound eternal ordci* or se-
quence of things and events (Svabhdba), God (Isvara).*
Time (Kala), sudden and unlooked for^ appearances
of the phenomena (Yadrichchha), Necessity (Niyati) and
transformation (Parindma) with the origin^il Nature
(Prakriti). The five different forms of matter (such as
P2thcr etc) are nothing but the modifications or trans-
formed states of the original nature and are characterised
by the three universal qualities of Sattva, Rajas and
Tamas, and all created things, whether mobile or im-
mobile, should be considered as alike exponented by the
same. In the Science of medicine the cause of a
disease is the one sole aim to be achieved by means of
administering proper medicinal remedies (matter), and
hence the properties of matter are the only fit subject
to be dealt with in a book on pharmacy. And further,
because the immediately prior cause of the human
organism is a proper and congenial admixture of the
sperm and ovum (matter), the sense organs arc the
resultants of phenomenal — evolution of matter, and the
objects of sense perception arc equally material or
phenomenal in their nature. 12-^14.

Memorable verse : --A man by a particular
organ of his body perceives the same matter which
forms the proper object of that sense organ in as much
as the^perceiving sense organ and the perceived sensible
are produced by the same material cause. The matter,

* The second factor according to Sinkhya, in the order of cosmic
evolution, which as the seed of the universe, was hid in the burning disc
of the central, primordial Sun, out of which the different solar systems
have come into being.

Chap. 1.] SARIRA STHANAM. II 9

which specifically forms the object of a particular sense
organ, cannot be perceived by the other. We see a
flower with the eyes and not with the nose. 15.

The Science of medicine does not lay down that the
self-conscious Selves (Kshctrajna) are all pervading, but
on the contrary it asserts that they arc real and eternal
and arc born ifi the planes of divine, human or animal
existence according to their good or evil deeds in life.
The (Existence of these self-conscious entities can be
ascertained duly by inference inasmuch as they are
extremely subtle in their essence. The self-conscious
self is possessed of infinite consciousness, is real and
eternally subject to the process of being evolved out
into a finite, organic individual through the dynamics
of the combined sperm and ovum. The view is further
corroborated by a dictum of the Sruti which holds that
Parusha (individual) is nothing but a combination of
a self-conscious self and the five kinds of matter (Mahd-
bhutas) formed into an organic body. This Purusha or
individual, which is called Individual of action tKarxna-
Purusha), falls within the scope of the science and art
of medicine.* 16 — 17.

* Here lies the difference between S^nkhya and Ayurveda. While the
former discourses on in material character of the soul, the latter com-
mences to discuss on the questions how the material environment in
which the soul is said to inhabit is evolved, and how the inclusion of
the spiritual within the material organism is effected.

Hence Sus'ruta’s Physiology, like that of Charaka, is in the strictest
sense of the word molecular and his science of life is an attempt at
explanation of consciousness from the materialistic standpoint,^ which
agrees with the views of modern western science. Intellect according to
Sus'ruta is material and belongs to the same category which the S^nkhya
system of philosophy in its explanation of evolution enumerates originally
as seven. The soul, according to Sus'ruta, is an independent existence and
is often associated with what is called life. Where there is life, there is a
soul, and it is not everywhere the same. The soul in Sus^ruta is individual

120 THE SUSHllUTA SAMHITA. I-

The attributes of an org'anic Indi-
vidual : — Longing for pleasure, shunning of pain,
enemity, energetic undertaking of work, respiration
(Prdna\ emission of flatus (Apdna), closing an^ opening
of the eyelids, intellect (Vuddhi), sentiment (Manah),
deliberation, discretion, memory, knowledge of art,
perseverance, sensation and perception, are the attributes
of an organic individual. i8. ,

Distinctive features of the different
classes of mental temperaments :-~An

absence of all killing or hostile propensities, a judicious
regimen of diet, forbearance, truthfulness, piety, a belief
in God, spiritual knowledge, intellect, a good retentive
memory, comprehension, and the doing of good deeds
irrespective of consequences, are the qualities which
grace the mind of a person of a Sittvika temperament.
Feeling of much pain and misery, a roving spirit, non-
comprehension, vanity, untruthfulncss, nonclemcncy,
pride, an over winning confidence in one’s own excel-
lence, lust, anger and hilarity are the attributes ^which
mark a mind of the Esijashika cast. Despondency,
stupidity, disbelief in the existence of God, implqty,
stupification and perversity of intellect, lethargy in
action and sleepiness are the qualities which mark a
mind of a Ts^masbika stamp. i9i

The distinctive traits of the five
material of Elements of the world

The properties of Aka^sa (ether) are sound, the sense of
hearing, porosity and differentia evolution of the veins,
ligaments etc. into their characterised species (Viviktat^.)

takes cognisance of sorrow, disease and death by its
union with the body ( iff f iff fU: f )• Hence
the living frame together with the soul that ia said to inhabit it forms the
subject-matter of Ayurvedic medical treatment. Ed.

SARIRA STH\NAM.

I2I

Chap. I ] .

The properties VaCyu (ethcrin) are touch, the skin, all
functional activities of the organism, throbbing of the
whole body (Spandana) and lightness. The properties
of Teja, (Qre or heat) arc form, the eyes, colours, heat,
iflumination, digestion, anger, generation of instanta-
neous energy valour. The properties of Apa (water
or liquid) are taste, the tongue, fluidity, heaviness, cold-
ness, oliogirvousness and semen. The properties or
modifications of Prithivi (the earth matter or solid)
arc smell, the nose, embodiment and heaviness. 20.

Of these the ether or Akasa abounds in attributes of
the Sdttvika stamp, the Vayu or ctherin in RAjashika,
the Teja in Sdttvika and Rajashika, the water in Sdttvika
and.Tamashika and the earth in Tamasha attributes. 21.
There are Memorable Verses : -These

qualities arc found to characterise and enter into the suc-
cessive elements in the order of their enumeration. The
specific attributes of these elements are manifest in the
substances which are respectively originated from them.
The term Prakriti or original nature connotes the eight
categories (of Avyakta, Mahan, Ahamkdra, and the five
Tanmatras) and the rest of the twenty four fundamental
principles are its modifications. The Purusha forms the
twentyfifth principle. These twentyfive fundamental prin-
ciples of cosmogony have been dealt with in the present
treatise (Salya-Tantram) as well as in the other treatise
(^dlaky-Tantram and Sankhya Philosophy). 22 — 23.

Thus ends the first Chapter of the S'arira Sihananin the Sus'ruta Samhild
which deals with the science of Being in general. •

16

CHAPTER 11.

Now wc shall discourse on the Sdriiani \vl]ic?7i
treats of the purification of semen and cataminal
Fluid etc. (^ukra-^onita-^uddhirnama
^ariram). i.

A man is incapable ol begetting childreit, whose
seminal fluid, affected by the aggravated Vdyu, Pittam or
Kapham, emits a cadaverous smell, or has actiuired
a clotted or shreddy character* or which looks like
putrid pus. or has become thin, or smells like urine
or stool, 2.

Deranged Semen : — Semen vitiated by the
deranged VAyu acquires a (reddish-black) colour and
gives rise to a pain (piercing and cutting etc.) which
characterises the Vayu (at the time of being emitted).
Similarly semen deranged by the Pittam gets a (yellowish
or bluish etc.) colour and produces the specific pain
(burning and sucking etc.) of the deranged Pittam
(at the time of emission). Semen vitiated by the action
of the deranged Kapham has a (white) colour and pro-
duces the pain (itching sensation etc.) peculiar to the
deranged Kapham (at the time of its outflow). The
semen vitiated by blood is tinged with a bloody hue,
produces all kinds of pain peculiar to the deranged
Sonita (Pittam). The semen smells like a putrid corpse
an4 is emitted in large c[uantities. The shreddy or
clotted character of the fluid (Granthila) should be
ascribed to the action of the deranged Vayu and
Kapham. If vitiated by the action of the deranged
Pittam and Kapham it looks like putrid pus (Puti-
puya). Thin semen is caused by the deranged Vdyu and

SARIRA STHANAM.

123

IL]

Pittam as described before. A concerted action of the
deranged VAyu, Pittam, and Kapham causes the semen
to smell like urine or fecal matter. Of these, the
cadaverously smelling, shreddy and clotted, putrid pus-
like and thinned semen can be remedied and corrected
only with the greatest difficulty ; while the one, having
the smell of stool or urine, should be regarded as beyond
cure. The remaining kinds are curable.

Defanged Artavam The catamenial fluid
(Artavam) of a woman vitiated by the deranged VAyu,
Pittam, Kapham, or blood, cither severally or in
combination of two or more Doshas should be likewise
considered as unfit for the purpose of fecundation.
Vitiated catamenial fluid exhibits the characteristic
colour and pain of the deranged Doshas or blood
(underlying at its roots). Of the several kinds (of
vitiated catamenial fluids) those which smell like a putrid
corpse or fetid pus, or which is clotted, or is thin, or emits
the smell of urine or fecal matter, should be deemed as
being beyond remedy, the rest being amenable. 4.

Memorable Verses The first three types
of seminal derangements or defects should be corrected
by an intelligent physical! with an application of
medicated oil etc. (^Sneha-karma), diaphoric measures
etc* or urctheral injections (Uttara-vasti). A medi-
cated Ghrita prepared with a (decoction and Kalka
of; Dhdtaki flowers, K/iadira, Dddima and A^yuna
barks should be given to drink to a man whose
semen em’ts a cadaverous smell (Kunapa\ As an alter-
native, a medicated Ghrita prepared with (a decoction
and levigated paste or Kalka of) the drugs forming the
S^dlasdrddi group should be given to him. In a case of

*' The word in ihe text includes emelics^ purgatives, Anuvd-

sdonm and Asth?ipanam measures according to their specific Doshas.

124

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap II.

clotted and shreddy semen (Granthi), the patient should
be made to drink a medicated Ghrita prepared with a
(decoction and Kalka of) S'athi, or with an alcaline solu-
tion prepared from the ashes of the burnt Pald^'ha wood.
In the case of a pus like appearance of the fluid the
patient should be treated with the medicated Ghrita
prepared with (a decoction and Kalka of) the drugs
included within the groups of Parushakddi ^nd Vatddi
(Nyigrodhidi) Ganas. In a case of thin *semcn,
measures laid down under the same head before, as well
as those to be hereafter described should be resorted to.
Similarly a medicated Ghrita, prepared with (a de-
coction and Kalka ofj Chitrakk roots, Uskira roots and
Hingu, should be drunk in a case of the semen smelling
like urine or fecal matter. In all cases of seminal
disorders as well as in menstrual anomjilics, Uttara-
Vssti (urctheral or vaginal injection) should be made
after having recourse to the application of medicated
oil etc. (Sneha-karma', purgatives, emetics, Asthdpana
and Anuvdsana measures. 5 — 12

Treatment of deranged Artava:— In
all the four cases when the catamenial blood would be
found to be vitiated tby the deranged Vdyu, Pittam,
Kaphah or Sonita), the preliminary remedial measures of
the application of oil etc. purgatives etc. (Pancha-karma)
should be first employed and then the following
measures should be undertaken viz. application of
Kalka, (levigated paste of drugs), Pichu (medicated
plugs —pecharics etc), Pathya t^lct) and Aohamaua
(washes with decoctions) as described under the treat-
ment of Gyoncecological cases etc. Appearance of
clots of blood (Granthi) in place of the healthy men-
strual fluid would indicate, decoction or a pulverised
compound of P^thd, Trushuna and Vrikshaka (Kutaja).

Chap. II.]

NIDANA STHANAM.

125

A decoction of and Chandanam is indica-

ted in the case when the menstrual fluid would smell like
fetid pus, or contain marrow. The remedies described
under the bead of seminal disorders, should be likewise
prescribed in cases of menstrual anomalies caused by
the action of the deranged Vdyu, Pittam and Kaphah
according to the requirements of each individual case
under treatment. Sdli-rice, barley, wine and meat
with cholagogue properties should be deemed as a
wholesome diet in these cases. 13 — 16.

Traits of pure and healthy semen
and menstrual blood Semen which is
transparent like crystal, fluid, glo.s.sy, .sweet and emits
the smell of honey ; or like oil or honey in appearance
according to others, should be considered as hcalth}r
The catamenial blood (Artava) which is red like the
blood of a hare, or the washings of shellac and leaves
no stains on cloths (which ma>’ be washed off by
simply soaking them in water) should be considered as
healthy. 17 — 18.

Asrig'dara (Menorrhagia) : — An abnormal or
excessive discharge of the menstrual blood (Artava),
or its long persistence even after the wonted time,
or its appearance at a premature or unnatural period
(as well as contrarit}' in its colour or properties) is
called Asrigdara. All types of th^ disease (Asrigdara)
are attended with an aching in the limbs and a painful
flow (of the catamenial fluid). In case of excessive
hcemorrhage ifrom the uteru.s\ symptoms such as weak-
ness, vertigo^ loss of consciousness, darkness of vision,
or difficult breathing, thirst, burning (sensation of the
body), delirium, palour, somnolence and other Vdtaja

* Bhadrais'riyam is 8'richandanam according to Dallana or while
Sandal wood according Gaydddsa.

126

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chnp. 11.

troubles (convulsion, hysteria etc.) may set in. A
physician should treat a case of Asrigdara with
measures and remedies as laid down under the head of
Rakta-pittam (hemorrhage) in a ease jvhen the
patient is young (of sixteen years), careful in her diet,
and the disease unattended with severe complica-
tions. 19-2T.

AmenorrhOB : —in a case of suppression of
menstruation (Amenorrhoe) caused by the obstruction
of the deranged Doshas (Vdyu and Kapham) in the
passage, the patient .should be advised to take fish,
Kulaitha pulse, Masha pulse, Khnjikam fermented sour
gru d etc.), Tila, wine (Sura), cow's urine, whey, half
dilute'! Takra, curd and S^uktam for her diet. The
symptoms and treatment of thin ami scanty menstriia-
t!on have been de.scribed before. Still in such a ease
measures laid down for the treatment of Nashta-Rakta
(amenorrhee) may be adopted. Under a course of
treatment described as before, the semen or the cata-
menial blood of a person would be resorted to their
healthy and normal condition. 22 — 23.

A woman with i^healthy) catamenial flow should
forego the bed of her husb.and during the first three
days of her unclcanncss, as well as day sleep and
collyrium. She shall not shed tears nor bathe, nor
smear her person (with sandal paste etc.), nor anoint
her body, nor pare her nail, nor run, nor indulge in
loud and excessive laughter and talk, nor should she
hearjoud noise, nor comb her hair, nor expose herself
to droughts, nor do any fatiguing work at all ; because
if a woman sleeps in the day time (during the first three
day.s of her period) her child of subsequent conception
becomes sleepy or .somnolent. The woman who applies
Qolly'rium along her eyelids (during those days), gives

Chap. II.]

SARIRA STHANAM.

I 27

birth to a blind child ; by shedding tears (during her
period) a woman gives birth to a child of defective eye-
sight ; by bathing or smearing her body (with sandal
paste etc.J a miserable one ; by anointing her body
a leper (Kushthi) ; by paring her nails a child with bad
nails ; by running a restless one ; by indulging in ex-
cessive laughtcTj a child with brown (S)iva) teeth or
palate or tongue ; by excessive talking a garrulous
child or one of incoherent speech ; by hearing loud
sounds, a deaf child ; by combing her hair, a bald one ;
wherc'ris by exposure to the wind or by doing
fatiguing work (during the first three days of her
period) she gives birth to an insane child (conceived
immediately after it). Hence these acts (day sleep etc)
are to be avoided. 24.

Reg'imen to be observed in her

menses : -A woman in her menses should lie down
on a matress made of Kus'a blades (during the first three
days of her uncleanness), should take her food from her
own blended palms or from earthen sauces, or from trays
made of leaves. She should live on a course of Habishya
diet and forswear during the time, even the sight of her
husband. After this period, on the fourth day she should
take a ceremonial ablution, put on a new ^untorn)
garment and ornaments and then visit her husband after
having uttered the words of necessary benediction 25.

Metrical Text : — A child conceived after the
period resembles the man whom she first sees after
ablution on the fourth day of her menses ; hence she
should see none but her husband* at that time (so *that
the child may resemble his father). After that the
priest shall perform the rites (Garbhidhana ceremony),

^ In the case of the husband being abstni at the lime, she should look

at the sun*

128.

THE SUSIIRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. II.

to help the conception of a male child and after the
ceremony a wise husband should observe the following
rules of conduct. 26 — 27..

Conduct of Husband A husb^ud wish-
ing to beget a son by his wife, should not visit her bed
for a month ^before the day of the next f^pw). Then on
the fourth day of her uncleanness, he should anoint or
lubricate his body with Ghrita, should partake of ^ food
in the afternoon or eveningcomposed of boiled S'd/t rice,
milk and clarified butter, and then visit the bed of his
wife The wife also, in her tern, should observe a similar
vow of sexual abstinence (Brahma-charini ) for a month
before that day on which she should anoint or lubricate
her body with oil, partake of food largely composed
of oil and Mhsha pulse, and then meet her husband
at night. The husband then having uttered the appro-
priate Veda Mantras and having awakened confidence
in the wife, should go unto her on the fourth, sixth,
eighth, tenth or on the twelfth night of her menses for
the progenation of a male child. 28.

Metrical Text ;^A visit to the wife on any
of these nights leads to the continual increase of the
wealth, progeny, and the duration of the husband’s life.
On the other hand, a visit to ones wife on the fifth,
seventh, ninth, or eleventh day of her flow leads to the
conception ol a female child The thirteenth and the
remaining days (till the next cour.se) arc condemned
as regards intercourse. 29 —30

Prohibited Period etc. A going unto
one’s wife on the first day of her monthly course tends to
shorten one’s life and a child born of the act dies imme-
diately after its delivery. The same result is produced
by a visit on the second day, or the child dies lying-in
joom i.e. ten days of its birth ; A visit on the third day

Chap. II* j

SARIRA STHANAM.

129

leads to the child’s being deformed and short-lived. A
child which is the fruit of a visit on the fourth day lives
long, will be well developed and^remain in the full vigour
of health. ^The semen cast in the womb of a woman
during the continuance of her monthly flow does not
become fruitful because it is carried back and flows out
in the same manner as a thing thrown into a stream does
not go against but is carried away with the current.
Hence a nusband should foreswear the company of his
wife during the first three days of her uncleanness, when
she also should observe a vow of sexual abstinence ; the
husband should not visit his wife within the month -after
the twelfth day of her menses). 31.

After the impregnation on any of these nights, three
or four drops (of the expressed juice) of any of the
following drugs such as Lakshanct, Vata-S'ungc^ ,
S'ahadevd or ViYvadevd, mixed with milk should be
poured into the right nostril of the enceinte for the
conception of a male child and care should be taken
Chat she does not spit it away. 32.

Metrical Text A co-ordination of ihe four
factors of menstrual period (Eitu), healthy womb
(Kshetra), nutrient liquid t,e. chyle of digested food
(Ambu), healthy semen (Vija) and the proper observance
of the rules is necessary for the conception and develop-
ment of a healthy child just as the proper season
(Ritu), good soil (Kshetra), water (containing nutrient
matter) and vigorous seeds (Vija) together with proper
care, help the germination of strong and undiseas^d
sprouts. A child which is the fruit of such conception
is destined to be beautiful, of vigorous health, generous,
long-lived, virtuous, attached to the good of its
parents and capable of discharging its parental obliga-
tions. 33.

17

130 THE SUSIIRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. It.

Causes of different colours of the

Child:— The fiery principle (Teja-dhaitu) of the
organism, which is the originator of all colours of the
skin (complexion), happening to mix largejy with the
watery principle of the body at the time of conception,
serves to make the child a fair complexioned one
(Gaura-varna) ; mixed with a large quantity of the
earth principle (Kshiti) of the body, it makps the chiid a
dark complexioned one (Krishna-varna). In combi-
nation with a large quantity of earth and ethereal
principles of the organism, it imparts a dusky (Krishna-
sydma) complexion [to the full developed foetus). A
similar combination of watery and ethereal principles
serves to make the child dusky yellow (Gaura-sydma).
Others on the contrary aver that the complexion of the
child is determined by the colours of the food taken
by its mother during the period of gestation. 34.

A child is born blind in the failure of the fiery
principle (Teja-dhitu) of the organism in reaching the
region of its still undeveloped eyes (part — where the
eyes would be) ; so also a penetration by the same
(Teja-dhdtu) into its blood accounts for the blood-shot
eyes of the child. Entered into the Pittam it makes
the child a yellow-pupiled one (Pingalaksha). Entered
into its bodily Kapham it makes it a white-eyed body
and mixed with its bodily Viyu, a child of defective
eyesight. 35.

Memorable verses:— As a lump of con^
do^ised clarified butter melts and expands if placed by
the side of a fire, so the ovum (Artava) of a woman is dis-
lodged and glides away in contact with an adult male*.

* Sus'iutd's theory is that ovulation occurs about the same lime as
menstruation and rather initiates the latter, and the shed ova are washed
out wiih the menstrual flow, hence there is a possibility of conception on

Chap, ir,] SARIRA STIIANAM. I31

A seed divided into two by the deranged VAyu within
the (cavity of the) uterus (Kukshi) gives rise to the birth
of twins, conditioned by the good or evil deeds of their
prior existence ^ A child born of scanty paternal
sperm becomes an Asekya and feels no sexual desire
(erection) without previously (sucking the genitals and)
drinking the scfiicn of another man. A child begotten
in a sordid vagina is called a Sougaiidhika, whose
organ (!k)es*not respond to the sexual desire without
smelling the genitals of others. The man who first be-
comes a passive member of an act of sodomy and then
again commits sodomy with the woman (he visits) is
called a Kumbhika (or Guda-yoni and is included
within the category of a Kliva). 36 — 40.

The man who cannot copulate with a woman without
previously seeing the sexual intercourse of another couple
is called Ir^aka. A child born of an act of fecund-
ation foolishly or ignorantly effected during the menses
of its mother by its progenitor by holding her on his
bosom during the act is called a Shanda and invariably
exhibits effeminate traits in his character. A daughter
born of a woman riding on her husband during the act
of sexual intercourse will develop masculine traits in
her character. 41 — ^43.

connexion during the period of flow. But when the menstruation
stops of itself by the end of the third day, it also indicates (hat
ovulation has ceased and no ovum is left “to be fertilized, hence the
question arises how can there be conception then on connexion on the
fourth day and thereafter ? The explanation (as in the following verse)
is that the ovulating organ though quiescent at the lime is again
stimulated to activity by intercourse with a male and new ova are shed
which are ready to be fertilized by the semen,— Ed,

♦ Gayi interprets the term “Dharmetara” to mean evil deeds (other
than good) and quotes verses from S'rutis, S'mritis and Tantras on ex-
piations of sin in support of his view.

T32 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA [Chap. II,

Semen is developed in the four types of Kliva
known as Asekya, Sougandhika, Kumbhikaand Irshaka,
whereas a Shanda is devoid of that fluid (Sukra).
The semen carrying ducts of an Asekya etc. are ex-
panded by the drinking of the semen as abo^e described
which helps the erection of his reproductive organ. 44-45

The conduct and character of a child and its incli-
nation to particular dietary are determined by those of
its parents during the act of fecundation. *A t)oncless
(/. e. with cartilaginous bones) monstrosity is the
outcome of the sexual act in which both the parties are
female and their Sukra (sexual secretion) unite some
how or other in the womb of one of them. Fecundation
may take place in the womb of a woman, dreaming of
sexual intercourse in the night of her menstrual ablution.
The local Vayu carries the dislodged ovum into the uterus
and exhibits symptoms of pregnancy, which develop
month after month till the full period of gestation. The
offspring of such a conception is a Kalala (a thin bone-
less jelly-like mass) on account of the absence of the
paternal elements* in its development. Such monstro-
sities as serpents, scorpions, or gourd shaped feetus
delivered from the womb of a woman should be ascribed
as the effects of deadly sins. 46-49.

The child of a mother whose wishes are not honoured
and gratified during pregnancy stands in danger of being
bom palmless, hunchbacked, lame, dumb or nasal
voiced through the deranged condition of the Vdyu of
its mother*s body. The malformation of a child in the
wofhb should be ascribed to the atheism of its parents,
or to the effects of their misdeeds in a prior existence, or

* Hair, beard, nails, teeth, arteries, veins, ligaments and semen are
called paternal elements inasmuch as these are said to be inherited by
the child from its father

Chap. II.]

SARIRA STHANAM.

133

to the aggravated condition of the Vdyu, Pittam and
Kapham. 50 — 51.

A foetus in uterus does not excrete faeces or urine,
owing to the scantiness of the fecal matter, etc , in its
intestines and also to the obstruction and consequently
lessened admission of the Vayu into its lower bowels.
A child in the womb docs not cry inasmuch as its
mouth remains covered with the sheath of the placenta
i.e.fcet(il memh'anes (Yardu) and its throat is stuffed with
Kapham. The processes of respiration, sleeping and
movement of the foetus in the womb are effected through
tho.se of its mother. 52—53.

The adju.stment of the different limbs and organs
of the body of a child in the womb at their proper
places, the non-development of hair on its palms and soles
and the subsequent cutting and falling off of its teetharc
spontaneously effected according to the laws of nature
after the model of its own species. An honest, pious,
erudite man, who has acquired a vast knowledge of
the ^'Astras in his prior existence, becomes largely
possessed of mental traits of the SAttvika stamp in
this life too and also remembers his prior births
(Jsttismara). Acts similar to those, which a man
performs in a prior existence, overtake him also in the
next. Similarly the traits and the temperament which
he had developed in a previous, existence arc likewise
sure to be patent in the next. 54~55-

Thus ends the second Chapter of the S'^rira Sth^nam in the Sns'ruta
Samhitd which treats of the purification of sperm and ovum. «

CHAPTER III.

Now wc shall discourse on the S^iriram whitfh treats of
pregnancy, etc. (GarbhsC VakrgCnti ^alriram .1.

The male reproductive element (Sukm) is endowed
with Soma-guna (i.e , thermolytic properties) the female
element Artava) presents the opposite propert)^ and is
therefore Agni-guna (i c , thcrmogcnetic properties^
The principles of earth, water, fire, air and ether are also
present in men in their subtile forms and contribute to
the formation of the material parts by their molecular
adjustment in the way of supplying nutrition and in
way of the adding to their bulk. 2,

Combination of Self with the im-
preg’nated matter:— The local Vdyu (nerve-
force) heightens or aggravates the heat generated by
the friction of the sexual organs in an act of copula-
tion. The Vdyu and heat thus aggravated tend to dis-
lodge the semen from its sac or receptacle in a man
which enters into the uterus of a woman through the
vaginal canal and there it mixes with the ovum
(Artavam) dislodged and secreted by similar causes.
The combined ovum and semen arc subsequently con-
fined in the uterus ^Garbhdsaya). After that, He who
is known by the epithet i of Self-conscious, impressioncr
(creator of sensations and perceptions), toucher, smeller,
seer, hearer, taster, Self or Ego, creator, wanderer, wit-
nessj ordainer, speaker, though eternal, unmanifested
and incomprehensible in his real nature, takes hold of
the five subtile or essential material principles contributed
by the united impregnating matter, assumes a subtile
shape throughout, marked by the three fundamental

Qiap. in ] SARIRA STHANAM. \ iS

qualities of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, and led away by
the Vdyu, lies confined in the uterus to be subsequently
evolved out in the shape of a god, animal, or monster,
as determined by his acts in the former existence. 3.

Factors which determine sex s— The

birth of a male-child marks the preponderance of semen
over the ovum (in its conception) ; the birth of a
daughter shows the preponderance of the maternal ele-
ment. ® A child of no-sex (hermaphrodite) is the product
when ovum and sperm arc equal (in their quality and
quantity). The first twelve nights after the cessation
of the flow should be deemed as the proper period for
conception, as being the time during which the ova are
secreted. Certain authorities hold that there arc women
who never menstruate to all appearances 4 — 5.

Memorable verses The face of a woman
(lit : a woman of undetected menstruation) becomes
full and lively A moist and clumsy deposit is found
on the body, face, teeth and gums. She feels a
desire for sexual intercourse and speaks sweet words.
Her eyes, hair, and belly droop down. A sort of
distinct throbbing is felt in her aims, thighs, mammae,
umbilicus, perineum and buttocks. Her sexual desire
grows intense and prominent, and its gratification gives
her utmost joy and pleasure. These symptoms will at
once indicate that a woman has menstruated (inter-
nally). 6.

Just as the petals of a full blown lotus flower arc
gathered up during the night, so the uterus (Yoni) of a
woman is folded up {i. e,, os of the uterus is closed)* after
the lapse of the menstrual period {ie. fifteen days from the
date of the flow). The menstrual flow, accumulated in
the course of a month, is led in time by the local YAyu
through its specific duct (Dhamani) into the mouth of

136 THE SUSHRUTA SAMIIITA. [Chap. III.

the uterus (Yoni) whence it flows out odourless and
blackish. 7.

Period of Menstruation The process
(menstruation) commences at the twelfth year, flowing
once in every month, and continues till the fiftieth’*' year
when it disappears with the sensible decay of the body. 8

A visit*!* to one’s wife on even days during the cata-
menial period (twelve days in all from the cessation of
the flow) leads to the conception of a male chilcf while
an intercourse on odd days results in the birth of a
daughter. Hence a man, seeking a male-issue, should
approach his wife for the purpose in a clean body and
with a quiet and calm spirit on an even date. 9.

A sense of fatigue and physical languor, thirst,
lassitude and weariness in the thighs, suppression of the
flow of semen and menstrual secretion (^ukra and
Sonita) out of the uterus (Yoni), and throbbing in the
organ Rafter coition) are symptoms of a recent fecun-
dation. lO.

Signs of Pregnancy- (M. T. A black
rash (areola) around the nipples of the mammae, the
rising appearance of a row of hair (as far as the umbilicus),
contractions of the eye-wings, sudden vomitings, nausea
which does not abate even on smelling perfumes, water-

* Some are of opinion that the menstruation continues up to the
sixtieth year.

t According to Videha, menstrual secretion flows less on even
days, hence a son is born if the sexual intercourse be made on those
days ; whereas menstrual secretion becomes more on odd days, so a
daughter is born if the intercourse be made on odd days.

According to Bhoja, a son is born from intercourse on even days and
a daughter is born from that on odd days. The birth of a male issue is
due to the preponderance of semen virile and that of a female sex is due
to the preponderance of menstrual secretion. If both the secretions be
equal (in quality and quantity) a hermaphrodite is issued.

Chap. HI.]

SARIRA STHANAM.

137

brash, and a sense of general lassitude are the indications
of pregnancy, ri.

Prohibited conducts during* gesta*

tion : — Immediately on the ascertainment of her
pregnancy, % woman should avoid all kinds of physical
labour, sexual intercourse, fasting, causes of emaciation
of the body, day-sleep, keeping of late hours, indulgence
in grief, fright, journey by carriage or in any kind of
conveyance/ sitting on her haunches, excessive appli-
cation of Sneha-karmas etc., and venesection at an
improper time , after the eighth month of gestation),
and voluntary retention of any natural urging of the
body. 12.

n/lctrical Text : — The child in the womb feels
pain in the same part of its body as the one in which
its mother feels any ; whether this (pain) may be from
an injury or through the effect of any deranged morbific
principle (Dosha) of her organism. 13.

Development of the Foetus:— In the first
month of gestation a gelatinous substance is only
formed (in the womb) ; the molecules of the primary
elements (Mahdbhuta — air, fire, earth, water, and ether)
being acted upon by cold (Kapham^, heat (Pittam) and
air (Vdyu or nerve-force) are condensed in the second
month. A lump-like appearance (of that confused
matter) indicates the male-sex (of the embryo). An
elongated-like shape of the matter denotes that the
foetus belong to the opposite sex ; whereas its tumour-
like shape (like a I^dlmali-bud) predicts the absence of
any sex {i e, a hermaphrodite). In the third month,
five lump-like protuberances appear at the places where
the five organs —namely the two hands, two legs and the
head — would be and the minor limbs and members of
the body are fonned in the shape of extremely small

18

138 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. CCh»p. III.

papillx. In the fourth month all the limbs and ot^ans
(of the body of the embryo) become more potent and
the foetus is endowed with consciousness owing to the
formation of viscus of the heart. As heart is the seat
of consciousness, so as the heart becomes patent, it is
endowed with consciousness and hence it expresses its
desire for things of taste, smell etc. (through the
longings of its mother). The enciente is called double-
hearted (Dauhrida) at the time, whose* wi^es and
desires — ^not being honoured and gratified — lead to the
birth of a paralysed, hump-backed, crooked-armed,
lame, dwarfed, defect-eyed, and a blind child. Hence
the desires of the enciente should be gratified, which
would ensure the birth of a strong, vigorous and long-
lived son. 14.

Memorable Verses;— A physician should
cause the longings of a pregnant woman (Dauhrida)
to be gratified inasmuch as such gratifications would
aUeviate the discomforts of gestation ; her desires being
fulfilled ensure the birth of a strong, long-lived, and
virtuous son. A non-fulfilment of her desires during
pregnancy, proves injurious both to her child and her
ownself. A non-gratification of any sensual enjoy-
ment by its mother :Dauhrida) during gestation tends
to painfully affect the particular sense-organ of the
child.

Longings and its effects during
pregnancy : — An enciente longing for a royal
interview during her gestation (fourth month) gives
bir((h of » child, who is sure to be rich and to hold a
high position in life Her longing for fine silks,
clothes, ornaments etc. indicates the birth of a beauti-
ful child of aesthetic taste. The birth of a imous and
Mdf-<^trolled child is indicated by its mother's longing

Chap. lit.}

SARIRA STfiANAM.

139

for a visit to a hermitage. The desire of a pregnant
woman to see a divine image or an idol, predicts the
birth of a child in her womb who would grace the council
of an augiftt assembly in life. Similarly, a desire to
see a savage animal on the part of a pregnant woman
signifies the presence of a child of savage and cruel
temperament in her womb. A desire for the flesh of a
Godhil indicates the presence of a sleepy, drowsy person
in her womb who would be tenaciously fond of good
things in life. Similarly a longing for beef on the
part of the mother (during gestation) indicates the birth
of a strong and vigorous child capable of sustaining
any amount of fatigue and physical pain A longing
for buflfalo-meat of the mother indicates the birth of a
hairy, valiant and red-eyed child (in her womb); a
longing for boar-flesh indicates the birth of a drowsy
child though valiant ; a longing for venison indicates
that of an energetic, determined and sylvan-habited
child ; a longing for Srimclra-meat indicates that of a
distracted person ; a longing for the flesh of Tittira
bird indicates that of a child of timid disposition ;
whereas a desire on the part of an enciente for the
flesh of any particular animal indicates that the child
in the womb would be of such stature and would
develop such traits of character in life as are peculiar
to that animal. The desires of a woman during her
pregnancy are determined by ordained fate and effects
of the acts of the child in its prior existence (that are t«t
be happened during the present life). 15. *

Development of the Feetus in the

fifth month the foetus is endowed with mind (Manah)
and wakes up from the sleep of its sub-conscious exis-
tence. In the sixth month cognition (Buddhi) comes
in. In the seventh month all the limbs and meihbers

140 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. tChap. 111.

of its body are more markedly developed. The Ojo-
dhdtu (in the heart of the foetus) does not remain silent
in the eighth month * A child born at that time (eighth
month) dies for want of Ojo-dhdtu soon aftar its birth,
a fact which may be equally ascribed to the agency of
the malignant monsters. Hence (in the eighth month of
gestation) offerings of meat should be made to the demons
and monsters (for the safe continuance of thf child).
The parturition takes place either in the ninth, tenth,
eleventh or twelfth month of conception, otherwise
something wrong with the foetus should be appre-
hended. 1 6.

The umbilical chord (Nadi) of the foetus is found to
be attached to the cavity of the vein or artery of its
maternal part through which the essence of lymph-chyle
(Rasa) produced from the assimilated food of the
mother, enters into its organism and fastens its growth
and development, (a fact which may be understood from
the analogy of percolation or transudation of blood).
Immediately after the completion of the process of
fecundation, the vessels (Dhamani) of its maternal body
which carry the lymph-chyle (Rasa) and run laterally and
longitudinally in all directions through it, tend to foster
the foetus with their own tiansudation all through its
continuance in the womb. 17.

Different opinions on the formation
of the foetai body r-Saunaka says that
probably the head of the foetus is first developed
sifice head is the only organ that makes the functions
of all other organs possible. Kritaviryya says, it is
the heart that is first developed since heart is the seat
of Man ah and Buddhi (mind and intellect). The son of

* Sometimes it passes from the body of the child to that of the
mother and vU$ vgrsa.

Chap. IIL] SARIRA STHANAM. 141

Fari^l^ara says that the developmeut of the umbilical re-
gion of foetus must necessarily precede (that of any other
part of its body) inasmuch as it is through umbilical
chord that an embryo draws its substance from mothers
body. Mairkaudeya says that the hands and feet of a
foetus are first te be developed since they are the only
means of movements in the womb. Sabhuti Gautama
says that the development Qf the trunk is the earliest in
point of time since all other limbs and organs lie solder-
ed to and imbedded in that part of the body. But all
these are not really the fact. Dhanvantari holds that the
development of all the parts of the body of an embryo
goes on simultaneously ; and they can not be perceived
or detected in their earlier stages of development in the
womb owing to their extremely attenuated size like a
mango fruit or sprouts of bamboo. As the stone, marrow,
pith etc. of a ripe and matured mango-fruit or the
sprouts of bamboo, cannot be separately perceived in
the earlier stage of their growth but arc quite distin-
guishable in the course of their development, likewise
in the early stage of pregnancy the limbs and organs of
the body (foetus) are not perceptible for their extremely
attenuated stage but become potent (and therefore they
are distinctly perceived) in the course of time for their
development. 18.

Factors respectively supplied by the
paternal and maternal elements :-Now

we shall describe the parts and principles of the
body of a foetus which are respectively contributed by
the paternal element, maternal factor, the Scrum
(Rasaja),the soul (Atmaja), the natural (Sattvaja) and the
innate physiological conditions (Sdtmyaja). The hairs
of the head and body, beard and moustaches, bones,
nails, teeth, veins (^ira), nerves, arteries (Dbamani),

t42

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. III.

semen and all the steady and hard substances (in
the oi^anism of a child) are contributed by the
paternal element in the conception Pitraja ; whereas
flesh, blood, fat, marrow, heart, umbilicus, liv^r, spleen,
intestines, anus (Guda) and all other soft matters in
the body owe their origin to the maternal element
(Mitrija) ; strength, complexion, growth, rotundity and
decay of the body are due to the serum (il^asaja).
The sensual organs, conciousness, knowledge, wisdom,
duration of life (longivity), pleasure and pain etc. are
the outcome of the spiritual element in man (Atmaja).
We shall describe the Sattvaja features of the body in
the next chapter. Valour, healthful ness, strength, glow
and memory are the products of a child naturally
born with physiological conditions of the parents
(Sdtmyaja). 19.

Slg(ns of male and female concep-
tion * — An enciente, in whose right mammae the milk
is first detected, who first lifts up her right leg at the
time of locomotion, whose right eye looks larger, or
who evinces a longing largely for things of masculine
names, dreams of having received lotus flowers (red
and white), Utpala, Kumuda, Amrataka, or flowers of
such masculine denomination in her sleep, or the glow
of whose face becomes brighter during pregnancy, may
be expected to give birth to a male child ; whereas
the birth of a daughter or a female child should be
pre-assumed from the contriety of the foregoing indi-
catiot)^. An enciente whose sides become raised and
the forepart of whose abdomen is found to bulge out
will give birth to a sex-less (hermaphrodite) child. An
enciente, the middle part of whose abdomen becomes
sunk Or divided in the middle like a leather-bag, will
give birth to a twin. 20. ’

Chap, in.] SARIRA STHANAM. I43

Memorable verses S — Those women who
are devout in their worship of the gods and the
BrAhmins and cherish a clean soul in a clean body
during pregnancy are sure to be blest with good,
virtuous and generous children ; whereas a contrary
conduct during the period is sure to be attended
with contrary fruits. The development of the limbs
and the members etc. of a foetus in the womb is natural
and spontaneous, and the qualities and conditions
which mark these organs are determined by the acts
of the child which are anterior to its genesis and were
done in its prior existence. 21-22.

Thus ends the third Chapter of the S'drira Sthdnam in the Su 'ruta
Samhit^ which treats of the generation and pregnancy.

CHAPTER IV.

Now we shall discourse on the ^'Ariram which
treats of the development of a fetus in the womb,
as well as of the factors which contribute to the growth
of its different bodily organs and principles (Garbha-
Vyak^ranam-^sfriram). i.

The Pittam (fiery or thermogenic) and Sleshma
(lunar principles of the body, the bodily VAyu, the three
primary qualities of Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas (adhesion,
cohesion and disintegration), the five sense organs, and
the Self (Karma-Purusha) are the preserver of the life
(PrAnAh) of the Foetus. 2.

Folds of Skin : —Seven folds or layers of cover-
ing (Tvaka — skin) arc formed and deposited on the
rapidly transforming product of the combination of
(semen) Sukra and Sonita (fertilized ovum) which
have been thus charged with the individual Soul
or Self in the same manner as layers (of cream) are
formed and deposited on the surface of (boiling) milk.
Of these the first fold or layer is called Avabhstsini
(reflecting) as it serves to reflect all colours and is cap-
able of being tinged with the hues of all the five mate-
rial principles of the body. The thickness of this fold
measures eighteen-twentieth of a Vrih^ (rice grain) and

it is the scat of skin diseases, such as Sidhma, Padma-

•

* The complexion of a person is due to this first layer ; and as the
colour of an opaque body is due to the rays that are reflected from its
surface, this layer is rightly named Avabhds'ini or reflecting layer.

** The text runs “Vriherashtadashabhdga,” which means eighteen (or
so many) parts of a Vrihi ; and Dalian comments that “Vrihi” stands for
^ measure equal to the twentieth division of a Vrihi or rice ^raim

Ch*p. IV. ]

SARIRA STHANAM.

145

kantaka etc. The second fold (from the surface) is
called Lohiti ; it measures a sixteen-twentieth of a
Vrihi and is the seat of such (cutaneous affections; as
Tilakdlaka, Nyachcha and Vyanga etc. The third fold
or layer is called which measures in thick-

ness, a twelve-twentieth of a Vrihi, and forms the scat
of such diseases as Aj igalli, Charmadala, and Masaka
etc. The fourth fold or layer is called Ta^mrai
measuring an ei^ht-tweiiticth of a Vrihi and forms
the seat of such diseases as the various kinds of Kilasa
and Kushtha etc. The fifth fold or layer is called
Vediui, measuring in thickness a five-twentieth of a
Vrihi and forms the seat of Kushtha, Visarpa, etc. The
sixth fold or layer is called BiDhini, which is of equal
thickness as a Vrihi (grain), and is the seat of Granthi,
Apachi, Arvuda, Slipada and Gala-ganda etc. The
seventh fold or layer is called Maiasa-dhara' twice a
Vrihi in thickness and is the seat of Bhagandara,
Vidradhi, and Arsa etc. These dimensions should be
understood to hold good of the skin of the fleshy parts
of the body, and not of the skin on the forehead, or
about the tips of the fingers, inasmuch as there is a
surgical dictum to the effect that an incision as deep as
the thickness of the thumb may be made into the
region of the abdomen with the help of a Vrihi-mukha
(instrument). 3.

The Kal^s too number seven in all and are situated
at the extreme borders (forming encasement and support)
of the different fundamental principles (Dhdtus) of the
organism. 4.

Memorable Verses : — As the duramen or
core of a piece of wood or stem becomes exposed to view
by cutting into it, so the root principles (Dhrftus) of the

y may be seen by removing the successive layers or

19

14 ^ tHE SUSHRUtA 8AMH1TA. Chap. IV.J

tissues of its flesh. These Kalds are extensively supplied
with SnAyus (fibrous tissues), bathed in mucous, and
encased in a membranous covering. 5-6.

HIsfnsadhariT-Kaljt: - Of these Kalis, the first
is named Ml^asadhart^ (fascia), in the contained flesh
(bodily substance of the Kali) of the Siri (veins), Sniyu
(fibrous tissues), Dhamani (arteries) and other Srotas
(channels) are found to spread and branch out. 7.

Memorable Verse As the roots and stems
of a lotus plant respectively situated in the ooze and
water (of a tank), do simultaneously grow and expand,
so the veins etc. situated in the flesh, grow and
ramify. 8.

RaktadharsC-KalSl ; -The second Kali is
called Baktl(-dhari( (Vascular tissue of the blood vessels
etc.). The blood is contained in these inside the flesh
and specially in the veins (Siri) and in such viscera of
the body as the liver and spleen. 9.

Memorable Verse : — As a plant containing
latex in its tissues, when injured or pricked, exudes
milky juice, so blood oozes out instantaneously on the
flesh of the body (supplied with the Raktidhari-kali)
being injured. 10.

Medadhard-KalcC : — The third Kali is called
Medadharit (adipose tissue). Meda (fat) is present (chiefly)
in the abdomen of all animals, as well as in the cartila-
ges (small bones). The fatty substance present in large
bones is called Hajjil (marrow). 1 1.

« Memorable Verse:— Marrow Is found inside
large bones, whereas a substance similar in appearance
and found inside other bony structures (cartils^es) should
be considered as Meda, mixed with blood. The fats,
present in purely muscular structures, go by the name
of Va*d (muscle-fat). 12-13.

[Chap. IT, SARIRA STHANAM. I47

dle8hmstdhari(-Kal£( The fourth KalA is
called dleshmitdhariC (Synovial tissues) and is present
about all the bone-joints of animals. 14.

Memorable Verse : -As a wheel easily turns
upon a well greased axle, so the joints moistened by the
mucous (^leshmi) contained in these sacs admit of easy
movements. 15.

Piij*i8hadhar2(-Kald The fifth kald is
called Purishadhari and being situated in the Kostha
(abdomen) serves to separate the fsecal refuse in the
(Pakvis'aya) lower gut (from other ingested matters). 16.

Memorable Verse : —This Kald extends about
the liver, upper and lower intestines and other abdominal
viscera and keeps the foeces in the lower intestines (Un-
dukam) separate and hence is called Maladhard-kald \J.

PlttadharsC-Kallt!— The sixth Kald is called
Pittaphari{-kaW ; it holds (the chyme derived from) the
four kinds of solid and liquid foods (in the Pitta-sthdnam
or biliary region! propelled from the stomach (Amds'aya
or Grahani-Nddi) and on its way to the (Pakds'aya)
intestines (for the proper action of the digestive juices
upon it) 18.

Msmorable Verse : — The four kinds of food,
viz. those that are chewed, swallowed, drunk, or licked,
and brought into the intestines (Kostha) of a man, are
digested in proper time through the heating agency
(action) of the Pittam 19.

^UkradharsC-KslsC S —The seventh Kald is
called £iakradhar{( (semen-bearing), which extends
throughout the entire body of all living creatures. 20.

Memorable Verse : -The physician should
know that like fat (Sarpi) in the milk, or sugar In the
expressed juice of sugar-«aiie, the (seat of) semen is co-
•Htsnilire with the whole organism of a man (or animal).

148

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

tChtp. IV.

The semen passes through the ducts situated about two
fingers’ breadth on either side (vas deferens) and just
below the neck of the bladder and finally flows out
through the canal. The semen of a man during an act of
sexual intercourse with a female under exhilaration
comes down from all parts of his body owii.g to the
extreme excitement (engendered by the act). 21-33.

The orifices of the Artava— carrying channels^ (vessels
of the uterine mucosa) of a pregnant woman are ob-
structed by the foetus during pregnancy and hence there
is no show of menses (during gestation). The menstrual
blood thus obstructed in its downward course ascends
upwards ; a part of it accumulates and goes to the
formation of placenta (Aparsf', while the rest ascends
higher up and reaches the breasts ; this is the reason
why the breasts of a pregnant woman become full and
plump. 24.

The spleen and liver of the foetus are formed out
of blood ; the lungs are made of the froth of the
blood ; and the Unduka or faecal receptacle, of the refuge
matter (Mala) of the blood. 25,

Metrical Texts : — The intestines (Antra), the
bladder (Vasti), and the anus (Guda) of the foetus are
formed out of the essence of the blood and Kapham,
baked by the Pittam into which Viyu enters as well.
As fire fed by draughts of air refines the dregs of
golden ore and transforms it into pure metal, so blood
and Kapham acted upon by the heat of the Pittam
ai« transformed into the shape of the intestines etc.
in the abdomen. The tongue is made of the essence
of the flesh, blood and Kapham. The Vdyu, com-
bined with heat (Pittam) in adequate proportion, rends
through the internal channels into the flesh and trans-
forms them into muscles (Pesi). The Vdyu, by taking off

Chiip. IV.]

SARIRA STHAKAM.

149

the oily principles of fat (Meda), transforms them into
and (fibrous tissues) Sni{yu,the underbaked (Mridu)
ones being converted into the Sird and the overbaked
(Kshara) enes into the Sndyu. The internal cavities
( Asayas) of the body mark the spots or regions where the
Vdyu had constantly stayed in its embryo stage. 26-29.

The kidneys (Vrikkas) are made out of the essence
of the blood and fat. The testes are formed out of the
essence of the blood, flesh, Kapham and fat. The heart
is formed out of the essence of blood and Kapham ;
and the vessels (Dhamanis) carrying the vital principles
of the body are attached to it (heart). The spleen and the
lungs are situated below and beneath the heart on the
left side, and the liver and Kloma (Pancreas ?) below
and beneath it (heart) on the right. The heart is the
special seat of consciousness (Chetaui) in all creatures.
Sleep sets in when this viscus heart) of a person becomes
enveloped by the effects of the Tamas (principles of
illusion or nescience). 30-31,

Memorable Verse The heart which is of
the shape of a lotus bud hangs with its apex downward,
folding itself up during sleep and expanding with the
return of wakening or consciousness. 32.

Sleep and Its virtues Sleep is the illu-
sive energy of God (lit.-- the all-pervading deity) and
naturally has its sway ever ' all created beings. The
kind of sleep which sets in when the sensation-carrying
channels \Sn^yu) of the body are choked by Sleshm^,
which abounds in the quality of Tamas, is known as
Tstmasi-nidrs^. It is this sleep which produces uncon-
sciousness at the time of dissolution or death. A man
of Ts^mxsika-tempdr ament sleeps both in the day and
night ; one of the KfiQasika-temperament sleeps either in
the day or in the night ; while sleep never visits the

t$0 THE SUSHkUTA SAMHITA. Chap. IV.]

eyelids of a man of Sifttrika-temperament before mid-
night. Persons with enfeebled Kapham and aggra-
vated Viyu, or suffering from bodily and mental troubles,
get little sleep, and if at all, their sleep is of tsbe Vaiki-
rika or delirious type {i.e. much disturbed)*, 33-34.

Memorable Verses ;—0 Sus'ruta ! the heart is
said to be the primary seat of consciousness (Chetan^) in
the animated beings. Sleep overcomes a man wJnenever
the heart is enveloped in the illusive effects of Tamas.
Steep is the offspring of Tamas and it is the quality of
Sattvam that brings on awakening. This is the funda-
mental law of Nature. The self-conscious individuality
(Self)) ensconced in the material frame of man which
is composed of the five material elements, recollects
through the agency of the mind (Manah), which abounds
in the quality of Rajas, the renaissance of his by-gone
existences, and wakens up in his psychic plane the pic-
tures of good or evil deeds done by him therein.
Dreams are but the embodiment of these recollections.
The, self or Jivatnuf* though he sleeps not himself, is
said to be sleeping, whenever the sense organs are over-
powered by the illusive energy of Tamas. 35.

Day sleep is forbidden in all seasons of the year,
except in summer and in the case of infants, old men,
and persons enfeebled by sexual excesses, or in Kshata-
kshina diseases and in case of habitual tipplers. A sleep
in the day may be enjoyed after the fatigue of a long
journey, riding, or physical labour, or on an empty
storilach. It may be allowed as well to men suffering
from the loss of fat, Kapham or blood, to those of

* Such persons may get sleep only, when being tired and exhausted
they cease to think of their affairs.

(J / Charaka :-^When the acthre self of a persoUi tired in body and
mit^, loiel touch with hts worldly affairs, sleep comes to himj

Chap. IV,] SARIRA STHAKAi! . i " f 5r

scanty perspiration, or of dry or parched constitution ;
and also to those who have been suffering from indi-
gestion and who may sleep for a Muhurta (48 minutes)
in the day lime. Those who have kept late hours in
the night "may sleep in the day for half the time they
have watched in the night (and no more). Day sleep is
the outcome of perverted nature and all the Doshas of
the body are aggravated by a sleep in the day, bringing
on many a troublesome complaints such as cough,
asthma, catarrh, heaviness of the body, aching or lassitude
in the limbs, fever, loss of appetite etc. On the other
hand, the keeping of late hours in the night develops
symptoms (Upadrava) which are peculiar to the deranged
V^yu and Pittam. 36.

memorable Verses:— Hence, one should not
sleep in the day, nor keep late hours. Having known both
these acts to be injurious, the wise should observe
moderation in sleep. A conformity to the preceding
rule of conduct is rewarded with health, good humour,
strength, healthful complexion, virility and beauty, a
frame which is neither too fat nor too thin, and a long life
of a hundred years). A day sleep may not prove injurious
to those who are habituated to it and conversely keeping
late hours at night may not tell upon the health of those
to whom it is customary, 37-39.

An aggravated condition pf the bodily Vdyu or
Pittam, an aggrieved state of the mind, loss of vital
fluid, and a hurt or an injury may bring on insomnia, the
remedy being the adoption of measures antagonistic to
those which destroy sleep. The following measures arc
useful in cases of sleeplessness— such as anointing the
body, rubbing of oil on the head, soft massages of the
body (with cleansing paste) and shampooing ; a diet
consisting of cakes and pastty made up of !^li-rice and

152

THE SUSHRyXA SAMHITA.

Cbap. IV.]

wheat prepared with sugar or other derivatives of sugar-
cane, sweet or soothing articles with milk or meat juice
or flesh of animals of the Biskira or Vilesaya class,
and eating of grapes, sugar and sugar-cane at night, are
beneficial i^in such cases) ; so also a soft ancf pleasant
bed, and easy and convenient seats and means of loco-
motion. Hence, a wise physician should advise those
and similar other measures to allay insomnia. 40-41.

Excessive sleep should be remedied by dVnetics,
Sans'odhana measures, fastings, bleeding, and works
which tend to disturb the mental equanimity of man.
Keeping up at night is beneficial to persons afflicted with
obesity, poison or the deranged Kapham ; so also a nap
in the day is beneficial to people troubled with hiccough,
colic pain, dysentery, indigestion, or thirst. 42-43.

Somnolence or Drowsiness etc. : -in

this kind of light sleep, or in th^ preliminary stage of
sleep, the sense organs are overpowered and remain
only partially cognisant of their respective objects and
all (subjective and objective) symptoms of a sleepy
person such as, yawning, sense off atigue and heaviness
ol the limbs, present themselves in succession ; these are
the special features of Tandrs^. One (prolonged) inha-
ling of the air through a widely open mouth and
subsequent exhaling with the contraction of the limbs
and tearful eyes are (all together) called Jrimbhsf or
yawning.

A sense of fatigue without any physical labour which
comes upon a person unaccompanied by hurried res-
pirafion is called Elama. It obstructs the proper
functions of the senses as also the workings of the active
organs.* An inordinate love of pleasure and a great
aversion to pain, attended with an apathy to all sorts of

* Hftnd, leg, anus, and generative organ etc.

Chap. IV.]

SARIRA STHANAM.

153

work even with the capacity of carrying them through is
called Alasyam (laziness) Nausea, without vomiting of
ingested food, attended with salivation and formation
of sputum, and cardiac distress arc the symptoms of
Utklesham? A sweet taste in the mouth, drowsiness,
a beating pain in the heart, dizziness, and non-relish
for food arc the signs of Glaai (languor). A feeling a.s
if the whole body were wrapped in a wet sheet, accom-
panied by an extreme heaviness of the heart, is called
Gauravam. 44-50.

Loss of consciousness (Murchchai) is due to an excess
of the deranged Pittam and to the quality of the Tamas ;
vertigo (Bhrama) is due to an aggravated state of the
Vayu, Pittam, and to the quality of tue Rajas ; drowsiness
(Tandrai) is due to a similar condition of the Vdyu,
Kapham and to the quality of the Tamas ; while sleep
(Nidratjis produced by the predominance of Kapham and
to the quality of the Tamas in the organism. 51.

The growth of a f(jetus in the womb is effected by
the serum (Rasa) prepared out of the food (assimilated
by its mother) incarcerated by the Vavu in the internal
passage of its body. 52.

MerriOrablC Versas : — Be it clearly under-
.stood that there exists fire or heat(Jyoti) in the umbilical
region of the foetus which is fanned by its bodily
Vdyu and thus contributes to the growth of its body.
The same VAyu in combination with the heat (thus
generated), expands the upward, downward, and lateral
channels (in the body of the embryo) and thus leads
to the growth of the foetus. The eyes (Dristi— aper-
ture of sight) and the hair-follicles of a man do not

* In the text w * find the word “Inchiya” which refers to both
JnAncndrlya (sensory functions) and Karmendriya (motor functions) of
the body.

20

154

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. IV.

participate at all (in the general expansion of the body).
This is a law of nature, and is the opinion of Dhanvantari.
On the other hand the growth of hair and finger nails
continue even when the body enters the stage of decay.
This also is a law of nature. 53-56. ^

The Temperaments The temperaments
(Prakriti) of persons may be of seven different types,
according as the deranged Doshas of the body are
involved therein, either severally, or in comlDination
of two or of all the three together. The temperament
(Prakriti) of a man is determined by the preponder-
ance of the particular Doshas at the time of his genera-
tion (actual combination of the semen and ovum) and
is marked by that preponderant Dosha. The character-
istics of the different Prakritis are now described. 57-58.

VsCtaJa-Tcmperament A man of Vdtika-
temparament is wakeful, averse to bathing and cold
contact, unshapely, thievish, vain, dishonest and fond
of music ; the soles of his feet, and the palms of his
hands are much fissured ; has often a rough and grisly
beard and moustache, finger nails and hairs in him ;
he is hot-tempered and is given to biting his finger
nails and grinding his teeth (when asleep). Morally he
is impulsive, unsteady in his friendship, ungrateful, lean,
and rough ; his body is marked with a large number of
prominent veins (Dhamani) ; he is incoherent in his
habit and vacillating in his temper. He is a fast walker
and dreams of scaling the skies in his sleep. His eyes
are always moving. His mind is never steady. He
makes few friends, is capable of accumulating very
little money and talks incoherently. The traits of
his character etc. sfeem to resemble those of a goat,
jackal, hare, mouse, camel, dog, vulture, crow, and of an

ass. 59-60,

Ch«p. IV,]

SARIRA STHANAM.

15S

PIttvaJa-Temperament A man of

Pittvaja temperament perspires copiously emitting a fetid
smell. His limbs are loosely shaped and yellowish in
colour. T^e finger nails, eyes, palate, tongue, lips, soles
and palms of such a person are copper-coloured. He looks
ugly with wrinkles, baldness and grey hair; he eats much,
is averse to warmth and irritable in temper, though he
cools down very soon. He is a man of middling strength
and lives up to middle age. He is intelligent and
possesses a good retentive memory and loves to
monopolise the conversation (by pulling down any
speaker that may be present). He is vigorous and
is simply irresistible in battle. He dreams in his
sleep of such things as meteors, lightning-flashes, fire,
Ndgeshvara, Palas'a or Karnikdra plants. He is never
overpowered with fear nor bends before a powerful
antagonist ; he protects the suppliant and is very often
afflicted with suppuration in the cavity of the mouth.
The traits of his character resemble those of a serpent,
an owl, a Gandharba (heavenly musician), Yaksha, cat,
monkey, tiger, bear, and of a mongoose. 61-64.

Kaphaja-Temperainent ; —The complexion
of a man of S'leshmd temperament resembles either
the colour of a blade of grass, blue lotus, polished
sword, wet Arishta, or that of the stem of the ^ara grass.
He is comely in appearance, fond of sweet tastes,
grateful, self-controlled, forbearing, unselfish and strong ;
he does not hastily form any opinion, and is fast in hiS
enmity. His eyes are white ; his hair curly and raven
black. He is prosperous in life. His voice resembles the
rumblings of a rain-cloud, the roar of a lion, or the
sound of a Mridanga. He dreams in his sleep of large
lakes or pools decked with myriads of full blown lotus
flowers, swans and Chakra vdkas. His eyes are slightly

156

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap IV.

red towards the corners, the limbs are proportionate and
symmetrically developed with a cool effulgence radiating
from them He is possessed of the qualities of the
Sdttvika stamp, capable of sustaining pain nd fatigue
and respectful towards his superiors He possesses faith
in the Sistras and is unflinching and unchanging in his
friendship ; he suffers no vicissitudes of fortune, makes
large gifts after long deliberation, is true to his word
and always obedient to his preceptors. The traits of his
character resemble those of Brahma, Rudra, Indra,
Varuna, a lion, horse, an elephant, cow, bull, an eagle,
swan and of the lower animals. 65-68,

A combination of two different temperaments should
be called a double temperament or a Dvandaja one ;
and one of all the three temperaments in a person
should be stated as a Sa^unipa^tika one. 69.

The temperament of a man is never altered, nor
does it suffer any deterioration or abatement. A
change, abatement or deterioration in any particular
case should be regarded as the harbinger of death.
As a worm, bred in poison, is not troubled with it,
90 the temperament of a person however painful to
others does no inconvenience to himself. Several
authorities hold that the temperaments of persons have
their origin in the material elements of the body and
accordingly they classify them as the Vaitika Prakriti,
the Taijasa Prakriti, and the i.pya (watery) Prakriti,
the characteristic traits of which respectively correspond
toAhe first three temperaments described above. 70 — yr.

A man of the Ps(rthiva temperament is large in
his stature, and is firm, strong and muscular in his limbs.
A man of the Nahhasa temperament is pious and
long-lived, has large aural cavities. The mental tempera-
ments are classified according to their qualities. 72.

Chap. IV.] SARlRA STHANAM. IS7

Sattvika Features The features of a
Brahma-kaiya person are cleanliness of person and con-
duct, belief in the existence of God, a constant reader of
the Vedas, a worship and reverence of elders and
preceptors, hospitality and celebration of religious
sacrifices. Those of a Mahendra-kstya person are valour,
command, constant discussion of the Sistras, main-
tenance of^ servants and dependents and magnanimity.
The features of a Karuna-ka^ya person are a liking for
exposure to cold, forbearance, a brown hue of the pupils,
golden colour of the hair and sweet speech. The
features of a Kouvera-kaya person are, arbitration
of disputes, capacity of bearing hardships, earning and
accumulation of wealth, and capacity of propagation
or fertility. The features of a Gandharva-katya person
are love of garlands and perfumes, fondness of songs
and music, and love making. The features of a Yamya-
Sattva person are sense of duty, promptness, firmness
of action, courage, mcmoiy, purity, and absence
of anger, illusion, fear and malice. The features of a
Rishi'Sattva man arc divine contemplation, obser-
vance of vows, complete sexual abstinence, performance
of Homas, celebration of religious sacrifices, knowledge,
wisdom and cultivation of divine or spiritual science.
These seven types of men should be considered as
belonging to the Sdttvika grojap (of Sdttvika mental
temperament). Now hear me describe the features of
men of Rdjasika stamp (of mind\ 73.

Rstjasika Features Asura-Sattva men
are affluent in circumstances, dreadful, valorous, irascible,
jealous of other men's excellence, gluttonous and fond
of eating alone without sharing with any one else. A
Sarpa-Sattva man is irritable, laborious, cowardly,
angry, double-dealing, and hasty in eating and sexual

IS8 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Cb«p. IV.

intercourse. A Sakana-Sattva man is gluttonous,
intemperate in sexual matters, irritable and fickle. A
Estkshasa-Sattva man is solitaiy in his habits, fierce,
jealous of others excellence, externally pious, extremely
vain and ignorant. The characteristics of a Paifisfcha-
Sattva man are eating food partaken of by another, irri-
tability of temper, rashness, shamelessness, and covetous-
ness of female possessions. Those of Freta-^attva man
are utter want of knowledge as regards duty, laziness,
miserableness, envy, covetousness, niggardliness. These
six belong to the Rdjasika cast of mind. Now hear
me describe the characteristic traits of men of the
Tdmasika temperaments. 74.

TsCmasIka Features;— The features of a
Plisava-Sattva man are perverseness of intellect, parsi-
moniousness, frequent sexual dreams and incapacity of
ascertaining or discerning anything. The features of
Matsya-Sattva man are unsteadiness, stupidity, cowar-
dice, fond of inteimissive quarrel and oppression and a
longing for water. The features of a Vanaspati-Sattva
man are fondness of staying at the same place, constant
eating and absence of truthfulness, piety, riches and
enjoyment. Thus the three types of Tdmasika tempera-
ment have been described, A physician should take in
hand a patient with an eye towards these mental traits
etc. A physician should coolly deliberate upon the
diflferent types of temperament described herein and
their characteristic features. 75-76.

llius ends the fourth Chapter of the S'arirn Slhdnam in the S'uVtuU
Samhitd which treats of foetal development etc.

CHAPTER V.

' 0 * f

Now we shall discourse on the Sdriram which treats
of the anatomy of the human body (^gfrlra-

^ankhy^-VysCkaranam). i.

Definition of Garbha and ^£(rira

0 It

The combined semen and ovum (Sukra and Sonita) in
the womb, mixed with (the eight categoiies known as)
the Prakriti and (her sixteen modifications known as)
VikAra, and ridden in by the Atms^ (self-consicous selQ,
is called the fcBtUS. There is consciousness in the
embryo. The V^yu (or the vital force) divides it into
Dosha, Dhdtu, Mala, etc., limbs, and organs, etc. The
Teja (or the heat latent in the fecundated matter) gives
rise to the metabolism of the tissues ; the Apa (water)
keeps it in a liquid state ; the Kshiti (earth) is embodied
in the shape of its species ; and the Aks^sa (ether) contri-
butes to its growth and development. A fully developed
foetus with all its parts, such as the hands, feet, tongue,
nose, ears, buttocks etc. and the sense-organs, is called
Ss^riram or body. The body is composed of six
main parts, namely, the four extremities (upper and
lower), the trunk or middle body, and the head. 2.

Different members of the body s— Now
we shall describe the Pratyangas or members of the
body. The head, the belly (Epigastrium), the back, the
navel (umbilical region), the forehead, the nose, the cbin,
the bladder, and the throat (neck), occur singly ; the
ears, the eyes, the nostrils, the eye-brows, the temples,
the shoulders, the cheek, the armpits, the breasts, the
testes, the sides, the buttocks, the arms, the thighs, and
the knee-joints, etc., occur in pairs. The fingers and

THE SUSHRUTA SAmWA*.

[Chap V.

i6o

toes which number twenty in all, and the interior
channel** (^r5tas) of the body, to be presently described,
are likewise included within the Pratyan'gas. These
are the different Fratyang^as or members. 3.

Enumeration of the different limbs
and members of the body The different
layers of the skin, the Kalds, the Dhdtus (root principles,
such as blood, chyle, etc.), the Mala (excrements , the
Doshas (morbific principles, such as the Vayu/'Pittam,
orKapham', the spleen, the liver, the lungs, the colon
and caecum (Unduka), the heart, the cavities or viscera
(Asdyas), the intestines (Antras), the Vrikkou (Kidneys)
the Srotas (internal passages or ducts), the Kandara
(nerve trunks), the Jdlas (membranes), the Kurchas,’^ the
Rajjus i^tendons) the Sevanis (sutures), the Sanghdtas
(facets), the Siraanta, the bones, the joints, the Sndyu
(ligament), the Pesi (muscles), the Marmas (vital parts,
such as anastomosis of veins and arteries, etc.), the Sira
(veins), the Dhamani (arteries), and the YogavAhini
SVotas-]-, constitute what is collectively called the
organism. 4.

Their number :~-Thc layers !of skin (Tvaka)
number seven in all. There are seven connective tissues
or fascia (KalAs). The cavities or viscera (Asayas) arc
seven in all. The root principles (DhAtu) of the body
are seven in number. There are seven hundred S^irA
(veins), five hundred Pesi (muscles), nine hundred
SnAyu (ligaments), three hundred bones, two hundred
an4 ten Sandhi ^joints^, one hundred and seven Marmas
(vital parts), twenty-four Dhamanis (arteries etc.), three
Doshas (morbific principle— such as the VAyu,' Pittam,

* Meetings of muscles, ligam^nti, veins, nerveS^and bones as at the
annular ligament.

t Those, that arc connection with the Dhamani.

Chap. V.] SARIRA STHANAM. l6l

and Kapham), three kinds of Mala (excrement^J^ and
nine Srota (canals) in all in the human organism, which
will be described in detail later on. 5.

The KalA, the root^ principles of the body,

(Dhitus) the morbific principles (Doshas) such as the
VAyu etc, of the body, liver, spleen, lungs, Unduka
(colons), heart and the Vrikkas (kidneys) have been
already^described (in the preceding chapter). 6.

The ASdya.S (cavities or viscera) : — They are
named as the Vs^tsbsaya (the receptacle of the bodily
VAyu), Pitts^saya (the receptacle of the Pittam),
Sleshmsisaya (the receptacle of Sleshmd or Kapham),
Raktaisaya (the receptacle of the blood), Amisaya
(stomach), Paikvatsaya (intestines \ and the Matrs(-
8aya , (bladder). Females have another Asaya
(receptacle) in addition to these which is called the
G-arbhsksaya (uterus). The intestines (of an adult)
male, measure fourteen cubits (three and a half Vyatmas)
in length, while those of an adult female measure only
twelve cubits. 7 — 8.

The Srotas or Channels The nine
canals (Srotas) of the body, such as the ears, the eyes,
the mouth, the nostrils, the anus and the urethra, open
on the outside. Females have three more such ducts
or canals as the two breasts (milk channels) and the
one which carries off the menstrual blood. 9.

The KandarSiS ; — The kandarils number six-
teen in all, of which four arc in the legs, four in the
hands, four in the neck, and four in the back. The
Kandar4s of the four extremeties extend to the roots of
the nails of the fingers and toes. The four Kandards of
the neck, connecting it with the heart, extend down to
the penis. The four KandarAs at the back and in the
region of the ^rdni extend down ' to the buttocks

21

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. V.

162

(Vimba). These Kandards terminate above in the head,
the 4iighs, the breast and in the balls of the shoulders
respectively (i.c. the Kandards of the neck terminate
above in the head, those of the legs in the thighs, those
of the dorsum in the chest, and those of the arms in the
shoulders). 10.

The Jdla. or Plexuses The Jdla or
plexuses are of four kinds, such as the muscular plcx-

Q

uses, the Vascular plexuses, ligamentous plexuses,
and bony plexuses. One of each of the four kinds
of plexuses, is found about each of the Manibandda
(wrists) and Gulfa (ankles'). These four kinds of
plexuses intermingle and cross one another in the
form of a net-work. The whole body is a chdin-work
of plexuses, ii.

The kurclias There arc six Kurchas^iTi all ;
of which two are in the hands, two in the feet, one in the
neck, and one in the penis. There arc four great mus-
cular cords or Kajjus which originate from cither
side of the spinal column, one pair going inwards
and another outwards for the purpose of binding the
muscles together.f 12—13.

The Scvanls or Sutures Thcy arc
seven in number, c. g. five in the head, one in the tongue
and one in the genital. An incision should not be
made into any of these sc van is. 14.

The Asthi-Sangh^tas The Asthi-sangh-

Atas (collection of a number of bones) arc fourteen in

The Kurchas (clusters or groups) may be made up of muscles,
bones, vessels and ligamentous structure— Dallana.

+ According to Gaydd^sa four such cords are found on each side of
the spinal column and thus totalling eight in all.

t Sevan! evidently means the central tendinous band which looks
like a swturc from which the muscles on either side arise,

Chap. V.]

SARIIU StriANAM.

163 .

number. Of these one is found in each of the follqiij^ing
positions, viz the two ankles, the two knees and tlfe‘two
groins ; of the remaining eight, six are to be found in
similar positions of the upper extremities, namely
one in each of the wrists, elbows and axillas ; one is in
the cranium and another in the regions of the Trika*
(thus making up fourteen in all), 15.

Th^ Slmantas The Simantas number four-
teen in all, and arc respectively situated about the place
of each of the aforesaid Asthi-sanghata. Several autho-
rities assert that there are eighteen Sanghdtas.f 16.

The Bones : —According to the followers of the
Ayurveda (general medicine), the entire number of
bones fn the human body is three hundred and sixty ;
whereas Salya-Tantram (the present work) counts only
three hundred. Of these, one hundred and twenty are
to be found in the (four) extremities, one hundred and
seventeen in the pelvis (Sroni), sides (PdrsVa), back,
chest (Urah) and the region of the abdomen (Udara),
and sixty-three in the neck and the regions above ; thus
numbering three hundred in the aggregate.^: 17.

* “Trika” generally means ihe sacral region, but Dallanan says
that here it refers to the meeting of the two clavicles with the breast*
bone.

t According to them four more Asihi-sangatas are to be found over
and above the fourteen already mentioned ; these are — one above the
sacrum, one above the chest, one at the junction of the thorax and
abdomen, and one at the acromial end (of the Scapula).

X Pundita Gangadhara Kaviratna of Murshidabad in his famous
commentary, known as the T'ikdjalpa-kalpa-taru^ in the 7th. chapter
of Sirira Sthiinam in the Charaka Samhitd states : —

“In the surgical text-book of Sus'ruta the number of bones in the
human body is given to be three hundred in all. Of these, one
hundred and eight bones are in the four exlremeties ; one hundred
and twenty-six in the pelvic cavity (S'roni), sides (Pars'va), back (Prishiha),
(Akska) collar-bones and breast (Urah) } and sixty-six in the region

i64

THE SOSHRUTA SAMHITA*

[Chap, V.

Qpnes of thefour Extremities:— There
are tliree bones in each toe of the foot, thus making
fifteen bones altogether (in the toes of each leg). Ten
bones constitute the Tala (sole), Kurcha (cluster),
and Gulpha (ankle) of each leg, and one forms the
Fdshni (heel) ; two bones are found in the JanghA
(leg) ; one in the Jdnu (knee), and one in the Uru
(thigh) ; thus making thirty bones in one lower
extremity. The same number holds good in the case of
the other leg as well as in that of the two upper limbs.
(Thus the bones in the four extremities arc one hundred
and twenty in all). i8.

Bones of the Trunk Five bones form
the Sroni (pelvic cavity) ; of these four are found about
the Guda (anus), Bhaga (pubis), and the Nitamva

upward the neck. Thus the total number of three hundred is made up.
Now there are three bones in each toe of the feet ; this makes fifteen
altogether. Seven bones constitute the sole (Tala), cluster (Kurcha),
and the ankle (Gulfa). There is one bone in the heel (Pdshni), two
in the leg (Janghd), one in the knee (Jdnu), and one in the thigh
(Uru), Thus there are twenty-seven bones in one lower limb. The
same number applies to the other lower limb as well as to the two upper
limbs. Thus a total number of one hundred and eight bones is made
up. There are five bones in the pelvic cavity (S'roni) ; of these there
are two in the hips (Nitamba), and the pubes (Bhaga), anus (Guda)
and sacrum (Trika) is constituted with one bone each. There are
thirty-six bones in one side (Pdrs'va) and the same count applies to the
other. There are thirty bones in the back (Prishtha) ; two in the collar-
bone (Aksbasanjna) ; seventeen in the breast (Ura) ; eleven in the
neck (Grivd) ; four in the wind-pipe (Kantha-nddi) ; and two in the jaws
(Ha^u). There are thirty-two teeth. There are three bones in the
nose (Ndsa) ; two in the palate (Tdlu) ; one each in either cheek
(Ganda), ear (Kama) and temple (S'ankha), making six together; and
six in the cranium (Sira). Thus a total number of sixty-six bones
is made up. (Hence) the total number of three hundred bones is made
(with the grand total of the three foregoing totals). Thus the list of
bones of a skeleton is described.”

Chap. V,]

sarira sthanam.

165

(hips), and the fifth one is the Trika or triangular
bone (the sacrum). There are thirty-six bone® in
one Pdrsva (side), and the same number in the other ;
thirty in the Prishtha (back), eight in the Urah (chest) ;
and two ’ more known as Akshaka (collar-bone).
(Thus making one hundred and seventeen in
all). 19.

Bones above the Clavicles : —There are
nine bones in the Grivd (neck) ; four in the Kantha-nAdi*
(wind-pipe) ; two in the Hanu (Jaws). The teeth num-
ber thirty-two. There are three bones in the nose ;
one in the Tilu (palate) ; also one in each Kama (ear),
Sankha (temple), and Ganda (cheek), (thus making six
in all) ; six bones form the Sir^ (cranium). [Thus
making sixty-three in all]. 20.

Different kinds of Bones and their
situations These bones may be divided into five
classes (according to their character), such as the KapAla,
Ruchaka, Taruna, Valaya and the Nalaka, The bones,
situated in the knee-joints, shoulders (Ansaf), hips
(Nitamvas), cheeks (Gandab palate, temples, and the
cranium belong to the Kapila kind (flat bones). The
teeth belong to the Ruchaka class. The bones in the
nose, ears, throat (trachea) and the socket of the eyes
(Akshi-koshaf) are called Taruna (cartilages) ; while
those which are found in the psdm (wrist), foot (ankle),
sides back, chest and regions of the abdomen, belong to
the Valaya (irregular or curved) class. The remaining

* Tala, Kurcha, and Kantha-nadi are identical with Chofak’s
S41ak^, Sth£na and Jalru respectively.

t Though it is ?tsserled here that there exist Taruna bones in the
sockets of the eyes (Akshi-kosha) but there is no mention at all in the
text, of the presence of any such therein. There is no mention of the
shoulder-blade (Ansa) here though it is a part of the skeleton.

i66

THE SUSHRUTA SAMlllTA.

[Chap. V.

bones belong to Nalaka class (long-bones, lit. — recd-likc
or cylindrical). 21.

Memorable Verses As trees arcsui)ported
by the hard core inside their trunks, so the body is
supported (and kept erect) by the firm bones (which eire
found in its inside). And since these bones form the
pith (Sara) of the human organism, they are not des-
troyed even after the destruction and falling, off of the
attached flesh, skin, etc. of the body. Muscles are
attached strongly to the bones by means of the veins
(Siras) and ligaments (Snayus), and are thus kepi in
position and do not fall off. 22.

The Sandhis or Joints~(M. T.) : -The
joints may be divided into two kinds according as
they arc immovable (synarthrosis) and movable (diar-
throsis). Those which are situated at the four extremi-
ties as well as in the Kati (waist) and Hanus (jaws^ arc
movable ; the others arc known to be unmovable by the
learned. There are two hundred and ten articulations
(Sandhis) in the human body. Of these sixty-eight
-~re in the four extremities ; fifty-nine in the trunk
^Koshtha); and eighty-three in the neck and in the
region above it. 23,

Sandhis of the four Extremities

Three joints are found in each toe, two only in the
great toe, thus making fourteen in each leg ; one
is placed in each ankle, knee-joint and groin, thus
making seventeen Sandhis in each leg or thirty-four in
thejtwo lower extremities. A similar number is to be
found in each of the two upper extremities. 24-25.

Sandhis of the koshtha and Clavi-
cles : —There are three Sandhis about the Kap^la or flat
bone in the Kati (waist, hence pelvi.s) ; twenty-four in the
vertibral column; twenty four in the sides ; eight in the

Chap. V.] SARIRA STHANAM. 167

chest ; eight in the GrivA (neck) ; three in the Kanthas
(windpipe) ; eighteen in the cords or bands (NAdi) binding
the Kloma and the heart ; thirty-two about the roots of
the teeth, ^one in the region of the thyroid (KAkalaka) ;
one in the nose ; two in the eyes ; one in each of the two
cars, temples and checks (thus making six in all) ; two
about the joints of the jaw-bones ; two over the eye-
brows twp above the temples ; five in the KapAla
bone of the fore-head and one in the head. 26-27.

Their forms, distinctions, and lo-
cations : — These joints may be divided into eight
different classes (named after the objects which they
respectively resemble in shape), namely Kora (hinged
or lap-shaped), Udukhala (ball and socket), SAmudga
(back of the palm), Pratara (raft), Tiinna-sevani
(scam-like or dovc-tailcd\ Vayasa-tunda ,crcw-bcak),
Mandala (circular), and SankhA-vartah (involutions of
conch-shell). The joints in the fingers, wrists, ankles
knee-joints and elbows (Karpura) belong to the Kora
group. Those in the axilla or shoulder-joint (KakshA).
teeth, and hip (Vankshana) arc of the Udukhala type.
The joints in the region of the anus, vagina, shoulders
( Ansa-pitha — i.e glenoid cavity) and hips, belong to the
SaJmudga form. The joints in the neck and the spinal
columns, belong to the Pratara (irregular) type ; while
those found in the KapAla bones of the pelvis (Kati)
and the forehead, arc of Tunna-sevani (suture) form.
The joints on cither side of the cheek-bones (tem-
poromandibular) belong to the Vatyasa-tuuda type. The
Mandala joints occur in the encircling Nadi of the
heart, throat, eyes and Kloma. Sankhsk-varta joints
occur in the bones of the ears and the nostrils. The
peculiar features of these different kinds of joints
(Sandhis) are evident from their names. 28.

i68

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. V.

Mctricail Text : — Only the bone-joints have
been enumerated and described ; the joints of muscles
ligaments and veins are innumerable. 29.

The Ligaments (SnsCyu) S -Thqrc arc nine
hundred ligaments (Sndyus) in the human hod}\ of
which six hundred occur in the four extremities ; two
hundred and thirty in the trunk (Koshtha) and seventy
in the neck and upwards. (Of the six hundred ligaments
in the four extremities), six ligaments are situated in
each toe making thirty (in the toes of each foot) ; thirty
in the Tala (soles), Gulpha (ankles), and the Kurcha
(ankle-joint) ; thirty in the leg (Janghd) ; ten in the
knee-joints (Jinu) ; forty in the Udara (abdomen) ; ten
in the groin (Vankshana) ; thus making one hundred
and fifty in each leg. The same number is found in
the other lower limb and in each of the two upper
extremities. (Of the two hundred and thirty ligaments
in the trunk\ there are sixty in the lumbar region
(Kati) ; eighty in the back ; sixty in the sides ; and
thirty in the chest. (Of the seventy ligaments to be
found in the region above the clavicles) there are thirty
six in the neck (Grivd) and thirty-four in the head.
Thus the total number of ligaments in a human body
is nine hundred. 30—33.

Memorable Verses Now hear me describe
the ligaments (Sndyus). They may be grouped under
four distinct heads, viz., Pratdnavati (ramifying or
branching), Vritta (ring-shaped or circular), Prithu
(tWek or broad), and ^ushira (perforated). The liga-
ments (Sndyus) which present in the four extremities
and the joints belong to the PrataCnavati type. The
Kandards or large ligaments are of the Vritta type ;
while those which arc found in the stomach (Amisaya)or
in the intestines (Pakvds'aya), and in the bladder belong

SARIRA STHANAM,

Chap. V.]

169

to the Sushira type. The ligaments of the chest, back,
sides and head are of the Prithu type. 34 — 35.

As a boat made of planks and timber fastened
together by means of a large number of bindings
is enabled to float on the water and to carry cargo ;
so the human frame being bound and fastened at the
Sandhis or joints by a large number of ligaments
(Snayu) is ^enabled to bear pr!^ssure. An injury to, or
diseases of, the bones, veins, joints or muscles arc not so
detrimental to the system as is the case if the SnAyus
are affected in any way. Only the physician, who is
acquainted with the internal and external ligaments
(SnAyus) of the body, is qualified to extract a hidden
and imbedded Salyam (extraneous matter etc.) from any
part of the body. 36.

The Muscles (Pesis) The muscles (Pcsis)
number five hundred in all, of which four hundred
are in the four extremities ; Sixty-six* in the
trunk (Koshtha) and thirty-four in the region above the
clavicles, 37.

Muscles in the Extremities There are
three muscles in each of the toes, thus making fifteen
in the toes of one leg ; ten in the anterior part of the foot
and the same number (ten'i attached to the Kurchcha ;
ten in the sole and the ankle-bone (Gulpha, — malledi) ;
twenty in the region between the Gulpha and the knee-
joint ; five in the knee-joint (Janu) ; twenty in the thigh
(Uru) ; and ten in the groin (Vankshana) ; thus making
one hundred muscles in all in each leg. The same
number is found in each of the other three extremities ;
(thus making four hundred in all). 38.

Muscles In the Koshtha : -(Of the sixty-

six muscles in the trunk), three arc in the region of the
• Qaydddsa reads sixty in the trunks and forty above the clavicles.

22

170

THE vSUSHRUTA SAM HIT A.

Chap. V.]

anus(Pa/u); one in the penis; one in the perineum
(Sevan i); two in the scrotum; five in each of the
haunches (Sphik) ; two in the top or head of the
bladder ; five in the abdomen (Udara) ; one about the
umbilicus ; five along each side (of the spinal column),
on the upper part of the back (making ten in all) ; six
in the sides ; ten in the chest ; seven around the armpits
and shoulders (Akshaka-Ansa) ; two in the region of
heart and stomach (Amdsaya) ; and six in the region
of the liver, spleen and colon (Unduka). 39.

Muscles of the Head and Neck (Of

the thirty-four muscles found in this region), four arc in
the throat (GrivA) ; eight in the two jaw-bones (Hanu) ;
one each in the regions of the throat (Kdkalaka and
Gala) ; two in the palate ; one in the tongue ; two in
the lips : two in the nose ; two in the eyes ; four in the
cheeks ; two in the ears ; four in the forehead ; and
one in the head. Thus the positions and distribu-
tions of the five hundred muscles (Pesis) have been
described. 40.

Metrical Text : — The ligaments, veins, bones
and joints etc., of a human body, derive their strength
from the fact of their being supported by or covered over
by the muscles. 41.

Extra Muscles in Women Females

have twenty extra muscles ; ten mu.sclcs are to be found
about the two breasts, five in each, which (muscles)
attain their full growth during puberty ; four muscles
are present about the parturient passage ; and of these
(four) two are about the external and two in the internal
orifices (of the vagina) ; three about the region of the
os, and three along the passages of the ovum and .sperm.
The Garbhdsdya or uterus is situated in the space
bounded by the Pittds'aya (small intestine) and Pakvis'aya

Chap. V.]

SARIRA STHANAM.

171

(large intestine) and the foetus lies in this during the
period of gestation.* 42-43.

According to their position in the system, these
muscles arg found to be thick, slender, small, expanded,
circular, short, long, hard, soft, smooth or rough. The
muscles cover the veins, ligaments, bones and joints;
hence their shape and size are determined by the
exigencies (f)rganic structures) of their positions. 44.

Memorable Verses : -The muscles which
arc found in the penis and scrotum of a man as des-
cribed before correspond to the covering of the uterus
in the case of a woman owing to the absence of those
organs in her body. The positions and classifications
of the veins, channels. Mannas and arteries will be
dealt with in a separate chapter. 45-46,

The vagina of a woman resembles the navel of a
conch-shell in shape and is possessed of three involuted
turns (Avartas) like the interior of mollusc The uterus
(Garbhasaya — fietal bed) is situated at the third posterior
involuted turn. The shape of the uterus resembles the
mouth of aRohit-fish (narrow at the mouth and expanded
in the upper end). The fretus lies in a crouched or
doubled up posture in the uterus and thus naturally at
the time of parturition its head is presented at the
entrance to the vagina. 47-48.

Superiority of ^alya-Tantram s-Thc

different parts or members of the body as mentioned
before including even the skin cannot be correctly
described by any one who is not versed in Anatomy.
Hence, any one desirous of acquiring a thorough
knowledge of anatomy should prepaie a dead body
and carefully observe (by dissecting it) and examine

* If wc read Mutrab'aya (bladder) in place of Tilta^j'aya ii txplainb
the anatomy belter. —Ed,

172

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

Chap. V.]

its different parts. For a thorough knowledge can only
be acquired by comparing the accounts given in the
Sistras (books on the subject) by direct personal
observation. 49.

Mode of diSS6Ction : — A dead body selected
for this purpose should not be wanting in any of its parts,
should not be a person who had lived up to a hundred
years (i. c. too old age) or ol one who die(J from any
protracted disease or of poison. The excrementa should
be first removed from the entrails and the body should
be left to decompose in the water of a solitary and still
pool, and securely placed in a cage (so that it may not be
eaten away by fish nor drift away), after having covered
it entirely with the outer sheaths of Munja grass, Kusa
grass, hemp or with rope etc. After seven days the body
would be thoroughly decomposed, when the observer
should slowly scrape off the decomposed skin etc. with a
whisk made of grass-roots, hair, Kusa blade or with a
strip of split bamboo and carefully observe with his own
eyes all the various different organs, external and internal,
beginning with the skin as described before. 50—56.

Memorable Verses:— The Self, the occult
or invisible Lord of the body cannot be detected except
with the psychic eye or with that of the mind. He, who
has observed the internal mechanism of the human body
and is well read in the works bearing on these subjects
and has thus all his doubts expelled from his mind is
alone qualified in the science of Ayurveda and has a
rightful claim to practise the art of healing, 57.

Thus ends the fifth Chapter of the S'drira-sthdnam in the Sus'rula
Samhitd w hich treats of the anatomy of the human body.

CHAPTER VI.

Now wc shall discourse on the Sariram which speci-
fically treats of the Marinas* or vital parts of the body
(Pratyeka-marma-nirdesa Sslriram.) i.

Classification of Marmas There are
one hundred and seven Marmas (in the human organ-
ism), which may be divided into five classes, such as
the Mansa-Marmas, Sira-Marmas, Sndyu-Marmas, Asthi-
M annas and the Sandhi-Mannas. Indeed there arc no
other Mannas (vulnerable or vital parts) to be found
in the body than the preceding ones. 2.

Their different numbers : -There arc
eleven Mansa-Marmas (vulnerable muscle-joints) ; forty-
one Sird-Marmas (similar veins, anastomosis) ; twenty-
seven Snayu-Marmas (vital ligament-unions) ; eight
Asthi-Marmas (^bone-unions) and twenty Sandhi-Marmas
(vulnerable joints). 3.

Their Loca^tions : — Of these, eleven are in
one leg, thus making twenty-two in the two lower ex-
tremities, The same number counts in the two hands.
There arc twelve Marmas in the regions of the
chest and the abdomen (Udara); fourteen in the back ;
and thirty-seven in the region of the neck (Griva) and
above it. 4.

Names and distributions of Marmas :

— The Marmas which arc situated in each leg are known
as Kshipra, Tala-Hridaya, Kurchcha, Kurchcha-Sirah,
Gulpha, Indravasti, Janu, Ani, Urvi, Lohitaksha and
Vitapa. The twelve Marmas which arc situated in the

* Places whore veins, arteries, ligaments, joints and mu.clos unite
and an injury to which proves generally fatal.

174 the SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. Chap. VL]

thorax and the abdomen (Udara) are Guda (anus), Vast!
(bladder^, NAbhi (umbilicus), Hridaya (heart), Stana-
mula (the roots of two breasts), the Stana-Rohita,
(muscles of the breasts', the two Apalaps an^ the two
Apastambhas. The fourteen Marmas to be found in
the back are the Katika-tarunas (Taruna-boncs of the
waist’, the two Kukundaras, the two Nitamvas (hips),
PArs'va-Sandhis (the two side-joints), the two Y^'^hatis,
the two Ansa-phalakas (shoulder-blades) and the two
Ansas (shoulders). The eleven Marmas to be found in an
arm are known as the Kshipra, Tala-Hridaya, Kurchcha,
Kurchcha-Sirah, Manivandha, Indravasti, Kurpara,
Ani, Urvi, LohitAksha and Kakshadhara. What is said of
the one arm holds good of the other. The Marmas situated
above the clavicle regions are known as the four Dhamanis,
the eight Matrikds,thc twoKrikatikas, the two Vidhuras,
the two Phanas, the two Apingas, the two Avartas, the
two Utkshepas, the two Sankhas, one Sthapani five
Simantas, four Sringatakas and one Adhipati. 5—9.

The different heads of Wlarmas:— Of

the aforesaid Marmas, those known as the Tala-
Hridaya, Indravasti, Guda and Stana-rohita, arc
Hs^nsi-Marmas. Those known as Nila-dhamani,
Matrikd, Sringataka, Apanga, Sthapani, Phana, Stana-
mula, Apaldpa, Apastambha, Hridaya, Ndbhi, Parsva-
Sandhi, Vrihati, Lohitdksha and Urvi, are Sirfit-Marmas.
Those known as the Ani, Vitapa, Kakshadhara,
Kurchcha, Kurchcha-Sirah, Vasti, Kshipra, Ansas,
(shoulders), Vidhura and Utkshepa, are Sns^yu-Marmas.
Those known as the Katika-taruna, Nitamva, Ansa-
phalaka, J^ankha, are Asthi-Marmas. The J^nu, the
Kurpara, the Simanta, the Adhipati, the Gulpha, the
Manivandha, the Kukundara, the Avarta and the
Knkatika arc Saudhi-Mamas. ro— 14.

Chap. VI.]

SARIRA STHANAM.

175

Qualitative classes Again these Marmas
(vital unions of the body) are under five distinct heads,
namely, Sadya-Prdnahara, (fatal within twenty-four
hours), KAldntara-Pranahara, (fatal within a fortnight
or a month^, Visalyaghna (fatal as soon as a dart or any
other imbedded foreign matter is extracted therefrom),
Vaikalyakara, (maiming or deforming) and Rujdkar
(painful) [according as an injury respectively produces
the aforesaid effects]. Of these, nineteen Marmas
belong to the Sadya-Prdnahara group ; thirty-three to
the Kildntara-PrAnahara group ; three to the Vis'alya-
ghna group; forty-four to the Vaikalyakara group ; and
eight to the Rujakara group. 15.

Memorable Verses To the Sadya-Pra{na-

hara group (fatal in the course of a day if anyway hurt)
belong the four Sringatakas, one Adhipati, the two
Sankhas, the eight Kantha-Siras, the Guda, the
Hridaya, the Vast! and the Ndbhi. To the Ks^latntara-
Pratnahara group (fatal later on, if any way hurt)
belong the eight Vaksha-Marmas, the five Simantas,
the four Tala-Marmas, the four Kshipra-Marmas, the
four Indra-vastis, the two Katika-tarunas, the two
ParsVa-Sandhis, the two Vrihatis, and the two
Nitamvas. To the Visalyaghna class belong the two
Utkshepas and the one Sthapani. To the Vaikalyakara
(deforming! group belong the Marmas, known as the
four Lohitakshas, the four Anis, the two Jdnus, the
four Urvis, the four Kurchchas, the two Vitapas, the
two Kurparas, the two Kukundaras, the two Kaksha-
dharas, the two Vidhuras, the two Krikatikhs, the two
Ansas (shoulder), the two Ansa-phalakas, (shoulder-
blades), the two Apkngas (tips of eyes), the two Nials,
the two ManyAs, the two Phanas and the two Avartas.
A learned physician should know that the two Gulphas,

176

THE SUSHRUTA SAMIIITA.

[Chap- VI.

the two Mani-vandhas and the four Kurchcha-Sirah (of
the hands and legs'; belong to the Rujatkara group
(painful if hurt). A piercing of the Kshipra-Marma
ends in an instantaneous death ; or death may follow
at a later time. 16-2 r. '

Firm unions of Mdnsa (muscles), Sira (veins), Sn^yu
(ligaments), bones or bone-joints are called Marmas
(or vital parts of the body) which naturally and specifi-
cally form the seats of life (Prs^na), and hence a hurt to
any one of the Marmas invariably produces such symp-
toms as arise, from the hurt of a certain Marma.* 22.

The Marmas belonging to the Sadya-Pranahara group
are possessed of fiery virtues (thcrmogenetic) ; as
fiery virtues are easily enfeebled, so they prove fatal
to life (in the event of being any way hurt) ; while
those belonging to the KAlantara-Pnlnahara group arc
fiery and lunar (cool) in their properties. And
as the fiery virtues arc enfeebled easily and the cooling
virtues take a considerable time in being so, the
Marmas of this group prove fatal in the long run (in
the event of being any way hurt, if not instantaneously
like the preceding ones). The Visalyaghna Marmas
are possessed of Vataja properties (that is, they arrest
the escape of the vital VAyu) ; so long as the dart
does not allow the Vayu to escape from their injured
interior, the life prolongs ; but as soon as the dart is
extricated, the Vdyu escapes from the inside of the
hurt and necessarily proves fatal. The Vaikalyakaras
are possessed of Saumya (lunar properties) and they
retain the vital fluid owing fff their steady and cooling
virtues, and hence tend only to deform the organism

* Some are of opinion that hallucination, delirium, death, stupor and
coma as described in the Sutrast anam are the results of injuries to
thes Mar as,

Chap. VL] SARIkA STHANAM. 1 77

in the event of their being hurt, instead of bringing
on death. The Rujikara Marmas of fiery and Vdtaja
properties become extremely painful inasmuch as both
of them are pain-generating in their properties.
Others, on the contrary, hold the pain to be the result
of the properties of the five material components of
the body ^Fancha-bhautika). 23.

Different Opinions on the Klarmas

Some assert that Marmas, which are the firm union of
the five bodily factors (of veins, ligaments, muscles, bones
and joints), belong to the first group (Sadya-Prana-
hara) ; that those, which form the junction of four such, or
in which there is one in smaller quantity, will prove fatal
in the long run, in the event of their being hurt or injured
(^KAlAntara-Pranahara).* Those, which are the junction
of three such factors, belong to the Vis'alya-PrAnaharaf
group ; those of the two belong to the Vaikalyakara I

* The Marmas, such as Stana-mula, Apaldpa, Apastambha,
Simanta, Katika-Taruna, Pdrsva-Sandhi, Vrihati, and Nitamva be*
longing to the Kalantara-maraka group, are devoid of Mdnsa (muscles) ;
and the ‘Marmas’ known as Stanarohita, Talahridaya, Kshipra, and
Indravasti, belonging to the same class, are devoid of Asthi (bonest

1* The Utkshepa marma, belonging to the Vis'alya pi^nahara
group, is devoid of Mdnsa (muscles) and Sandhi (joint).

t The Slhapani* Marma, belonging to the Vaikalyakara class, is
devoid of Mansa (muscle), S'ira and Sn^yu ; the Lohitaksha-marma
(of the same group) is devoid of Snayu, Sandhi and Asthi (bones) ; the
Janu<marma (of the same group) is devoid of Mdnsa, S'ird and Sndyu;
the Urvi- marma (of the said group) is devoid of Asthi, Mdnsa and Sn&yu ;
the Vitapa-raarma (of the same class) devoid of Mdnsa, Sird and Asthi r
the Kurpara^marma (of the same class) is devoid of Mdnsa, S'irai
and Sndyu ; the Kukundara<marma (of the same class) is devoid
of Mdnsa, S'ird and Sandhi ; the Kakshadhara- marma (of the same
class) is devoid of S'ird, Asthi, and Sandhi ; the Vidhura-marma (of the
said group) is devoid of Mdnsa, Sird and Sandhi ; the Krikatika- marma
is devoid of Mdnsa, S'ird, and Sandhi ; the Ansa-marma (of the same
group) is devoid of Mdnsa, Sndyu and Sandhi ; the Ansa’phalaka>marma

23

178

THE SUSHRUTA SAlVtHltA .

[Chap. VI.

group ; and those in which only one of them exists
belongs to the last or pain-generating type (RujAkara)*.

But the fore going theory is not a sound one, inas-
much as blood is found to exude from an injured joint
which would be an impossibility in the absence of any
vein, ligament (Sndyu) and muscle being intimately
connected with it. Hence every Marma should be
understood as a junction or meeting place oj the five
organic principles of ligaments, veins, muscles, bones
and joints. 24-25.

Metrical text : — This is further corroborated
by the fact that the four classes of Sir 4 or vessels (which
respectively carry the Vdyu, Pitta, Kapha and the blood)
are found to enter into the Marmas for the purpose
of keeping or maintaining the moisture of the local
ligaments (Snayu), bones, muscles and joints and thus
sustain the organism.f The Vayu, aggravated by an
injury to a Marma, blocks up (those four classes of
vessels) in their entire course throughout the organism
and gives rise to great pain which extends all over the
body. All the internal mechanism of a man (of which a
Marma has been pierced into with a shaft or with any
other piercing matter) becomes extremely painful, and
seems as if it were being constantly shaken or jerked,
and symptoms of syncope are found to set in. Hence a
careful examination of the affected Marma should

(of the said group) is devoid of Minsa, Sn^yu and Sandhi ; the Nila,
Manyd and Phana Marmas (of the same group) are devoid of Mdnsa,
Sftndhi and Asthi ; the Avarta-marma is devoid of S'irS., Sniyu and
Minsa ; the Apanga^marma (of the said class) is devoid of Mdnsa, Sn4yu
and Sandhi.

♦ The Gulpha, Manibandha, and Kurchcha-s'ira Marmas, belonging
to the Ruj^kaia group, are devoid of M^nsa, S'iri, Sniyu and Asthi, i.r.
Sandhi alone is present in these.

t Hence the piercing of a bone is attended with bleeding.

Chap. VI.]

SARIRA STHANAM.

179

precede all the foregoing acts of extricating a Salya from
its inside. From that similar aggravated conditions and
actions of the Pitta and the Kapha should be presumed
in the event of a Marma being any way injured or
pierced into? 26 — 29.

A Marma of the Sadyah-Prinahara type being
perforated at its edge brings on death at a later time
(within seven days), whereas a deformity of the organ
follows ^rom the piercing of a K^ldntara-Mdraka’*^
Marma at the side (instead of in the centre). Similarly,
an excruciating pain and distressful after-effects mark a
similar perforation of a Marma of the Visalyaghna^f*
group. And a Marma of the Rujikara^ class pro-
duces an excruciating pain (instead of a sharp one) in
the event of its being pierced at the fringe. 30.

An injured Marma of the Sadyah-Prilnahara type
terminates in death within seven days of the injury,
while one of the Kdldntara type, within a fortnight or a
month from the date of hurt(according to circumstances).
A case of injured Kshipra-Marma seldom proves fatal
before that time (seven days). An injured Marma of the
Visalyaghna or Vaikalyakara group may prove fatal
in the event of its being severely injured. 31.

Marmas of the Extremities Now we
shall describe the situation of every Marma, The

* If any of the Marmas of the Kaliihtara-Prdnahara group be
deeply perforated, then this perforation is sure to bring on death within
a day (i.e. it will act like a slightly injured Marma of the Sadyah-
Prdnahara group).

*

t Any Marma of the Vis'alyaghna-group, being deeply perforated,
brings on death within seven days (4 e, it will behave like a slightly
injured Marma of the Kdldntara-Prknahara class).

t Any Marma of the Rujdkata class, being deeply perforated (injured),
is sure to bring excruciating pain etc, (d.e,, it will act like a slightly
injured Marnia of the Vis'alyaghna group).

l8o THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap, VI.

Marma, known as the Kshipra* is situated in the
region between the first and the second toes (Tarsal
articulation), which, being injured or pierced, brings
on death from convulsions. The Marma, known as the
Tala-Hridayat, is situated in the middle , of the sole
of the foot in a straight line drawn from the root of
the middle toe. An injury to this Marma gives rise to
extreme pain which ends in death. The Marma, known
as the Kurchchal, is situated two fingei^’ width
above from the Kshipra one on each side of the
foot. An injury to this Marma results in shivering
and bending in of the foot. The Marma called
Kurchcha-^irah § is situated under the ankle-joints,
one on each side of the foot (Gulpha- Sandhi) ; an
injury to it gives rise to pain and swelling of the
affected part. A perforation of the Gulpha-Marma i!,
which is situated at the junction of the foot and
the calf, results in pain, paralysis and maimedness
of the affected leg. 32-37.

An injury to the Marma which is situated in the
middle muscle of the calf to the distance of between
twelve and thirteen fingers’ width from the ankle, and
known as the Indravasti-Marnia,^^ results in excessive
hiemorrhage which ends in death. 38.

* It U a Sndyu-Marma (ligament) to the width of half a finger, and
belongs to the K^Mntara group.

t It is a M^nsa-Marma to the width of half a finger and belongs to the
K^ldntara group.

* li is a Sndyu-Marma lo the length of four fingers* width, and
belongs to the Vaikalyakara group.

I It is a SnAyu-Marma, one finger in length and belongs to the
Vaikalyakara group.

(I It is a Sandhi Marma, to the length of two fingers*, and belongs to
the Vaikalyakara group.

IF Indiavasti measures two fingers in length according to Bhoja and

Chap. VI.] SARIRA STHANAM. l8l

An injury to or piercing of the Js(nu-Marnia>^
situated at the union of the thigh and the knee, results
in lameness of the patient. 39.

A piercing of the Aui-Marma,+ situated on both the
sides abo^{p three fingers’ width from the J4nu (knee-joint),
brings on swelling and paralysis (numbness) of the
leg. 40.

A perforation of the Urvi-Mama,]: situated in the
middle of*' the Uru (thigh), results in the atrophy
of the leg, owing to the incidental haemorrhage. An
injury to the Lohitfi^ksha-Marma,!! situated respectively
a little above and below the Urvi-Marma and the
Vankshana (groin-joint), and placed near the thigh, is
attended with excessive haemorrhage and causes para-
lysis (of the leg). 41-42.

An injury to the Vitapa-Marma,ir situated between
the Scrotum and the Vankshana (inguinal region), brings
on loss of manhood or scantiness of semen. Thus the
eleven Sakthi-Marmas of one leg have been described ;
those in the other being of an identical nature with the
preceding ones. The Marmas in the hands are almost
identical with those of the legs, with the exception that
Manivandha, Eurpara and Eakshadhara Marmas

Gay^ddsa, though half a finger in width according to others. It is a
M^nsa-Marma and belongs to the K^lantara group.

* It is a joint-Marma, three fingers in length and belongs to the
Vaikalyakara group.

t It is a ligament- Marma, half a finger in length, {three fingers
according to Gaykdilsa) and is of the Vaikalyakara class.

t It is a S'ird- Marina, half a finger in length and of the Vaikalya*
kara group.

I) It is a S'ird-Marma, halfa finger in length and of the Vaikalya-
kara group.

IF It is a Snkyu-Marma to the length of one finger and of the
Vaikalyakara group.

I82

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. VI.

occur in the place of the Gulpha, Jdnu and
Vitapa Marmas respectively. As the Vitapa-Marma
is situated between the scrotum and the Vankshana
(inguinal region), so the Kakshadhara-Marma is situated
between the Vaksha (chest) and the Kaksha (armpit).
An injury to these causes supervening symptoms.
An injury to the M^inivandha-Marma (wrist-marma)
results specially in inoperativeness (Kuntha) of the
affected hand ; an injury to the Kurpara-Marma ends
in dangling (Kuni) of the hand ; and an injury to
the Kakshadhara results in hemiplegia. Thus the
forty-four Marmas of the upper and the lower extremi-
ties have been described. 43-46.

Marmas on the Thorax etc. Now we

shall describe the Marmas, situated in the region of
the thorax and the abdomen (trunk,'. A hurt to
the Guda-Marma^, which is attached to the large
intestine and serves as the passage of stool and flatus,
ends fatally (within twenty-four hours of the hurt).
An injury to the Vasti-Marma,t situated inside
the cavity of the pelvic region and the bladder and
composed of small muscles and blood (and which
serves as the receptacle of urine), proves fatal with-
in the day, except in the cases of extracting the
gravel, only when the injury to the organ is short
of complete perforation of both of its walls. The
urine oozes out through the aperture in the case
where only one of its walls has been perforated, and
whiph may be closed and healed up with proper
and judicious medical treatment. An injury to the

* It is a M^nsa-Marma to the length of four fingers’ width and be-
longs to the Sadyo-miraka class.

t It is a ligament combination (Snayu marma) to the length of four
fingers, belonging to the Sadyab-Pr^nhara class,

Chap. Vl.]

SARIRA STHANAM.

183

Ns^bhi’Marma,^ the root of all the ^ir^is and situated
between the Amdsaya (stomach) and the Pakvisaya
(intestines) ends in death within the day. 47 -So*

A hurt^to the Hridaya-Marma,t which is situated
in the thorax between the two breasts and above the
pit of the Am^saya and forms the seat of the qualities
of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, proves fatal within the
day. An jnjury to the Stana-mula-Marmasi situated
immediately below each of the breasts and about two
fingers in width fills the Koshtha (thorax) with deranged
Kapha, brings on cough, difficult breathing (asthma)
and proves fatal. An injury to any of the Stana-
Bohita*Marmas,§ situated above the nipples of
the breasts about two fingers in width, fills the cavity
of the Koshtha (thorax) with blood, producing symptoms
of cough and asthma, and ends fatally. An injury to
the Apalipa-Marmas, situated below the Ansa-kuta
(balls of the shoulders) and above the sides (meeting
of the different branches of the sub-clavicle veins Le,
axilla', transforms the blood of the organism into pus
and proves fatal thereby. SI-S4.

An injury to any of the Vayu-carrying vessels, known
as the Apastambha-Marma^ (meeting of the bifurcated
branches of the bronchi lying on both the sides

^ It is a S'ird-Marma to the length of four hngers, belonging to the
Sadyah-Prdnahara class.

+ It is a S'ir^i-Marma to the length of four fingers and of the Sadyah-
Pranahara class.

t It is a S'ir^«Marma, two fingers in length and of the Kilintara
class. *

§ It is a Mdnsa-Marma about half a finger in length and of the
K^Untara class, (according to Vgabhata, of the Sadyo-Mdraka class).

ii It is a S'iri-Marma, half a finger in length, and of the R^lintara
class.

f It is a Slrd-Marma, half a finger in length and belongs to the
KiiUntara class.

iS4

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. Vl.

of the breast), fills the Koshtha with the deranged
V4yu (tympanites) accomapanied by cough and dys-
pepsia, and terminates in death. Thus the twelve
Marmas situated in the thorax and abdtfmen are
described. SS-56.

PriShtha Marmas : — Now we shall discourse
on the Marmas in the back (of a man). An injury to
any of the Katika-tarunas^ (sacro-iliac arliculation),
situated in the region of the S'roni fsacrum) on both
sides of the spinal column, gives rise to an excessive
haemorrhage and consequent pallor and ends in death.
A hurt to any of the Kukundara Marmas ^ (lit a
hollow— the great sacro-sciatic notch), situated on both
sides of the spinal column and in the region slightly
below the waist (in the loins), results in complete
anaesthesia and inoperativeness of the lower extremi-
ties. A hurt to the Nitamva-Marmas,! attached to
the side above the ^roni (pelvis) and attached inside to
the muscles of the waists, gives rise to Sosha (atrophia)
in the lower extremities, weakness and ultimately brings
on death. An injury to the PatrsVa-Sandhi-Marmas §
(caelic axes) which are situated just at the middle below
the extremities of the sides (P^irsva) and which lies
attached at the middle between the loins at their lower
regions, feels the Koshtha (abdomen) with the blood
and results into death A hurt to the Vrihati-Marmas ]

* It i 8 *an Asthi-Marma, half a finger in length and of the Kdlintara*
mira^i clasi.

t They are Joint-marmas (Sandhi), half a finger in length and of the
Vaikmlyakara group.

t It 18 a bone Marma, half a finger tn length, and of the Kdldntara class.

I It is a S'ird-Marma to the length of half a finger and belongs to
the K^l^ntara class.

I They are S'ira*Marnias (arterial anestomsis) to the lengt of half
a finger and belong to the Kdldntara class.

Chap. VI.]

SARIRA StHANAM.

185

which commencing from the roots of the breast
course round both the sides of the spinal column
(Pristha-vamsa), cause excessive bleeding, and the patient
dies, as supervening symptoms arise from an excessive
loss of blood. An injury to any of the two Atnsa-phalaka-
Marmas* situated on either side of the vertebral column
and connected with the scapula brings on anesthesia
or atrophy (Sosha) of the arms. There are two Marmas
known as Amsa-Marmasf which are situated on cither
side midway between the neck and the head of the arms
and connect the Amsa-Pitha (glenoid cavity) and the
Skandha (shoulder). An injury to any of these Marmas
is attended with an incapacity of moving the hands.
Thus the fourteen Marmas in the back have been
described. 57-65.

The Jatrugata-WIarmas : - Now we shall
describe the Marmas which arc situated in the regions
above the clavicles (Urddhva-Jatru). There are four
Dhamani (arteries) about the two sides of the Kantha-
NAdi (wind-pipe). Two of them arc known as Nili, and
the other two as Mauyst. One Nild and one Manyd are
situated on either side of the larynx, (i.e , anterior and
posterior side of the larynxl An injury to any of them
produces dumbness, and change of voice (hoarseness),
and also the loss of the faculty of taste. I An injury to
any of the eight Sirds (arteries), four being on each side
of the neck (Grivd), and known as Sira'- Haft rika-
Marmas § ) ends fatally within the day. 66-69.

* It is an Asthi-Marma, half a Bnger in length and is Vaikalyakara.

t They are Sniyu-Marmas, half a finger in length and of the
Vaikalyakara class.

t They are S'ir4-Marmas, to the lengrh of four fingers and of the
Vaikalyakara class.

§ They are S'iri-Marmas, four fingers in length and of the Sadyo-
Mdran class.

24

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

tChap. VI.

1 86

An injury to any of the two Marmas lying at the
junction of the head and neck (Grivd) and known as
£rikl£tikl(* (transverse process .of the arch of the atlas)
results in a free movement of the head. A Jiurt to any
of the Marmas attached to the lower end of an ear
(posterior extrensic ligament) and known as the
Vidhuraf Marma results in the loss of hearing. An
injury to the Phana-Marmas t attached to the interior
channels of both the nostrils, results in the loss of the
faculty of smell. An injury to the Apdnga-Marmas §
(Anastomosis of the infra-orbital artery) situated below
the tips of the eye-brows and about the external corners
of the eyes, brings on blindness or defective vision. An
injury to the Avarta- Mannas situated above and below
the eye-brows, brings on blindness and impaired vision.
An injury to the Sankha-MarmasIT (meeting or suture
of the temporal, frontal and sphenoid bones — Pterion),
situated over the tips of the eye-brows and between the
ears and the forehead, results in death within the day.
The Marmas situated over the two temples (Sankha)
and at the border of the hair (sculp) are called Utkshepa-
Marma (meeting of the posterior and anterior temporal
arteries)$. An extraction of a shaft (Salya) or of any

* They are Sandhi- Mar mas, half a hnger in length, and of the
Vaikalyakara group.

f It is a 5'n4yu-Marma, and is of the Vaikalyakara class.

t They are S'ird-Marmas to the length of half a finger and of the
Vaikalyakara class*

^ They are S'ird Marmas to the length of half a finger and of the
Vaikalyakara class,

II They are Sandhi-Marmas, to the length of half a finger and of the
V aikalyakari class.

IT They are Asthi-Marmas to the length of half a finger.

$ They are S'ndyu-Marmas, half a finger in length and of the
Via'alyaghna class.

Chap. V/.J SARIRA STHANAM. 1 87

extraneous pointed thing lodged into these Marmas,
results in the death of the patient, who, on the contrary,
lives as long as the shaft is allowed to remain inside or
if the shaft comes out itself (after putrefaction). 70-75.

An injury to the Sthapani-Marma* (nasal arch of
the frontal veins), situated in the middle of the eye-
brows, ends in the manner of the preceding one. An
injury to any of the five joints of the head which are
known as the Simanta-Marmast, results in fear, insensi-
bility and madness of the patient and terminates in
death. An injury to any of the four Sringitaka-
Marmast which forms the junction of the four ^ir 4 s
(nerves), (branches of the facial artery) and soothes the
nose, the eyes, the ears and the tongue, proves fatal
within the day. An injury to the Adhipati- Marmas §
(the vertical groove on the frontal bone) which is marked
in the inner side of the roof of the cranium by the Sir^.-
Sannipdta (superior longitudinal sinus), and on the
exterior side by the ringlet of the hair (Romivarta)
proves fatal within the day. Thus we have described
the thirty-seven Marmas, situated in the region above
the clavicles (Urddhva-Jatru). 76-80.

Memorable Verses j— An incision should
be made at the spot a finger’s width remote from the
Urvi, Kurchcha-Sird, Vitapa, Kaksha and a P^rsVa-
Marma ; whereas, a clear space, of two fingers should

* They are S'ird-Marmas to the length of half a finger and of the
Visdlyaghna class.

t They are Sandhi-Marmas to the length of four fingers and of the
KdUntara-Pr^nahara class.

t They are S'ird-Marmas to the length of four fingers and of the
Sadyah-Pr^nahara class.

§ It is a Sandhi-Marma, half a finger in length and of Ih^ SadyaH-
Fi(inahara clasg*

i88

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA .

[Chap. VI.

be avoided from its situation in making any Incision
about the Stanamula, Manivandha or Gulpha-Marma.
Similarly a space of three fingers should be avoided
from the Hridaya, Vasti, Kurchcha, Guda or Ndbhi
Marma ; and a space of four fingers should be avoided
in respect of the four Sringdtakas, five Simantas and
ten Marmas in the neck (Nild etc.) ; a space of half
a finger being the rule in respect of the rcnaaining (fifty-
six).* Men, versed in the science of surgery, have laid
down the rule that, in a case of surgical operation, the
situation and dimension of each local Marma should
be first taken into account and the incision should be
made in a way so as not to affect that particular Marma,
inasmuch as an incision, even extending or affecting,
in the least, the edge or the side of the Marma, may
prove fatal. Hence all the Marma-Sthdnas should be
carefully avoided in a surgical operation. 8i.

The amputation of a hand or a leg may not prove
fatal whereas a wound in any of the Marmas situated
therein is sure to bring on death. The vessels become
contracted in the case of a cut in the leg or in the hand
of a man, and hence the incidental bleeding is compara-
tively scantier. Therefore it is that a cut in any of these
parts of the body, however painful, does not necessarily
prove fatal, like the lopping off of the branches of a
tree. On the contrary, a man pierced into in any such
Marmas, as the Kshipra or the Tala, suffers from excessive

• Some are of opinion that a surgical operation (in the case of the
remaining fifty-six) should be made, leaving a space equal in measurement
to the dimensions of a palm (from the affected part), Gayddisa, having
learnt from Bhoja, explains that a space of two fingers should be left (from
the affected part) in making surgical operations of the ten marmas, namely,
the two Gulphas, the rooU of the two breasts, the four Indravastis, and the
two ^anivandfadi.

Chap. VI.] SARIRA STHANAM. 1 89

haemorrhage (from the affected part) and attended with
an excruciating pain, owing to the derangement of the
Vdyu, and meets his doom like a tree whose roots
have been severed. Hence, in a case of piercing or
of injury \o any of these Marmas, the hand or the leg
should be immediately amputated at the wrist or at
the ankle (respectively). 82.

The medical authorities have described the Marmas
to have covered half in the scope of Salya Tantra
(Surgery), inasmuch as a person hurt in any of the
Marmas dies presently (i. e., within seven days of the
hurt). A deformity of the organ is sure to result from
an injury to one of these Marmas, even if death be
averted by a course of judicious and skillful medical
treatment. 83.

The life of the patient is not to be despaired of even
in the case of fracture or crushing of a bone of the
Koshtha, Sirah and Kapdla or perforation of the intestines
etc , if the local Marmas are found not to be in any way
hurt or affected. Recovery is common in cases of
cuts (pierce) in the Sakthi, Bhuja, Pdda and Kara
or in any other part of the body and even where a
whole leg or hand is found to be severed and carried
away if the Marmas are not in any way hurt or
affected. 84.

These Marmas form the primary .seats of the Vdyu,
the Soma (lunar) and Tejas (fiery principles of the
organism), as well as of the three fundamental qualities
of Satva, Rajas and Tamas, and that is the reason why
a man, hurt in any of the Marmas, does not live. 85.

An injury to a Marmaof the Sadyah-Prdnahara class
(in which death occurs within a day) is attended with
the imperfection of the sense organs, loss of conscious-
ness, bewilderment of Mana.h (mind) and Buddl^i

190 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. VL

(intellect) and iVarious kinds of pain. An injury to a
Marma of th,e KAldntara group (of a person) is sure to
be attended with the loss of Dhitus (blood etc.) and
various kinds of supervening symptoms (Upadrava) which
end in death. The body of a person, hurt ‘in any of
[the Vaikalyakara Marmas, may remain operative only
under a skillful medical treatment ; but a deformity
of the affected organ is inevitable. An injury to any
of the Visalyaghna Marmas ends in death for the
reasons mentioned above. An injury to any of the
Rujdkara Marmas gives rise to various kinds of pain
in the affected organ, which may ultimately bring about
a deformity of the same, if placed under the treatment
of an ignorant and unskillful Vaidya (Surgeon). 86.

An injury to the adjacent part of a Marma, whether
incidental to a cut, incision/ blow (Abhighdta), burn,
puncture, or to any other cause exhibits the same
series of symptoms as an actually affected one. An
injury to a Marma, whether it be severe or slight, is
sure to bring deformity or death,* 87.

The diseases which are seated in the Marmas, are
generally serious, but they may be made to prove
amenable with the greatest care and difficulty. 88-89.

* Gayjiddsa does not read this verse.

Thus ends the sixth Chapter of the S'drira Slhdnam in the Sus'ruta
Samhit^, which treats of Marmas.

CHAPTER VII.

Now ^^e shall discourse on the Sdriram which treats
of the description and classification of Sird or vascular
system • ( ^irsC-Vamana-VibhaktinsCma
^sCriram).

There are seven hundred Sirds (vessels) in the
human organism (except those which cannot be counted
for their extremely attenuated size). The vessels
(Sirds) by their contractibility and expansibility &c ,
sustain and nourish the organism in the same manner
as streamlets and canals serve to keep a field or a
garden moist and fruitful. From the principal or cen-
tral trunk hundreds of small and minute vessels branch
off and spread all over the body, just as small or minute
fibres are found to emanate from the large central vein
of the leaf of a plant. They originate from the umbili-
cal region and thence they spread all over the body up-
wards and downwards and obliquely. 2,

Memorable Verses All the Sirds (vessels)
that are found in the organisms of created beings, ori-
ginate from the umbilical region (Ndbhi)")“ and thence
they spread all over their bodies. The life of an or-
ganic animal is seated in the vessels surrounding its
navel which forms their starting point. The navel in
its turn rests on or is attached to the Prdnas (the life-
carrying vessels — nerves attached to it) in the same

* The Sanskrita term S'ira denotes veins, nerves, arteries and lympha-
tic vessels as well. Some read S*ird’Varna (different colours of the
Sirds) in lieu of S'ird*varnana (description of S'iras).

t Most probably the idea is derive I from the appearance of the S'irds
in their foetal state.

192

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. Vll,

manner as the nave of a wheel supports the spokes, and
the spokes in their turn support the nave. 3-4.

Principal firsts .--Of these s'iras (vessels),
forty are principal ones, of which ten are VAyu-carrying
Sirds (nerves), ten are Pitta-carrying Sirds (\feins), ten
convey Kapha (lymphatic vessels?) and ten arc blood-
carrying Sirds (arteries). Of these the Vdyu-carrying
Sirds, situated in the specific receptacle of that bodily
principle (Vdta), arc again found to branch out in one
hundred and seventy five smaller branches (ramifications).
Similarly, each of the remaining Pitta-carrying, Kapha-
carrying and blood-carrying vessels (Sirds) situated in
their specific receptacles, (f^, in the receptacles of Pitta,
Kapha and spleen and liver respectively) are found to
branch out in as many numbers (one hundred and
seventy-five), — thus making a total of seven hundred
in all. 5.

Their Specific Locations There are
twenty-five Vdyu-carrying Sirds (nerves) in one leg and
the same count applies to the other. Similarly there
are twenty five Vsiyu-carrying Sirds (vessels) in each of
the hands. There are thirty-four Vdyu-carrying vessels
in the Koshtha - trunk) ; of these eight occur in the pelvic
regions attached with the anus and the penis ; two in
each of the sides, six in the back, six in the Udara
(cavity of the abdomen), and ten in the region of the
chest. There are forty-one Vdyu-carrying Sird’s (ves-
sels) situated in the region above the clavicles. Of
thgse fourteen occur in the neck ; four in the two ears ;
nine in the tongue ; six in the nose and eight in the
two eyes. Thus we have finished the description of the
one hundred and seventy-five Sirds that carry Vdyu. 6.

What has been said of these Vdyu-carrying vessels
(Sirds) will also hold good to the rest (in blood-carrying,

Chap. VIL]

SARIRA STHANAM.

193

Pitta-carrying and Kapha-carrying channels in the res-
pective regions of the body), with the exception that
in these three cases, ( Pitta, Kapha and blood ) ten
occur in the eyes and two in the ears in lieu of eight
and four respectively, as in the case of V4yu-carrying
^ir4s (vessels). Thus we have described the seven hun-
dred Sirds with their branches. 7.

Memojrable Verses— The Vdyu-carrying
Sirds : —The Vdyu in its normal state and coursing
through its specific Siras (vessels) helps the unobstructed
performance of its specific functions viz., expansion,
contraction, speech, &c., and produces the clearness and
non-illusivenesi of Buddhi ( intellect ) and the sense-
organs, whereas a coursing of the said Vdyu in a de-
ranged condition through the aforesai i ^irds (vessels),
gives rise to a host of such diseases as are due to the
derangement of Vdyu. 8.

The Pitta-carrying ^ir£(s s— The Pitta in
its normal state and coursing through its specific ^irds
(vessels) produces the healthy glow of coimpiexipn,
relish for food, kindling of the appetite, healthfulqo^s
and other good effects, characteristic of the Pitta, whiph
however being aggravated and coursing through theni
gives rise to a host of Pittaja diseases. 9,

The Kapha-conveying ^ir48:^The

Kapha in its normal state and coursiqgthrough itsspecific
^irds (vessels) smoothes and contributes to the firmness
of the limbs and joints, improves the strength and pro-
duces all other good effects specially belonging to it,
whereas the same Kapha, flowing through them in an
aggravated condition, ushers in a large number of the
Kaphaja distempers of, the body. lo.

The Rakta-carrylng Iflriii i^The Wood

in its normal state and flowing through its specific ^irds

25

J94 the SUSHRUTA SAMHITA, [Chap. VII.

(vfessfels) strengthens , the other fundamental principles
(Dhitus).of the body, improves the complexion, aids
the organ of touch in the proper performance of its-
functions and produces other functions characteristic of
it in the body. Flowing through them in a vitiated
condition, it begets diseases which are due to the de-
rangement of the blood, ii.

There is not a single Sird (ve.ssel) in the body
which carries either the Vdyu, or the Pitta or the
Kapha alone. Hence each of the vcs.sels should be
regarded as affording an opportunity for conveying all
kinds of the Doshas of the body, for as soon as they arc
deranged and aggravated they seem to flow thiough all
the -Siras promiscuously, Hence they are called Sarva*
vahah. 12.

Specific coiours of the ^ir^s;~Thc

vessels which carry the bodily V^yu, (nerves) have a
vermilion (yellowish red) hue and seem to be stuffed
with Viyu. The Pitta<arrying vessels (veins) are
coloured blue and felt warm to the touch. The Kapha-
carrying vessels are hard, cold to the touch and white-
coloured; The blood-carrying vessels (arteries) arc red
and neither too hot, nor too cold. 13.

Now we shall describe ; the . ^irds (veins) which a
surgeon should not pipree or open, inasmuch as. it.may
result in death, or bodily deformity. An intelligent
sui^on shall always bear in mind that sixteen out of
the four hundred vessels in the extremeties, thirty-two
out of the hundred and thirty-six vessels in the trunk
and fifty out of the sixty-four vessels in the region above
rile clavicles, should not be opened or bled . on any
account. M-i^-

Of the one hundred vessels in a single leg, : the one
J4ladhard (which is attached to the connective tissue

Chap. VII.]

SARI&A STttANAM,

m

of the Kurchcha-Sirah) as NVell as thp three internal
ones, of which two sire known as the Urvi-veins and th^
other as the LohitAksha, together with the correspond-
ing' ones in the other leg and in the two hands, thus
making sixteen in all, which are situated in the upper
and lower extremeties, should be held unfit for opening.
Of the thirty-two veins in the pelvic region (Sroni), eight
such, known as the four)Vitapas (two on each side of the
testicles) and the four known as the Katika-tarun as (two
on each side) should be considered unfit for bleeding or
opening. Of the sixteen veins (eight on each side) at the
sides, the one which courses upward from each of the two
sides and is attached to the Marina known as the Pairsva-
Sandhi, should be considered unfit for similar purposes.
Of the twenty-four Siras which arc found in either side
of the spinal column, an incision should not be made
into any of the two Sirds (on each side) known as
the Vrihati and which run upward along either side
of it (spinal column). Similarly of the twenty-four Sirds
in the abdomen, the two along each of the two sides of
symphis pubis should be held unfit for opening or
bleeding. Of the forty veins in the chest, the two in the
heart, two in the root of each breast and two in each
of the wStana-rohita (muscle of the breast) and one in
each of the Apastambhas and Apalapas, making fourteen
in all, should not be opened. Thui^ thirty-two. Sirds In
the regions of the back (i. c., the sides and the pelvic
regions), the abdomen and the chest should be regarded
as unfit for opening or other surgical purposes, \ i6 — 2K
There are one hundred and sixty-four SirAs in the
region above the clavicles. Of these the eight and four
(making twelve and respectively known as the eight
Mdtrikds, the two NilAs and the two Manyas) out
of the fifty-six in the neck and the throat, should be

106 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. tG^p. V t.

regarded as uhfit for opening. Similarly the two veins
in tfhe t#o KrikdtikAs and two in the two Vidhuras,
should be held unfit for similar purposes ; thus making
sixteen in all in the neck. Of the sixteen vessels (eight
on each side) of the Hanus (Jaws), the two S'irds about
each of the joint of the jaw-bones should never be
opened. 22.

Of the thirty-six* vessels in the tongucj sixteen are
shURted *in the under-surface of that organ and twenty
in the upper surface ; of these the two speech-carrying
and the two taste-carrying ones should be held unfit for
venesection. Of the twenty-four vessels in the nose,
the four adjacent to the nose proper and the one running
into the soft palate should be held unfit for similar
purposes. Of the thirty-eight vessels in the two eyes,
the one situated at each Apdnga should not be
Opened. Of the ten vessels in the two ears, the sound-
cRriying one in either ear should not be opened. Of
the sixty vessels of the nose and eyes coursing
through the region of the forehead, the four vessels
adjacent to the sculp proper and the Avarta-Marma
should be held unfit for opening or bleeding. One
vessel (SirA) in each of the two Avartas and the one in
the Sthapani-marma should not be opened (on any
account). Of the ten vessels in the temple, the one
about each temple-joint should be held unfitfor opening
or bleeding. Of the twelve vessels in the head, the one

MUits that there are eight each of the Viyu-carrying, Pitta-
cartyioSi Kapfaa-ciuhrying and blood-carrying S'iris in the region of the
neCk, thiu nUUItig a total of 3a in place of 36 of the text.

He alio boMi that there are 38 in place of 36 SlrUi in the tongue,
16 in place of 34 in the nose, 34 in place of 38 in the eyea, 16 in place of
10 in the ears and 8 in place of 10 in the temple. In the counting of the
S'irit situate in the other parts of the body, be, however, does not differ
from the text.

Chap. Vlt] SARlRA STHANAM,

in each of the two Utkshepa-Marmas, one in each of the
(five) Simanta-Marmas and one in the Adhipati-Marma,
should be held unfit for the purpose. No incision or
opening should be made into any of these fifty vessels
situated in the region above the clavicles. 2 3-3 1.

Memorable verses As the stem and leaves
etc., of a lotus plant, originated from its bulb, spread
over the whole surface of a pool or tank (lit : water),
so the vessels emanating from the umbilicus of a man
spread over his whole organism. 32.

Thus ends the seventh Chapter ot the S'arira Slhanam in the
Sus ruta Sambii^ which treats of the description and classification of
S'irds (vessels).

CHAPTER VIII.

Now we shall discourse on the SAriram which treats
of the method of Venesection etc. (^irst-Vyadha-
Vldhl-^sTriram). r

Persons unfit for Vcncsccti.on The

vessel or vessels (Sird) of an infant, an old man, a per-
ched man, one fatigued and emaciated with endocarditis
(Kshata-kshina), a person of timid or coward disposition,
a person used up with excessive drinking or sexual
enjoyments or tired with the troubles of long journey,
an intoxicated person, a patient who has been treated
with purgatives, emetics or with Anubj4sana and
Asthdpana measures (enemas), a man who has passed
a sleepless night, an impotent (Kliva) or emaciated person,
an enceinte, or one afHicted with cough, asthma, high
fever, phthisis convulsions, paralysis, thirst, epilepsy,
or effects of fasting, should not be pierced or opened.
Incisions should not be made into those veins (Sirds)
which are not fit for opening, or into the fit ones, if
invisible ; it should be the same with those which cannot
be properly ligatured or even if ligatured cannot be
raised up. 2,

Diseases which are amenable to acts of venesection
have been described before (^nita-Varnaniya-Adhyiya).
Venesection may be performed in the said diseases as
well as in those which have not been enumerated in
connection with them and also in other cases whether
suppurated or unsuppurated, if such a proceeding is
deemed necessary and after the application of Sneha and
Sveda. Venesection should be made even in the cases
declared unfit for it (such as in an infant etc.) in cases of

Chap. VIII.]

SARIRA STHANAM.

199

blood-poisoning (such as snake-bite etc.) and in fatal
diseases (Vidradhi etc.). 3-4.

Prelimiriary rules : —The patient should be
duly fomented [Sveda) and anointed (Sneha) with oily
preparations. A liquid* food or diet consisting o^articles
which are antidotal to the bodily principles (Doshas)
which engendered the disease or Yavagu (gruel) should
be given to^him at first. Then at the proper season (i.e.,
not in the rainy or winter season etc.) the patient should
be brought near the surgeon and made to sit or lie down
and the part to be incised upon should be bound, neither
too loosely {eg , in the extremities etc.) nor too tightly
(^.^.,in the head etc.), with any of the accessories, such as
cloth, linen, skin, the inner fibres of a bark, creepers etc,,
so as not to create any pain or agitation in his mind.
Then the vein should be duly opened with proper instru-
ment (and with a careful regard to the situation of any
local Marma). 5

Metrical text Venesection should not be
performed in an extremely cold or hot, cloudy or windy
day. It is forbidden to open a vein without necessity
or in a healthy person, or in a disease in which such as a
proceeding is absolutely prohibited. 6.

The Yantra-Vidhi :-The patient whose
vein is to be operated upon should be seated on a stool
to the height of an Aratni (distance of the elbow from
the tip of the small finger) with his face turned towards
the sun. He should keep his legs in a drawn up or
contracted posture resting his elbows (Kurpara) on^his
kneerjoints and the hands with his two thumbs closed
in his fists placed on (the upper ends of; his Manyis
(sterno mastoid muscles), Then having cast the binding

* A liquid food is rcconvmendcd for the purpose of liquefj^itig the
blood so as la bhed easily* .. .

200 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. Vlli.

linen on the two dosed fists thus placed on the neck, the
surgeon should ask another man from the back side of
the patient to take hold of the two ends of the cloth
with his left hand having the palm turned upward, and
then ask him to tie up with his right hand tfie handle
round the part, neither too diffusely nor too tightly nor
too loosely, so as to raise the vein and to press the
bandage round the back for a good ,out-flow of
blood. Then he (surgeon) should perform the operation
in the desired spot, the patient having been previously
asked to sit with his mouth full of air (rV., he should
confine his breathing till the surgical operation is com-
pleted). This proceeding should be adopted in opening
any vein of the head, save those which are situated in the
cavity of the mouth. 7.

In the case of opening a vein (Sird) in the leg, the
affected leg should be placed on a level ground, while
the other leg should be held in a somewhat contracted
posture, at a little higher place. The affected leg should
be bound with a piece of linen below its knee-joint
and pressed with the hands down to the ankle. A liga-
ture of the above kind should then be tied four fingers
above the region to be incised upon, after which the
vein should be opened. 8.

In the case of opening a vein (^ird) in the arms,
the patient should be caused to sit easily and fixedly
with his two thumbs closed in his fists (as above).
A ligature ol the above-mentioned kind (rope etc.,)
shpuld be tied (four fingeijs above the part to be incised
upon and the vein opened in the aforesaid manner.
The knee-joint and the elbow should be held in a
contriR:ted or drawn up posture at the time of opening
a vein in a case of Gridhrasi (Sciatica) and Visfvachi,
respectively. The patient should hold his back raised

Chap. VUI.J SARIRA STlIAKAMi 201

up and expanded and his head (and shoulders) bent down
at the time of opening a vein in the back, shoulders and
the Sroni (hips). He should hold his head thrust back
and his chest and body expanded at the time of open-
ing a vein in the chest or in the abdomen. 9-12.

He shall embrace his own body with his arms at the
time of opening a vein in his sides. The penis should
be drawn downward in an flaccid state.) on a

similar occasion in that region. The tongue should be
raised up to the roof of the mouth and its fore*part
supported by the teeth at the time of opening a vein in
its under-surface. The patient should be told to keep his
mouth fully open at the time of opening a vein in the
gums or in the palate. Similarly a Surgeon should devise
proper and adequate means for the purpose of raising
up (distinct appearance of) a SirA (vein) and determine
the nature of the bandage to be used therein according
to the exigencies (/>., the health and the kind of diseases
of the patient), of each case. 13-17.

An incision to the depth of a barley-corn should be
made with a Vrihimukha instrument (Into a vein
situated) in the muscular parts of ,the body, whereas the
instrument should be thrust only half that depth or to
the depth of a Vrihi seed in other places (Vrihi here
signifies S* ukadhdnya as well as Rakta-s'Ali\ An inci-
sion over a bone should be made with the Kuthdriki
(small surgical axe) to the half depth of a barley-
corn. 18-19.

Memorable Verses An opening should
be effected in such a day in the rainy season as would
be devoid of the I'umblings of a thunder-cloudy during
the cold («>., in the fourth) part of the day in summer,
and at noon in the winter season (Hemanta). These
are the only three times of opening a vein. A well

26

20i

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHItA, [Chap. VIlI.

and successfully pierced vein bleeds in streams (almost
simultaneously with the thrusting of the knife) and
spontaneously stops after a Muhurta (a little while). The
vitiated blood is seen first to flow out of an opened
vein, like the drop of yellow pigment first coftiing out of
a Kusumbha flower. Blood does not flow out from an in-
cision made into a vein of an unconscious (Murchchhita),
much frightened, or a thirsty patient. An incision of a
vein without proper bandaging and raising up is attend-
ed with a similar result. 20-23.

A weak person, or one affected with the unusual
derangement of the bodily Doshas etc., or one fainted
(under operation), should not be subjected to a measure
of continuous blood-letting at a time ; instead of that,
the vein should be opened afresh in the same afternoon
or on the following day, or on the third day (as the exi-
gency requires). An intelligent surgeon should not
allow the flow of blood to an excess but should stop
the flow even with a remnant of the diseased blood in
the system and admuiister soothing internal remedies
(Samsamana) for the purification of the diseased rem-
nant. Bleeding to the quantity of a Prastha* measure
should be deemed sufficient for a strong and adult patient,
stuffed with a large quantity of the deranged Doshas (in
the body). 24-26,

The vein should be incised with a Vrihimukha instru-
ment at a distance of two fingers above the seat
of the Kshipra-marma in such diseases as Pddaddha,
PAda-harsha, Ava-vAhuka, Chippa, Visarpa, VAta-rakta,
VAta-kantaka, VicharchikA, PAdadAri etc. The mode
of opening a vein in the case of ^lipada (Elephantiasis)

* Id medicinal preparations, a Prastha measure is understood to be
four seers in the case of liquids, but in cases of excreta due to emetic and
purgative measures and of blood-lotting, a Prastha is meant to be
thirteen Palas and a half only.

[Chap. VIII.

SARIRA STHANAM.

203

would be described under the treatment of that disease.
In V^ta-rogas, such as Kroshtuka-s’irah (Synovites),
maimedness (Pangu) and lameness (Khanja), the Su4
(vein) of the Jangh^i (lower leg-calf), four fingers above
the Gulpha, should be openech In cases of Apachi
(scrofula), the vein should be opened simultaneously with
the appearance of the disease two fingers below the
Indravasti-njarma. In a case of Gridhrasi (sciatica),
the vein should be opened four fingers above or below
the JAnu (knee-joint). In a case of goitre, the veins
attached to the roots of the Uru (thighs) should be
opened. The instructions regarding the opening of a
vein in one leg shall hold good in the case of that in
the other, as well as in cases of those situated in the
two upper extremities (hands), but the speciality is that
in a case of enlarged spleen, the vein near the Kurpara-
sandhi (elbow-joint) of the left hand or that inside the
fourth and the fifth fingers should be opened. Similarly
in a case of Yakridd 41 yodara or Kaphodara, the corres-
ponding vein in the right hand should be opened.
Several authorities advise the opening of the same vein
in cases of cough and asthma* due to the action of the
deranged Kapha. 27-3$.

In a case of Vis'vachi, the same argument holds good
(four fingers above or below the Kurpara-sandhi) as in
a case of Gridhrasi. In a case of' PravAhikd (diarrhoea)
attended with ^ula (colic), the vein within two fingers
width around of the Pelvis (^roni) should be opened .
The vein of the penis should be opened in a case ©f
Parikartik 4 (D.R.-Parivartlkd), Upadans'a, S’uka-dosha
and seminal disprders, The vein on either side of

* G«yi boldi that in cases of asthma and cough venesection should
be had recouise to only when they are in a mild form.

204 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. Chap. VIII.]

the scrotum should be opened in a case of hydrocele
(Mutra-Vriddhi). 36-39.

The vein four fingers below the navel and on the
left side of the Sevan! (suture) should be opened in a
case of Dakodara (ascites). In a case *of internal
abscess and colic in the sides (Pleurodynia), the vein in
the region between the breast and the left armpit
should be opened. Several authorities assert that in a
case of AvavAhuka and VAhus'osha (atrophy'of the hand),
the vein between the Amsas (shoulders) should be
opened. In a case of Tritiyaka (Tertian) fever, the vein
inside the Trika-Sandhi should be opened. In a case
of Ckaturt/iaka fever, a vein joined with either side of
and below the shoulder-joint should be opened. In a
*■ case of Apasmdra, the middle vein adjacent to the joint
of the jaw-bones (Hanu-Sandhi) should be opened. In
a case of insanity and hysteria* (Apasmira), the vein
between the temple and the edge of the sculp or those
in the ApAnga (tips of the eyes), the forehead or the
chest should be opened. In cases of the diseases of the
tongue and the teeth, the veins on the under-surface
(Adho-JihvA) of the tongue should be opened. In
the case of a disease of the palate, the local vein should
be opened. In diseases of the ears and specially in
a case of inflammatory ear-ache (Karna-l^ula), the vein
along the region above the ears should be opened. In
diseases of the nose and specially in a case of the loss
of the smelling faculty, the vein at the tip of the nose
should be opened. In cases of eye-diseases, such as

* DAlUna, however, differs here from the text. He says, on the
authority of V^gbhata, that the opening of a vein between the temple and
ihe edge of the sculp or those in the Ap^nga, the forehead and the chest
should he recommended in cases of insanity only, and not in the case of
pf Apasm^ra as veil (as in the text),

Chap. VIII.]

SARIRA STHANAM.

205

Timira (blindness), Akshipika (ophthalmia) etc., as well
as in diseases of the head and in Adhimantha, the veins
about the nose, the forehead and the Apdnga (the
outer canthus of the eyes), should be opened. 40-51.

Defective Venesection : — Now we shall
describe the twenty kinds of defects relating to an
opened vein (Dushta-vyadhana). They are as follows : —
Durviddhd, .Atividdhd, Kunchit4, PichchitA, Kuttita,
Aprasrutd, AtyudirnA, Ante-abhihatd, Paris'ushkd,
Kunitd, Vepitd, Anutthita-viddhd, SastrahatA, Tiryag-
viddhi, Apaviddhd, AvyAdhyd, Vidrutd, Dhenukd,
Punhpunarviddhd and Marmaviddh^, i.e., incised about
the SirA-marma, the Sndyu-marma, the Asthi-marma
and the Sandhi-marma. 52-53.

Their definitions : — The vein in which an
act of venesection is unattended with a satisfactory
outflow of blood owing to its being incised with an
extremely slender instrument and is marked by an
extremely painful swelling in consequence thereof, is
called Durviddhei (badly incised). The vein in which
the incision becomes excessive and no blood comes out
properly or enters an internal channel owing to the
largeness of the incision, is called Atividdhlf (over-in-
cised). An opened vein in which the incision has been
made in a curving manner and is j^ttended with the fore-
going results, is called Eunohittf (crooked or contracted).
An incised vein presenting a flattened or thrashed ap-
pearance on account of its being opened with a blunt
knife ^Kantha-^astra) is called Pichohitsf (thrashed).
The vein at the sides of which incisions have been
successively madq, instead of in its body, is called
Knttitl^ (lacerated). An incised vein, unattended with
any bleeding owing to the patient’s fright, coldness or
loss of consciousness, is called Aprasrntlt (unbleeding).

2o6

THE SUSHRUTA SAMIIITA.

[Chap. VIII.

A vein with a large incision in its body made with
a sharp and flat-edged instrument, is called Atyudirn^
(improperly wide-incised). An opened vein in which
blood oozes out in small quantity is called Ante-
abhihatsi (struck in the interior). An opened vein
in an anaemic patient (marked by a total absence
of bleeding and) stuffed with Vayu (lit, as if the
flow has been dried up by the Vdyu), is called
PariBasbkd (dried up). A vein opened but to a quarter
part of the proper length and attended with a scanty
outflow of blood, is called Kanitsi (partially incised). A
vein which trembles owing to its being bandaged at a
wrong place and from which blood does not flow out
in consequence, is called Vepitsi (quivering). A vein
incised without being previously properly rai.sed up and
attended with a similar re.sult (i e., absence of blood), is
called Anutthita-viddhi. A vein cut into two and
attended with excessive bleeding and inoperativeness
of the organ is called ^astrabat^ (knife-cut). A vein
incised with an instrument applied slantingly and
(consequently) not fully opened, is called Tiryag-viddbti
(obliquely incised). A vein incised several times
and (every time) with an improper instrument, is called
Apaviddhst (wrongly incised). A vein unfit for opening
(/>., whose opening has been forbidden in the ^lstras\
is called Avys(dhys( (unfit for opening). A vein opened
carelessly and hastily is called Vidrutrf (erratic). A
vein bleeding continuously owing to its being repeatedly
pressed and successively opened, is called Dhenukl^.
A vein variously cut owing to its being pierced into
the same part with an extremely slender-pointed instru-
ment, is called Panah-punarvidabit (repeatedly incised).
If a vein in the Sndyu-ftiarmas, the Asthi-marmas, the
^irA-marmaii or the Sandhi-marmas be opened, it is

Chap. VIII.3

SARIRA STHANAM,

207

called Marma-viddhat and in such cases severe pain,
emaciation (Sosha) deformity or (even) death may be
the result. 54.

Memorable Verses : —Practice (even) docs
not give the necessary skill in surgical operation of the
veins etc., as they are naturally unsteady and changing
like fishes. Hence a vein should be opened with the
greatest carc^ An opening into the body, made by an
ignorant and unskilful surgeon, is attended with the
aforesaid dangers and many other distressing symptoms.
An act of venesection, properly performed, gives more
speedy relief than that derived from the application of
medicated oil &c , or of plaster as well. Venesection
(bleeding) properly performed is half of the treatment
described in surgery like the application of Vasti-
karmas (enematic measures) in therapeutics. 55.

A man medically anointed (Sneha-karma), diapho-
rised (Sveda\ vomited (Vamana), purged (Virechana),
or treated with both the Vasti-karmas (Anuvdsana and
Asthdpana) or bled shall forego anger, physical labour,
sexual intercourse, sleep in the day time, excessive
talking, physical exercises, riding or driving etc., sitting
on his haunches, frequent ramblings, exposure to cold,
winds and the sun, hardly digestible, uncongenial and
incompatible food until the strength is perfectly restored
or, according to some authorities, for a month. These
subjects will be fully dealt with later on Aturopa-
drava-chikits^, ch. — 39). 56.

Memorable Verses The vitiated blood
incarcerated in any part of the body should be abstract-
ed therefrom by scarifying it, by cupping it with a
Sira (pipe), a horn, a gourd, or leeches, or by the opening
of a vein respectively, according to the density of the
blood, (Others assert that) leeches should be applied in

208 the SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. tchap. VlH.

the case of the (vitiated) blood being confined deep
into the body, scarification with a surgical instrument
should be made in the case of clotted blood, with a pipe
in the case of extensive vitiation of the blood through-
out the body and with a horn or a gourd in the
case of the deranged blood having been seated in the
skin. 57-58.

Thus ends ihe eighth Chapter of the S'irira Sthdnam in the Sus'ruta
Samhiti which treats of venesection.

chapter IX.

* /

Now we shall discourse on the SAriram which treats
of the description of the arteries, nerves and ducts, etc.*

(Dhamani-Vystkarana-^strlram). i.

There a^e twenty-four Dhamanies (ducts) in all, and
all of them have their origins in the naval region
(which includes the whole abdominal regioni-). Several
authorities assert that no arbitrary distinctions should
be made among the Siras (veins), Dhamanis (arteries),
and the Srotas, (channels), since Dhamanis and Srotas
are but different modifications of one original kind
of Sird (vessels). But this opinion is not a sound one
inasmuch as they have got different natures, origins
and functions and as being described so in the Ayurveda.
But owing to their adjacent positions, the existence
of several authoritative dicta (Apta-vdk) regarding the
oneness of their character, similarity of their functions,
and the minute nature of their shape, they appear to
be homologous in their action, even amidst the real
diversities in their work and office. 2.

Of the twenty-four Dhamanis, which (originally)
have their roots in the naval region (Ndbhi), ten
have upward course, ten have flownward course, and
four flow laterally or transversely. 3.

Functions of the up-coursing Dha-

manis: — The ten up-coursing Dhamanis (nerved)

^ Sans. Dhatna — to be filled with air, so called from the fact
of their being distend^ with air after death.

t So far, as in fcetal life, allantoic arteries and the unbilical veins
sobserve the purposes of nutrition, excretion, etc., and reflects the rudi-
mentary vascular system.

27

210

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA,

[Chap. IX.

perform such specific functions of the body, as sound,
touch, taste, sight, smell, inspiration, sighing, yawning,
^sneezing, laughter, speech, and weeping, etc., and tend to
maintain the integrity of the body. These Dhamani^,
reaching the heart, respectively ramify themlelvcs into
three branches, thus making thirty (ramifications in all).
Ten of these serve the follow ng purposes, viz , two serve
as the channels of the bodily V^yu, two of the Pitta,
two of the Kapha, two of the blood, and two of the
Rasa (lymph chyle). Eight of the remaining ones
(twenty), serve the following functions, viz.^ two of them
cany sound, two sight or colour, two smell, and two
taste. Moreover a man speaks with the help of another
two, makes sound with the help of another couple,
sleeps through the instrumentality of another pair
(couple), and wakes up with the help of another couple.
Two of the Dhamanis (ducts) carry the fluid of lachry-
mation, two of them (ducts), attached to the breasts
of a woman, carry milk of her breasts, which, coursing
through the breast of a man, convey his seminal fluid.
Thus we have described the thirty Dhamanis with
their ramifications. These sustain and maintain the
integrity (of the limbs and members of the body) above
the (line of) umbilicus, such as the Udara, the sides,
the back, the chest, the neck, the shoulders and the
arms. 4.

Memorable Verse The up-coursing Uhama-
nis duly perform the offices stated above. Now I
shall describe the specific functions, etc., {Le,, nature,
office, and situations, etc.,) of the down-coursing ones. 5.

Functions of the down -coursing

Dhamanis S — The down-coursing Dhamanis res-
pectively form the channels for the downward conveyance
of Viyu (flatus), urine, stool, semen, and catamenial

Chap. IX.]

SARIRA STHANAM.

2II

fluid, etc. These Dhamanis reaching down into the
PittAsaya (receptacle of the Pitta) separate the serum
prepared out of the food and drink through the agency
of the local heat (and pitta\ and carry it to the remotest
parts of the organism maintaining their healthy
moisture, supplying them with the necessary principles
of nutrition and (ultimately) conveying them to the up-
coursing and lateral Dhamanis, in order to be conveyed
to the parts traversed by them respectively. Thus they
indirectly serve to supply the heart with its quota of
healthy Rasa (serus fluid), if not in a direct way. Moreover
they tend to separate the effetematter (urine, stool and
sweat) from the fully transformed lymph-chyle in the
abdomen, the stomach and the small intestines (Amdsaya
and Pakvdsaya). Each of the down-coursing Dhamanis
is found to ramify into three branches at a place midway
between the Amdsaya (stomach) and the Pakvdsaya
(intestines). Thus they number thirty in all. The
functions of the ten out of these (thirty vessels) are as
follows, viz., two serve to carry Vdyu, two Pitta, two
Kapha, two blood, and two Rasa (lymph-chyle). Tw^o of
these Dhamanis, running into the intestines, carry the
food, another two carry the Toya* (watery) part, another
two, running into the bladder, serve to carry out the
urine (from the bladder), another two carry the semen,
and another two serve as the channels of transmission
and emission of the same fluid and serve to carry the
ovarian discharge in women. The two Dhamanis, attached
to the large intestine (Sthuldntra), serve as the channefs
of faecal matter, while the remaining eight convey
perspiration to the lateral-coursing Dhamanis. Thus we
have finished describing these thirty Dhamanis with
their ramifications. These sustain and maintain the
♦ This watery part reaching the bladder is Han^forn(ied into uri^e^

212

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. IX.

integrity of the parts of the body below the naval
region, such as the Fakvis'aya (Intestine), the waist, the
organic principles of stool and urine,, the organs of
generation; the anus, the bladder, and the lower limbs of
the body (Sakthi) (according to their utility in the
physical economy of the organism). 6.

Memorable Verse These down-coursing
Dhamanis perform the afore-said functions. Now I
shall describe the specific functions nature, office,
and situations, etc.,) of the lateral-coursing Dhamanis. 7.

Functions of the lateral-coursing
Dhamanis: — The four lateral-coursing Dhamanis,
gradually ramifying themselves into hundreds and
thousands of branches, simply baffle counting. The
net-work of these Dhamanis spreads over the whole
oi^nism and maintain its integrity. Their exterior
orifices are attached to the roots of hairs (pores of the
skin) through which they convey the perspiration and
the Rasa (serum), thus supplying the body, both inter-
nally and externally, with the soothing nutritions
(moisture of healthy lymph-chyle). The effects and
potencies of the articles of anointment, sprinkling,
immersion, and plasters, enter through these orifices
into the internal organism through the agency of the
heat in the skin, and sensations of a pleasant or
painful contact are experienced through their instru-
mentality. Thus we have finished describing the four
lateral-coursing Dhamanis with their ramifications
tlyoughout the whole oi^anism. 8.

Memorable Verses The Dhamanis have
got pores in their sides through which they carry
the Rasa (lymph-chyle) throughout the organism, like
the filaments and fibres of water-lily and lotus. The.'e
Phamanis furnish the self-consqious Ego, confined in

Chap. IK.]

SARIRA STHANAM.

213

the material body, which is the resultant of the combi-
nation of the five material elements, with a distinct
sensation# peculiar to each of the five sense-organsf
and break up the combination (of the five material
elements) at?the time of death. 9 — 10.

Now we shall describe the symptoms produced by a
Srota (duct or channel) pierced at its root or starting
point. The ducts or channels respectively conveying
the life, the food, the water, (the organic principle of)
the Rasa (serum), the blood, the muscles, the fat,
the urine, the stool, the semen, and the cata-
menial blood, naturally fall within the scope of
Surgery (Salya-tantra). Several authorities assert that
the Srotas (vessels) are innumerable and perform
different functions in their different aspects.

The two Srotas (channels) of Prstaa (bronchi) have
their roots in the heart and the Rasa-carrying Dhama-
nis (pulmonary arteries). An injury to any of these
Srotas (vessels) produces groaning, bending down of
the body, loss of consciousness (Moha), illusion, and
shivering, or may ultimately prove fatal. The food-
carrying Srotas (i^isophagus) have their roots in the
Amdsaya (stomach) and in the food-carrying Dhamanis
(intestines). An injury to or piercing of such a duct
(Srota), gives rise to tympanites, colic pain, aversion to
food, vomiting, thirst, blindness cjr darkness of vision, or
may even end in death. There are two water-carrying
(Udaka-vaha) ducts or channels which have their roots
in the palate and the Kloma, and a piei cing of arjy

* Hearing, touch, smell, taste, and sight.

t Eyes, ears, nose, longue and skin.

t But this science does not take any cognisance of them, since the
pain incidental to a piercing of, or an injury to, any of these extremely
^hnnnels^ must be slight in its charieter.

214

THE SUSHRtJTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. IX.

of these makes the patient thirsty and ends in his instan-
taneous death {i. e , within seven days). The sernm-
carrying (Rasa-vaha) ducts are two in number and
have their roots in (the viscus of) the heart and the
serum-carrying Dhamanis (vessels). An injury to or
piercing of any of these ducts gives rise to ^osha (con-
sumption) and symptoms identical with those developed
by a hurt to the Prdna-vaha channels gf the body,
ending in death. The blood-carrying Srotas (channels)
are two in number and have their roots in the spleen and
the liver, and the blood-carrying Dhamanis (capillaries
in general). An injury to any of these channels is
attended with pallor, bluishness of complexion, fever,
burning sensations, excessive haemorrhage, and redness
of the eyes. The two mu sole-carrying Srotas (ducts or
channels) have their roots in the (SnAyu), nerves
Tvak (serum), and the blood-carrying Dhamanis
(capillaries). An injury to any of these channels is
characterised by swelling, loss or atrophy of the muscles,
appearance of varicose veins or may (ultimately) resu't
in death. The fat-carrying Srotas (ducts) are two in
number and have their roots in the region of the Kati
(waist) and the Vrikkas (kidneys). An injury to any
of these bring in (a copious flow of) perspiration, oily
gloss of the skin, parched condition of the palate,
extensive swelling (of the affected locality) and thirst.
The two urine-carrying Srotas (channels) have their
roots in the bladder and the penis (urethra). An injury
tck any of these is marked by constipation or epistaxis
in the bladder, retention of urine, and numbness of the
genitals. The two stool-carrying Srotas (ducts) have
their roots in the Guda (anus) and the Pakvd^aya
(intestines) ; an injury to any of these is characterised
by complete retention of stool (in the bowels), acconx-

Ch>p. IX.]

SARIRA STHANAM.

2IS

panied by a distention of the abdomen, foul smell and
intussusception of the intestine (as in a case of ententes).
The two semen-carrying Srotas (ducts) have their
roots in the breasts and the testes. An injury to any
of them leafis to loss of manhood, delayed emission
of semen, or blood-streaked character of that
fluid. The two Artava- carrying Srotas (ducts) have
their roots in the uterus as well as in the Dhamanis

* t

which carry the Artava (ovarian product). An injury
to any of these brings on sterility, suppression of
the menses and incapacity for copulation. A cutting
to the Sevani (median raphe of the perineum) exhibits
symptoms identical with those of a case of injured
bladder or anus, described before. A physician may
take in hand the medical treatment of a case of a Srota
which has been pierced, but he shall not necessarily
entertain any hope of ultimate success. (But time
works wonders, and such a case may sometimes end in
recovery). A case of pierced duct, from which the
dart (Salya, or the like piercing matter) has been
extricated, may be medically treated (without holding
out any prospect of recovery to the friends of the
patient), according to the direction laid down under
the head of ulcer ^Vrana). I1--12.

Metrical Text : — The ducts emanating from the
cavity of the heart, other than the ^irds(veins), Dhamanis
(arteries), and found to course through the whole body,
are called Srotas (lit. channels or currents). 13.

Thu ends the ninth Chapter of the S'^rira Sthanam in the
Sus'ruta Samhiti which treats of the descriptions of the arteries,
c nets and nerves#

CHAPTER X.

Now we shall discourse on the Siriram which treats
of the nursing and management, etc., of pregnant
women from the day of conception till parturition

(Garbhini-VysCkarana-^sCriram). i.

General Rules : — An enciente, from the first
day of conception, should always cherish a clear joy-
ful spirit in a clean body. She should wear clean and
white garments, or<i aments, &c., engage herself in the
doing of peace-giving and benedictory rites and live in
devotion to the gods, the Brahmins and her elders and
superiors. She should not touch nor come into contact
with unclean, deformed or maimed persons, and should
forego the use of. fetid smelling things, avoid dreadful
sights and painful or agitating sounds and the use of
dry, stale and dirty food as well as that prepared
overnight. Long and distant walks from home, resorts
to cremation-grounds or to a solitary retreat, or to a
Chaitya*, and sitting under the -shadow of a tree should
be absolutely forbidden (to her during the period of
gestation). Indulgence in anger, fright or other agita-
ting emotions of the mind should be deemed injurious.
To carry a heavy load, to talk in a loud voice and
all other things which might occasion injury to the
foetus, (sexual intercourse, &c,) should be refrained from.
The practice of constant anointment and the cleansing
of the body, &c., (with Amalaki, Haridrd, etc. —lit. cos-
metics) should be given up. All fatiguing exercises
should be discontinued and the rules laid down for the

* Cbsttya^-'is a haunted or diefied tree, or according to others a
Budhiitic monastery.

Chap. X. ] S ARIR A STH AJ^ AM . 2 1 7

guidance of a woman in her menses should be strfctly
adhered to. The couch and the bed of a pregnant
woman should be low, soft and guarded on all sides by
a number soft pillows or cushions. The food should
be amply sweet, palatable (Hridya)* well-cooked, pre-
pared with appetising drugs and abounding in fluid
substances. These rules should be followed up till
delivery, a.

Special regimen during^ the period
of Gestation : —During the first three months of
pregnancy an enclente should partake of food abound-
ing in sweet, cool and fluid articles. Several medical
authorities recommend a food made of Shashtika rice
with milk, to be given to her specially in the third
month of gestation, with curd in the fourth, with milk
in the fifth and with clarified butter in the sixth
month of pregnancy. Food largely composed of
milk and butter, as well as relishing (Hridya) food
with the soup of the flesh 6f jdngala (wild) animals
should be given to her in the fourth, food with milk
and clarified butter in the fifth, adequate quantity
of clarified butter prepared with (the decoction of)
^vadamshtrd, or gruel (Yav%u) in the sixth ; and clarified
butter prepared with (the decoction of) the Prithak-
parnyddi group in adequate quantities in the seventh
month of gestation. These help Ihe fcetal development.
For the purpose of restoring the Vdyu of her body
(nervous system) to the normal course and condition and
for the cleansing of the bowels, the enciente should Be
given an Asthdpana (enema), composed of a decoc-
tion of Vadara mixed with Vald, Ativald, ^atapushpd,
Palala (flesh), milk, cream of curd, oil, Saindhava salt,

• Hridya^ here means the diet in which there is an abundance of
0)o-producing (albuminous) properties.

2i8

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. X.

Madana fruit, honey and clarified butter. After that
she should have an AnuvAsana (enema) made up of
oil prepared with milk and decoction of the drugs
known as the Madhuradi-gana. This restores the VAyu
to its normal course and condition, which brings on
an easy and natural parturition unattended with any
puerperal disorders. Henceforth up to the time of
delivery the enciente should have liquid food (Yavagu)
made up of emollient substances (fats; and soup of the
flesh of Jdngala animals (deer, etc.). If treated on these
lines the enciente remains healthy and strong, and
parturition becomes easy and unattended with evils.
An enciente should be made to enter the lying-in
chamber in the ninth month of her pregnancy and
under the auspices of happy stars and propitious
lunar conditions. The chamber of confinement (Sutikd-
griha) in respect of a Brihmin, Kshatriya, Vaisya and
Sudra mother should be raised on grounds respectively
possessed of white, red, ‘yellow and black soils, and
made of Vilva, Vata, Tinduka and Bhallataka wood.
Couches should be made of these woods respectively
in cases of the dififerent social orders. The walls of
the room should be well-plastered and the furniture
(necessary accessories) should be placed tidy in their
proper places. The door of a lying-in chamber should
be made to face the south or the east, and * the inner
dimensions of the room should be eight cubits in length
and four in breadth. Religious rites for warding off
the visitation of evil spirits and malignant stars should
be undertaken at (the door of) the room. 3.

Signs Of Imminent parturition -(M.—

T.) : — A looseness of the sides of the abdomen and
untying of the umbilical cord of the child (from the
cardiac cord of its mother) and a perception of the

ap. X.J

SARlRA StHANAM.

219

characteristic pain at the waist would indicate the
approach of the time of delivery. A constant and
severe pain at the waist and the back, constant (in-
voluntary) motions of the bowels and micturition and
mucous discharge from the vulva arc the symptoms
which are manifest at the time a little before) of
parturition. 4-5.

Preliminary Measures Rites of bene-
diction should be performed for the safety of the
enciente in her travail and she should be made to
pronounce benedictory Mantras surrounded by male
babies on all sides. A fruit with a masculine name
should be given in her hand. Her body should be
anointed with oil and washed with warm water and
she should be made to drink largely a gruel (Yavigu)
made of articles (which exert a beneficial virtue at the
time). Then she should be laid on her back on a soft
and sufficiently spacious bed, her head being placed
on a pillow and her legs slightly flexed and drawn up.
Four elderly ladies with paired finger-nails and skilled
in the art of accouchement and with whom she feels
no delicacy, should attend and nurse her at the time. 6.

Then after having gently lubricated the mouth of
the parturient canal along the natural direction of the
pubic hairs (Anuloma) (so as not to create any discom-
fort in the part) one of them, /(elderly ladies) should
address the enciente as follows : — fortunate damsel,
try to bear down the child, but do not make such an
attempt in the absence of real pain.” On experiencing
an untying of the umbilical cord of the child, the
enciente should gently make such urgings, whenever
^ihe will experience pain in the pelvic, pudendal and
pubic regions and in the region between the neck of
the bladder and the pelvis. Deep urgings should be

22C'

THE StJSHRUTA SAMHltA.

dhap. Jd]

made on the exit of the fcetus out of the uterus,
and after that deeper urgings should be made during
the passage of the child through the canal until
delivery. 7.

An ut^ing (made by the enciente) in Ae absence
of any real pain may lead to deafness, dumbness and
deformity of the jaw-bones of the child or subject
it to attacks of cough, asthma, consumption^, etc., or lead
to the diseases of its head, or to the birth of a haunch-
backed or deformed child. A case of abnormal presenta-
tion (Pratiloma) should be converted into the normal
or cephalic one (Anuloma) by version*. 8-9.

In the case of protracted delivery, e.g.^ an obstruc-
tion of the child at the vagina, — the vagina should be
fumigated with the fumes of the slough (cast-off skin)
of a cobra (snake) or with the. fumes of Pinditaka
(Madana) or the roots of Hiranyapushpi (Kantakdri)
should be tied (round the neck or the waist) or Suvar-
chala {Atasi) or Vis'alyd (PdtaU) should be tied round
the hand (wrist) and leg (ankle) of the parturient
woman. 10.

Post-parturient Measures : —The shreds

or membranes lying on the body of the child should be
removed immediately after its birth and its mouth
should be cleansed with clarified butter and rock-salt.
Then a linen pad soaked in clarified butter}* should be
applied on the head of the new-born baby. Then the
umbilical cord, after having been slightly drawn out,
should be ligatured with one end of a string at a point
eight fingers apart from its navel, the other end

* The verioui fotim of (Pretilome) ebnotmal pteMnUlioni have been
d^ibed tmdet Madha-Gacbba Niddnam (Niddn-Stbdna— Chap. !}(.)
and Uicit iieatment it to be found in ChikiUi-Slhdna— Chap. XV.

t Sirahnadeva tceommende'Vald-Taila instead ofelarlficd butter.

Chap. X.]

SARlRA StllAKAM

221

of the string being tied round its neck ; then the um-
bilical cord should be severed immediately above the
ligature, il.

Natal Rites : — Then having sprayed (the face
of) the bab^ with cold water, the post-natal rites should
be performed unto it. After that the baby should be
made to lick an electuary composed of honey, clarified
butter and the expressed juice of Brdhtni leaves and
Anantd, mixed with (half a Rati weight of) gold dust and
given with the ring-finger of the feeder. Then the body
of the child should be anointed with Vald-taila and
it should be bathed in an infusion of the barks of
Kshiri trees, or in the washings (decoctions) of drugs
known as the Sarvagandha (El Adi group), or in water
in which red-hot gold or silver bar has been immersed,
or in a tepid decoction of Kapittfia leaves, according
to the nature of the season, the preponderance of the
deranged Doshas in its body and according to its physi-
cal conditions. 12.

Diet for the Child— (M.—T.) : — The milk in
the breasts of a newly parturient woman sets in three or
four days after parturition owing to the dilation of the
orifices of the milk ducts (galactoferous ducts). Hence
the baby should be fed thrice daily (morning, noon
and evening) on a handful (child’s own hand) of clarified
butter and honey mixed with ^ Rati weight of) pul-
verized Anantd roots sanctified with Mantras on the
first day ; and on the second and third days the child
should be fed on clarified butter prepared with the
Laksttand (root). On the following (fourth t day the child
should be fed on its handful of honey and clarified
butter only twice (1. e,, in the morning and at noon).
(From the evening of fourth ddy) the mother should
first squeeze off a quantity of her milk and then give

21 ^ THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. tCh.p. X.

the child her breast. (This rule should be observed
at the time of tending the child every day). 13-14.

Treatment of the mother : -The body

6f the mother should be anointed (after parturition)
with the Val^i-Taila and treated < both intirnally and
externally) with a decoction of Viyu-subduing drugs
(such as the Bhadra-Ddrvddi group, etc.). If still there be
any abnormality in the condition of the ^Doshas (the
discharge of vitiated blood i e., lochia), the mother
should be given to drink a luke-warm solution of
treacle mixed with powders of Pippali, Pippali roots,
Hasti-pippali, Chiiraka and S' ringavera, and the medi-
cine should be continued for two or three days or
longer, (if necessary), till the disappearance of the
vitiated blood (lochia). When the discharge gets normal
{i e., on the appearance of healthy lochia), the mother
should be made to take for three days a gruel
(Yavdgu) prepared with the decoction of the drugs
constituting the V iddri-Gandhddi Gana and mixed with
(a good quantity of) clarified butter or a Yavagu prepared
in milk. After that a meal of boiled Sili-rice and a
broth made from the meats of JAngala animals
boiled with barley. Kola and Kulattha pulse, should be
prescribed for her, taking into consideration the
strength and the condition of her appetite (Agni or
digesting power). The mother should observe this
regimen of diet and conduct for one month and a half
fafter deliveiy). After this period she may be at
liberty to choose any food to her liking and revert
to her natural mode of living. According to several
authorities, however, a woman does not regain her
natural temperament of body till the reappearance of
the healthy menstruation (after parturition). 15.

A strong but newly delivered woman, born and

Chap. X.]

SARIRA STHANAM.

223

bred up in a JAiigala country should be given to drink,
for three or five nights, either oil or clarified butter
in an adequate quantity with an after-potion consisting
of the decoction of drugs constituting the group known
as the Pippalyddi Gana. She should be daily anointed
with oil, etc. If, however, of delicate health, she
should be made to take, for three or five nights in
succession, a medicated YavAgu (gruel) as described in
the last para. Thenceforth a diet of demulcent pro-
perties should be prescribed for her and her body
should be regularly washed with a copious quantity
of tepid water. A mother, alter parturition, should
forego (for a considerable time) sexual intercourse,
physical labour and indulgence in irascible emotions^*
etc. 16

Memorable Verses Any disease acquired
by a newly delivered mother (Sutikd) by her injudicious
conduct of life soon lapses into one of a difficult type
(hard to cure) ; and it becomes incurable if it be due to
too much fasting. Hence a wise physician should treat
her with such measures as arc natural and congenial to
her temperament, the time, the place and the nature
of the disease, so that she may not be afflicted with any
evil effect. 17.

A placenta retained in the uterus causes constipa-
tion (Andha) of the bowels aqid distention of the
abdomen (tympanites\ Hence" in such a case her
throat should be tickled with a finger covered with
hair ; or the exterior orifice of the vagina should be
fumigated with the fumes of the cast-off skin of a snake,
Katukay Aldvu, Kritavedhana and mustard seeds mixed
with mustard oik In the alternative, a plaster of Ldngali

* Fifteen kinds of emotions as desprib^d ii^ tbe thirty-ninth chapter of
the Chikilsd-sthdnatn*

224 the SUSHRUTjC SAMHITA. ■ ' CChap. X.

roots should be applied to the palms and soles of her
hands and feet ; or the milky juice of Snuhi tree
should be applied over her scalp ; or a compound made
of pasted Ldngali roots and Kusktha mixed with either
wine or the cow’s urine should be given her for drink.
A Kalka either of S'dli roots or of the drugs con-
stituting the Pippaly&di Gana mixed with wine (Surd)
should be given her for the purpose In nthe alterna-
tive, an Asthdpana (enema) of white mustard seeds
Kushtha (Kuda), Ldngali, and the milky juice of Mahd-
vriksha, mixed with Surd-manda should be prescribed.
(If the above measures fail) an Uttara-Vasti t^terine
douche) prepared with the aforesaid drugs and boiled in
mustard oil should be applied ; or else the placenta
should be removed by' the hand lubricated with an olea-
ginous substance and with the nails clipped off, i8.

Makkalla and its Treatment The

lochia of a newly delivered woman whose organism
has become excessively dry on account of profuse use
of absorbants or deranged by any other causes, — the
lochia being obstructed in its exit by the local Vdyu,—
gives rise to Granthis (nodules) which may appear
below the navel, on the sides of the pelvis about the
region of the bladder or of the pubis. Severe piercing
pain (^ula) is felt about the region of the navel, the
Stomach and the bladder and a sensation of pricking
with needle and cutting pain in the intestines.
At the same time the abdomen becomes distended
liifith the retention of urine. These are the symptoms
of Xakkalla. In such a case, a decoction of the drugs
of thfe Viratkrvddi Gana mixed with a powdered com-
potitld of the Ushakddt Gana should be given her. In the
aUerilative, a potion of carbonate of potash ( Yavakskdra)
dissolved in tepid water or jn clarified bqtter ; of rogk-

Chap. X.] ‘ SARIRA STHANAM. 22 $

,

salt dissolved in the decoction; of the Pippaly&di Gana ;
of a compound made of the powdered drugs of the latter
Gana with Surd-manda ; of the powders of cardamom
and Panchd-kolas dissolved in the decoction of the
drugs of th^ Varunddi Gana ; of the powders of pepper
and Bhadraddru dissolved in the decoction of the
Prithakparnyddi Gana ; or of pulverized Trikatu^
Chaturjdtakfi and Kustumburu mixed with old treacle ;
or of simple Arishta, should be prescribed. 19.

Management of the Child The baby
being wrapped up in silk should be laid on a bed covered
with a silken sheet ; it should be fanned with the
branches of a Pilu^ Nimbay Vadariy or Parushaka tree.
A (thin"' pad (Pichu) soaked in oil should be constantly
kept on the head of the child, and its body should be
fumigated with the fumes of drugs Vacha, mustard,
etc.) potent enough to keep off the (evil) influences of
demons and evil spirits. The same drugs should be tied
round the neck, hands, legs and head of the infant and
the floor of the lying-in room should be kept strewn
over with pounded sesamum, mustard, linseed [Atasi), A
five should also be kept kindled in the chamber. Measures
laid down in the chapter on the nursing of an Ulcer-
patient (chapter IX. Sutra.) should be observed in the
present case as well. 20.

Then on the tenth day of its birth the parents having
performed the necessary rites of benediction and cele-
brated the occasion with suitable festivities, shall give
the child a name of their own choice or one determined
by its natal a'^trism, etc. 21.

Lactation and selection of a wet-
nurse S -^For the healthy growth of the child a wet-
nurse should be selected from among the matrons of
its own caste (Varna\ and possessed of the following

39

1226

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. X.

necessary qualifications. She should be of middle
stature, neither too old nor too young (middle-aged),
of sound health, of good character (not irascible or easily
excitable), not fickle, ungreedy, neither too thin nor too
corpulent, with lips unprotruded, and with healthy and
pure milk in her breasts which should neither be too
much pendulent nor drawn up. It should be carefully
observed that her skin is healthy and unmajked by any
moles or stains, she being free from any sort of crime
(such as gambling, day-sleep, debauchery, etc.). She
should be of an affectionate heart, and with all her
children living.

She should be of respectable parentage and conse-
quently possessed of many good qualities, with an exu-
berance of milk in her breasts, and not in the habit of
doing anything that degrades woman in life. A '‘^yfima’
girl possessed of the aforesaid qualities makes a good
wet-nurse. A child nursed at the breast of a woman
with upturned or unprominent nipples is apt to be
deformed (Kardla) in features, while extremely pendu-
lous (large and flabby) breasts may suffocate the child
by covering its mouth and nostrils. Having chosen a
wet-nurse of the commendable type, the child with its
head well-washed should, on an auspicious day, be laid
on her lap wrapped in a clean and untorn linen. The
face of the child should be turned towards the north,
while the nurse should look to the east at the time.
Then, after first having a small quantity of the milk
pfessed out and the breast washed and consecrated with
the following Mantras (incantations) the child should be
m^de to suck her right breast 22.

Metrical Texts : — “O, thou beautiful damsel,
jmajr the four oceans of the earth contribute to the
secretion of mill^ in thy hjreasts, for the purpose of in:\-

(ihap.

SARIRA Sf HANAM.

227

proving the bodily strength of the child. O, thou with
a beautiful face, may the child, reared on your milk,
attain a long life, like the gods made immortal with
drinks of ambrosia”. 22.

A child nursed at the breast of any and every
woman for want of a nurse of the commendable type,
may fall an easy prey to disease, owing to the fact of the
promiscuous nature of the milk proving incongenial to
its physical temperament. The milk of a nurse not
being pressed out and spelled off at the outset may
produce cough, difficulty of breathing, or vomiting of
the child, owing to the sudden rush of the accumulated
milk into its throat choking up the channels. Hence
a child should not be allowed to suck in such milk. 23.

The I0.SS or suppression of the milk in the breasts of
a woman is usually due to anger, grief, and the absence
of natural affection for her child, etc. For the purpose of
establishing a flow in her breast, her equanimity should
be first restored, and diets consisting of Sili-rice, barley,
wheat, Shashtika, meat-soup, wine (Sur 4 \ Souviraka,
sesamum-paste, garlic, fish, Kas*eruka^ SWingdtaka, lotus-
stalk, Vtddn-kandiz, Madhiika flower, Satdzari, Nalikd^
Aldvu, and Kdla-S'dka, etc., should be prescribed. 24.

Examination, etc., of milk The breast-
milk of a nurse or a mother should be tested by casting
it in water. The milk which is thin, cold, clear, and
tinged like the hue of a conclf-shell, is found to be
easily miscible with water, does not give rise to
froths and shreds, and neither floats nor sinks in watef,
should be regarded as pure and healthy. A child fed
on such milk is sure to thrive and gain in strentgh and
health. A child should not be allowed to take the
breast of a hungry, aggrieved, fatigued, too thin, tdo
corpulent, fevered, or a pregnant woman, nor of one in

22S

THE SOSHRtJTA SAMHITA .

tCbap, X,

whom the assimilated food is followed by an acid reac-
tion, or of one who is fond of incongenial and unhealthy
dietary, or whose fundamental principles are vitiated.
A child should not be given the breast until an adminis-
tered medicine is assimilated in its organisfti, lest this
should give rise to a violent aggravation of the pharmaco-
logical action of the medicine, as well as of the deranged
Doshas (V 4 yu, Pitta, etc.), and the refuse matters (Malas)
of its body. 25.

Memorable Verses ; —The Doshas iVdyu,
Pitta and Kapha) of a wet-nurse are aggravated by
ingestion of indigestible or incompatible food, or of those
articles which tend to derange the Doshas of the body,
and hence her milk may be vitiated. A child, fed on the
vitiated milk of a woman, vitiated by the deranged
Doshas owing to injudicious and intemperate eating
and living, falls an easy prey to physical disease. An
intelligent physician in such a case should devise means
for the purification of the milk as well as of the derang-
ed Doshas which account for such vitiation (inasmuch as
the medication of the child alone will not produce any
satisfactory effect). 26-27.

Infantile diseases and their Diagno-
sis : — A child constantly touches its diseased part or
organ and cries for the least touch (by another of that
part of its body). If the seat of disease be its head, the
child cannot raise nor move that organ and remains with
its eyes closely shut. A disease seated in its bladder
gives rise to retention of urine, thirst, pain and occa-
sional fainting fits. A retention of urine and stool,,
discolouring of complexion, vomiting, distention of the
abdomen, and gurgling in the intestines indicate the
seat of the disease to be its Koshtha (colon). A
constant crying (and the child’s refusal to be consoled)

Cbap. X.]

SARIRA STHANAM.

229

would signify that the diseased principle (morbiferous
diathesis) extends all through its organism. 28.

Treatment of Infants Medicines laid
down under the head of a particular disease should like-
wise be prescribed in the case of its appearance in a
child or an infant ; but then only the remedies of mild
potency and those which do not tend to disintegrate the
bodily fat and Kapha should be given in adequate
doses (according to age, etc.) as mentioned here-
after and administered through the vehicle of milk and
clarified butter, to a child living on milk alone, while the
nurse also is to take the same medicines as well.* In
the case of a child fed both on milk and (boiled) rice
{KshirdnnddaX.c., living on both solid an j liquid food) the
medicine should be administered both to the child and
its wet-nurse. In the case of a child living on solid food
only, decoctions (Kashdya) etc. should be given to the
child and not to the nurse. Medicines to the quantity of
a small pinchful may be prescribed for a suckling who
has completed its first month of life. Kalkas (medicated
pastes) should be given to a child fed on both milk and
rice to the size of a stone of a plum-fruit (Kola), and the
dose for a child fed on rice (solid food) only being to
the size of a plum (Kola).+ 29.

* Milk and clarified butter being congenial to the constitution of
infants should be used as vehicles for drugs in their cases but, these are
not necessary in the case of the nurse.

t According to several other authorities, the dosage in the case of
children is to be regulated as follows

In the case of a child, one month old, drugs should be given in the fof m
of an electuary through the vehicle of milk, honey, syrup, clarified butter,
etCt-^the dose being one Kati (about two grains) at first, and gradually
increased by a Rati a month, till it completes one year. After this time the
dose is to be one Masbd (about twenty grains) for each year of age till
he is fifteen.

TUs dosage, however, does not apply In the present age.— Ed«

230 the SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. C^hap. X.

Metrical Texts : — in the case of any disease
of a child nursed at the breast, the breasts of the nurse
should be plastered with the pastes of drugs recommended
by physicians for the particular malady (instead of
giving the drugs to the child), and the chilcl made to
suck the same. The use of clarified butter is not bene-
ficial to a child on the first day of an attack of Vata-
jvara (fever due to the derangement of the bodily Vdyu\
within the first two days of an attack of Pittaja fever,
and within the first three days of that of Kaphaja fever.
But the use of clarified butter may be prescribed for
an infant fed on milk and boiled rice, or on boiled rice
alone, according to requirements. 30-3 r.

In case of fever a child should be given no suck at
all, lest the symptoms of thirst might develop. Pur-
gatives, Vastis, or emetics are forbidden in the disease
of children, unless the disease threatens to take a fatal
course. 32.

If the local Viyu aggravated by the waste of brain-
materials (Mastulunga), bends down the palate bone of a
child attended with an excessive thirst and agony,
clarified butter boiled with (the decoction and Kalka of)
the drugs of the Madhura Gana, should be used both
internally and externally, and the patient should as well
be treated with spray of cold water (to stimulate him).
The disease in which the navel of a child becomes
swollen and painful, is called Tundi. It should be
remedied by applying fomentations, medicated oils,
UpanAhas, etc., possessed of the virtue of subduing the
VAyU. A suppuration of the anal region (Guda-pa^ka) of
a child should be treated with Pittaghna (Pitta-destroy-
ing) measures and medicines. RasAnjana used inte^
nally and externally (as an unguent) proves very effica-
cious in these cases, 33-35.

Chap. X.]

SARIRA STHANAM.

231

Infantile Elixirs : — Clarified butter cooked
with (the decoction and Kalka of) white mustard seeds,
Vachd, Mansi, Payasyd, Apdmdrga, S'aidvari, Sdrivd,
Brdhmi, Pi^pali, Haridrd^ Kushtha and Saindhava salt
should be given to an infant fed exclusively on milk.
Clarified butter prepared with (the docoction and Kalka
of) Madhuka (Yashtimadhu), Vacha, Chitraka, Pippali
and Triphald should be given to an infant fed both on
milk and (boiled) rice (solid and liquid food). Clarified
butter boiled with (the decoction and Kalka of) Dasamula,
milk, Tagara, Bhadraddru, Maricha, honey, Vidanga^
Drdkshd and the two sorts of Brdhmis should be given
to an infant fed on (boiled) rice (solid food) By these the
health, strength, intellect and longivity of the child
is improved. 36-37.

A child should be so handled or lifted as not to
cause any discomfort. A baby should not be scolded,
nor suddenly roused up (from sleep), lest it might get
awfully frightened. It should not be suddenly drawn
up nor suddenly laid down, lest this should result in the
derangement of its bodily VAyu. An attempt to seat
it (before it has learnt to sit steadily), may lead to
haunch-back (Kyphosis). Lovingly should a child
be fondled and amused with toys and play-things.
A child unruffled by any of the above ways becomes
healthy, cheerful and intelligent as it grows older. An
infant should be guarded against any exposure to the
rains, the sun, or the glare of lightning. He should not
be placed under a tree or a creeper, in low lands,
and in lonely houses or in their shades (cavesl ; and it
should be protected from the malignant influences of
evil stars and occult powers. 38.

Metrical Texts : —A child should not be left
(alone^ in an unclean andujuholy place^nor under the sky

232

THE SUSHROTA SAMHITA.

[Cbtpi ‘X,

(uncovered place), nor over an undulating ground, nor
should it be exposed to heat, storm, rain, dust, smoke and
water Milk is congenial to the organism of a chiid,
t e., it is its proper food Hence in the absence of
sufficient breast-milk, the child should be given the milk
of a cow or of a she-goat in adequate quantities. 39.

In the sixth month of its birth the child should be
fed on light and wholesome boiled rice. A phild should
always be kept in an inner apartment of the house,
and religious rites should be performed on its behalf for
the propitiation of evil deities, and it should be carefully
guarded against the influences of evil stars. 40.

Symptoms when a malignant star,
etc., strikes : —The child looks frightened and
agitated, cries, becomes unconscious at times, wounds
himself or its nurse with its teeth and finger-nails,
gnashes its teeth, crooks, yawns, or moves its eye-brows
with upturned eyes, vomits frothy matter, bites its lips,
becomes cross, passes loose stool mixed with shreds
of mucus, cries in an agonised voice, becomes dull in
complexion, becomes weak, does not sleep in the night,
does not suck the breast as before, or emits a fishy,
bug-like or mole-like smell from its body— these are
the general symptoms exhibited by a child under the
influence of a malignant star or planet which will be
specifically described later on in the Uttara-Tantra 41.

Education and Marriage : -The educa-
tion of a child should be commenced at a suitable age
and with subjects proper to the particular social Varna
or order it belongs to. On attaining the twenty-fifth year
he should marry a girl of twelve. A conformity to
these rules, is sure to crown him with health, satisfaction,
pn^eny and a capacity for fully discharging the religious
rites and paying off his parental debts. 42.

Chap. X.] SARIRA STHANAM. 233

^ ‘ Metrical Texts : — An offspring of a girl below
the age of sixteen by a man below twenty-five is
usually found to die in the womb. Such a child, in the
event of its being born alive, dies a premature death
or else becdtnes weak in organs (Indriyas). Hence agirl
of extremely tender age should not be feciindated at all.
An extremely old woman, or one suffering from a
chronic affection (of the generative organ), or afflicted
with any other disease, should not be likewise impreg-
nated. A man with similar disabilities should be held
likewise unfit. 40-44.

A foetus, on the point of being miscarried on account
of the above-mentioned causes, produces pain in the
uterus, bladder, waist (Kati), and the inguinal regions
(Vamkshana) and bleeding. In such a case, the patient
should be treated with cold baths, sprays of cold water
and medicated plaster (Pradeha) &c., at the time, and
milk * boiled with drugs constituting the Jivaniya
group, should be given to her for drink. In case of
unusual movements of the foetus in the womb, the
enciente should be given a drink of milk boiled with the
drugs of Utpalddi Gana^ for soothing and making it
steady in its place. 45.

A foetus being displaced from its normal position
produces the following symptoms, viz , pain or spasms
in the back and the sides (Pdrs'va), burning sensation,
excessive discharge of blood and detention of urine and
foeces A foetus changing place or shifting from one
place to anofher, swells up the abdomen (Koshtha)i
Cooling and soothing measures should be adopted in
such cases. 46.

* Jivaniya drugs two To! ds, milk sixteen Tol^s and water sixty-four
Tolds, to be boiled and reduced to sixteen ToUs, 1.^., to weight of the
milk..

30

tHii SUSHRUTA SAMHItA.

{CliRpt

m

Medical Treatment :->in a case of pain
under the circumstances, the enciente should be made
to drink a potion consisting of milk boiled with Makd-
saha, Kskudrasahd, Madhuka flower, S'vadansttd and
Kantakdri, mixed with sugar and honey. Irf the case of
retention of urine, the patient should be made to
drink a potion of milk boiled with drugs known as the
Bdrvddi Gam (mixed with sugar and honey). In the
case of A'nAha (retention of stool attended with disten-
tion of the abdomen), a potion consisting of milk
boiled with asafetida, Sauvarchala salt, garlic and Vacha
(mixed with honey and sugar) should be given. In
cases of excessive bleeding, linctus made of the powdered
chamber of a Kosbthigiriki insect * , Sanumgd,
Dkdtaki flowers, Navamdlikd, Gairika, resin and Rasdn-
jam, or of as many of them as would be available,
mixed with honey, should be licked. In the alternative,
the bark and sprouts of the drugs known as the Nya-
grodkddi Gam mixed with boiled milk should be
administered, or a Kalka of the drugs of the Utpalidi
group mixed with boiled milk should be used, or a
Kalka of S'dluka, S'ring^taka and Kas'eru mixed with
boiled milk should be given. As a further alternative, the
enciente may be made to eat cakes made of powdered
^li rice with the decoction of Udumbara fruit and
Audaka-kanda, mixed with honey and sugar. A piece
of linen or a plug soaked in the expressed juice of the
drugs of the Nyagrodhidi group should be inserted
hrto the passage of the vagina. 47.

In a case of pain unattended with bleeding, the
enciente should be made to drink a potion composed of
mitk-boilcd with Madhuka (Yashtimadhu), Devaddru and

** There k « kind of iniect which makes its diamher with earth
generaUr andec the ceiling or on the walls. This earth should he used.

Chap. X,] SARIRA STHANAM. . *55

Payasyd ; or with As’mantaka, Satdvari and Payasyd ;
or with the drugs of the group of V iddrigandhddi Gana ;
or with Vrih^ti, Kantakdri, Utpala, S'atdvari, Sdrivd,
Payasyd and Madhuka (Yashtimadhu). These remedies
speedily applied tend to alleviate the pain and make the
foetus steady in the womb. 48.

After the foetus has been steadied by the aforesaid
mesaures, a diet consisting of (boiled rice and) cow’s
milk, boiled with the dried tender fruits of Udumvara,
should be prescribed for the patient. In the event of
miioarriage, the patient should be made to drink a
YavAgu feruel) of the Udddlaka rice, &c., cooked with
the decoction of the Pachaniya group (Pippalyddi) and
devoid of all saline and fatty matter, for a number of
days corresponding to that of the month of gestation.
Old treacle mixed with .the powdered drugs of the
Dipaniya group (Pancha-kola), or simply some Ari.shta
(AbhayArishta, etc.), should be given, in the event
of there being pain in the pelvis, bladder and
abdomen. 49.

The internal ducts and channels (Srotas) stuffed with
aggravated VAyu lead to the weakening (Laya) of the
foetus and, if the state continues, it leads even to its
death. Hence the case should be treated with mild
anointing measures, etc., (Sneha-karma, etc.,) and gruels
made of the flesh of the birds of the Utkros'a species and
mixed with a sufficient quantity of clarified butter, should
be given to her. As an alternative, KulmAsha « boiled
with .Misha, sesamum and pieces of dried (tendes)
Vilva fruit should be given her, after which she should
be made to drink, for a week, honey and Middhvika (a
kind of weak », wine). At the non-delivery of the child

* ’'Katmiiha’' may mean eithe* Kulaltha puhe or half boiled wheat,
hwky, ate.

236 . THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. X.

tven after the lapse of the full term of gestation, the
enciente should be made to thrash corn with a pestle in
an Udukhala or mortar (husking apparatus) or should be
made tojsit or move (on legs or by conveyance), on an
uneven ground. 50. *

Atrophy of a fcetus in the womb should be ascribed
to the action of the deranged Vdyu. This is detected
by the comparatively lesser fulness of the abdomen
of the enciente and slow movement of the fcetus in
the womb. In such a case, the enciente should be
treated with milk, with the Vrimhaniya (of restorative
and constructive properties) drugs, and with meat-
soup.* 51.

A combination of ovum and semen affected by the
deranged Vdyu in the womb, may not give ri.se to a
successful fecundation (living impregnated matter), but
leads to a distention of the abdomen (as in pregnancy),
which again, at any time, may disappear of itself. And
this is ascribed by the ignorant to the malignant
influence of Naigamesha (spirits). Such an impregnated
matter, sometimes lying concealed in the uterus, is
called NAgodara, which should be treated with the
remedies laid down under the head of Lina-Garbha
(weak foetus). 52.

Now we shall discourse on the management of
pregnancy according to the months (period) of gestation.

Hetrioal Texts: — The following receipes, such as,
(i)Madhuka (Yashtimadhu), S'dkavija, Payasy^, and
Devadiru ; (2) As'mantaka, black sesamum, pippali,
Manjishth^, Timra-valli and ^atdvari ; (3) Vrikshidani,
Payasyi, Lat 4 (Durv^), Utpala and Sdrivi ; (4) Anantd,
S 4 riv&, RisnA; Padma, and Madhuka (Yashtimadhu) ;

*, The pellicle “che” in ihe text tignifiei the use of any other
coasiniclite tonic.

Chap. X.]

SARIRA STHANAM.

237

(5) Vrihati, Kantakdri, Kds'mari, sprouts (^uiiga) and
barks of milk-exuding trees (as, Vata, etc.), and clarified
butterf- ; (6) Pris'ni-parni, Vald, ^igru, S'vadanshtrd
and Madhuparnikd ; and (7) S'ring'taka, Visa (stalks
of lotus), ^rdkshd, Kas'aru, Madhuka (Yashtimadhu),
and sugar ; should successively be given with milk* to
an enciente, from the first to the seventh month of her
gestation, in the case of a threatened miscarraige or
abortion. 53.

An enciente should be made to drink milk boiled
with the roots of Kapittha, Vrihati, Vilva, Patola,
Ikshu and Kantakdri, (in case of impending or
threatened miscarraige) in the eighth month of her
pregnancy. In the ninth month (and under similar
conditions), the potion should be made up of Madhuka
(Yashtimadhu), Ananta-mula, Payashd and Sdrivd. In
the tenth month (and under similar conditions), a potion
consisting of milk boiled with Sunthi and Payasyd
is beneficial, or, in the alternative, may be given a potion
made up of milk with Sunthi, Madhuka (Liquorice; and
Devaddru. The severe pain would vanish and the
feetus would continue to develop safely in the womb,
under the aforesaid mode of treatment. 54-S7.

A child born of a woman, who had remained sterile
(not-conceived) for a period of six years (Niviitta-
prasavd)* after a previous chi^-birth, becomes a short-
lived one. 58.

* ChaVradaita reads Visam” (stalks of lotus) instead of QliritaP'*
(clarified butler).

t If a conception does not occur in a woman for a period of more than
five years after a child-birth, she is called Nivritta prasaViC*

* SivtTddsa also says that powders of these drugs should be given
with boiled milk, but he adds that some authorities recommend theae
drugs to be boiled in milk according to Kshira-pdka-vidhl.

238 THE SUSH&UTA SAMHITA. t^jap. X*

Application of mild emetic medicines, (though for-
bidden in the case of a pregnant woman), may be
resorted to, in the case of a fatal disease, (even in that
stage). A diet consisting of sweet and acid things should
be prescribed for her, so as to bring the deranged
Doshas to the normal state ; mild Sams'amaniya
(soothing and pacifying) medicines should be applied
and food and drink consisting of articles nyld in their
potency, predomlnently sweet-tasting and not injurious
to the foetus, should be advised and mild (external)
measures not baneful to the foetus should be resorted
to, according to the requirements of the case. 59.

Memorable Verses The growth, memory,
strength and intellect of a child are improved by the
use of the four following medicinal compounds, used as
linctus (Prds'a), viz., (r) well-powdered gold, Kushtha,
honey, clarified butter and Vacha ; (2) Matsydkshaka*
(Brdhmi), ^ankha puspi, powdered gold, clarified butter
and honey ; (3) Arkapuspi, honey, clarified butter
powdered gold and Vacha ; and (4) powdered gold,
Kaitaryyah (Mah 4 -Nimba), white Durbd,t clarified
butter and honey. 60.

Thus ends the tenth Chapter of the S'^rira Sth^nam in the Sub^tuta
Sttnhtld, which treats of the nursing and management etc. of pregnant
women.

^ Some, however, explain Matsy^kshaka to be Dhu$lura\ others again
say it is a kind of red*flowered shrub grown in the Anupa country.

t The word “S'veta,” in the Text, may either be adjective to
•Ottrvit^' and mean *‘whitc” or it may mean white Vacha or white
Aparajitd or white Durvff.

Hers ends the $drira Sthstnam,

THE

SUSRUTA SAMHITA

CHIKITSA-STHANAM.

(Section of Therapeutics).

CHAPTER I,

Now we shall discourse on the medical treatment
of the two kinds of inflamed ulcers (Dvivratliya
Chikitsitam). i.

Ulcers may be grouped under two head.<» according
as they are Idiopathie or Trftamatic in their oiigrn.
The first group includes within its boundary all ulcers
that are caused through the vitiated condition of the
blood or the several deranged conditions of the VAyu,
Pitta and Kapha, or are due to their concerted:
action (Sannipdta), while the second group embraces
those which are caused by the bites of men, beasts,
birds, ferocious animals, reptiles or lizards, or by a
fall, pressure and blow, or by fire, alkali, poison, or
irritant drugs, or through injuries inflicted by pointed
wood, skeletal bones* horlis, discus, arrows, axes,
tridents, or Kuntas (a kind of shoveP, or such other
weapons. Although both these classes of ulcers posse^^s
many features in common, they have been grouped
under two distinct heads on account of the diversity of
their origin, t ie difference in remedial measures to be
adopted in their treatment, and the variation in their

* Fragments of broken pottery.— Dallana.

240 THE SUSHRUTA S^MHITA. [Chap. I.

strength and tenacity. Hence the cha’pter is ‘tailed

Dvivraniya. 2^.

In all cases of traumatic ulcers, cooling measures
should be at once resorted to, just after (the fall or
blow or stroke), for the cooling of the expanding (radia-
ting) heat of the incidenta* ulcer, in the manner laid
down in respect of (the pacification of enraged) Pitta,
and a compound of honey and clarified butter should be
applied on the wounded locality for the adhesion
(Sandhdna) of the lacerated parts, [and for the pacifica-
tion, i e , restoration to normal state, of the local blood
and VAyu aggravated through an obstruction of their
passage]. Hence arises the necessity of making the
two-fold classification of ulcers. After that (a week)
a traumatic ulcer should be treated as an idiopathic
one (to all intents and purposes', inasmuch as it is
found to be associated with deranged Vdyu, Pitta or
Kapha. Hence at that stage the medical treatment
of both the forms of ulcer is (practically) the same. 3.

In short, ulcers arc further subdivided (particularly)
into fifteen groups, according to the presence of the
morbific diathesis (deranged Vdyu, Pitta Kapha
and blood therein), either severally or in combi-
nations as described (before) in the Chapter on Vrana-
Pras'na (Sutra Sthinam. Ch. XXI). Several author-
ities, by adding the simple uncomplicated ulcers (un-
associated with any of the morbific principles of the
deranged Vdyu, fitta, &c.) to the list, hold the number
oC types to be sixteen. (Practically they are in-
nuiherable, according to the combinations made of the
deranged Vdyu, etc, and the different Dhl^tus of the
system). 4.

Symptoms of ulcer may be divided into two kinds viz.^
General and Specific. Pain is the general characteristic

Ch»p, I.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. ±41

(of all forms of , ulcer), while the symptoms, which are
exhibited in each case according to the virtue of the
deranged Viyu, Pitta, etc , involved therein, are called the
Specific ones. A Vrana is so named from its etymology
(the term tfbing derived from the root Vrana — to break)
and signifies a cracked or broken condition ,of the skin
and flesh of the afflicted part) of the body. 5 .

The V^taja-UIccr : — The ulcer assumes a
broWn or vermilion colour and exudes a thin, slimy
and cold secretion, largely attended with tension,
throbbing and a sort of pricking and piercing pain (in
its inside), which seems as if being expanded and
extended. This type of ulcer does not extend much
and is characterised by a complete destruction of the
tissue (flesh). The Pittaja ulcer is rapid in its growth.
It assumes a bluish yellow colour, exudes a hot secretion
resembling the washings of Kimsuka flowers, and is
attended with burning, suppuration and redness, being
surrounded with eruptions of small yellow-coloured
pustules. The Kaphaja ulcer is found to be extended
and raised around its margin and is accompanied by an
irresistible itching sensation. It is thick and compact
(in its depth), covered with a large number of vessels
and membranous tissues (S'ird-sn4yu-jdla), grey in
colour, slightly painful, hard and heavy, and exudes a
thick, cold, white and slimy secretion. The Baktaja
ulcer (resulting from a vitiated condition of the blood)
looks like a lump of red coral. It is often found
to be surrounded by black vesicles and pustules and
to smell like a strong alkali. It becomes painful and
produces a sensation, as if fumes were escaping out
(of it). Bleeding (is present) and the specific symp-
toms of the Pittaja type are likewise found to
supervene. 6—9.

3 ^

242 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. Chap. 1.]

The Vitta-Pittaja Type : -—An ulcer due to
the concerted action of the deranged Vdyu and Pitta
is marked by a pricking and burning pain and a red
or vermilion colour. A sensation of fumes arising out
of it (is als.o felt) and the ulcer exudes i secretion
which partakes of the characteristic colours of both the
deranged Vdyu and Pitta. An, itching and piercing
pain is felt in the ulcer d ue to the combined action of
the deranged VAyu and Kapha (Kapha-Vaitaja type),
which becomes heavy and indurated, constantly dis-
charging a cold, slimy secretion. An ulcer resulting
from the deranged condition of the Pitta and Kapha
(Eajpha-Fittaja type) becomes heavy, hot and yellow.
It is marked by a burning sensatian and exudes a pale,
yellow-coloured secretion. An ulcer marked by the
aggravated condition of the deranged V^yu and blood
(Vl^ta-Baktaja type) is dry and thin and is largely
atterided with a piercing pain and anaesthesia. It
exudes blood or a vermil-coloured secretion and is
marked by the combined hues respectively peculiar to
the deranged Vdyu and blood. An ulcer due to the
combined action of the deranged Pitta and blood
(Bakta-Fittaja type) is marked by a colour which
resembles the surface cream of clarified butter. It
smells like the washing of fish, is soft, spreading (erysi-
pelatous),- and secretes a hot blackish matter. An
ulcer due to the combined action of the deranged
Ka{>I^ and blood (Eapka-Raktaja tjrpe) is red-coloured,
Iftavy. slimy, glossy and indurated. It is usually
marked by itching and exudes a yellowish bloody
secietiom ulcer due to the concerted action of the
M deranged Vi^, Pitta and blood (Vilta-Fitta-Baktaja
type) is tnaiked by a sort; of throbbing, pricking and;
burning pain. It dischaiges a flow of thin yellowish

Chap. I.]

CHIKITSA STHAKAI^.

Hi

blood and- produces a sensation,- as if fumes were
escaping (out of its cavity). An ulcer due to the con-
certed action of the deranged Viyu, Kapha and blood
(Vtita-Sieshma-Raktaja type) is usually attended with
itching, throbbing and tingling sensations and thick, grey,
blood-streaked discharge. An ulcer associated with
the deranged Kapha, Pitta, and blood (Kapha-Fitta-
Raktaja type) is largely attended with redness, itching,
suppuratioft and burning sensation. It emits a thick,
greyish, bloody secretion. An ulcer marked, by the
concerted action of the deranged Vdyu, Pitta and
Kapha (Stfnnipsftika) is attended with diverse kinds
of pain, secretion, colour, &c,, peculiar to each of
these types. An ulcer associated with the combined
action of the deranged V 4 yu, Pitta, Kapha and blood
(Vita-Pitta-Kapha-Raktaja type) is attended with a
sensation, as if it were being burnt and lacerated. It is
largely accompanied by throbbing, itching sensation,
a sort of pricking and burning pain, with complete
anesthesia in the locality; redness, suppuration, various
other kinds of colour, pain and secretion are its further
characteristics. 10—20.

An ulcer (Vrana) which is of the same colour with the
back of the tongue, soft, glossy, smooth, painless, well-
shaped and marked by the absence of any kind of
secretion whatsoever, is called a clean ulcer (^addha-
Vrana). 21.

Therapeutics S-^The medical (and sut^ical)
treatment of a Vrana (ulcer) admits of being divided
into sixty# different factors, such as,— Apatarpana
(fasting or low diet), Alepa (plastering), Parisheka
(irrigating or spraying), Abhyanga (anointing), Sveda

* N*B* Authorities, however, differ in enumerating these factor^i,
although every one of them sticks to the total number of sixty.

^44 SlJSHRtfTA SAMHItA. t^^***?' *•

(fomentations, etc.), VimUpana (resolution by mass-
age or rubbing), Upaniha (poultice), Pichana (inducing
suppuration), VisrAvana (evacuating or draining), Sneha
(internal use of medicated oils, ghrita, etc.), Vamana
(emetics), Virechana (purgatives), Chhedana ^(excision),
Bhedana (opening — e.g., of an abscess), Ddrana (bursting
by medicinal applications), Lekhana (scraping), Aharana
(extraction', Eshana (probing), Vyadhana (puncturing —
opening a vein), Vidrdvana (inducing discharge), Sivana
(suturing), SandhAna (helping re-union or adhesion),
Pidana (pressing), SonitdsthApana (arrest of bleeding),
Nirvdpana (cooling application), Utkdrikd (massive
poultices), Kashdya (washing with decoctions), Varti
(lint or plug), Kalka (paste), Ghrita (application of
medicated clarified butter), Taila (application of
medicated oil', Rasa-kriyi (application of drug-extracts),
Avachurnana (dusting with medicinal powders), Vrana-
Dhupana (fumigation of an ulcer), Utsidana (raising of
the margins or bed of an ulcer), Avasddana (destruction
of exuberant granulation), Mridu-Karma (softening),
DAruna-Karma (hardening of soft parts), Kshdra-Karma
(application of caustics), Agni-Karma (cauterization),
Krishna-Karma (blackening), Pdndu-Karma (making
yellow-coloured cicatrices), Pratisdrana (rubbing with
medicinal powders), Roma-sanjanana (growing of hairs),
Lomdpaharana (epilation), Vasti-karma (application of
enemas), Uttara-Vasti-karma (urethral and vaginal
injections', Vandha (bandaging), Patraddna (application
o£ certain leaves — vide Infra), Krimighna (Vermifugal
measures', Vrimhana (application of restorative tonics),
Vishaghna (disinfectant or anti-poisonous applications),
l^iro-virechana (errhines), Nasya (snuflF), Kavala-
dbdrana (holding in the mouth of certain drug-masses for
diseases of the oral cavity or gaigling), Dhuma (smoking

Chap. 1.]

ClllKlTSA STHANAM.

24S

or vapouring), Madhu-sarpih (honey and clarified butter),
Yantra (mechanical contrivances, eg., pulleys, &c.),
Ahdra (diet) and Rakshd-Vidhdna (protection from
the influence of malicious spirits). 22.

Of these,«Kashdya, Varti, Kalka, Ghrita, Taila, Rasa-
kriyd and Avachurnana are the measures for the cleansing
(^odhana) of an ulcer and for helping its granulation
(Ropana). The eight acts (from Chhedana to Sivana)
are surgical operations. We have already spoken of
such acts as Sonitdsthdpana, Kshdra-karma, Agni-
karma, Yantra, Ahdra, Rakshd-vidhdna and Vandha-
Vidhdna (in the Sutra-sthdna). Later on, we shall
discourse on Sneha,’ Sveda, Vamana, Virechana, Vasti,
Uttara-vasti, Siro-virechana, Nasya, Dhuma, and Kavala-
dhdrana. Of the remaining measures we shall speak
in the present chapter. 23.

There are six kinds of swellings (^ophas), as described
before, and the following eleven measures, commencing
with Apatarpana and ending in Virechana, should be
regarded as their cure. These are the proper remedies for
a swelling and do not (cease to be efficacious in, nor) prove
hostile to cases of swelling which are transformed into
ulcers. The other measures should be deemed as
remedial to ulcers but Apatarpana is the first,
general and principal remedy in all types of swellings
(^ophas). 24.

memorable Verses Apatarpana (fasting)
should be prescribed in the case of a patient, full of
enraged Dos has, as well as, in one having his organioi
principles (DhAtus) and refuse matters (Malas) of the
system, deranged by them, for the purpose of bringing
them to their normal condition, with a regard both
to their nature and to the strength, age, &c., of the
patient. Persons afflicted with diseases which result

246

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap, I.

from the up-coursing of the deranged Vdyu (Urdhva-v4ta)
such as cough, asthma, &c., or with thirst, hunger,
dryness of the mouth and fatigue, as well as old men,
infants, weak persons, men of timid dispositions and
pregnant women should never fast. A swelling and an
extremely painful ulcer should be respectively treated
with a proper medicated plaster at the very outset. The
pain in such a case will yield to the medicinal plaster
as a blazing room or house is readily extinguished by
means of steady watering. Such plasters not only give
comforttothe patient (by removing the pain and leading
to the absorption of the swelling), but heaves up the bed
of the sore or the ulcer and contributes to its speedy
purification and healing up (granulation). 25—28.

In the case of a swelling brought on by the deranged
V 4 yu, the affected part should be washed or sprinkled
(Parisheka) with a warm lotion of clarified butter, oil,
Dhinydmla and essence of meat or with a decoction
of the drugs that tend to pacify the enraged VAyu
and to relieve the pain. A swelling due to the action of
the deranged Pitta or blood or to the effect of
a blow or poison should be washed or sprinkled
with a lotion of milk, clarified butter, honey and sugar
dissolved in water, the expressed juice of sugar-cane
and a cold decoction of the drugs of the Madhura group
(Kikolyddi-gana) and the Kshira-Vrikshas. A Eaphaja
swelling on the body should be washed or sprinkled
with a luke-warm lotion of oil, cow’s urine, alkaline
aolution, wine (Surd), ^ukta and with a decoction of
drugs that destroy the deranged Kapha. 297-31.

Metrical Text : —As a fire is put out by jets of
water, so the fire of the deranged morbific principles
(Doshdgni) of the body are speedily subdued and put down
by the application of (medicinal lotions) washes. 32.

Chap. I.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

247

An anointing (Abhyanga), duly prescribed and used
with a full regard to the nature of the aggravated
Doshas, leads to their pacification (restoration to the
normal condition) and to softness (subsidence) of the’
swelling, fs-

Metrical Texts: — An application of an anoint-
ment (Abhyanga) should precede the measures of fomen-
tation, resolution, &c , while it should follow all evacuating
measures, &c. A painful, extended and indurated swell-
ing, as well as an ulcer of a similar nature, should be
fomented, while an act ofVimlApana (resolution by
gentle massage) should be done in respect of a fixed or
unfluctuating swelling attended with little or no pain
whatsoever. A wise physician should first annoint
and foment the part and then gently and slowly press
it with a bamboo-reed or with the back of his thumb
or palm. A non-suppurated swelling or one that is
partially suppurated should be treated with poultice
(Upandha), which would lead to its resolution or suppu-
ration, as the case might be. A swelling, not resolved
or not subsiding even after the adoption of the measures
beginning with Apatarpana and ending in Virechana
^in the given list), should be caused to suppurate
with the drugs enumerated in the chapter of Mis'raka,
such as curd, whey, wine (Surd), Sukta and Dhdnydmla
(a kind of fermented paddy gruel). They should be
formed into a paste and the paste should be cooked into
an eflficacious poultice-like composition (Utkdrikd), and
mixed with salt and oil or clarified butter, it should be
applied over the affected part (swelling) and bandaged
with the leaves of ^ an Eranda plant. The patient
should be allowed to take a wholesome {i e., which does
not produce Kapha) diet as soon as suppuration would
set in (in the swelling). 34-39.

248 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA . CCh»p. I.

Blood-letting : — Blood-letting should be re-
sorted to in a case of newly formed swelling for
its resolution and for alleviating the pain. Bleeding
(Visriivana) is recommended in the case of an ulcer
which is indurated, marked by a considerable swelling
and inflammation and is reddish black or red-coloured,
extremely painful, gagged in its shape and considerably
extended at its base (congested), specially in the case

u

of a poisonous ulcer, for the subsidence of the pain and
for warding off a process of suppuration therein, either
by applying leeches or by opening (a vein in the
locality) by means of an instrument. An ulcer-patient
of a dry or parched temperament affected with dis-
tressing supervenients or ulcer-cachixia or who is weak
should be made to drink an emulsive potion cooked
with (a decoction of) appropriate drugs. A patient
afflicted with an ulcer with an elevated margin and
attended with swelling and specially marked by the
presence of the deranged Kapha and by a flow of
blackish red blood should be treated with emetics.
Ulcer-experts recommend purgatives to a patient
afflicted with an old or long-standing ulcer, attended
with a deranged condition of the Vdyu and Pitta.
An excision should be made into an ulcer which refuses
to suppurate and which is of a hard and indurated
character attended with sloughing of the local nerves and
ligaments (Sniyu). An opening or excision (Bhedana)
should be made into an ulcer (Vrana) in the inside of
which pus has accumalated and makes it heave up and
which not finding any outlet consequently eats into the
underlying tissues and makes fissures and cavities. 40-46.

Measures which contribute to a spontaneous bursting
by medicinal applications (Diirana) of a swelling should
be adopted in the case of an infant or an old or enfeebled

Chap. I.] CHIICITSA StHANAM. 249

patient, or of one incapable of bearing the pain (of a
surgical operation), or of a person of a timid disposition,
as well as in the case of a woman, and in the case of
swellings which appear on the vulnerable parts (Marmas)
of the bod^. Remedies which lead to the spontaneous
bursting of a swelling should be applied by a wise
physician to a well-suppurated swelling drawn up and
with all its^pus gathered to a head ; or an alkaline
substance should be applied on its surface and a
bursting should be effected when the Doshas are found
to be just aggravated by the incarcerated pus. 47.

An ulcer which is indurated, whose edges are thick
and rounded, which has been repeatedly burst open,
and the flesh of whose cavity is hard and elevated,
should be scarified by a surgeon ; or, in other words,
an indurated ulcer should be deeply scarified, one
with thick and rounded edges should be excessively
scarified, while the one which has been repeatedly
burst open should be entirely scraped off. An ulcer
with a hard and elevated bed should be scraped evenly
and longitudinally along the length of Its cavity. In
the absence of a scarifying instrument, the act should be
performed with a piece of Kshauma (cloth made of the
fibres of an Atasi plant), a linen (Plota) or a cotton pad
(Pichu), or with such alkaline substances as nitrate of
potash, Samudra-phena, rock-salt, or rough leaves of
trees (e. g., those of Udumbara, &c.). 48.

The cavities or courses of a sinus, or of an ulcer which
had any foreign matter lying imbedded in its inside, of
which takes a crooked or round about direction, as well as
of the one formed into cavities within its interior, should

* This scraping off of the ulcer should be done by an instrument of
Surgery and not by any rough leaf or the like, mentioned hereafter.

33

250

TttE SUStiRUtA SAMtlltA.

tCbap. 1.

be probed by gently introducing the tender fibres of
bamboo sprouts (Karira), a (lock of) hair, a finger, or an
indicator into its inside. The course of a sinus occurring
about the anus or in the region of the eyes (Netra-
Vartma) should be probed with the slfender fibres
of Chuchchu, Upodiki, or Karira, in the event of
their mouths being narrow and attended with bleeding.
The ^lya (incarcerated pus, etc.) should be extricated,
whether the mouth of the sinus is constricted or other-
wise, in conformityw ith the directions laid down before
on that behalf. In diseases amenable to acts of punctur-
ing (Vyadhana), the knife should be inserted into the
seat of the disease to a proper depth and extent, to be
determined by its situation in the body, and the
Doshas (pus, etc.) should be let out, as stated before.
Ulcers with a wide mouth, unattended with any symptoms
of suppuration, and occurring in a fleshy part of the
body, should be sutured up, and the adhesion (San-
dhdna) of the edges should likewise be effected, as direct-
ed before. A plaster composed of drugs (capable of
drawing out and secreting the pus), as described before,
should be applied around the mouth of an ulcer seated
in any of the Marmas (vulnerable parts), or full of pus
in its inside, with a narrow-mouthed aperture. The
plaster should be removed when dry, and should not
be applied on the orifice of the ulcer, as it would, in that
case, interfere with the spontaneous secretion of pus
.(Dosha). 49-54-

« An excessive haemorrhage incidental to such acts, as
excessive hurting of the vein, etc., should be arrested with
;suitable styptic* measures and remedies (^nit^isthipana).

* Styptic mnsuru are of four kinds -Sandh4na,Skabdai»t Pichaoa.
and Pahana. Sec Sulra-Slbinaint Chap. XIV.

chap. I.J

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

251

An ulcer attended with fever, suppuration and burning
sensation due to the excited state of the deranged
Pitta and congestion of blood should be allayed (Nir-
vdpana — literally putting out) with suitable and proper
medicinal ftmedies. It should be allayed with com-
pounds made up of the proper cooling drugs (of the
Mis'raka chapter), pasted with milk and lubricated with
clarified butter. Cooling plasters (Lepa) should then be
applied as well. 55-56.

An ulcer whose flesh is eaten away, which discharges
a thin secretion, or is non-suppurating in its character,
and is marked by roughness, hardness, shivering and
the presence of an aching and piercing pain, should
be fomented with a poultice-like efficacious preparation
(Utksfriktf )cooked with the drugs of Vdyu-subduing
properties, those included within the Amla-varga, and
those which belong to the Kdkolyidi group, and with
the oily seeds (such as linseed, sesamum, mustard,
castor, etc.). An indurated, painful, faetid, moist and
slimy ulcer should be washed with a disinfectant or
purifying lotion consisting of a decoction of the drugs
mentioned before for the purpose. 57-58.

Plugs or lints plastered with a paste of the purifying
drugs (enumerated before) should be inserted into an
ulcer with any foreign matter (e.g., pus) lying embedded
in it, dr into one with a deep but narrow opening, or into
one situated in a fleshy part of the body. An ulcer full
of putrid flesh and marked by the action of the highly
deranged Doshas (Vdyu and Kapha) should be purified*
with a paste of the aforesaid available drugs making up
the plug. An ulcer of a Fittaja origin, which is deep-
seated and attended with a burning sensation and with
suppuration, should be purified with the application of
a medicated clarified butter, prepared with the purifying

252

THE SqSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. I*

drugs with an admixture of Kdrpisa-phala*. An
intelligent Surgeon should purify an ulcer with raised
flesh, and which is dry and is attended with scanty
secretion with an application of medicated mustard oil.
An indurated ulcer, refusing to be purified With the fore-
going medicated oils, should be purified with a duly
prepared decoction of the drugs enumerated before
{Sutra, chap. 38,— the SdlasArAdi group) and prepared in
the following manner of Rasa-kriyat A decoction of
the said drugs duly prepared should be saturated with
an after-throw of Hatitdla, Manahs'ild^ Kdsisa and
Saurdshtra earth, and well compounded together ; the
preparation should also be mixed with the expressed
juice of Mdtulunga and with honey. The medicine thus
prepared should be applied to the ulcer on every third
or fourth day, 59.

Deep“f and foul-smelling ulcers covered with layers
of deranged fat (phlegmonous ulcer) should be purified
by the learned physician with the powders of the drugs
with which the purifying plug or the lint has been
enjoined to be plastered (Ajagandhd, &c.). Decoctions
of the drugs which are possessed of the virtue of setting
in a process of granulation (Ropana' in an ulcer, such
as Vata, &c., as stated before, should be used by a
surgeon (Vaidya) after it had been found to have been
thoroughly purified. Medicated plugs, composed of
drugs possessing healing properties (such as, Soma^Amriid^
As'vagandhd, etc.) should be inserted in deep-seated ulcers,
when cleansed and unattended with pain. 60-62.

* The total weight of the purifying drugs should be equal to that of
the Kdrpdsa-phala alone and they should be boiled together with four times
their quantity of clarified butter and with sixteen times of water.

t There is a different reading of “Agambhira’* in place of “Gabhira,**
but Gayi thinks the emendation undesirable.

Ch^P* !•] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 2?3

A Kalka or a levigated paste of sesamum and
honey (mentioned in the Misraka Chapter) should be
applied for the purpose of healing up an ulcer situated
in a muscular part from which all putrid flesh has
been removed or sloughed off and which exhibited a clear
cavity. This paste (of sesamum) tends to allay the
deranged Vayu through its sweet taste, oleaginous-
ness and heat-making potency ; subdues the deranged
Pitta through its astringent, sweet and bitter taste and
proves beneficial even in the case of the deranged
Kapha through its heat-producing potency and bitter
and astringent taste. An application of the levigated
paste of sesamum mixed with the drugs of purifying and
healing properties tends to purify and heal up an ulcer.
An application of the levigated paste of sesamum mixed
with honey and Nimba-XtdiVts leads to the purification
of sores ; whereas an application of the same paste
{ie , sesamum, honey and leaves of Nimbd), mixed with
clarified butter tends to heal up the ulcer. Several
authorities atribute the same virtue to a barley-paste.^
Levigated pastes of barley and of sesamum (or a paste of
barley mixed with sesamum) contribute to the resolution
or subsidence of a non-suppurated swelling, fully suppur-
ate one which is partially suppurated, lead to the spon-
taneous bursting of a fully suppurated one, and purify
as well as heal up one that has already burst out. 63-65.

An ulcer, which is due to the effects of poison, vitiated
blood, or aggravated Pitta, and which is deep-seated oris
of traumatic origin, should be healed up with a medicated
clarified butter prepared with the drugs of healing virtues
(Ropaniya — enumerated before) and milk. An ulcer
marked by an aggravated condition of the deranged

* Jejjada and Gayaddsa interpret the term to mean ‘‘barley-paste
mixed with sesamum.”

254

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. I.

Vdyu and Kapha should be healed up with the applica-
tion of an oil, boiled and prepared with the proper
purifying drugs mentioned before. 6667.

Basa-kriy^* with the two kinds of Haridrd should
be resorted to for the purpose of healing up an ulcer, in
which bandaging is forbidden (such as those due to the
deranged Pitta or blood, or to blow, &c., or to the effects
of poison), and an ulcer appearing on thq, moveable
joints, which, though exhibiting all the features of
a well-cleansed sore, has not been marked by any process
of healthy granulationf. Healing medicinal powders
should be used in the case of an ulcer which is con-
fined to the skin, and is firm-fleshed and marked by
the absence of any irregularity in its shape (/.«,, not
uneven in its margin). The mode of applying medicinal
powders, as stated in the Sutra-sthdna, should be adopted
in the present instance. 68-69.

The healing and purifying measures described above
should be deemed equally applicable to, and efficacious
in cases, of ulcers in general with regard to their
Doshas (both idiopathic and traumatic). The success
of these measures has been witnessed in thousands of
cases and has been recorded in the Sastras (authorised
works on medicine). Hence they should be used as
incantations without any doubt as to their tested and
infallible efficacy. An intelligent physician should
employ the drugs, mentioned before, in any of the
seven forms (either in the shape of a decoction, or a

* The decoction of Irifhald and the dings of the Nysgtodhddi group
diould be duly ptepued, fiUeted and then condensed to the consistency of
treacle. Powders of Saridri and Diitu-batidtd should be then thrown
idto it. In the end, the whole preparation should be well>stirred,
mixed vith honey and applied. This is what is called SMA-kripii.

t Several editions read '‘though cleansed yet ungranolating ulcers.”

Chap. I.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

255

plug, or a paste, or through the medium of medicated oils
and clarified butter, or in the shape of Rasa-kriyd, or as
powders), according to the requirements of each case. 70.

The drugs which constitute the two groups ofPancha-
mulas (major and minor), as well as those of the Vdyu-
subduing group, should be employed in the case of an ulcer
due to the aggravated Vatyu in any of the seven forms
— decoction, etc. Similarly the drugs which are included
within the groups of Nyagrodhddi or Kdkolyddi should
be used in any of those seven forms, in the case of an
ulcer due to the aggravated Pitta (for the purification
and healing thereof). Drugs which form the group of
AragvadhAdi, as well as those which have been des-
cribed as heat-making in their potency, should be used
in any of those seven aforesaid forms, in the case of
an ulcer due to the deranged Eapha. The drugs of two
or three of those groups, should be combinedly used
in any of those seven forms, in connection with an
ulcer marked by the aggravated condition of any two
or three of the deranged Doshas respectively. 71-74.

Fumig^ation : — Vdtaja ulcers with severe pain
and secretion should be fumigated with the fumes of
Kshaufna^ barley, clarified butter and other proper fumi-
gating substances [such as turpentine and resin (gum of
^Ala tree)]. 75.

Utskdana-KriysC ( Elevation ) Medicated
plasters (consisting of Apdmdrga, Afvagandkd, etc.) and
medicated clarified butter (prepared with the same
drugs should be used in ulcers (due to the aggravatedVdyu
and marked by the absence of any secretion, and affecting
a considerably smaller area or depth of flesh, as well
as in those (due to the deranged and aggravated Pitta
and) seated deep into the flesh, for the purpose of raising
up (filling up) the beds or cavities thereof. Meat of carni-

256

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

tChap. I

vorous animals should be taken in the proper manner by
the patient, inasmuch as meat properly partaken of in
a calm and joyful frame of mind adds to the bodily flesh
of its partaken 76.

AvaS^dana (destruction of super-growths) : —
Proper drugs or articles (such as sulphate of copper,
etc.) powdered and pasted with honey should be applied
for destroying the soft marginal growths of an ulcer
found to be more elevated than the surrounding surface
of the affected locality. 77.

IVI rid U- Karma (softening) In respect of
indurated and fleshless (not seated in a part of the body
where flesh abounds) ulcers marked by a deranged
condition of Vdyu, softening measures (with the
help of repeated applications of lotions and plasters
composed of sweet and demulcent substances mixed
with salt in a tepid or luke-warm state) and blood-
letting”^ should be resorted to. Sprinkling (Seka) and
application of clarified butter or oil prepared with the
Viyu-subduing drugs should also be resorted to. 78.

D^runa-karma : — The employment of harde-
ning measures (Daruna-karma) is efficacious in con-
nection with soft ulcers and in the following man-
ner. Barks of Dhava^ Priyangu^ As oka, Rohini,
Triphald, Dhdtaki flowers, Lodhra and Sarjarasa^ taken
in equal parts and pounded into fine powders, should be
strewn over the ulcer, i.e., the ulcer should be dusted
with the same. 79.

• Kshlfra- Karma (Potential cauterization): —
The measure of applying alkali should be adopted for the

* Blood-letting should be resorted to in the event of any vitiated
blood being found to have been involved in the case ; but in the event of
a simitar participation of any deranged Kapha, oils and lotions composed
of the Viyu-destroying drugs should be made use of.

Chap. I.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

257

purification of the sore of a long-standing ulcer which is
of an indurated character with its margin raised higher
(than the surrounding skin), and is marked by itching
and a stubborn resistance to all purifying medicines. 8o.

AgTlI-^KErma (actual cauterization) An ulcer
incidental to an act of lithotomic operation allowing the
urine to dribble out through its fissure, or one marked
by excessive bleeding, or in which the connecting ends
have been completely severed, should be actually cauter-
ised with fire. 8i .

Krishna- Karma S —The blackening of a
white cicatrix, which is the result of a bad or defective
granulation, should be made (after the complete healing
up of the ulcer) in the following manner. Several Bhalld^
taka seeds should be first soaked in the urine of a cow
(and then dried in the sun, this process should be
repeated for seven days consecutively), after which they
should be kept (a week) immersed in a pitcher full of
milk. After that the seeds should be cut into two and
placed in an iron pitcher. Another pitcher should be
buried in the ground with a thin and perforated lid
placed over its mouth, and the pitcher containing the
seeds should be placed upon it with its mouth downward
(so that the mouths of the Wo pitchers might meet), and
then the meeting place should be firmly joined (with
clay). This being done a cow^dung fire should be lit
around the upper pitcher. The oily matter (melted by
the heat) and dribbling down from the BhallAtaka seeds
into the underground pitcher should be slowly and care- *
fully collected. The hoofs of village animals (such as
horses, etc.) and those which live in swamps (Anupas—
such as buffaloes, etc.) should be burnt and pounded
together into extremely fine powder. The oil (of the
Bhalldtaka seeds collected as above) should then be

33

'258

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. I.

mixed with this powder, and applied to the white
cicatrix. Similarly, the oily essence of the piths of
some kinds of wood, as well as of some kinds of fruit
{Phala-sneha) prepared in the manner of the Bhalldtaka
oil (and mixed with the powdered ashes of fioofs) should
be used for the blackening of a cicatrix. 82-83.

P2CndU-ka.ra.na. : — The natural and healthy
colour (Pdndu) of the surrounding skin ghould be im-
parted to a cicatrix which has assumed a black colour
owing to the defective or faulty healing up of the sore in
the following manner. The fruit of the Rohini* should be
immersed in goat’s milk for seven nights and, afterwards
finely pasted with the same milk, should be applied
to the skin. This measure is called Paindu-karana
(imparting a yellow or natural skin-colour to the
cicatrix). To attain the same result, the powder of a
new earthen pot, Vetasa roots, S'dla roots. Sulphate of
iron, and Madhuka (Yashti-madhu) pasted together with
honey may be used. As an alternative, the hollow rind
of the Kapittha fruit, from which the pulp has been
removed, should be filled with the urine of a goat to-
gether with Kdsisa (Sulphate of iron), Rochand, Tuttham
(Sulphate of copper). Haritdla, Manahs’ild, scrapings
of raw bamboo skin, Prapunndda (seeds of Ch^kunde),
and Rasanjana and buried a month beneath the roots
of an Arjum tree after which it should be taken out
and applied to the black cicatrix. The shell of a hen’s
egg, Kataka, Madhuka, (Yashti-madhu), sea-oysters and
‘crystals^ (pearls according to Jejjata and Brahmadeva)
taken in equal parts should be pounded and pasted with

* Rohini, ■ccording to some coamentatori, mean* a kind of Haritaki ;
according to otben, it means Kata-tumbi.

t Burnt ashet of sea-oysters and pearls etc., should be used.

Chap. L]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

259

the urine of a cow and made into boluses which should
be rubbed over the cicatrix.^ 84-87.

Roma-sanjanana— hair-producers The
burnt ashes of ivory and pure Rasdnjana (black
antimony) pounded (and pasted with goat’s milk) should
be applied to the spot where the appearance of hair
{Lomotpatti) is desired. An application of this plaster
would lead to the appearance of hair even on the palms
of the hands. Another alternative is a pulverised
compound consisting of the burnt ashes of the bones,
nails, hair, skin, hoofs and horns of any quadruped,
over a part of the body, previously anointed (rubbed)
with oil, which would lead to the appearance of hair in
that region. And lastly, a plaster composed of Sulphate
of iron, and tender Karmija leaves pasted with the
expressed juice of Kapittha, would be attended with
the same result. 88—90.

Hair-depllators The hair of an ulcer-
ated part of the body found to interfere with the satis-
factory healing up of the ulcer, should be shaved with
a razor or clipped with scissors, or rooted out with the
help of forceps. As an alternative, an application of a
plaster consisting of two parts of pulverised (burnt ashes
of) conch-shell and one part of Haritdla (yellow orpiment
or yellow oxide of arsenic) pasted with Sukta (an
acid gruel) over the desired sgpt, would be attended
with the same result A compound made of the oil of
BhallaCtaka mixed with the milky exudation of Snuhi,
should be used by an intelligent physician as a depila-^
tory measure. As an alternative, the burnt ashes of the
stems of plantain leaves and Dirghavrinta (SyonAka)
mixed with rodc-salt, Haritdla and the seeds of Sami,

* This also is a remedy for giving a natural colour to the skin.

s6o

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

tChap. I.

pasted with cold water, should be deemed a good hair-
depilatory.* A plaster composed of the ashes of the
tail of a domestic lizard, plantain, Haritdla (oxide of
arsenic), and the seeds of Ingudi burnt together and
pasted with oil and water, and baked in ^he sun may
also be used for the eradicating of hair in the affected
locality, 94-95.

Vasti" Karma : — A medicated Vasti (enema)
should be applied to the rectum in the case*' of an ulcer
marked by an aggravated condition of the deranged
Vayu which is extremely dry and is attended with an
excruciating pain occurring specially in the lower region
of the body. A measure of Uttara-vasti (Vaginal or
Urethral syringe) should be adopted in the cases of
strictures and other disorders connected with urine,
semen and menstruation, as well as in cases of
gravel f in case these are due to an ulcer. An ulcer is
purified, softened and healed up by bandaging leaving
no room for the apprehension of a relapse. Hence
bandaging is recommended. 96-98.

Pa.tra€l£(na. (application of leaves on an ulcer) : — •
Leaves possessed of proper medicinal virtues taking
into consideration the particular Dosha and season of the
year should be tied (over the medicinal plaster applied)
over an ulcer of non-shifting or non-changing character
and not affecting a large depth of flesh and which
refuses to be healed up owing to its extreme dryness.
An ulcer of the deranged VAyu should be tied over with
^ the leaves of the Eranda^ Bhurja^ Putika^ or Haridrd
plants as well as with those of the Upodikd and
Gdmbhdri, An ulcer marked by an aggravated condition

* According to seme this may be used internally for the purpose.

t D. R. Some read “Tathrfnile” in place of “Asmarl-traiie.**
. **Tatkini}e*’ means and in oases of (aggravated) Viiyu.

Chap. li]

CHIkITSA STHANAM.

261

of the deranged Pitta, or incidental to a vitiated condi-
tion of the blood, should be tied in the aforesaid manner
with the leaves of the Kds'mari, the Kshira trees (milk-
exuding trees), and aquatic plants. An ulcer due to the
deranged and aggravated Kapha, should be tied over
with the leaves of the Pdthd, Murvd, Guduchi, Kdka-
mdchi, Haridrd or of the S'ukandsd, Only those leaves
which are not rough, nor putrid, nor old and decomposed,
nor worm-^aten and which are soft and tender shouldtbe
used for purposes of Patradfiina.^ The rationale of such
a procedure (Patra-vandha) is that the leaves tied by an
intelligent physician in the manner above indicated
serve to generate heat or cold and retain the liniment
or medicated oil in their seat of application. 99-102.

Vcrmifug'a.l : — The germination of worms due
to flies in an ulcer is attended with various kinds of
extreme pain, swelling and bleeding in case the worms
cat up the flesh. A decoction of the drugs of the
Surasddi gana proves efficacious as a wash and healing
medicine in such a case. The ulcer should be plastered
with such drugs as the bark of Saptapama, Karanja,
Arka, Nimba, and Rdjddana pasted with the urine of a
cow, or washed with an alkaline wash (for expelling the
vermin from it). As an alternative, the worms should be
brought out of the ulcer by placing a small piece of raw
flesh on the ulcer. These vj^rmin may be divided into
twenty groups or classes, which will be fully dealt with
later on, {Uttara-Tantram— ch. 54). 103.

Vrlnha.nam (use of restorative and constructiye
tonics) : — All kinds of tone-giving and constructive
measures should be adopted in the case of a patient

u

* The leaf which does not poison the Sneha and the essence of the
medictnai drugs placed in a folded piece of linen (and applied over an
ulcer is the proper leaf and) should be used for tying over the paste.

262

THE SUSHRUtA SAMHITA.

[Chap. 1.

weak and emaciated with the troubles of a long-standing
sore, taking full precaution not to tax his digestive
powers. Anti-toxic (Vishaghna) medicines and measures
and symptoms of poisonings will be described under
their respective heads in the Kalpa-Sth^nam . • 104-105.
^iro-virechana and Nasya ;-s'iro-vire-

chana measures (errhines) should be resorted to by
skilful physicians in respect of ulcers situated in the
clavicle regions and marked by itching and swelling.
The use of medicated (fatty) snufF (Nasya) is recom-
mended in cases where the ulcers would be found to be
seated in the regions above the clavicles and marked by
an aggravated condition of the deranged Vdyu, pain,
and absence of the oily matter. 106-107.

Kavala-dharana : — Medicated gargles (con-
sisting of decoctions of drugs) of purifying or healing
virtues either hot or cold * (according to require-
ments) should be used in the case of an ulcer in the
mouth, for the purpose of alleviating the Doshas therein,
for allaying the local pain and burning, and for removing
the impurities of the teeth and the tongue. 108.

Dhuma-p^na inhaling of smoke or vapours
(of medicated drugs) should be prescribed in cases of ulcers
of the deranged Vdyu and Kapha attended with swelling,
secretion and pain and situated in the region above the
clavicles. Application of honey and clarified butter, se-
parately or mixed together should be prescribed in cases
of extended or elongated ulcers which are traumatic or
incidental in their character (Sadyo-Vrana) for allaying
the heat of the ulcer and for bringing about its adhe-
sion. Surgical instruments should be used in connec-

* Hot gargles are recommended in cases of ulcers of the deranged
Viyu and Kapha while cold ones in cases of ulcers of the aggravated Pitta
and blood.

Clup. I.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

263

tion with an ulcer which is deep-seated but provided
with a narrow orifice and which is due to the pene-
tration of a ^alya (shaft) and which could not be re-
moved with the hand alone. 109- 1 1 1 .

The dtet of an ulcer-patient should in all cases be
made to consist of food which is light in quantity
as well a? in quality, demulcent, heat-making (in potency)
and possessed of appetising properties.* * * § Protective rites
should be performed for the safety of an ulcer-patient
from the influences of malignant stars and spirits with
the major and the minor duties (Yama and Niyama)
enjoined to be practised on his behalf. 112-113.

The causes of ulcers are six*}* ; their seats in the
body number eightj: in all ; the features which charac-
terise them arc five $. The medicinal measures and
remedies in respect of ulcers are sixty in number.
And these ulcers arc curable with the help or co-opera-
tion of the four necessary factors (the physician, the
medicines, the nurse and the patient). 114.

The comparatively smaller number of drugs which
I have mentioned (under the heads of Ropana,
Sodhana, etc., in the present chapter) from fear of
prolixity, may be increased in combination with other
drugs or substances of similar virtue, (digestionary trans-
formation and potency, etc.) without any apprehension

* See Chap. XIX.— Sulra-Sthdnam.

t The six causes of an ulcer are Vdyu, Pitta, Kapha, Sannip^ta,
S'onita aud Agantu.

t The eight seats of an ulcer are Tvak, Mdnsa, S'ira, Sniyu, Sandhi,
Asthi, Koshtha and Marma.

§ The five symptoms of an ulcer are due to Vita, Pitta, Kapha,
Sannipdta and Agantu. The symptoms due to S'onita being identical
with those due to Pitta, are not separately counted.

II The sixty medicinal measures and remedies arc those described
before in the present chapter.

264 THE SUSHRtJTA SAMHITA. [Clmp. 1.

of doing any mischief thereby. Recipes consisting
of rare or a large number of drugs or ingredients,
should be made up with as many of them as would be
available in the absence of all of them, as mentioned
in the present work. A drug belonging to^any parti-
cular Gana or group if separately described as non-
eflficacious to any specific disease, should be omitted
whereas a drug not belonging to a group may be added
to it if it is elsewhere laid down as positively beneficial
thereto. 115-117.

Upadrava : — The distressing supervening symp-
toms which arc found to attend a case of ulcer, are quite
different from those of an ulcer-patient. Those which
confine themselves solely to the ulcer are five in all —
smell, colour, etc., and those which arc exclusively mani-
fest in the patient arc fever, diarrhoea, hiccup, vomit-
ing, fainting fits, aversion to food, cough, difficult
breathing, indigestion and thirst. The medical treat-
ment of ulcers though described in detail in the present
chapter, will be further dealt with in the next chapter
on Sadyo-Vrana. 118-120.

Thus ends the first Chapter of the Chikitsila-Sthdnam in the Sus'ruta
Samhitd which deals with the treatment of the two kinds of ulcer.

CHAPTER 11.

Now we shall discourse on the medical treatment of
recent or tr^mmatic wounds or sores (S^dyovr^ttld.*"
Chlkits^C). I,

Mctrlca.1 Texts; —The holy Dhanvantari, the
foremost of the pious and the greatest of all discoursers,
thus discoursed to his disciple Susruta, the son of
Visvdmitra. 2.

Different shapes Of Sores : —I shall de-
scribe the shapes of the various kinds of Vrana (sores
or wounds) caused by weapons of variously shaped edges
in the different parts of the human body. Traumatic
ulcers have a variety of shapes. Some of these are
elongated, others are rectangular, or triangular, or
circular, while some are crescent shaped, or extended, or
have a zigzag shape, and some are hollow ia the middle
like a saucer, and lastly some have she shapes of a
barley corn (bulged out at the middle). An abscess
or a swelling, due to the several Doshas and which
spontaneouly bursts out, may assume any of the aforesaid
forms, while the one effected by a surgeon’s knife should
never have a distorted or an improper shape, A surgeon
thoroughly familiar with the shapes of ulcers is never
puzzled at the sight of one of a terrible and distorted
shape. 3-- 5 *,

Physicians of yore have grouped these variously
shaped traumatic ulcers under six broad sub-heads, such
as the Chhinna (cut), Bhinna (punctured or perforated),
Viddha (pierced), Kshata (contused), Pichchita (crushed),
and the Ghrishta (mangled or lacerated) according to
their common features and I shall describe their
symptoms. 6 .

34

’ 266

THK SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. U.

Their definitions: — A traumatic ulcer which
is oblique or straight and elongated is called a Chhinna
^cut) ulcer, while a complete severance of a part or
member of the body is also designated by that name.
A perforation of any of the cavities or rdteptacles of
the body by the tip of a Kunta, spear, Rishti, or a sword
or by a horn, attended with a little discharge, constitutes
what is called a Bhinna (punctured) wound or ulcer.
The Amjisaya (stomach), the Pakv^saya (intestines), the
AgnyAsaya (gall-bladder?', the Mutrdsaya (urinary
bladder! the Raktdsaya (receptacle of blood), the heart,
the Unduka and the lungs constitute what is called the
Koshtha (viscu>). A perforation (of the wall of any)
of the Asayas causes it to become filled with blood
which is discharged through the urethra, the anus, the
mouth or the nostrils and is attended with fever, thirst,
fainting fits, dyspnoea, burning sensations, tympanites,
suppression bf stool, urine and flatus (Vata) with an
aversion for food, perspiration, redness of the eyes, a
bloody smell in the mouth, and feted one in the body
and an aching pain in the heart and in the sides. 7 — lo.

Now hear me discourse on (their) detailed symptoms.
A perforation of the wall of the Ams^saya (stomach) is
marked by constant vomiting of blood, excessive
tympanites and an excruciating pain. A perforation of
the Fakvs^8aya fills it with blood and is attended with
extreme pain, a heaviness in the limbs, coldness of the
sub'Umbilical region, and bleeding through the (lower)
“ducts and orifices of the body. Even in the absence of
any perforation, the Antras (intestines) are filled with
blood through the small pores or apertures in their walls
in the same manner as a pitcher with its mouth firmly
covered may be filled through the pores (in its sides), and
^ s^se of heaviness is also perceived in their inside. n-i 3.

Ch»p. IL] CHJKITSA STHANAM. 267

A wound or an ulcer caused by any sharp pointed
Salya (shaft) in any part of the body other than the
aforesaid Asayas with or without that Salya being extri-
cated is called a Viddha (pierced one). An ulcer which
is neither alcut nor a perforation or puncture but partakes
of the nature of both and is uneven is called a Kshata
(wound). A part of the body with the local bone
crushed between the folds of a door or by a blow be-
comes extended and covered with blood and marrow and
is called a Pichchita (thrashed) wound or ulcer. The
skin of any part of the body sufifering abrasion through
friction or from any other such like causes and attended
with heat and a secretion is called a Ghrishta (mangled
or lacerated) wound or ulcer. 14-17.

Their Treatment : —A part or member of the
body any wise cut, perforated, pierced or wounded which
is attended with excessive bleeding and with the local
Vdyu enraged or aggravated by the incidehtal bleeding,
or haemorrhage will occasion excruciating pain. Potions
of Sneha (oily or fatty liquids) and using the same as a
washing (in a lukewarm state) should be advised in such
cases. Preparation of Vesavaras and other Krisards
largely mixed with oil or clarified butter should be used
as poultices and fomentations with the Mdsha pulse,
etc., and the use of oily ungents and emulsive Vastis
(enematas)* prepared with dec&ctions of Vdyu-subduing
drugs should be applied. A crushed or thrashed wound
or abrasion is not attended wi:h any excessive bleeding
an absolute absence whereof, (on^he contrary) gives risb
to an excessive burning sensation and suppuration in
the affected part. Cold washes and cooling plasters
should be used in these cases for the alleviation of the

* Snehapdna is fccommendcd when the ulcer is in a region above the
umbilicus and Vasti*karma when the ulcer is in a subumbiiical region.

268

THE SUSHRtJTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. It.

burning and suppuration as well as for the cooling of
the (incarcerated) heat. What has been specifically
said of these six forms of ulcers, or w'ounds should be
understood to include the treatment of all kinds of trau-
matic wounds or ulcers as well. i8 — 20. *

Treatment of cuts or incised wounds

&C S — Now we shall discourse on the medical treatment
of Gbhinna cuts An open mouthed ulcer on the side
of the head* should be duly sutured as described before
and firmly bandaged. An car severed or lopped off
should be sutured in the proper way and position and
oil should be poured into its cavity. A Chhinna cut on
the Krikatika (lying on the posterior side of the junction
of the neck and the head) and even if it allow the
V^yu f (air) to escape through its cavity should be
brought together and duly sutured and bandaged in a
manner (so as not to leave any intervening space
between\ The part thus adhesioned should be sprinkled
with clarified butter prepared from goat's milk. The
patient should be made to take his food lying on his
back, properly secured or fastened with straps (so that he
might not move his head and advised to perform all
other physical acts such as, urination, defecation etc , in
that position). 21-24

In the case of a lateral and wide-mouthed wound
(sword-cut, etc.) on the extremeties, the bone-joints
should be- duly set and joined together as instructed
before and the wound should be sutured and speedily
* bandaged in the manner of a VelHtaka bandage, or

* Several commentatora explain those that are situated either on the
head or on the sides.

t The dictum that a hurl on any of the wind-carrying sounding chan-
nels is pronounced to be incurable, should not be supposed to hold good
in the preiifht case.

Chap. n.l CHIKITSA STHAKAM. 269

with a piece of skin or hide in the Gophand or such
other form as would seem proper and beneficial and oil
should be poured over it. In the case of a wound on
the back the patient should be laid on his back, while in
the case (if its occurring on the chest the patient should
be laid on his face* 25-27.

In the case of a hand or a leg being carried away or
completely severed the wound should be cauterised with
the application of hot oil and bandaged in the manner
of a Kosha bandage and proper healing medicines
should be applied. An oil cooked with the eight drugs
Chandanat Padmakuy Rodhra^ Uipala^ Priyan^u, Haridrd,
(Yasthimadhu) and milk, forms one of the
most efficacious healing (Ropana) agents A Kalka of
the thirteen dxxxgs — Chandafiay Kaikatdkhya, the two
kinds of Sahd (MugAni and Mdshdni), Mdnsi, (D.R. —
Mdshahva, Somdhva), Amritd, Hatenu^ Mrindla
Triphaldy Padmaka and Utpala should be cooked in
oil mixed with milk (four times that of oil) and the three
other kinds of oily matter (lard, marrow and clarified
butter) and this medicated oil should be used for
sprinkling over a wound of this type for the purpose of
healing (Ropana). 28.

Medical Treatment of Bhinna

Henceforth we shall deal with the medical treatment
of Bhinna (excised) wounds.^ A case of an excised eye
(Bhinna) should be given up as incurable. But in
the case where an eye (ball) instead of being completely
separated would be found to be dangling out (of -its

^ For the complete elimination of the deranged Dosha pus, etc ,
of the wound tnvloved in the case— Jejjata.

He who has got a wound on his back Jihould be laid on his face and
*he who has got an ulcer on his breast should be laid on his back—
Different Reading Gayi,

270

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap, It.

socket) the affected organ should be re-instated in its
natural cavity in a manner so as not to disturb the
connected ^irAs (nerve arrangements) and gently pressed
with the palms of the hand by first putting a lotus leaf
on its (eye) surface. After that the eye shoufd be filled
(Tarpana) with the following (D.R.-Ajena in place of
‘ Anena' — i.e., prepared from goat’s milk) medicated
clarified butter, which should be as well used in the
form of an errhine. The recipe is as follows : — Clarified
butter prepared from goat's milk, Madhuka, Utpala,
Jivaka and Rishavaka taken in equal parts should
be pasted together, and cooked with sixteen seers of
cow's milk and four seers of clarified butter* The
use of the medicated Ghrita thus prepated should be
regarded as commendable in all types of occular hurt or
injury. 29.

In the case of a perforation of the abdomen marked
by the discharge of lumps or rope-like Varti (fat)
through the wound, the emitted or ejected fat-lump
should be dusted with the burnt ashes (D. R. -powders)
of astringent woods (such as Manu, Arjuna^ etc.) and
black clay (pounded together). A ligature of thread
should then be bou id round the fat-lump and the fat-
lump cut off with a heated instrument. Honey should
then be applied and the wound (Vrana) should then
be duly bandaged. The patient should be caused
to drink clarified butter after the full digestion of his

injested food. Instead of this Ghrita, milk prepared

*

* Several authorities, however, say that equal parts of clarified
butter prepared from goat’s milk and from cow’s milk should be taken and
cooked with 16 seers of cow’s milk and with the four drugs as a^Kalka.

But Gstyi recommends only four seers of clarified butter prepared from
goat’s milk cooked with 16 seers of cow’s milk and the four drugs at
a Ka}ka« ;

Chap. II }

CHTKITSA STHANAM.

271

medicinally with Yashti maddu, Ldkshd and Gokshura,
mixed with (a proper quantity of) sugar and castor oil
(as Prakshepa)* is equally commendable for the alle-
viation of the pain and the burning sensation, (in the
wound or cilcer). The fat-lump (pariental fat) afore-
said causes a rumbling sound with pain in the abdomen
and may prove even fatal in the event of its being left
uncut. The medicated oil to be mentioned hereafter
in connection with Medaja-Granthi should be applied
in such cases. 30-32

Foreign bodies (Salya) piercing into any of the
Koshthas after having run through the (seven layers ofj
skin, whether passing through the veins, etc , (muscles,
nerves, bones or joints or not, produces the distressing
symptoms described before (Ch. 1 1 1. — Sutra). The blood
(of the affected chamber or receptacle) in such case lies
incarcerated therein in the event of its failing to find an
outlet and causes a paUor of the face and a coldness of the
extremities and of the face in the patient. Respiration
becomes cold, the eyes red-coloured, the bowels consti-
pated and the abdomen distended. The manifestation
of these symptoms indicates the incurable character of
the disease. 33-34.

• This explanation is given on the authority of old V^gabhata.
Dallana, however, explains the verse in a difTerent way. He explains it
to mean two different preparations of milk — one with Yashli-madhu and
mixed with sugar and castor oil as a Prakshepa and the other with
Gokshura and mixed with Lakihd and castor oil as a Prakshepa.

A third ln'erpr..tation woul 1 make three preparations of milk prepared
separately with Yashii-madhu, Ldkshd and Gokshura— sugar and castor
oil being mixed in the first (as Prakshepa) and castor oil alone in the
second and third.

A fourth preparation would be to prepare the milk separately with
Yasliimadhu, Ldkshd and Gokshura as in the preceding case— without the;
(fiddition of castor oil (as Prakshepa).

272

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. ' tCh»p. II,

^ ■

Emesis is beneficial in the case where the blood
would be found to be confined in the Amds'aya
(stomach). Purgatives should unhesitatingly be pre-
scribed where the blood would be found to have been
lodged in the Pakvds'aya (intestines) and »Asthdpana
measures without oil should be employed with hot,
purifying (^Sodhana) substances (such as the cow-urine,
etc.). The patient should be made to drink a Yavdgu
(gruel) with Saindhava salt and his diet should consist
of boiled rice mixed with the soup of barley, Kola and
Kulalttha pulse divested of oil. 35-36.

In a case of a perforation or piercing of any of the
bodily Koshthas attended with excessive haemorrhage
or bleeding, the patient should be caused to drink (a
potion of animal) blood and such a case marked by the
passage of stool, urine, etc., through their proper channels
of outlet and by the absence of fever and tympanites
and other dangerous symptoms, (Upadrava), may end
in the ultimate recovery of the patient. 37-38.

In a case of a perforation of the Koshtha (abdomen)
where the intestines have protruded or bulged out in an
untorn condition, they should be gently re-introduced
into the cavity and placed in their original position,
and not otherwise. According to others, however,
lai^e black ants should be applied even to the perforat-
ed intestines in such a case and their bodies should be
separated from their heads after they had firmly bitten
the perforated parts with their claws. Aftei- that the
intestines with the heads of the ants attached to them
should be gently pushed back into the cavity and re-
instated In their original situation therein. The bulged
out intestines should be rinsed with grass, blood and
dust, washed with milk and lubricated with clari-
fied butter Mid gently re-introduced into the cavity of

(^p. iLi

CHlktTSA STHANAM.

2^3

the abdomen with the hand with its finger naiis cicaniy
paired. The dried intestines should be washed with mtfk
and lubricated with clarified butter before introducing
it into their former and natural place in the abdo-
men. 39-41^.

In a case where the intestines could be but partially
introduced, the three following measures should be
adopted. TJie interior of the throat of the patient
should be gently rubbed with a finger [and the urging
for vomiting thus engendered, would help the full
introduction of the intestines into the abdominal cavity].
As an alternative, he should be enlivened with sprays
of cold water ; or he should be caught hold of by his
hands and lifted up into the air with the help of strong
attendants and shaken in a manner that would bring
about a complete introduction of the intestines into
the natural position in the abdominal cavity. They
should be so introduced as to press upon their specific
(Maladhari) Kald (facia). 42-43.

In a case where the re-introduction of the intes-
tines into the abdominal cavity would be found to be
difficult owing to the narrowness or largeness of the
orifice of the wound, it should be extended or widened
with a small or slight incisiona ccording to requirements,
and the intestines re-introduced into their proper place.
The orifice or mouth of the woiind should be forthwith
carefully sutured as soon as the intestines would be
found to have been introduced into their right place.
Intestines dislodged from their proper seat, or not intro-
duced into their correct position, or coiled up into a
lump bring on death. 44-46.

Subseciuent Treatment t -[After the full
and correct introduction of the intestines] the wound
should he bandaged with a piece of silk-cloth saturated

3 S

2^4 fHE sUsMROtA SAMHItA. ’

with clarified butter, and the patient should be given a
draught of tepid clarified butter (D. R. tepid milk) with
castor oil for an easy passage of the stool and downward
coursing of the Vdyu (spontaneous emission of the flatus).
Then, for its healing up (Ropana), a medicafted oil, pre-
pared with the bark of the Asvakama, Dhava^ S'dlmali,
Mesha-s’ringi, S'allaki, Arjuna, Viddri, and Kshiri trees
and Vald roots should be applied to the wound. For a
year the patient should live a life of strictest conticence
and forego all kinds of physical exercise. 47 — 48.

The legs and the eyes of the patient should be
washed and sprinkled with water in the event of the
bursting out of the testicles which should be intro-
duced into their proper place within the scrotum, and
sewn up in the manner of a Tunna-sevani (raised seam).
The scrotum should be bandaged in the shape of a
Gopbani^-Vandha and a restraining apparatus (Ghatta-
Yantra) placed round the waist of the patient (to
guard it against its oscillations or hanging down). The
wound should not be lubricated with any kind of
oil or Ghrita inasmuch as it would make the wound
moist and slimy. The wound should be healed with a
medicated oil prepared with Kdldnusdri, Aguru, Eld,
Jdti flower, Chandana, Padmaka, Manahs'ild, Devaddru,
Amrita and sulphate of copper (pounded together). 49-50.

A plug of hair should be inserted into a wound on
the head, after having extracted the foreign matter
therefrom, with a view to arrest the exuding of the
brain matter (Mastulunga) which invariably proves fatal
to the patient through the aggravation of the deranged
Vdyu in consequence thereof. The hairs of the plug
should be taken out one by one as the healing process
prepresses (granulation). An oleaginous medicated plug
or lint should be inserted into a wound on any other

Chap. II.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

275

part of the body, which should be treated with the
measures and remedial agents laid down in connectiofx
with a traumatic ulcer after having first allowed the
vitiated blood to escape. 51-52.

The medicated oil known as the Chakra- taila*
should be poured (frequently applied) by means of a
slender pipe into an ulcer (wound) which is deep-seated
but narrow-mouthed, after first letting out the vitiated
blood-J-. An oil duly prepared and boiled with Samangd,
Haridtd, Padtnd, Trharga\ Tuttha, Vidanga, Katuka,
Pathyd, Guduchi and Karanja acts as a good healing
(Ropana) £^ent (in these cases). The use of an oil
prepared with Tdlis'a, Padtnaka, Mdnsi, Harenu, Aguru,
Chandana, and the two kinds of Haridrd, Padrna-vija,
Udira and Yashti-madhu acts as a good healing remedy
in cases of traumatic ulcers. 53‘SS'

A cut wound (Kshata) should be treated with its
own specific measures and remedies, while a bruised
one (Fichchita) should be treated (to all intents and
purposes) as a case of Bhagna (bone-fracture). The first
treatment of a mangled or contused wound (Ohrishta)
is to extinguish pain, after which it should be dusted
with the powder of proper medicinal drugs (such a.s
S'dla, Safya, Arjuna, etc.). 56-57.

In the case of a dislocation of any part of the body,
caused by a fall (from a tree), or in the event of having
been run over or trampled down (Mathita — by a carriage
or by a beast), or of being wounded (by a blow, etc.),

^ The oil just ptessed out of an old oiUmill or squeezed out of the
chips of wood belonging to an old one, in the manner of the AxiU*talla
to be described hereafter, is called the Ohakxa 'taila

t The vitiated blood should first be let oat for fear of putrefaction
of the ulcer.

TriphaU, Trikatu and Trimada are called ^ttiTarga*

2/6 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [C1»»P*

the patient should be kept immersed in a large tank
(Droni) of oil and the diet should consist of the soup or
essence (Rasa) of meat. A man fatigued (from the
labours of a journey), or hurt at any of the Harinas,
should be likewise treated with the « preceding
measures. 58.

Oil or clarified butter should be always administered
as drinks, washes or external healing applications for an

r

ulcer-patient with a due regard to his temperament and
the nature of the season. Medicated Ghritas, yet to be
mentioned in connection with the medical treatment of
a Pittaja abscess, should be used as well in the case of
a traumatic ulcer (according to its respective indica-
tions). A physician should wash a traumatic ulcer
attended with an aching pain either with a Vald-oil or
tepid clarified butter (according to the nature of the
^ason and the temperament of the patient).* 59—61.

An oil cooVfAyNx^Samangd^Rajani^ JPadmd(Bhivgi),
Pathyd, sulphate of copper, Suvarchdd, Padmaka,
Lodkra, Yaskti-madhuka, Vidanga, Harepuka, Tdlisa-
patra^ Nalada (/atdmdnsi), (red) Chandana, Padma*
kedara, Manjishthd^ Udira^ Ldkshd^ and the tender
leaves of Kshiri trees, Piydla seeds, raw and tender
fruit, or with as many of them as would be
available, should be regarded as a good healing remedy
in respect of all non-malignant traumatic sores or ulcers.
Applications of astringent, sweet, cooling and oily
medicines should be used for a week in a case of a
traumatic ulcer (Sadyo-vrana), after which those men-
tioned before, in the Chapter of Divraniya, should be
adopted. 62— *63.

* WUhollin Autumn and in the cate of a patient of Rakta-pkta
tempcfament, and with Vald^oil in winter and in the case of one of a Vdta*
kapha temperament.

Chap. II.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

277

Treatment of Dushta-Vrana:— in the

case of a malignant ulcer (Dushta-Vrana) emetics,
errhines, purgatives, Asthdpana, fasting, specific sorts
ipf diet (composed of bitter, pungent and astringent
things) anc> blood-letting, should be prescribed (accord-
ing to the requirements of each case). The ulcer or
sore should be washed with the decoctions of the
drugs of both the Aragvadhddi and the Surasddi ganas,
and an oil cooked with a decoction of the said
drugs should be applied to the wound for ithe
purification (Sodhana) thereof. As an alternative, an oil
boiled and prepared in an alkaline water or solution
(four times that of oil) with a Kalka of alkaline subs-
tances (such as Ghantdpdruli, Palds'a, etc.) should be
used for that end. Oil cooked with Dravanti
(^atamuli, according to certain authorities, Mushika-
parni according to others), Chiravilva, Danti, Chit-
raka, Prithvikd Nimba-leaves, Kdsisa, Tuttha, Trivrit,
Tejovati, Nili (indigo), the two kinds of Haridrd,
Saindhava s§lt, Tila, Bhumi-Kadamba, Suvahd, S'ukd-
khyd, Ldngaldhvd, Natpdli, Jdlini, Madayanti,
Mrigddani, Sudhd, Murvd, Arka, Kiidri, Haritdla,
and Karanja, or with as many of them as would be
available, should be used for the purification (of a malig-
nant sore or ulcer). If found applicable, a medicated
Ghrita prepared and cooked w;ith the foregoing drugs
and substances as Kalka should be used for the same
purpose. In the case of a malignant ulcer, due to the
aggravated Vdyu, the purifying remedy should cohsret
of a Kalka of Saindhava salt, Trivrit and castor leaves.
In the case of a (malignant) Pittaja sore, the remedy
should consist of a Kalka of Trivrit^ Haridrd, Yashti-
madhu and Tila. In the case of a malignant ulcer,
caused by the aggravated Kapha, the purifying remedial

278

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. 11.

agent should consist of Tila^ Tejohvd^ Danti, Svarjikd
and Chitraka roots. An ulcer brought on owing to the
presence of the virus of Meha or Eashtha in the system,
measures and remedies mentioned under the treatmenln
of Dushta-vrana should be adopted and used.^ 64 — 68.

The recognised school of physicians, which recognises
these six types of traumatic sores, does not add to the
list, herein mentioned, other types of ulcers, whereas
vain pedagogues try to swell it with a larger number of
types by adding connotative prefixes and suffixes to the
names of the aforesaid six. It is mere vain-gloriousness
on their part to say so, since all the other types that
they can devise are but single instances and can be made
to fall under one of these six general heads. Hence
there should be only six kinds (of traumatic sores) and
not more. 69.

Thus ends the second Chapter of the Chikitsita Sthdnam of the Sus'ruta
Samhit^ which deals with the treatment of Sadyo-vrana (traumatic sores).

CHAPTER III.

Now shall discourse on the medical treatments
of fractures and dislocations (Bha.gfna.S). r.

Metrical Texts A fracture or dislocation
(Bhagna) occurring in a person of a Vdtika tempera-
ment, or of* intemperate habits, or in one who is sparing
in his diet, or is affected with such supervening disorders
(as fever, tympanites, suppression of the stool and urine,
&c.) is hard to curc.^ A fracture-patient must forego
the use of salt, acid, pungent and alkaline substances
and must live a life of strictest continence, avoid expo-
sure to the sun and forego physical exercises andparchi-
fying (devoid of oleaginous) articles of food. A diet
consisting of boiled rice, meat-soup, milk, f clarified
butter, soup of Satina pulse and all other nutritive and
constructive food and drink, should be discriminately
given to a fracture-patient. The barks of Udumhara^
Madhuka^ As^vattha, Palds^a, Kakuhha^ Bamboo^ Vata
or Sdla trees should be used as splints (Kusa). Manji-
shthd, Madhuka, red sandal wood and 5^//-rice mixed
with S'ata-Dhauta clarified butter (?>., clarified butter

* Jejjata does not read the first verse, but Gayi does.

t As a general rule, milk should not be prescribed to a patient
suffering from an ulcer (Vrana) in general ; but a case of fracture forms
an exception thereto. Some authorities hold that tepid milk may be
given to a fracture-patient, if there be no ulcer (Vrana). Others, on the
contrary, are of opinion that milk should not, in any case, be given to a
fracture -patient for fear of suppuration and the setting in of pus.

Others, however, take ^'Kshita-aarpih*’ to be a compound word and
explain the term to mean the clarified butter prepared from milk (as
distinguished from that prepared from curd).

But experience tells us that in cases of excessive weakness or emacia«
tion, milk may be given without any hesitation— Ed.

THE SUSHRtTA SAMltlTA.

[dhap^ Itt.

washed one hundred times in succe^ion) should be used
for plastering the fracture. 2-6,

Bandagfe : — Fractures should be (dressed and)
bandaged once a week in cold weather, on every fifths
day in temperate weather in spring and autumn),
and on every fourth day in hot weather (z>., in summer),
or the interval of the period for bandaging should be
determined by the intensity of the Doshas involved in
each individual case. An extremely loose bandage
prevents the firm adhesion of a fractured bone, a light
bandage gives rise to pain, swelling and suppuration
of the local skin, &c. Hence in cases of fractures,
experts prefer a bandage which is neither too tight nor
too loose. 7-8.

Washing'S : — A cold decoction of the drugs of
the Nyagrodhddi group should be used in washing (the
affected part), whereas in the presence of (excessive)
pain, (the part) should be washed with milk boiled with
the drugs of the (minor) Pancha-mula.or simply with the
oil known as the Chakra-taila made lukewarm*. Cold (or
warm) lotions and medicinal plasters (Pradehas)ofDosha-
subduing drugs should be prescribed with due regard to
the nature of the season and the Doshas involved in
each case- 9-10.

A' preparation of milk f from a cow, delivered for the
first time, boiled with the drugs of the Madhurddi group
and mixed with powdered shellac and clarified butter (as
ah afterthrow) should be given (when cold) to a fracture-
plitient as a beverage every morning. In a csise of

* In winter and where the aching pain ii preient due to Vdyn and

t Coniiiting of the drugs of the Kdkolyddi group weighing two Tedds,
nitfc sixteen Tolds, water sixty^four Tolds, boiled together with the water
eatiteli' evaporated.

dhap. in.] CHliCiTSA StHANAM.

fracture attended with ulcer on the part, an astringent
plaster plentifully mixed with honey and clarified butter
should be applied ; and the rest (diet and regimen of
conduct) should be as laid down in the case of a (simple)
fracture. ii-i2.

PrOg'nO^iS : -A case of fracture occurring in a
youth or a person with slightly deranged Doshas or in
winter, is held to be easily curable (with the help of the
aforesaid medicines and dietK A fractured bone in a,
youth is joined by the aforesaid treatment in the course
of a month, in two months in the case of a middle-
aged man and in three months in one of old age. 13-14.

An elevated and fractured joint should be reduced by
pressing it down, while one hanging down should be
set by raising it up, by pulling it in the case of it$
being pushed aude, and by reinstating it in its upward
(proper) position in the event of its being lowered down;
An intelligent physician should set all dislocated (Bhagna)
joints, whether fixed or movable, by the mode of
reduction, known as Anchhana, Pidana, (pressure),
Sankshepa and Vandhana (bandaging). 15-16.

Trcatincnt A crushed or dislocated joint
should not be shaken (?>., should be kept at rest) and
cold lotions or washes and medicated plasters (Pradeha)
should be applied to the part. A joint is spontaneously
reset to its natural or normal sta^te or position after the
correction of its deformity incidental to a blow or hurt
having been effected. The fractured of dislocated part
should be first covered with a piece of linen soaked in
clarified butter; Splint should then be placed over it
and the part properly bandaged. i7-t9.

Treatment of fractures In particular

limbs Now we shall discourse on the measures to
be adopted in fractures occurring in each particular

36

a$2 fItE SAlttttf A. t<3“P-

Umb. In the case of a nsil'joint, being in any way
crushed or swollen by the accumulation of the deranged
blood (in the locality), the incarcerated blood should be
first let out with the help of an awl {Axi) and the part
should be plastered with a paste of ^ 41 i-rice. * A finger or
phalanx bone put out of joint or fractured should be first
set in its natural position and bandaged with a piece of
thin linen and should be then sprinkled over with
clarified butter. In the case of a fracture in the foot the
fractured part should be first lubricated with clarified
butter, then duly splinted up, and bandaged with linen.
Such a patient should forego all kinds of locomotion.
In the case of a fracture of the knee-joint or thigh-bone
the affected part should be lubricated with clarified
butter and carefully pulled straight, after which it should
be splinted with barks (of Nyagrodha, etc.) and band-
aged with clean linen. In case of the fracture projecting
out a thigh-bone should be reset with the help of a
circular splint and bandaged. In the case of Sphutita
(cracked) or Fichchita (bruised) thigh-bone, the part
should be also bandaged in the aforesaid manner. 20-24,
In a case of a fracture in the Kati (Ilium-bone), it
should be reduced by the fractured bone being raised
up or pressed down (as the case may be) and the patient
should then be treated with Vasti (enematas of medicated
oils or Ghritas*). In the case of a fracture of one
of the rib-bones (P^r^aka), the patient should be lubri-
otted with clarified butter. He should then be lifted
^ (in a standiag posture) and the fractured rib (bone),
nrhether left or right, should be relaxed by being rubbed
with clarified butter. Strips of bamboo or pad

* Is the Nidii».StUu~QMp. XV., 9— it It stated that a wae of
ftaetare is the Kati dioald be given np (Vatjjqwt), Jcjjata, however,
ci^pltdBa *‘V«ij<Vet’’ at ''haid to core.”

Oiap. m.3 CHIKITSA STflAHAM. 2»3

(KavalikA) should bs placed over it and the patient
should be carefully laid in a tank or cauldron Ml of
oil with the bamboo splint duly tied up with straps
of hide. In the case of a dislocation of the Am8a>
Sandhi (Moulder-joint), the region of the Kaksha
(arm-pit) should be raised up with an iron-rod (Mushala)
and the wise physician should bandage the part, thus
reduced, in the shape of a Svastika (8-shaped) bandage.
A dislocated elbow-joint should be first rubbed with
the thumb, after which it should be pressed with a view
to set it in its right place by fixing and expanding the
same. After that the affected part should be sprinkled
over with any oleaginous substance. The same measures
should be adopted in the case of a dislocation of
the knee-joint (Jinu-sandhi), the wrist- joint (Gulpha-
sandhi) and the ankle-joint (Mani-vandha). 25-29.

In the case of fractured bones in the palms of the
hands, the two palms* should be made even and opposed,
and then bandaged together and the affected parts ahonld
be sprinkled with raw and unmedicated oil (Ama-tgila).
The patient should be maide later first to hold a ball of
cow-dung, then a ball of clay and then a piece of stonb
in his palms and so on, with the progressive return of
strength (to the affected parts), in a case of a fracture of
the Akshaka, the affected part should be first fomented
and then reduced by raising it up with a Mushala
(iron-rod) in the arm-pit or by pressing it down (as the
case may be) and should be firmly bandaged. A case
of fractured am-bone should be treated according
to the directions given in the case of a fractured
thigh-bone. 30-32,

* The text has tali sami kritpiJ* explains **Ubhe tale*'
to mean **pAlme of the hands and soles of the feet Gayd Dto explains

it to meVtn **the palms of both the bands/'

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

tdhap.lil.

I'l th 3 cas 3 of a bsnding (twisting) or intussuscep-
tion of the neck downward, the head should be lifted up
by putting the fingers into the hollow (Avatu) above the
nape of the neck and at the roots of the jaw-bones (Hanu,*.
Then the part should be bandaged with a pieCe of linen
after having evenly put the splint (Kus'a round the neck).
The patient should be caused to lie constantly on his
back for a week. In a case of a dislocation of the joints
of the jaw-bones (Hanu\ the jaw-bones should be foment-
ed and duly set in their right position, bandaged in the
manner of a Panchingi-vandha, and a Ghrita boiled
and prepared with (the Kalka and a decoction of) the
Madhura (Kdkolyddi) and Vdyu-subduing (ChavyAdi)
groups should be used as errhines by the patient. 33-31.

A tooth of a young person, not broken but loose,
should be plastered with a cooling paste on its outside
after having pressed out the accumulated blood at the
root. The tooth should be sprinkled or washed with
cold water and treated with drugs having SandhAniya
(adhesive) properties f The patient should be caused
to drink milk with the help of a lotus stem. The
loose tooth of an old man should be drawn. A nose
sunk down or depressed (by a blow) should be raised
up with the help of a rod or director, while it should
be straightened in a case of simple bending. Then
two tubes, open at both ends, should be inserted into
•the nostrils (to facilitate the process of breathing)
and the organ should be bandaged and sprinkled with
clarified butter. In the case of (the cartilage of) the
ear being, broken, the organ should be rubbed with

* According to Gajri, the lifting op of the head by putting fingers in
\he Avatu and in the Hanm should be made in cates of bending and
inttasuieeption of the neck retpectively, ’

t Honey, clarified bntter, and drugs of the Nyagrodhddi group.

Chap. IIL]

CHIKITSA STHANAM,

285

clarified butter straightened, and evenly set. in its
right position and bandaged. Measures and remedial
agents mentioned in connection with Sadyo-vrana,
should be likewise adopted and employed in the present
instance. ^7-

In a case of a fracture of the bone of the forehead
unattended by any oozing out of brain matter, the
affected part should be simply rubbed with honey and
clarified butter and then duly bandaged. The patient
should take clarified butter for a week* 38.

Cooling plasters and washes should be applied to a
part of the body, swollen but not in any way ulcerated
on account of a fall or a blow. In the case of a fracture
of the bone in the leg and in the thigh, the patient should
be laid down on a plank or board and bound to five
stakes or pegs in five different places for the purpose
of preventing any movements of his limbs. The
distribution of the (bindings) pegs in each case should be
as follows. In the first case (fractured leg-bone), two on
each side of the two thighs making four and one on thp
exterior side of the enguinal region of the affected side.
In the second case (fracture of knee-joint) two on each
side of the ankle-joints making four and one on the side
of the sole of the affected leg. The same sort of bed and
fastenings should be used in cases of fractures and
dislocations of the pelvic- joint, the spinal column, the
chest and the shouldersf. In cases of long-standing
dislocations, the joint should be lubricated with oily or
lardaceous applications, fomented and softened (with

* In the case of such an emission or oozing out a plug of bristles or
hair as described in the preceding chapter and remedial agents laid down
in connection therewith, should be used.

t The priSciple of splintering and bandaging may be profitably
compared with those followed in Agnur’a splint^

286 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. III.

proper medicinal drugs) in the manner mentioned above
in order to reduce it to its natural state. 39-40.

In the case of a faulty union of a (fractured) bone
lying between two joints (Krfada-bhagna\ the union
should be s^ain disjointed, and the fractured bone should
again be set right and treated as a case of ordinary
fracture. In the case where a fractured bone would be
found to have protruded out of the ulcerated part and
dried, it should be carefully cut off near the margin of
the (incidental) ulcer, (so as not to create a fresh ulcer on
any other spot of the affected parti and subsequently
treated as a case of fractural ulcer. A fracture occurring
in the upper part of the body should be treated with
applications of Mastikya-Sirovasti [oil-soaked pads on
the head] and pourings of oil into the cavity of the ears.
Potions of clarified butter,* errhines and Anuv^na
(enematas) should be prescribed in cases of fractures in
the extremeties. 41-43-

Qandha-Taila Now we shall discourse on
the recipe of a medicated oil, capable of bringing
about the union of fractured bones. A quantity of black
sesamum-seeds (tied up into a knot with a piece of linen)
should be kept immersed at night in a stream of running
water and taken out and dried in the sun (for seven conse-
cutive days). It should then be saturated with cow’s milk
(at night and dried in the sun, during the second week).
During the third week the sesamum-seeds should be
saturated with a decoction of Yashti-madhu (at night)
And dried in the sun the next day. Then (during
the fourth week) it should be again saturated with cow's
mfik and dried and powdered. The said sesamum-

C AfltforaiogtoXeijsiSt not.only Aouvitnat.eaemtsa podoat of
eliwiilMi boitot oad MfWtwt slso iboitld b« piewiibod in OMM of fmetaiM
intheosttemetha

Ctap. III.} CHIKITSA STHAKAM. 2^7

powder and powder of the drugs, constituting the
KikoIyAdi Gana as well as Yasthi-madhu, ManjUkfhd,
Sdrivd, Kushtha, Safja-rasa, Mdnsi, Deva-ddm, (red)
Chandana, and S'atapushpd should be mixed together.
Then a qu^tity of cow’s milk boiled with the aromatic
drugs (of the Eladi group) should be used with the pre-
ceding pulverised compound for the purpose of pressing
out the oil therefrom. The oil thus pressed out' should
be boiled in four times the quantity of cow’s milk with
the drugs such as Eld, S'dlpami, Tejapatra, Jivaka,
Tagara, Rodhra, Prapaundarika, Kdldmsdri, (Tagara),
Saireyaka, Kshira-Viddri, Anantd, Madhulikd, S'ringd-
taka, and those of the aforesaid list (Kdkolyidi group
and Yasthi-madhu, etc., up to S'atapushpd) pasted
together. The oil should be duly cooked over a
gentle fire and is called the Gandha-Taila. This oil
should be administered with good results in possible
ways (eg;., as potions, liniments, unguents and errhines)
to a fracture-patient. Its efficacy is witnessed in cases
of convulsions, hemiplegia, parchedness or atrophy of
the palate, in Ardita . (facial paralysis) as well as in
Manyi-stambha (Paralysis or stiffness of the neck),
in diseases of the head (cephalagia), in ear-ache in
Hanu'graha, in deafness and in blindness and in
emaciation due to sexual excesses. Administered in
food or drink, or employed as a liniment, in Vasti-karma
(enemata measures) or as an errhine, it acts as a
sovereign restorative. Rubbed over the neck, chest
and shoulders, it adds to the strength and expansion
of those parts of the body, makes the face fair and
lovely like a full-blown lotus and imparts a sweet

* There iho^d be three puts of eenmom powder and one part of
the powders of Kikolyddi, Yariiti-niadhn, Man}l»htbd. etc. (combined).
Bat din Dhsa says that (but puts of sesamam-powders should be taken.

288

THE SUSHROTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. lit.

fragrance to the breath. It is one of the most powerful
remedial agents in disorders of the aggravated Vdyu
(diseases of the nervous system).' It may be used
even by kings and for them it should be specially
prepared. 44-45. ^

The expressed oil of the seeds of the Trapusha,
Aksha and PiyAla should be cooked with a decoction of
drugs of the Madhura group (KdkolyAdi gana) and with
ten times the quantity of milk. A quantity of lard if
available, should be poured into it (during the process of
cooking). It is an excellent medicated oil and used as
a potion for anointing, and as an errhine, Vasti-karma
and washes, it speedily brings about the union of
fractured bones. 46,

A physician should exert his utmost to guard against
the advent of any suppurative setting in in a fractured
bone, since a suppuration of the local veins, nerves and
muscles is difficult to cure A complete union of a
fractured joint should be inferred from its painless or
unhurt character, from its full and perfect development
(leaving no detectable signs of its once fractured con-
dition), from the absence of all elevation (unevenness)
and from its perfect freedom in flexion and expansion,
etc. 47-48.

Thus ends the third Chapter of the Chikitsita Sihanam in the Sui»'r«ta
Sanihitd which deals with the medical treatment of fractures and dis.
locations.

CHAPTER IV.

Now w% shall discourse on the medical treatment of
nervous disorders (Vfifta-vygfdhi). r.

Metrical Texts The patient having been
made to vomit in the event of the deranged Vdyu being
incarcerated (lodged) in the Amstsaya (stomach), a
pulverised compound known as the Shad-Dharana-yoga
(a compound of six Dharanas or twenty-four Mdshd
weight) with tepid water should be administered to him
for seven days. A compound made up of Chitrakuy
Indra-yava^ Pdthd^ Katuka, Ativishd, Abhayd (taken
in equal parts) together is known as the Shad-
Dharana'-yoga’’^ and contains the properties of sub-
duing an attack of Vdta-vyddhi. 2-3.

In the event of the aggravated Vayu being incar-
cerated in the Pakvs^saya ' intestines), purgatives of fatty
matters (Sneha-Virechana, i.e ,Tilvaka-Sarpih,ctc.), and
^dhana- Vasti of purifying drugs (with decoctions and
Kalka of fatty matters) and diet (Prdsa) abounding in
saltf or saline articles should be prescribed. In the case
of the aggravated Vdyu being incarcerated in the Vasti
(urinary bladder), diuretic (lit bladder- cleansing)
measures and remedial agentfe should be resorted to.
Anointing with medicated oils, Ghritas, etc., application
of poultices (Upandha) compounded of Vdyu-subduing
drugs, massage, and plasters (Alepa) of similar pro-
perties are the remedies in cases where the aggravated
Vdyu is lodged in the internal ducts or channels such

* One Dharana is equiil to four Misbis.

t Snishii-Lrtvana and K^nda-Itavanat etc.

37

290 . THE SUSHKUTA SAMHITa" [Ch*P- IV.

as the ears, etc., of the body. Blood-letting (vene-
section) is the rem edy where the aggravated Vdyu
would be found to be confined in the skin, flesh,
blood or veins (^iris). Similarly, application of fatty
matters iSneha), actual cauterization, massage, appli-
cation of poultices and binding of ligatures should be the
remedies where the aggravateci VAyu would be found
to have become involved in the Surfyu (ligaments), joints
and boaes Where the aggravated Viyu" would be
found to have become situated in the bone, the skin and
flesh of that part of the body should be perforated with
a proper surgical instrument (Ara-Sastra) and the under-
lying bone should be similarly treated with an awl. A
tube open at both ends should be inserted into the
aperture, thus made, and a strong physician should suck
the aggravated Vdyu from out of the affected bone by
applying his mouth to the exterior open end of the
tube. 4-9.

In the case of the aggravatd Vrlyu having contamin-
ated the semeu, measures and remedies for seminal dis-
orders (^ukra-doshaj* should be employed. The intelligent
(physician) would take recourse to measures, such as
blood-letting, immersion or bath in a vessel (full of Vdyu-
subduing decoctions), fomentation with heated stones, as
well as in the manner of Karshu-Sveda, vapour-bath in
a closed chamber (Kuti sveda), anointment, Vasti-
Karmas, etc., in the event of the aggravated Vdyu having
extended throughout the whole organism ; whereas
bleeding by means of a horn (cuffing) should be
regarded as the remedy when the aggravated Dosha

* Treatments, such as, the purification of the semen, etc., and the use
of medicines for making Aphrodisia (V^ji-karana) and for the remedy
of the disordered urinary organ (Mulra-dosha) should be adopted and
employed.

Chap. IV.] CHIKITSA STHANAM, * 29 1

would be found to have been confined in any parti ular
part of the body,* 10-12.

In the event of the aggravated Vayu being connected
either with the Pitta or the Kapha, such a course of treat-
ment shorfid be adopted as would not be hostile to the
two other Doshas. Blood-letting (in small quantities)
should be resorted to several times in a case of
complete cenesthesia (Supta-Vata) and the body should
be anointed with oil mixed with salt and chamber-dust
(Agfira-dhuma) Milk b:>ilei with a dec action of the
drugs of the Pancha-mula group, acid-fruits (PhalAmla),
meat-soup or soup of (well-cooked) corn (DhAnya)
with clarified butter are beneficial in cases of VAta-
roga. 13-15.

^sllvana-Upansdia : -A poultice composed
of the drugs of the Kdkolyadi group, the Vdyu-sub-
duing drugs (those of Bhadra-ddrvddi and VidAri-
gandhAdi groups), and all kinds of acid articlesf (such as,
KAnjika, Sauvira, fermented ricc-grucl, etc.), the flesh of
animals which live in swamps (Anupa) or in water
(Audaka)]:, oil, clarified butter and all kinds of
lardaceous substances, mixed together and saturated
with a profuse quantity of salt and then slightly heated
is known by the name of Sadvana A person suffering
from any form of VAta roga should be always treated
with such SAlvana poultices ^Upan Aha). The poultice
should be applied to such part of the body as is

* It is to be undci stood that measures and remedies laid dowh
under the head of Sarvdnga-gata should be used when the Vayu
would be found to be diffused throughout the whole organism instead of
being confined to amy specific part. .

t According to others it means all kinds of acid- fruits, etc.

X Chakradatta reads (well-cooked with the /leJi

of '‘Anupa'* animals) in place of I

292

 ,\TJ'E SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

laap. IV.

numbed, painful or contracted and the affected part
should be firmly ban daged thereafter with a piece of
Kshauma* linen < r woollen cloth. As an alternative,
the affected part should be plastered (and well rubbed)
with the ingredients of the ^Ivana-UpanAha and inserted
into a bag made of cat or mungoose skin or that of a
camel or deer hide, 16.

The aggravated Viyu, if located in the shoulders, the
chest, the sacrum (,Trika) or the ManyA, should be subdued
by emetics and errhines judiciously employed. Siro-Vasti
should be applied to the head of the patient as long as it
would take one to utter a thousand Mdtrds (a short vowel
sound), more or less, as the case may require, where the
aggravated Vdyu would be found to have located itsellf
in the head, (if necessary) blood-letting should be
resorted to. As a mountain is capable of obstructing the
passive of the wind, so the Sneha-Vasti (oily enema) is
alone capable of resisting the action of the aggravated
V&yu whether it extends throughout the whole system
or is confined to a single part. I7'i9

Measures beneficial to VsCta-Vysidhi:

— An app ication of Sneha, fomentations, anointment of
the body, Vasti, oily purgatives, Siro-vasti, the rubbing of
oils on the head, oily fumigation, gargling with tepid oil,
oily errhines, the use of meat-soup, milk, meat, clarified
butter, oil and other lardaceous articles (of food), all
kinds of acid fruits, salt, lukewarm washes, gentle
massage, the use of saffron, Agura, Patra, Kusktha, Eld,
Waga*’a, the wearing of woollen, silken, cotton or any
dthsr thick kind of garments, living in a warm room or
in ojwi not exposed to the wind or in an inner chamber,
the use of a soft bed, basking in the glare of fire, entire
sexual abstinence, these and such like other things

* Some (sad it at VtUke, mede up berk*

Chap. IV ]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

293

■should be generally adopted by a patient suffering from
Vdta-roga 20.

The Tilvaka-Chrlta A paste (Kalka)of
the following drugs, viz, Trivrit, Danti, Suvama-kshiri,
Saptald, S 9 ^mkhini^ Triphald and Vidanga^ each weigh-
ing an Aksha \two toUs), and Tilvaka-roots and
Kampillaka, each weighing a Vilva (eight tolds), a
decoction of Triphala and curd, each weighing two
Patras * t^hirty-two seers) and clarified butter, weighing
sixteen seers, should be duly cooked together. Medical
authorities recommend this Tilvaka Ghlita as an oily
purgative in cases of Vdta-roga. Asoka-Ghrita and
Ramyaka-Ghrita aie prepared in the same manner, (viz.,
by substituting Asoka and Ramyaka respectively for
Tilvaka). 2 i,

The Anu-Talla The log of a long-standing
wooden oil-mill should be cut into small chips and then
thrashed and boiled in water in a large cauldron. The
globules of oil that will be found floating on the surface
of the boiling water should be skimmed off either with
the hand or with a saucer. The oil thus collected
should then be cooked with the Kalka of Viyu-subduing
drugs as in the preparation of a medicated oil. This
oil is known as the Anu-Taila The use of this oil has
been advised by medical authorities in cases of V^ta-
roga. This oil is so name# from the fact of its being
pressed out of small chips of oily wood (as described
above). 22.

The Saha8ra-prfka-Talla:-The wood
of drugs belonging to the group of Mahd-pancha-mula
should be collected in large quantities and burnt on a

• Hua means 64 PaUi, i e., 8 seerti but in cases of liquids the
weight should be dqubled,

m

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Clmp IV.

plot of land, so as to make the soil black. The fire
should be kept burning one whole night ; on the
following morning on the extinction of the fire the ashes
should be removed and the ground, when cool, should
be soaked with one hundred Ghatas (six thdbsand and
four hundred seers; of oil cooked with the drugs of
the V iddri-gandhddi group and with the same quantity
of milk and kept in that condition for one night more.
On the next morning the earth should be dug up, down
to the stratum found to have been soaked with the oil
and the soil should then be dissolved in warm water in
large cauldrons for the purpose. The oil that will be
found floating on the surface of the water should be
skimmed off with both hands and kept in a safe basin.
Then the decoction of the Vdyu-subduing drugs (the
Bhadra-diirvddi group), meat-juice, milk, fermented rice-
gruel (each taken in a quantity measuring a quarter
part of that oil) should be taken one thousand times
and each time should be boiled with the oil. Vrlyu-
subduing and aromatic drugs and .spices, in the northern
(.trans-Him^ilaya) and southern (Deccan) countries, should
be thrown into it and boiled with the oil. The boiling
should be completed within the period during which it
could be properly done. Then after the completion of
the cooking, conch-shells should be blown, Dundubhis
should be sounded, umbrellas should be held open,
chowries should be blown into it and a thousand
Brdhmins should be treated with repasts. The oil so
sacredly prepared should be stored carefully in golden,
silver or earthen pitchers. This oil is called the
Saliasrapfitka-TaUa and is of irresistible potency and
fit even for the use of kings. Sataprfka-Taila is also
prepared in the above manner (with the aforesaid ingre-
dients) by cooking it one hundred times only. 23*

Chap. IV.)

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

295

The Patra-Lavana : — The green leaves of the
Eranda plants and those of the trees known as Mush-
kaka, Naktamdla, Atarushaka, Putika, Aragvadha and
Chitraka should be thrashed with (salt of equal quantity)
in an Udulthala (a hand thrashing mill) and placed in
an earthen pitcher, saturated with oil or clarified butter.
Having covered the mouth of the pitcher with a lid, it
should be plastered and burnt in fire of cow-dung.
The medicine thus prepared (with the help of internal
heat) is called the Patra-Lavaua. Medical experts
advise the application of this medicine in cases of
Vata-roga. '^4.

The K^nda-Lavana Similarly, Snuhi-
twigs, Brinjal (V^rtdku), and y/^r//-bark (taken in
equal parts) and rock-salt (of equal weight as the entire
drugs) should be thrashed and kept in a pitcher. Oil,
clarified butter, lard and marrow should be added to
it equal in weight with salt and then having covered
the mouth of the pitcher with a lid, it should be plaster-
ed and burnt in a fire of cow-dung (as before). The
use of this medicated salt which is called the Ksinda*
Lavana or Sneha-Lavana is recommended by experts
in VAla-roga. 25.

The KalysCnaka- Lavana The follow-

ing drugs with their roots, leaves and twigs, viz.y
Gandira^ Paldsa^ Kutaja, Yilva^ Arka, Snuhi, Apd-
mdrga, Pdtald, Pdribhadra^ Nddeyiy Krishnagandhd
Nipa, Nimbuy Nirdahani, Atarushakay Nakta-mdlakay
Putikay Vfihati, Kantikari^ Bhalldtaka, Ingudi, Baija^
yantiy Kadaliy Varshdbhu, Hriveray Kshuraka, Indra-
vdruniy Svetamokshaka and Asoka should be gathered in
a green condition and mixed with (as large a quantity
of) rock-salt and having thrashed them in an Udukhala
should be burnt in a hermetically sealed pitcher as

[Chap. IV.

*96 THE SUSHRUTA 9 AllflIt.r

f ^ '

above, after which it should be filtei‘ed (twenty times)
and boiled in the manner of alka#ne preparations At
the close of the boiling, powders* of the drugs of the
Hingvddi or Pippalyidi group should be mixed with
it. This medicine is called the Kalstynaka-^Lav^na and
is specially efficacious in all cases of Vdta-roga and
is applicable both in food and drink in cases of Gulma,
enlarged spleen, impaired digestion, indigestion, hae-
morrhoids, intestinal worms, aversion to food and
cough. 26 .

Memorable Verse The remedy proves
efficacious in Vdta-roga through its heat-making potency,
power of liquifying and secreting the deranged Doshas
and of restoring and correcting them as well. 27,

Thus ends the fourth Chapter of the Chikitsita Slbanam in the
Sus'ruta Samhitd which deals with the treatment of Vdla-\yddhi.

* The total weight of these powders should be one-fourth of the
weight of the rock-salt taken in the course of the preparation. — Dallana.

CHAPTER V.

Now w€ shall discourse on the chapter which deals
with the medical treatment of mah^-V^ta--
Vy^ahL I.

Several authorities group the disease Vata-Rakta
under two Sifferent sub-heads, such as superficial and
deep-seated. But such a classification is arbitrary and
unscientific, inasmuch as this disease first manifests
itself on the surface (layer of the skin) like Kushtha and
gradually invades the deeper tissues of the body. Hence
there are no (two) forms of this disease. i-2.

Ca.us0S of V^ta-Rakta : — The VAyu of
the body is enraged or agitated by such causes as
wrestling with a man of superior and uncommon physical
strength, etc., while the blood is vitiated by such causes
as constant over-eating of edibles which are of difficult
digestion and heat-making in their potency or ingestion
of food before the digestion of the previous meal. The
Vdyu thus enraged and agitated enters into the blood-
carrying channels of the body and being obstructed
in its passage, becomes mixed with the vitiated blood.
The deranged Vdyu and the blood thus combine to give
rise to a disease characterised ^ the specific symptoms
of each, which is known as Ys(ta-Rakta. The charac-
teristic pain, which at first confines itself to the extre-
mities, gradually extends over the whole body.

Premonitory symptoms of VcCta*
Rakta : —The disease is ushered in with a pricking
pain, a burning and an itching sensation (in the affected
part), a swelling, roughness and numbness (anaesthesia)
of the diseased locality, throbbing of the veins, ligaments,

38

298

the: sushruta samhita.

tchap. V.

nerves and arteries, a weakness in the thighs and sudden
appearance of red or brownish circular patches on the
palms of the hands and soles of the feet, fingers and heels,
etc., (A. R. — wrists). If neglected and immoderately
treated in its premonitory stages, the dijease soon
develops its characteristic symptoms in succession, which
have been described before ; whereas (a lifelong^ defor-
mity (of the affected part) is the penalty for neglecting
it (in its fully patent or developed stage). 3*

Memorable Verse : — Men of a mild and deli-
cate constitution, as welt as those who are (inordinately)
stout or sedentary in their habits or are addicted to
unwholesome and incompatible food, etc., are generally
found to be susceptible to an attack of Vsfta-Rakta. 4.

Prognosis : — A physician is advised to take in
hand the medical treatment of a Vdta-Rakta-patient
who has as yet not lost much strength and muscle, nor is
afflicted with thirst, fever, epileptic fits, dyspnoea, cough,
numbness (of the affected part), aversion to food, indi-
gestion, extension and contraction of the limb, as well
as of a person who is strong and temperate in his living
and can afford to pay for the diet and other necessary
accessories of the treatement. S-

Preliminary remedial measures in

the first stage of the disease the blood, having become
vitiated owing to its being obstructed in its course (by
the unusually agitated Vdyu in the system), should be
gradually and not profusely bled, except when the body
would be found to have become extremely dry or to have
lost its natural healthful glow or complexion through the
action of the aggravated morbific principle (Vdyu), for
fear of further aggravating the VAyu. Emetics, purga-
tives, and Vast! (enemas), etc., should be administered
and the patient should be made to take a diet consisting

Chap. V.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

299

of old and matured clarified butter (and boiled rice), in
the case where the aggravated condition of the deranged
Vdyu would be found to predominate. As an alternative,
he should be made to drink a potion consisting of goat’s
milk mixecJ with half its quantity of oil, with two Told
weight of Yashti-madhu or goat’s milk cooked with
Pris*niparni (two Told weight) with honey and sugar
(added after cooking), or cooked with S^unthi, S*ringd-
taka, and Kaseruka, or cooked with S'ydmd, Rdsnd,
Sushavi, Pris*niparni, Pilu,S*atdvari, S'vadamshtrd and
Das a-mula, 6

Oil, cooked with the addition ol milk previously
boiled with the decoction of Das'a-mula of eight times
its own weight and a Kalka of Madhuka, Mesha-s* ringi
(A. R. ^drngashtd), S^vadamshtrd, Sarala, Bhadra-ddru^
Vachd and Surabhi pasted together, should be adminisr
tered in drinks, etc , (viz, anointment, sprinkling, etc.\
As an alternative, the oil cooked with the decoction of
S'atdvari, Mayuraka, Madhuka^ Kshira-Viddri, Vald,
Ati vald and Trina-pancha-mula, with the paste of the
drugs belonging to the Kdkolyddi group, or the oil*
cooked with the decoction and a Kalka of Valil for
a hundred times should be prescribed for the patient
The affected part should be washed with the milk, boiled
with the roots of the V^ta-hara (VAyu-subduing) drugs
(/>., Dasa-mula), or simply with Amla feruel, etc.), or
a plaster composed of barley, Madhuka, Eranda (castor)
and Varshdbhu (pasted together and heated), should be
applied to the part. 7.

Plasters, etc. : — Barley, wheat, sesamum,
Mudga pulse aud Mdsha pulse should be taken in equal

* According to Jejjata Acbdryya, the Vald-Taila*^ which is
administered in the medical treatment of Mudha^garbha, should be
prescribed ip this case.

300

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA-

[Chap. V.

parts and pounded separately ; and the paste of the
following drugs, viz., Kdkoli, Kshira-kdkoli, Jivaka^
Rishabhaka, Vald, Ati-vald, Visa-mrindla (lotus stem),
Pris'nipami, Mesha-s'rinsi, Piydla, S'arkard (sugar),
Kas’eruka, Surabhi, and Vachd should be Hiixed with
each of the preceding powders and each of these
compounds (so formed) should be boiled with milk,
oil, lard, marrow and clarified butter. The five
compounds, thus prepared, are called Fltyasas, which
should be applied as a hot poultice (Upandha) to
the affected part ; or an Utks^rikai, made of the pulp
of oily fruit (seeds) * (prepared by cooking them with
milk) should be applied ; or powders of wheat, barley,
sesamum, Mudga pulse, or Misha pulse, and Ves'avira,
made of various kinds of fish and flesh, should be used
as a plaster. Vilvapes'ikd, Tagara, Deva-ddru, Sarald,
Rdsnd, Harenu, Kushtha, S'ata-puskpd, Eld, Surd and
cream of milk-curd pasted together, should be applied
to the affected part as a plaster (Upaniha'. As an
alternative, the expressed juice of Mitulunga, mixed with
Kinjika, Saindhava salt and clarified butter, pasted to-
gether with the root of the Madhu-s‘igru and with sesa-
mum,"}" should be used in a similar way, The preceding
remedies should be administered in a case of V^ta-Rakta
maiked by a preponderance of the aggravated Viyu. 8.

V£(ta-Rakta with a preponderance
of Pitta: —In cases of Vita Rakta where the Pitta
preponderates, the patient should be made to drink a
potion consisting of a decoction of Drdkshd, Aragvadha,
Katphda, Kshira-viddri, Yashti-madhu, Chandana and
Kds sweetened with a quantity of sugar and honey.

* Such as sesamum, castor^seed, linseed, Vibhitaka-seeds, etc.

t Some say that a paste of sesamum only should be used as a
I separate piaster.

Chap. V.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

301

As an alternative, a decoction of S'atdvari^ Yashti-
madhu^ Patola, Triphald, and Katu-rohini^ or a decoction
of Guduchi^ or a decoction of the drugs belonging to the
Chandanddi group, which are possessed of virtues for
allaying pittaja fever, should be administered to the
patient, sweetened with sugar and honey. Clarified
butter, cooked and prepared with a decoction of bitter
and astringent drugsiu also proves beneficial in such
cases. 9.

The affected part should be w'ashcd (Parisheka) with
a decoction of Visa-mrindla^ Chandana and Padmaka
(taken in equal parts and) mixed with half its quantity
of milk. As an alternative, the affected part should be
sprinkled with a compound composed of milk, the
expressed juice of Ikshu (sugar-cane), honey, sugar, and
washings of rice (taken in equal parts) ; or with curd-
cream, honey, and Dhdnycimla (fermented paddy-gruel),
mixed with a decoction of grapes and Iksku ; or the
affected part should be anointed with clarified butter
cooked with the drugs of the Jivaniya group, or with the
clarified butter washed a hundred times in water, or
with clarified butter cooked with the Kalka of the
Kdkolyddi group. 10,

Pradeha (plaster) composed of S'dli, Shashtika, Naluy
Vanjula, Tdlis'a, S'rigdtaka^ Galodya, Haridrd, Gairika^
S^aivala, Padma-kdshtha, leav^ of padma flotus), pasted
with Dhdnydmla and mixed with clarified butter, should
be applied to the affected part. This plaster (Pradeha)
may be applied lukewarm even in cases of Vdta-Raktar,
marked by a preponderance of the aggravated Vdyu.
All the remedial measures (laid down above) may also

* D. R.— Sweet, bitter, and astringent drugs.

Bitter drugs— Patolddi group ; Kashiya drugs— Triphalddi group ;
sweet drugs— Kdkolyddi group.

302

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. V.

be advantageously applied in qases marked by a pre-
ponderance of the vitiated blood, with this exception
that cold plasters and repeated blood-lettings should
be resorted to in the latter (Raktaja-Vdta-Rakta). ii.

V£(ta-Rakta with a preponderance

of Kaphas — Incases where the Kapha preponderates,
the patient should be made to drink a potion consisting
of a decoction of Haridrd and Amalaka, sweetened with
honey ; or a decoction of Triphald, or a Kalka of
Madhuka, S 'ringavera, Haritaki and Tikta-rohini mi'KzA
with honey. As an alternative, Haritaki and treacle
with either cow’s urine or water, should be given to him.

The affected part or limb should be sprinkled or
washed with cow’s urine, oil, alkaline water. Surd, Sukta,
or with a decoction of Kapha-destroying drugs. A hot
decoction of the drugs constituting the Aragvadhddi
group may be used with benefit in sprinkling the
affected part. The body of the patient should be lubri-
cated or anointed with clarified butter, boiled with
the cream of milk-curd, cow’s urine, wine, S'ukta and
with the Kalka of Yashti-madku, Sdrivd and Padnta-
kdshtha. A plaster (Pradeha), composed of pounded
sesamum, mustard seed, linseed and barley (taken in
equal parts) and mixed and pasted with S'leshmdtaka,
Kapittha,Madhu-s'igruz.n 6 iCO'«'s urine, and Yava-kshdra
should be applied (hot to the seat of thedisease). 12-13.

The Five Pradehas (i) A paste of white
mustard seed, (2; that of sesamum and As'vagandhd,

(3) a similar paste of Piydla, S’elu and Kapittha bark,

(4) that of Madku-iigxvi, Punamavd and (5) a paste of
Vyoska, Tikid, Prithakparni and Vrihati, these five
kinds of Pradehas should be separately pasted with
alkaline water and (any of them) applied lukewarm to
the affected locality. 14.

Chap. V.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

303

As an alternative, a plaster composed S^dlaparni,
Pris'nipamii Vrihati and Kantakdri^ pasted together
with milk and mixed with Tarpana,^ should be applied
(to the seat of the disease). In cases of Vdta-Rakta
involving the concerted action of two or three of the
Doshas, the remedy consists in applying such drugs in
combination as are possessed of the efficacy of subduing
the action of each of them. 15.

Guda-Haritaki and Pippali-Vardha-

ITIsCna Yogas l — Haritaki with treacle may be used
in all types of Vdta-Rakta. As an alternative, the
patient should be enjoined to use Pippali, pasted with
milk or water, every day (in the following way).+ The
number of Pippali should be increased by five or ten
respectively on each successive day till the tenth day of
its use ; after which period the number of Pippali should
be decreased (by a similar number) on each successive
day till it is reduced to the original five or ten. The
patient should live on a diet of milk and rice only (during
the entire course of this treatement). This medicine
which is known as the Pippali- Vardham^a,+ proves
efficacious in cases of Vdta-Rakta, chronic fever
(Vishama-Jvara), aversion to food, jaundice, enlarged
spleen, piles, cough, asthma, oedema, phthysis, loss of
appetite, heart-disease and ascitis. 16.

Clarified butter, cooked in ;milk with the paste of
the drugs of the Jivaniya group, should be used in

* Flout of barley or fried grain, dissolved in water, is known as
Tarpana. *

t The dosage should begin originally with five or ten Pippalis according
to the strength of the patient,

X Mabarshi Chfl jraka mentions this Yoga in the chapter on Rasdyana
and prescribes it also in the treatement of Udara. Chakradatta mentions
the use of this medicine in the treatment of liver and spleen and of
fever.

3^4

THfi SOSHRUTA SAMHITA.

Chap» V.

anointing (the body of the patient). A plaster, composed
of Sahd, Sahadevd, Chandana, Murud, Mmtd, Piydla,
S*atdvari^ Kas*eru, Padma’kdstha Yashti-madhu, S'ata-
pushpd (A. D. Viddri) and Kushtha, pasted together with
milk and mixed with the cream of clarified bitter, should
be applied (hot) to the affected locality. A plaster
composed of Saireyaka, Atarushaka, Vald, Ati-vald
Jivanti and Sushavi^ pasted together with the milk of a
she-goat, should be likewise applied (to the seat of the
disease). As an alternative, the diseased locality should
be plastered with the pastes of Kds*marya^ Yashti-
madhu and Tarpana mixed together ; or it should be
treated with Pinda-Taila, prepared by cooking Madhu-
chchhishta (bee’s wax), Manjishihd, resin, and Atlanta-
mula in milk* (and oil taken together), 17-20.

In all cases of Vdta-Rakta, old and matured clarified
butter boiled with the expressed juice of Amalaka
should be prescribed as drinks. The affected part
should be washed or sprinkled with old and matured
clarified butter, boiled with, a decoction and paste
(Kalka) of the drugs belonging to the Kdkolyddi group,
or with those of the Jivaniya group, or with the decoc-
tion of Sushavi, or of Kdravellaka. The Val4-Tailat
should be used for sprinkling and immersing purposes,
and as drink and Vasti-karma (enemas).

Diet ; — The diet should consist of articles made
of old and matured S'dli or Shashtika rice, wheat or
barley, taken with milk I or with the soup of Mudga

* Milk four times of oil should be taken.

t The ** Vald-Taila described in the medical treatment of Mudha-
gatbha, ch. XV.

t In the case of Vdia^roga with preponderant Pitta, the patient should
take the food with milk ; in the preponderance of Vdjru, with the soup of
Jdn^lH rneat^ and in the preponderance of Kapha, with Mudga-soup,
devoid of any acid combination.

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

Chap. V.]

305

pulse or flesh of Jdngala animals and devoid of any
acid combination.* 21.

Frequent bloodletting should be resorted to and
measures, such as, emetics, purgatives, Asthdpana and
Anuvasang. should be adopted in cases of the aggravated
Doshas-J- (involved in the case). 22.

Memorable Verses A case of Vdta-
Rakta of recent growth, proves readily amenable to the
remedial m*easures described before. Long-standing, i,e.^
chronic cases (of Vdta-Rakta) are never perfectly cured,
but can only be palliated. The application of poul-
tices (Upandha), of medicinal washes or sprinkles (Pari-
sheka), hot-plasters, anointings (Abhyanga), spacious
and comfortable bed-chambers which do not admit of
too large an influx of air, shampooing, and the use
of soft and pleasant beds and soft pillows, are chiefly
recommended in a case of Vita-Rakta ; whereas physical
exercise, sexual intercourse, display of anger, the use of
heat-making, saline, acid and difficultly digestible food
and eatables producing effuse serus or slimy matter in
the bodily channels, and sleep in the day-time (should
be deemed extremely injurious and hence) should be
studiously refrained from. 23.

The Medical Treatment of ApatsC-
naka l — The medical treatment of a patient suffering
from Apats^naka (hysterical convulsions), not exhibiting
fixedness of gaze and arched eye-brows, with an absence

* In the case of Vdla-roga, with a preponderance of Pitta, the patient
should take his food with milk ; in the preponderance of Vayu, with fhe
soup of Jdngala meat ; and in the preponderance of Kapha, with Mudga*
soup, devoid of any acid combination.

t In the preponderance of Kapha, emetics should be employed ; in
the preponderance of Pitta, purgatives should be given ; and in the pre*
ponderance of Vdyu, Anuvdsana and Asthapana measures should be
resorted to.

39 '

306 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Ghap. V,

of perspiration, quivering, delirium and the numbness
of genitals, found not to fall on the ground but capable
of being supported on his arms (AkhattA-pAti) and whose
trunk is not bent or arched on its posterior (dorsal) side
(Vahiriydma)', may be attempted (with succesa). The body
of the patient should be first anointed with emulsions
(Sneha) and then fomented ; strong medicated snuff
should then be administred for purifying (the accumu-
lated mucus in) the head. After that the patient should
be made to drink a clear potion prepared of clarified
butter, cooked in combination with a decoction of the
drugs constituting the Vidiri-gandhddi group, extract
of meat, milk and milk-curd, so as to arrest the further
expansion of the deranged Vdyu into the system.

Traivrita Chrita : — A decoction of the Vdyu-
subduing drugs, such as, Bhadra-ddrvddi, etc., barley,
Kulattha pulse. Kola, and the flesh of the Anupa and
Audaka animals with the Pancha-Vargas» should be

* According lo Jejjata, “Pancha-Vargam” means the flesh of the fwe
kinds of Aoupa animals, z/is., Kulachara, Plava, Kos'astha, Padin and
Matsya (Ashes).

The reading here is doubtful. The term ‘‘Audaka” in the compound
word “ Sdnupaudaka-mamsam ” seems to be redundant, inasmuch as
“Audaka” animals are included in the “ Anupa ” class. (Sutra, chap.
XLV^I. Page 487, Vol I). In this case the word “ Pancha-vargam ” also
seems to be only an explanation of the term “Anupa” meaning the fiive
kinds of Anupa flesh, and it seems to have surreptitiously crept into the body
of the text from the marginal notes of some authoritative manuscript copy
of the book. If, however, we are to abide by the current reading of the
book, “Pancha>varga” cannot mean the flve kinds of flesh in the presence
of the word “Audaka” mentioned separately, as Jejjata would have it. In*^
that case it can only mean either the five groups of Pancha^mulas, viz., the
majqr Pancha-mulas, the minor Pancha-mulas, the Valli'Pancba-mulas,
thq Kantaka- Pancha-mulas and the Tiina-Pancha-mulas. (Sutra, chap.
XXXVllI, Pages 355-6, Vol. I), as some would explain it to mean. Others,
however, prefer the reading as it i$ and explain the term “Fancha-varga”
to be the five kinds of medicinal drugs mentioned before in the: sentence,

Chap. V.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

307

made. The decoction, thus prepared, should be mixed
with milk and fermented rice-gruel, etc., and then cooked
with an adequate quantity of clarified butter, oil, lard
and marrow by casting Kalka (paste) of the Madhura
(Kdkolyddi group) into it. This Traivrita-Ghrita* (lit.
consisting of clarified butter with three other lardaceous
articles), thus prepared, should be administered to
Apatanaka;paticnts in potions and diet, in effusions
and immersions, in anointings and errhines, as well as
in Anuveisana measures. Diaphoretic measures should
be applied according to the prescribed rules. In a
case marked by an unusually aggravated condition • of
the Vdyu, the patient should be made to stand neck-deep
in a pit tolerably warmed or heated with burning husks,
and cow-dung. As an alternative, Palds'a leaves should
be strewn over a hot stone-slab or over a hot oven,
after having sprinkled wine over them^ and the
patient should be laid full length upon these leaves, or
fomentations should be made with Ves*avdra, Kris*ara
and Pdyasa. 24—25.

An oil, cooked in combination with the expressed

viz., the Vataghna drugs, Yava, Kola, Kulattha and flesh. Others, again,
mean by the term “Pancha-varga” the five parts, viz., leaf, fruit, flower,
bark and root, of the Vdtaghna drugs mentioned in the sentence.

We have, however, the authority of V^gbhata and Chakradatta in our
side to accept the first view that the terfi **Audaka’* is redundant, in-
asmuch as they have not read the word “Audaka” in their compilations.
—Ed.

* According to Dallana, four seers of clarified butter, oil, lard and
marrow (each weighing one seer), sixteen seers of K^nji, etc., sixteen see*rs
of milk, sixteen seers of the decoction and one seer of the Kalka (paste)
should be taken in its preparation. But Gayddisa is of opinion that
four seers of milk should be taken instead of sixteen seers.

Four seers of Ghiita, etc., four se^rs of milk, six seers of Kdnji, six
seers of the decoction and one seer of the Kalka (paste) are generally
taken byexperienced physicians in Us preparation.'— Ed.

3p8 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. V. *

juice of Mulakay Eranda, Sphurja, Arjaka.Arka^ Saptald
and S'amkkini should be used in washing (Parisheka),
etc., the body of an Apatdnaka-patient. Potions con-
sisting of sour Dadhi (milk-curd) mixed with powdered
pepper and Vackd, or of oil, clarified bifeter, lard,
or honey, mixed with the same things and taken
in an empty stomach, prove curative in cases of
Apat&naka. 26.

These remedial measures are applicable in cases of
ApatAnaka when the action of the aggravated Vayu
alone preponderates. In a case involving the concerted
action of two or mere of the Doshas, drugs, remedial
to each of them, should be combinedly employed.
Medicinal liquid errhines {Avapida) should be emplo^’cd
after the subsidence of a severe attack The fat or lard
of a cock, crab, Krishna-fish, porpoise or of a boar
should be taken* by the patient. As an alternative,
he should be made to drink (a potion consisting of)
milk boiled with VAyu-subduing drugs (Dasa-mula, etc.),
or a gruel (YavAgu) composed of barley, Kola, Kulattha-
pulse diXidi^Mulaka, cooked with curd, oil and clarified
butter. Oily purgatives, AsthApana and AnuvAsana
measures, should be employed if the paroxysm does
not subside even in ten days. Medicines and remedial
measures laid down under the head of VAta-vyAdhi
and the process of RakshA-karma, should be likewise
adopted (in cases of ApatAnaka). 27.

Treatment of PaksheCghsCta A physi-
cian is enjoined to take in hand the medical treatment
of a patient laid up with PakshAghAta, unattended
by a discolouring of the skin, but having pain in the
affected part, and who habitually observes the rules of

* . Vridtiha Vighhata recommends external application with these
lards,

Chap. V.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

309

diet and regimen and who can afford to pay for the
necessary accessories. The affected part should be first
anointed and then fomented. Mild emetics and
purgatives should be subsequently employed for the
purpose of Cleansing the system. Medicated Anuvdsana
and Asthdpana measures should then be employed, after
which the general directions and remedial measures,
laid down under the treatment of Akshepaka^ should
be followed and employed at the proper time Appli-
cations of the Mastikya-Siro-vasti with the Anu-taila for
anointing the body, of the articles of Salvana-Sveda
for the purpose of poulticing, and of the Vala-taila as an
Anuvdsana measure, arc the marked features of the
medical treatment of this disease, and should be followed
carefully for a .continuous period of three or four
months. 28 -

These preceding remedies as well as dry fomenta-
tions (Ruksha-sveda) and errhines, which possess
the virtue of subduing the deranged Vayu and
Kapha should be likewise employed in cases of Manyai-
stambha. 29

Treatment of Apatantraka : —Fasting

is prohibited in cases of patients suffering from Apa-
tantraka (Apoplectic convulsions). Emetic, AsthApana
and AnuvAsana measures are likewise forbidden. The
passage of respiration should bC blown open by violent
breathings in the event of its being choked up with- an
accumulation of the deranged Vdyu and Kapha The
patient should be made to drink a potion consisting of
Tumburu^ Pushkara, Hingu, Amla-vetasa^ Haritaki and
the three (officinal) kinds of salts, with a decoction
of barley.* As an alternative, four seers of clarified

* Chakradatta quotes this in the chapter on the treatment of colic
(s'ula), but does not read ‘Amla-vetasa’ there*

310 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. V.

butter, cooked in combination with sixteen seers of
milk, two Pala weight of Sauvarchala salt and fifty of
Haritakis should be prescribed for the use of the patient.
All other remedial agents,* possessing the virtue of
subduing the deranged Vayu and Kapha* should be
likewise employed. 30.

Treatment of Ardita A patient suffering
from Ardita (facial Paralysis) should be treated with the
measures and remedies laid down under the head of
Vita-vyadhi in the event of his being found to be suffi-
ciently strong and capable of affording the neces-
sary expenses for his treatment. Errhines, Mastikya-
^iro-vasti, inhalation of the smoke (Dhuma-p 4 na) from
medicated drugs, poulticing (Upandha), unguents and
Nddi-sveda, etc., are the special features of the medical
treatment of this disease. After that, a decoction should
be made of the drugs constituting the groups of Trina-
Pancha-mula, Mahd-Pancha-mula, Kdkolyddi^nA Viddri-
gandhddi groups, aquatic bulbs, and the flesh of animals
which are aquatic in their habits (Audaka) and those
which frequent swampy places (Anupa), by boiling them
together with a Drona measure of milk and double the
quantity of water. The decoction should be considered
boiled when three quarter parts of its original weight of
the liquid has been evaporated and should then be
strained. The decoction thus prepared should be boiled
with a Prastha measure of oil (four seers) and be removed
from the fire when the oil is well mixed with the milk.
The compound (oil and milk) thus prepared should be
allowed to cool down and then churned. The churned
off cream (Sneha) should be again boiled with the drugs
of the Madhura (Kdkolyddi) group, Mdsha-parni and
milk (four times that of the original oil). This
medicated oil is known as the K^Mra-TaUa and should

Chap. V.)

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

311

be administered as potions and unguents, etc , to an
Ardita*patient The above preparation with clarified
butter in the place of oil is known as the Eshira-
sarpih and it should be used as an Akshi-tarpana (eye-
lotion). Srf— 32.

Venesection should be duly resorted to in the affect
ed parts, according to the directions given before, in cases
of Sciatica, Gridhrasi, Visvachi (Synovitis of the knee-
joints), Kroshtuka-^irah, Khanja (lameness), Pangula,
Vdta-kantaka, Pdda-dAha, Pdda-harsha, Ava-vahuka and
Vadhiryya and in cases where the deranged Vdyu would
be found to be seated in a Dhamani. Measures
and remedies laid down under the head of VAta-
vyAdhi should be adopted, except in a case of
Ava-vAhuka 33,

The expressed juice of green ginger, made lukewarm
after mixing it with (eflual quantities of) oil, honey and
Saindhava salt, should be poured into the cavity of the
ear in a case of (acute) ear-ache. As an alternative,
the urine of a she-goat, or oil and honey, or oil with
the urine (of a cow) mixed with the e;xpressed juice of
Mdiulunga, pomegranate and tamarind, or the oil boiled
and prepared with SurA, Takra, Sukta, salt and
the urine (of a cow), should be poured into the cavity of
the ear ; fomentation should be given (to the interior of
the affected organ) after thk manner of NAdi-sveda.
The remedial measures for VAta-vyAdhi should be re-
sorted to. We shall, however, revert to the subject in
the Uttara-Tantra. 34.

The patient should be made to drink a potion of
Sneha-Lavana* dissolved in an adequate quantity of
water, or the powders of the PippalyAdi group (with an

* Sneha-Lavana has been described in Chap. 4. (treatment of
Vdta-vyidhi) para. 24.

312 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. V.

adequate quantity of water), or clarified butter, thickened
or saturated with pulverised asafcetida and Yava-kshdra
(Carbonate of Potass), in cases of Tuni and Prati-tuni.
Applications of Vastis should also be resorted to. 35.

In a case of Adhmsina (Tympanites),* the remedy
should consist in the applications of powders of the
Dipaniya (appetising) group, of suppositories (Phala-varti),
Vastis and digestive drugs (Pachaniya group). The
patient should also be advised to observe a rigid fast
and his abdomen should be fomented with hot palms.
After that he should break his fast with boiled rice pre-
pared with appetising (Dipana) drugs such as, Dhdnyaka,
Jiraka, etc. Similarly, a case of Pratystdhmskiia should
be treated with fasting, emetics and appetising drugs.
Cases of AshthiW or Pratyashthilat should be treated
as a case of Gulma and internal abscess, to all intents
and purposes. 36-38.

HingvaCdi-Vati :--A compound consisting of
asafcetida, Trikatu, Vachd, Ajamodd, Dhanyd, Aja-
gandhd.Dddimba, TiniidiiViX\ik, Chitraka, Yava-kshdra,
Saindhava salt,, Vid salt, Sauvarchala salt, Svarjikd-
kshdra^ Pippali^mula, Amla-vetasa, S^athi, Pushkara-mulat
Hapushd, Chavyd, Ajdji and Pathyd, powdered together
and treated many times with the expressed juice of Mdtu-
lunga in the manner of Bhdvand’’^ saturation, should be
made into boluses, each weighing an Aksha (two Tolds)
in* weight. One (such) pill should be taken (in an empty
stomach) every morning in all diseases of the deranged
Vdyu. This compound proves curative in cough,
asthma, internal tumour (Gulma), ascites, heart-disease,

* “ Bhdvand*’ consists in soaking a powder or a pulverised compound
with the expressed juice or d<;coction of any drugs or with any liquid and
in getting it dry (generally). This process should be cotinued many limes
(generally seven times) in succesion.

Chap. V.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

315

tympanites, aching pain at the sides, in the abdomen
and in the bladder, in cases of an aversion to food,
retention of stool, strangunary, enlarged spleen, piles,
Tuni and Prati-tuni. 39.

Memorable Verses : — From the symptoms
or leading indications, exhibited in each case and from a
close examination thereof, it should be inferred whether
the Vdyu alone has been deranged or whether it has
combined with any other Dosha, or has affected any
other fundamental principle (Dhdtu) of the organism as
well ; and the medical treatment should follow a
course, so as not to prove hostile to the Doshas or the
Dhsftus (organic principles) implicated in the case, in
its attempt to subdue the aggravated Vdyu. In a
case of cold, compact and painful swelling (appearing
in any part of the body) owing to the combination of
the deranged Vdyu with fat, the treatment should be
identical with that of a swelling in general. 40-41,

Uru-Stambha : — The deranged Vdyu, sur-
charged with the local fat and Kapha gives rise to a
swelling in the region of the thigh which is known
as Uru-stambha ; others designate it as Adhya-Vita.
This disease is marked by lassitude and an aching pain
in the limbs, by the presence of fever, horripilation and
somnolence and by a sensation of coldness, numbness,
heaviness, and unsteadiness in the thighs, which seem
foreign to the body. 42.

Its Treatment ; —The patient should be made
to drink a potion consisting of the pulverised compound*
known as the Shad-dharana-yoga ; or of the drugs con-
stituting the Pippallyddi group, dissolved in (an adequate
quantity of) hot water without using any. oleaginous
substance ; or a lambative, composed of pulverised
T^iphald and Katuka mixed with honey, should be

40

314 THE SUSHRUTA 8AMHITA. [Ch«p. V.

used ; or a potion, consisting of Guggulu or • S'ilAjatu
dissolved in cow’s urine, should be administered. These
compounds subdue the s^gravated V4yu surcharged
with deranged fat and Kapha and prove curative in
heart-disease, an aversion to food, Gulma and internal
abscesses. A medicinal plaster composed of Karanja
fruits arid mustard seeds, pasted with a copious quantity
of cow’s urine should be applied hot to the affected part,
which may be as well fomented with cow’s urine mixed
with alkali (Kshdra) ; or the locality should be sham-
pooed with articles devoid of any oily substance. The
diet of the patient should consist of old and matured
^ydmdka, Kodrava, Udddla and ^41i rice with the soup of
dry Mulaka or Patola, or of the flesh of animals of
the Jdngala group cooked without clarified butter or
vegetables {S'dka) cooked without salt. The use of oil
and of lardaceous substances in general (Sneha-karma)
should, however, be prescribed after the deranged fat
and Kapha have (totally) subsided. 43 .

Therapeutic properties of Guggulu :

— Guggulu is aromatic, light, penetrating into the mi-
nutest parts of the body, sharp, heat-making in potency,
pungent in taste and digestion, laxative, emulsive, slimy,
and wholesome to the heart (Hridya). New dnggalu is
an aphrodisiac and a constructive tonic. Old Guggnln
is anti-fat and hence reduces corpulency. It is
owing to its sharpness and heat-making potency
that Guggulu tends to reduce the V4yu and the
*Kapha ; it is its laxativeness that destroys the Malas
(refuge deposits in the Srotas) and the deranged
Pitta ; its aroma removes the bad odours of the
Kodltlia ; and it is its subtle essence that improves
the appetising faculty. Guggulu should be taken
cTCiy morning with a decoction of TripfuJd, D&rvi and

Chap. V.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM

3^5

Patola Of with that of Km* a roots* ; it may also be
taken with an adequate quantity of cow*s urine, or with
alkalinei* or tepid water. The patient should take
boiled rice with soup, milk, or extract of meat after the,
Guggulu has been digested. Diseases such as internal
tumour (Gulma), urinary complaints (Meha), Uddvarta,
ascites, fistula-in-ano, worms in the intestines, itches,
an aversion to food, leucoderma (^vitra), tumour and
glands (Arvuda\ sinus, Adhya-Vdta, swelling (cedema),
cutaneous affections (Kushtha) and malignant sores and
ulcers readily yield to it, if used for a month (with the
observance of the regimen of diet and conduct laid down
previously). It also destroys the deranged Vdyu incar-
cerated in the Koshtha, bones and joints, just as a
thunderbolt will destroy trees. 44.

Thus ends the fifth Chapter of the Chikitsita Sthdnam in the SusVuta*
Samhiti which deals with the medical treatment of Mab^'Vd(a*Vy^dhi.

* Some explain that a third decoction should be that of Trif^ali,
Ddrvi, Patola and Kus'a grass taken together.—Dallana.

The decoctions may be prepared separately with TriphaU,* Dirvi,
Patola and Kus'a. — Ed,

t Some read **Kshica” (milk) in the place of *^Kshara” (alkali)*

CHAPTER VI.

Now we shall discourse on the medical treatment of
Haemorrhoids (Arsas). i .

The remedial measures in haemorrhoids may be
grouped under four subheads ; namely, the employment of
(active) medicinal remedies, the application"^ of an alkali
(into the seat of the disease), actual cauterization (of the
polypii) and surgical operation. A case of recent origin
involving the action of theDoshas to a slight degree and
uncomplicated with any grave or dangerous symptom
and complication may prove amenable to medicine
alone. Deep-seated polypii, which are soft to the touch
and markedly elevated and extended (external — D R.),
should be treated with alkaline applications, while
those which are rough, firm, thick and hard should be
cauterized with fire. Polypii which are raised, exuding
and slender at the roots should be surgically treated.
Hoemorrhoids which are held amenable to medicine and
are not visible (to the naked eye) should be treated with
the help of medicines alone. Now, listen to the
procedure to be adopted in the treatment of Arsas
which would require alkaline applications, a cauteriza-
tion, or a surgical operation. 2.

Application of Kshrfra:— The body of
the patient suffering from haemorrhoids, in the event of
possessing sufficient strength, should be anointed and
duly fomented. He should be made to eat warm but
demulcent food (Anna) in a fluid state (of a gruel-like
consistency) to alleviate the excessive pain in-
cidental to the action of the deranged Yiyu. In a
season neither too hot nor too •cold, and when the

Chftp. VI.)

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

317

sky is cloudless, he should be placed in a raised
up position in a clean and well-equipped place on
a plain slab or on a clean bed with his head resting
on the lap of an attendant and the anal region
exposed ^ the sun. In this position the waist should
be made to elevate a little and to rest on a cushion
of cloths or blankets. The neck and the thighs of
the patient should be drawn out, and then secured with
trappings and held fast by the attendants so as not to
allow him to move. Then a straight and slender-mouthed
instrument (somewhat like the modern rectal speculum^
lubricated with clarified butter, should be gently inserted
into the rectum and the patient should be asked to
strain down gently at the time. After seeing the
polypus (through the speculum), it should be scraped
with an indicator and cleansed with a piece of cotton or
linen after which an alkali should be applied to it.
The exterior orifice of the instrument should be closed
with the palm of the hand after this application and kept
in that manner for a period that would be required to
utter a hundred words.

Then after having cleansed the polypus, a fresh
application should be made according to the strength
of the alkali and the intensity of the aggravated Doshas
involved in the case. Further application of the alkali
should be stopped and the polypus washed with
fermented rice-gruel (Dhdnydmla), curd-cream, Sukta,
or the juice of acid fruits, in the event of its having
been found to have become a little flabby, bent down,
and to have assumed the colour of a ripe Jambu fruit
After that it should be cooled with clarified butter
mixed with Yashti-Madhu, the trappings should be
removed and the patient should be raised up and placed
in a sitting posture in warm water and refreshed with

3I8 the SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Ch«p. VI.

sprays of cold water, or, according to some authorities,
with warm water. Then the patient should be made to
lie in a spacious chamber, not exposed to the blasts of
cold winds (specially), and advised as regards his diet and
regimen Each of the remaining polypii, if any, should
be cauterized with the alkaline application at an interval
of seven days. In case of a number of polypii, those
on the right side should be first cauterized and then
those on the left, and after that those on the posterior
side ; and lastly those that would be found to be in
front. 3.

Polypii, having their origin in the deranged Vijvi and
Kapha, should be cauterized with fire or alkali ; while
those, which are the outcome of the deranged Pitta and
vitiated blood should be treated with a mild alkali alone.
A perfect and satisfactory cauterization (Samyag*
dagdha) of a polypus should be understood from such
symptoms as, restoration of the bodily V4yu to its
normal condition, relish for food, keenness of the appe-
tite, lightness of the body and improvement in strength,
complexion and pleasure. An over-cauterized (Ati-
dagdha) polypus gives rise to such symptoms as,
cracking of the region of the anus, a burning sensation
(in the affected locality), fainting, fever, thirst, and
profuse hasmorrhage (from the rectum), and consequent
complications ; while an insufficiently cauterized (Hiuft*^
dftg^a) polypus is known by its tawny brown colour,
smallness; of the incidental ulcer, itching, derangement
of the bodily Vdyu, discomfoj'ts of the cognitive organs
and a non-cure of the disease. 4.

A large polypus, appearing in a strong person, should
be cUf^ped off (with a knife) and cauterized with fire.
As regards art external polypus full of extremely
aggravated DoShas ;(Vdyu, Pitta, Kapha and blood) no

Chap. VI.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

319

Yantra should be used, but the treatment should consist
of fomentation, anointing, poulticing, immersion,
plastering, evacuating measures (Visrdva), cauterization
with fire and alkali and a surgical operation.
Measures *Iaid down under the head of Rakta-pitta
should be resorted to in cases of haemorrhage
(from the seat of aflTection). Remedies mentioned
in connectjon with dysentery (AtisAra) should be em-
ployed in cases of a looseness of the bowels ; whereas
in cases of constipation of the bowels oily purgatives
should be administered, or the remedies for Uddvartta
should be adopted. These rules shall hold good in the
cases of treating.(cauterization, etc,) a polypus occurring
in any part of the body whatsoever. 5.

A polypus should be caught hold of and an alkali
should be applied thereto with a Darvi, or a brush
(Kurcha), or an indicator' (Saldkd). in a case of a
prblapsus of the anus, cauterization should be made
without the help of any Yantra (speculum).

Diet : — In all types of hsemorrhoids, the diet
should consist of wheat barley, Shashtika rice or ^^li
rice, (boiled) and mixed with clarified butter, to be taken
with milk, Nimba-soup, or Patola-soup. The patient
should be advised to take (his meal) with Vdstuka^
Tanduliyakay Jivanii, Upodikd^ As^va-vald, tender
nMulakay Pdlankay Asana, ^Chilli, Chuchchu, Kaldya.
Vallii or any other S'dkas (pot-herbs}, according to the
nature of rhe Doshas involved in the case Any other
oleaginous, diuretic, laxative and appetising (Dipana)
diet possessing the virtue of curing piles should also be
prescribed, 6.

After the cauterization of the polypus, as well as in
a case where no cauterization ivould be necessary, the
body of the patient shoiild be anointed with clarified

320

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. VI.

butter and oil, etc,, and measures both general and
Specific (mentioned below and in accordance with the
Dosha or Doshas involved) should be employed for the
purpose of improving the digestive powers and to
alleviate any aggravation of the Vfityu. Me should
be made to drink a potion consisting of clarified butter
cooked with the Vjiyu-subduing and appetising (Dipana)
drugs* (Kalka and Kvdtha) mixed with the powders
of Hingu, etc., (described in the treatment of Maha-Vdta-
vyidhi, chapter. V). In a case of Pittaja-Arsas, clarified
butter prepared by cooking it with the drugs of the
Pippcdlyddi and Bhadra-ddrvddi\ groups, should again
be cooked with the decoction of PrithakparnyAdi group
and^the Kalka of the Dipaniya (Pippallyddi) group, and
given as a potion to the patient. In a case of haemorr-
hoid due to the action of the deranged blood \
(RakWriias), the clarified butter should be cooked with
a decoction of Manjishtkd, Murungi, (D. R. Surangi),
&c., while in a case of one due to the action of the
deranged Kapha, the clarified butter .should be cooked
with a decoction of the drugs constituting the
Suras ddi group. The supervening distresses should
be alleviated by the remedial measures peculiar to
each of them ^ .

Cauterization with fire or with an alkali or any surgical

♦ Such as the decoction of the drugs of the Bhadra-darvddi (Vdyu-
subduing) and Pippalyddi (Dipaniya) group?. This Ghrita should be
prescribed in a VsCtaja Arsas*

t The epithet “Bhadra-ddrvddi-pippallyddi” in the phrase “Bhadra-
ddrvddi-pippallyddt-sarpih” seems to be included into the body of the
text through an accident. In our opinion, it is only an annotation of the
phrase ^^Dipaniya-Vdta-hara-siddha’' occurring in the last sentence. — "Ri,

t The Kalkas of the Pippallyddi group should also be taken in the
preparation of the two kinds of medicated clarified butter to be used in
Rakt^ra'as, and Pittdf»'as.-T*-i)tf//aw

Chap. VI. J

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

321

operation in the present disease should be effected by
introducing the Yantra (speculum) into the rectum (with
the utmost care, inasmuch as an error happening in any
of these cases may bring on impotency, swelling (^opha),
a burning sensation, epilepsy, rumbling in the intestines,
retention of stool and urine, dysentery, diarrhoea, or may
ultimately end in death. 8.

Rectal Speculum : — Now we shall describe

the dimensions of the Yantras (and the materials of
which they are made of). The instrument may be
made of iron, ivory, horn or wood. It should be made
to resemble the teat of a cow. In the case of a male
patient, it should be four fingers in length and five
fingers in circumference ; whereas in the case of a female
patient, the length should be commensurate with that of
the palm of the hand (of the same length as before —
D. R.) and six fingers in circumference. The instrument
should be provided with two separate apertures in its
inside, one for seeing the interior of the rectum and the
other for applying an alkali, or actual cautery (Agni) to
the polypus, since it is impossible to apply fire and*
alkali through the same aperture. The circumference
of the aperture in the upper three fingers of the instru-
ment should be like that of a thumb. There should
be a bulb-like protrusion of the same width, at the
bottom, and above it a space of half a finger’s width.
Thus we have briefly described the shape of the
instrument. 9-10.

Alepa (platers) : — Now we shall describe the’
plasters to be applied to the haemorrhoids (to cause
their spontaneous dropping off). The first consists of
pulverised turmeric mixed with the milky exudation of
the Snuhi tree. The second contains of the cock-
evacuations and pulverised Gunjd, turmeric and Pippali

41

322 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. CChap. VI.

pasted with the urine and bile of a cow. The third
is compounded of Danti, Chitraka, Suvarchikd and
Ldngali pounded together and made into a paste with
cow’s bile. The fourth consists of Pippali, rock-salt,
5 'fmAa-seeds and Kushtha pasted with the milky juice
of an Arka, or Snuhi plant. An oil cooked in combina-
tion with Kdsisa (sulphate of iron), Haritdla (yellow
orpiment), rock-salt, As'vamdraka, Vidanga, Putika,
Kritavedhana, Jamhu, Arka, Uttamdrani, Danti,
Chitraka, Alarka and Snuhi-mWk, and used as an
unguent, leads to the falling off of the polypus, ii.

Internal piles Now we shall describe the
remedial measures which bring about the falling off of
the invisible (internal) haemorrhoids. The patient should
take Haritaki with treacle every morning ; or a hundred
Haritakis should be boiled in a Drona measure of cow’s
urine and the patient, observing a strict continence,
should take with honey every morning as many of .them
as suit his constitution ;• or he should be made to
take every day a paste made of the roots of Apdmdrga
.with the washings of rice and with honey. S'atdvari
pasted with an adequate quantity of milk or (a Karsha
measure of) the powders of Chitraka mixed with a copious
quantity of good Sidhu wine, or a gruel (Mantha)
(neither extremely thick nor thin), or powdered barley
or wheat mixed with Takra and Bhalldtaka powder,
should be administered without any salt. A quantity of
Takra should be kept in an earthen pitcher, plastered
Inside with a paste of Chitraka roots, and given to
the patient in food and drinks whether fermented or
not. A Takra should also be separately prepared as in
the preceding manner with Bkdrgi, Asphotd, barley,
Atm^alaka and Guduchi and administered similarly.; this
is called the Takra-ka4>ft (butter<-milk compound). 12.

Chap. VI.3

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

323

A medicated Takra should also be prepared with
Pippalit Pippali-mula, Chavya, Chitraka, Vidanga,
S'unthi and Haritaki, in the manner described above,
(and given to the patient), -who should abstain from
taking any«solid food, but live only on (this) Takra for a
period of one full month ; or he should be given milk
boiled with a decoction of S’ringavera, Punamavd and
Chitraka, or a condensed decoction (Phdnita) of the
bark of iCutaja roots mixed with an after-throw of the
powdered drugs of the Pippalyddi group and honey.
The patient should be made to partake of the medicinal
compound known as the Hingvitdi-churna,* described
in the chapter on Mahd-V4ta-vyddhi, and be made to
live either on milk, or on Takra. As an alternative, he
should take Kulmdska boiled in Kshdrodaka (alkaline
water) prepared from Ckitraka-toots and made saline
with a liberal after-throw of Yava-kshdra; or he should
take milk boiled with the Kshdrodaka (alkaline water)
prepared from Chitraka-xoot%, or Kulmisha boiled with
the alkaline water prepared from the ashes of burnt
Paldsa ; or he should drink frequent potions of clarified
butter mixed with the alkali made of the ashes of either
Patola, Apdmdrga, Vrikati, or Paldsd wood ; or drink
Takra mixed with the Kalka of the roots of Kuttya and
of Vanddka ; or take the alkaline water of Putika
mixed with a Kalka of Chitra^fi, Putika and Ndgara ;
or use the clarified butter boiled in an alkaline solutionf
with the powdered drugs of the Pippalyddi group,

•

* In a preponderance of Vdyu and Kapha, Takra should be taken as
diet ; whereas milk should be taken in a case of . the preponderance of
vitiated blood.

t During the period when the above mentioned alkaline preparations
are used, the diet of the patient should cohsist of clarified butter, milk
l^nd meat'Soup for fei^r of tke loss pf the Ojo-Dhitu,

324

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. VI.

added to it by way of an after-throw ; or he should take
every morning one or two Palas of black sesamum
(according as required), with cold water. These
measures prove remedial m cases of haemorrhoids and
tend to improve the digestion. 13. ^

Dantyarishta A Tuld weight* (twelve seers
and a half) of the following drugs, ziz., Das'a-mula,
Dantiy Ckitraka and Haritaki should be boiled with
four Drona measures of water till reduced to one quarter
part (one Drona). The decoction, thus prepared, should
be cooled down, filtered, mixed with a Tuld measure of
treacle and preserved into a receptacle which formerly
contained clarified butter, which should then be
kept buried for a month in a heap of unthrashed
barley At the close of this period an adequate dose
of this preparation should be given to the patient
every morning. This medicine proves beneficial in
cases of haemorrhoids, chronic diarrhoea (Grahani),
jaundice, obstinate constipation of the bowels (Uddvartta)
and in an aversion to food. It is also a good stomachic
agent.

AbhaylCriShtaf Two Pala weight of each
of the following drugs, vis., Pippali, Maricha, Vidanga,
Elavdlukd and Lodkra, five]: Pala weight of Indra-
ydruni, ten Pala weight of the inner pulps of the Kapittfia
frOit, half a Prastha measure (one Prastha is equal
to two seers) of Haritaki and one Prastha weight of
Amalaki, boiled together with four Drona measures of

t

* Some are of opinion that one TuI4 weight of each of the drugs
should be taken ; but Gayadisa does not say so.

t Charaka also reads this under the name of Abhay4ri$hta.

X Experienced physicians recommend two and a half Pala weight of
2ndra-V4rQni in lieu of five Palas for its astringent taste. Charakii
^oweyer, lecommenda oply ^*half a ^a)a*’^

Chap. VI.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 325

water until reduced to one quarter of its quantity. This
decoction should be filtered (through a piece of linen)
and cooled down, after which two Tuld weight of
treacle should be added to it. The whole preparation
should be* then kept in a receptacle which formerly
contained clarified butter, and be kept buried half a
month in a heap of unthrashed barley. After the lapse
of the said period, the patient should be made to drink
(an adequate quantity of) this preparation every
morning according to his strength. * This Arishta
proves curative in cases of an enlarged spleen,
impaired digestion, chronic diarrhoea (Grahani), Arsas,
heart-disease, jaundice, cutaneous affection, ascites,
Gulma, oedema (Sopha), and worms in the intestines,
and improves the strength and complexion of the
body. 14

Anointing (Sneha-karma), fomentation, use of emetics
and purgatives and the application of Anuvdsana and
Asth^ipana measures should be employed in cases of
haemorrhoids due to the action of the deranged Viyu*.
The use of purgatives is recommended in the Pittaja
type ; soothing or pacifyi^jg (Samsamana) measures in
the Raktaja type ; and S^ringavera and Kulattha in the
type caused by the action of the deranged Kapha. All
the preceding remedies should be combinedly employed
when the concerted action pf all the Doshas would
be detected. As an alternative, milk boiled with the
proper drugs may be administered in every case. 1 5.

Bhall^taka-yOgfaf : — Now we shall describe
the mode of using Bhallsttaka in cases of haemorrhoids.

* Some are of opinion that the Rishis do not read this line. But as
Gayad^sa explains it, so Dallana, he tells us, also does the same.

t A physician should apply this medicine after a due consideration
and according to th^ physical condition of the patient,

326 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

A ripe and fresh Bhalldtaka should be cut into two,
three or four pieces and a decoction should be made of
them in the usual way. The patient should be made
to drink four Told weight of this cold every morning
after lubricating or anointing his tongue, palate and
lips with clarified butter, and should take his chief
meal with milk and clarified butter in the afternoon.
The number of Bhalldtakas in preparing the decoction
should be increased by one every day till the fifth
day, (and the ‘quantity of the decoction to be drunk
by the patient should be similarly increased). After
that, the number of Bhalldtakas (and consequently
the quantity of the decoction to be taken) should be
increased by five every day. This method should be
followed till the number of the Bhalldtakas reaches
seventy, after which it should be decreased every
day by five until it is reduced to five Bhalldtakas
only (and five Sukti measures of the decoction).
Subsequently the number of Bhalldtaka (and the dose)
should be diminished by one (and one Sukti measure
respectively) every day, until it is reduced to the original
one (and one ^ukti measure^. By taking a thousand
Bhalldtakas in this manner, one may get rid of an attack
of any kind of Kushtha and Arsas, and, having
become strong and healthy, may live for one hundred
years. i6.

Other forms of BhallsCtaka-yoga : —

The oil extracted from or pressed out of Bhalldtakas,
iq the manner laid down in the chapter on Dvi-vrana,
should be taken in a dose of one Sukti (fouc Tolds) every
morning. The patient, as in the preceding case, should
take his meal ( of boiled rice, milk and clarified
butter) after the digestion of the oil with a similar good
effect, As aq alternative, oil should be esctracted froiq

Ch«p. VI,1

GHIKITSA STHANAM.

327

the marrow of Bhalldtakas and the patient, after cleansing
his system with emetics and purgatives, etc., and regulat-
ing his diet in the order of Peyd, etc. should enter
into a spacious chamber, protected from the blasts of the
winds ancJ take two Palas, or one Pala weight of the oil
according to his strength. A meal of boiled rice,
milk and clarified butter, etc., should be taken after the
oil had be^n fully digested. The oil should be conti-
nued, in this way, for a month, the regimen of diet
«hould be strictly observed for a period of three months
and the patient should abstain from anger, etc , during
this period. The use of this oil, in the above mentioned
way, not only ensures a radical .cure of the disease with
all its complications, but would increase the duration of
life to a hundred years with the glow of youth and
health and with an increment in the powers of memory,
retention and wisdom. The application of this oil for
-every one month will extend one’s life • for a period
of one hundred years. In the same way a continuous
use fol' ten months would enable him to live for a
thousand years. 17.

memorable Verses Vrikshaka (Kutaja)

and Bhalls^taka* prove as much curative in cases of
all- kinds of haemorrhoids, as Kdhadira and Vijaka are
effective in cases of cutaneous affections (Kushtha).
Cauterization with fire, or with an alkali, proves as
much palliative in cases of external haemorrhoids as
turmeric proves soothing in those of Prameha. 18-19.

Medicated Ghritas, appetising d rugs, electuarfes,
medicinal wines, Ayaskriti and Asava should be
prescribed in cases o( haemorrhoids, according to
the nature and intensity of the Doshas involved

* Boiled with sixteen times of water in the event of the Bbaliiitaka
being dry, otherwise with eight times of water only.

328

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. VI.

therein. Voluntary suppression of any natural urgings
of the body, sexual intercourse, riding on horse-back,
etc., sitting on the legs and such diets as would
aggravate the Doshas, should be avoided in cases of
haemorrhoids. 20-21. “

Thus ends the sixth Chapter in the Chikitsita Sth^nam of the Sus'ruta
Samhita which deals with the medical treatment of Ars'as.^

CHAPTER VIL

Now we» shall discourse on the medical treatment
of urinary calculus, etc. (Asmarl). i.

Metrical Texts : — Asmari (urinary calculus,
etc ) is a dangerous disease and is as fatal as death itself.
A case of recent origin (acute) proves amenable to
medicines, while an enlarged or chronic one requires
surgical operations. The remedial measures, in the
order of anointing, etc., should be employed in the first
or incipient stage of the disease, whereby the entire
defects with their causes roots of the disease) would
be radically cured. 2.

Treatment of VsCtaJa Asmari Clarified

butter cooked with a decoction of Pdshdnabheda^ Vasuka^
Vas'tra, As'mantaka, S*atdvari^ S'vadamstrd^ Vrihati^
Kantakdrikd, Kapotavamka, AWtagala^ Kakubka*^ Us'ira^
Kubjaka, Vrikskddani, Bhalluka, Varuna^ dka-phala^
barley, Kulattha^ Kola and Kataka fruits and with the
Kalka of the drugs constituting the group of Ushakddi,
speedily brings about the disintergration of As'mari
(urinary calculi, etc.) due to the action of the deranged
Viyu. Milk, Yavdgu (gruel), a decoction, soup, or an
alkali, properly prepared with the above Vdyu-subduing
drug.s should also be administered as food and drink
in the above cases. 3.

Treatment of Pittaja Asmari : — Simi-*

larly a medicated clarified butter cooked with the

«

* Chakradatta reads Kopotavaku£” in place of '*Kapotavamka
“K^nchana” in place of ‘ Kakubha*’ ; and ‘‘Gulmaka” in place of
**Kubjaka.’' From an examination of Ballana it appears that
ICachchhaka^’ is also a reading of Kakubha.”

42

330

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. VII.

decoction of Kus*a,Kds*a,S*ara, Gundrd, Itkatay Morata,
As'mabhidy S'atdvan\ Viddri, Vdrdki, S'dli-mula, Tri-
kantaka, Bkalluka^ Pdtaldy Pdthd^ Pattura, Kuruntikd,
Punarnavd^ , S'irishay with the paste (Kalka) consisting
of S'ildjatu, Madhuka (flower) and the seeds of Indivara\,
Trapusha and Ervdruka, would speedily bring about
the disintegration of Pittaja Asmari (calculi, etc.).
An alkali, Yavdgu (gruel), soup, a decoction, or milk,
properly prepared with the above Pitta-subduing drugs,
should also be prescribed as food and drink in these
cases. 4.

Treatment of Kaphaja Asmari

The use of medicated clarified butter prepared from
the milk of a she^oatf and cooked with the paste
(Kalka) of the drugs constituting the Varunddi groups,
GuggulUy Eld, HarenUy Kushtha, the Bhadrddi group,
Maricha, Chitraka, ^urdhvd and the Ushakddi group,
leads to the speedy disintegration and expulsion of the
Asmari (stone, etc.) due to the action of the deranged
Kapha. So also the use of an alkali, Yavdgu (gruel),
soup, milk, or a decoction, properly prepared with the
above Kapha-subduing drugs, is recommended as food
and drink in such cases. 5.

A potion consisting of the powdered fruit of the Pichukuy
Amkola, Kataka, S'dka and Indivara mixed withtreacle§

* Chakradatta reads “Punarnavd” i,e.y both the kinds of Punarnavd.

t Jejjata. explains ‘‘Indivara” as ‘Nilotpala.* But Gaydddsa does not
support this.

• '4 Some say that “Aja-sarpih” is superfluous. Chakradatta reads
^ in place of

1” meaning thereby that the decoction of the Varunddi-gana is to
ba . used* Chakradatta’s reading seems to be the correct one and is
observed ip practice with good results.— Ed.

; ; J The quantity of treacle, to be taken, should be equal to the entire
quantity of the powders ; and hot water should be used — Dallana.

Chap. Vll.] CHIKITSA STHANAM, , .33 1

and water proves beneficial in cases of Gravel (Sarkard).
The bones of the Krauncha, camel and as 3 , as well as
the drugs known as S^vadamshtrd^ Tdlamuli^ Ajambdd^
Kadamba'xoots and Ndgara pounded together and ad-
ministered* through the vehicle of wine (Surd) or hot
water, leads to the disintegration of ^arkard (gravel).
The milk of an ewe mixed with powdered Trikantaka-
seeds and phoney should be used for seven days for the
disintegration and separation of an Asmari. 6-7.

AlkallneTreatments:— An alkali should be
prepared from the ashes of the drugs used in the prepara-
tion of the aforesaid medicated clarified butters, by dis-
solving and filtering them in ewe’s urine The alkali should
then be slowly boiled with an alkali similarly prepared
from the dung of domestic animals, with the powders of
Trikatu and the drugs of the Ushakddi group thrown
into them as an after-throw. It proves curative in cases
of stone, Gulma, and gravel. Alkalies*}- from burnt bark
of sesamum, Apdmdrga^ plantain, P aids' a and barley
taken with the urine of an ewe destroy the gravel
(S'arkard). As an alternative, the alkalies of Pdtald and
Karavira should be used in the preceding manner. 8-9.

Two Told (Aksha) weights of the pastes of S'va-
damstrd, Y ashti-madhu and Brdhmi (mixed with ewe’s
urine) should be given to the patient ; or the expressed
juice of the Edakd, S* obhdnjana and Mdrkava (with the
said urine) should be given, or a potion consisting of the
pasted roots of the Kapotavamka with Kdnjika, or Surd,
etc., should be administered. Milk boiled with the afore-
said drug (Kapotavamka) should be taken by a patient

♦ Some explain it as “Gokshura-secds” and others as “Markataka-
seeds.*^

t Four or six Told weight of an alkali should be dissolved and filtered
for a number of times before use.

33^ the EWSHRUTA SAMHItA. ICIwp- VII.

in case there is pain (in urinating). Milk boiled with
Triphald or Varshdbhu should be administered as a
drink and a decoction of the drugs of the Vira-tarddi
group should be employed in all these cases.* lO.

A physician should have recourse to th< following
measures (surgical operations) in cases where the
above-mentioned decoctions, medicated milk, alkalies,
clarified butter and Uttara-vasti (urethral syringe) .of
the aforesaid drugs, etc., would prove ineffective. Surgical
operations in these cases do not prove successful even in
the hands of a skilful and experienced surgeon ; so
a surgical (Lithotomic) operation should be considered
a remedy that has little to recommend itself. The death
of the patient is almost certain without a surgical opera-
tion and the result to be derived from it is also uncertain,
rtence a skilled surgeon should perform such operations
only with the permission of the king. 11-12.

modes of Surg^ical Operations The

patient should be soothed (Snigdha) by the application of
oleaginous substances, his system should be cleansed with
emetics and purgatives and be slightly reduced thereby ;
he should then be fomented after being anointed
with . oily unguents ; and be made to pertake of a
meal. Prayers, offerings and prophylactic charms
should be offered and the instruments and surgical
accessories required in the case should be arranged
in the order laid down in the Agropaharaniya chapter

of the present work (Sutra-sthdnam, ch. V.). The

0-

* * Dallana recommends the use of TriphaU boiled with milk in
cases of pain accompanying Plttaja As'mari, while (hat boiled with
VarSh^bhu is advised to be given for the alleviation of pain in a case of
Vdtaja or Kaphaja As' man. The drugs of Vira*tarddi group should be
used wlA milk, ciarified butter* a decoction, Yavdgu (gruel), food, etc.,
and also for bath, immersion, etc.

a«p. VII.J

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

333

surgeon should use his best endeavours to encourage
the patient and infuse hope and confidence in the
patient’s mind. A person of strong physique and un-
agitated mind should be first made to sit on a level
board or table as high as the knee-joint. The patient
should then be made to lie on his back on the 'table
placing the upper part of his body in the attendant’s lap,
with his waist resting on an elevated cloth cushion.
Then the elbows and knee-joints (of the patient) should
be contracted and bound up with fastenings (S'dtaka) or
with linen. After that the umbelical region (abdomen)
of the patient should be well rubbed with oil or with
clarified butter and the left side of the umbelical region
should be pressed down with a closed fist so that the
stone comes within the reach of the operator. The
surgeon should then introduce into the rectum, the
second and third fingers of his left hand, duly anointed
and with the nails well pared. Then the fingers, should
be carried upward towards the rope of the perineum
in the middle line so as to bring the stone between the
rectum and the penis, when it should be so firmly and
strongly pressed as to look like an elevated Granthi
(tumour), taking care that the bladder remains con-
tracted but at the same time even.

Prog(noSlS-*lVI. Text s — An operation should
not be proceeded with nor an attempt made to extract
the stone (^alya) in a case where, the stone on being
h^indled, the patient would be found to drop down
motionless faint) with his head bent down, and eyes
fixed in a vacant stare like that of a dead man, as an
extraction in such a case is sure to be followed by death.
The operation should only be continued in the absence
of such an occurrence.

An incision should then be made on the ieft side

334

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. Vlt

of the raphe of the perineum at the distance of a barley-
corn and of a sufficient width to allow the free egress of
the stone. Several authorities recommend the opening
to be on the right side of the raphe of the perineum for
the convenience of. the operation. Special carfe should be
taken in extracting the stone from its cavity so that it
may not break into pieces nor leave any broken particles
behind (i.e., inside the bladder), however small, as they
would, in such a case, be sure to grow larger again.
Hence the entire stone should be extracted with the
help of an Agravaktra Yantra (a kind of forceps the
points of which arc not too sharp). 13.

Lithotomic Operation in a female : -

In a woman, the uterus (Garbhdsaya) is adjacent to the
urinary bladder, hence the stone should be removed
by making an oblique and upward incision, otherwise
a urine-exuding ulcer might result from the deep
incision in that locality. Any hurt to the urethra
during the operation would be attended with the
same result even in a male patient. An incision
made only on one side of the organ in a disease other
than that of stone, baffles all attempts at healing ;
while an ulcer incidental to an incision made on both
its sides, should be deemed incurable An ulcer
incidental to an incision made on either side of the
bladder in extracting a stone might be healed up, in-
asmuch as medicinal potions and fomentations, etc.,
employed for the healing of a surgical wound, lead
to the healing of the wound in the bladder ; secondly
"because the surgical opening is only made large enough
for the extraction of the stone as recommended in the
authoritative books ; and thirdly because an increase
in the quantity of urine contributes to an increase in
the size of the stone and hence a slight secretion of that

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

Chap. VII.]

335

fluid or employment of diuretic Peyds, etc., are not
attended with any injurious effects.

Post-Surgical Measures : — After the ex-
traction of a stone, the patient should be made to sit in
a Droni (cauldron) full of warm water and be fomented
thereby. In doing so the possibility of an accumula-
tion of blood in the bladder will be prevented ; however
if blood be accumulated therein, a decoction of the Kshira-
trees should be injected into the bladder with the help
of a Pushpa-netra (urethral Syringe). 14-15-

Memorable Verse : — Stones and the accu-
mulated blood in the bladder would be speedily expelled
by means of injecting a decoction of the Kshira-trees
into it with the help of a Pushpa-netra (urethral
Syringe). 16.

For the clearance of the urinary passage, a treacle
solution should be given to the patient ; and after tak-
ing him out of the Droni, the incidental ulcer should be
lubricated with honey and clarified butter. A Yavdgu,
boiled with the drugs* possessed of the virtue of cleans-
ing or purifying the urine, and mixed with clarified
butter, should be given to the patient in a warm state
every morning and evening for three consecutive days.

After that period a diet (meal) of rice well
boiled and mixed with milk and a large quantity of
treacle, should be given (to the patient) in small quan-
tities for ten days for the purification of the blood and
the secretion of urine as well as for the purpose of esta-
blishing secretion in the ulcer. The patient should be
made to partake of a diet (of rice) with the soup of the
flesh of Jangala animals and the expressed juice of acid
fruits after the lapse of these ten days. 17.

* The urine-purifying drugs are Ihe Trina-Panchamulas, Gokshura,
K^samarda» P^shdnabheda, etc,

336 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Ch«p. VII.

After that period, the body of the patient should be
carefully fomented for ten successive days by applying
any warm oleaginous substance or with any warm
medicinal fluid (Drava-Sveda). As an alternative, the
ulcer should be washed with the decoction of (the
bark of) the Kshira-Vrikshas. A paste of Rodhra,
Madhuka, Manjishthd and Prapaundarika (pounded to-
gether), should be applied then to the ulcer. A medicated
oil or Ghrita cooked with turmeric and the preceding
drugs should be applied to the ulcer. The accumulated
blood in the affected part should be removed with the
help of a Uttara-vasti (urethral Syringe). The ulcer
should be cauterized with fire in the manner described
before in the event of the urine not flowing through
its natural passage after the lapse of seven days.
After the urine takes its natural course, Uttara-va.sti,
Asthiipana and Anuvasana measures should be employed
with the decoction of the drugs belonging to the
Madhura- Varga.

A seminial stone or gravel (S'arkari) spontaneously
brought down into the urinary passage should be re-
moved through the same passage. The urethra should be
cut open and the stone should be extracted with a hook
(Vadis'a) or any other instrument in the case of its not
being expelled out by the passage. The patient should
refrain from sexual intercourse, riding on horse back or
on the back of an elephant, swimming, climbing on
trees and up mountains and partaking of indigestible
, substances for a year even after the healing of the
ulcer. i8.

Parts to be guarded in Lithotomlc
Operations! —The Mutra-vaha (urine-carrying) and
the S^iikra-vaha (semen-carrying) ducts or channels, the
Mushka-srotas (cords of the testes), the Mutra-praseka

Chap. VII.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 337

(urinary ) channels, the Sevan! (the raphe of the perineum),
the Yoni (uterus, vagina, etc.), the Guda (rectum j and the
Vasti (bladder) should be carefully guarded at the time of
performing a lithotomic operation. Death results in the *
event of the*urine-carrying channels being in any way
hurt during the operation owing to an accumulation of
urine in the bladder. Similarly, any hurt or injury to the
semen-carryipg ducts at the time, results in death or in
impotency of the patient ; a hurt to the cords of the
testes begets an incapacity of fecundation ; a hurt to the
urinary ducts leads to a frequent dribbling of urine ; while
a hurt to the Yoni (uterus, vagina, etc.), or to the
raphe of the perineum gives rise to extreme pain.
The symptoms which characterise a hurt to the rectum
or to the bladder have been described before. 19.

Memorable Verses;— The surgeon who is
not well cognisant of the nature and positions of the
Marmas or vulnerable parts seated in the eight Srotas
(ducts) of the body such as, the raphe of the perineum,
the spermatic cords, the cords of the testes and the
corresponding^ ones in females (Yoni), the anal region,
the urinary ducts, the urine-carrying ducts, and the
urinary bladder and is not practiced in the art of
surgery brings about the death of many an innocent
victim. 20.

Thus ends the seventh Chapter of the ChikitsiU Sthdnam in the
Sus^ruta Samhita which deals with the treatment of Urinary calculus.

43

CHAPTER VIIL

Now we shall discourse on the medicalotreatmcnt of
Fistula-in>ano, etc«, (Bhag^ariclara). T.

The disease admits of being divided into five different
groups, of which the two, known as S'ambukdvarta and
S'alyaja (traumatic>, should be regarded as incurable,
and th*^ rest as extremely difficult to cure. 2.

The General Treatment The eleven^*"

kinds of remedial measures commencing with Apatar-
pana up to purgatives (as described under the treatment
of Dvi-vrana) should be employed as long as any
fistular ulcer would remain in an insuppurated stage.*
The patient should be soothed by the application of
medicated oil, etc, and his body should be fomented by
immersing him in a receptacle of warm water, etc. as
soon as suppuration would set in (and even after the
ulcer had burst). Then having laid him on a bed
and bound his hands and thighs with straps as des-
cribed under the treatment of HaemorrhoiH, the surgeon
should examine closely as to where the mouth of the
fistula is directed, outward or inward, and whether
the ulcer itself is situated, upward or downward. Then
the whole cavity or receptacle of pus (sinus) should
be raised up and scraped out with an Eshani (indicator
or probe). In a case of inter-mouthed fistula, the patient
•should be secured with straps (as before described)
and asked to strain down. An incision should then
be made by first directing the indicator when its mouth
would become visible from the outside. Cauterization

* ApftUrpana, Atepa, ParUheka, Abbyanga, Sveda, Vimldpana,
Upandba, Pdebana, Visrdvana, Sneba, and Vamana.

Chap. VIII.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

339

with fire or an alkali is a general remedial measure which
may be resorted to in all the types of this disease. 3-4.

Specific Measures— m. Texts in cases
of the ^ataponaka type all the small Vranas about
the anus shauld be first incisioned and the principal sinus
in the locality should not be looked after until these
small ones had been healed up. The connected abscesses
should be respectively incisioned on the external side^
while the unconnected ones should not be opened at
the same time in order that they may not run into
one another and be thus converted into a wide^mouthed
ulcer. The urine and the faecal matter are found in each
case to flow out of the cavity of such a wide-mouthed
ulcer ; and aching pains in the rectum and a rumbling
sound in the abdomen, due to the action of the aggrav-
ated Viyu, are experienced. Such a case is enough
to confound even a well-read and experienced physician.
Hence the mouth of a fistula of the ^ataponaka type
should not be opened with a broad incision.

Forms of incision An experienced surgeon
should know that the Ldngalaka, Ardha-Ldngalaka,
Sarvatobhadraka and the Gotirthaka forms of incision
should be the different shapes of Incision, in a case of
a many-mouthed S'ataponaka. An incision equal in its
two sides is called the Litugalaka (curvilineal), while the
one with one arm longer than Che other is named the
Ardha-Litogalaka. An incision made in the region of
the anus in the shape of a cross (crucial) and a little
removed from the raphe of the perineum, is called thef
Sarvatobhadraka by men conversant with the shapes
of sutgical incisions. An incision made by inserting the
knife in one side is called the Gotirthaka (longitudinal).
All exuding (bleeding) channels in the affected region
should be cauterized With fire by the suigeon.

340

THE SOSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. Vni.

A case of the ^ataponaka type occurring in a
person of timid disposition or of delicate constitution, is
extremely difficult to cure. Medicinal fomentations en-
dowed with the virtue of arresting secretion and alleviat-
ing pain, should, be quickly applied (to the «eat of the
disease)! Fomentations with Kri^ard, or Pdyasa (por-
ridge), made with the aforesaid Svedaniya (diaphoretic)
drugs with a decoction of the drugs constituting the
Vilvddi group, Vrikskddani and roots of the castor-plant
mixed and boiled together with the flesh of the Ldva,
Vishkira (a kind of bird) and that of animals living
in swampy or marshy land or aquatic in their habits
or Grdmya animals, and then kept in an oily pitcher and
applied in the way of a Nddi-Sveda (fomentation through
Nddi or pipe), should be at once applied to the seat of
the ulcer. Sesamum, castor-seeds, linseed, .Mrfi^fl-pulse,
barley, wheat, mustard-seeds, salts and the Amla-Varga
(see Rasa-Vijndniya chapter) should be boiled in a
saucer and the affected part or ulcer should be fomented
therewith. After being fomented, the patient should
drink (a potion consisting of) Kushtha, salts (the five
officinal kinds of salts) Vachd, Hingu and Ajamoda
taken in equal parts and mixed with (an adequate
quantity of) clarified butter, grape-wine (Mdrdvika),
Kinjika (Amla), Surd or Sauviraka.* Subsequent to
that, the ulcer should be wetted with the Madhuka-oW
and the rectum should be washed with medicated oils
which would alleviate pain due to the action of the
■deranged and aggravated Vdyu. The preceding
medicinal remedies tend to bring about the outflow or
evacuations of stool and urine through their natural
channels or courses, and undoubtedly alleviate all
acute and supervening distresses which specifically mark
* By the uie of this potion the digestive power is inoreesed.

Chap, VlII.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

341

the progress of the disease. We have described the treat-
ment of a case of fistula- in-ano of the Sataponaka
(sieve) type ; now listen to me about the treatment of
the Ushtragriva (camel’s neck) type of the disease. 5 ,

Treatment of Ushtra-griva The ulcer

should first be searched with a probe or director and,
after an operation, an alkali should be applied to it.
To remove all sloughed off or sloughing flesh and
membranes cauterization with fire is forbidden. [The
fissures of pus (sinuses) and sloughed off flesh should be
first drawn out]. A plaster of clarified butter and
pasted sesamum should then be applied to it, and the
ulcer duly bandaged. Clarified butter should be constant-
ly applied over the bandage which should be removed
on the third day. Cleansing or disinfecting (S'odhana)
measures should then be used by the surgeon, accord-
ing to the Doshas involved in the ulcer, and the
successive healing (Ropana) measures resorted after its
being properly purified (S'odhana). 6

Treatment of Parlsrsfvl In a case of the
ParisrAvi (exuding) type, where there is bleeding and
secretion from the ulcer, the sinus and the cavities of pus
should be first removed and then cauterized with an alkali
or with fire by an intelligent surgeon. The region of the
anus should then be kept wet by the sprinkling of luke-
warm Anu-toila (described in Ae chapter on V4ta-vy4dhi).
Warm plasters, or poultices, mixed with Yavakshdra
and the urine (of a cow) should then be applied.
Decoction of the ernetic drugs as the seeds of Madma,
etc.), should also be sprinkled slightly on the affected
part. The ulcer when found to be softened and
nearly free from pain and secretion (owing to the
preceding measures) should be searched with a probe
and the principal sinus should be cut open and again

342

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. (Chap, VIII.

completely cauterized with fire or with an alkali. The
incisions should be made in the shape or form of a
Kharjura-patra (leaf of the date-palm), Ardha-chandra
(half-moon), Chandra-chakra (moon’s disc), Suchi-mukha
(needle’s mouth), or Avdmmukha (with downward mouth).
After that the ulcer should be purified with mild cleans-
ing or disinfecting remedies (as described above) 7.

In the case of an infant cauterization with fire or
with an alkali, the use of strong purgatives and surgical
operatioris are forbidden in the case of the disease
(Bhagandara), whether outer-mouthed or inter-mouthed.
Medicinal remedies calculated to be mild, though keen
in their efficacy, should be used in such cases. A plug or
a Varti in the shape of a wick and made of powdered
Aragvadha, Haridrd and KaU, mixed with honey and
clarified butter, should be inserted into the ulcer for
purifying purposes. This medicinal compound speedily
brings about the healing of a sinus, just as the wind
will drive away a cloud. 8—9.

Treatment of Agantuka Btiagan-

dara The sinus in a fistula of traumatic origin
should be carefully cut open by a surgeon (with a knife)
and cauterized, according to the rules laid down, with
a red-hot Jambvoshtha (instrument) or with a red-
hot director (^aUki). Vermifugal remedies should be
applied to it, and measures laid down in connec-
tion with the extraction of a Salya from the body
should be carefully resorted to, 10.

'Treatment of Tridoshaja Bhagan-
dara I— A case of Bhagandara, due to the concerted
action of the three Ooshas, should be treated without
holding out any hope of recovery tot he patient's people,
or should be given up as hopeless. The measures hnd
remedies mentioned above should be adopted in

caup, VII!.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

343

succession in all types of Bhagandara. In the
event of there being any pain in it, owing to the
insertion of a knife or to any other suigical operation,
luke-warm Anu-taila should be applied. As an alternative,
the drugs* possessed of the virtue of subduing the de-
ranged V 4 yu (Bhadra-ddrvddi and Erandidi groups)
should be boiled in a pot covered by a lid having a
hole or aperture on its top ; then the patient with his
rectum anointed with oil, etc., should be made to sit in
such a way over the said covered pot that the seat of
the disease may be fomented with the warm fumes
escaping through that aperture ; or N^di-sveda should
be applied to the affected region through a pipe in a
recumbent posture to alleviate the pain. As an
alternative, a hot bath should be prescribed for the
alleviation of the pain. ^Ivana Upani^ha (described in
connection with the treatment of Vdta-vy 4 dhi and that
with the skins of the Kadali Mriga.LopAka and Priyaka,
should be applied to the affected locality to subdue
the pain. A potion of the drugs or substances such
as, Trikaiu, Vachd, Hingu, salt (five kinds of salt) and
Dipyaka, should be administered with wine, Kinjika,
Sauviraka and Kulattha-Soup, etc. 11-12.

Jyotishmati, Ldngalaki, S'ydmd, Danti, Trivrit, Tila,
Kusktha,S'atdh3/d,Golotni, Tilvaka, Giri-kamikd, Kdsisa
and the two kinds of Kdnchand-kshiri, compose the group
which is possessed of the virtue of purifying (afistular sore).
(The decoction of these substances should be applied for
the purification of the ulcer). The sore of a fistula mhy
be filled (healed) up by the application of (a compound
of) Trivrit, .TYA*, Ndgadanti, Manfiskthd and rock-salt
pasted together with milk and honey. A plaster (Kalka)
consisting of Rasdnjana, turmeric, Ddru-haridrd;
Manjiskthd, Nimba leaves, Trivrit, T^ovati and DanH

344 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. VIII.

proves curative in a case of sinus. The drugs known as
Kushtha^ Trivrit, Tila^ Danti, Pippali^ Saindhava^
honey, turmeric, Triphald and sulphate of copper
(Tuttha) are efficacious in purifying an ulcer. 13-16.

Oil* cooked (slowly) with Pippali, YasMi-madhu,
Lodhra^ Kushtha^ Eld, Harenu, Samangd (BarAha-krdntd),
Dhdtaki flower, Sdrivd^ the two kinds of Haridrd,
Priyangu, Sarja-rasa, Padntaka, Padmd-keY ara, Sudhd,
Vachd^Ldfigalikd, wax, and Saindhava should be regarded
as a potent remedy in healing up the ulcer and curing
fistula-in-ano . This remedy proves beneficial in cases of
scrofula (Ganda-mAld), Meha, ulcers and in the Mandala
type of cutaneous affections as well. The drugs which
constitute the Nyagrodhddi group are efficacious in dis-
infecting (^dhana) and healing up an ulcer. A medi-
cated oil or Ghrita prepared with the pieceding drugs
proves curative in a case of fistula in-ano Similarly
a medicated oil duly cooked and prepared with the roots
of ^rivrit, Danti, Haridrd, and Arka, as well as with
Vidanga, Triphald, milk of both Snuki and Arka, honey
and wax should be applied, as it is specifically efficacious
in a case of Bhagandara 17-19

Syandana Talla:— Oil slowly cooked and
prepared (in the manner aforesaid) with Chitraka, Arka
Trivrit, Pdthd, Malapu (Kdkodumbara), Karavira,
Sudkd (Snuhi), Vachd, Ldngalaki, Saptapama, Suvar-
ckikd and fyotiskmati, is called the Syandana-Taila and
should be constantly applied in a case of Bhagandara.
It*’ is efficacious in purifying, healing and imparting a
natural skin<olour to the cicatrix. A learned and
experienced physician should adopt the remedial
measures for this disease according to the procedure laid

* Four seers of oil, one seer of the drugs and sixteen seers of water
shottid be taken at the time of preparation.

Chap. Vlll.] CHlKITSA STHANAM. 345

down under the treatment of Dvi-Vrana, when there
is any ulcer (vrana) in existence. 20 .

The bulb-like protrusion above the hole of the instru-
ment (speculum), mentioned in connection with the
treatment pf Arsas, should be removed and the instru-
ment, now in the shape of a half-moon, should be used
by an experienced surgeon in the treatment of a case of
fistula-in-ano. The patient should refrain from sexual
intercourse,* physical exercise, riding, anger, and the use
of heavy and indigestible articles of food for a full
period of one year even after the healing up of the ulcer
in a Bhagandara. 21 — 22.

Thus ends the eighth Chapter of the Chikitsila Sthdnam of the
Sub^ma- Samhitd which deals with the treatment of Bhagandara.

44

CHAPTER IX.

Now we shall discourse on the medical treatment of
cutaneous affections in general (Eushtha). i.

A cutaneous disease (Twag-dosha) originates through
injudicious conduct of life such as, partaking of large
quantities of unwholesome food, or taking it before the
previously eaten one is digested {i. e , eating too often),
indulgence in incompatible articles of fare, voluntary
suppression of the natural urgings of the body, and
improper application of medicated oil, clarified butter,
or other lardacious articles. It is attributed even to the
dynamics of sinful acts done by a man in this or in
some prior existence. 2.

Conduct of diet and reg^imen A

person afflicted with any kind of skin disease ^jbould
reirain from taking meat, lard, milk, curd, oil, Kulattha
pulse, Mdsha Nishpdva, preparations and modifica-

tions of sugarcane juice, acid substances, incompatible
food, meals taken before the complete digestion of the
preceding one, unwholesome and indigestible food, or
food causing a burning sensation and some kind of
internal secretion, day-sleep and sexual intercourse. 3.

Regulation of diet and conduct

The old and matured grain of S'dli, Shashtika, barley,
wheat, Koradushay S'ydfndka, Udddlaka^ etc., boiled and
taken along with the soup (Supa) or a decoction* (Yusha)

* An unsalted decoction of any substance not seasoned with any
spices whatever is called Yushat while the one salted and seasoned
with spices is caUed Supa. In preparing the soup of any pulse, all husks
should be carefully thrashed out and the grain should be slightly fried
before boiling*

Chap. IX,]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

.347

of either Mudga pulse ,or Adhaki pulse mixed with
Nimba leaves and Arushkara are wholesome in a case
of Kushtha, Preparations of any of the aforesaid
grains may be taken with Manduka-parni, Avalguja^
Ataruskakd and Rupikd flowers cooked in mustard oil or
clarified butter, or with the soup prepared of the articles
of the Tikta-varga (bitter group, mentioned in the Sutra-
sthAnam). JThe cooked flesh of J^ngala animals, devoid
of all fatty matter, should be given to a patient,
habituated to the use of meat diet. The medicated oil,
known as the Vajraka*Taila should be used for anoint-
ing the body. A decoction of the drugs of the Arag-
vadhddi group should be used for rubbing (Utsddana)
purposes. Decoctions of Khadira should be employed
in drinks, baths, washes, etc. The preceding rules are
intended to regulate the diet and regimen of one suffer-
ing from Kushtha (cutaneous affections). 4.

Preliminary Treatment in the premo-
nifary stages of the disease the system should
cleansed by the application of ’both emetics and pur-
gatives. When the disease is found to invade the
Tvak* only, a plaster prepared of the purifying drugs
should be applied to the affected parts ; blood-letting
and the use of medicinal decoctions and purifying and
disinfecting plasters are the repedies to be employed
when the desease would appear to infect the blood-
The same remedies and Arishta, Mantha, Prds'a, etc ,
should be employed when the disease would be found
* to have invaded the principle of the Mdmsa (muscles).
Palliation and temporary respite are the only cure that
can be offered in a case of the sin-begotten type'f of the

* Tvak here means Rasa or seram. '

t The type of Kushtha affecting the principle of Modas (fat) is
generally supposed to be sin-begotten.

348

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. IX.

disease which is the fourth (in order of enumeration) and
that even is purely contingent on the willingness and
capacity of the patient to conform to.a strict regimen of
diet, conduct and dress. Blood-letting and purifying
measures (emetics and purgatives) should be ftsorted to
in such a case and then the special medicinal remedies
prepared from BhalWtakat, SiWjatu, Guggulu, Aguru,
Tuvaraka, Khadira^ and Asana and the;.. Ayaskriti
should be used in accordance with the prescribed i rules.
The disease in its fifth form (is found to invade the
hones and) should be given up as incurable. 3-6.

Treatments of Doshaja Types in
the first stage of Kushtha, the patient should be treated
in accordance with the prescribed maxims (rules) of
Sneha-pdna. In a case of Vdtaja-Eushtha, cil or
clarified butter, cooked with (a decoction and Kalka of)
MesJia-s’ringi, S'wadamshtrd, S'amgashtd, Guduchi
and the drugs included in the group of Das’amula
should be used as drink and ointment. In cases
of the Fittaja type, the patient should be made to
drink (a potion consisting of) clarified butter prepared
with (a decoction and Kalka of) Dhava, As'va^ama,
Kakubfia, Folds' a, Pichu-mardha, Parpataka, Madhuka,
Rodhra and Samangd, In the Eaphaja type, clarified
butter cooked with (a decoction and Kalka of) Piydla,
S'dla, Aragvadha, Nimba, Saptapama, Chitraka,
Maricha, Vacha and Kushtha should be prescribed.

* * BbalHlAka-prepatations . have been described in the treatment of *
Ars'as, preparations of S'iUjatu, Guggulu, Aguru and Tuvaraka in the
treatment of Prameba.pidakti, and Khadira, Asana and Ayaskriti prepara-
tions in the treatment of Mahi-kushtha.

t Oil should be used in a case of Kapha-predominance, whereas
clarified batter in that of Pitta-predominance. Others' assert that clarified
butler should be used for drinking purposes and oil for anointments.

Chap. IX.3

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

349

The clarified butter cooked with (a Kalka and a decoc-
tion of I Bhalldtaka,Ahhayd and Vidanga, or (the medicinal

oils known as) the Tuvaraka Taila and the Bhalldtaka
*

Taila should be used in all types of Kushtha. 7-8.

The •lVlah€t-tikta Chrita :-A paste or
Kalka should be made by pounding equal parts of
Saptaparm^ Aragvadha, Ativishd^ Pdthd^ Katu-rokini,
Amntdy %'ipliald^ Patola, Pichu-marda, Parpataka^
Durdlabhd, Trdyamdnd^ Mustd, Chandana, Padmaka^
Haridrd, Upakulyd, Vis did, Murvd, S'atdvari, S'drivd,
Indra-yava^ Atarushaka, Shadgranthd {vacha), Madhuka,
Bhu-nimha and Grishtikd*. This paste (Kalka) should be
cooked with four times its own weight of clarified butter,
with the juice of Amalaka, weighing twice as much as the
clarified butter and with water weighing four times the
quantity of the Amalaka juice. It should be constantly
stirred (with a ladle), while being cooked. This medi-
cated Ghrita is called the Maha(-tikta Ghrita, which
proves curative in Kushtha, chronic fevers, haemorrhage,
heart-disease, insanity, Apasm^ra, Gulma, postular
eruptions, menorrhagia, goitre, scrofula, elephantiasis,
jaundice, erysipelas, impotency, itches and Pdmd, etc. 9.

The Tikta-Sarplh Two Pala weight of
each of the following drugs, Triphald, Patola, Pichu-
marda, Atarushaka, Katu-rohin^ Durdlahhd^ Trdyamdnd
and Parpatakaf should be taken and boiled together in
a Drona measure of water. The boiling should be
continued till it is reduced to one fourth of its original
quantity. Then half a Pala weight of each of the
following drugs, viz ., Trdyamdnd, Musta, Indra-yava, (red)

* Chakradalta does not read “Grishtikd” but read “Us'ira” instead.
He also takes both the kinds of “Haridri,” of “Upakulyd** (Pippali) and
of •*Sdrivd*’.

+ Chakradatta reads ‘‘Nis'd** addition to the above drugs,

350

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Ch»p. IX.

Chandana, Kirdta and Pippali should be pasted together.
This pasted Kalka and the decoction should be cooked
with aPrastha measure of clarified butter. The medicated
Ghrita thus prepared is called the Tikta-Sarpih. Dis-
eases such as Kushtha, chronic fever, Gulmrf, Haemor-
rhoids, Grahani, edema, jaundice, erysipelas aid impo-
tency readily yield to the curative eificao^ of this
Ghrita. lo. ,

Medfcinal Plasters for Kushtha

Having first soothed the patient with any of the pre-
ceding medicated clarified butters and having his body
fomented , the surgeon should have recourse to the veni-
section. One, two, three, four, or five s'irds (veins) of the
patient may be opened (according to the circumtances).
The raised or elevated patches on the skin should be
scraped off, or should be kept constantly covered with a
medicinal plaster. As an alternative, the characteristic
patches of the disease should be first rubbed with
the substance known as the Satnudra-phena or with the
leaves of S'dka, Goji, or Kdkodumbara and a plaster
(Lepa) composed of Ldkshd, Sarja-rasa, Rasdnjana,
Prapunndda, Avalquja, Tejovati and the roots of
As'm-mdraka, Arka, Kutaja, and Arevata, pasted with
the urine or bile of a cow, should be applied to them ; or
Svarjikd, sulphate of copper, sulphate of iron, Vidanga,
Agira-dhuma, Chitraka, Katuka, Sudhd, turmeric and
Saindhava pounded together with the urine or bile of a
cow should be applied to the diseased localities.

As an alternative, the alkali, prepared from the ashes
of Paldda wood in the prescribed manner, should
be boiled with the powders of the preceding drugs ; it
should be removed from the oven after reducing it lo
the thickness or consistency of a Phdnita and used in
plastering (the diseased patches) ; or a plaster composed

Cbp. IX.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 3$!

of fyotishka fruits, Ldkskd, Mancha^ Pippali and the
leaves of the ]dti flower pasted together ; or a plaster
composed of yellow orpiment, Manah-sHld, the milky
juice of Arka, sesamum, S'igru and Maricha^ pasted
together ; )Or a plaster composed of Svarjikd^ Kushtha,
sulphate hf copper, Kutaja, chitraka, Vidanga, Maricha
' 6 XiAManm-s'ild pasted together ; or a plaster of Haritaki^
Karanjik^ Vidanga^ white mustard seeds, rock-salt, Gora-
chand, Somardji and Haridrd pasted together should be
applied to the diseased localities.

Metrical Text The preceding seven medi-
cinal plasters are possessed of the virtue of destroying
or curing Kushtha in general. Now hear me deal with
the remedies to be specifically employed in cases of
ringworm (Dadru) and leucoderma (Svitra\ 1 1 .

Treatment of Dadru A plaster composed
of Kushtha, mustard seeds, S'ri-niketa, Haridrd, Trikatu
and the seeds of Chakra-ntarda and of Mulaka pasted
together with Takra (butter milk ?) should be applied to
the ringworm. The disease is found to readily yield
to the curative efficacy of a medicinal plaster, composed
of Saindhava, Chakra-marda seeds, treacle, Kes^ara
(Vakula), and Tdrksha-s'aila (Rasdnjana) pasted together
with expressed Kapittha juice. Preparations of Hema-
kshirij Vyddhi-ghdta (Aragv^dha), S*irisha, Nimba,
Sarja, Vatsaka and Aja-karna (a species of Sarja) should
be used in cases of ringworm of a virulent type for
baths (D. R. Drinks),^ plasters and rubbing. 12.

Treatment of ^vltra in cases of ^vitna
and Fundarika, the patient should be made to drink a
lukewarm decoction prepared with equal parts of the

^ In drinks or baths, a decoction should be used and in plasters and
rubbings the ingredients should be pasted with Takra and the expressed
juice of Kapittha.

352 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Cliap. IX,

roots of Bhadrd (Udumbara) and Malapu, The use
of this potion would produce blisters on the patches.
These blisters should be treated, after their bursting, with
a plaster (Pralepa) composed of the ashes of the burnt
skin of leopards and elephants and made«into a thin
paste with (mustard) oil. A plaster .compose/, d of the
insect known as the Puti and the Kshara / alkali) of
Aragvadha should be found to be the best remedy for
Svitra. 13.

All kinds of Svitra are found to readily yield to the
application of a medicinal plaster made of the black
ashes of a well-burnt cobra (Krishna-Sarpa) pasted with
the oil of Vibhitaka. The white ashes of the said cobra
mixed with one and a half time of its own weight of water
should be filtered seven times in the manner of preparing
an alkali. Mustard oil* should be cooked with this
alkaline w^ater weighing fpur times as much. An appli-
cation of this oil proves curative in cases of Svitra, 14.

The Prapunndda seeds, Kushtha and Yashti-madhu
should be pasted together with clarified butter. The
plaster thus prepared should be given to a domestic
white cock, purposely kept without food for a day and
a half when it would evince any sign of hunger after the
period. The dung of the said cock should then be
collected after a full digestion of the said medicated
drugs and applied as plasters on the affected patches for
a month. It would bring about the cure (even) of
internalf Svitras. 15.

« Well burnt ashes of the dung of an elephant]:, mixed

* This is the best medicine for curing S'vitra.

t The internal S'vitras are those under the blisters produced by the
application of the remedy mentioned first in the list.

t S'iv^^sa, the commentator of Chakradatta, says that some read
in place of in which case it would mean **S'amatha.”

Chap. IX.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

353

with elephant’s urine, should be filtered several times
(twenty-one times or seven times) after the manner of an
alkaline preparation. A Drona measure of this alkaline
solution should be boiled with the seeds of the Somardji
weighing 9 tenth part thereof. This compound should
be taken (down from the oven as soon as it assumes
a glossy fliue and should then be made into boluses.
Having ribbed the diseased patches of ^vitra, a
plaster of these boluses should be applied to them
which would soon assume a healthy and natural com-
plexion. 16.

The leaves and bark (Dala-tvacham) of the Amrd
(mango) and the Haritaki* should be well soaked in a
decoction of the same drugs (after the manner of a
Bhdvand-saturation) and made into Vartis (rV., plugs).
These Vartis should again be well soaked in the milky
exudation of the Vata tree and lighted (with mustard oil)
in a copper vessel used as an Indian lamp. The lamp
black, thus produced, should be collected and well
soaked in a decoction of Haritaki. Kildsa (a particular
kind of Kushtha) is destroyed, if rubbed with this
preparation for several times after having been lubri-
cated with mustard oil.'}’ 17.

* According to some, both the iMvei and bark of the "Amta” and
of the “Haritaki” should be taken. * '

t The leaves and bark respectively of the A'mra and the HwUaki
should be taken in the preparation. The whole stansa seems to be of faulty
construction. Dallana, in his commentary, says that some read the fourth
line as ll" This seems to

be a better reading. It removes the difficulty in the construction, but it
omits also the word from the text. This, however, is also an

improvement, inilsmuch as this preparation seems to be a remedy for
Svitra (which is only a variety of Kilisa> like the preceding and the
following ones ; and it seems unlikely that Sus'iuta would introduce a
remedy for Killha in general in the special treatment of S'vitia.

45

354 THE SliSHfttfTA iSaMHItA. IChap. I3i.

A case of ieucoderma would (undoubtedly) yield to
the curative virtue of a medicinal plaster composed
of Somardji seeds, Mdkshika, Kdkodumhara, Ldkshd,
powdered iron, Pippali and Rasdnjana, taken in equal
parts and black sesamum equal to their* combined
weight, pasted with the bile of a cow and applied to the
diseased patches. Similarly, a case of ^vAra ^ould
prove amenable to the application of peacooS’s bile, or
of burnt Hrivera mixed with the said bile. i8.

Various types of ^vitra are cured with the appli-
cation of either of the two following medicinal plasters.
The first consists of Tuttha (sulphate of copper), Haritdla
(yellow oxide of arsenic), Katukd, Trikatu, Simha (Rakta-
^obhdnjana), Arka, Karavira, Kushtha, Avalguja, Bhal-
Idtaka, Kshirini, mustard seeds and Snuhi ; and the
second consists of the leaves of the Tilvaka, Arishta
(Nimbal, Pilu and Aragvadha pasted together with the
seeds of the Vidanga and Karavira and Haridrd, Ddru~
Ibaridrd, Vrihati and Kantakdri. 19.

NilSl^Chrita. : — Vdyasi, Phalgu and Tiktd each
weighing one hundred Palas, two Prastha measures of
powdered iron, three Adhaka (eight seers) measures of
Triphald and two Adhaka measures of Asana should be
boiled together with three Drona measures of water. This
decoction should be taken down when reduced to one
quarter of its original measure and cooked again with a
quantity of clarified butter (weighing a quarter part of
the former (decoction) and with a Kalka consisting of
Indra-yava, Trikatu, Tvak, Deva-ddru, Aragvadha, Pdrd-
vatapadi, Danti, Vdkuchi, Kedatdhva (Vakula) and
Kantakdri, The patient should be made to drink this
medicated clarified butter when the disease would be
found to have attacked the Bhtftns (fundamental prin-
ciples of the organism), or to have become involved in the

Chap. IX.} CHIKITSA STHANAM. 355

aggravated Doshas of the system. The diseased patches
should be rubbed with it, in the event of the affection
being found to be confined to the Tvak (skin) alone.
Even the type of Kushtha, commonly held to be incvJr-
able, has Been found to prove amenable to the use of
this med rcated clarified butter, which is known as the
Nila-Ghrla. 20.

IVIah^-N!la-Chrita :-A TulA* weight of

the drugs known as Triphald, Tvak, Trikatu, Surasd,
Madayantikd, Vdyasi and Aragvadha and ten Pala
weights of each of the drugs known as Kdkamdchi,
Arka, Varuna, Danti, Kutaja, Chitraka, Ddru-haridrd
and Kantakdri should be boiled together with three
Drona measures of water. This decoction^ boiled down
or reduced to six Prastha measures, should be again
boiled with the watery secretion of cowdung, cow’s
urine, milk, curd and clarified butter, each weighing an
Adhaka, and with the Kalka (weighing one-fourth as .
much of clarified butter) of Bhu-nimba, Trikatu,
Chitraka, KardnJa-ixvXi, Nilikd, S'ydtnd, Avalguja, Pilu,
Nilini and Mr«^a-flowers. It is a curative for Kushtha,
The rubbing of the diseased patches with this Ghrita
imparts a healthy and natural colour to the skin in
cases of Svitra or white leprosy. It also cures diseases
like fislula-in-ano, worms in ^the intestines and Ars'as,
It is known as the Mahtf-Nila-Ghrita.f 21.

A compound consisting of cow’s urine, Chitraka,
Trikatu and honey should be kept for a fortnight in a

• A TuU is equal to a hundred Palas or twelve seers and a half of
our modern measure.

t Dallana, in his commentary, says that the two Ghritas (Nila and
Mahi«Nila) seem to be spurious (Andrsha)., But he has included them
in his coipmcntary as Jejjata and Gayadfod have read and explained
then) before him^

356 THE 8USHRUTA SAMIUTA. IChap. IX.

closed earthen pitcher which formerly contained clarified
butter. A l^vitra-patient would do well to take this
medicine after this period. He should also observe the
rules of diet and regimen of a Kushtha*patient. The
application of a Lepa (medicinal plaster), prepared by
pasting the tender twigs of the Putika, Ar^, Snuht,
Aragvadha and of the fdti flower with cow’s umne, would
prove curative in cases of ^vitra, ringworm, ^Icer, bad
types of haemorrhoids and sinus. 22-23.

In case the foregoing medicinal remedies prove
ineffective, the patient should be duly bled for the
purpose of letting out the vitiated blood from the
system, and after sufficiently recouping his strength
(after blood-bfetting) his body should .be anointed with
clarified butter. Copious vomitings should be induced
with the help of strong emetics and the patient should
be treated subsequently with a judicious adnrinistration
*of purgatives (so as to remove the aggravated Doshas
from the system). The aggravated Doshas of the
body, not being fully expelled from the organism of
a Kushtha-patient by means of the preceding emetic
add purgative measures, tend to extend all over the
organism and the disease in consequence thereof is sure
to lapse into one of an incurable type. Hence the
aggravated Doshas should be fully eliminated from the
organism. 24*25.

Emetics should be administered to a Kushtha-patient
once a fortnight and Sramsana (purgatives) once h
mpnth. He should be bled twice a year though not
profusely and medicated snuffs should be administered
to him every fourth day. 26.

Internal application of Haritaki, Trikatu and treacle
(pteparad from the juice of the sugarcane) mixed with
oil would lead to the early recovery of a case of Kushtba,

Onp. 13C.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

357

As an alternative, he should use a lambative medicinal
compound of Amalaka, AksAa, Pippali and ViJanga
mixed with honey and clarified butter. Or he should
take a Pala weight of Haridrd with' an adequate quantity
of cow’s uifne every day for a month in order to get
free from? Kushtha ; or the same quantity of the fine
powder o{\Pippali or of Chitraka should be given to
him through the same vehicle arid for the same period
which would cure him of Kushtha. The same quantity
of the fine powder of Rasdnjana should be given through
the said vehicle and in the same manner for a period
of one month and the same should also be repeatedly
applied externally. 27-28,

The bark of Ariskta (Nimba) and Sapta-parni,Ldkshd^
Musta, Das'a-muli, Haridrd, Ddru-haridrd, Manjishthd,
Aksha, Vdsaka, Deva ddru, Pathyd, Chitraka Trikatu,
Amalaki and Vidanga taken .in equal parts and pounded
together should be mixed with powdered Vidanga weigh- '
ing as much as the total weight of the preceding drugs ;
the patient should be made to take a Pala weight of
this pulverised compound every day (for a month), or he
should be made to drink (in adequate doses) a Drona
measure of medicated clarified butter, cooked with the
powders of Triphald and Trikatu. As an alternative,
Aksha-pida should be boil !4 in a Drona measure of
cow’s* urine. Clarified butter, cooked in this pre-
paration may be used, as a remedy for Kushtha.
An adequate quantity of old and matured clarified
butter should be boiled with Aragvadhz., Sapta-pama,
Patch, Vrikshaka, Naktamdh, Nimba, the two kinds
of Haridrd and Mushkaka. This medicated Ghrita,

* Cow’s urine end water in equal parts should be taken according to
some commentators. Dallaaa, however, recommends cow’s urine only and
po water, ,7

358

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. IX‘

thus' 'preparedi would lead to the destruction of
Kush’tha.* '29-30.

; Drugs such as Rodhra,Nimba, Padma-kdsktha, Rakta-
ckandana, Sapta-parni, Akska, Vrikshaka and Vijaka
should be administered in the bath’j* of* the patient in
the 6vent of there being any burning sensatwn ; or a
potion . consisting of honey and pasted 'Mri-hhandi
(Trivrit) should be gi'ven to him. Old an* matured
Mudga, boiled in the decoction of Nimba and mixed
with oil, should be given to the patient as drink where
sloughing would be detected in the diseased localities.
A decoction of Nimba or that of Arka, Alarka and
Sapta-chchhada should be given him if there be any
worms in the diseased locality. The affected part of
the body should be plastered over with the roots of the
As'va-mdra and Vidanga, pasted with cow's urine, in the
event of its being eaten away by the worms. Cow’s urine
should be sprinkled over the diseased locality and all
food (of the patient) should be given with the powders
of '\ridanga. 31-32.

As an alternative, the affected parts should be
rubbed with the oil of Karanja, mustard, S'ig-ru, or
Kos^dmra, or with an oil (any one of the preceding oils)
cooked with (a decoction of) pungent, bitter and heat-
producing substances. Measures laid down under the
head of Dushta-Vrana (malignant ulcer) should be
resorted to in a case where the aforesaid remedies would
fail to produce any beneficial effect. 33.

* Dallana says that the authorship of this remedy should not be attri-
buted toSub'ruta, inasmuch as Jejjatu does not mention itinhiscommenlary.

t The drugs are to be boiled in, water in which the patient should
take bis bath.

, $ The decoction should be prepared in the manner of " Shudanga-
kaipa.’» ' *

Chap. IX.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

359

Vajraka-Taila The roots of Sapta-pama,
Karanja, Arka, Mdlatiy Karavira^ Snuhiy S^irisia^
Chitraka and Asphotd as well as of Visha (aconite ro<»t),
Ldngalay V ajrdkhya (mica), sulphate of iron, Haritdlay
Manah-s* ihd Karanja-st^dSy TrikatUy Triphald, the two
kinds of \Haridrd, white mustard-seeds, Vidanga and
Prapunnc^a should be pasted together with the urine of
a cow. Tfie paste thus prepared should be cooked in
an adequate quantity of oil.* This oil known as the
Vajraka-Taila, used as uguents, proves remedial to
Kushtha etc., sinus and malignant ulcers in general. 34.

Mah^-Vajraka Taila The drugs and sub-
stances known as white mustard-seeds (Siddhirthaka),
the two kinds of Karanja^ the two kinds of Haridrdy
Rasanjandy Kutaja^ Prapunndda, Sapta-parnayMrigddani
Ldkshdy Sarja-rasay Arka, Asphotd^ .Aragvadhay Snuhiy
S^irishay Tuvaray Kutajay Arus/ikaruy Vachdy Kushtha.y
Vidangdy Manjishthdy Ldngali, Chitrakay Mdlatiy Katu*
tumbiy Gandhdhvdy Mulakdy Saindhava^ Karavirdy Griha-
dhumdy Visha (aconite), Kampillakay Sindura (mercuric
oxide), Tejohvd and sulphate of copper should be taken
in equal parts and made into a paste. This paste
(Kalka) should be cooked with either Karanja-oxX or
mustard-oilf ,"^oth of which have great curative potency,
with double the quantity of cow’s urine. It may also be
prepared with sesamum-oil, but in this case four times as
*much of cow’s urine should be taken. As an anointment
it is undoubtedly efficacious in a case of Kushtha of
whatsoever type as well as in cases of scrofula, fistula-in-
ano, sinus and malignant ulcers. This oil is known by the

* S^ivaddsa, the commentator on chakradatla, asserts, on the authority
of V^gbhata, that the oil should be sesamum-oil and it should be boiled
with cow’s urine.

t According to Gayaddsa itm$taid*oil should be used.

360

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

CGIup. IX.

name of Maluf-Vajraka oil and is possessed of supreme
and unquestionable ef^cacy. 35.

The drugs which constitute the Ldkshddi group
should be pasted with an adequate quantity of cow’s
urine and cooked* with sesamum-oil and ipixed with
Pitta (cow’s bile). The oil, thus prepared, (should be
preserved for a week inside the body of a Xhfukdldvu.
The oil should be taken out (after this period) and the
patient should use it both internally and externally
(in an adequate quantity). After doing this, he should
expose himself to the heat of the sun whereby all the
Doshas would be eliminated from his organism. After
the complete elimination of the Doshas from the sys-
tem, the patient should be removed from the sun and
bathed with a decoction-f of Khadira, and a gruel, pre-
pared with the decoction of Khadira, should be given
him as diet. Similarly, oil or clarified butter boiled and
prepared with the drugs constituting the Sams’ odhana
group (mentioned in chap, xxxix, Sutra.) or with
the drugs possessing anti-Kushtha properties should
be u^d as hot plasters and rubbings (in the diseased
localities). Puigatives should be administered every
morning with good results. The preceding remedies
should be taken and continued for h^e, six^ seven,
or eight days, or till the Doshas of the system pro-
ducing the. disease are not perfectly eliminated. As
an alternative, camel’s urine and after its full digestion,
camel’s mjllk should be taken. Even parasitic types of
Kushtha are sure to disappear within six months (under
the course of this treatment). 36.

* In eeokint Uw oil, cow’i urine weighing four timet of oil thouhl be
Uricett.— I>tlluie.

f liW deeoction of Kbadin in the bath at well at in the preparation of
thegmdthottldbeprtpaiedafterthe manner of Shadanga-Kalpa.— Dailana.

Chip. IX.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 361

A Kushtha-patient desirous of being perfectly cured
should constantly use preparations of Khadira in his
drinks, food, bath, etc, Khadira, if properly used, is
potent enough to curb the virulence of the disease in
the same ptoportion as the latter is in invading the
successive? strata of the human organism and ultimately,
in bringing on the death of the patient, 37.

The paring of the nails and shaving the hair off, light
physical exercise, the use of wholesome food, regularity
in using medlfcines, abstinence from wine, women and
meat-diet are the rules of conduct which should be
strictly observed by a patient affected with Kushtha.
With the strict observance of the above rules a Kushtha-
patient may be expected to recover. 38.

Thus ends the ninth Chapter of the Chikitsita Sthtinam in the
Sus'ruta Samhiti which deals with the medical treatment of Kushtha.

46

CHAPTER X.

Now we shall discourse on the medical® treatment
of major cutaneous affections (MahsT-KusIlftha).* i.

Metrical Text : — An intelligent physician
should have recourse to the following medicinal com-
pounds in virulent types of Kushtha, urinary com-
plaints (Meha), diseases due to the action of the de-
ranged and aggravated Kapha and general cedima of
the body and also in respect of inordinately corpulent
persons wishing to reduce their obesity. 2.

Mantha^KalpaS Pounded barley-com
should be saturated with the urine of a cow and kept in
a large bamboo basket (Kilinja) for the whole night ; and
should then bj dried in the sun on the following day.
This process should be continued for seven consecutive
days. At the close of this period it should be fried in an
earthen vesjel vKap41a) and then ground to fine powder
(^aktu). The powder, thus prepared should be given
every morning to a person afflicted with Kushtha
(leprosy), or any urinary complaint (Prameha) through
the medium of a decoction of the drugs included
within the S'dlasdrddi grou'p, or of the Kantaki {tYiomy) f
and mixed with a pulverised compound of Bhalld-
takot, Avalguja, Arka, Chitraka, Vidanga

4 od M«sta weighing a fourth part of the S'aktn. Barley-
should, in the same manner, be soaked in a

%

♦ ICiliiltha wbkb »ffec»8 the deeper tissues and fundamental principles
olll^ body ia called Mah^-Kushtha.

Gay! inter piets the term “ Mahd*Kushtha ” as signifying those seven
types of Kushtha which cannot he attributed to any detectable cause,
t Vadara, Khadira, Arimeda^ Snuhi, etc.

Cbap. 3t.] CHlKlTSA STttAllAll. 3^1

decoction of the drugs constituting the S'dla-sdrddi or
the Aragvadhddi groups, or barley-corn should be given
to a cow to eat and the undigested barley-corn pass^
with the cow-dutig should be collected. This barley-
corn should then be fried and powdered in the form of
^ktu. Yhis powder should be mixed with a pul-
verised compound of Bhalldtakat etc., mentioned above,
and given to the patient through the medium of a
decoction of any one of the Khadira, Asana, Nitnba,
Rdja~Vrikshd, Rohitaka zxxA Guduchi, sweetened with
honey and sugar, and acidified with grapes, or the ex-
pressed juice of pomegranate and Amla-vetasa and
then mixed with rock-salt. This is the method of pre-
paring all kinds of Manthas. 3.

Articles of food made of barley-corn in the form
of Dhdnd, Lunchaka, Kulmdsha, Apapa, Pttniakosfa,
Utkdrikd,* ^ashkulik^, Kundrif and Kondli, etc., slionld^
be given as diet. Preparations of wheat and Venu-yava
(seeds of bamboo) after the manner of barley prepara-
tions should also be recommended as a proper
food. 4-5.

MedlcatGCi Arlshtas Now we shall describe
the mode of preparing Arishtas (applicable in cases
of Kushtha). Six Pala weight of each of the following
drugs, viz., Putika, Chavya, Chitraka, Deva-ddru, Sdrivd,
Danti and Trjkatu, and one Kudava weight of Vadara
and Triphatd should be powdered. An earthen jar or
pitcher, which formerly contained clarified butter, should
be purifiedi and plastered inside with a compoufid

* Gayaddsa reads Chitrdi (a kind of soup) befoie ** Ulkdrikl’

t Dallana dOQS not read “Kondli” but rays that tome read “Koniliki*
in place of **Kun4ri*’ both of which are synonyms* We havei howevtti
both the terms in our text.

t The jar should be purified' or disinfected by fumigation with the
medicinal drugs such as Nimio-kavtSf Guggulu, etc.

jdt the StiSriaUTA SAMriJTA. tCitwp- ^

of honey, clarified butter and powdered Pippali. Then
the pulverised compound, mentioned above, together
with seven Kudava measures of water*, half a Kudava
measure of iron-powder, and half a Tuld weight of treacle,
should be poured into the said jar which shodld then be
tightly covered with a lid and placed under a* heap of
barley for seven days (for fermentation). After this
period, it should be taken out and the patient should be
made to take some of it (every day) according to his
physical capacity. This Arishta (fermented liquor) cures
Kushtha, obesity, urinary complaints (Meha), jaundice
and oedima. Arishtas may also be similarly perpared
from the drugs included in the S' dla-sdradi, the Nya-
grodhddi or the Aragvadhddi group. 6.

Medicatecl Asavas Now we shall describe
the mode of preparing Asavas. The ashes of burnt
Paldda should be dissolved in hot water and duly filtered.
Three parts of this (alkaline) water, subsequently cooled,
and two parts of Phdnita (molasses) should be
mixed tc^ether and fermented in the manner of pre-
paring Arishtaf. Asavas may be similarly prepared
with the alkali made of the ashes of sesamum plants
(described in connection with the treatment of As'mari
-r-Chapter. VII), or with the drugs constituting the S'dla^
sdrddi, the Nyagrodfiddi, or the Aragvadhddi groups, or
with cow’s urine as in the preceeding manper. 7.

Medicated 8uri(s:-Now we shall describe
the process of preparing Surds (wines). A decoction
should be duly made of S'Undpd and Khadira woods
with Vttamdrani, Brdhmi and Kos'dtaki boiled together

• JfejjaU reeommend* twenty-eieht PiJa weight of water, bat G»ya-
jdiiarlbe* not eappoit thie.

t Bowdsre of Putika, Chitnka, etc., neotioned in eonneetloo nhh the
piepamtion of Ariehtas thonld be likewite added to It,— Delleae.

Chm. X.] CItlitITSA StHAifAM. • * ^65

in water*. Then Suri-kinva (the drug which is used to
cause the fermentation in the manufacture of spirits)
should be mixed with the above decoction and the
compound distilled in the usual officinial method. The
liquor thhs prepared is called Sari^. Suris may be
similarly prepared, from the drugs of the S' dla^sdrddU
the Aragvadhadi, or the Nyagrodhddi groups. 8.

Medicated Avalehas (lambatives) : — Now
we shall describe (the method of preparing) medicated
Avalehas (lambatives). A decoction should be prepared
with, the Sira (essential parts) of Khiidira, Asana, Nimba,
Rdja-vriksha and S'dla. •)* Fine powders of the same
drugs should be mixed with the above (decoction) and
boiled again. The compound should be removed from
the fire neither thick nor thin. The patient should
be made. to lick a handful^ of the compound mixed
with honey and be made to abstain from taking any meal
in the morning. Similar preparations may be made
(Avaleha) from the drugs of the S'dla-sdrddi, the Arag-
vadhddi, or the Nyagrodhddi groups. 9.

Medicinal Churnasr-Now we shall de-
scribe the process of preparing pulverised compounds.
A Prashtha measure of the powdered Sira of the
trees belonging to the S'dla-sdrddi group should be

* One part of S'icAb'apt^ one of Khadira and a third of Uttamdrani,
B(dhmi and Kos'dtaki should be taken. »TuU weight of the drugs and
four Drona measures of water should be boiled and reduced to one Drona.

Da liana.

t Gayd does not read *'S'dla” in the list.

t Though ib« word “Pdnitala” means a “Karsha” i.#., two ToUs, yet
as there is the word **Pumam*’ inserted alter it, so a handful should be
understood here by this term.— Dallana. It should be observed,
however^ that the diflerenee ih the two interpretalfpns is ultimately
immatetliih— Ed.

36 ^ the StSHRUTA SAWaiTA. ^

many times (i. e., seven days) saturated with the decoc-
tion of the drugs of the Aragvadkddi group (and dried).
Then the prepared compound should be taken with the
vehicle of the decoction of the drugs of the said S'dla-
sdrddi group. A pulverised compound {Chuiita) may be
as well prepared in the above manner from the fruits
of the Nyagrodddhi group or from the flowers of the
Aragvadkddi group. lo;

Medicinal Ayaskriti Now we shall de-
scribe the process of preparing an Ayaskriti (iron com-
pound). Thin leaves of steel should be plastered with the
(five officinal kinds of) salts and heated in fire a of dried
cow-dung. When red-hot, they should be immersed in a
decoction of Trip}iald and the drugs of the S' dla-sdrddi
group. The above process should be repeated sixteen
times in succession after which they should be heated and
burnt in a fire of Khadira wood. When cooled down,
the iron foils should be pounded into fine powder and
passed through a piece, of thick linen. The patient should
be made to take this powder with honey and clarified
butter in an adequate dose suiting his capacity. After
the digestion of the medicine, he should take such .a meal
as, is not hostile to hisparticular disease and is devoid
of salt and acid articles. The use of a Tuli measure
of this medicinal iron preparation in the above manner
leads to the recovery of Kushtha, Meha (urinaiy com-
plaints),'obeSity, oediraa, jaundice, insanity and epilepsy
and makes the patient live for one hundred years. The
use of each additional Tuld weight of the preparation
adds a century to the duration of the user's life.

; This is the mode of medically preparing all kinds of
lioi* (zinc, copper, lead and gold). Ii-I2.

AyftSkrltl :~A bail of iron
(weighing fifty Palas) heated and made red-hot in a

Ch*i».X.] CHIKITSA STHANAM.; 3^67.

fire of Khadira wood should be cooled by fmniersing it
in a cauldran (Droni), made of ^reen) Pal&^a wood
and containing (five-hundred Palas of) Svarasa (expressed;
juice* of Trivit, S'ydmd, Agnimantha, Samkhini, Kevuka,^
Lodhra/^fiphali, Palds'a and ^imsap^. The iron mass
should be thus heated and cooled twenty one times
in succession ; finally the iron ball should be immersed'
and boiled in the expressed juice of the foregoing drugs'
over a fire of cow-dungs. It should be removed from
the fire when only a quarter part of the liquid would
remain. It should now be filtered, and the mass of
iron should be again heated in the fire mixed with tbe
same liquid and boiled s^ain ; when the cooking is
,nearly complete, (it should be removed from the fire
and) a pulverised compound of the drugs included in the
PippalyddigxQU^ together with honey and clarified butter
each weighing double the quantity of the iron mass or
ball should be mixed with the same. When cooled down,
this preparation should be preserved in a well-sealed
iron-pitcher. The medicine, thus prepared, should be
given to the patient according to his capacity but not
less than a Sukti (half a Pala) or a Prakuncha measure
(one Pala). After the digestion of this medicine, a diet
should be given to the patient determined by the nature
of his disease. This is calledthe Aashadha Ayaskriti
and it cures even the incurable types of Kushtha and
urinary complaints (Meha\ reduces obesity, impairs
oedima and improves the impaired digestive functions.

* Old and experienced phyticieht explain "SvarasoM" lo be the
decoction a* well. Gayadisa saya that a decoction of one Dtona weight
of the drugs, boiled in four Dtona weight of water and reduced to its
quartet part should be taken. Oallana says that if the expressed juice of
the drugs be not available, then a cold Infusion of One Adhaka weight of
the powdered drugs should be taken.

368 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. , [Chtp, X.

It is specially efficacious in cases of phthisis
(Rdja-Yakshmd). A proper and regular use of this
remedy increases the duration of life to a hundred
years. 1 3.

Mahaushadha-AyaskrItI decoction
of the drugs of the S'dla-sdrddi group should be poured
in a Droni (vessel) made of Palds'a wood. Sheets of
iron should be made red-hot and cooled down
(twenty one times) by immersing them into the said
decoction of the drugs of the 5 dla-sdrddi group. The
mterior part of an eartheg pitcher should be disinfected
(with fumigation). Then the iron foils and the powder
of the drugs of the Pippalyddi group together with
treacle and honey should be added and preserved
in the earthen pitcher with its mouth well-covered
with a lid for a period of one month (in winter) or a
fortnight (in summer). This preparation is called the
Mahanshadha-Ayaskriti and an adequate qusmtity of
it should be given to the patient after the lapse of the
said period. Similar preparations of (iron) may be
made with a decoction of the drugs of the Nyagro-
dhddi or Arevatddi (Aragvadhidi) group. 14.

The Khadlra Vidhdna : —Now we shall
describe the Ehadira preparations. The earth around
the central root of a middle-aged Khadira tree, grown
in a commendable soil and not worm-eaten, should
be dug out and the central and principal root of the
tree should be cut open. An iron pitcher should be
^aced under the tree so that the secreted juice may
collect into it through the main root. The outer surface
of the tree should be completely plastered with a
paste of clay and .cow-dung (mixed together). It should
then be treated with a hre fed with fagots mixed
yirith cow-dung so that the glutinous secretions of

Chap. XO

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

369

the Khadira tree would naturally settle . down Jnto the
pitcher (through the principal root). When the pitcher
is filled up, the juice should be collected and
filtered and then kept in another vessel with its lid
carefully •closed and sealed. The extract so pre-
served sliould be taken in proper doses with honey, clari-
fied butter and the expressed juice of Amalaka. The
patient should be made to take such diet and observe
such regimen of conduct, as has been prescribed in
connection with the use of Bhallsitaka compounds, after
the digestion of the medicine. A Prastha measure of
this remedy gradually taken by a man enables him to
live a hundred summers. 15.

Khadira-S^ra-Kalpa A decoction made
by boiling a TuU weight of the essential part (Sdra).of the
Khadira tree with a Drona measure of water and boiled
down to a sixteenth part of its original quantity should
be kept in a vessel with its mouth tightly closed.
An adequate quantity of this decoction should be taken
every day with honey, clarified butter and the expressed
juice of Amalaka, The present method should be
adopted with the extract from the essential parts (Sira)
of all other medicinal trees. 16.

Every morning the patient should be made to take
an adequate dose of the powders of Ehadira-ss^ra,
or its decoction, until a Tuli weight is consumed, or
he should be made to take a potion of the clarified
butter churned from the milk of a ewe and cooked in
a decoction of Khadira-sdra. As an alternafive
the expressed juice or a decoction oi Amrita^valli, or
clarified butter cooked with that juice or decoction,
should be taken every morning. The patient should
every afternoon take a meal of boiled. rice with clari-
fied butter and i^m<« 4 t^»soup. A constant use of this

4;

370

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. X.

remedy and a conformity to the foregoing diet for a
month would lead to a radical cure of any type of
Kushtha. 17.

Oils pressed out of black sesamum and Bhalldtaka,
clarified butter, the expressed juice of Amdlaka and
the decoction of the drugs of the S* dla-sdrddi group,
each weighing a Drona measure, and a Pala weight
of each of the following drugs, viz., Triphald^ Trikatu,
the pith or marrow of Parusha fruit, Vidan^a seed,
Chitraka, Arka, Avalguja, Haridrd^ Ddru-haridrd,
Trivrit, Danti^ Indra-yava, Yashti-madhu, Ativishd,
Rasdnfana and Priyangu, should be boiled together
in the manner of cooking medicated oil, etc. (Sneha-
pdka VidhAna). When well cooked, this medicated com-
pound should be strained (through a piece of clean linen)
and carefully preserved (in an earthen pitcher with its
mouth well closed with a lid). The system of the patient
should be well cleansed (with appropriate emetics
and purgatives) and a Pala weight of this preparation,
mixed with honey, should be given to him every
morning. After the digestion of this medicine, he
should be made to take a light meal of rice well cooked
with a decoction of the Khadira-wood and mixed with
clarified butter, and the soup (Yusha) of Amalaka or
Mudga unseasoned with salt. A Drona measure (of this
compound), gradually taken in the aforesaid manner by
a patient taking a (light) decoction* of Khadira (instead
of water), would ensure a speedy recovery from all
types of Kushtha and enable the patient to witness a
hundred summers (on earth) in the full enjoyment of
sound health and intellect. i8.

* The decoction of Khadira<wood for drink should be prepared after
the manlier ol Shadaoga*p^iya piepautiQB«-^£d.

Chap. X.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 37 1

Memorable Verse An intelligent physi-
cian may prepare a thousand varieties of medicated
remedies, such as Surds, Asavas, Arishtas, Lehas
(lambatives), powders and Ayaskritis (metal-prepara-
tions) witii the aforesaid drugs and in the manner
described above. 19.

Thus ends the tenth Chapter of Chikitsita Sthdnam in the Sus'ruta
Samhitd which deals with the medical treatment of Mahd-Kushtha.

CHAPTER XL

Now we shall discourse on the medical treatment of
the diseases of the urinary tracts (PraiTICha.). i.

This disease may be ascribed to two causes, such
as the congenital (Sahaja) and that attributable to
the use of injudicious diet. The first type (Sahaja)
is due to a defect in the seeds of one’s parents and
the second is originated from the use of unwhole-
some food. The symptoms, which mark the first
of these two types, are emaciation and a dryness
(of the body), diminished capacity of eating, too
much thirst and restlessness; while the symptoms, which
usually attend the latter type of the disease, are obesity,
voracity, gloss of the body, increased soporific tendency
and inclination for lounging in bed or on cushions. A
case of emaciation, etc., (viz., the first kind of Prameha)
should be remedied with nutritious food and drink, etc.,
whereas Apatarpana, etc., (fasting, physical exercise,
depletory measures etc.), should be adopted in cases of
obesity viz., the second kind of (Prameha). 2.

Forbidden Articles of Food & Drink:

-#A11 patients suffering from Prameha should forego
the use of (the different species of wine and fermented
liquor known as) Sauviraka, Tushodaka, S'ukta, Maireya,
Syrd, and Asava, water, oil, clarified butter, milk, any
modification of the expressed juice of sugarcane, cakes,
milk-curd, acid, Pdnaka*, the flesh of domestic and
aquatic animals and of those which frequent swamps
or marshy places 3.

^ Made of su^ar, Ieinon*juicf, or fermented rice*gruel boiled together.

Chap. XL]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

373

Articles of diet: — The use of sufficiently old
and matured, S^dli and Shashtika rice, barley, wheat,
Kodrava, Udddlaka, with the different preparations of
Chanaka^ Adhaki, Kulattha or Mudga pulse is recom-
mended ; (fr the meal should be taken with the S'dkas
(potherbs) of bitter or astringent taste cooked with the
oils of Nikumhha, Ingudi, mustard or linseed oil ; or
with the soup of the lean flesh of Jdngala animals
which are possessed of anti-diuretic properties cooked
without any clarified butter and unseasoned with any
acid juice. 4.

Preliminary Treatment The patient
should be first anointed with any of the oils (of Nikum-
bha, Ingudi, Sarshapa, Atasi, etc.); or with the medi-
cated clarified butter* cooked with the drugs of the
Priyangvddi group and should also be treated with strong
emetics and purgativesf. After the application of pur-
gatives, an Asthipana measure with a decoction of the
drugs of the Surasddi group, mixed with honey and Sain-
dhava salt and with the powders of S'unthi, Bhadraddru
and Musta by way of an after-throw, should be resorted
to. (On the eighth day) in a case attended with a burn-
ing sensation, a decoction of the Nyagrodhddi group
without mixed with a little quantity of) Sneha (oil
or clarified butter) should be used (in the manner of
an Asthdpana).

The five Medicinal remedies After

cleansing the system, the expressed juicej of
Amalaka mixed with//<rzn</r^f (powder) and honey should

* The patient should be anointed with the medicated clarified butter
in a case of Pittaja-meha.

t Emetics in cases of Kaphaja-molia and purgatives in those of
Pittaja-meha, should be applied.

X This is also found in Charaka and has been quoted by Chakradatta
in his compilation,

374

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHlTA.

[aap. XL

be administered. As an alternative, a decoction* of
Triphaldy Vis'dld, Deva^ddru and Musta or an Aksha
(two Told) measure of the Kalka (powders)-f* of S^dla^
Kampillaka and Mushkaka (both of them) sweetened
with honey and the expressed juice of Amaiaka should
be taken ; or powders]; of the flowers of Kutaja\Kapittha^
Rohita^ Vibhitaka and Saptapama (should be taken
with honey, Haridrd and the expressed juice of Amaiaka),
or a decoction of the roots, leaves, barks, flowers and
fruits of Nimba^ Aragvadha^ Saptapa^^na^ Mui'vd, Kutaja^
Soma-vriksha, P aids a should be given to the patient.
All cases of Meha are often found to yield to the use of
any of these five medicinal preparations. 5.

Specific Treatments Now we shall speci-
fically describe the course of treatment to be adopted
in each particular type of the disease (Prameha). A
decoction of Pdrijdta should be given in a case of
Udaka-meha ; a decoction of Vaijayanti in that of
Ikshu-meha ; a decoction of Nimba in a case of Sarsi-
melia ; a decoction of Chitraka in a case of S'ikat£(-
meha; a decoction of Khadira in a case of S'anair-
meha; a decoction of Pdthd and Agum in a
case of Lavana-meha ; a decoction of Haridrd

* This is quoted by ChakradAtta but he reads “

of “ and does not mention the use of the expressed juice of

/

Amaiaka. The practice, however, is to follow the recipe of Chakradatta.

t The third Yoga of the text is also quoted by Chakradatta but no
addition of Haridrd powder is prescribed there. Chakradatta is more
generally followed in the case.

$ The fourth Yoga of the text is found also in Charaka although with
some variation. Charaka adds the flowers of Kampilla and SMia in the
list, but does rot recommend the use of Haridrd powder nor of the
expressed juice of Amalaki as the medium of taking the medicine.
Charaka, however, is quoted verbatim by Chakradatta and is followed
in practical use,

Chap. XI.}

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

375

and Ddru'haridrd in a case of Fishta-xneha ;
a decoction of S'aptapama in a case of Ssfndra-
meha ; a decoction of Durvd, S'aivdla, Plava, Hatha-
karanja and Kas'eruka, or that of Kakubha and red-
sandal wojfl in a case of Sakra-meha ; and a decoction
of Triphald, Aragvadha and Drdkshd mixed with honey
in a case of a Fhena-nieha. All decoctions, to be em-
ployed in the foregoing ten types of Kaphaja-meha,
should be sweetened with honey (.slightly sweetened with
honey — D. R ).

Treatment of Pittaja Prameha:-ln

the Pittaja types of the disease, a decoction of the drugs
of the S' dla-sdrddi group or that of As'vattha should be
administered in a case of Nila-meha ; similarly a de-
coction of Rdfa-vriksha should be given in a case of
Haridrs£-meha ; a decoction of the Nyagrodhddi group,
mixed with honey, in a case of Amla-meha ; a decoc-
tion of Triphld in a case of £shlfra-raeha ; a decoc-
tion of Manjishthd and (red) Chandana in a case of
Manjishth^-meha ; and a decoction of Gudtichi, seeds of
Ttnduka, Kds'tnarya and Kharjura, mixed with honey,
in a case of Sonita-meha*. 6.

Palliative Measures Now we shall de-
scribe the palliative measures to be adopted even in cases
of incurable types of the disea^. A Kalka compound of
Kdshtha, KutajafPdthd, Hingu sjad Katu-rokini ^\ion\d
be taken with a decoction of Guduchi and Chitraka in
a case of Sarpir-meha. A patient afflicted with an ^
attack of Vasi-meha should be made to drink a decoc-
tion of Agni-mantha or of S'ims'apd. Similarly a decoc-

* Honey should be added to all oi these decoctions prescribed in
cases Pittaja-meha.—Dallana.

t Honey should also be added to these decoctions prescribed in
cases of V^tja Meha,— Dallana.

3;6 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. IChfrp. XL

tion o{ Khadira^ Kadara and Kramuka should be given
in a case of Kshaudra-meha ; a decoction of Tinduka,
Kapittka, S'irisha, Palds'a^ Pdthd, Murvd^ and Dus-
parsd (Durdlabhi) mixed with honey,* or the Kshdra,
(alkaline water) prepared from the ashes of the bones of
an elephant, horse, hog, ass or camel, in a case of
Hasti-meha. A gruel (YavAgu prepared in the manner
of Shadanga-kalpa) with a decoction of aquatic bulbs
and sweetened with milk and the juice of sugarcane
should be prescribed in a case attended with a burning
sensation. 7.

Medicinal Arishtas, Asavas, Yavsf-
etc. Z — Likewise Arishtas, Ayaskritis, lamba-
tives and Asavas should be prepared (in the manner
hereinbefore described) with Pnyan^u, Anantd, Yuthikd,
Padtnd (Bhdrgi), Trdyantikd, Lokitikd, Ambashthd, bark
of pomegranate, S'dla-parni, (D.R. — Tdla-parni), Padma
(lotus), Tunga, Kes'ura, Dhdtaki, Vakula, S^almali,
S* ri-veshtaka and Mocharasa, should be administered
to the patient. As an alternative, similar preparations
made of SWingdtaka, Gilodya^, Mrindla^ Kas'eruka,
Madhuka, A^mra, fambu, Asana, TiniYa, Arjuna^ Kai-
vanga^ Lodhra^Bhalldtaka, Charmi-vnks/fa, Giri-kamikd^ ♦
SHta-s'iva, Nichula^ Dddima, Aja-karna, Hari-vriksha,
Rdjddana^Gopaghontd and Vikanikata should be prescrib-
ed. Different preparations of Yavdgu, etc. should be given
to the patient as diet. A gruel (Yavdgu) cooked with
the decoction of the preceding medcinal drugs or (only
’these) decoctions should be given to the patient as drinks.

Potions of any of the aforesaid Asavas thickened
with an admixture of powdered Pdthd, Chitraka and
Haritaki and sweetened with a liberal quantity of honey

* JejjAta interprets it as grape- wiQe» but Gayadasa does not support
this view.

Chap. XI]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

377

should be prescribed for a rich or royal patient of
injudicious conduct and refusing to take medicines ;
or he should be made to drink frequent potions of
Mddhvika liquors (prepared from honey) * with meat
roasted orTgridiron over a charcoal fire. Food and drinks
mixed with honey, Kapittha and pepper should be
prescribed for him. 8. ^

The powdered dung of a camel, a mule, or an ass
should be administered to him in food ; he should take
his meal with soups saturated with a compound of
asafoetida and Saindhava salt or with mustard prepara-
tions (Riga). * His food and drink should be fragrant
and well flavoured Iwith ingredient not incompatible
with the nature of the disease. 9-10.

The practice of regular physical exercise, wrestling,
active sports, riding on a horse or an elephant, long
walks, pedestrial journeys, practising archery, casting
of javelines, etc., should be resorted to in a case where
the disease has made a decided advance, ii.

A poor and friendless patient should live on alms,
lead a life of perfect continence like an ascetic, forego
the use of shoes and umbrella and walk a hundred
Yojanasf or more on foot without staying for more than
one night at a single village. A rich man (suffering
from Prameha) should live on S'ydma'ka, Kapiitka,
Tinduka and As'mantaka and live among the deer.
He should constantly follow the tracks of cows and take
their dung and urine (for food and drink). ’ A Brdhman
patient should live on the grain, spontaneously fallen
from plants, constantly study the Vedas and draw

* Some read i e. potherb ( of mustard ) in place of

t A Yojana is equal to eight miles.

48

37 ?

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. XL

chariots occupied by Brdhmanas. ♦ A patient belong-
ing to the lower orders of society t^udras, etc.) should be
made to sink wells (under such circumstances) and the
strength of a weak or emaciated patient should be pre-
served ^with nutritive diets, etc.). I2.

Memorable Verse A poor patient, carefully
following these directions of his medical advisers
without the least demur or delay, should be able to get
rid of the disease (Prameha) in the course of a year or
even in less than that time. 13.

Thus ends the eleventh Chapter of the Chikitsita Slhanam in the
Sus'iuta Samhitd which deals with the medical treatment of Prameha.

* Some explain the phrase to mean that he

ghould retain in his memory (the teachings of) the Vedas.. —Dallana.

CHAPTER XII.

Now Ve shall discourse on the medical treatment of
the abscesses or eruptions which mark the sequel of a
case of Prameha (Pramcha-PldaksC). i.

The nine kinds of abscesses (Pidakds), such as
Sardvikd, etc., have been described before. Of such
abscesses those, appearing in a strong person but
small in size, affecting (only) the Tvak (skin) and the
flesh, soft to the touch, slightly painful, easily suppura-
tive and after a time bursting, are curable. 2.

Patients suffering from Prameha and afflicted with
the above kinds of abscesses (Pidakas) should be
treated (in the following manner). Measures, such as
fastings (Apatarpana), etc., decoctions* (of Vata, etc.)
and the urine of a she-goat, should be employed in the.
incubative stage of the disease. The urine, perspira-
tion and the ^leshmd (sputum, etc.), soon acquire a
sweetish taste, if the aforesaid preliminary measures
are not resorted to and if the patient goes on using sweet
articles of food in utter disregard of the instructions,
thus developing fully the specific indications of Pra-
meha. In this stage the system of the patient should
be cleansed (Sams'odhana) with both emetics and
purgatives. If the disease is not checked (even at
this stage) with the aforesaid measures (emetics and
purgatives), the aggravated Doshas of the body go on
increasing in intensity and tend to affect or vitiate the
flesh and the blood and produce an inflamatory swelling
of the body, or bring on other supervening distresses

* Astringent drugs of fig-tree (Vata-tree), etc.— D. It

380 the SUSHRUTA SAMHItA. tCh^p. Xll.

in their train, venesection as well as the aforesaid
remedies and measures should be resorted to in such
cases. 3 .

The swelling increases in size attended with exces-
sive pain and burning sensation, if the aforesaid remedies
be not employed at this stage of the disease. Surgical
operations and other remedial measures, described in
connection with abscesses or inflammatory swellings
(Vrana) in general, should be resorted to in such cases.
If these be not done (at this stage), the pus eats into
the deeper tissues of the locality, creates large cavities
in its inside, and is accumulated there and the abscess
(Vrana) becomes incurable. * Hence a case of Prameha
should be remedied at its very outset, 4-6.

DhsCnvantara Ghrita Ten Pala weight of
each of these drugs, viz,, Bhalldtaka^ Vilva, Ambu, roots
of Pippaliy Vdakiryydy Prakiryyd'\ , VarsAdb/iu, Punar-
navd\^ Chitraka, S'athi^ Snuhi^ Varunaka^ Pushkara^
Danti and Haritaki and one Prastha measure of each
of the following, viz., barley, Kola and Kulattha pulse
should be boiled with a Drona measure of water. The
decoction should be boiled down to its quarter part,
removed from the fire, and strained. It should then be
cooked with a Prastha measure (four seers) of clarified
butter with half a Pala weight of each of the following
drugs, viz.^ Vachd, Trivrit^ Kampilluy Bhdrgi, Nichula^
Sunthi^ Gaja-Pippali^ Vidanga and Sirisha as Kalka.

* ^ On the failure of the above treatment it would spontaneously burst
out and secrete pus and force its way Inside, which would lead gradually
to widen its mouth or fissure, and help its *running into an incurable
stage,— Dallana.

t “Udakiryd and Prakiryd” are the two kinds of Karanja.

t *^Varshabhtt and Punarnavil** are the two kinds of Punarnav^
(/.e., red and white).

ChAp. XIl.] CHlKltSA STHANAM. 381

It is called the Dhstnvantara-Ghrita^ and covers within
the range of its therapeutic application Meha (urinary
diseases), swelling, (S'otha), Kushtha, Gulma, Ascites,
haemorrhoids, enlargement of the spleen, carbuncles
(PidakA) a«d abscesses. 7.

Ordinary purgatives fail to produce any satisfactory
effect in cases of Madhu-Meha owing to the excessive
accumulation and pervasion of Hedas (fat) in the or-
ganism of the patient. Hence strong Sodhana (pur-
gatives) should be employed in such cases. In all types
of Meha, attended with Pidaki (eruptions or abscesses)
and other complications, the perspiration and expectora-
tions, etc. of a Prameha-patient acquire a sweet taste
and smell like that of honey. Hence they are techni-
cally known as Madhu-Meha (to all intents and pur-
poses . Fomentation (of any kind) is forbidden in the
case of a patient suffering from Madhu-Meha, since it
might lead to the gradual emaciation of his frame by
drying up the organic fat (Medas), which is usually
found to abound in his organism. The aggravated Doshas
of the body fail to make an upward passage in the
organism of a Prameha-patient, owing to the weakness
of the channels of chyle, blood. Kapha and Pitta (as
well as for an exhausted condition of the nerves in his
body) and the Doshas are thus forced to course in and
confine themselves into the lower part of the body where
their incarceration helps the easy formation of Fidaksts
(abscesses), etc. Such a PidakA should be remedied with
the measures described in connection with Vranas, is
soon as the process. of suppuration would set in; whereas

* According to Dallana, the introduction of this medicated Ghrita
into the text is an interpolation. Since JejJata has not explained it in his
commentary, Dallana does not explain it. Cbakradatta, liowever,
mentions this Ghrita in his compilation, though with some additions and
alterations under the treatment of Prameha.—Ed.

382 tHE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. tCh»p. Xlt.

it should be treated as a swelling in its unsuppurated
stage. Medicated oils should be likewise employed
for the purposes of healing (Ropana), etc. 8.

A decoction of the drugs of the Aragvadhddi group
should be used for the purpose of raising up (Utsddana)
the cavity of the incidental ulcer ; that of the S'ala-sdra'di
group should ’be used for sprinkling purposes ; that of the
drugs of the Pippalyddi gxou^ should be given as food
and drinks. A pulverised compound of Pdthd, Chitraka,
S^drmgashtd, Kshudra^ Vrihati^ S'drtvd Soma-valka^
Saptaparna, Aragvadha and Kutaja roots mixed with
honey should be internally given to the patient.

S'^Ia- 82 Lr£(di Avaleha : — A decoction of (one
hundred Pala weight of), the drugs of the S^dla-sdrddi
group should be made by boiling it (in sixteen times the
weight of water) down to a quarter part (of the water) and
then duly filtered (through a piece of linen). It should
be cooked again very carefully, so that it may not be
burnt; powders of Amalaka^ Rodhra, Priyamgu^ Danti.
black-iron and copper should then be added to it just
before the completion of the cooking, so that it may b^
reduced to the consistency of an Avalcha (lambativc).
It should then be removed from the fire and kept in a
closed earthen pitcher. The patient should take an
adequate dose of this medicine as it is a sovereign re*;
medy for all types of Prameha. 9.

NavsCyasa-Churna Equal parts of the
powders of the following nine drugs, viz., THphald,
Chitraka^ Trikatu^ Vidanga and Musta^ and nine parts

* Chakradatta reads “ S'iv4 ” in place of **Anialaka*' and does not
include ** Priyamgu ” in the list. According to some commentators the

total weight of the after-throw (Prakshepa) would be a quarter part of the
total weight of the drugs boiled ; whereas, according to others, the
different drugs for Prakshepa would weigh one Pala each.

Chap. XII.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 383

of powdered black* iron* should be mixed together and
taken in adequate doses with honey and clarified butter*
This is called the Navayasa Churna, which proves
curative in abdominal •obesity, improves the impaired
digestior^ind acts as a prophylactic against haemor-
rhoids, swelling, jaundice, Kushtha, indigestion, cough,
asthma and Pramcha, etc. 10.

LoharlShta : —A decoction of the drugs of the
S*ald-sdrdtU group should be made by boiling it down
to a quarter part (of the original quantity of water).
Then it should be duly filtered ; when cooled, a quantity
(?>., fifty Pala weight) of Mdkshika-honeyf should be
added to it. A quantity of purified treacle : reduced to
the consistency of Fhdnita as well as fine powders of
the drugs of the Pippalyddi group should be mixed with
it. A strong and well cleansed (earthen) pitcher satu-

* Charaka and Chakrapdni Datta insert this medicine among the
curatives of “ Pa'ndu-toga S'ivadasa (the commentator) advises to
take “ Manduiadron” instead of “ blackdron In the practical field
also we derive great and good effects in cases of spleen and liver diseases
and specially in cases of infantile liver and heart diseases. — Ed.

t Dallana says (hat fifty Pala weight of each of the two substances —
Madhva'sava and Pha'nita, and twenty-five Pala weight of each of the
following substances , viz., the powders of the drugs of the Pippalyddi
group and steel-foils, should be taken in preparing it. But Gayaddsa
explains that such a quantity of old and matured honey should be mixed
with the decoction as will sweeten it ; the same quantity of old and
matured Phdnita treacle should be taken ; the powders of Pippalyddi
group should be added to it till it gets a slight astringent (Katuka)
taste.

•

Some commentators, however, hold that the honey, the powders of the
drugs of the Pippalyddi group and of the steel-foils should be each a
quarter part of the (fecoction in weight.

Dallana explains the term “Madhu** as the A'sava prepared of
honey. Gayaddsa, however, explains it simply as honey.

t The Phdnita should be refined by dissolving it in the decoction of
the drugs of the S'dla-sdrddi group and then filtere . — Dajlanaf

384

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. XIL

rated with clarified butter should be purified (in the
usual way) and its interior plastered with coating of
honey and powdered Pippali made into a thin paste.
The medicinal compound prepared as above should be
kept in the pitcher. After that, thin foils of steel made
red-hot in a fire of Khadira wood should be immersed
into the compound prepared before. Then the pitcher
with the steel-foils immersed into its contents should be
kept buried in a heap of barley for three or four months
or until the steel-foils are entirely eaten away by the
medicine and the characteristic flavour is produced. It
should be used in proper doses every morning and a
suitable diet should be given to the patient after its use.
It reduces fat, improves the impaired digestion and
proves efficacious in cases of swellings, internal tumours,
Kushtha,Meha, jaundice, dropsy of the spleen (Plihodara),
chronic fever, and excessive urination (dribbling of
urine). This preparation is called Lohfitrishta* and it is
a highly efficacious remedy, n.

* The recipe of Lohdrishta, according to Vdgbhata, is as follows : —

The drugs of the Asanddi group (which corresponds with Sus'ruta’s

S'4la-sdrddi group), each weighing twenty Palas, should be boiled in eight

Dronas of water down to a quarter part of it? weight. Two hundred Pala
*

weight of treacle and half an Adhaka (four seers) of honey and the powders
of the drugs of the Vatsakddi group (which corresponds with the Pippa-
lya'di group of Sus'ruta), each weighing one Pala, should be mixed
with the ahovef decoction when cooled. A (new earthen) pitcher should
be plastered inside with (an adequate quantity of) Pippali-powder and
h6ney, the outer side being plastered with shellac. The above prepara-
tion should now be poured into this pitcher which should be kept in a
heap of barley. A fire should be kindled with Khadira charcoal. Thin
lron*foils should be alternately heated in this fire and immersed in the
above preparation until the iron- foils are powdered. V^gbhata gives
the name of Ayaskritl to this preparation.

We, however, follow V^gbhata in the preparation of this Arisbta with
pood ircsttlls..— Bd,

Chap, XII.]

CIIIKITSA STIIANAM.

385

Traits of cure l -The cure of Prameha-patients
should be understood from the non-slimy and unturbid
condition of the urine and from its clear transparent
aspect and bitter or pungent taste. 1 2 .

Thus ends the twelfth Chapter of the Chikitsita Sth^nam in the Sus'rula
Sambitd which deals with the medical treatment of Prameha-Pidaka.

49

CHAPTER XIIL

Now we shall discourse on the medical treatment
of Diabetes (Madhu-Meha). I.

Metrical Text : — The intelligent physician
should adopt the following course of treatment in the
case of a Madhu-Meha-patient abandoned as incurable
by other physicians. 2.

^ilsCjatu, its origin and properties

A kind of gelatinous substance is secreted from the sides
of the mountains when they have become heated by the
rays of the sun in the months of Jyaishtha and Ashddha.
This substance is what is known as the Sildjatu and it
cures all distempers of the body.

The presence of the six kinds of metal, such as tin,
lead, copper, silver, gold and black-iron, in their essen-
tial form in the substance (Sildjatu), may be
detected by their respective smell and hence it is
known to the people by the name of Shad-Yoni
(lit. — having six different origins). The taste of
this shellac-coloured substance has the same taste
(Rasa) and potency (Virya) as the metal to whose
essence it owes its origin. It should be understood that
as tin, lead and iron, etc., are progressively more and
more efficacious, so the different varieties of Sil^jatu, ori-
ginated from the essence of tin, lead, iron, etc., are pro-
gressively more efficacious in their application.

All kinds of S'ilijatu have a bitter and pungent
taste with an astringent after-taste (Anu-rasa), are
laxative, pungent in their digestionaty reaction, heat-
making in their potency and possessed of absorbing and
purifying (Chhedana) properties. Of these what lool<;s

Chap. XllL]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

387

black and glossy, is heavy and devoid of sandy particles,
as well as what smells like the urine of a cow, should
be considered as the best. This best kind of ^ildjatu
should be infused with the decoction of the drugs of
the ^dla-^rddi group after the manner of Bhdvand
saturation (for ten, twenty or thirty days). Then after
cleansing the body (by the application of emetics and
purgatives), it should be taken every morning (by the
patient in adequate doses), well pasted with Sdrodaka.*
He should further be made to take a meal of boiled
rice mixed with the soup of the flesh of animals of
the Jdngala group after the medicine had been fully
digested. 3-4.

A Tuld measure of this hill-begottcn panacea
(^ilajatu), when gradually taken, (in adequade doses)
tends to improve the strength and complexion of
the body, cures an attack of Madhu-Meha and
enables the user to witness a hundred summers on*
earth, free from disease and decay. Each Tula
weight of this medicine, taken successively, ajdds a
century to the duration of human life, while ten Tula
measures extend it to a thousand years. The regimen
of diet and conduct during the period of its use should
be identical with that described in connection with the
use of the Bhallsttaka compounds. Cases of Meha, Kush-
tha, epilepsy (ApasmSra), insanity, elephantiasis, poison-
begotten distempers, phthisis, aedema, haemorrhoids,
Gulma (internal tumours), jaundice and chronic fever,
prove readily amenable to the curative efficacy of
^ilAjatu. Indeed there is no such bodily distemper

* It is evident from the reading of Chakradatla that “S^rodaka'^
means a decoction of the drugs of the grlup. But Dallana

explains it as **Pancha-sdrodaka’’ which is quite unintelligible. In
practice, also, Chakiadatta is followed. '—Ed.

388

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XIIL

which does not yield to its highly curative virtues. It
acts as a potent solvent in cases of long-standing Sarkard
(gravel) in the bladder as well as of stone. Sildjatu
should be treated (soaked and dried) with appropriate
medicinal drugs by stirring it up with the sanpe. 5.

The M£tkshika Kalpa:— The met 4 l known ^
as MsCkshika (iron-pyrites), which grows in the river
Tdpi and which copes with the divine ambrosia in its
highly therapeutic properties, may be also used in the
same way and under the same sort of preparation.
The metal is divided into two classes according to
its colour, as Svarna-Mdkshika (gold-coloured) and
Rajata-Makshika (silver-coloured). Of these the first has
a sweet taste while the second is acid. Both of them
prove efficacious in cases of decrepitude, Kushtha, Meha,
jaundice and consumption. A person using Sildjatu
and MAkshika (in the manner prescribed above) should
refrain from taking pigeon-flesh and Kulattha pulse
(during his life-time). 6.

The following measures should be adopted by an
experienced physician in the case of a patient suffering
from (Meha and) Kushtha and who has a firm faith in
medicines and is desirous of existence (life) and in
whose case the curative efficacy of Pancha-karma* has
been baffled. 7-

The Tu varaka Kal pa : —The Tuvaraka plants
which grow on the shores of the Western Sea
(Arabian Sea) are constantly tossed about by the winds
raised by the waves of the sea. The pith or marrow
of the seeds (lit,'— fruits) of these plants should be care-

* Some take the term in its ordinary sense to mean the five measures
of emetics, purgat^es, etc. ; but Dailana would explain it as the measures
adopted in the treatment of the Kushtha affecting the bone which is the
fifth Dbatu in the system.

Chap. XIIL] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 389

fully collected in the rainy season while they ripen and
should be subsequenly dried and pounded. The oil
should be either pressed out of these seeds in a mill in
the manner of preparing sesamum oil, or squeezed out
(of a presi bag) like that used in the case of Kusumbha
flowers, *The oil should be boiled over a fire so as to
have its inherent watery particles completely evaporated.
Then it should be taken down from the fire and kept in
a pitcher and then buried for a fortnight in a heap of
well dried cowdung. The patient (in the meantime)
should be duly anointed, fomented and treated with
cleansing remedies (i.e., emetics and purgatives).* He
should wait a fortnight (after the administration of
the aforesaid measures) and wait for a period of
four mealsf (i.e., two days) more ; and on the next
morning he should drink a portion of the oil in ade-
quate doses (two Tolds) under the auspices of favourable
astral combinations in the lighted fortnight of the month.
He should be made to recite, at the time of his taking
the fourth dose, a Mantra which runs as follows : —
“Cleanscst and purificst, O Thou potent essence of seed-
marrow, all the essential principles of (my) vital organism.
The deity who knows no decay and suffers no change and
who weilds a discus, a mace and a conch-shell in his
arms, commands thee on that behalf^

The Doshas in both the upper and the lower parts of
a patient’s body are cleansed with the help of this oil

* The Kapha should be first reduced with emetics ; and after a
fortnight, the Pitta with purgatives, A fortnight after the use of purgatives,
a potion of the Tuvarka oil should be administered inasmuch as it is a
Sams'odhaka (cleansing) remedy,

t On the sixteenth day after the administration of the cleansing mea-
sures, as well as on the morning of the seventeenth day, the patient should
take his meals as usual. On the evening of the seventeenth day no meal
should be taken. On the following morning the oil should be taken.

390

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. XIH.

(which should be given to the patient in the morning) ;
while a cold gruel, unseasoned* with salt and not mixed
with any emollient substance (oil or clarified butter)
should be given to him in the afternoon. The use of this
oil should be repeated in the same manner for five days
in succession, and the patient should avoicl anger,
etc., and live on Mudga soup (Yusha) and boiled rice for
a fortnight. A five days’ use of this oil would ensure
the cure of every types of Kushtha (and Madhu-
meha). 8-9.

The foregoing (Tuvaraka) oil should be boiled and
prepared with a decoction of Khadira weighing three
times the quantity of the oil and taken internally with
patience for a month for the same purpose. The patient
should anoint his body with the same and then take his
meals in the prescribed form. A Kushtha-patient (as
well as a Meha-patient) suffering from hoarseness, red-
eyes and with worm-eaten and emaciated limbs should
be speedily treated with this oil as an anointment and
a drink. Regular potions of the above medicinal (Tuva-
raka) oil taken with honey, clarified butter and a
decoction of Khadira and a diet consisting of the soups
of bird’s flesh (during its course) would enable the user
to live for a period of two hundred years. A use of this
oil as errhines (Nasya) for a period of fifty consecutive
. days would enable the user to witness three hundred
years on earth, in the full enjoyment of bodily vigour
and a youthful glow of complexion, as well as with a
very powerful retentive memory.

A regular use (in an adequate dose) of the pith
of Tuvaraka cleanses the system of the patient
and is a most potent remedy in cases of Kushtha
and Meha. 10.

* A Utile quantity of salt' and of oil or clarified butter may be given.

Chap. XIIL]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

391

The pith (inner pulp of the seeds^ of the Tuvaraka
burnt in a closed vessel (Antar-dhuma) should be mixed
with Saindhava-salt, An/ana* and Tuvaraka oil This
prepared compound, used as a collyrium, is efficacious in
cases of.^ye-diseases, such as night-blindness, Arman,
Nili, Kdcha-roga (dimness of sight) and Timira. ii.

Thus ends the thirteenth Chapter of the Chikitsita Sthdnam in the
Sub'ruta Samhita which'deals with the treatment of Madhu-Meha.

* Dallana recommends the three things, viz., the pith of the Tuvaraka)
the Saindhava-salt and the Rasanjana to be mixed and burnt together in a
closed vessel.

CHAPTER XIV.

Now we shall discourse on the medical trdktment of
dropsy with an abnormal condition of the abdomen

(Udara). i.

Of the eight different types of Udara, described be-
fore, those severally known as the Vaddha-guda and the
Parisrkvi should be understood as incurable, the rest being
equally hard to cure. Hence the medical treatment of all
cases of Udara (abdominal dropsy) should be resorted to
without holding out any positive hope of rccover>\ The
first four types of the disease (as metioned in the list of
enumeration), may prove amenable to medicine ; but the
rest would require Surgical treatment. All the types of
the disease, however, would, with the progress of time,
require a surgical operation, or (attaining an incurable
stage) they may have to be abondned. 2.

Diet of articles forbidden A patient,
afflicted with an attack of Udara, should forego the use
of heavy (indigestible), or emollient fare, of all kinds
of meats and of those that produce a state of extreme
dryness in the system, or produce a slimy secretion from
the channels (of the Doshas and the vital principles) of
the body, or give rise to a sort of digestionary acid
reaction (acid transformation in the stomach) and re-
frain from bathing and using effusions. Meals consisting
of well cooked S* dli rice, barley, wheat, or Nivdra seeds
should be the daily diet of such a patient. 3:

Treatment of the VsCtaJa type : - in a
case of Vktaja Udara, the body of the patient should be
atiointed with clarified butter cooked with the drugs of
^hc Viddri*gandhddi group, while the one cooked wjth

Chap. XIV.l

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

393

Tilvaka should be used as purgatives (Anuloma), A
compound made of a copious quantity of oil of
Chitrd seeds, mixed with a decoction of the drugs of the
V iddri-gandhddi group, should be used as Asthdpana
and An^ivdsana measures. The S8(lvana UpansQia
(poultice) should be applied to the abdomen. Milk
cooked with the drugs of the V iddrigandhddi group,
or the soup of the flesh of Jdngala animals should be
given to the patient with his meal and the affected
region should be frequently fomented, 4.

Treatment of the PIttaJa Type In

a case of Pittaja Udara, the patient should be anointed
with clarified butter cooked with the drugs of the
Madhura (Kikolyddi) group. Similarly, clarified butter
cooked with S^ydmd^ Jriphald and Trivrit should be
used as purgatives and the decoction of the drugs of the
Nyagrodhddi group, mixed with a copious quantity of
sugar, honey and clarified butter, should be used as
AnuvAsana and A'sthipana measures. The abdomen
should be poulticed with Pdyasa (porridge prepared with
rice and milk) and the diet should consist of boiled rice
and milk, cooked with the drugs of the Viddri-gandhddi
group. 5.

Treatment of the Kaphaja Type In

a case of Kaphaja Udara, the patient should be anointed
with clarified butter, cooked with the decoction of the
drugs of the Pippalyddi group. Likewise, clarified
butter, cooked with the milky juice of Snuhi plants,
should be used as purgatives ; and the decoction of the
drugs of the Mushkakddi group, with a copious quantity
of Trikatu, cow’s urine, Kshdra (Yava-kshara) and oil,
should be applied as Anuvdsana and Asthdpana
measures, A poultice (Upaniha) prepared of S^ana
seeds, A tasz seeds, (flower), mustard, Mulaka

SO

m

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. XIV.

seeds and Kinva should be applied (hot) to the ab-
domen. The diet should consist of (boiled rice well-
mixed with) Kulattha soup (Yusha), profusely seasoned
with powdered Trikatu, or of Pdyasa ; and the abdomen
should be frequently fomented. 6. ,

Treatment of Dushyodara in a case

of Dushyodara, the patient should be treated without
giving any hope of a positive cure. Purgatives with
clarified butter, cooked with the expressed juice of
the Saptald and S'amkhini, should be first administered
(continuously) for a fortnight or even a month ; or clari-
fied butter, cooked with the milky juice of the Mahd-
vriksha^ and with wine and cow’s urine, should be simi-
larly used as a purgative. A Kalka made up of the roots
of the As'vamdraka, Gtinjd and Kdkddani mixed with
wine (Surd), should be given after the bowels had begun
to move freely. As an alternative, a Krishna* Sarpa (black
lance-hooded cobra) should be enraged to bite a sugarcane
and this piece of sugarcane should be given to the patient
to chew (and suck) ; or the fruits of creepers (Valli-phala)
should be used (in the preceding manner) ; or poisonous*
roots and bulbs should be prescribed, whereby the
disease may be cured or may take a different turn. 7.

Memorable Verse: -A case of abdominal
dropsy ^Udara) of whatsoever type should be presumed
to have its origin in an aggravation of the bodily
Vdyu and an accumulation of fecal matter in the
bowels ; hence frequent use of Anulomana (purgatives,
etc.) is recommended in this disease. 8.

♦ If this be not done, the patient is sure to die ; but it is not certain
whether he would get any relief from this treatment. It being, however,
possible in some cases to save the life of a patient by the application
6f this medicine, it should be used, as the last resort with the permission
of the Icing. ^Dallana.

Chap. XIV.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 39§

General Treatment:— Now we shall
describe a few general medicinal compounds (which may
be used with advantage in cases of Udara). They are as
follows ; — Castor oil with milk or with the urine of a cow.
should t^p^taken for a month or two. No water should
be taken during the period, or the patient should forego
the use of water and all other food, but drink only the
urine of a she-buflFalo and (cow’s) milk ; * or he should
live upon the milk of a she-camel alone, foregoing the
use of rice and water and submit himself to a course of
Pippali for one month in The manner described before
(under the treatment of Mahd-VatavyAdhi),f or take the
oil of the Nikumhha with Saindhava-salt and powdered
Ajamodd dissolved in it The said oil (of Nikumbha),
cooked with a hundred Pdtra weight of the expressed
juice of Ardraka2.Xi6. S'rmgavera (fresh ginger), should be
applied in the event of there being any Sula (colic pain),
*due to the action of the deranged and aggravated Vdyu.
Milk, boiled with the expressed juice of SWingavera
(fresh ginger), should be taken. A paste-compound of
Chavya and ringavera, or a paste-compound of Sarala,
Deva-ddru and Chitraka (with milk), or a paste-com-
pound of Murangiy S^dlaparni, S^ydmd and Punartiavd
(with milk), or the oil of Joytishka seed, mixed with
milk, Svarjikd and Asafoetida, should be administered
to the patient. 9.

He should take Haritaki with treacle, or a thousand
Pippali soaked (twenty one times) with the milky juice
of the Snuhi plant i,in the manner of BhAvanA saturation),
should be gradually consumed. Powdered Pippali and

* The milk here, says Dallana on the authority of Jc'jjata, sl.ould be
buffalo's milk. But, according to V^gbhata and S'ivaddsa, the commen-
tator of Chakradatta, cow's milk should be used. — Ed.

t The Pippalis shohld be taken with milk only in the present instance.

396 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XIV.

Haritaki should be soaked with the milky juice of the
Snuhi plant (and dried in the sun)* Utkirikd should
now be preapared with this compound and given to the
patient. lo, ^

The Haritaki Chrita:— A Pra^tjia mea-
sure of powdered Haritaki should be mixed with an
Adhaka measure of clarified butter and heated over a char-
coal fire by stirring it up quickly with a ladle ; when well
mixed, the compound should be poured into an earthen
pitcher, which should be kept well corked and buried
in a* heap of barley for a fortnight. The pitcher should
then be taken out and the compound should be
strained and cooked again with an adequate ♦ quantity
of the decoction of Haritaki^ Kdnjika (fermented
rice-gruel) and curd. The patient should use this medi-
cine for a month or a fortnight in proper doses and
with adequate vehicles, ii.

The Mahi-vriksha Ghrlta:— A quantity*
of the milky juice (one fourth of the cow’s milk in quanti-
ty) of the Makd-vriksha (Snuhi plant), should be boiled
with cow’s milk. Then it should be removed from the oven,
cooled down and churned (with a churning rod). The
butter thus prepared and cooked again with the milky
exudations of the Mahd-vriksha (and an adequate
quantity of water) should be given to the patient for
a month or a fortnight in adequate doses and with
proper vehicles. 12.

The ChavysCdf Chrita Half aKarsha (one
Told) measure of each of the following d rugs, Chavya^
Chitraka^ Danti, Ativishd, Haridrd, S^amkhini^ Trivrit
and Trikatu, together with an eight Karsha measure of
the inner pulps of the fruit (seeds) of the Rdja-vriksha,

* Each of the three things (liquids) should be four limes as tpuch as
the clarified better.

Chap. XIV.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 397

two Pala weight of the milky juice of the Mahd-vriksha^
eight Pala weight of cow's milk and eight Pala weight of
cow's urine, should be cooked* with a Prastha measure
(four seers) of clarified butter. The medicated Ghrita, thus
prepared, * Should be given jn convenient doses to the
patient for the period of a month or a fortnight. 13.

The aforesaid three Ghritas (Haritaki-Ghrita, Mahd-
vriksha-Ghrita and Chavyddi-Ghrita) and the Tilvaka-
Ghrita (mentioned in the chapter dealing with Vdta-
vyddi) should be employed, whenever purgatives would
be necessary in cases of Udara, internal tumour (Gulma),
abscess, AshthiU, Andha, Kushtha, insanity and
epilepsy. 14.

Constant use of (cow's) urine or (any kind of) Asava,
Arishta or winc^ cooked with the milky exudation of
Mahd-vrikshd^ f is recommended. A decoction of
purgative drugs, thickened with an admixtui'e, in
copious quantity, of powdered Sunthi and Deva-ddru,
may be used with advantage in this desease.

Anstha Varti:— APala weight of the emetic
and purgative drugs and the same weight of the fine
powders of the drugs of each of the Vachddi^ Pippalyddi
and the Haridrddi group, and all the officinal kinds of
salt should be mixed (with four or eight times that of) the
urine (of a cow, buffalo, etc,). Then this ^mixture) com-
pound should be boiled and cooked over a gentle fire with
a Prastha measure of the milky juice of Mahd-vriksha

★ In ihe absence of any mention about the quantity of water to be
added, four limes as much of water should be added for the completion of
the preparation according to the general maxim.-— Ed.

t Dallana explains the sentence as follows

Asavas, Arishtas and Sur^s should be prepared with urine (instead of
the liquid i.e., water) and the milky exudation of Mah^-vriksha (as aq
after-throw), and should be constantly used.

398

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. XIV.

by constantly stirring it with a ladle Precaution should
be taken so that the Kalkas may not be scorched
or burnt. This medicinal compound, when properly
prepared, should be removed from the fire and when
cooled should then be m^de into pills (Guliikd), each
being an Aksha (two Tolds) in weight. These pills
should be given once, twice or thrice daily according to
the exigency of the case and the capacity of the patient
for a period of three or four consecutive months The
medicine is known as the Aufitha-varti, and is specially
benefidal in cases of Mahd-vyddhi, and is equally
efficacious in destroying intestinal worms. These
pills, if regularly used, prove beneficial in cases of
cough, asthma, Kushtha, parasites, catarrh, indigestion,
aversion to food and Uddvarta. 15.

Second An^(ha-Varti i -The inner pulp of
the sheds of Madana fruits with Kutaja, Jimutaka,
Ikshvdku (bitter gourde DhAmdrgava, Trivrit, Trikatu^
mustard seed and rock-salt, should be pasted together
with either the milky juice of Mahd-vriksha or with the
urine of a cow ; and the paste should be made into
thumb-shaped plugs (Varti). In a case of Andha of the
patient already suffering from Udara, the outer end of
his rectum should be lubricated with oil and salt and
one or two of the plugs should be inserted therein. The
application of this AnaJha-varti should as well be
applied in cases of Uddvarta, due to a suppression or
retention of stool, urine, and Vdta (flatus) and in
cases of tympanites (Adhmdna) and distention of the
abdomen (Andha) i6.

Treatment of Plihodara in a case of
PHhodara, • applications of Sneha (oil, etc.) and Sveda

* Dropsical swelling of tl^e abdomen owing to an enlargenient of tl^e
spleen.

Chap. XIV 1

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

399

( fomentations ) should be made alnd the . patient
should be fed on boiled rice mixed with milk-curd.
Then the vein (Sird) inside the elbow of his left hand,
should be duly opened. The spleen should be rubbed
with the ha^id for the proper out-flow of its deranged
blood (for the relief of that enlarged organ). Then
having properly cleansed his system, the physician
should advise the patient to take the alkali of marine
oyster-shells through the medium of milk. As an alter-
native, Yava-kshdra should be given to h.xmv^^{i\iSauvarck-
ikd and Hingu, or with filtered alkali (made with the
ashes) of Paldsa wood. As an alternative, the alkali
of Pdrijdtakciy Ikshvdku and Apdmdtga^ mixed with oil,
should be prescribed ; or the decoction of S'obhdnjana^
mixed with Chitraka^Saindhava ^LwdPippalipv the alkali
of Puti’karanja, filtered with Kdnjika and mixed with
a copious quantity of Vid salt (black salt) and
powdered Pippali should be administerd. 17.

Shat-palaka Ghrita One pala weight of
each of the following drugs, viz,. Pippali, Pippali-roots,
Chitraka, S'unthi, Y ava-kshdra and Saindhava should
be cooked with one Prastha measure of clarified butter
and the same quantity of milk’’^. The medicated Ghrita
thusprepared is called the Shat-palaka-Ghrita. It is high-
ly efficacious in cases of an enlargement of the spleen,
impaired digestion, Gulma, dropsy, Uddvarta, swelling
(Svayathu), jaundice, cough, asthma, catarrh, Urdhva-
Vdta and Vishama-Jvara. In cases of Udara attended
with impaired digestion, the Hingva'di Churna should be*
prescribed. These measures should be as well employ-
ed in a case of an enlargement of the liver (Yakrit),
but the speciality is that the vein (inside the elbow) of

^ The practice, in this case, is to add twelve Seers (three prastha
measures) of water to the Prastha measure of milk at the time of cooking.

400 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XIV.

the right hand (instead of the left hand) should be opened
in this case i8.

Metrical Text : — After slightly bending down
the wrist (of the left hand), the vein in connection with
the thumb of the left hand should be cauterized with
a (burning) Sara for the purpose of giving relief in a
case of enlarged spleen. 19.

Treatment of Vaddha-gudodara,

etc. :-In cases of the Vaddha-guda (Entertis) and
the Parisriivi types of Udara, the patient should be
first treated with emulsive measures and fomentations
and then anointed with a sneha. Then an incision should
be made on the left side of the abdomen below the um-
bilicus and four fingers to the left of the line of hair which
stretches downward from the navel. The intestine to the
length of four fingers should be gently drawn out ;
any stone, any dry hardened substance (Scybalum ?),
or any hair found stiffing to the intestine should be
carefully examined and removed. Then the intestine
should be 'moistened with honey and clarified butter.
It should then be gently replaced in its original
position and the mouth of the incision in the abdomen
should be sewn up. 20.

Treatment of ParisrsCvl - Udara -in

cases of the Patisrtfyi type of Udara, the obstructing
matter should be similarly removed (from the intestines),
as in the preceding case, and the secreting intestine
should be purified. The (two ends ol the severed
•intestines should be firmly pressed and adhered toge-
ther and large black ants should be applied to these
spots to grip them fastly with their claws. Then the
bodies of the ants having their heads firmly adhering to
the spots, as directed, should be severed and the intes-
tines should be gently reintroduced into their original

Chap. XIV.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

401

position (with the severed heads of the ants adhering to
the ends of the incision) and sutured up, as in the prece-
ding case. A union or adhesion of the incidental
wound should then be duly effected. The ‘•earn should
now be plaS^tered with black earth mixed with Ya.shti-
madhu and duly bandaged. The surgeon should cause
the patient to be removed to a chamber protected frdm
the wind and give him the necessary instructions. The
patient should be made to sit in a vessel full of oil or
clarified butter and his diet should consist only of
milk. 21.

Treatment of Udakodara A patient
afflicted with Jalodara (ascites) should be first anointed
with medicated oils, possessed of Vdyu-subduing virtues,
and fomented with hot water. Then his friends and
relatives should be asked to hold him firmly by his
arm-pits, when the surgeon would make a puncture with
a surgical instrument, known as the Vrihi-mukha, on
the left side of the abdomen below the umbilicus, to the
breadth of the thumb in depth and at a distance of
four fingers to the left of the dividing line of hairs
in the abdomen. Simultaneously with that, a metal
tube or a bird’s quill, open at both ends, should be
introduced through the passage of the puncture to allow
the morbific fluids (Doshodoka), accumulated in the
abdomen, to ooze out. And then having removed the
tube or the quill, the puncture should be lubricated with
oil and Saindhava salt and bandaged in the manner
described in connection with the bandaging of ulcers. *

The entire quantity of the morbific fluid should not
be allowed to ooze out in a single day, inasmuch as
thirst, fever, aching of the limbs, dysentery, dyspncea
and a burning of the feet (Pdda-d 4 ha) might supervene in
con.sequence, or as it might lead to a fresh accumulation

5 ^

402

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

l[Chap. XIV.

of matter in the abdomen, in the event of the
patient being of a weak constitution. Hence it should
be gradually tapped at intervals of three, four, five, six,
eight, tefi, twelve, or of even sixteen days. After the
complete outflow of the fluid, the abdomenp should be
firmly tied with a piece of flannel, silk-cloth or
lesfther, inasmuch as this would prevent its flatulent
distention.

Diet:-F or six months the patient should take
his food only with milk or with the soup (Rasa) of
Jdngala animals.

The diet* for the next three months should consist of
(meals taken with) milk diluted (and boiled) with an
equal quantity of water or with the soup of flesh of
animals of the Jdngala group seasoned with the juice
of acid fruits. During the next three months it should
consist of light and wholesome meals. This rule
observed for a year brings about a cure. 22.

Memorable' Verse Skilled physicians
should prescribe boiled milk and the soup of the flesh

* The use o( water is forbidden during these nine months.

During the first six months, drinking, washing, etc., should be done
with milk or the soup of Jdngala animals. After this period, the said
purposes should be served with hatf.diluled milk or meat-soup seasoned
with the juice of acid fruits. Water may be used during the period of
the next three mDnths.— Dallana.

Vigbhata following Charaka says: —

« The patient should live only on milk for six months. After this
period, he should live on porridge (Peyd) boiled with milk ; and for the
next three months he should live on boiled S'ydmd-rice with milk,
or with the soup of meat seasoned with the juice or acid fruits and mixed
with clariBed butter and a small qu.'intity of salt.

The water of tender and green cocoanuts is used in cases of Udara
in place of pure drinking water with beneBt. —Ed*

Chap. JCIV.j CHlfcltSA STHAKAM. 4O3

of animals of the JAngala group as food and drink
in all cases of Udara and use these as Asthdpana
measures and as purgatives as well. 23.

Thus enjs the fourteenth Chapter in the Chikitsita Sthdnam of the
Sus'ruta Samhitd which deals with the treatment of Udara.

CHAPTER XV.

Now wc shall discourse on the (surgical aftd medical)
treatment of the cases of difficult malprcscntation of the
foetus and of difficult labour (Mudha-Garbha). i.

The extraction of a foetus, acting (in the womb) as
an obstructing Salya (foreign matter lodged in the body),
is the most difficult of all surgical operations, inasmuch
as actual contact or actual manipulation is the only
means accessible to a surgeon in the region of the pelvic
cavity, the spleen, the liver, the intestines and the
uterus. All surgical acts in respect of the foetus or the
enceinte, such as lifting up, drawing down, changing of
postures (version), excision, incision, the cutting of limbs
and section, pressure, the straightening and the perforat-
ing of the abdomen, could not be done otherwise than by
actual contact of the hand, which may sometimes
prove fatal to the foetus or to the cncientc. Hence the
king should be first informed (as success in these cases
is often uncertain) and all acts should be performed
with the greatest care and coolness.

We have stated before that the foetus is generally
presented in cases of difficult labour in eight different
postures or forms. The obstruction of the child in the
passage of parturition (Garbha-Sanga) may be effected
Jn three different ways, owing to its head, shoulders or.
hips being presented in a wrong way and held fast in
the passage. Every care should be taken and no pains
spared to bring a child alive into the world, which is not
already dead in the womb. The sacred verses (Mantras),
possessing of the virtue of bringing out the foetus, should
be recited in the hearing of the enciente in the case of a

Chap. XV.] CttiKiTSA STHANAM. 40S

failure in the first attempts at effecting parturition.
The mantras are as follows. 2.

Metrical Texts ‘O thou beautiful damsel,
may the divine ambrosia' and the Moon god with Chitra*
bhanu and the celestial horse Uchchaih-Sravas take

t

their residence in thy room ; may this water-begotten
nectar, help thee, O lady, in swiftly casting off thy womb.
May the Sun, the V^isavas and the Wind-god (Pavana)
in the company of the saline Ocean give thee peace.
The incarcerated beasts have been freed from their
fastenings and binding chords. The Sun god has freed
his rays of light. Freed from all danger, come, O,
come, O child, and rest in peace in these precincts,” 3.

Proper and useful medicinal remedies should also be
employed for the delivery of the child.

Postures of the Foetus:— in the case of the

foetus being dead in the womb, the cnciente should be
made to lie on her back with her thighs flexed down
and with a pillow of rags under her waist so as to keep
it a little elevated. Then the physician should lubri-
cate his (own) hand with a compound consisting of earth,
clarified butter and (the compressed juice of) Sallaki^
Dhanvana and S^dhnali and inserting it into the passage
of parturition (Yoni) should draw out the dead foetus
(downward with the hand). 4.

In the case of a leg-presentation (Sakthi), the feetus
should be drawn downward by pulling its legs. In case
where a single leg (Sakthi) is presented, the other leg of
the foetus should be expanded and then it should ie
drawn downward;

In the case of the presentation of the buttccks(Sphik)
(breech presentation), the buttocks should be first pressed
and lifted up and then the feetus should be drawn
downward by the legs. In the case of a longitudinal

406 the SUSHRUtA SAMHITA. CCh«p. XV.

presentation (the child coming stretched cross-wise) like
a belt and arrested in the passage, its lower extremities
should be pushed upward with the hand and the child
should be drawn out with its upper part {viz., the head,
etc.), thus pointed downward, and brought stt^jght into
the passage of parturition. In a case of the head being
hung back a little on one side, the shoulder should be
lifted up by pressing it (with the hand) after chafening
it, so as to bring the head at the door of the passage
and the child should be drawn straight downward
Similarly in the case of the presentation of the two
amts, the shoulder should be lifted up by pressing it
(with the hand) and, the head being brought back to
the passage, the child should be drawn downward.
The remaining two kinds of false presentation (Mudha-
garbha) previously described (in the eighth Chapter of
the NidAna Sthina) should be considered as irreme-
diable. The applications of instruments (Sastra) should
be the last resort when such manipulatory measures
would fail. 5.

Metrical Text : —But even in such irremediable
(Asidhya) cases, surgical operations should not be made
if the foetus could be detected alive in the womb, as
such a course (as the cutting of the foetus, etc.) would
fatally end both as regards the child and its mother. 6.

Operations Involving destruction of
the Foetus— Craniotomy In cases where
there would be any necessity of using an instrument for
the purpose of delivery, the enciente should be en-
cours^ed (with hopes of life) before making the surgical
operation. The head or skull of the child in such
eases should be severed with the knife known as the
Mandal^a or the Anguli-^astra* ; 'then having carefully
taken out the particles of the skull-bone (Kapila),

Chap. XV.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

407

the foetus should be drawn out by pulling it at its chest
or at the shoulder with a ^anku (forceps). Where the
head would not be punctured and smashed, the foetus
should be drawn out by pulling it at the cheeks or the
eye-sockgfs. The hands of the foetus should be severed
from the body at the shoulders, when they (the shoulders)
would be found to have been obstructed in the passage
and then the foetus should be drawn out. The abdomen
of a child, dead in the womb, should be pierced and the
intestines drawn out, in event of the former being swollen
into a flatulent (Vdta) distension like a leather bag vfor
holding water), as such a procedure would remove the
stiffness of itslimbs^and then it should be drawn out. The
bones of the thighs (Jaghana-kapila) should be first cut
out and removed, where the foetus would be found to have
adhered fast to the passage with its thighs (Jaghana). 7.

Metrical Texts In short, that part of the
body of the foetus should be severed and removed
which {prevents its (fetus) withdrawal from the womb
and the life of the mother should be saved at all
hazards. The different types of false-presentations
should be ascribed to the abnormal coursing of the
deranged Viyu (in the uterus), and hence an intelligent
physician .should adopt, after careful* considerations,
proper remedies (for its pacification). An intelligent
physician should not waste a single moment in drawing
out the fetus, as soon as it would be found to be dead
in the w'omb, since neglect in such cases leads to the
instantaneous death of the mother, like an animal dying
of suffocation. An erudite physician, well-versed in
anatomy, should use in such cases a Mandaligra instru-
ment for the purpose of cutting out (the foetus), since
a sharpe-edged Vriddhi-patra may sometimes hurt the
mother during the operation, 9-10.

408 the SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. ficfiap. xr.

A non-falUng placenta (Aparai) should be extracted
in the way indicated before or the enciente should be
firmly pressed and the placenta extracted with the
hand. Her body should be constantly shaken or
her shoulders constantly rubbed at the Vme (of
extracting, the placenta") after lubricating the passsage
of parturition with oil. ii.

After- measures Thus having extracted
the Salya (fetus), the body of the mother should be
washed with w'arm water and anointed with oil, etc.
Oil should also be copiously applied to the passage of
parturition * as it would soften the Yoni and alleviate
the pain therein. After that, powdered Pippali.
Pippali-roots^ S'unthi, Eld^ Hingu^ Bhdrgi^ Dipyaka.
Vachd, Ativiskd, Kdsnd and CJtavya should be given
in a Sneha (clarified butter, etc.), for the (proper)
discharge (/>., purification) of the Doshas (lotia) and for
the alleviation of the pain. A plaster, or a decoction, or
a pulverised compound of the said drugs without the
addition of any Sneha (clarified butter, etc.) may also be
given to her. As an alternative, the physician should
ask the parturient woman to take S'dka-hdivk, Hingu,
,Ativishd, PdtJtd, Katu-rohini and Tejovati prepared and
administered in the preceding manner. Then for
three, five or seven days, Sneha (clarified butter, etc.)
should again be given ; or the patient should be asked
to take well prepared Asavas and Arishtas at night time.

A decoction of the bark of S^irisha and Kakubha

• ^

should be used for washing (Achamanaf) purposes and
the other supervening distresses complications)

should be remedied with proper medicines.. r2-A.

* The oil should be introduced into the vaginal canal by means o.
Hchu. i t., cotton plugs soaked in oil, etc.

t This decoction should be specially used for t washing the uterus
(Voni).— Ed.

Chap. CHIKITSA STHANAM. 469

Diet and regimen of conduct The

mother should always be neat and clean and subjected
to a course of a small quantity of wholesome and
emollient diet and to daily anointments and foment-
ations ; ^iTd she should be advised to renounce all anger.
Milk cooked with the Vdyu-subduing drugs should be
used for the^st ten days. Meat-soup should then be
prescribed for another such period, after which a diet
should be prescribed according to the patient’s health
and nature. This regimen should be observed for a
period of four months, after which, the patient would
be found to have regained her health, strength and
glow of complexion, without any complications, when the
medical treatment, etc , should be discontinued. 12-14.

The following Vali-Taila should be used for apply-
ing into the Yoni (Vagina, etc.), for anointing the body
and for drinking and eating purposes (i.c., along with
other food) as well as for Vasti-Karma, as the oil is
highly efficacious in curbing the action of the deranged
and aggravated bodily Valyn. 15 — A.

The Val^Taila : -* An adequate quantity of
sesamum oil should be cooked with eight times as much
of the decoction of each of the following ; viz., Vald
roots, Dasa-miila and the three combined drugs of Yava,
Kola and Kulattha and with eight times as much of
milk and (one-fourth as much of) a paste (Kalka) com-
pound of the drugs included in the Madhura group as
well as with Saindkava-^B.\t, Aguru, Sar/a-rasa, Sarala-
Kdshtha, Deva-ddru, Manjishthd, Chandana, Kushtha,

♦ Four seers of sesamun oil, thirty-two seers of the decoction of the
Vald-roots, ihirly-lwo seers of the decoction of Das'a-mula, thirty-two
seers of the decoction of the drugs Yava, Kola and Kulattha taken
together, thirty-two seers of milk and one seer of the paste compound
(Kalka) should be taken in the preparation of the oil.

52

416 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [CS^ap. Xv.

Eld^ Kdldnusdrivd, Mansi, S* alley a, Teja-patra, Tagara,
S'dfivd^ Vachdj S'aidvari, As* va-gandhd ^ S'dta-pushpd
and Punarnavd. After the completion of its cooking
the oil should be kept carefully in a golden, silver, or
earthen pitcher with its mouth well-stoppered> , This oil
is known as the Valst-Taila and proves curative in all
diseases due to the action of the deranged Vdyu. A
newly delivered woman should use this oil in adequate
doses, according to her physical condition. Women
wishing to be mothers and men seeking the blessings
of fatherhood should use this Taila, which pioves
equally beneficial in cases of an emaciation of the body
due to the action of the deranged Vdyu, weariness of
the body through hard labour, and also in cases of hurt
or injury to any vital and vulnerable part of the body
(Marma), in cases of fractured bones, convulsions, Vdta-
Vyddhi, hiccough, cough, Adhimantha, Gulma and
dyspnoea, A case of hernia would likewise yield to the
continuous use of this oil for six months. The essential
and vital principles (Dh^tus) of the organism of a man
arc strengthened through its use and his youth will
suffer no decay. It should be used alike by kings, king-
like and wealthy persons, as well as by those of a
delicate and ease-loving temperament. 15 — B.

The Vala-Kalpa : —Seeds of sesamum
should be successively soaked a number of times in a
decoction of Vald roots ♦ and then dried (in the manner
of a Bhdvani saturation). The oil pressed out of such
sesamum should be successively cooked a hundred times
with the decoction of F^/rf-roots. This being done, the
oil should be poured into an earthen pitcher and the

* Vald wouM be the Kalka in this oil, says Dallana. But he also says
that some authorities hold that the Kalkas used in the Vald-Taila should
be used as the Kalka in this oil as well.

Chap. XV.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 4II

patient, while taking it in adequate doses, should live
in a lonely chamber protected from the wind. After its
digestion, the patient should partake of milk and boiled
Shashtika rice. A Drona measure of the oil, should in
this way, fee gradually taken and the regimen of diet
(milk and Shashtika rice, etc.) should be observed for
double that period. This oil is efficacious in improving
one’s strength and complexion and adds a century (of
yearsj to the duration of one’s life, and at the same time
absolves him from all sins. It is said that the use of each
succesive Drona measure of this oil adds a century to
one’s days on earth. 16.

Oils may similarly be prepared with each of Ativishd^
Guduchi, Aditya-parniy Saireyaka, ViratarUy S'atdvari^
Tri-kantakay Madhuka and Pra$dra 7 iiy and may be
prescribed by an experienced and erudite physician. 17.

Nilotpala and S'atdvari should be cooked in milk.
The milk thus prepared should be again cooked with
sesamurn oil successively a hundred times and a
paste of all :he drugs used as a paste in the Vala Taila
should be added to it at the time of cocking. The
therapeutic virtues of all these oils are the same as
those of the Vald-Taila and the same regimen of diet
and conduct should be observed in all such cases, 18.

Thus ends ihe fifteenth Chapter of the Chikitsila Slhdoam in the
Sus'ruta Samhitd which deals with the medical treatment of Mudha-
garbha*

CHAPTER XVI.

Now we shall discourse on the medical 'treatment
of Abscesses and Tumours (Vidradhi). i.

Of the six types of Vidradhis, the one of the Sinni-

pdtika type should be regarded as incurable In all

other types curative measures* should be speedily

resorted to in their unsuppurated stage, as in the treat-
/

ment of a case of Sopha (inflammatory swelling or
boil). 2.

Treatment of V^itaja-Vidradhi in

a case of Vdtaja Vidradhi, a compact or thick plaster
(Alepa) composed of pasted Murangi-xoo\.'^,'\ mixed
with clarified butter, oil and lard (Vasd), should be
applied lukewarm. The flesh of the animals which
frequent swamps and marshes as well as of aquatic ani-
mals boiled with the drugs of the Kdkolyddi group,
Kdnjika, salt, barley powder and Sneha (clarified
butter, &c.), should be applied as a poultice (Upandha^
and the affected part should be constantly fomented
with (warm) Ves'aviira, Krisard, milk and Pdyasa.
Blood-letting should also be resorted to. 3.

If, in spite of the use of the preceding remedies,
suppuration should begin to set in, suppurating measures
should be resorted to and the abscess (finally) lanced

Commencing with Apatarpana up to purgative measures (Chikits^,
chapter.— 1).

t Both Dallana and Chakrdpani Datta read ^^Vdtaghna” in place of
*‘Murangi*’ of the text. Dallana explains the term “Vdtaghna’^ as the
“Bhadra-ddrvddi group’* and S'iva-d£sa, the commentator of Chakra pilni,
explains it as the “Das'a-mula**. Both of them, however, say that he
different reading is “Surangi” meaning “S'obhdnjana. “Murangi also
means **S'obhdnjana.”— Ep.

Chap. XVI.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 413

with a knife. Cleansing measures should then be applied
to the (incidental) ulcer. After incision, the ulcer
should be washed with a decoction of the Pancha-mula ;
and an oil cooked with the drugs of the Bhadra-ddrvddi
group anjl* Yashti-madhUyd,nd, mixed with an abundant
quantity of salt, should be used in filling (healing up)
the cavity of the wound. The cleansing of the ulcer
should be effected with the powdered Vairechanika
(purgative) drugs mixed with Traivrita* and the
healing should be effected with Traivrita cooked with
the drugs of the Prithak-paryiyddi group. 4-6.

Treatment of PIttaja Vidradhi;— In a
case of Pittaja Vidradhi a plaster (Pradeha) composed
of sugar, fried paddy, Yashti-Madhu and Sdrivd pasted
with milk .should be applied. As an alternative, a
plaster composed of Payasydy Us'ira and (red) sandal
wood pasted with milk should be used. Cold infusions
of Pdkya (Yava-kshdra), sugarcanc-juice and milk, and
jivaniya-Ghrita mixed with sugar should be used in
affusing the abscess. The patient should be advised to
lick a lambativc composed of powdered Haritaki
and Jrivrit saturated with honey ; and leeches should
be applied (to an unsuppurated) abscess for letting out
the blood. An intelligent surgeon should (lance a
suppurated abscess and) wash the incidental ulcer with a
decoction of Kshira-Vtiksha or of aquatic bulbs.
Poultices of sesamum and Yashti-Madhu mixed with
honey and clarified butter should then be applied to
it and bandaged with a piece of thin linen. Clarified
butter cooked with Prapaundarika^ Maftjishtha,
Yashti-Madhu, Us' tray Padmaka^ Haridrd and milk,

* ‘‘Traivrita’* is a technical term and means clarified butter mixed
the three other lardacious substances, viz., oil, lard and marrow.
Vide Chikitflita Sth^nam. Chapter— V.

414 the SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XVL

should be used to heal up the cavity of a Pittaja
ulcer by (inducing granulation). As an alternative,
clarified butter cooked with Kshira^S'ukld, Prithak-
parni, Samangd, Rodhra, Chandana and the tender
leaves and bark of the drugs of the Nyagrodkddi group
should be employed for the same end. 7~io.

Karanjadya Ghrita A Karsha measure
of each of the following drugs, viz., the tender leaves and
fruits of t)\Q]Nakfamdlai the leaves of the Sutnana (Jdti
flower), Patola and of Arishta, Haridrd, Daru-Haridrd^
wax, Yashti-Madhu, Tikta-Rohini, Priyangup Kus'a^
roots, Nichula-h^vk, Mafijishthd^ sandal wood, Us*ira^
Utpala, Sdrivd and Trivrit should be cooked with a
Prastha measure of clarified butter. This medicated
Ghrita is called the Karanjaidya Ghrita, and it
will cure malignant ulcers (Dushta-Vrana) and act as a
purifier in sinus and recent ulcers, etc., burns and scalds,
deep sores and even deep-seated sinuses, ii.

Treatment Of Kaphaja Vidradhi :-ln

a case of Kaphaja Vidradhi, the seat of affection should
be fomented with a heated brick, sand, iron, cow-dung,
husks, ashes and cow’s urine.f The Doshas involved
in sucli a case should be curbed down by a constant
use of medicinal decoctions, emetics, plasters (Alepa)
and poultices (Upandha). The vitiated blood of the
locality should be cuffed out with an Aldvu-yantra
(gourd). The abscess when suppurated should be (lanced

♦ * Chakrapdni Datla in his compilation does not include Priyangu,
Kus'a-roots add Nichula-bark in the list but he reads both the kinds of
sdrivd, i. e., Anantamula and S'ydrod>Iatd.

t In ChakradaCta, the reading is i.e., pasted in cow*s urine,

instead of I S'ivaddsa, the commentator, however, holds that

this reading is not authoritative, though he says that some commentators
have accepted t.

Ch»p, XVI.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 41S

and) washed with a decoction of Aragvadha. The
sore of such an ulcer should be filled up (healed) with a
medicinal compound consisting of the paste of Haridrd
Trivrit, S'aktu, sesamum and honey and bandaged in
the manry^ described before. After that, a medicated
oil properly cooked with a paste of Kulatthikd, Danii,
Jrivrit S'ydmd, Arka, Tilvaka, cow’s urine and rock-
salt should be applied in such a case. 12-13.

Treatment of Agantuja and Raktaja
Vidradhi ; -In a case of abscess of traumatic
(Agantuja) origin, or due to the vitiated condition of the
blood (Raktaja), all the measures and remedies laid
down in connection with those of the Pittaja type
should be employed by a r killed surgeon, 14

Treatment of internal Vidradhi A

case of an unsuppurated internal abscess yields to the use
of a potion consisting of a decoction of the drugs of
the Varunddi group saturated with the powders (Kalka)
of those of the Ushakddi group. Clarified butter
cooked with the decoction of the drugs of the two
preceding groups, as well as clarified butter cooked with
purgative ^drugs, taken every morning, will cure an
internal abscess in a very short time. The decoctions
of the above groups should be mixed with Sneha (oil or
clarified butter) and speedily used as an Asthdpana as
well as an Anuvdsana measure. The bark of Mad)ni-s*igru
mixed with the powder^ of the drugs antidotal to the
Doshas involved in the case, being administered in food
and drink and used as a plaster, proves curative in a
case of an internal abscess in its unsuppurated stage.
As an alternative, the said drug (i.e., Madhu-sigru) should
be taken with water, Dhdnydmla, cow’s rine, or Sur^
(wine). Purified SHldjatu, Gugguluy S^unthi, or Deva-
ddru^ dissolved in the decoction of the drugs antidotal to

4i6

THE SUSHRUTA SAMlllTA.

[Chap. XVL

the aggravated Uoshas involved in the case, should be
administered. Applications of poultices, Sneha-Karma
(emollient measures), as well as Anulomana (Vdyu-sub-
duing) measures should be frequently resorted to in
such cases. 15-20.

The veins (S'irA) should be opened in a case of the
Kaphaja type of abscess as directed before ; while
some authorities advise to open the veins at the arms in
cases of Raktaja, Vataja and Pittaja types. 21.

Treatment of Suppurated internal
Vidradhi S— A suppurated internal Vidradhi having
bulged up (above the surface of the body) should be
opened with a knife and treated in the manner of an
(incidental) ulcer. Whether the pus drains through the
lower or the upper channel of the body (rectum or
mouth) the patient should be made to take the drugs of
the Varunddi group or Madhu-s'igrii mixed with (a
copious quantity of) Maireya^ Suni, Asava, or Kanjika.
The diet should consist of rice boiled and cooked with
white mustard seed in the decoction of Madhu-s'igru
and taken with the soup of barley, Kola and Kulalttha
pulse. The Tilvaka Ghrita (Chikitsd SthAna, ch. IV.),
or clarified butter cooked with the decoction of the
Trivritddi group, should be taken every morning in
adequate doses for the purpose. Particular care should
be taken by the phsyician to guard against the suppura-
tion of an internal abscess, since suppuration in such
cases leads but to a slender hope of success. 22-23.

Treatment of Majja-j^ta Vidradhi :

— The medical treatment of a patient, afflicated with a
Majja-jdta abscess (abscess affecting the marrow), should
be taken in hand without holding out any definite hope
of recovery fas a proper course of treatment in such
cases does not invariably prove successful). Sneha-karma

Chap. XVL] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 417

(anointments, etc.) and fomentations should be first
resorted to, after which blood-letting should be
made ; and the remedial measures of the present
chapter should be then employed When it reaches the
suppurating stage, the bone should be operated upon,
and after the full elimination of the pus and the putrid
matter from the incised ulcer, purifying remedies should
be employed. The incidental ulcer should be washed
with the decoction of the bitter drugs and the Tikta-
Sarpis* should be u;ed. An intelligent physician
should apply the decoction of the drugs of the
Samsodhaniya group, if the oozing out of the marrow
is not arrested. A medicated oil cooked with Priyangu^
Dhdtaki^ Rodhta, Katphala, Nemi\ and Saindhava
salt should be used in healing up an ulcer incidental
to an opened up Vidradhi. 24-25.

Thus ends the sixteenth Chapter of the Chikitsita Sth^nam in the
Sus'ruta Samhitd which deals with the treatment of abscess.

* This medicated Ghrita (Chikitsita Stb^nam, Ch. IX) may be used
both internally and externally with good results. Ed.

t Dallana reads “Tini” in place of “Nemi,** both of which, however,
mean “TinisV*. Chakradatta does not include “Saindhava” in the list, but
reads “Tinio'a*twacham“ in place of “Nemi-Saindbavam”. S'ivadisa,
however, adds another reading ‘Tinis 'am Dhavam’' on the authority of
Chandr^ta.

53

CHAPTER XVIL

Now we shall discourse on the medical tr^tment of
erysipelas, etc., (Visarpa), sinus, etc., (NsCdi-
Vrana) and diseases of the mammary glands

(Stana-roga), i.

Of the types of erysipelas (Visarpa) the first three
(viz., the Vdtaja, Pittaja and Kaphaja ones) are curable ;
the two remaining types, viz., those caused by the con-
certed action of the three Doshas (of the body) and
those originating from wounds (Kshataja) should be
considered as incurable. In cases of the curable types,
medicated Ghritas, plasters (Upadehas) and affusions
(Seka) prepared with the drugs (antidotal to the specific
aggravated Dosha or Doshas (involved in the case)
should be prescribed. 2

Treatment of Vd^taja Visarpa in

cases of the Vitaja type of the disease, Mustd, S'atdhvd,
Sura-ddru, Kushtha, Vdrdhi, Kustumbum (Dhanyj^ka)
Krishna-gandhd, and the drugs of a heat-making potency
(Ushna-gana)* should be used in preparing the medicinal
washings (Seka), plasters and Ghritas, The drugs res-
pectively included within the groups of the Vrihat-
Pancha-mula and the Svalpa^Pancka-mula^ the Kantaka-
Pancha-mula and the Valli-Pancha-mula should be
(separately) used to prepare the medicinal plasters,
stffusions, medicated Ghritas and as well as the neces-
sary oils. 3.

* Chakradatla reads **Arka'*, Vams'd and Arlagala instead of the
drugs of a heat-making potency. Dallana explains the drugs of a
hcat-making potency to be the drugs of the Bhadra-d4rv4di and the

Pippalyddi groups.

Chap, XVII.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

419.

Treatment of Pittaja Visarpa In

cases of Pittaja Visarpa, a plaster consisting of
Kas'eruka, S'ringdtaka, Padma, Gundrd i^Guduchi),
S'aivdla, Utpala and clay pasted together and mixed -
with clarified butter, should be wrapped^ in a piece
of linen, and applied cool to the affected part. A
paste composed of Hrivera, Ldmajjaka (Usira-mula),
Chandana^ Srotoja (Rasanjana\ Muktd, Mani and
Gairika, pasted together with milk and mixed with
clarified butter should be applied thin and cool to the
affected part to alleviate the pain. Pittaja erysi-
pelas readily yields to the application of a medicinal
plaster composed of Prapaundarika, Yashti-nudhu^
Payasyd^ t Manjishtlid, Padmaka^ Chandana and
Sugandhikd pasted together. Decoctions of the drugs of
the Nyagrodhddi group should be used in washing (the
affected part; ; or clarified, butter should be cooked with
the expressed juice of the above drugs and employed
in the case. The part may be affused (Seka) with cold
milk (or water), or with water mixed with honey or
sugar, or with the expressed juice of the sugarcane. 4-5.

Gauryadi Ghrita:— A Prastha measure of
clarified butter should be cooked with the Kalka of
Gatiri, J Yashti-madhu, Aravinda, Rodhra, Ambu,
Rdjddana, Gairika, Rishabhaka^ Padniakay Sdrivd,
KdkoH, Medd, Kumuda^ Utpala, Chandana^ Madhu-
S^arkard, Drdkshd^ Sthird^ PriY ni-parni, and S* * * § atd/ivd
taken in equal parts (and weighing one seer § in all)

* In order to facilitate Sts removal.

t It means “Kshira-vid^ri”. jejjata explains it as **Arka pushpi’*.

t Some explain it as “Haridrd”, while others explain it as
“Gorochand**.

§ Dallana, however, says that these drugs will weigh four Pains

420

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHtlTA.

[Chap. XVII.

and with the decoctions, weighing four times that of the
Ghrlta, of the drugs of the Nyagrodhddi, Sthirddi (minor
Pancha-mula) and Vilvddi (major Pancha-mula)
groups together with the same weight (sixteen seers) of
milk. The washing (of the affected part) with this me-
dicated Ghrita proves curative in Pittaja erysipelas and
sinus. Visphota (boils'', head diseases, malignant sores
and inflammatory affections of the mouth, yield to
the internal use of this Ghrita. It is called the
Q'iUryyidi Ghrita and is highly efficacious in
the derangements to which children are liable, (com-
monly) attributed to the malignant influences of evil
stars, as well as in cases of emaciated ones. 6.

Treatment of Kaphaja Visarpa

Cases of the Kaphaja type of Visarpa readily yield to a
proper application of a medicinal plaster (Pradeha)
composed of Aja-gandhd, ^As'va-gandhd, Sarald,*
Kdld, Ekaishikd t and Aja-s'ringi J pasted with
the urine of a cow. Drugs, such as Kdldnusdryd, Aguru,
Chocha (cardamom), Gunjd, Rdsnd, Vachd, S'ita s'iva,
Indra-parni, Pdlindi, Munjdta and Mahi-Kadamba
fapplied similarly) are also efficacious in the present
type. Drugs of the Varunddi group may be used in any
form (such as plasters, washes, etc.', for erysipelas.
Blood-letting (by means of leeches) and Sams’odhana
(purifying) measures are the principal remedies in all
cases of this disease (Visarpa^. Suppurated erysipelas
should be first purified and then treated with the reme-
dies described in the treatment of Vrana (ulcer). 7-8.

* “Smfi” here mean* “Tiivril’*. Cbakradatta readi “VWT”
which also means **Tnvrii”.

t *Bkaishtkd/’ according to Dallana, would mean S'ativari but
Sltad^ explains it as Pdthd.

X Gayaddsa explains it as Karkata-S'ringi.

Chap. XVIt] CHIKITSA STHANAM, 42 1

Treatment of N^Cdl-vrana A Case of
Nidi- Vrana (sinus) due to the concerted action of the
three Doshas (Sannipataja) baffles all cure, while the
four remaining types are amenable to careful medical
treatment. Poultices (Upandhtj* should be applied at
the outset in the Vsttaja Natdi-Vrana and then
the course of the pus-channels should be (ascer-
tained and) fully opened (with a knife) and bandaged
with a paste of scsamum, Apdmdrg'a-seeds and
Saindhava salt. A decoction of (the drugs of) the
Vrihat-Pancha-mula group should be constantly
used in washing the ulcer. Oil f duly cooked with
the following drugs, viz , Himsrd, Haridrd^ Katuka^
Valdy Gojihvikd and Vilva-xoo^s should be used for the
purification, filling up and healing of the sores of
the sinus. 9-1 1.

Treatment of PIttaJa NsCdi In a case
of Pittaja sinus, an intelligent surgeon should
employ a porridge (Utkarika) mixed with milk and
clarified butter as a poultice. Then having opened
the sinus with a knife, a plaster composed of Tila,
Ndga-danti and Yashti-madhu should be applied to
heal it. A decoction of Soma, Nimba and Haridrd
should be used by a skillful surgeon in washing the
ulcer daily. A medicated Ghrita cooked with S*ydmd,
Trivrit, Triphald, Haridrd^ Ddru-Haridrd^ Rodhra
and Kutaja and with milk should be used to lubricate
(Tarpana) the sinus. This Ghrita will even heal a sinus
affecting the Koshtha. 12-13.

* Poulticing with the drugs which induce suppuration is not approv*
ed of by Gayaddsa.

t Four seers of oil, the (Kalka) drugs combindely weighing one
seer and sixteen seers of water are to be taken in its preparation* —
Dallana.

422

TME SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. tChap. XVIL

Treatment Of Kaphaja N^tdi:— in a case
of the Kaphaja type of the Nidi, the sinus should be duly
poulticed Upanaha) with Kulattha, white mustard seeds,
S'aktu and Kinva. When softened by its application,
the direction of the sinus (with the help of a director)
should be first ascertained ; and an expert surgeon should
then open it fully with a knife and plaster it with a com-
pound composed of Nimha, sesamum, Saindhava salt and
Saurdshtra-mrittikd. A decoction (Sva-rasa-lit.—express-
ed juice) of the Karanja^ Nimba, Jdti, Aksha and Piiu
should be used in washing the incidental ulcer. Oil duly
cooked with Suvarchikd, Saindhava, Chitraka, Nikum-
bha^ Tdli? Nala, Rupikd and Apdmdrga-SQtds and with
cow’s urine should be used for healing purposes. 14.

Treatment of ^alyaja NsCdi in a case
of ^alyaja Nsidi (incidental to any foreign matter into
the body), the Salya should be first extracted by an
incision into the sinus. Then having fully cleansed the
channel, the ulcer should be purified with a plaster of
sesamum profusely saturated with honey and clarified
butter. It should be then healed up. Oil cooked with
the decoction of the tender fruits of the Ktimbhika^
Kharjuray Kapitthay Vilva and the Vanaspatis (Vata,
etc.), and with the Kalkas of Mustd^ Sarald^ Priyangu.
Sugandkikd, Mocharasay'\ Ahi-pushpa (Ndgesvara),
Rodhra and Dhdtaki flowers leads to a speedy healing
up (granulation) of ulcers (Vrana) and traumatic
sipuses. 15.

* Dallana’a reading evidently is “Tdli-lala" and he explains it as
the roots of **Bhumy4inalakr\ Chakradatta also prescribes this oil but he
takes **Nilikd’’ instead of S'ivaddsa, again, in his commentary

quotes from Sus'rula but reads ‘‘Nili-Nala* in place of T^la-Nala.

t “Mocha-rasa’^ is explained by Dallana to be “S'obhAnjana,” but it
generally means “S'41mali-veshta,'’and S'ivaddm explains it as such. — £d.

Chap. XVIL]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

423

Treatment with Ksh^ra-Sutra An

erudite surgeon should open a i^iniis, occurring in any
of the Marmas, or in a weak, timid, or emaciated person
with an alkalined string (Kshatra-Sutra\ and not with a
surgical k iife. The course of the sinus should be first
ascertained with a director ; and a needle, threaded with
a string of alkalined thread should be passed from one
end of the sinus and quickly drawn out through the other.
Then the two ends of the thread should be firmly fasten*
ed together. An intelligent surgeon should likewise pass
another alkalined thread in the event of the alkali of the
first thread being comparatively weak. This should
be repeated till the sinus completely bursts out.
The surgeon should know that the same procedure
may be as well adopted in cases of fistula-in-ano.
Similarly in cases of tumours (Arvuda), etc. they
should be lifted up (with the hand) and tied round at
their base with an alkalined thread, or it should be
punctured around with a kind of needle with their mouth
resembling a barley corn and then tied again at their
base with an alkalined thread. After their bursting (and
falling offj, they should be treated as common ulcers
(Vrana\ 16.

The different kinds of Plug-Stick (Varti) described
in the Dvi-Vraniya Chapter (Chikitsita— chap.-i,) may
be similarly used with advantage in all cases of sinus*
The use of a plug made of the following drugs, viz./
the bark and fruit of the Ghonta, (the five officinal kinds
of) salt,* Ldkshd, Puga and the leaves of the Alavmd •)-

* According to Chakradalta’s reading and S'ivadis’s commentary tbere^
on, only the Saindhava (instead of the five officinal kinds of sail) ^'hould be
taken. We, however, follow Dallana’s interpretation with good results.

t ‘‘Alavand*’ has been explained by Dallana as “Kaka-mardanikd*’
and by S'ivad^sa as “Jyolishmati”. S'ivad^sa is, however, followed in
practice in this case, . : . ,

424 the SUSHRUTA SAMHITA-V ^VIL

pasted together with the milky juice of the and

Ar^a leads to the speedy healing up of a siflus. The
powdered* stones of Vibhitaka^ mangoe fruits, Vata*
sprouts, Harenu, S*amkk^n^-sQtd^ Vdrdhukanda mixed
with oil can also be used in a case of sinus. I7“I9*

The seeds of the Dhustura, Madana and ^Kodrava,
Koddtaki, S'uka-nasd, Mriga-bhojani and the seeds and
flowers of xhitAmkota should be pounded together and
applied to a sinus (Nidi) after having washed it with a
decoction of Ldkshd. Cases of sinus speedily yield
to the curative efflcacy of the application of these
powders mixed with oil. The use of the oil cooked
with cow’s urine and with the preceding drugs (as
Kalkas) brings about the healing up of a sinus in seven
nights. 20-21.

The application of the oil cooked with the roots of
the Pinditaka treated with the expressed juice of the
V ardha-kanda in the manner of a BhAv^ani saturation
and with the bulbi of Suvahd brings about a speedy and
effective remedy for a sinus. The same effect is pro-
duced by an application of the oil cooked with the
bulbs of the the Vajra-kanda. 22.

Bhall^^taksCdya Taila:— The use of the
oil cooked with the paste (Kalka) of Bkalldtaka,
Arka, Markka, Saindhava salt, Vidanga, Hartdrd,
Ddru-Haridrd and Chitraka and with the expressed
juice of the Bhringa-rdja readily cures cases of sinus,
Apachi and ulcer due to VAyu and Kapha, 23.

• Treatment of Stana-rogra: -In cases of
a-(terangement of the milk (of the breast) a draught of
clarified butter should be quickly given to the Dhdtri

• According lo some difTerent reading "burnt ashes" (instead of pow-
ders) of the drugs should be taken. In our humble opinion the reading in
the text seems to be the correct one,

Chap. XVIL] , CHIKITSA STHANaM.

42s

(mo?lier or wet-nurse) by the physician ; and in the
evening a draught composed of the decoction of Nimba^
mixed with honey and Mdgadhikd, should be given
to her for emetic purposes. Next day she should
take a meal (of boiled rice) with the soup (Yusha)
of Mudga pulse. The use of emetics should be
continued for three, four, or six days ; or she
should be made to drink a potion of clarified butter
(cooked) with Triphald. A decoction of Bhdrgi,
Ativishd, Vachd, Sura-ddru, Pdthd, the drugs of the
Mustddi Gana, Mutvd and Katu-rohini, or that of the
drugs of the Aragvadhddi group mixed with honey,
should be given to the Dhdtri ^wet-nurse) for the purifi-
cation of her breast-milk. 26.

The above are the general remedial measures which
are to be adopted in the affections of breaBt-milk. Any
other defect in the breast-milk should be corrected
specially with an eye to the nature of the Dosha
involved in the case. In cases of inflammatory
swellings of the breasts, the physician should remedy
them by means of any one of the various measures laid
down under the head of Vidradhi with a due considera-
tion to the requirements of each particular case. Medici-
nal remedies should only be internally employed and no
poultices should be applied for the speedy suppuration
of the swelling of the breast, even if found to have al-
ready commenced to suppurate ; since the breasts are of
an extremely soft and fleshy growth, any tight banda-
ging about those parts may be followed by local slough-
ing or even bursting. In a case where suppuration liad
already taken place, an operation should be made
in the affected part, avoiding the milk-carrying veins
as well as the nipple with its black surroundings.
In all the cases of Stana-Vidradhi-^ whether

54

4^6

THE SUSHROTA SAMHITA. * tCh«p. XVll.

non-sdpparatbd, suppurating^, or suppurated— the
milk should be pressed out from the breast of the
Dhdtri* 27-29.

Thus ends the Seventeenth Chapter of the Chikitsita Sthdnam in the
Suh'ruta Samhitd which deals with the treatment of erysipelas, sinus
and the diseases of the mammary glands.

* The milk should be pressed out of the Dh^tri’s breasts in the
non- suppurated stage, to alleviate the burning sensation therein, in the
suppurating &tage for the avoidance of further suppuration, and in the
suppurated stage for the prevention of sores, sinus, etc.

CHAPTER XVIIl.

Now^we shall discourse on the medical treatment
of Glandular Swellings, etc. (Cranthi), Scurvy
(Apachi), Tumour, etc. (Arvuda) and Goitre

(Cala-ganda). i

General treatment of Cranthi In

the non -suppurated or acute (inflammatory) stage of
Qranthi, an experienced physician should prescribe
the measures ♦ laid down in connection with (in-
flammatory) swellings (Sopha) in general. As bodily
strength arrests the progress of the disease, the
strength of the patient should hence be always carefully
guarded against suffering any diminution in that respect
The patient should be made to drink oil, or clarified
butter, or both ; or he should be made to drink lard,
oil and clarified butter, mixed together.f Apehivdtd
(Prasdrani) and Das* a-mida cooked with the four kinds
of lardacious or emollient substances (oil, clarified

* Beginning with Apatarpana up to the purgative measures.

t Oil, clarified butter and lard mixed together is technically called
the “Trlvrita DalUna.

In the case of a Vitaja Granthf, a potion of oil cooked with the
decoction and paste (Kalka) of the Vayu-subduing drugs should be
prescribed for the patient ; in the case of a Pittaja Granthi, clarified
butter cooked with the decoction and Kalka of the Pitta-subduing drugs
should be administered in the same manner ; while in the case of a Kaphaja
Granthi, oil cooked with the decoction and Kalk\ of the Kapha-subduing
drugs should be taken by the patient. But in a case of Granthi due to
the concerted action of the two, or three of the Doshas, any compound
medicated oil, prepared by cooking any two, three, or four of the oily
substances, vis., oil, clarified butter, lard and marrow, with the
decoction and Kalka of those drugs which are antidotes to the said
Poshas, should be prescribed for the patient as drinks,

428

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XVIII.

butter, lard and marrow), or with any two of them
should be prescribed. 2-3.

Treatment of VsCtaJa Cranthi A

medicinal plaster composed of Himsrd, Rohini^ Amritd,
Bhdrgi^ S' yondka, Vilva, Aguru, Krishna-^andf^d, Goji
and Tdla-patri (Tila-parni — D. R ) pasted together,
should be applied (to the inflamed gland) in the
Va(taja type of Granthi. Different kinds of fomen-
tation (Sveda), poulticing (Upandha) and medicinal
plasters (Lepa), possessed of the efficacy of subdu-
ing the deranged Vdyu, should be likewise resorted to. A
suppurated swelling should be opened and the pus drained.
Then the incised wound should be washed with a
decoction of Vilva* Arka and Narendra (Aragvadha)
and purified (disinfected) with a plaster consisting of
sesamum and the leaves of the Panchndgula (castor oil
plants), together with Saindhava salt. After the
purification, it should be healed up by applying a
medicated oil, mixed with the powders of Rdsnd and
Sarald ; or by a medicated oil prepared by cooking it
with Vidanga, Yashti-madhu and Amritd and cow’s
milk. 4.

Treatment of PIttaJa Granthi:— In a

case of the Fittaja type of the disease, leeches should
be applied to the affected part, which should be further
affused with milk and water. The patient should be
made to drink a cold decoction of the drugs of the
Kdkolyddi group with the addition of sugar ; or he
should take the powders of Haritaki through the
medium of grape-juice, or of the expressed juice of sugar-
cane. Hot plasters, prepared by pasting together the
bark of the Madhuka (flower) tree, and of the Jambii

* Some read and explain that theidecociions of

the Vilv^di and the Arkadi groups are to be taken for Iho purpose.

Chap. XVIII.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

429

tree, Atjuna tree, and Vetasa creeper. As an alter-
native, hot plasters compounded of the roots of the
Trina-s* * * § unya (Ketaki), or Muchukunda mixed with
sugar, should be constantly applied to the affected part.
The Graatlii should be opened when fully suppurated,
and the pus let out ; after which it should be washed
with a decoction of the bark of the V anaspati?^ The
incidental ulcer should then be purified with a plaster
composed of sesamum and Yashti madhu ; and lastly it
should be healed up with clarified butter cooked with
the drugs of the Madhiira (Kdkolyadi group 5-6.

Treatment of Kaphaja Granthi In a
case of the Khaphaja type of the disease, the Doshas
should be first eliminated from the system with the
regular and successive measures.f The affected part
(Granthi) should then be fomented and firmly pressed
(Vimlcipana) and rubbed with either the thumb, or a
piece of iron rod, or stone, or with a bamboo rod in order
to bring about its resolution. A plaster composed of the
roots of the V ikamkata, I Aragvadha^ Kdkananti (Gunja),
Kdkddani i^Vdyasa-tinduka), and Tdpasa-Vrikska
(Ingudi) and with Pinda-phala (Tiktdldvu), Arka, ^
Bhdrgi, Karanja, Kdld and Madana^ pasted together,
should be applied to it by an erudite physician. A
glandular swelling Kaphaja Qranthi) on any part of the
body other than a vital and vulnerable one (Marma) and

* The Vanaspati class consists of Vata, Plaksha, As'vattha and
Udumbara trees. •

t These are the applications of Sn:iba, fomentation, emetics, pur-
gatives, Asthdpana, S'iro-virechana and blood-letting.

X Dallana explains “Vikamkata” as “Kanla-karikii,” but it means
Sruvd (called Vainch in Bengal) and S'ivaddsa also explains it as
such.—

§ Chakradatta does not read **Aika” in the Hst.

430

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XVIII.

not (otherwise) resolved and absorbed should be cut open
even in its non-suppurated stage and the glands
removed. The expert surgeon should then cauterize the
incidental wound after the cessation of the bleeding and
treat it in the manner * of the Sadyo-Vrana*treatment.
These remedies should be employed by the experienced
physician, where the swelling would be found to have
assumed a large, stiflT, elevated and fleshy aspect
(bulging from the deeper tissues of the flesh). A
Kaphaja Granthi should be opened with an incision as
soon as it becomes fully suppurated and should then be
washed with a decoction of appropriate medicinal
drugs. The incidental ulcer should be purified (disin-
fected) with a purifying remedy prepared with a
profuse quantity of Yava-kshara, honey and clarified
butter ; and finally it should be healed up by the
application of an oil, cooked with Vidanga, Pdthd and
Rohini, 7-9,

Treatment Of Wledoja Granthi : -in a

case of Medoja Granthi (originated from the vitiated
condition of the bodily fat) a plaster of pasted sesamum,
placed inside the folds of a piece of linen, should
be applied to the seat of the affected part and fomen-
tations with hot iron* rods should be frequently applied,
inasmuch as application of heat (lit. — fire) is efficacious
in such cases. As an alternative, the affected part
should be fomented with a ladle, pasted with heated
shellac (LdkshA). The Granthi (in its non-suppu rated
sfage) should be opened by an incision and the
fat removed ; the incidental ulcer should then be
(actually) cauterized. On the other hand, the Granthi,
when fully suppurated, should be incised and washed
with the urine (of a cow). Then a paste, composed of
• AppHcatidns of honey, clarified butter, etp.

Chap. XVliL]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

43 ^

sesamum, Suvarchikd, Haritdla and rock-salt, pounded
together and mixed with honey, clarified butter and an
abundant quantity of Yava-kshAra, should be applied
to the incidental wound for purifying purposes. Oil,
cooked wirti the two kinds of Karanjay Gunjd^ the
green scrapings of bamboo, Ingudi and the urine * of a
cow, should be used to heal the ulcer. lo-il.

Treatment of Apachi Clarified butter
cooked with the fruit of Jimutaka and Kosha-vatiy
and with (the roots of) Danti, Dravanti and Trivrit^
is a very powerful and efficacious remedy.f Adminis-
tered internally as well as externally, it leads to the
cure of the advanced cases of Apachi. 12.

A strong emetic composed of Nirgundiy Jdti (flower)
and Varihistha (Vdld) together with Jinidtakuy profusely
mixed with honey and Saindhaviiy should be given
warm to the patient. It is a very powerful emetic,
and leads to the recovery of even a malignant form
of Apachi. An oil, cooked with the pastes (Kalka) of
Kaita^yya, t Vimbi and Karaviray may be profitably used
as an errhine (Siro-virechana). Oil cooked with the
expressed juice of S*akhotaka may also be used profit-
ably as an errhine. § Avapida errhines (used in drops

* Cow’s urine measuring four times the oil should be taken in
the preparation of this medicated oil. ^

t In preparing this medicated Ghrita, the quantity of clarified
butter should be taken four times as much as the combined weight of
the Kalka (paste). These should be boiled with water, taken four times
as much as the quantity of clarified butter. Some authorities, however/
are of opinion that both the paste (Kalka) and the decoction of the drugs
arc to be taken in its preparation.
t Some read ‘Jjirgundi’ after it.

g This medicated oil should be cooked without any Kalka. But some
are of opinion that both the decoction and the Kalka of S'ikhotaka should
be used.

432

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. X III.

into the nostrils' should be applied with Madhuka-sdra,
S'i^-secds and Ajfdmdr^^a-seeds* 13-15.

A glandular swelling (GranthI), occurring In any
part of the body other than a Marma, should be opened
In its non-suppurated stage and cauterized with
fire ; f or it should be rubbed with an alkali \ after
scarificatic n as already advised. 16.

A length of twelve fingers should be measured
(Mitvd) from and above the Pdrshni, the posterior
side of the ankle (and the space of Indra-vasti above
this part should be ascertained). The Indra-vasti
(occupying a space of half a finger, or, according to
others, two fingers) having been carefully avoided, an
excision (on the opposite side of the affection) should
be made and the spawn-like glands having been
removed (therefrom), the excisioned part should be
cauterised with fire.

Others say that the excision should be made straight
above the ankle (Ghoni) after carefully avoiding the
space of Indra-vasti, measuring two fingers (and to
make sure an additional space of half a finger should
be left out), which would be found out by taking one-
eighth part (of the Janghd, />., the leg— excluding the
foot and measuring tsventy fingers) from the Khulaka
(ankle-joint) of which the (two) Gulphas (ankles) look
like the (two) ears. § 17-18.

* Madhuka-sdra mixed wiih tepid water and the expressed juice

of S'igru-seeds and of Apdmdrga seeds should be used.

*

t In cases of the preponderance of Vdyu and of Kapha.

t In cases of the preponderance of Pitta.

§ There is a good deal of difference as to the reading and explanation
of this passage amongst the difierent commentators. The different explana*
lions arise from the different interpretations put upon the word

in the Text, nft fRU tic.” The words nfir”

chtp. xviir.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

433

As an alternative, the region of the wrist (Mani-
bandha) should be branded by a physician with three
mark lines, one finger apart, for a radical cure of
Apachi. 19.

t

may mean either of the following. (i)On the opposite side of the Pirshni*
V^gbhata subscribes to this view. (2) On the opposite the other)
Parshni, that is to say, if the affection be on the right side of the body
the operation should be made on the Parshni of the left leg and so on,
Vriddha Vagbhata subscribes to thi« interpretation in the clearest
language. (3) In the region of the Parshni, r.e., on the dorsal side of
the leg.

The different commentators, again, do not agree as to the seat and
extent of the excision. Some say that the operation should be made
ab0V6 the Indra-vasti and the extent should be two fingers in length.
Vdgbhata seems to subscribe to this view. Others hold that the operation
should be made below the Indra-vasti and the extent should be two
fingers’ length : Dallana is of this opinion. A third class of commentators
assert that the whole extent of the length from above the Parshni up to
the Indra vasti should be opened.

As to the extent of the Indra-vasti, again, there is a difference.
According to Dallana it occupies a space of two fingers. But Jejjata
holds that it occupies a space of half a finger only. The Indra-vasti
(Marma) is situated twelve fingers above (1.^., in the thirteenth finger oQ
the Parshni. The reading in the printed editions of the text is
whereas Vrinda and Chakradatta read Dallana’s reading also

evidently is ‘*fir^** would be quite redundant and as

gives a better meaning, we accept this reading.

Now we come to the second slan^. Commentators differ more in the
exposition of this stanza than of the former. By the expression

is meant by some commentators “from the Gulpha to the Kama,”
Others, however, mean to take it as an adjective to and explain

it as meaning “from above the Khulaka whereof the Gulphas look like
theKarnas.” As regards the expression some are inclined

to think that the excision should be made straight above the Ghond
(i.c., the posterior part and especially the big vein there which looks like
the nose (Ghond) of the ankle-joint).

Others, however, read it as explain it

as meaning “in a straight line with the Ghond (which may mean

55

434

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XVIIL

The ashes (Masi) of the skins of a peacock, cow,
lizard (Godhd) and snake and of tortoise shells
should be dusted (over an Apachi after lubricating it)
with the (expressed) oil of the Ingudi. Medicated oils to
be described under the treatment of ^lipada (elephan-
tiasis) and Vairechanika fumes should also be applied in
a case of Apachi and the diet should consist of cooked
barley and Mudga pulse. 20-21.

Treatment of V^taja Arvuda in a
case of Vflitaja Arvuda, a poultice composed of
Karkdriika, Ervdruka, cocoanut, Piydla and castor
seeds, boiled with milk, water and clarified butter,
and mixed with oil, should be applied lukewarm
(to the tumour). As an alternative, a poultice
made up of boiled meat or of Ves'a-vdra, should be
applied to it. Fomentation of the part in the manner
of a NaCdi-sveda (application of medicated fumes through
a pipe) should be applied by an experienced physician
and the (vitiated) blood (of the locality) should be
repeatedly cuffed off with a horn. S'atdhvd or Trivrit*,
boiled with the decoction of the Vdyu-subduing
drugs and with milk and Kdnjika, should be given to
the patient. 22-23.

Treatment of PIttaJa Arvuda : —

Applications of mild fomentations and poultices (to the

either the nose or the big vein (Kandard) at the heel looking like the
nose (Ghond) of the ankle joint and below the Indra vasti’\

IJallant says that the part to be excisioned, according to the first
stanza, is below the Indra-vasti and that, according to the second, is
above thetlndra-vasli. We also think that the seat of the Indra-vasti
should be carefully avoided and an excision should be made both above
and below the Indra-vasti, according to the requirements in each case.

* There is a different reading in place of

In that case, roots of white Trivrit should be boiled with the
decoction, etc.

Chap, XVIIL]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

435

affected part) and of purgatives are efficacious in
Fittaja Arvuda. The tumour should be well rubbed
with (the rough surface of) the leaves of the Udumbara,
Sdka, or of the Goji and it should be plastered over
with thctfine powders of Sarja-rasa, Priyangu, Pattanga
(red sandal wood), Rodhra, Anjana * and Yashti-
madhu^ mixed with honey. As an alternative, a plaster
composed of Aragvadha^ Goji, Soma and Sjdmd,
pasted together should be applied to it after the
secretion Visriva. Clarified butter, cooked with
Klitaka (as a Kalka) and with the decoction of S'ydnid,
Girihvd^ Anjanaki, Drdkshd and Saptalikd should be
prescribed for internal application in a case of Fittaja
Arvuda and of abdominal dropsy (Jathara) of the
Fittaja type 24-26.

Treatment of Kaphaja Arvuda :-ln

cases of the Kaphaja type of Arvuda blood should be
let out from the affected part after the system of the
patient has been cleansed (by emetics and purgatives).
Then a medicinal plaster composed of the drugs, which
arc efficacious in correcting the Doshas, confined to the
upper and lower parts of the organism, should be
applied hot to the tumour. Or a plaster composed of
Kdnsya-nila, S'uka^ Ldngaldkhya and Kdkddani roots,
and the dung of a Kapota and of Pdrdvata pasted
together with urine, or with alkaline water should be
applied to it The Kalkas (pastes) of Nishpdva{^*\vv!tA)^
Piny aka (oil-cakes of sesamum) and Kulattha pulse,
pasted with curd-cream and an abundunt quantity, of
flesh, should be used in plastering the affected part so
that worms and parasites may be produced in the ulcer

^ ChakradatU reads “Arjuna” in place of “Anjana**.

t These are the drugs included in the emetic and purgative groups
(see chap, XXXIX. Sutsa Sthinam).

436

THE SU9HRUTA SAMHITA. [Ch*p. XVIIl.

and flies attracted to it (and so consume the ulcer). A
small portion of the ulcer, left unconsumed (un-eaten)
by worms and parasites, etc., should be scarified and
the ulcer should then be cauterised with fire. 27-28.

A comparatively superficial tumour (Arvuda should
be covered with thin leaves of zinc, copper, lead,
or of iron, and cauterization with fire or with an
alkali as well as surgical operations should be carefully
and repeatedly resorted to, so as not to hurt, nor in any
way injure the body. The incidental ulcer should be
washed with the decoction of the leaves of the Asp/ioia,
Jdti, and Karavira for the purpose of puiification. A
medicated oil, cooked with Bhdrgi^ VidajigHy Pdthd
Triphald should then be used as a healing remedy. An
experienced physician should treat a tumour, sponta-
neously suppurating, in the manner of a suppurated
ulcer. 29-31.

Treatment of medoja Arvuda A

Medoja Arvuda (fat origined tumour) should be first
fomented and then incised. The blood in its inside
having been cleansed it should be quickly sutured and
then plastered over with a compound composed of
Haridrd^ Griha-dhuma (soot of a room), Rodhra,
Pattanga^ Manah s'ild and Haritdla pounded together
and mixed with a proper quantity of honey After its
purification, thus produced, it should be treated with
the application of Karanja-Taila (prescribed before in
cases of Vidradhi). Even the least particle of Doshas
(pu%, etc.) in a tumour, left unremoved, would lead
to a fresh growth of the excrescence and bring on death
just like the least particle of an unextinguished fire.
Hence it should be destroyed in its entirety. 32-33.

Treatment of VsCtaJa Cala-ganda

A case of the Vittaja type of Gala-ganda (goitre) should

Chap. XVIIL]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

437

be treated with fomentations of the vapours of the
decoctions of tender leaves of the Vayu-subduing drugs
prepared by boiling them with Kdnjika, various kinds
of urine and milk as well as with minced meat and oil,
and shoul^bc applied in the manner of a Niidisveda.
After this fomentation, the contents should be carefully
drained i^from inside the goitre). Then after having duly
purified (the incidental ulcer), it should be plastered with
a medicinal compound composed of (the seeds of) the
S'ana^ Atasi, Mulaka, S'igru and sesamum and Kinva
and the piths of the Piydla^ or with that composed of
Kdld, Amritdy S'tgru, Punarnavd, Arka, Gaja-pippali,
Karahdta . Madana) and Kushtha, or with that com-
posed of Ekaishikd, Vrikshaka and Tilvaka. All of
them should be pasted with Sura and Kdnjika and ap-
plied hot to the affected part. The internal u>c of a
medicated oil, cooked* with Amritd^ Nimbay Hamsdhvd^
Vrikskakay Pippaliy Va/d, Ati-valdy and Deva-ddfUy
always proves efficacious in a case of goitre. 34-36.

Treatment of Kaphaja Gala-ganda :

—A case of the Kaphaja type of goitre should be treated
with applications of fomentation and poultice and
should be duly drained (Visrdva). Then a medicinal
plaster composed of Aja-gand/id, Ati-vishdy Vts'alj'd,
Vishdmkd, Kushthay S'ukdhvayd, Gunjd (taken in
equal parts) and pasted with the alkaline water
prepared from the ashes of the Palds'a wood should
be applied hot to the affected part. A medicated oil
cooked with the drugs of the Pippalyddi group and*
mixed with the five officinal kinds of salt should

* Some say that the oil should be prepared with the decoction as
Well as with Kalka of the said drugs. Others, however, hold that water
should be used in the preparation of the oil and the said drugs should be
used only as a Kalka.

438

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. tChtp. XVIIL

be taken by the patient. Emetics, errhines and
inhalations of Vairechanika-dhuma are beneficial in such
cases. In the Va'taja and the Kaphaja types of goitre
(Gala-ganda), the skilful physician should employ
suppurating measures in partially suppurated cases.
The patient’s diet should consist of rice, barley and
Mudga soup and should be taken with honey, Trikatu,
cow’s urine, fresh ginger, Patola and Nimba. 37-39.
Treatment of Medoja Gala-ganda

In a case of a Medoja goitre (due to the deranged fat\ the
patient should be first made to use oleaginous substances
(internally and externally) and venesection should then
be resorted to, as advised before (Sdrira-Sthdna, Ch VIII).
A hot plaster composed of S'ydmd (Trivrit), Sudhd,
Mandura^ Danti and Rasdnjana pasted together should
be applied to the seat of the disease. Powders of the
essential parts (Sdra) of a S'dla tree mixed with cow’s
urine may be given every morning with advantage.

As an alternative, the Goitre (Gala ganda) should
be opened, its fatty contents fully removed and the
wound then sutured. Or it should be cauterised with
the application of heated animal marrow, clarified
butter, lard, or honey •, after which it should be lubri-
cated with clarified butter and honey (mixed together),
and a pulverised compound of Kdsisa, Tuttha, and
Gorochand, should be applied to it ; or after lubricating
it with oil, it should be dusted with the ashes of cow-
dung and of S*dla-sdra. Daily washings with the decoc-
tion of Triphald, hard bandaging and a diet of barley,
prove efficacious (in cases of goitre). 40.

Thus ends the Eighteenth Chapter of the Chikitsita Sthdnam in the
Sus'ruta Samhit^, which deals with the medical treatment of Glands,
Scrofula, Tumour and Goitre.

CHAPTER XIX.

Now we shall discourse on the medical treatment of
hernia, hydrocele, scrotal tumour, etc. (Vriddhi),
diseases of the genital organ (Upa.da.mS^a.) and
elephantiasis (^lipada). i.

In the six types of Vriddhi other than the one
known as the Antra-Vriddhi (Hernia), riding on horse
back, etc., excessive physical labour, fastings, sitting in an
unnatural position, constant walking, voluntary restraint
of any natural urging (for stool and urine, etc.), sexual
intercourse and eating of food difficult of digestion
should be avoided. 2.

Treatment of Vd^taja Vriddhi In

the V^taja type of Vriddhi, the patient should be first
soothed (Snigdha) with the application of Traivrita
Ghrita (vide, Chap. V. Chikitsita Sthdna), He should then
be duly fomented and subjected to a proper course of
purgatives. As an alternative, he should be made to
drink the expressed oil of the Kos*dmra, Tilvaka, or
Eranda (castor) oil (as a purgative) with milk for a month.
A decoction of the Vdyu subduing f drugs mixed with
the powders of the same drugs should then be employed
by an experienced physician at a proper time * in
the manner of a Niruha Vasti. The patient should
then be made to take a meal (of boiled rice' along with
meat soup ; and oil cooked with Yaskti madhu should be
applied (in the manner of an Anuvdsana measure).

^ After a period of one week from the time of the application of
purgatives and in case the patient is strong enough to undergo the
Niruha Vasti measure.

440 the SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. tch»p. XIX/

' \ I

Applications of Sneha (oil, etc.), poultices (Upandha),
and plasters (Pradeha) of the VAyu-subduing drugs should
be applied to the affected part If the tumour (Vriddhi)
begins to suppurate, it should be made to do so
fully. It should be then opened with ^n incision
avoiding the median line (Sevani) of the perineum
and the proper purifying (i.e., antiseptic and healing)
measures should be resorted to in the usual way
laid down (in the treatment of Dvi-vrana*). 3.

Treatment of Pittaja Vriddhi A

case of the non-suppurated stage of Pittaja Vriddhi
may be beneficially treated with the remedies laid
down in connection with a case of the same type of
glandular swelling (Pittaja Granthi). In the case of
it being suppurated, the surgeon should open it with
a knife and purify it with the application of honey
and clarified butter. The incidental ulcer should then be
healed up with oils and pastes of healing virtues. 4.

Treatment Of Raktaja Vriddhi In a

case of Raktaja Vriddhi (originated through the vitia-
ted condition of the blood), the (vitiated) blood should
be drawn out by the application of leeches. As an
alternative, purgatives should be administered through
the medium of honey and sugar Remedial measures
described in connection with the Pittaja type of the
disease should be employed both in the suppurated
and the non-suppurated stages (of this type). 5.

Treatment of Kaphaja Vriddhi In
a case of the Kaphaja type of the disease, poultices
with the heat-making f drugs (i.e, Vachidi, Pippdlyadi

* According to Gayad^sa, the measures to be adopted should be those
laid down in the Mis'raka chapter (Chap. XXV).

t Some lay that the heat- producing drugs are these comprised in the
Aja-gandh^di group mentioned in the MisVaka chapter, Sutra Sthioam*

XIX. 1 CHIKITSA STHANAW. 44I

"and Mushkakddi groups, etc.) pasted with cow*s wm
should be applied, The patient should be made to
drink a potion consisting of the decoction of Ddru^
Haridrd mixed with the urine of a cow, and all the
remedial ^•measures with the exclusion of VimWpana
(resolution by pressure) laid down under the treatment
of the Kaphaja Granthi should be employed. The
tumour should be opened (with a knife) when suppurated
and the oil cooked with fdti, Arushkara, Amkota and
Sapta-parna should be used for the purification
(disinfection) of the incidental ulcer. 6.

Treatment of Medoja Vriddhi In

a case of the Medoja (fat-originated) type of the disease,
the affected part should be (lightly) fomented, * and
plasters composed of drugs (of the roots) of the Surasddi
group or of the S' iro-vircchana group (Ch. XXXIX.
Sutra SthAna) pasted with the urine of a cow should be
applied to it in a lukewarm state. The inflamed and
swollen scrotal tumour, (lightly) fomented as before,
should be tightened round with a piece of cloth. Then
having encouraged the patient, the surgeon should open
the tumour with a Vriddhipatra (knife) carefully avoid-
ing the two testes (lying within the scrotal sac) and the
median line of the perineum (Sevani). Then having
carefully removed all morbid prodilcts (Medas) from its
inside, Saindhava and sulphate of iron should be applied
to the incised part, and the scrotum should be carefully
bandaged (in the manner of a GophanA bandage). After
the proper purification (disinfection) of the ulcer, its
healing should be effected with the application of an oil

* The fomentation should be applied according to S'ivad^s'a, wiih
balls of cow-dung, etc., slightly heated. It should be noted in this
connection that strong fomentations should not, in any case, be applied
to the testes.

56

44Z

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap/ XIX.

cooked with Manahs^ild, Haritdla (yellow oxide of
arsenic), rock-salt, and Bhalldtaka, 7.

Treatment of Wlutraja VriddhI : —

In a case of an enlargement of the scrotun (hydro-
cele) due to the derangement of urine, it shoi^d be first
fomented and then a piece of cloth should be tightened
fount it. A puncture should then be made in the bottom
of the sac with a Vrihimukha instrument, on either side
of the raphe of the perineum (Sevani). A tube open
at both ends should be introduced (into the puncture)
and the accumulated (morbid) fluid should be let out.
The tube should then be taken off* and the scrotum
should be tied up with a bandage of the SthagikA
pattern and the incidental ulcer should be purified and
healed up with appropriate medicinal applications. 8.

Treatmentof Antra-Vriddhl : -A case
of Antra-Vriddhi (hernia when strangulated) extending
down to the scrotal sac (Kosha) should be given up as
irremediable ; but, in the case of its not being so
extended, it should be treated as a case of VAtaja-
Vriddhi. If the colon be found to have descended down
to inguinal region (Vamkshana), it should be cauterized
with a heated crescent-mouthed rod (Arddha-Chandra
S'aldkd) to prevent its descending down into the scrotal
sac, A case of hernia that, in spite of all these pre-
cautions, descends down into the scrotal sac (Kosha),
should be given up as irremediable. The first finger of
the hand opposite * the affected part [Le,, the affected
testes) should be incised at its middle and cauterized.

* Incision and caiiterizition should be performed in the thumb of
the tight hand, if the left testis is afTccted, and in case the affection is in
the right testis, incision and cauterization should be mi^de in the thut^b
of the left han4r

Chap. ±1X.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 44^

In cases of hernia (Antra-Vriddhi) of the Vlltaja'
and of the Kaphaja type the affected part should
be carefully cauterized in the above manner ; but in
these two cases, the SnAyu (ligaments) should be cut
off in ad<fition i^before cauterization). In a case of
Antra-Vriddhi the veins (S'irA) of the temples at the
(upper) end of the ears on the opposite sides of the
affection should be carefully opened avoiding the
Sevani therein. 9-12.

Treatment of Upadams'a ♦ :-ln cases of

the curable type of Upadams'a, Sneha (oleaginous sub-
stances) should be first applied, and the affected part
should be fomented. Then the veins of the penis
should be opened, or leeches should be applied (to the
organ) for the elimination of the contaminated blood t
(according as the affections arc more or less severe). 13.

General Treatments :~The system of the
patient should be cleansed with both emetics and
purgatives in the event of an excessive aggravation
of the Doshas inasmuch as the local pain and swelling
would subside simultaneously with the elimination of
the aggravated Doshas from the system. Medicinal
Vastis (enemas) should be injected (into the rectum) in
the way of a Niruha-Vasti for the elimination of the
aggravated Doshas, where the weakness of the patient
Would prohibit the application of purgatives. 14.

Treatment of V^taja Upadams'a ip

a case of the Vataja type of the disease, drugs* such as,
Propaundarika , Yashtimadhu, Varshdbhu, Kushtha,
Deva-ddru, Sarald, Agum and Rdsnd, should be used
as a plaster (over the affected organ). Similarly

^ See note, Chapter XII., Nid4na Slhdoam.

t Jejjata holds that leeches should be applied in a case of superficial
Upadams^fu

4M

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Ch«p. XIX.

plasters composed of Nickula, castor-seeds, and pul-
verised wheat and barley grains pasted with Sneha
(clarified butter, oil, etc.) should be applied lukewarm to
the seat of the disease, which should also be affused
with a decoction of the above-mentioned d,rugs, vis.,
Prapaundarika, etc. 1 5 ■

Treatment of Pittaja Upadams'a ;-in

a case of the Pittaja type of the disease, a plaster
composed of Gairika, Anjana, Yashti-madhu, S'drivd,
Us'ira, Padmaka, (red) Chandana and Utpala mixed
with a Sneha (clarified butter),* or that composed of
Padma, Mrindla, Sarj'/a, Arjuna, Vetasa, and Yashti-
madhu mixed with clarified butter should be applied to
the affected organ which should be sprinkled with a
solution of milk, clarified butter, sugar, sugar- cane juice
and honey, or with a cold decoction of the drugs of
Vata, etc. i6.

Treatment of Kaphaja Upadams'a : —

In a case of the Kaphaja type of the disease, a plaster
composed of the barks of S' dla, As'va-karna, Aja-karna
and Dhava pasted with Surii and mixed with oil, should
be applied hot to the affected part As an alternative,
the drugs such as, Haridrd, Ativiskd, Mustd^ Sarald,
Deva-ddru^ Patra, PdthA, and Pattura should be used
for similar purposes and the affected organ should
be affused with a decoction of the drugs of the Su-
rasddi and A'ragvadhddi groups. 17.

The above remedial measures, viz.^ plasters, sprinkl-
ing (Parisheka), blood-letting and Samsodhana (//.,
application of purgatives, emetics^ etc.) as well as those

* According to S'ivnddsa the Sneha to be uied in the plaster should
be clarified butter washed a hundred times.

Chap. XIXO

CHtKiTSA STHANAM.

445

described in the Sutra Sthdnam (and the first Chapter
of the Chikitsita Sthdnam), should be resorted to
in a case of (non suppurated) Upadams'a. The physi-
cian should try his bc'it to arrest the setting in of
suppuration (in a case of Upadamsa) inasmuch as
suppuration in (and consequent putrefaction of) the (local)
veins, ligaments, skin and flesh would lead to the
destruction of the organ (Dhvaja). An incision should
be made as soon as suppuration would set in, and the
pus and other putrid matters being drawn out, the
incised part should be plastered with the paste of
sesamum mixed with honey and clarified butter.
The incidental ulcer should be washed with a decoction *
of the leaves of Karavira, of fdti and A^ragvadha, or of
Vaijayanti and Arka. i8.

The use of a medicinal plaster composed of the fine
powders of Saurdshtra-mrittikd^ Gairika^ Tuttha^
Pushpa-fCdsisa, Saindhava, Rodhra^ Rasdnjana^ Ddru-
Haridrd, Haritdla, Manahs Ud, Harenukd and Eldy
mixed with honey is highly recommended in all cases
of Upadams'a. 19.

A decoction of the tender leaves of JambUy A'tnray
Sumanas, Nimba, S'vetdy and of Kdmboji and the
barks of S^allakiy Vadara^ Vilva, P aids a, Unis' a and
of the Kshiri trees, as well as Tidphald should be used
by the physician for constantly washing the ulcer. Oil
cooked with the preceding decoction, with the Kalkas of
Goji^ Vidanga and Yashti-madhUy as well as with the
different spices (Elidi group) should be used as the best
remedy for the purpose of the healing up (Ropana) of

* According to Chakradatta the five kinds of leaves should be
separatdy used in the preparations of the decoctions for waahing.

t Miushaparni according to Gayad4sa.

44^ THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XIX.

an Upadams'a-ulcer of whatsoever type. The use of a
pulverised compound composed of Svarjikd^ Tuttha,
Kdsisa, S'aileya, Rasdnjana^ and Manahs*ild taken in
equal parts arrests the extension of an ulcer and
Visarpa. Cases of Upadams'a and Visarpa readily yield
to the application of a pulverised compound of the
ashes of Gundrd^ Haritdia and Mana/is'zld, An
(external) application of Bhrim^ardja^ Jriphald and
Danti mixed with the powders of copper and iron,
destroys Upadams'a just as the thunderbolt of Indra
(completely) destroys a tree. 20 .

Treatment of Tridoshaja and Rak-
taja Upadams'a : —The medical treatment of the
two kinds of Upadams'a due to the concerted action of
the three Doshas as well as that due to the vitiated blood
(R^ktaja) should be taken in hand without holding out
any definite hope of recovery. The above-mentioned
medicines specific to the different Doshas should be
combinedly applied in these cases in consideration of
the nature and intensity of the Doshas specifically involv-
ed in them. . Now hear me discourse on the special
treatment of Tridoshaja Upadams'a, It should be the
same as in the case of a malignant ulcer (Dushta-Vrana).
The putrid portion of the male organ should be cut off
and the remaining portion should be fully cauterized (in
the incised part) with a Jambvoshtha instrument, made
red-hot in fire. Honey, and clarified butter should then
be applied to the cauterized part, and medicinal plasters
and oils possessed of healing properties should be
applied to the incidental ulcer when it would be
cleansed (disinfected). 21-22.

Treatment of dlipada:-! n a case of
Elephantiasis (Slipada) due to the action of the deranged
and aggravated Vsiyu, the vein (^ird) at a distance

Chap. XIX, ]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

447

of four fingers above the instep (Gulpha) should be
opened after an application of Sneha and Sveda ^
to the patient. Vastis should be employed when
the patient has been (soothed and) restored to his
former c(jfldition (with appropriate and nutritious diet,
etc.V He should be made to take coniinuously for a
month, a potion consisting of castor-oil mixed with
(an adequate quantity of cow’s) urine The patient
should take rice as his diet with milk duly cooked with
S2inthi The use of the Traivrita Ghrita as well as
cauterization of the affected part with fire is also recom-
mended in such a case. 23

Treatment of Pittaja ^lipacla:-in a

case of Pittaja type of Elephantiasis, the vein
below the instep (Gulpha) should be opened. Medicinal
remedies mentioned in connection with the treatment
of the Pittaja type of tumours (Arvuda) and of Erysi-
pelas (Visarpa) as well as other Pitta-subduing remedies
and measures should be employedf. 24.

Treatment of Kaphaja ^lipacla:-in

a case of the Kaphaja type of elephantiasis the principal
vein (Sir/i) of the first toe should be opened by an
experienced surgeon and the patient should be made
to take at intervals the decoction (of the Kapha-sub-
duing drugs) with honey. As an^alternative, the patient
should be advised to take the powders (Kalka) of Abhayd
mixed with any officinal kind of urine. The affected
locality should be constantly plastered with the paste

• Chakradalta reads in place of g'-

meaning thereby that such Sveda and Upandha should be applied
before the incision of the vein. Gayad^sa also supports this reading as
is evident from Dallana^s commentary, — Ed.

t The panicle in the text shows that Kapha-subduing remedies

ipeasures should also be used in all these cases^

448

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA,

[Cbap. XIX.

of Katukuy Amritdy S^unthi^ Vidangay Deva-ddru and
Chitrakay or with Chitraka and Deva-ddru. An oil
cooked with Vidangay Marichay Arka, S'unihiy Chitrakay
Deva-ddru, Elakd and all the five officinal kinds of salt
should be given him as a potion. Cooked tjarley is
specially recommended as diet in the present case. 25.

As an alternative, the patient should be made to
drink a potion of mustard oil* or of the expressed juice
of the leaves of Puti-Karanja according to his capacity
for the cure of Slipada. In the same wayf the juice of
Putranjivaka should be prescribed by a physician
after a due consideration as to the strength of the
patient and of the time. The same juice (/>., of Putran-
jivaka) should be taken along with the juice of the
bulbs of Kechuka with PAkima (vit) salt. 26.

The Alkaline Remedies An alkali

should be prepared from the ashes of Kdkddaniy Kdka-
janghdy Vrihatiy Kantakdrikd^ Kadamba-pushpay Mandd-
ri, Lambd Sukanasd in the usual way by filtering them
(twenty one times) after dissolving them in cow’s urine.
The expressed juice of Kdkodumbarikd, Sukanasd and
the decoction of Madana fruit should be mixed with
the above alkaline preparation ^and duly cooked in the
manner of Kshdra-pdka). Diseases, such as Slipada

• Chakradatta reads in place of

tn” which shows that the expressed juice of Puti-Karanja leaves should
be taken with mustard oil ani not separately. Dallana evidently supports
this in his commentary. That Chakradatta’s reading is the correct one is
also evident from the next copulet which says that the expressed juice of
Putranjivaka should be taken in the preceding manner. This “preceding
manner’* evidently means “with mustard oil”, and unless' we accept
Chakradatta’s reading, the expression would be unmeaning.— Ed.

t It evidently means that the expressed juice of Putranjivaka should
be ti^ken with mustard oil— see last note,— EJd.

Chap. XIX.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

449

(Elephantiasis), Apachi (ScrofuIa\ Gala-ganda ^Goitre),
Grahani (chronic diarrhoea), aversion to food and the
affections of all kinds oi poison, yield to the internal 1186
of this alkaline preparation. An oil cooked with the
aforesaid cjrugs, if used as errhines and anointments,
will cure all the foregoing maladies as well as malignant
ulcers (Dushta-vrana). 27.

The ashes of the Dravanti^ Trivrit, Danti, Nili,
S'yatndj Saptald and S'amkhini should be filtered in the
way of preparing alkalies after dissolving them in cow^s
urine. The solutioh, thus prepared, should be boiled
with a decoction of Triphala. Taken internally it
tends to act in the lower part of the body {ie ,
it moves the bowels). This medicine produces the same
effect as the preceding ones. 28.

Thus ends the nineteenth Chapter of the Chikitsita Sthinam in the
Sus'futa Samhitd which deiU with the medical treatment of Vriddhi,
Upadams'a and SMipada.

CHAPTER XX.

Now we shall discourse on the medical treatment of
the minor ailments or diseases (Kshudra-rogal i.

Treatment of Aja-gal I i ka : -Leeches
should be applied to the affected part in a case of non-
suppurated Aja-gallika[ ; it should be subsequently
plastered with the alkalies (Kshara) of oyster-shells,
S*rughni (Svaijika), and of Yava ; as an alternative,
it should be plastered with the paste compound (Kalka)
o( Sydmi, Ldngalaki and Pdthd, When suppurated it
should bs treated in the manner of an ulcer (Vrana). 2.
Treatment of Yava-prakhya, etc.

Fomentation (Sveda) should be the first remedy to be
resorted to in cases of Antratlaji, Tava-prakhyai,
Panasi, Kachchhapi and Pishstna-gardabha (in their
non-suppurated stages). They should then be plastered
with the pastes (Kalka) of Manahs'ild, Haritdla,
Kushtha and Deva-ddru. An incision should be made
as soon as suppuration would set in ; and the treatment
should b; similar to that of an ulcer. 3-4.

Treatment of Vivrltcf, etc. :-The

remedies mentioned in connection with the treatment
of the Pittaja type of Erysipelas (Visarpa) should
b2 employed in cases of Vivritfii, Indra-vriddhi,
Gardabhi. Jsfla-gardabha, Irivelli, Kaksha^^ Gandha-
nstmili and Visphotaka. Clarified butter cooked with

* Gayaddsa explains that a non-suppurated Aja-galllkSk should
be first plastered with Yava-kshdra, oyster-shells and Saurdshtri. Leeches
should be next applied to it.

t Chaktadatt* reads &c.” in place of

jppjpf &c.”, evidently, after the conomentary of Gayadisa

Chap. XX. Jf • CHIKITSA STHANAM. 451

the drugs of the Madhura (Kikolyddi) group should
be applied in healing up the ulcers in the suppujated
stages. 5 .

Treatment of Chipya, etc in a case
of Chipyar, the affected part should be first washed*
with hot water and (the incarcerated pus, etc.)
drained (Visrdva) by cutting it away (with a knife).
Then after anointing it with (the oil known as) the
Chakra-taila it should be dusted over with the
powders of Sarja (resin) and duly bandaged. If
this process of treatment fail, the affected part should'
be cauterised with fire and an oil cooked with (a
decoction of) the drugs of the Madhura (Kdkolyddi)
group should be applied to heal (the incidental ulcer).
The same course of treatment should also be adopted
in a case of Ku-nakha (bad nail). 6-7.

Treatment of VidsCriksC In a ca e of
Vidiriki, the affected part should be first anointed
(with oleaginous substances) and then fomented. It
should then be rubbed (with the fingers) ; and a plaster
composed of Naga-Vrittika, Varshdbhu and Vilva-
roots, well pasted together, should be applied to it.
Purifying and disinfecting (Sams'odhana) remedies
should b2 employed as soon as the affected part would
be found to have been changed into the state of an
ulcer (Vrana), and it should then b^ healed up with the
application of an oil cooked with the decoction of (the
drugs of the Kaskdya (Nyagrodhadi) and Madhura
(KdkolyAdi) groups In the non suppurated stage of
Viddrikd, the vitiated blood therein should be let out
by means of PrachchhAna (scarification), or by applying
leeches. The affected part should then be plastered with

♦Vrindaand Chakradatla prescribe fomentation (Sveda), and not
wa9l:jlng, \yith bot water and they 4o not prescribe secretion (VisrAva).

452 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. CCl»*P* XX-

the roots of the Aja-kama and of the Paldsa pasted
together. A case of fully suppurated Vids^rikit should
be lanced and plastered with a paste compound of Patola,
Pichumarda and sesamum, mixed with clarified butter
and should then be duly bandaged. The incidental ulcer
should then be washed with a decoction (of the barks,
of the Kshiri trees and Khadira. Healing remedies
should be applied after it has been properly purified
(disinfected) 8-9.

Treatment of ^arkarsCrvuda, etc.:— A

case of Sarkars^rvuda should be treated like that of
an Arvuda (tumour) of the fat-origined type. Cases of
Kachchhu, Vicharchikst and Pskmst should be treated
in the manner of a Kushtha. A medicinal plaster
composed of Siktha (wax), S'atdhvd and white
mustard seeds, or of Vachd, Ddru-haridrd and mus-
tard seeds, pasted together, should be applied (to the
seat of the disease). As an alternative, Naktamdla
(Karanja) oil, or Sdra-taila ^ boiled with (the drugs cf)
the Katuka (Pippalyddi) group should be applied for
anointing purposes. lo-ii.

Treatment of P^Cda-d^Cri In a case of
Fltda-ds^rii the prescribed vein should be opened, and
the affected part should be treated with fomentations
and unguents, t The affected part should be plastered
with (an ointment composed of) wax, lard, marrow,
powder of Sarja (resin), t clarified butter, Yava-Kshdra
and Gairika. I 2 .

* By “Sdra-taila” is meant the oil pressed from the Sira (essential
parts) of S'ims'ap^, Aguru, Sarala, Deva-d^ru and such other trecf. Some,
however, read “Sarala-laila” in place of “S^ra-taila.’*— Dallana.

t According to Dallana and S'ivaddsa, fomentations and unguents
should be 6rst applied, and the vein should be next opened.

t Chakradttta also prescribes a similar remedy, but there he ’ does
not read “Sarja and *• Gairika.— Ed,

Chtp. XX.]

CHIKITSA STHANaM.

453

Treatment of Alasa and Kadara in

a case of Alasa, the legs should be sprinkled with Arandla
(a kind of KAnjika) ; and a plaster composed of sesamum,
Nimba leaves, sulphate of iron {Kdsisa), Haritdla and
Saindhavfi, or of Haritaki pasted with the decoction
of LdksJid (LdkshA-rasa) * should be applied to the
affected parts. }31ood-letting should also be resorted to.
As an alternative, mustard oil boiled with the expressed
juice of Kantakdri should be applied to them or the
affected localities should be rubbed or chafed (Piati-
sirana) with a pulverised compound of sulphate of iron
(Kdsisa), Gorochand and Manah-s' ild. In a case of
Kadara, the seat of the disease should be scraped off
(with the aid of a knife) and cauterised with (the
application of) heated oil.-j*

Treatment of Indra-lupta In a case
of Indra-lupta (baldness or Alopecia), the bald part
or seat should be anointed and fomented, and then
bleeding (by venesection) should be resorted to, after
which a plaster composed of Mcmah-s ild, Kdsisd, Tuttha
and Markka^ or of Kutannatd and Deva-ddy'U pasted
together, should be applied to it. As an alternative, it
should be deeply scraped and constantly kept covered
with a paste of 6 //;//rf-seeds. As an alternative,
Kasstyana medicines should be administered for its
cure. An oil cooked with Mdlati, Karavira, Chitraka
and Naktamdla is highly efficacious in curing a case of
Alopecia, if used as an unguent. 15 .

Treatment of Arumshikfif : -Blood-let-

* Chakrap^ni reads in place of

Sivaddsa explains as * ”~Ed,

t Chakcadatta prescribes cauterisation with fire a^ well, io such %
9ase,— Ed,

454

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHlTA.

[Chap. XX.

ting# from the affected part should be first resorted to in
a case of Arumshikat ; and it should then be affused

i

with the decoction of Nhnba. Medicinal plasters pre-
pared with the R isa (liquid) pressed from horse-dung,
mixed with Saindhava, should be applied to it. As an
alternative, it should be plastered with the paste com-
pound (Kalka) of Hariidla, Haridrd. Nintba and Patola,
or with that of Yasthi-madhu^ Nilotpala, Eranda^ and
Mdrkava, 1 6.

Treatment Of D^runaka, etc.:— Anoint-
ment and fomentation of the diseased patches are the (pre-
liminary) remedies in a case of Ds(riinaka> after which
bleeding should be effected by opening the vein in the
forehead. Remedial measures such as^ Avapida-Sirovasti
and Abhyanga (anointment) should be employed as
well ; and the affected parts should be washed with the
alkaline solution of burnt Kodrava weeds. Measures
for arresting the premature greyness of hair (Palita)
will be described later on (in the Mis’raka Chapter
XXV). Curative plasters and remedies, etc , mentioned
in connection with the treatment of Kushtha should be
employed in cases of Masuriksi; or those, laid down
under the treatment of Erysipelas (Visarpa) originated
through the concerted action of the deranged Pitta and
Kapha should as well be used. 17-19.

Treatment of Jatu-mani, etc. The
seats of affection should be scraped (with a knife)
and gradually and judiciously cauterisedf by
applying an alkali or fire in cases of Jatu
mani (congenital moles), Mas'aka and Tila-ksUaka

* According lo Chakradaila blood-letting should be resorted to in
such cases only by means of venesection, or with leeches.

t The cauterisation should be effected with an alkuli, when the
4iseaBe is superficial and with fire when it is deep«seated,

Chap. XX.}

CHIKITSA STHANAM,

45 S

(freckles). An opening of the local veins in the
temporal region, etc., should be effected in cases of
Nyachchha, Vyanga and Niliki, in accordance with the
prescribed rules. The affected parts should be rubbed
(with Sanludra-phena, etc.) and plastered with the barks
of Kshiri trees, pasted with milk ;or with Vald, Ati-vald^
Yashtintadhu and Rajani, pasted together. As an
alternative, plasters composed of Payasyd, Agum and
Kdliya pasted together with Gairika, or of a tooth
of a boar pasted with clarified butter and honey, or of
Kapittha and Rdjddana pasted together, may also be
used with benefit 20 21.

Treatment of Yuv£(na-Pidak£(, etc:.—

Emetics are specially efficacious in cases of Ynvtl^Iia-
pidakSb ( pimples) which disfigure the face in youth.
The application of medicinal plasters composed of
Vachd, Lodhra, Saindhava and (white mustard seeds
or of Kustumburu, Vachd, Lodhra and Kushtha
pasted together is also I'ecommcnded. In a case
of Padmini-Eantaka, a decoction of Nimha bark
should be given as an emetic, and the patient should
be made to drink a potion of clarified butter cooked
with a decoction of Nimba and mixed with
honey. A decoction * of Nimba and Aragvadha
should be used for chafing (Ut^^dana) the diseased
locality. 22-23.

Treatment of ParIvartiksC, etc.:— in a

case of FarivartiksI U'etroflexion of the prepuce) the
glans penis should be rubbed with clarified butter and
duly fomented, and ^Ivana and such other Viyu-
subduing plasters (Upandha) should be applied for three

* Ch.krapiini prescribes the powders in place of the decoction

(«I^) of Nimba and Aragvadha. He also reads in place

l^ut here they mean (he same thing.— Ed.

456 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. 30.

or five days. Then having lubricated the part (With
jGrhrita), the g‘lam penis should be gently pressed and
the prepuce should be smoothly drawn over the glans
penis^ so as to cover it entirely within its fold. The pre-
puce, being so drawn, should be fomented wfth warm
poultices. Vdyu-subduing Vastis (Clysters) should be
employed and emollient diet should be prescribed
(during the course of the treatment/. A case of Ava<
psftiksi should be similarly treated, after a due considera-
tion of the nature and intensity of the Doshas involved
in the case. 24-25

Treatment of Niruddha-Prakas'a

In a case of Niruddha-Prakasa (constriction or stricture
of the urethra , a tube (open at both ends) made of iron,
wood, or shellac should be lubricated with clarified butter
and gently introduced into the urethra. The marrow
or lard of a boar, or of a porpoise, or the Chakra-taila,
mixed with Vdyu-subduing drugs should be sprinkled
over the affected part. Thicker and thicker tubes
should be duly introduced into the urethra every
third day. The passage should be made to dilate in the
aforesaid manner, and emollient food should be given
to the patient. As an alternative, an incision should
be made ^into the lower part of the penis), avoiding the
sevani (raphe of the perineum\ and it should be treated
as an incidental ulcer ^Sadyo-vrana\ 26.

Treatment of Sanniruddha-Guda,
etc. Cases of Sauniruddha-Quda (stricture of
the anus), Valmika and Agni-Rohini should be duly
treated with regard to the nature and intensity (of the
Doshas engendering the disease , but without holding out
any definite hope of recovery. The treatment of a case
of Agni-RoMni should be like that of Visarpa (Erysi-
pelas), while the remedial measures, mentioned in connee-

Cbap^ kx.]

CHIKITSA STHANAlkT.

457 '

tion with Niruddha-prakas'a, should be employed in a
case of Sanniruddha-Guda. 27.

Treatment of Valmika : -The diseased
patches should be scraped off in a case of Valmika and
cauterisedfcwith fire or with an alkali ; while the purifica-
tion and healing up (of the incidental ulcer; should
be effected as in the treatment of an Arvuda
(tumour. A case of Valmika appearing in any part of
the body other than a Marma, and not of a considerable
growth should be duly treated with venesection after the
application of Samsodhana measures (purgative, emetic,
etc.;. The affected part should be plastered (Pralepa)
with a medicinal compound composed of the roots of
{Vana-) Kulattha, Arevata, Danti and S^ydmd^ pasted
together with Guduchi^ reck salt, Palala (pastes of sesa-
mum) and powdered barley. It should be poulticed
(Upaniha) with the same compound, well mixed with
clarified butter and made lukewarm (in case suppu-
ration be desired). When found to be fully suppu-
rated, the course of the pus- channels should be
ascertained by an experienced surgeon. The ulcer should
then be opened (with a knife) and cauterised, and after
being fully purified of the putrid flesh ^^in its cavity),
it should be again cauterised with an alkali. Healing
(Ropana) remedies should be applied to it after it
has been found to be thoroughly cleansed Nimba-
oil cooked with Suntanas fJSti leaves, Granthi, Bhalld^
takay Manahs^ildy Kdldnusdri, small E/dy A guru and
red Chandana should be applied with advantage
to heal up the v incidental ulcer in a case of) Valmika,
A patient suffering from an attack of Valmika appearing
either on his hands or feet and attended with swell-
ing and a large number of cavities should be aban-
doned by a wise physician. 28.

58

45^ THE SUSHRUTA SAmHITA. [Chap. kx.

Treatment of Ahi-putansT, etc.: — in

the treatment of an infant laid up with an attack of
Ahi putanit the breast-milk of its mother or nurse should
be first purified. Cases of Ahi-putand yield to the use of
a potion of clarified butter, cooked with Triphald^Rasdji-
/ana and Patola leaves, and a decoction of Triphald,
Kola and Khadira should be used (as a wash) to heal
the ulcer. Plasters composed of sulphate of iron, Goro-
chand, sulphate of copper {Tuttha), Haritdia and Rasdn-
/ana, pasted together \vith K^injika, or of Vadari bark
and rock-salt, should be applied (to the diseased locality .
It should be dusted as well with the pulv^erised com-
pound of a burnt earthen pot and sulphate of copper.
The preceding measures should be adopted in cases
of Vrishana<Kachchhu as well. 29-30.

Treatment of Guda-Bhramsa : -in a
case of Gada-Bhramsa, the protruded part should be
fomented and lubricated with Sneha.^^ It should then be
gently re-introduced. The region of the anus should
then be bandaged with apiece of hide in the manner of
a Gophand Bandha, with an opening in it (lying imme
diately below the anus), so that it may not in any way
interfere with the emission of Vayii. The affected part
should then be constantly fomented. A quantity of milk,
Makd-pancka-mula and the body (flesh) of a mouse,
bereft of its entrails should be first boiled together (with
water). An oil cooked with the milk thus prepared
(with water) and the Vdyu-subduing drugs should
be administered as drink and unguents. By these
measures the most difficult cases of prolapsus ani would
be cured. 31*32.

* According to S'iva^disa, cow’s fat only should be Used.

Thus ends the twentieth Chapter of the Chikitsita Sthinam in the
dus'ruta Sambit^ which deals with the treatment of minor aiitnents.

CHAPTER XXL

Now shall discourse on the medical treatment of
the Sores fin the penis produced by the Suka, a kind of
poisonous insect (^uka-Rog^a). i.

Treatment of Sarshapip etc. in a

case of the Sarshapi type of the disease, the affected
(ulcerated) part should be scarified and dusted with
the (powdered) drugs of an astringent taste (as de-
scribed in the Misraka chapter), and an oil, cooked with
(the Kalka and decoction of) the same drugs, should be
applied for healing purposes. In a case of the Ashthi-
likflt type of the disease, the skilful physician should
apply leeches to the seat of affection. In case the swelling
does not still subside, it should be removed and treated
as a Kaphaja Granthi (glandular swelling). A Crauthi
type of the disease should be constantly fomented in the
manner of Na^di-Sveda, and should be poulticed with a
lukewarm medicinal compound mixed with a profuse
quantity of Sneha (oil). 2-4.

Treatment of Kumbhlkcf, etc. An
incision should be made into the suppurated seat of
affection in a case of the Kumbhikl( type of the disease,
and the incidental ulcer should be {fiirified (disinfected)
and healed up with the application of the oil, cooked
with Triphald^ Lodkra, Tinduka and Amrdtaka* In
the Alaji type of the disease, the affected part should
be bled by applying leeches to it and should then be
affused with a decoction of the astringent drugs. An

* S'lva-ddsa in his commentary on Chakra* datta quotes this couplet
from Sus'riita, but there he reads place of that is to

say, he says (hat A^mra should be used in place of Amritaka. He
fuiiber adds that the slopes of Amra apd Tipduka fruits should be takep,

4(5o the SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Ch«P- XXI.

oil, cooked with the decoction of the same drugs, should
be used to heal up the (incidental Wlcer, 5-6.

Treatment of Mridifa, etc. !— in the
Mridita type of the disease, the affected part should be
affused with tepid Val{( oil and poulticed^ with a
lukewarm plaster (Upaniha) of the drugs of the Mad-
hura (Kdkolyddi) group, pasted and mixed with clarified
butter. Leeches should be speedily applied to the condyl-
omatous growths (Pidakd) in a case of Sammndha-
Pidakd. In cases of suppuration, they should be opened
and plastered with honey and clarified butter. In a case
of Avamantha. the growths (Pidakd) should be opened,
when fuppurated, and healed up with the application of
an oil, cooked with Dhava, As'va-Karna, Pattanga^
S*allaki and Tinduka. 7~9

Treatment of Push kariksC, etc. in a

case of Pasllk vrikd, all kinds of cooling measures should
be applied and the vitiated blood should be extracted
by applying leeches. The affected part should be
subsequently affused with clarified butter. In a
case of the Sparila-hdai type of the disease, blood
should be let out and plasters (Pradeha) of Madhura
(Kikolyidi) drugs should be applied. The affected part
should be affused with a very cold compound of milk,
clarified butter and the expressed juice of sugar cane.
In the type of the disease known as Uttamsf, the
Fidakis (condylomatous growths) should be removed
with the help of a Vadisa instrument, and powders of
astringent drugs with honey should be applied to the
seat of affection. 10—12.

Treatment Of ^ata-ponaka, etc.:— in

a case of the ^ata-ponaka type of the disease, the affect-
ed part should be scarified and the measures laid down
jq connectioq with Rqsa-Kriyd shoul(^ be resortecj to,

Ch»p. XXL]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

461

After this, an oil, cooked with the Prithak-pamyddi
drugs* should be likewise applied to the seat of the
disease.' The medWnal treatment, in a case of Tvak-
pstka, should be the same as described in connection
with Firysipelas (Visarpa), The remedial measures,
laid down under the head of Rakta-vidradhi, should be
employed in a case of the ^Dnitfiirvuda type of the
disease. 13 -14.

General Treatment Remedies such as
medicinal decoctions, pastes (Kalka\ medicated clarified
butter, powders, Rasa-Kriyi, etc., and the measures for
purifying and healing (incidental sores or ulcers\ should
be employed with due consideration to the nature
and intensity of the aggravated Doshas involved in the
case. The application of specifically prepared medicated
clarified butter, purgatives, blood-letting and light
diet should be similarl}" prescribed. •}“ 15.

Prognosis : -The medical treatment of the
patient affected with any of the following types of the
disease, viz., Arvuda, Mimsa-pAka, Vidradhi and Tila-
KAlaka should be undertaken without holding out any
definite prospect of recovery. t6.

Thus ends the twenty-first Chapter of the Chikitsita Sth^nam in the
Suslruta Samhitd which deals with the treatment of S'uka-Roga.

f

* For Rasa-kriyd and the Prithak-parnyddi drugs, see Chapter
XXXVI— Sutra-sthdna.

t This seems to be the general treatment of all the types of S nka-
Eoga.

CHAPTER XXII.

Now we shall discourse on the medical treatment
of the affections of the mouth (Mukha-RO^a.). i.

Treatment Of Vsitaja Oshtha-kopa:~

In a case of inflammation of the lips (Oshtha-Eopa)
due to the action of the deranged Vatyu, the affected
part should be rubbed with (an ointment composed of)
the four kinds of lardacious (Sneha) substances mixed
with wax. Fomentations in the manner of Na^di-Sveda
should also be resorted to by an intelligent physician
Applications of the Sailvana poultices and those of the
medicated oils, possessed of the virtue of subduing the
deranged Vciyu, as crrhincs and Mastikya (Siro-vasti)
are also recommended. The lips should be treated
with the powder composed of S'? i veshiaka,* Sarfa rasa^
Sura^ddru, Guggulu and Yashti^inadJiu, 2-4.

Treatment of Pittaja Oshtha-kopa,

etC>: - In a case of Oshtha-kopa of traumatic origin,
(Abhighsitaja) or one due to the deranged action of the
blood (Raktaja) or of the Pitta, bleeding of the affect-
ed part should be effected by the application of leeches
and all the measures and remedies (Samsodhana and
Samsamana) mentioned in connection with the treatment
of the Pitta-Vidradhi should be likewise employed. 5.

Treatment of Kaphaja Oshthakopa :

— The Use of medicated Siro-virechana(errhines\ fumiga-
tions, (Vairechanika Dhuma), fomentation and (Sveda)
Kavala (gurgles), prepared from the Kapha-subduing
drugs should be recommended after blood-letting in the
Eaphaja type of Oshtha-kopa. The swollen and inflamed
lips should be treated (Prati-sirana) with a compound con-

* y^gbhata reads ** wax, in place of \

Chap. XXIl.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

463

sisting of TrikatUf Sarjikd-kshdra, Yavd-Kshdra and
Vid-lavana i,black-sa!t) * pounded together and made
into a thin paste with the admixture of honey. 6.

Treatment of Medoja Oshtha-kopa :

-In a» case of the fatty type of Oshtha-kopa, the
affected part should be fomented and opened (when
suppurated] ; and should then be purified and
cauterised with fire, A paste compound of Priyangu^
Triphaid, Lodhra and honey should be rubbed over the
affected part (Prati-sarana). These are the remedies for
the curable types of Oshtha-kopa. 7-8.

Treatment of the Diseases of Danta

-Mula : — Now we shall describe the treat-
ment of the affection of the roots of the teeth i^Gingi-
vitis). In a case of the Sita^da type of the disease,
the gums should be first bled and a decoction of
Sarshapa^ Ndgara, Triph ild and Musta f mixed
with Rasdnjana should then be used as gurgles. The
gums should be plastered (Pralepa) with Priyangu^
Musta and Triphald and (clarified butter, cooked with)
the decoction of Triphald, Madhuka, Utpala and
Padmaka should be used as an errhine* In an acute
case of Danta-Fupputaka, the gums should be first bled
and then rubbed (Prati sarana) with the five officinal
kinds of salt and Yava-Kshdra mixed with honey.
The use of errhines (Siro-virechana), medicated snuffs
(Nasya) and demulcent food is recommended. 9-10.

Treatment of Danta-Veshta, etc.

In a case of Danta- Veshta, the swelling should be first
bled and then rubbed with a pulverised compound of
Rodhra, Pattanga, Yashti-madhu and Ldkshd mixed with
a profuse quantity of honey. A decoction of (the bark

* Vrinda and Chakrapdni do not read Vid-lavanp.

t Vrinda and Chakra-datta do not read Musla, nor Rasilnjana^

4^4 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. CC5h«p. XXIL

of) the Kshiri trees, mixed with sugar, honey and clari-
fied butter (as an after-throwi should be used as gurglfe
(Gandusha). Clarified butter, cooked with the drugs
of the Kdkolyddi group with ten times its own weight of
milk, should be used as snuff (Nasya). In a case of
Saushira^ the affected parts, after being properly bled,
should be plastered (Lepa) with Lodhra, Musta and
Rasdnjana, pounded together and mixed with honey.
A decoction of the Kshiri trees should be used as
gurgles (Gandusha), and clarified butter cooked with
the paste-compound of Sdrivd^ UtpaLi, Yashti-madhu,
Sdvara[\^oA\\tz^y Aguru, (red) Chandana and ten times
its own weight of milk should be recommended
as an errhine. 11-12.

Treatment of Pari-dara, etc. In a

case of Pari-dara the treatment should consist of the
remedies described in connection with ^itdda* In a
case of Upakass(as well,* the system of the patient
should be cleansed both ways i^by means of emetics and
purgatives), and his head should be cleansed with ^iro-
virechana. The affected part {in a case of Upa-kusa)
should, in addition, be bled (by rubbing it over) with the
leaves of the Kdkodumbarikd, or of the Goji, or with
the application of a medicinal compound composed of
the five officinal kinds of salt and Trikatu mixed with
honey. Tepid watery solutions^ of Pippali, (white)
Sarshapa, Ndgara, and Nichula fruits should also be
used as gurgles (Kavala). The use of clarified butter
cooked with the drugs of the Madkura (Kdkolyddi)

♦ This shows that cleansing the system by means of emetics and
porgativ^s, as well as with S'ifo-virechana should be resorted to in a case
of Pari«dara as well.

t The solution may be prepared with the drugs taken together or
separately.

Ghftp. XXII.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 465

,1

group ^as errhine (Nasya) and gurgle (Kavala) is also
recommended. 1 3-14.

Treatment of Danta-Vaidarbha, etc.s

—In a case of Daiita'Vaidarbha> the regions about
the rootj^ of the teeth should be cleansed by open-
ing them with a (MandaUgra) instrument and sub-
sequently treated with alkaline applications. Cooling
measures should also be resorted to i^during the treatment
of this disease). In a case of Adhika-danta, the
additional tooth should be uprooted and removed ;
then (in order to arrest the bleeding, if any), the part
should be cauterised with fire, and then an experienced
physician should apply the remedies mentioned under
the head of worm-eaten teeth (Krimi-dantaka). 15-16
Treatment of Adhi-maimsa In a case
of Adhi-ms^msa, the additional fleshy growth about
the roots of a tooth should be removed (with
a knife) and treated with a compound of Vackd,
Tejovati^ Pdthd, Sarjikd and Yava-kshdra, pasted
together with honey. Powdered Pippali^ mixed with
honey, should be used as a gurgle (Kavala); and a decoc-
tion of Patolay Triphald and Nimba for washing the
affected part. Errhines (Siro-virechana) and inhalation
of Vairechana smoke, (that lead to the secretion of
mucus from the head), would likejwise prove efficacious
in such cases. 17.

Treatment of Danta-NsCdi : — In a case of
Danta-Nadi, the treatment of Nddi (Sinus) about the
teeth is identical with that of sinus in general. The
specific remedial measure, however, is that the gum of
the affected tooth should be incised, and the tooth should
be extracted, if it be not in the upper jaw. The affected
part should then be purified and cauterised with an
alkali or fire. Hence in a case of Sinus (Nddi),

59

a com-

466

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. KXll.

plete extraction of any fragment of the broken bone,
or tooth, is essentially necessary (for its cure), inas-
much as, if left uiiextracted, it may cause the sinus to
affect (run below) the jaw-bone. If the affected tooth
be in the upper jaw, and if it be found to be firm and
steady at its roots, though attended with tooth-ache,*
it should not be extracted, inasmuch as it might
produce an excessive haemorrhage from its roots,
and usher in blindness, facial paralysis, or other
dangerous affections (such as convulsion, etc.) due
to the excessive loss of blood. Hence in the case
of a looseness of such a tooth in the upper jaw, it should
not be extracted. A decoction f of Jdti^ Madana,
Svddu-Kantaka and Khadira should be used to wash
the mouth. An oil cooked witti Jdti, Madana.
Katuka, Svddu-Kantaka, Yashti-madhu, Rodhra,
Manjishthd and Khadira should be used to cleanse and
heal a sinus invading the roots of a tooth. The re-
medial measures to be employed in the diseases affecting
the roots of the teeth have thus been described above.

* Both Vrinda and Chakradatta quote this passage from the text, but
both of them read (excessive bleeding takes place) in

place of (i^ found to be firm and steady at its roots,

though attended with tooth ache). S'rUkantha Datta, again, in his com-
mentary quotes another reading (*f it in its

sockets and be extracted with its roots). In our humble opinion, however,
the current reading of the text seems to be the correct one, inasmuch as
both the readings quoted above seem to be redundant in the presence of the

two following sentences ” Ed.

t According to S'rikantba and S'ivaddsa, it appears that the applica-
tion of this decoction as a wash is not to be found in all editions of the
Sus'ruta Samhit^, but they say that it is found only in Jejjat^'s reading.
Jejjatd’s reading and explanation seem to be correct firtvc been
followed by us in the translation.-* Ed*

Chap. XXn.]

CHIKITSA STHANaM.

467

We shall now proceed to describe the medicinal remedies
to be employed in the diseases which confine them-
selves exclusively to the teeth. 18-21.

Treatment of the diseases of Tooth
proper A case of Danta-harsha yields to the
use of any lukewarm Sneha ,* or the Traivrita-ghrita
(mentioned in Chapter V), or of the decoction of the
VAyu-subduing drugs as gurgles (Kavala). An applica-
tion of Snaihika Dhama (emulsive fumes) and the use
of snuff (Nasya), emulsive articles of food, meat soups,
gruel prepared with meat (Rasa-YavAgu), milk, milk-
cream, clarified butter, S'iro-vasti and the other VAyu-
subduing measures generally prove efficacious. 22.

In a case of Dailta Sarkarfii (Tartar-calcareous
deposits on the teeth), the deposit should be removed
in such a way as not to hurt the roots of the tooth, after
which the part should be dusted (Prati-sArana) with
powdered Ldkshd with honey. All the remedies men-
tioned in connection with the treatment of Danta-
harsha may as well be employed in this disease. 23.

Treatment of Kap^liksf, etc. These

remedies are also efficacious in a case of Kapsfliki
(caries of the tooth) which is extremely hard to cure.
In a case of Krimi-Banta (worm-eaten tooth) found to
be firm and unloosed (in its socket), the affected tooth
should be fomented, and the accumulation (f. the pus,
blood, etc.) should be removed. It should then be treated
with some VAyu-subduing errhines of the Ava-pida
form and with emollient gurgles (Gandusha), as well as
with plasters, prepared with Varshdbhu and the drugs
of the Bhadra-Ddrvddi group and with a diet of
emulsive articles of food. In the case, however, where

* All the fouf kinds of Sneha should be used separately or
combinedly*

46 ^ THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. fChap. XXlI.

the tooth is found to be loose (in the socket", the
loose tooth should be extracted, and the cavity
cauterised with fire or an alkali (for the purpose
of arresting the bleeding). An oil cooked with the
pastes (Kalka) of Viddri, Yashti-madhu, S'Hngdtaka,
and Kas'eruka and with ten times its own weight of
milk should be administered as an errhine (in such
cases). The course of treatment in a case of Hanu-
moksha is the same as in one of facial paralysis. 24-27.

A person suffering from any affection of the teeth
should refrain from taking acid fruits, cold water, dr)^
(Ruksha) food, excessively hard articles of food and
from brushing his teeth (with a twig). The treatment
of the curable types of tooth-diseases has betn thus
described above, we shall now (proceed to) describe the
treatment of the curable types of tongue-diseases. 2(S 29.

Treatment of Tongue-diseases In

the Vitaja type of Jihvi-kantaka (Papilla), the
treatment should be the same as in the case of
Vdtaja Oshtha-kopa. In the Fittaja type (of Jihvd
kantaka), the vitiated blood should be made to secrete
from the affected organ by rubbing it with any article of
rough surface (such as the leaves of dkhotaka^ etc.), and
the drugs of the Madhura (Kdkolyddi) group should be
used for gurgles and errhines, as well as for being rubbed
over (Prati-sdrana) the affected organ. In the Kaphaja
type (of Jihvd-kantaka), the organ should be bled by
scarifying it (with a Mandala patra and such other
instrument) ; it should then be rubbed with the
powders of the drugs of the Pippalyddi group mixed
with honey. A compound of powdered .white mustard-
seed and Saindhava should be administered as
gurgles (Kavala), and the patient should be made
to take his food with the soup of Patola^ Ntmia,

CHIKITSA STHANAM,

Chap. X^n.]

469

and Vdrtdku mixed with (a liberal quantitjT of)
Yava-Kshdra 30 .

Treatment of Upa-Jihv£( in a ca,se of
Upa-jihvat (Ranula),the affected part should be scaqfied
and rubbed with an alkali, and the patient should be
treated with crrhines (Siro-vireka), gurgles (Gandusha)
and inhalations of smokes (Dhuma), The treatment of
the tongue diseases has been thus described above.
We shall now describe the medical treatment of the
affections of the palate (Tdlu-gata Roga). 31-32.
Treatment Of theTalu-gata diseases:

— In a case of Gala-sandika^, the Sundiki (protuber-
ance) should be drawn out along the tongue with the
help of the thumb and the second finger of the hand, or
with a Samdamsa (forceps) and then cut off with a Man-
daldgra instrument. But it should be severed neither
more nor less than three-quarters of the append-
age, inasmuch as profuse haemorrhage might follow
an excessive incision, and death might result therefrom ;
whereas, a case of lesser severance is usually found to
be attended with swelling, excessive salivation, somno-
lence,* vertigo, darkness of vision, etc. Hence a
surgeon, well-versed in the science of surgery and well-
skilled in practical operations, should carefully operate
a Gala-sundtkd (with a knife) at d subsequently adopt
the following measures. The incidental ulcer should
bi treated with the pulverised compound of Maricha,
Ati-viskd.Pdthd^ V achd, Kushtha^XiA Kutannata^ misced
with honey and rock-salt. A decoction of Vachd^
Ati-^vishd, Pdthd^ Rdsnd, Katuka-rohini and Pichu-marda
should be used as gurgle (Kavala). The five drugs, viz.,

* SVikantha Datta, in his commentary on Vtinda’s compilation, quotes
this passage from the text, but does not include ''somnolence” th Btein.
Hc:reads p*acc of “tirmr 1

470

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. XXII.

Ingudi, Apdmdr^a, Danti, Sarald and Deva-ddru
should be pasted together and made into Vartis (sticks),
well flavoured by the addition of perfuming drugs.
Twice every day (once in the morning and again in the
evening), should the patient be made to ^inhale the
fumes of these burning Vartis (sticks) which have the
property of subduing the (deranged) Kapha, and
should be made to take the soup of Mudga boiled in
alkaline water.* In cases of Tundikeri, Adhrusha,
Eurma, Mi(insa samghitta and Ts^lu pupputa, the pre*'
ceding measures should be adopted, but the surgical
operation should vary with the nature of the particular
disease under treatment. 33-34.

Treatment of TatIu-psCka, etc.

Remedies which destroy the deranged Pitta should be
employed in Ts(lu-ps(ka (suppuration of the palate) ;
while applications of Sneha (oil, etc.) and Sveda
(fomentations), as well as Vdyu-subduing measures should
be the remedies in a case of a Wlu-^pha (swelling
of the palate). The remedies to be employed in the
diseases affecting the palate have been thus described
above. Now hear me discourse on the remedial
measures in Eantha-Boga (diseases of the throat).

35-36-

Treatment of Throat-diseases In

a curable type of Rohini, blood-letting and the
applications of emetics, gurgles, inhalations (of medi-
cated fumes) and errhines (Nasya) are efficacious.
In cases of Vtftaja Rohini, blood-letting should
be first effected, and the affected part should then be

* The alkaline water to be used in the Mudga-soup should be pre-
pared from Yava-kshdra according to Dallana. But according to Slva-
disa, alkaline water prepared from the ashes of Mushkaka, Ap^m^iga^
etc.) should be used.

Chap. XXIL]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

471

rubbed with salts. Gurgles »^Gandusha) of tepid
Sneha (oil, clarified butter, etc.) should be con-
stantly resorted to. In cases of the Fittaja
Rohini, the powdered Pattanga^ honey and sugar
should be^fubbed (Prati sArana) over (the affected part),
and the decoctions* of Drdkshd and of Parushaka,
should be used as gurgles (Kavala). In the Kaphaja
type of Rohini, the affected part should be rubbed
with Katuka and Agdra-dhuma (soot of a house —
chimney-soot). An oil properly cooked with S'vetd
Vidanga, Danti and Saindhava should be employed as
(Nasya) and employed as gurgles (Kavala). In a case
of Raktaja Rohiui, a physician shall employ the
same measures of treatment as in the Pittaja type of
the disease. 37.

Treatment of Kantha-^^luka, etc.:

— In a case of Kautha-Sailuka, it should be bled and
treated as a case of Tundikeri, and the patient should
be enjoined to take a single meal in the day consisting
only of a small quantity of Yavdnna (barley-rice) with
clarified butter. The treatment of a case of Adhi-
jihvikst should be the same as that of Upa-jihvikd. In
a case of Bka-vrinda, blood-letting of the affected part
should be resorted to (by the application of leeches),
and ^odhanaf (purifying) rejhnedies should be
employed. The medical treatment of a case of Gil^ya
(Siliyu.-D.R.) consists of a surgical operation (on the
seat of thj disease). Incision should be made into a

• According to Chakra- p4ni, Drikshd and Parushaka should be
combinedly used in preparing the decoction.

t The “purifying remidies*’ here means 8^iro*vtrechana, fumigation,
plasters and applications of alkali, etc., for purifying the Doshas in the
throat.

472 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXII.

Galll-Vidradhi (throat-abscess' in its suppurated stage
and appearing at a part other than a Marma (vulner-
able part). 38-42.

Treatment of Sarva-sara IVlukha-
Rdga : — The affected part should be rubbed with
powdered salts* in a case of Sarva-sara Mukha-roga
(invading the entire cavity of the mouth) due to the
aggravated Viya. Oil cooked with the (decoction and
the pastes of) VAyu-subduing drugs such as, the Bhadra-
darvddi group, etc.) and used as errhines (Nasya) and
gurgles (Kavala) is efficacious in this disease. After the
applitation of this oil, the patient should be treated with
the itiaihika form of fumigation (Dhuma) in the follow-
ing manner. Tuntuka leaves smeared with honey should
be plastered with a compound of the Sara of Sdla,
Piydla and castor wood, the marrow of In^udi and
Madhuka^ Guggulu, Dhydmaka (Gandha trina), Mdmsi^
Kdldnu-sdrivd^ S'ri (Lavanga), Sarja-rasa, S'dileya and
wax pounded together and mixed with an adequate
quantity of clarified butter or oil. It should then be
burnt, and the patient made to inhale the fumes. This
medicinal fumigation (Dhuma) proves remedial in the
disease. It destroys the deranged Vaiyu and Kapha,
and proves curative in all affections of the mouth,
In the Pittaja type of the Sarva sara Mukha-roga, all
the Itiorbific principles (Doshas) should be eliminated
from the patient^s body (with emetics and purgatives),

* i>ftllana and Nis'chala explain the term as the

powdiiN bf the five officinal kinds of salt. S'iva-ddsa, however, holds that
powdered Saindhava salt only should be used. Vrinda reads **
and the bomrocntator S'ri-kanlha Datta explains it to mean cither the
powders bf **^nm*\ »Ve., Jyotishmali or those of i.e., the five

officipil Mnds of salt*— Ed.

Chap. XXll.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

473

and all kinds of sweet, soothing and Pitta-subduing
drugs should be administered. Medicated gurgles
(Gandusha), fumigation (Dhuma), Pratisjirana (rubbings)
and purifying (S'odhana) measures as well as the
Kapha-subduing remedies should be employed in the
Kaphajaftype of the Sarva-sara-Mukha-roga, and the
patient should be made to take one Dharana measure
(Twenty-four Ratis) of powdered Ativishd Pdthd,
Musta, Deva ddrUy Katuka and Kutaja seeds, with an
adequate quantity of cow’s urine. This medicine acts
as a potent remedy for all the Kaphaja disorders of the
body. Gurgles Kavala) with milk, sugarcane juice,
cow’s urine, curd-cream, KAnjika, oil or clarified
butter (Sneha) should be prescribed according to the
nature of the aggravated Doshas involved in each case
(of the Sarva-sara-Mukha-roga). We have described
above the medical treatment of the affections of mouth
which yield to medical remedies. 43-45.

incurable Types S — Now we shall enumerate
the different incurable types of mouth-diseases. Of
the types of Oshtha-psika, those due to the vitiated
condition of the flesh, or of blood, and those due
to the concerted action of the aggravated Doshas
(Sannipdta) should be deemed as incurable. Of the
diseases peculiar to the roots of the teeth, the affections
known as the SAnnipitika Danlla'ntfdi (Sinus in the
gums) and the SAnnipAtika ^ushira (MahA-Saushira)
should be also deemed as incurable Of the affec-
tions of the teeth, those known as the ^ys(va-dantaka,
Dtflana and Bhanjana, and of the diseases which
restrict themselves to the tongue, the one known as the
Altfsa should be looked upon as incurable. Similarly,
of the affections of the palate, the Arvuda should be
deemed as incurable. Of those of the throat, the Svara

60

474

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Ch«p. XXII

ghna, Valaya, Brinda, Baldsa, Biddrikd, Galangha,
Hdpasa-tdna, ^ataghni and Rohini should be regarded
as beyond the pale of medicine. The nineteen kinds of
the disease mentioned above are incurable, and the
medical treatment of the>e diseases should b6? taken in
hand without holding out any definite hope of
recovery. 46 —49.

Thus entls the Twenty-second Chapter of the Chikitsita-Sthdnam in the
Sus'ruta Samhitd which deals with the medical treatment of the diseases
of the month.

CHAPTER XXIII.

Now we shall discourse on the (symptoms and)
medical t/eatment of swellings (^opha). i.

The six kinds of swelling (^Sopha) appearing in the
particular parts of the body have already been described*
with the variations in their symptoms and the medical
treatment to be pursued in each case, . But the swelling
known as the Sarva-sara ^opha (general Anasarca)
may be divided into five subheads. They are as
follows, namely, the Vs(taja. Pittaja^ Kapahja San-
nipittaja and Vishaja , the one due to the introduc-
tion of any extraneous poison ipto the system). 2.

Their ceuSCS S — The Doshas (morbific prin-
ciples) become aggravated and give rise to swellings
(^pha') of the body, by such causes, as by undertaking
a journey immediately after a meal, or by the use of
Harita-sdkas (potherbs , cakes and salts in inordinate
quantities, or by the excessive use of acids by weak
and emaciated persons, or by the use of clay, baked or
unbaked, of lime-stones, or of the flesh of aquatic
animals, or of those frequenting swampy places, exces-
sive sexual intercourse, use of fares consisting of incom-
patible articles and lastly by the joltings when riding
on elephants, horses, camels, in vehicles, etc., or on
persons on the part of dyspeptic patients. 3.

Specific Symptoms A swelling (^opha)
of the Vsttajit type is vermilion or black-coloured and
is attended with softness and a pricking pain in the
swelling which disappears at intervals. A swelling of
the Pittaja type assumes a blood-red or yellow colour,
swiftly expands and is attended with a burning and

* See Stttre-ethluw, Cheptef XVil.

476

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. XXIII.

drawing pain (Chosha). A swelling of the Kaphaja
type assumes a white or greyish colour, becomes hard,
cold to the touch and glossy, is slow in its growth, and
is attended with itching, pain, etc. A swelling of the
Sltnnipsftika type (due to the concerted action* of all the
three Doshas of the body) exhibits all the symptoms
which specifically belong to each of the three above-
said types . 4-7.

Symptoms of Vishaja-^opha : — A

swelling (^Sopha) which results from the contact or
introduction of a (weakened) chemical poison (Gara) with
or into the body, or from the use of polluted water,
or by bathing in a foul and stagnant pool or tank, or by
dusting the body with the powders of substances
poisoned by any poisonous animal, or from the contact
with weeds and plants, which have become poisoned
by the urine, foecal matter, or semen of poisonous
animals, is called a Vishaja swelling The swelling
is soft, pendent and persistent, expands rapidly and
moves gradually (from one part of the body to the
other) and is attended with a burning sensation and
suppuration* 8,

Memorable Verse The aggravated Doshas
of the body confined in the stomach (Amdsaya) give rise
to a swelling in the upper part of the body. Confined
in the intestines (Pakvasaya), they give rise to a swelling
in the middle part of the body. If they are confined
in the receptacle of the foeces (Malds'aya), the lower part
of the body becomes swollen. The swelling extends
all over the body in the event of their (Doshas) being
diffused throughout the organism. 9.

Prognosis l — An oedematous swelling (^opha)
occurring in the middle part (trunk) of the body or
extending all over it may be cured with difficulty as

ChAp. XXIIL]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

477

well as the one which first occurs at either (the upper or
lower) half of the body and tends to extend upward.
A case of swelling attended with dyspnoea, thirst,
weakness, fever, vomiting, hiccough, dysentery, colic
(S'ula , ^tid a want of relish for food is extremely hard
to cure and soon proves fatal. lo-ii.

We shall now proceed to describe their general and
specific remedies. The use of acids, salts, milk, curd,
treacle, lard, water, oil, clarified butter, cakes and all
kinds of heavy (in digestion) edibles should be refrained
from in all the types of oedema (S'opha). 12-13.

The Special Treatment of ^opha

Traivrita (Ghrita) or castor oil should be administered
for a month or a fortnight to the patient suffering from
the Viitaja type of oedema (^opha). Clarified butter
cooked with the decoction of the drugs of the Nyagro-
dhddi and the A'ragvadAddi groups should be respec-
tively prescribed in the Pittaja and Kaphtya types.
In the Sannipdtaja type, the patient should be made
to drink a potion of clarified butter cooked
with a PAtra* measure of the milky exudation of the
Snuhi plant and twelve PAtra measures of fermented
rice gruel (KAnjika) with an adequate quantity of
Danii as a Kalka. The remedy in regard to a swelling
due to the action of poison (Vish9(ja} imbibed into the
system will be duly described in the Kalpa SthAnam. 14.
The general remedies Now we shall

describe the general remedies (which are applicable in
cases of ^tha). Any of the four Ghritas ending with
the Tilvaka Ghrita which have already been mentioned
under the treatment of IJdara would prove remedial
in a case of ^vayathu (CEdematous Swelling). The
use of (the officinal) urine and the applications of the
* A P4tn measure is equal to eight seers

478

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. 'tCh«p. Xlll

(medicated) Vartis are likewise recommended. The
patient should be made to take every day the
medicine known as the Navs(yasa^ through the
medium of honey. He should be made to take a
Dharana weight of the compound of ^jjpwdered
Vidanga, Ativiskd, Kutaja-(ru\t , Bkadra-ddru, Ndgara
and Maricha in tepid water. Trikatu, Yava-kshdra
and powdered iron should be mixed together and
administered through the mediu m of the decoction
of Triphald\ or, co.v’s milk and cow's urine, in
equal proportions should be taken. As an alternative,
treacle and Haritaki mixed in equal proportions should
be administered. Deva^ddru and S'unthi\ may be given ;
or Guggulu:!’ dissolved in cow’s urine or in the
decoction of Varshdbhu. Equal parts of treacle
and S'ringavera § may as well be prescribed ; or the
roots of the Varshdbhu pasted with the decoction of the
same drug and mixed with powdered S'unthi dissolved
in milk should be given to the patient every day for a
month. He should take Mudga pulse fried with the
clarified butter prepared by cooking it with the decoc-
tion of Trikatu and Varshdbhu. Milk boiled with
Pippali, PippcUi-roois^ Chavya^ Chitrakay Mayura (ApA-
mArga) and Varshdbhu, or with Sunthi and Surangi-
roots, or with Trikatu, Eranda-xooXs and S'ydfnd-XQo\^,
or with Varshdbhu, S'unthi, Sahd and Deva-ddru
should be given to the patient A paste of Aldvu and

* See Chapter XXII, para. lo, ChikitBita-sth^nam.

t Some commentators explain that the compound of Deva-diru and
S'nilthi aUo should be taken through the medium of cow’s urine or the
desoctioD of Varshdbhu.

According to Ohakradatta’s reading, Deva-ddru, S’unthi and
Gt^nlu should be taken together with cow’s urine.

(The S*ringavera in this compound may be either fresh or

drtod.— Ed.

chap. XXIII ]

CHIKITSA STHANaM.

479

Vibhitaka dissolved in the washings of rice, should
likewise be administered. 15.

The diet of the patient should consist of cooked
barley or wheat saturated with the unsalted soup of
Mudga pulse, cooked with Yava-kshdra, Pippali,
Markka and S'ringavera, and prepared with only a
small quantity of oil or clarified butter. A decoction
of Vrikshaka, Arka, Naktamdla, Nimba and Varshdbhu
should be used in effusing (Parisheka,) the affected part.
It should be plastered with a compound conasting of
Sars/iapa, Suvarchald, Saindhava and S'drtigasktd,
pasted together. Strong purgatives, Asthdpana
measures and applications of Sneha, Sveda and
Upanifha should be constantly employed according to
the nature and instensity of the aggravated Doshas
involved in the case. In a case of Sotha, other than
what is the outcome or supervening symptom (IJpadrava)
of any other disease, the patient should be frequently
bled by opening a vein of the locality. 16.

Memorable Verse :~A patient wishing to
get rid of an attack of ^opha (cedematous swelling)
should refrain from taking all sorts of cakes, acid sub-
stances, liquor, clay, salts, oil, clarified butter,* water,
heavy and indigestible articles of food, sleep in the day
time, the flesh of animals other tha^ that of the animals
of the Jingala group and from visiting the bed of any
woman, 17.

Thus ends the Twenty-third Chapter in the Chikitaita Sthinam of the
Sus'ituta Samhitd which deals with the medical treatment of S'opha.

• Some teadj»‘ treacle in place of “ wijj," i.a., clarified

butter. This reading seems to be the correct one, inasmuch as it is
supported by all other authoritative works on Ayurveda — Ed.

CHAPTER XXIV.

Now we shall discourse on the rules of hygiene and
the prophilactic measures in general

v^dha-Prati-shedhaniya). i.

Metrical Texts ; — Now we shall describe the
rules of conduct to be daily observed by an intelligent
man (after leaving his bed) seeking perfect health and a
sound body. 2.

Tooth -brushing A man should leave his
bed early in the morning and brush his teeth. The
tooth-brush (Danta-Kdshtha) should be made of a
fresh twig of a tree or a plant grown on a commendable
tract and it should be straight, not worm-eaten, devoid
of any knot or at most with one knot only (on one side),
and should be twelve fingers in length and like the
small finger in girth. The potency and taste of the
twig (tooth-brush) should be determined by or vary
according to the season of the year and the preponder-
ance of any particular Dosha in the physical tempera-
ment of its user.* The twig of a plant possessed of any
of the four tastes as sweet, bitter, astringent and pungent
should be alone collected and used, Nimha is the
best of all the bitter trees ; Khadira of the astringent
ones ; Madhuka of the sweet ; and Karanja of the
pungent ones. 3

* A man of a Kaphaja temperament should use a twig of a plant
possessed of a pnnaont taste (Tikta) in brushing his teeth. A man of a
Flttaja temperament should brush his teeth with a twig possessed of a
sweet taste (Madhura), while a man of a Vtftlka temperament (nervous)
should use that with an astringent (Kasiya) taste. This rule should be
observed even in respect of the preponderant Doshas of the body, in a
disease*

Chap, XXIV.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 48 1

The teeth should be daily cleansed with (a com-
pound consisting of) honey, powdered Trukatu^ Tri-
varga*, Tejovati, Saindhava and oil Each tooth should
be separately cleansed with the preceding cleansing paste
applied oif (the top of the twig bitten into the form of)
a soft b\ush, and care should be taken not to hurt the
gum anywise during the rubbing. This tends to
cleanse and remove the bad smell (from the mouth) and
the uncleanlincss (of the teeth) as well as to subdue the
Kapha (of the body). It cleanses the mouth and
also produces a good relish for food and a cheerfulness
of mindf. 4.

Cases where tooth-brushing^ is for-
bidden : — Tooth-brushing is forbidden to the persons
suffering from affections of the teeth, lips, throat,
palate, or tongue, or from stomatitis, cough, asthma,
hiccough and vomiting, weakness, indigestion,
epilepsy, head-disease, thirst, fatigue, alcoholism, facial
paralysis, ear-ache, and to persons tired with over-
drinking. 5.

♦ The term *‘Tri-varga’' generally means Tri katu, Tri-phalA and
Tri-mada. Daltana explains it as meaning Tri-sugandhi, t.^., Tvak, £1^
and Patra.— Ed.

+ Additional Texts It brings on a Relish for food, imparts a
cleanliness, lightness and sense of freedom to the teeth, tongue, lips and
palate. It protects the mouth, throat, palate, lips and tongue from being
affected by any disease. It arrests salivation, imparts an agreeable aroma
to the mouth and relieves nausea and vrater brush. It strengthens the
religious inclination and gives a lightness to the organs. Hence one
should every day use the tooih-lwig, but its use is prohibited in respect
of persons suffering from diseases of the palate, lips or tongue as well as
from Mukha p^ka (stomatitis), dyspnoea, hiccough, parchedness of the
mouth and nausea. The last two lines of the additional text, however,
occur in the text in a slightly different form. See the next two lines of the
twt.

482

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXIV.

The use of a thin, smooth and flexible foil of gold,
silver, or wood, ten fingers in length, is commended for
the purpose of cleansing the tongue by scraping. It
gives relief and removes the bad taste, feetor, swelling
and numbness of the mouth. Sneha (oil) sh’puld be
used as a gurgle (Ganclusha) every day (after the cleansing
of the teeth), as it makes them firm, and brings on a
natural relish for food. 6-7.

Eye and IWouth -washes The mouth and
the eyes of a person of sound health should be washed
with the decoction of the barks of Kshira trees mixed
with milk, or with that of Bhillodaka, or of Amalaka^ or
with (a copious quantity ol) cold water.* This procedure
would soon prove efficacious in destroying such affections
of the body, as Nilika, dryness in the mouth, pustules
or eruptions, Vyanga and the diseases due to the
(concerted) action of the Rakta and Pitta, and by
such washings the face becomes lighter and the sight
stronger. 8.

COllyrium : -Srotonjana, produced in the river
Indus, is the best and t)urcst of Collyriums. It
alleviates the burning and itching sensations in the eyes,
removes all local pains, secretions and impurities,
increases the range of vision, enables the eyes to bear

* Gayaddsa interprets that the mouth should be washed with the
decoction of Bhillodaka and the eyes with that of A’^malaka. He also
interprets that the eyes and the mouth may both, however, be washed
with cold water.

t

Perhaps Gayaddsa was of opinion that the decoction of Amalaka,
being astringent, might airest the dilatation of the pupils due to age,
and so help to keep the eye-sight unimpaired. Others explain that the
mouth should be washed with the decoctions of Bhillodaka and of
Amalaka, and the eyes with cold water. The decoctions, however, if
used as an eye* wash, should be used in a cold state. ~Ed.

Chap. XXIV.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

483

the blasts of the wind and the glare of the sun and guards
against the inroads of occular affections. Hence the
application of colly rium (along the eye -lids) is highly
recommended ; but its use is forbidden just after taking
one’s mgal or bath (washing the head) and after the
fatigue' of vomiting, or riding, etc., nor after keeping
late hours and also not during an attack of fever. 9-11.

A betel-leaf prepared with cloves, camphor, nut-
meg (J^ti), lime, araca-nut, Kakkola and Katukdhva
(LatA-kasturi), etc., should be taken (chewed after meals),
as it tends to cleanse the mouth, impart a sweet aroma
to it, enhance its beauty and cleanse and strengthen
the voice, the tongue, the teeth, the jaws and the
sense-organs. It checks excessive salivation, soothes
the body (Hridya), and acts as a general safeguard
against throat disease. A betel-leaf (prepared as
before) proves wholesome after a bath, after meals,
after anointing as well as after rising from sleep.
A person suffering from Rakta-Pitta, Kshata-Kshina,
thirst, or parchedness of the mouth should refrain
from taking bctcl-lcaf, the use of which is equally for-
bidden in such diseases as aniemia, internal dryness
of the organism and epilepsy. 12.

^irobhyanga Anointing (Abhyanga) the
head with oil is a good cure for affections of the head.
It makes the hair grow luxuriantly, and imparts thick-
ness, softness and a datk gloss to them. It soothes and
invigorates the head and the sense-organs and removes
the wrinkles of the face. The medicinal oil known as
the Ghakra-Taila should be cooked with the paste
(Kalka) and the decoction of Madhuka, Kshira-s'ukld^
Sarala, Deva-ddru and the minor Pancha-mula taken
in equal parts fin each case). The head should be con-
stantly anointed with this cooling oil. 13-14.

4^4

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Ch«P' XXiV.

Combing the hair improves its growth, removes
dandriff and dirt, and destroys the parasites of the scalp.
Pouring oil (Karna-purana) into the cavities of the ears
is highly efficacious in pains of the jaws (Hanu' and of
the Manyd, and acts as a good cure for head’-^che and
ear-ache. Anointing (Abhyanga) the body (with oil,
etc ) imparts a glossy softness to the skin, guards
against the aggravation of the VAyu and the Kapha,
improves the colour and strength and gives a tone to the
root-principles (Dhdtus) of the body. * I5-I7-

Parisheka. : — Affusing the body (Parisheka)
removes the sense of fatigue, and brings about the
adhesion of broken joints. It alleviates the pain which
usually attends burns, scalds, bruises and lacerations, and
subdues the actions of the deranged Vdyu. Sneha (oil)
affused on the human organism imparts a tone and vigour
to its root-principles (Dhdtus), in the same manner as
water furnishes the roots of a tree or a plant with the
necessary nutritive elements, and fosters its growth,
when poured into the soil where it grows. The use of
Sneha (oil, etc.) at a bath causes the Sneha to penetrate
into the system through the mouths of the veins (SirAs)
and the ducts (Dhamanis) of the body, as also through

* Rubbed on the body and allowed to stand or kept unwiped, the
Sneha (oil) reaches down the skin, through the hair-follicles in the course
of time necessary to utter four hundred Mdtrds. It reaches the principle
of blood in the course of that necessary to utter five hundred Miitr^s,
and to the principle of flesh in the course of that necessary to utter six
hundred M^tr^s. It penetrates further to the principle of fat in the
course of that necessary to utter seven hundred Mdu^s, and to the
principle of bone in the course of that necessary to utter eight hundred
Mdtris, and lastly to the principle of marrow in the course of that
necessary to utter nine hundred Mdtr^s. It successively cures the diseases
respectively located in those principles.— Dallana.

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

Chap. XXIV.

4^5

the roots of the hair, and thus soothes and invigorates
the body with its own essence. i8 — 20.

Under the circumstances, affusions and anointments
of the body with oil or clarified butter should be pre-
scribed by an intelligent person with due regard to one's
habit, congeniality and temperament and to the climate
and the season of the year as well as to the preponder-
ance of the deranged Dosha or Doshas in one’s physical
constitution. 21.

Prohibitions of anointments, etc.:—

Anointments of the body simply with (unmedicated)
Sneha are strictly forbidden in cases of undigested (Ama)
Uoshas (as long as the aggravated Doshas of the body
continue in an unassimilated or undigested state and
in their full virulence and intensity). Anointment should
not be resorted to in cases of acute fever and indiges-
tion, nor after the exhibition of emetics and purgatives,
nor after an application of a Nirudha-Vasti. Anoint-
ment in the first two cases (acute fever and indigestion)
serves to make the diseases curable with difficulty and
even incurable, while that made on the same day after
the application of purgatives, emetics, or a Nirudha-
Vasti, tends to impair the digestive capacity, etc. Anoint-
ment is similarly prohibited in diseases due to Samtar-
pana (repletion, etc). 22 — 24. ^

Physical Exercise : - What is (popularly)
known as physical exercise is (nothing buti a sense
of weariness from bodily labour, and it should be
taken every day. After taking physical exercise, the
whole body should be shampooed, until it gives rise
to a comfortable sensation in the limbs. It makes
the body stout and strong, helps "the symmetrical
growth of the limbs and muscles, improves the com-
plexion and the digestive powers, prevents laziness and

486

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHIT . [Chap. XXiV.

makes the body light and glossy, firm and compact
The power of enduring fatigue and weariness and
the variations of temperature, thirst, etc., are the
virtues which are invariably found to follow in its
train. It leads to an undiseased existence and is the
best means of reducing corpulency. The enemies of
a man habituated to regular physical exercises, dare
not molest him through fear (for his strength — D. R.).
Imbecility and senile decay never approach him, and
the muscles of his body become firm and steady.
Diseases fly from the presence of a person, habituated* to
regular physical exercise and (subsequent) shampooing,
just as small beasts do on seeing a lion. It makes an
aged and deformed man (young and) good-looking.
Food consisting of articles incompatible in their
potency, and indigested and decomposed food are easily
digested in a man who takes regular physical exercise
(and cannot produce any bad eflfect\ Regular physical
exercise is (particularly) beneficial to a strong man
accustomed to the use of emollient food (abounding in
proteid matter), in all seasons of the year ; but in
the winter and the spring, it is highly (indispensably)
necessary for him. A man seeking his own good should
take physical exercise every day only to the half extent
of his capacity (Valardha), as otherwise it may prove
fatal. That amount of exercise which makes the PrAna-
Vdyu come out through the mouth*)* as soon as

* Dallana’s reading here evidently is place ot

I This would mean “of one taking so much exercise

as produces sweat.”

t According to several authorities, the appearance of perspiration
on the nose, the axilla, the forehead and in the joints of the hands
and the legs and dryness of the mouth are the symptoms which
indicate that one has taken Valslrdha physical exercise to the

half extent of his capacity).-— Da liana.

Chap. XXIV.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

487

hard-breathing would set in), is known as the VaWrdha
exercise. One^s own age, strength, physique and food
as well as the season of the year and the physical
nature of the country are the factors which should be
considered^'before one began to take physical exercise,
as otherwise it might bring on some disease 25.

Consumption, haemorrhage (Rakta-pitta), thirst
phthisis, aversion to food, vomiting, illusiveness, weari-
ness, fever, cough and asthma are the diseases, which are
likely to originate from excessive physical exercise,
and is, therefore, forbidden after a meal and the fatigues
of sexual intercourse, in a fit of vertigo and in respect of
persons suffering from haemorrhage, phthisis, cachexia,
cough, asthma and ulcer. 26-27.

The deranged Vdyu of the body is restored to its
normal condition by the help of Udvartana (massage).
It reduces the fat and the aggravated Kapha of the
system, smoothes and cleanses the skin and imparts a
firmness to the limbs. 28

Utsaidana (rubbing) and Udgharshana* (friction)
tend to dilate the orifice of the (superficial) ducts and
increa.se the temperature of the skin. UtsAdana
specifically improves the complexion of females and
gives a lovely appearance, cleanliness, beauty and
suppleness to the female form. Ucfgharshana (friction)
pacifies the bodily Viyu, cures itches, rashes and
eruptions (Kotha). Phenaka t imparts lightness and
steadiness to the thighs, cures itches, eruptions, Vdta-
stambha and excrctal diseases. Friction of the body
with brickbat powders excites the heat of skin, brings

* Utsidana and Udgharshana are the two kinds of rubbing the body
with medicinal powders with and without a Sneha respectively.

t Phoxiaka is a kind of friction of the body with small wooden
rollers,

488 THE S&^HRUTA SAMHITa. .[0^?“,®^;;'

on, the dilation of the orifices of the bodily ducts, ar\&
cures itches and Kotha. 29-32 ,, ^

Bathing ! —Bathing removes, somnolence, (in-
ordinate) bodily heat and a sense of fatigue. It allays
thirst and checks itching and perspiration, brijEgs on a
fresh relish for food, removes all bodily impurities, clears
the sense-organs, gladdens the mind, purifies the blood,
increases the appetising power, destroys drowsiness and
sin, and increases semen. The sight of a man is
invigorated by applying cold water to the head at the
time of bathing, while the pouring of warm water on
the head tends to injure the eye-sight. In cases
of an aggravation of the deranged WAyu and Kapha,
the head may be washed with warm water, as a
medicine, after a careful consideration of the intensity
of the disease. 33-35

Prohibition of Bathing Bathing in
extremely cold water in winter tends to enrage the
bodily VAyu and the Kapha, while bathing in hot water
in summer agitates the blood and the Pitta. Bathing
is not beneficial in fever, diarrhoea, ear-ache, tym-
panites, AdhmAna, aversion to food and indigestion, and
in the disorders or diseases due to the actions of the
deranged VAyu. It should not also be taken just after a
meal. 36-38.

Anulepana Anointing (Anulepana) the body
(with scented pastes) removes a sense of fatigue and
foetor and perspiration. It produces a sense of pleasure
and improves the Ojas, the strength and the complexion
of the body^ enhances the beauty and glow of the frame
and gives it a lovely appearance Anulepana is forbidden
in those cases in which bathing is prohibited. 39.

The wearing of gems, flowers and clean clothes is
beneficial in a variety of ways, as it acts as a good

Cfea^XXlV'O CHIKITSA S'fliANATVf, 489

:

j^rophylactic against the influences of monsters and
malignant spirits, enhances the Ojas and the beauty of
the body and keeps the mind in a cheerful mood ancj
proves highly auspicious, 40,

Ale^a: — Besmearing (Alepa" the face (with scented
pastes, etc.) imparts steadiness to the eyes, brings on a
broad and graceful contour of the cheeks and mruth,
produces their healthful glow like that of a lotus flower
and prevents its disfigurement by pimples, moles and
such like growths and eruptions (Vyanga). The use of
collyrium (Anjana) furthers the growth of large and
beautiful eye lashes, cleanses the eyes by removing
the unhealthy secretions, makes the eyes more wide
and graceful and also imparts a brilliant lustre to the
pupils. 41 42,

Devotion to the gods and Bnihinanas and hospi-
tality towards guests (Atithi) add to one’s good
name, piety, wealth, progeny and duration of life.
Food (Ahira) nourishes and gladdens the heart and
directly contributes to one’s bodily strength. It
improves the memory, appetising power, energy and
the natural strength of the mind (Tejas\ and increases
the Ojas and the duration of one’s life. 43-44.

Washing the feet increases the semen (Vrishya), re-
moves the sense of fatigue, gladder^ the heart, makes the
soles free from all adhering dirt and local diseases, acts
as a prophylactic against evil spirits (Rakshoghna) and
clears up* the vision. Anointing (Abhyanga) the
feet (with oil, etc) brings on sleep. It is refreshing
and invigorating to the body and the sight, removes all

* Dallana explains that washing the feet keeps the nerve (Nidi)
the soles with the eyes cool and thus helps to clear up the vision.
TBiiere Is a custom of frequently washing the feet amongst the Hindus
most prolMCbly on this account.— Ed.

62

490 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. tOhep. XXIV.

drowsiness and sense of fatigue and softens the skin of
the soles of the feet. 45-46.

The use of shoes is efficacious in curing the diseases
of the feet and is conducive to pleasure and verile
potency. It acts as a prophylactic against the Influences
of evil spirits, makes walking easy and pleasant, and
improves the Ojas in the body. Walking without shoes
is perilous to life and health, and is attended with
the danger of impaired vision. 47-48.

The shaving of hair and the paring of nails lead to
the expiation of one’s sins, make a man cheerful, tend
to appease his fate, increase his energy and impart
a lightness to the frame. The putting on of armour
(Vlinavlira) improves one’s strength, energy and com-
plexion and gives a lustre to the body. The wearing of
a turban (XTshnisha) acts as a protection against wind,
dust, sun and light, helps the luxurious growth of hair
and tends to improve the purity of the mind. 49-5 r.

The use of an umbrella is a protection against
rain, wind, dust, dew and sun. It improves one’s
energy, Ojas, eye-sight and complexion, and is an
auspicious thing in itself. The use of a stick (Danda)
dispels the fear of dogs, snakes, beasts of prey, (tigers,
etc.) and homed animals. It considerably alleviates
the toil of a journey, lessens the probability of making
a false step and is specially commended to the weak
and imbecile. It increases one’s energy, strength and
patience, makes the mind firm and bold, acts as a proper
support and makes one fearless. 52 53

Sitting idle (Asyd) gives pleasure. It improves the
glow of one’s complexion, increases the Kapha and corpu-
lency and makes the body delicate, while an active pedes-
trian habit (Adhva) is detrimental to the complexion.
It redupes the fat and Kapha of the body, and removes

Chap. XJtlV.]

CHIKITSA StHA^^AM.

491

the delicateness of the frame. Contrary results (to those
produced by sitting idle) are produced by excessive
walking which further brings on weakness and emacia-
tion of the body. A gentle walk or stroll, which is not
very fatiguing to the body, tends, on the contrary, to
improve his memory, strength, digestive capacity
(Agni) and the functions of the sense-organs. It
increases also the duration of life. 54 57.

Lying down in an easy posture on a soft bed removes
the sense of fatigue, pacifies or soothes the bodily
Vdyu, brings on sleep and lost recollections to the
mind, is spermatopoetic and is conducive to the
growth of the body ; while lying down in a contrary
manner is attended with contrary results. Fanning
with Chowiics (Vila-vyajana) is refreshing and keeps
off flies and mosquitoes ; while fanning (with ordinary
fans) arrests perspiration, removes the sense of fatigue
and fainting fits, and alleviates the burning, scorching
and parched sensations. Shampooing (SamvsQiana) is
pleasant, refreshing, soporific, and spermatopoetic
(Vrishya\ It destroys the bodily V 4 yu and Kapha,
removes the sense of fatigue and is soothing to the
blood, skin and the muscles. 58-60. *

A strong wind (FravSkta) is parchifying in its effect
and injurious to the complexion. ^ It destroys the burning
sensation (if any) in the body, allays thirst, removes
fainting fits and stops perspiration, but (at the same
time) produces numbness of the body and destroys the
digestive powers ; whereas the contrary results are pro-
duced by a gentle wind. The gentle breeze of summer
and of autumn should be breathed (as it is attended
with beneficial results to the .health). A seeker
after health and a long life should reside in a chamber,
not exposed to strong blasts of wind (Nivitta). An

492

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. XXIV.

undue exposure to the sun (Atapa) aggravates the Pitta,
but increases the power of digestion. It agitates the blood
and begets thirst, perspiration, faintness (sun stroke),
vertigo and a burning sensation in the body attended
with a discolouring of the complexion, etc. ;‘^whereas
the contrary results arc produced by a (cool) shade
(Chh^ysi). A basking in the glare of fire (Agni) remedies
the (wrong) coursing of the VAyu and Kapha, removes
cold and shivering, digests the slimy secretions in the
channels ; but aggravates the blood and Pitta. A good
sleep (Nidrat) enjoyed at the proper time (and for
the proper period) tends to improve the growth, strength,
vigour and complexion of the body. It increases
the power of digestion, removes drowsiness, and
restores the natural equilibrium among the different
fundamental principles (DhAtus) of the organism. 6i 65,
General rules of conduct The first

rule is that one should keep his nails and hair short,
always put on clean and white clothes, wear a light turban
and a pair of shoes and carry an umbrella and a stick in
his hand. One should discourse, when necessary, with
another in a sweet and gentle voice and his speech
should be laconic and pleasing. He should first accost
his elders and acquaintances in cases of meeting before
they speak. He should be kind and compassion-
ate to all creatures, and be approved of by his elders
and superiors. He should be in full possession of re-
sources and in an undisturbed state of the mind. One
should not stir out at night nor walk about in the grounds
of public executions, undulated places, dens and rocks.*
He should not go (at night) to where roads cross nor
to places covered with heaps of husks, ashes, bones,

* The text has Indra kila which means a hilly country inhabited
by barbarous people.

Cbap. XXiV.]

CHIKItSA STHANAlSt.

493

hair, stones, baked earth'and charcoal, nor to places
commonly considered as unholy. 66.

Men should never deride a king, nor use harsh and
impolite words to, nor act meanly and treacherously
towards l)j(Vn. One should not speak ill of the king,
the gods, the Brahmanas and the Pitris (departed
Manes), and he should never use harsh and slanderous
words. He should not tell a lie nor associate with
king-haters nor with the insane, degraded, mean and
narrow-hearted persons. 67.

Climbing up trees, mountains, ant-hills and undula-
ting grounds, etc , and going up to a waterfall as well as
riding on a wild and unbroken horse or elephant are
strictly prohibited. One should not descend into an
unknown tank, den as \vell as into the sea or into a river
at flood times. Old haunted and deserted houses, cre-
mation grounds and solitary forests should be strictly
shunned. One should not come into actual contact
with fire, wild beasts, snakes and venomous insects.
The site infested with wild beasts, snakes, venomous
insects, lizards and horned animals as well as w^here
virulent epidemics would be raging should be avoided,
nor should the sites of actual affrays and battles be
resorted to, nor the scene of a violent conflagration of
fire. 68.

Passing betwxen two rows of fire, between cows,
elders, Brihmanas, moving cradles and a married couple
is forbidden. One should not (unnecessarily) follow a
corpse. Even the shadow of a fallen, degraded and sick
person as well as of a cow, Brdhmana, divine image,
banner or of a Chaitya (tree growing on a cremation
ground) should not be trodden upon. One should
not gaze at the rising or the setting sun. One
should not report to another the fact of a milch

494

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. tCh»p. XXiV.

COW sucking her own calf, nor of her traversing or freely
grazing in another’s field nor the fact of witnessing a
rainbow or a meteor fall. One should not blow up a fire
with one’s breath, nor hit the ground or water with
one’s hands and feet. 69.

A man should never repress any natural urging of
his body, nor should he pass water or evacuate excre-
ments in an open or public place, within the confines of
a town or village, close to a cremation ground or any
place of worship, at the crossing of roads, in reservoirs
of water or on the high road nor should he do so facing
a fire, in the presence of his superiors, cows, the sun and
the moon nor facing against the wind. 70.

Scratching (unnecessarily) the ground with one’s
nails, etc., should not be done, and one should not yawn
nor sneeze, nor raise any eructations nor breathe hard in
an assembly (of gentlemen) without previously covering
his face. Sitting in an unseemly raised- up position on a
couch as well as with extended feet in front of one’s
superiors should be renounced. 71 .

The hair, nostrils, ear holes, teeth or any channel of
the body should not be fingered. The hair, face, finger-
nails, clothes and the body should not be shaken. Never
keep time with music by beating the body or the
cheeks with the hands or by striking the finger nails
against each other. Never (wantonly) strike or break or
cleave a piece of wood or stone or weed, etc. 72.

Never expose yourself to the rays of the sun, or to
the gusts of wind blowing in your face. Basking before a
fire immediately after a meal or sitting on one’s legs on
a narrow wooden stool should not be indulged in. Never
hold the neck in a contrary (contorted) posture. Neither
do nor eat anything by keeping the body in a contrary
posture. Never look steadfastly towards any object and

ChapXXIV.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

495

particularly towards the sun or any luminous body* or
towards any extremely attenuated, revolving or moving
object. Never carry a load on the head. Sleeping, wak-
ing, sitting, lying down, walking, jumping, running fast,
plunging jVi water, swimming, riding on a horse or in
a vehicle, talking, laughing, sexual intercourse and
taking (any other) physical exercise though accus-
tomed and recommended should not be inordinately
indulged in. 73.

A bad habit should be gradually discontinued and
a good one even when (beneficial to health) should
similarly be gradually inculcated by a quarter only and
not all at once. 74.

It is improper to lie down with one’s head downward.
One should not drink water from a broken vessel nor
with the help of blended palms. Food, which is
wholesome and approved of by one’s physician and
which abounds in articles of sweet and emollient pro-
pertiesi* shouM be taken at the proper (and regular)
time (every day) in a moderate quantity. It is forbidden
to take any food in the house of a trader (t>., of a
(hotel keeper) or a courtesan, nor in the house of a
wily, degenerate or inimical person, nor at a village-
assembly. The refuse of another’s dishes, as well as
articles of fo:d infested with Hies, insects, etc.^ or
po sessed of an objectionable colour, taste, smell, touch or

* Some explain “Jyolish” as a hhz: of fire and oihers explain it as

stars.

t The framers of the Ayurveda were aware of the fact that the human
sy4em is incapable of directly assimilating starchy substances without
converting them into sugar. This has been emphasised in the Sutra-
S:hiaa, where Sus'ruta insists that a food stuff, in order to be worthy
of the epithet, must be Madhura (t ^ , of sweet flavour) and contain
a large qnantity of proteid matter inch as is found in milk, butter^
fUent, etc,— Ifd.

495

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA

[Cb»p. XXIV.

sound or those which producelan unpleasant impression
in the mind, or food of like nature as well as those
served (handled) by many persons should not be partaken
of (in spite of repeated requests inlthat behalf). It is
not advisable to sit down to a meal without washing
one’s hands and feet. One should never take anything
by repressing a natural urging for stool and urine, nor
sit down to a meal just at the break or the close of day,
nor in an unprotected situation without any shade,
or without something to sit upon). One should not take
his meal after the expiry of the (daily) appointed time
nor in an insufficient or inordinate quantity, nor partake
of food whose Sneha (oleaginous substance) has been
removed. 75.

Metrical Text : — it is forbidden to see one’s
image reflected in water, nor is it advisable to plunge
naked into water. Curd should never be taken at
night, nor should it be taken (at all) without sugar * or
clarified butter, nor without saturating it with Mudga-
soup or the admixture of honey, nor without (the
expressed juice of) the Amalaka, nor with any hot
substance f or article, as otherwise it may bring on
Kushtha (cutaneous affections), erysipelas, etc. 76-77.

Exercise, addiction to wine, gambling and music are
bad. One should not bear witness to any fact (before a

* Dallana adds that curd should not be taken without an addition of
water and salt as well. This is also the practice in general.

t All the existing editions of the Sus'ruta Samhild read “ifHt:’’ (»«•■
curd should not be taken with any “hot” substance). Here it should be
noted that the terra “hoi” may also include the substances which are heat-
making in their potency. Here, however, the reading seems to be Ic-
correct. The lines are found verbatim in the work of Charaka, where he
reads hot curd should not be taken, since it produces, as he

(limself tells us later on, an aggravation of the blood and the ritta.-*-^.

Chap. XXIV.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 497

law court), nor stand surety for any body. One should
not use the shoe, umbrella, garland (of flowers\ orna-
ments or ragged clothes previously used by another.
Never defile a Brahmana, or a fire, or a cow by
touching Aem before washing (your hands and mouth)
after eating. 78.

Memorable Verses The general rules of
(good) conduct are described above. Health, wealth
and longevity never fall to the lot of those who do not
follow these rules of conduct. A wise man should take
food of such tastes (Rasa) in any particuln* season
of the year as is antidotal to the bodily Dosha which
is naturally aggravated in that season. 79-80.

Rules of drinking water, etc. Water
should not betaken during the rainy season and only in
moderate quantities in autumn. Water may be spar-
ingly taken durin<g the first four months of the rainy
season if foun-i to be indispensably necessary). Hot
water should be taken in winter and spring (Vasanta),
but cold water to one’s fill in summer. Sidhu and
Arishta should be taken in winter and spring.
Water boiled and subsequently cooled should be drunk
in summer and meat-juice in Privrit. Yusha (^Mudga-
soup, etc.,) should be taken in the rainy season and
cold water after the expiry of the . rains These rules
should be observed only by persons in sound health,
whereas the rules regarding persons suffering from
any disease should be regulated by the prescription of
any diet according to the particular Doshas involved
in each case. 81-82.

Any Sneha (such as oil or clarified butter j satura-
ted with powdered Saindhava salt and Pippali should be
regularly taken for the purpose of improving the
digestive capacity. The natural urging of the body

63

498

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. XXIV.

should never be repressed (as a repressed physical pro-
pulsion is sure to usher in a physical distemper). A
Sneha (oleaginous substance) should be freely and largely
used during the PrAvrit and the spring seasons as well as
in antumn (Sarat) as such a proceeding would act as a
good appetising measure and a cure for diseases. Eme-
tics, purgatives and applications of Vastis are respec-
tively beneficial in diseases due to the actions of the de-
ranged Kapha, Pitta andVayu, whereas a regular course
of physical exercise tends ^equally ^ to curb an ag-
gravation of all the three preceding Doshas of the body,
so much so that their aggravation can never be detected
in persons in the habit of taking it regularly
every day, though otherwise addicted to an incompatible
diet, etc. 83-86.

The attention should not be diverted to any other
subject at the time of urination, defecation, sexual inter-
course, taking of food, as well as at the time of taking
emetics and purgatives, etc. It is not wise to anticipate
and indulge in the gloomy thoughts of a future and
probable invasion of a disease, and to suffer any physical
privation on that account. 87-88.

All sexual excesses should be studiously abstained
inasmuch as they are sure to produce Sula (colic),
cough, asthma, fever, emaciation, phthisis, jaundice,
epilepsy, convulsions, etc. A person, who is moder-
ate in sexual intercourse, lives a long life, ^becomes
good-looking, healthy, strong and firm in his nerves and
muscles, and becomes capable of averting (untimely)
decay. One may visit his wife fjit a woman) on each
fourth night in all the seasons of the year except in
summer when he may see her once a fortnight. 89- A.

Women unfit to visit:— A woman in
her menses, not amorously disposed, uncleanly in her

Chap. XXIV.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

409

habits, not sufficiently endeared and endearing and
belonging to a higher social order* older than one’s self,
affected with any disease, wanting in any limbs, inimi'
cally disposed to one’s self, in her period of gestation,
suffering from any uterine disorder, belonging
to his ovvn blood iGotra), or leading the life of
an anchorite, or who is his preceptor’s wife, should
not be gone unto by a man (seeking health and
longevity). A woman should not be gone unto in
the SandhyAs (morning and evening\ as well as on the
Parva daysf (prescribed in the S'^tras), early in the
morning, at mid-day, or in the dead of night. Going unto
a woman at an infamous, unwholesome, or exposed place
is similarly forbidden. Sexual intercourse by a man who
is hungry, or thirsty, or who may be suffering from any
disease, or may be angry, or in a cheerless spirit, is strict-
ly forbidden. A man should not go unto a woman by
repressing a natural urging for VAta (flatus), stool or
urine, or if he is in a weak state of health, (as it would
be highly injurious to his health). Incest with lower
animals, unnatural sexual intercourse, obstruction of
semen in its passage, as well as sexual intercourse with
a woman having any vaginal disease are strictly for-
bidden even in respect of a strong person, 89-B

It is highly injurious for a man tso indulge excessive-
ly in sexual intercourse, or to enjoy it while standing,
or while lying on his back, or to shake his head at the
time ; these should not be indulged in by an intelligent

* The text has ‘‘Varna-Vriddha” which literally means superior
to the man in respect of Varna or the magnetic vibrations of the body,
which are determined by one’s birth in a certain family. It means
several castes of the Hindus.— Ed.

t The Parva days are the Bth, the 14th and i5tb days of either fott«
nights and the last days of the solar monthi.— £d.

$o6

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Cbap. XXIV.

and judicious person even (occasionally for pleasure's
sake. 89-C.

Evil effects of the foregoing abuses :

— Visiting a woman in her menses results in the loss of
sight, longevity and vital power, and should be accord-
ingly considered as a sinful act. The duration of a
man’s life is diminished by going unto a woman, older
in age or higher in social status (Varna), or unto the
wife of his preceptor or superior, in the morning or
the evening, or on the Parva days (the interdicted days),
or unto a woman belonging to the same blood as he. A
visit to a woman big with child is extremely painful
and injurious to the foetus confined in the womb. A visit
to a diseased woman results in the loss of the man’s
vital power. A going unto a deformed, uncleanly,
spiteful, non amorous, or sterile woman, or at an
unclean, infamous, or exposed place is detrimental to
the semen and intellect of the visitor 89-D.

Similarly, sexual intercourse enjoyed by a man at
noon time, or by one who is in an enfeebled, thirsty, or
hungry state of the body, in a standing up posture, or
in a cheerless mood, brings on an excessive loss of semen
and aggravation of the bodily Vdyu. Phthisis due to the
loss of semen is the result of over-intemperance in sexual
matters. Pain, enlargement of the spleen, epilepsy
and even death may follow from sexual gratifica-
tions in a diseased state of health. The V^yu and
the Pitta become aggravated by the sexual inter-
course enjoyed early in the morning or at midnight.
An incest with lower animals, unnatural sexual inter-
course, or that with a woman having a diseased vagina
is attended with an excessive loss of semen and an
aggravation of the bodily Viyu, and is the cause of Upa-
damsfa (syphilitic virus). An act of coition enjoyed by

Chap. XXIV.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 501

holding the woman on one’s bosom or by repressing the
natural urgings towards urination or defecation, as well
as a repressing of seminal discharge would help
the early formation of seminal concretions (in the
bladder)* 89 E.

Hence these (injurious and harmful) practices should
be shunned by a man for his welfare in this life as well
as for that in the next, On the contrary, repression of a
natural and (legitimate) sexual desire, from a sense of
unwise delicacy or shame, is a physical sin.* Hence a
healthy and passionate man possessed of the necessary
fecundating element, under the course of a proper Vdji-
karana (aphrodisiaci remedy, should cheerfully go
unto and duly enjoy the pleasures of company with
a girl, beautiful in looks, tender in years, modest, virtu-
ous, equally passionate, cheerful, kindred to him both in
physical and mental temperaments, and well-decked
with orn unents. Fatigue after coition should be re-
moved by the enjoyment of a bath f , a cool breeze, or a

* It should be always borne in mind that God has implanted
this desire in the mind of man and provided him with the necessary
organic appendages only for the propagation of his species and not for
the gratification of any diseased or morbiii sexual propensity which is
found nowhere else in Nature save and except in debauched human
subjects and which lowers them even below the level of brutes. Hence
love should be the essence of the bond which binds a couple and
converts them into a kind of human centaur, the man and the wife, and
union sexually considered, should be effected only under the promptings
of that sacred instinct in Nature which makes the lilies blow and causes
the pollens to unite their fecundating principles with one another and
which a healthy unjophisticated human heart can instinctively read as
the 860d tlni6 of youthful exuberance.

t A bath is recommended for a man of strong virile power, in case of
sexual intercourse in the day time or it may be possible to take a bath
early in summer nights. — Dallana.

502 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. tCh«p. XXIV.

sound sleep. Food or milk, saturated with sugar, and
meat-juice, prove very refreshing after the act. 89.

Thus ends the Twenty- foufih Chapter in the Chikitsita Sth^nam of the
Sus'tu^a Sanahitd which deals with he rules of Hygiene an 1 the prophy-
lactic measures in gent ral. ,

CHAPTER XXV.

Now we shall discourse on the medical treatment of
a variet>^of diseases (Misraka-Chikitsita). i.

It hks been stated before that blood-letting is the
remedy in diseases of the Pjtli (ear-lobes). Now hear
me describe in detail the treatment of those affections
which are confined to the lobes of the ears. They are
five in number and arc called the Paripota^ XJtpsCta,
Hnmaiitba Duhkha-Vardhana and the Parilehi. 2 3.

Causes and Symptoms : -if the lobe of
an ear be suddenly pulled and kept in that position for a
long time, a numbed and painful swelling of a blackish
red colour is produced on the lobe, owing to its soft
and delicate nature. This is found to spontaneously
burst or crack and is called the Paripota, which
should be ascribed to the action of the deranged Va^yu
(of the sy-tem). 4.

A painful swelling attended with a burning sensation
and suppuration, appearing in the lobe of the ear,
owing to the friction and movements of a heavy orna-
ment worn in the lobe, is originated from the vitiated
condition of the blood and the Pitta. Its colour is
either brown or red and is called? the Utpitta. 5.

Pulling the ear-lobes down by f )rce tends to enrage
the Vdyu (of the localities) which in union with (the
deranged) Kapha gives rise to a painful swelling in those
regions, attended with itching and tinged with the
specific colours# and symptoms of the Doshas
involved. The disease is called the Uamaatha, and is

* Mddhava in his Cvimpilation roiis (that the

awellingis atieadod with a numbness and no pain) in place of
V&gbhata also aupporta thU*— Ed.

^ 504 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHIT^ Chap. XXV.

originated through the concerted aciion of the deranged
V^yu and the Kapha, f'.

A swelling in an ear-lobe attended with pain,
burning and itching sensations owing to its being (pulled
down and) lengthened when found to suppurate- (in the
end) is called the Duhkha-vardhana ; it* restricts itself
only to the skin (of the affected part . 7.

Small exuding pustules resembling mustard-seeds
(in size) and attended with pain, burning and itch-
ing sensations, appear in the lobes of the ears owing to
the action of the vitiated blood, or the deranged Eapba,
or to the presence of parasites (in those localities).
The disease soon spreads itself (and assumes an erysi-
pelalious character). It is called the Parilehi from the
fact of its eating away the affected lobe with the entire
helix. 8.

General Treatment These dreadful dis-
eases (which invade the lobes of the cars; arc highly
dangerous and tend to destroy and eat away the affected
appendages, if not properly attended to at the outset and
specially when the patient is addicted to unwholesome
food and drink and to an injudicious conduct of life.
Hence a physician should speedily remedy these
complaints with applications of medicated Sneha,
Sveda, etc., ointments, washes, plasters, poultices and
blood-letting.f This is the general treatment of those
diseases. 9.

* Madhava adda “an unsuccessful perforaiion (in the ear. lobe)”
to be an addidonal cause of this disiase. He also reads

“due to the concerted action of the three Doshas” in place of
Madhava has Vagbhata’s support in this.— Ed.
t In cases of the predominance of the ViyUi anointment, Anuv^-
Sana and poultices should be resorted to. In cases of Pl(ta*predominance,
purgatives should be applied. Emetics should be applied in cases of
Kapha-predominance and lastly blood-letting, purgatives and washes,

Chap. XXV.] :hikitsa stiiaNam. 505

Specific Treatment Now we shall de-
scribe the medical remedies which should be specially
used 4n anointing (the afifccted parts in these diseases).
Drugs, such as Khara-Manjari, Yashti-madhu, Sain-
(ihavay D^a-ddru^ Ad va-gmidhd and the seeds oiMulaka
and of Avalguja should be pasted together and cooked
with a compound of milk, oil, clarified butter, lard,
marrow and wax. This preparation should be applied
lukewarm to the affected lobe in a case of the Pari-
potaka type. lo-ii.

Manjishthd, Sesamum, YasJLti-madhu, Sdrivd,
Utpala^ Padma-kdshtha^ Rodhra, Kadamba and the
tender leaves of the Vald^ Jambu and Amra (mango)
should be cooked together with (an adequate quantity of)
oil and Dhjiny«imla (Kdnjika). This oil proves curative
in a case of Utpa^ta. 12.

Similarly (a medicated) oil cooked with Tdlapatri,
As'vagandhd, Arka^ J VX’W67/^-scc<ls, Saindhava, Sarald^
Ldngali, lard of a Karkata (crab) and of a Godh4 (a
kind of lizard), proves beneficial in cases of Unmantha.
The affected lobes should be washed (Sechana) with
a decoction of the leaves of the As* mantaka, Jambu and
Amm {In such cascsV 13.

In a case of Parilehi, the affected lobe (Pdli) should
bs dusted with powdered Prapaufidarika, Yashti-
madhu^ Manjishthd and the two kinds of Haridrd after
lubricating it with the oil cooked with the Kalkas of
Ldkshd and Vidanga, It should be as well fomented
with heated cow-dung and plastered with the lukewarm
pastes of Vidanga alone, or in combination with Trivrit^

etc., should be resorted to in cases of the aft'eclion being due to the
concerted action of the vitiated blood and the Pitta.

* Sarali here means Dhupa^kishtha, according to Dallana.

64

So6 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. tChap. XXV.

Sydmd and Arka pasted together (with cow’s urine\
or with the pastes of Karanja'S^cd, Ingudi seed, Kutaja
and Aragvadha (pasted with cow's urine). Mustard oil
cooked* with the admixture of all the foregoing drugs
and with Markka^ NimhaA^zst^ and wax, proves effi-
cacious as unguents (in such cases). 14-15.

In cases where the ear-lobes arc affected and have
become either thin, or hard, an ointment should be
applied to them in order respectively to increase their
growth, or to soften them. 16.

The marrow of a jackal and of an animal frequenting
and living in sw'ampy grounds (Anupa, such as a buffalo,
etc.), together with lard^ oil and fresh clarified butter,
should be cooked with a quantity of milk weighing ten
times their combined weight and with the drugs of the
Madhura (Kakolyddi) group, Asvagandhd and Apd-
mirga and Ldkshd-Rasa (decoction or infusion of
Ldkshi). The oil thus prepared should be filtered
and preserved carefully in an earthen pitcher. The
affected ear-lobes should be constantly fomented and
well-lubricatcd with it. The use of this medicated oil
helps the growth of the ear-lobes and makes them
healthy, soft, smooth, painless, evenly developed and
capable of bearing the w’eight of ear-pendants. 17.

Treatment of Paiita :-The expressed
juice of the Bhringa-rdja and (the decoction of) Triphald,
powders of indigo leaves, Arjuna\i?^x\i, Bhringa-rdja,
Pinditaka^ black-iron, flowers of the Vija and of Saha*
chara^ Haritaki^ Vibhitaka and Amalaka mv^^d together
and pasted with a quantity of mud found adherent
to lotus-bulbs weighing as much as the combined

* Dalltni says that this oil should be cooked with cow*« urine
weighing four times ai much as the oil.

Chap. XXV.]

CHIKITSA STHAISAM.

507

weight of the aforesaid drugs should be kept in an iron-
pitcher well covered and preserved inside a room for a
fortnight. After this period it should be cooked with
(an adequate quantity of) oil and with the expressed
juice*’ of the BJiringa raja and (a decoction of) Triphald.
For the purpose of ascertaining the proper cooking
of the oil, a (white) feather of a ValAka icrane) should
be dipped into it, and satisfactory preparation should
be judged from the deep blue colour imparted to the
feather. The oil should be then preserved in a black-
iron pitcher for a month, Used as anointments, this
oil arrests a premature greyncss of the hair. 18.

The flowers of the S'airiya, Jambu, Arjuna and of
the Kds'mari, sesamum, Bhrifiga-rdja'%Q.^A'>, mango-
stones, t mud, Kantakdri^ Kdsisa^ marrow of

the seeds of Madana^ powdered iron, Rasdnjana,

Yashtimadhu^ Nilotpala, Sdrivdy and Madayanti\ should
be pasted together with the decoction of the Sara (pith)
of the Vijaka. It should then be mixed with seven
Frastha measures of the decoction of the Sdra of Vijaka
and preserved for ten days in a covered iron vessel.
This compound should then be carefully cooked with
an A'dhaka measure of Vibhitaka-oil and again pre-
served in a new iron-pitcher for a month. Then after
cleansing the system of the patient, the oil thus prepared

* In the cases of cooking an oil, the liquid substance to be used,
should be, as a general rule, four times as much as the oil ; but in this
case, the expressed juice of Bhringa-rdja and (the decoction of) Triphald
should be continued to be added, so long as the feather does not become
deep blue.

f- According to Dallana, the reading would have h^in i

the two kinds of Punarnav^,

t One Karsha measure of each of the aforesaid drugs should be
taken.

5o8

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. XXV,

should be used as errhines (Nasya) and in anointing the
head, and the patient should be advised to live on diet
consisting of Mdsha-pulsc, or of Krii'ard, In the course
of a month, it imparts a (deep black) gloss like that of
a black bee, or that of Rasdnjana to the hair aliid makes
it grow thick and curly. It cures baldness, arrests
the susceptibility of the system to an attack of pre-
mature decay, removes the wrinkles of the face, and
invigorates the sense-organs in the performance oj
their proper and respective functions. This oil should
not be given to a man who docs not wish to use it, nor
to an indigent person, to an ungrateful wretch, nor to
an enemy. 19.

Treatment of Vyanga, etc. x-^-Ldhshd,

Rodhra, the two kinds of llaridrdy Manah s^ild^
Haritdla, Kushtha, Ndga (lead), Gairika, V arnaka^
Manjishthd, I ''acha, Saurdsh tra-mritiikd^ Pattanga^
Gorochand, Rasdnjajia, bark of Hcmdnga i^Champaka),
the tender leaves of la fa, Kdliya- Kdshtha, Padina-
kdshtha, the filaments of a lotus, both red and white
chandana, Mercury"^ and the drugs of the Kdkolyddi
group should be pasted together with milk. The paste,
thus prepared, as well as lard, marrow, wax, clarified
butter, milk and a decoction of the drugs of the Kshira
trees should be cooked together. This medicated clarified
butter, is the best of all the unguents that may be applied
to the face. It cures the most difficult cases of Vyanga
and Nilikd, and removes all tans, specks, marks, moles,
eruptions, etc., from the face. It imparts smoothness to
the wrinkled skin, gives a healthy plumpness and bloom
to the cheeks, and makes the face as beautiful as a lotus.

* This is the first time that we come across the mention mnd use
of *‘Pdrada*’ (Mercury) in the Sus'ruta Samhitd,— Ed.

Chap. XXV.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

509

It should be recommended to kingsr and to the ladies
of the royal court, as well as to persons of the same
rank. It acts as a good remedy for cutaneous affec-
tions (Kushtha), and may be as well applied in cases of
Vipddikl* The uiic of a cosmetic compound consisting
of powdered Haritaki, leaves of Nimda, the bark of
man^c, stems of the pomegranate, and the flowers and
leaves of Madyantikd^d^si^iA together, imparts a god-like
effulgence to the complexion of a man. 20-21.

Thus ends the Twenty-fifth Chapter of the Chikitsita Sthanam in the
Sus'ruta Samhila which deals with the treatment of a variety of diseases.

CHAPTER XXVI.

Now we shall discourse on the medical treatment
for increasing the strength and virile power *of weak
persons (Kshitia- Valiyam Vaji-Karana). r.

A youth in sound health taking regularly some
sort of Vatj i'Karana (aphrodisiac^ remedy may enjoy
the pleasures of youth every night during all the
seasons of the year. Old men^ those wishing to enjoy
sexual pleasures or to secure the affections of women,
as well as those suffering from senile decay or sexual
incapacity, and persons weakened with sexual excesses,
should do well tci submit themselves to a course of
Vdji-karana remedies. They arc highly beneficial to
gay, handsome and opulent youths and to persons
who have got many wives. 2 A.

Definition of VeIJi-Karana if duly

taken, the Vdji-karana* remedies make a man sexually
as strong as a horse (Vaji\ and enable him to cheerfully
satisfy the heat and amorous ardours of young maidens,
a fact which has determined the nomenclature of this
class of ^medicinal) remedies. 2-B.

Means of VsCji-Karana : — Various kinds
of (nutritious and palatable) food and (sweet, luscious
and refreshing) liquid cordials, speech that gladdens
the ears, and touch which seems delicious to the skin,
clear nights mellowed by the beams of the full moon and
damsels young, beautiful and gay, dulcet songs that
charm the soul and captivate the mind, use of betel-
leaves^ wine and wreaths of (sweet-scented) flowers,

* The VlCjl’Karana remedies are of three kinds, (i) those pro-
ducing the semen, (2) those secreting the semen, and (3) those producing
»s well as secreting the semen.

Chap, XXVI.]

CllIKITSA STHANAM.

511

and a mer?y careless heart, these are the best aphro-
disiacs in life. 2.

Causes of Sexual Incapacity A cessa-
tion of the sexual desire owing to the rising of bitter
thoughts ^of recollection in the mind of a man, or a
forced intercourse with a disagreeable woman (who fails
to sufficiently rousc up the sexual desire in the heart
of her mate) illustrates an instance of mental impotency.
Excessive use of articles of pungent, acid, or saline
taste, or of heat-making articles of fare leads to the
loss of the Saumya Dhatu (watery principle) of the
organism. This is another kind of impotency. Virile
impotency resulting from the loss of semen in persons
addicted to excessive sexual pleasure without using any
aphrodisiac remedy is the merit form of virile impotency.
A long-standing disease of the male generative organ
(syphilis, ctc.\ or the destruction of a local Marma such
as the spermatic cord) destroys the powers of coition
altogether. This is the fourth form of impotency.
Sexual incapacity from the very birth is called the
congenital (.Sahaji) impotency. Voluntary suppression
of the sexual desire by a strong man observing perfect
continence, or through utter apathy produces a hardness
of the spermatic fluid, and is the cause of the sixth
form of virile impotency. Of the six foregoing types
of impotency, the congenital form as well as the
one due to the destruction of any local Marma
(spermatic cord) should be regarded as incurable, the
rest being curable and amenable to the measures and
remedies antidotal to their respective originating
causes. 3.

Their Remedies: — Now we shall describe the
different VaHji-Karana (aphrodisiac) remedies. Powders
of sesamum, Mdsha-^\xh^^ Viddri^ or S^dlunc^ should

512

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. XXyi*

be mixed with Saindhava salt and pasted with
copious quantity of the expressed juice of the sugarcane
of the Paundarika species. It should then be mixed
with hog’s lard, and Utkdrik^ should be prepared by
cooking it with clarified butter. By* u^ing this
(medicinal) UtWrikai, a man would be able td visit a
hundred women. 4.

The testes of a he-goat should be boiled in milk.
Sesamum seeds should then be successively treated
with this milk in the manner of a Bhdvand saturation.
Cakes should be made of these sesamum seeds with the
lard of a porpoise. This medicine exerts the same
action as the preceding one without producing any
exertion whatever. By eating the testes of a he-goat
with (an adequate quantity of) salt and powdered
long-pepper (Pippali), fried in clarified butter prepared
from churning milk (and not from curd), a man is
enabled to visit a hundred women. 5.

Powders of Pippali, 5 V//-rice wheat

and barley, should be taken in equal parts. Cakes
(Pupstlikst) should be prepared with this compound and
fried in clarified butter. By taking these cakes and
a potion of milk sweetened with (a copious quantity of)
sugar, a man becomes potent enough, to enjoy the
pleasures of love like a sparrow (Chataka). 6.

Powdered successively soaked in the expressed

juice of the same and dried, should be licked with
honey and clarified butter, whereby a man would be
able to visit ten women successively (at a time). Simi-
larly powders of (dried) Amalaka successively soaked
in its own expressed juice should be licked with honey,
sugar* and clarified butter, after which a quantity of

* According to S'ivaddsn it may also be taken with hooey and clarified
batter only*

CHIKITSA STHANAVt.

513

f.

Hi^ , ■ , '*

milk shblild be taken. This compound would make even
an old Ilian of eighty sexually as vigorous asayouth, 7-8
The testes of a he-goat or of a porpoise mixed with
salt and powdered long -pepper, and fried in clarified
butter should be taken for speedy and effective
aphrodisiac purposes The eggs of a tortoise, of an
alligator, or of a crab,* or the semen-J* of a male
buffalo, of a hc-ass, or of a he-goat should be similarly
taken for the same purpose. 9.

Milk boiled and cooked with the sprouts, bark,
roots and fruit of an Asvattha tree, should be sweeten-
ed with sugar and honey, and taken ; this enables a
man to enjoy sexual pleasures like a sparjjjpw* The
poivdcrcd bulbs of V^iddri, weighing an Udumbara (one
ToLi) in measure, and taken with milk and clarified
butteiVr would make an old man young again A
Pala measure of the pulverised Masha pulse, mixed
with honey and clarified butter should be licked and
a potion of milk should then be taken ; this would
make a man sexually as strong as a horse. Wheat and
Atina guptd seeds should be boiled in milk, and taken,
when cold, with clarified butter, and a potion of milk
should then be taken for the same purpose. 10-13.

Clarified butter should be boiled with eggs or
the testes (as the case might bv) of alligators, mice, frogs
and sparrows. By lubricating the soles of the feet
with this Ghrita, a man would be able to visit a woman
with undiminished vigour so long as he would not touch
the ground with his feet. 14.

* Some explain as house-sparrows,

t Here semen would mean the lestes, Ihc receptacle of the semen*
t Some read (boiled) in place of *

)oUed milk only should be taken and no clarified butler should be
kdded thereto.

6s

. $ 14 the. SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap.

The use of pulverised Atma guptd and Ikshuraka
(Kokildksha) seeds mixed with sugar and taken with
milk just milched enables a man to indulge in the
pleasures of youth for the whole night without any
sense of fatigue. The powders of the Uchchafd should
also be taken similarly (with milk and sugar). S'ativari
and Uchchatd roots should also be similarly taken by a
man wishing to have (sexual) vigour. A soup of Atma-
guptd seeds and ^^i‘//^-pulse (boiled together) should be
taken. Atmaguptd-'>z^ 6 .s,Gokshura seeds and Uchchatd
should be boiled wiih milk and constantly stirred with
a ladle. The use of this preparation (with an adequate
quantity qf sugar) enables a man to enjoy the pleasures
of love all the night long. Likewise the milk boiled
with Mdsha-puhe, Viddri, or Uchchatd should be taken
with honey, clarified butter and sugar. By using this a
man may indulge in the pleasures of the bed for the
whole night like a sparrow. 15-19.

The use of the milk of a Grishti (a cow delivered
only once) with a growm up calf (one year old) and
exclusively fed on the (fresh) leaves of the Mdsha-
parnay is recommended as a sexual tonic. All kinds of
meat and milk, as well as the drugs of the Kdkolyddi
group should be regarded as being highly possessed of
the virtue of imparting tone and vigour (to the male
productive organs). They should, therefore, be used (for
that purpose). The medicinal remedies and compounds
described in the present chapter should be taken in
sound health and proper seasons, as they are exhilarat-
ing and invigorating, and help the procreation of
children. 20-21.

Thus ends the Twenty-sixth Chapter of the Chikitsita Sih^nani in the
Bui'rula SamhiU which deals with the treatment of the viiilc impotcncy.

CHAPTER XXVII.

Now we shall discourse on the recipes and modes
of using lelixirs and rcjiivinators of the human organ-
ism whi(?h will make it invulnerable to the inroads
of any disease or of decay (SStTVOpd-gh^ld.—

Hainan iya-Ras^yanam). i.

Metrical Texts : — A wise physician should
(invariably) prescribe some sort of tonic (Rasdyana) for
his patients in their youth and middle age after having
their systems (properly) cleansed by the applications
of a Sneha and purifying remedies (emetics and
purgatives^. A person whose system has not been
(previously) cleansed (Sodhana) with the proper puri-
fying remedies .^emetics and purgatives) should not,
in any case, have rccouisc to such tonics inasmuch as
they would fail to produce the wished-for result, just
as the application of a dye to a piece of dirty cloth
will prove non-effective, 2.

Now we sliall describe the remedial measures and
agents for the maladies due to the aggravated
Doshas^, both mental and physical, w^hich have
already been described (in several places). Old age
and senile decay would be arrested (lit. perpetual or
life-long youth would be secured) by drinking milk,
cold water, honey and clarified butter, either severally
or jointly (f>., in any combinationt taken one, two,
three or four at a time\ in early life (just on or

* The mental Doshas are Rajas and Tamas, whereas the physical
Doshas are Vdyu, Pitta and Kapha.

t There would be four combinations of one each, six of two
each, four of three each and one of four jointly j thus there would be
fifteen combinations in all.

$16

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Ch»p. XXVII.

just before the completion of the process of organic
development). 3-4.

Vlclanga-Ra.8£(y£ina : — The powdered seeds
of the Vidattga (Tandula) and pulverised Yashti madhu
should be mixed together and taken in colB water in

•f

an adequate dose (according to the strength of the
patient), and a potion of cold water should then be
taken. This medicine should be regularly continued
for a month. The same pulverised Vidanga seeds
should be similarly taken for a month through the
vehicle of the decoction of Bhalldtaka mixed with honey ;
or of the decoction of grapes mixed with honey ; or
with the expressed juice of Anta^aka sweetened with
honey ; or through the vehicle of the decoction of
Guduchi, Thus there are tlicse five ways (of taking
pulverised Vidanga seeds (Tandula) as an c’ixir. A
meal of boiled rice with a copious quantity of clarified
butter should be taken with the soup of Amalaka and
Mudga pulse unseasoned with salt and cooked with only
a small quantity of Sneha (clarified butter) after the
medicine has been well digested. These iRasAyana)
remedies prove curative in cases of hsemorrhoids and
in complaints of worras. They improve memory and
the power of comprehension and their use for every
month increases the life-time of the user by one
hundred years. 5,

Vidang’a-Kalpa One Drona measure of
Vidanga (seeds) should be boiled in the way of
preparing cakes in an Indian cake-pan. When the
watery portion (of the cakes) have been removed (eva*
porated) and the Vidang'a- gra,ins well boiled, they should
be taken down and well pasted on a stoue-slab. They
should then be kept in a strong iron pitcher after
having been mi^ed with a copious quantity of the

Chap. XXVII.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

S17

decoction# of Yashti-madhu. The pitcher should be
buried in a heap of ashes inside a closed room
during the rainy season and preserved there during the
four months of rain ; after that period the pitcher should
be taken out (of the ashes). Its contents should then be
consecrated with (appropriate) Mantras by uttering them
a thousand times and should be taken every morning
in suitable quantities after the system has been thoroughly
cleansed (by appropriate emetics atid purgatives, etc.).
The diet should consist of cooked rice and clarified
butter mixed with a copious quantity of the soup of
Mudga pulse and Amalaka cooked with a small quantity
of Sneha and salt ; and should be taken after the
digestion of the medicine. The patient should lie on
the ground (and not on a bedding). Worms would be
found to have been issuing out of the body after the
regular and continuous use of the medicine for a month,
which should be extracted with the aid of a pair of
bamboo tongs or forceps after the body had been anoint-
ed with the Anu-taila (described before) Ants would
be coming out of the body during the second, and ver-
mins (Yuka) in the third month of the use of the medi-
cine which should also be removed as in the preceding
manner. The hair, nails and teeth begin to fall off and
become dilapidated in the fourth month of its use. In
the fifth month the body beams with a divine glow,
becomes resplendent as the midday sun, and exhibits
features which specifically belong to the ethcrial being.
The ears become capable of hearing the faintest and
remotest sound (under its use), and the vision extends
far into space and beholds objects at a great range

* Dallana explains the term Madhukodak^ttara to mean a large
quantity of Madhuka and water, (and by water he means the decoction of
Vidanfa),

Sl8 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXVII.

(which is not usually given to mortal eyes to descry).
The mind, shorn of the qualities of Rajas (action) and
Tamas (nescience), becomes possessed of Sattva (illumi-
nating principles or true knowledge). Things are per-
manently and indelibly impressed upon bis (user's)
memory at a single hearing and the faculty of inven-
tion wonderfully expands. Old age and decay perma-
nently vanish and youth returns to stay in him for
good, bringing with it an elephantine strength and a
horse-like speed, and he is enabled to live for eight
hundred springs The medicated (-il known as Anu-
taila should be used in anointing (the body at this
stage of treatment'' ; a decoction of Aja-kar 7 ia for
UtsAdana .washing) purposes^ well-water saturated with
Us'ira for bathing purposes, sandal paste in anointing
(Anulepana) the body, and the regimen of diet and
conduct as described in connection with the BhallaJtaka
treatment (Vidh^na) should be observed. 6.

Kasmarya Kalpa The use of huskless
Ks^smaryaja seeds for rejuvinating purposes, is similar
to the preceding one, except that it requires a separate
kind of diet and does not require the use to lie on the
ground. Under this treatment, the diet should consist
of (boiled) rice and well-boiled milk and the beneficial
effects that vvould result from its use, arc identical with
those of the foregoing one. These remedies should
b2 employed in diseases originating through the
vitiated blood and Ihtta of the system. 7.

Vala- Kalpa : — A Pala or half a Fala weight
of the (powdered) roots of the VaW should be well-stirred
in cow’s milk and taken (every day\ and the patient or
the user should not be allowed to stir out of his room as
prescribed before (during the entire course of taking the
ipedicine). He should be advised to take a meal con-

dhap. XXVIt] CIIIKITSA STIIANAM. §10

sisting of boiled rice, milk and clarified butter after the
medicine had been fully digested. Premature old age
and senile decay would be arrested for a period of twelve
years by taking this elixir continuously for twelve
days in Jie foregoing manner, whereas an extension
of its course to a hundred days would add a hundred
summers to the duration of his \outhful age. Ati-vaW,
Naga-vald; Vidairi, Sataivari may be similarly taken
for the same purposes^ with this distinction that the
(powders of) the Ati-vald should be taken with water,
those of the Ndga-vald, with honey, whereas Viddtid^nd
the S^atdvari powders should be taken with milk. The
regimen of diet and conduct as well as the beneficial
results produced therefrom should be the same (as from
the use of Vald). Tlie present remedies are recom-
mended to persons seeking strength or suffering from
an attack of Hiematemesis or Ploematochczia * 8.

V^r^hi Kalpa : — A Tula measure of the
powders of Vsfrathi-bulbs should be taken in an adequate
dose (everyday) by mixing it with honey and stirring
it with milk A meal of bailed rice with clarified
butter and milk should be taken after it had been
digested and the patient should be advised to observe
a regimen of diet and conduct (Pratishedha) as laid
down before (in connection with the foregoing elixirs).
By using it a man is enabled to witness a hundred
summers and docs not feel any fatigue after sexual
excesses. A quantity of this pow'der should be mixed
with milk and boiled (according to the rules of Kshira-
pdka). When sufficiently cooled, the milk should be
churned and the clarified butter produced therefrom
should be taken alter the medicine had been digested. A

^ Suffering from consumption and hoemoptysis.— D. K.

$20 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. tChap. XXVII.

continuous use of the medicine for a month enables a
man to live up to a good hundred years. 9.

A decoction should be made by boiling together
the pith of the Vijaka^ (Pita Sdla) and the roots of the
Agni-mantha with which a Prastha measure of Mdsha-
pulse should be duly cooked. When the Misha-pulse is
sufficiently boiled, an Aksha measure of powdered
Chitraka roots and the expressed juice of the Amalaka
weighing a fourth part of the Mds/ia-puha should
be added to it, and the whole compound should be
removed (from the oven) at the close of the cooking.
When cooled down this compound should be taken in
adequate doses with honey and clarified butter after
consecrating it a thousand times with appropriate
Mantras. Persons seeking longevity and a stronger or
improved range of vision should take this and they
should be advised to take their meals without any salt.
The meal, after the digestion of the medicine, should
consist of boiled rice and a copious quantity of clarified
butter and should be taken with unsalted Mudga, and
Amalaka soup or with milk alone. A continuous use
of either of these two medicines for three consecutive
months would make a man’s eye-sight as keen and
foreslghted as that of a Suparnat and enable him to
witness a hundred summers in the full vigour of health,
strength and manhood.^: 10.

^ DaiUna recommends one PaU weight of Vijaka Sdra and Agni-
manlha to be boiled in an Adhaka measure of water which should be
reduced to one half for the preparation of the decoction.

t Suparna is the king of birds and is said to be the most keen-
sighted.

t Dallana says that some commentators do not read this, since they
do not consider it to be a part of the original text. Jejjata also has not
read this.

Chap. XXVII.] CHIKITSA STHANAM, $21

Memorable Verse : — The use of ^ana (seeds)
boiled with milk and taken also with milk guards
against the loss of flesh and prevents the body from
suffering any decay. 1 1.

Thus ench the Twenty-seventh Chapter of the Chikitsita Sihanam in the
Sus'ruta Samhild which deals with elixirs and rejuvcnators.

66

CHAPTER XXVIIL

Now we shall discourse on the elixirs and remedial
agents which tend to improve the memory and invigor-
ate the mental faculties as well as to increase the
duration of human life (Medh^yushk^tnlyam
RasaCyanam). i.

dvet^valg^uJa-Ras£(yana The fruit
(seeds) of the white Avalguja should be dried in the
sun and then reduced to a fine powder. This powder
should be stirred with (an adequate quantity of) treacle
and placed in an earthen pitcher which previously
contained clarified butter (Sneha-kumbha). The pitcher
should then be kept buried in a heap of paddy for
seven days after which it should be taken out and
its contents given in convenient doses every mornii'g
before sunrise to a person, seeking improvement cf
memory and longevity, after his system has been
thoroughly cleansed \^with proper emetics and purgatives,
etc.). Hot water should then be drunk. After taking
the medicine, th:: patient should enter his room in
accordance with the rules laid down in connection with
the Bhalldtaka Vidhdna, After the digestion of the
medicine, the patient should be advised to take a cold
bith and to partake in the evening of a meal of
well-cooked S' dli or Shashtika rice with ^boiled) milk
sweetened with sugar. This medicine continuously
taken in this manner for six months would make the
life of its user sinless, and extend it in the full glow
of health and vigour and in the sound enjoyment of
a vigorous memory and of all his intellectual faculties
to a hundred green summers. 2.

Chap. XXVIIt} CHIKITSA STHANAM. 523

In cases of Kushtha, jaundice and abdominal
dropsy (Udara), the medicine should be prepared by
stirring (the powdered seeds of) the Krishni* (black
Avalguja) with the urine of a cow (instead of with
treacle) atfd given to the patient in doses of half a Pala
weight every morning after the sun has ceased to look
red.f In the afternoon the patient should be made to
partake of a meal of boiled rice with clarified butter
and unsalted A^ntalaka soup. A continuous use of this
medicine in the aforesaid manner for a month would
improve the memory and inteli^^ctual faculties of the user,
and enable him to witness a hundred summers on earth
in the full enjoyment of sound health, Chitraka rcotsj
and Bajani (turmeric) may be used in the same
manner and for similar purposes with this distinction that
the dose of the Chitraka-xooi preparation should be two
Pala measures (instead of half a Pala as laid down in
regard to the foregoing compounds). The rest are
identical with the above. 3.

Manduka-parni RasaCyana: -The Doshas
of the system of a person should be first thoroughly
cleansed (with the help of proper emetics and purgatives,
etc.), and he should be advised to undergo the prescribed
diet of vPeya, YavAgu, etc , in their proper order) He
should be further advised to e^nter his chamber in the
prescribed manner (and to remain there during the entire

•Jejjatft explains “Krbhnd” to mean Pippali. But both Gayi and
Dallana explain it to mean the black Avalguja. It should be mentioned,
here, that Dallana recommends the roots of blaek Avalguja, but we think
that its seeds should be taken.-— Ed.

t Before sunrise.— D. R.

t The roots of the Chitraka with black flowers should be taken.
Dallana.

524

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap, XXVIII.

course of the treatment). An adequate dose of the
expressed juice of the Manduka-parni should then be
stirred with milk, and should be taken after consecrating
It by reciting the proper Mantras a thousand times.
A potion of milk may then be taken immediDtely after.
After it had been fully digested a meal df cooked
barley grains with milk should then be partaken of ;
or (the expressed juice of Manduka-parni) with an
admixture of sesamum seeds followed by a potion
of milk. A meal of boiled rice with milk and clarified
butter should then be taken after the digestion of
the medicine and should be continued for three
months in succession. This would ensure a long life
of a hundred years in the full vigour of retentive
memory and intellectual faculties, and would impart a
god-like eflfulgcnce to the complexion. As an alter-
native, the patient should fast three days and take
only the expressed juice of Manduka-parui for these
three days. After this period he should live on milk
and clarified butter only, or he should be made to take
a Vilva measure (of the paste of Manduka-parni) stirred
with milk for ten consecutive days which would ensure
a life of a hundred years in the full enjoyment of his
intellectual faculties. 4.

BrsChml RaSSCyana : -Having had the Doshas
of the system duly cleansed (with proper emetics
and purgatives, etc.), a person (wishing to undergo a
treatment of RasiyanaJ should be advised to take the
prescribed diet of (Peyi, Yavdgu, etc , in their proper
order), and should be made to enter his room (Agdra).
He should then take the expressed juice of the Bnthmi
in an adequate dose after consecrating the juice a
thousand times with the proper Mantras. After the
medicine had been fully digested he should be advised

Chap. XXVIIL]

CaiKITSA STHANAM.

525

to take in the evening Yavdgu (gruel) without any salt ;
or with boiled milk in the event of his being habituated
to its use. A continuous use of the medicine for a
week improves the memory, leads to the expansion of
the intellectual faculties and imparts a celestical glow
to the cctmplexion. In the second week of its course it
revives old and forgotten memories in the user and adds
to his proficiency in the writing out of any book to
be written. In the third week it enables a man to repro-
duce from memory as many as one hundred words if
twice heard or read (at a single sitting . In the same
manner a (further) use of the drug for twenty-one days
removes all inauspicious features whether of the body
c>r of the mind, the goddess of learning appears in an
embodied form to the (mind of the) user, and all kinds
of knowledge come rushing into his memory. A single
hearing is enough to make him reproduce \verbatim
from memory a discourse however lengthy), and he is
enabled to live for five hundred years. 5

Brahmi Ghrita Two Prastha measures of
the expressed juice of the Brahmi and one Prastha
measure of clarified butter should be cooked with one
Kudava measure of Vidanga seeds, two Pala weight of
each of Vacha and Trivrit, and twelve (in number)
of each of Haritaki, Amalaka and Vibhitaka well
pounded and mixed together. When properly cooked,
the (prepared) Ghrita should be carefully preserved in a
covered pitcher. It should then be taken in adequate
doses as in the preceding manner. The patient should be
advised to take meals of boiled rice, clarified butter and
milk, after the medicine had been fully digested.
Under its use worms and vermin would be expelled
(from their unsuspected seats in the organism) and creep
out of the upper, lower and lateral parts of the body.

526 the SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. CCh«p. XXVlII.

This preparation would give a favourable turn to one’s
fortune, impart a lotus-like bloom (to the cheeks) with
perpetual youth, unparalleled intellectual faculties and a
life that would cover a period of three centuries of song
and sunshine. This elixir or Bass^yana coverswithin its
therapeutic range such affections of the body as* cutane-
ous diseases (Kushtha\ chronic fever, epilepsy, insanity,
and the diseases due to the effect of poisons and to the
evil influences of gho.sts and malignant spirits, as well
as of all other dangerous diseases. 6.

VachSL RassCyana: — paste of white Vachi
to the size of an Amalaka should be taken with (an ade-
quate quantity of) milk, after con.secrating it (in the
proper manner). The medicine should be taken after
cleansing the system (with emetics and purgatives,
etc.) and after entering the Agfira (room). After the
medicine had been digested, a meal of boiled rice with
milk and clarified butter should be partaken of. A
continuous use of this elixir for twelve days improves
the power of hearing. It increases the power of
memory if taken for the next twelve days. It enables
the user to remember a hundred words at a time by
a thrice repetition of the same (i.e,, by taking it for a
period of thirty-six days). A repetition of a twelve days’
(*.^, forty-eight days) use of the medicine leads to
the expiation of all sins ; it imparts a keenness of sight
like that of Garuda and enables the user to witness a
hundred summeis on earth. A decoction prepared with
two Pala weight of any other species of Vachli should
be taken with milk.* The benefits which would result
from its use and the rules of diet and conduct to be

* According to Dallanft, Ibis preparaiion of Vachd should be pre*
pared by boiling it in the manner of Kshira-p^ka Vtdbi.

:h«p. XXVIII.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

527

observed (during its course' are identical with those of
the preceding one. 7.

^ata-p£(ka VachsC-Ghrlta Clarified

butter should be cooked a hundred times in succession
with an Adequate quantity of Vachrf. The use of a
Drona measure of this medicated Ghrita (taken every
day in an adequate dose) extends the earthly career of
its user to five centuries, and proves beneficial in cases
of scrofula, goitre, elephantiasis and hoarseness. 8.

Measures for prolonging life— M. T. :

— Now we shall discourse on life-prolonging measures
and remedies. The powders of Vilva (roots) should
be consecrated a thousand times with Vilva flowers by
reciting the Sree-Sukta (as mentioned in the Rig-
Veda), They should then be mixed with (powdered) gold,
honey and clarified butter (in the form of an electuar>'),
and licked every morning. It is thus a combination of
medicine and Mantra, and, if used continuously for a
year, would remove all inauspicious features (both of
the body and of the mind), 9-10.

Every morning after a bath, a man should offer ten
thousand oblations in fire and take the powders and decoc-
tion of the roots and bark of the Vilva with milk in a
spirit of selfcontrol, whereby he would be able to
acquire longevity. This remedy should be considered as
a good Rasdyana. Similarly a decoction of Mrinafla
mixed with honey and fried paddy and duly consecrated
a hundred thousand times with oblations in fire would
be considered an infallible Rasdyana. 11-12.

The use (of a compound consisting of gold, Padma-
toed, PriyangU and fried paddy mixed with honey
and taken in (an adequate quantity of) cow’s milk
gives a favourable turn to one's fortune. A potion
pf n^ilk cooked with the decoction of the petals (Dala)

528

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. XXVIII.

of Nilotpala (in the manner of Kshira-pdka Vidhi) and
mixed with gold and sesamum seeds^ is attended with
similar results. 13-14.

Cow’s milk with gold, wax and Mdkshika (honey),
if (regularly) taken after having performed ^a Homa
ceremony a hundred thousand times, should bo consider-
ed the best RasAyana. The use of the pulverised com-
pound of the three things viz., Vachd, gold and Vilva, if
taken with clarified butter, tends to improve the health,
memory, intellectual powers and physical growth. It
increases the duration of one’s life and brings good luck
in its train. 15-16.

A (medicated) oil prepared by duly cooking it with
the decoction of a Tuld weight of Vds d-voois should be
taken by a man after having performed a Homa cere-
mony with a thousand libations for the expansion of
his intellectual faculty and the increase of the duration
of his life on earth A TuH weight of barley grains
should be powdered. The preparations of this barley
powder (gradually ^ taken with honey and powdered
Pippali increases one’s capacity for study. 17-18.

The use of pulverised Amalaka and gold with
honey imparts vitality to a dying man. A regular use
of the ^ata(7ari-ghrita mixed with honey and pulveris-
ed gold enables a man to subjugate even his king.
A compound consisting of Go-chandand, Mohanikd,
honey and gold should be taken by a man wishing a
good turn to his destiny. 19-21.

Clarified butter cooked with an admixture of the
pasted Yashti-madhu and with the decoction of Padma
and Nilotpala should be regularly taken with gold, and
then a potion of milk cooked with the foregoing drugs
should be taken. It invariably removes the evil features
^of 1;)0th mind and body), and gives a good turn to

Chap. XXViti,]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

529

fortune. It increases longevity and makes the user
(fortunate like) a king. 22 - A.

The Tri-padi (lit. three-footed) GAyatri should be
recited in connection with the use of any of these elixirs
where n<j Mantra would be found to be specifically
mentioned. The use of the foregoing medicinal com-
pounds improves one's beauty, surrounds a man with the
majesty and effulgence of the gods and makes him as
strong as an elephant. Constant study, disquisitions
(on philosophical and scientific topics), discussions in
other subjects, and residence with professors or men
learned in the respective branches of knowledge, are the
best means for improving memory and expanding one's
intellect. Eating after the digestion of a previous meal,
non-repression of any natural urgings of the body,
annihilation of all killing propensities, perfect contin-
ence, self-co ntrol and refraining from rash and hazard-
ous undertakings, should be deemed the keys to a
long life. 22.

Thus ends Ihe Twenty-eighth Chapter of ihe Chikitsiia-Slhdnam in
the Sus'ruta Samhitd which deals with elixirs and lemedial agents for
improving the memory and intellect and increasing longevity.

67

CHAPTER XXIX.

Now we shall discourse on the restorative and on
the constructive agents (Rasdyana) which arrest innate
morbific tendencies and decay^t (SvsLbh£(vika-

VysLdhi Pratishedhaniya RassCyana) i.

Metrical Text : - in the days of yore the gods
such as Brahmi, etc created a kind of Amrita ambrosia)
which is known by the epithet of Soma, for the preven-
tion of deathi* and decay of the body. We shall now
deal with the mode of using this (ambrosia). 2.

The one and the same divine Soma plant may be
classified into twenty-four species according to the differ-
ence of their habitats, structures, epithets and potencies.
They are as follows:— Munjavdn, Chandra^
mdh, Rajataprabha^ Duf'vd Soma, Kaniydn, S^vetdksha,
Kanaka prabha,Pratdnavdn, Tdla vrinta, Karavira, Am-
s*avdn, Svayam-prabha, Mahd-soma, Garnddhrifa, Gdya
trya^ Traishtubha, Pdmkta^ fdgata, S'dmkara, Agni-
shtofna, Raivata, Yathokta and Udupati, All these
kinds of Soma secure for the user a mastery of the
GAyatri (and hence in the Vedas), and are known by the
above auspicious names mentioned in the Vedas I

♦ These are decrepitude, death, hunger, thirst, sleep, etc.

t Here death may mean, according to some authorities, the death
df tissues as Well.

t The whole of the hymns in the 9th Book of the Rig-veda, besides a
few in other places, are dedicated to the honour of Somai but these twenty-
four names do not occur there. The plant is there represented as a god,
and his worship must at one time have attained a remarkable popularity.
The extraordinary properties of the exhilarating juice of the Soma are
frequently mentioned in the Rig-veda and the language throughout in
which it is behymned Could not be more eulogistic. As an instance of

Chap. XXIX.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 53 1

Their virtues and methods of using them are identical
with each other and are described below. 3 4.

Mode of USingf fhO Soma, : — A room or an
inner chamber (Agirs,) in a commendable site protected
with three walls on each side and provided with all kinds
of accessories and attendants, should be first secured
before taking (the expressed juice of) any of the aforesaid
Soma plants. Then at an auspicious hour on an auspi*
cious day marked by favourable astral combinations
and lunar phase, the person desirous of using the Soma
should enter the inner or central Chamber after having
had his system cleansed (with the proper emetics, purga-
tives, etc ) and having had his diet in the proper order (of
Peyd, etc.). A (whole) plant of the Ams'umdn (or of any
other kind of) Soma should be procured in the manner
to be observed at the time of collecting the Soma for an
(Agni-shtoma) sacrifice and (all) the (preliminary) rites
of Homa should be performed (in the usual orthodox
way). After that the bulb (of the Soma plant) should be
pricked with a golden needle and a quantity of the
secreted milky exudation should be collected in a golden
vessel. The patient (with the auspicious rites of protection,

this we might refer to Rig veda VIII. 48.3 which has been metrically
translated by Muir as follows

We*ve quaffed the Soma bright,

And are immortal grown ;

We’ve entered into light,

And all the gods have known.

What mortal now can harm,

Or foeman vex us more ?

Through thee, beyond alarm,

Immortal god, we soar.

It should be mentioned) however, (hat as far as our knowledge goes^
this Soma is now-a*days not within our reach.— Ed.

532 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXIX.

etc , done unto him) should drink off an Anjali (Kudava)
measure of the secreted juice at a draught without tast-
ing it, and the remainder, if any, should be cast into
water. He should then wash and rinse his mouth with
water in the manner of Achamana. Theh having
controlled his mind and speech with the vows cf Yama
(paramount duties^* and Niyama (minor duties)- *
should stay in the protected inner chamber surrounded
by his friends. 5.

Metrical Text : — After having drunk the
Rasiyana (Elixir) one should reside in a windless (pres-
cribed) chamber, spend his time in perfect control over
his senses, sitting, standing or walking about in his
chamber in a holy spirit and by no means indulging in
sleep (which is injurious under the circumstances). 6.

Or the patient may, after taking his meal in the
evening and hearing the benedictory words, lie down
on a mattress of Kus'a-grass covered with black-deer
skin and thus pass the night among his friends and may
take cold water when thirsty. Then having got out of
his bed in the morning he should hear the benedictory
words recited and have the benedictory rites performed
unto him. He should then touch the body of a cow
and sit down in the same manner (in his chamber).
Vomitings mark the digestion of the Soma-juice and
after vomiting the blood-streaked worm-infested matter,

•Patanjali, the propoundet of ihe Yoga system of Philosophy,
enumerates the Yamss as follows (harmlessness),

(trulhfuln.'ss), (abstinence from stealing), (continence)

and atr f^^ (non-acceptance of offerings except in prescribed cases).

tThe Niyamas, according to the same authority, are:—
(purity— external or internal), (contentment) (penance),

(religious study) an 1 “i,r?r;-ilf<irtn*r'' (meditation of the Divine

Being).

Chap. XXIX.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

533

milk boiled and cooled should be given him in the
evening. Worm-infested stools follow on the third day
(of its use) which help the system in purging off all filth
and obnoxious matter (accumulated in the organism)
through Srrors in diet and conduct, etc. The patient
should in that case bathe in the evening and take cold
boiled milk as before and lie down on a piece of
Kshauma cloth stretched over (the aforesaid mattress).
Swellings appear on the body on the fourth day (of its
use) and worms arc found to creep out from all parts
of the body. The patient should lie down that day on
a bed strewn over with dust and in the evening, he
should be made to drink a potion of milk as before.
He should pass the fifth and sixth day in the same
manner, but milk should be given him in the morning
and in the evening (instead of only in the evening).
The muscles become withered by this time and on the
seventh day the patient is found to be a mere skeleton
covered with a skin only and left with bare animation,
the vital spark being retained by the potency of Soma.
The body should be washed with tepid milk on that
day and plastered with a paste of sesamum, Yashti*
ntadhu and sandal wood, and milk (only) should be
given him to drink. 7-A.

On the morning of the eigfith day, the body should
be washed with milk, and plastered with sandal paste,
and potions of milk should be prescribed for him after
which the patient should be advised to leave his bed
of dust and lie down on one covered with a piece of
Kshauma cloth. From now the muscles of the body
begin to show signs of fresh and vigorous growth,
the skin becomes cracked, and the teeth, nails and
hair begin to fall off. On and from the ninth day the
rnedicinal oil known as Anu-Taila should be used to

534

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. XXIX

anoint (the body) and the decoction of Soma-valka for
bathing (Pari sheka). The same should be prescribed
on the tenth day, and from thence the skin becomes
firm. The eleventh and twelfth day should be passed
in the same way. From the thirteenth till the sixteenth
day (both the days inclusive) the body should be washed
with the decoction of Soma-valka. New teeth well-
formed, symmetrical, strong, hard and as clear as a
diamond or crystal or ruby would appear on the seven-
teenth and eighteenth days. Gruels (Yavigu) pre-
pared with old S'dli-rice and milk should form his diet
till the twenty-fifth day. After that period well boiled
S’dH rice should be taken in the morning and evening
with milk. Fixed, glossy and coral coloured finger-
nails resembling the new rising sun in lusture and
possessed of auspicious marks would be found to be
growing after the lapse of that period and hair begin
to grow, the skin would assume the soft hue of a blue
lotus (Nilotpala), Atasi flower or of a ruby stone.
After a month the hair should be shaved and a plaster
composed of Us'ira, Chandana and black sesamum
applied to the scalp, and the patient should take a
milk-bath. This would lead to the growth of deep
bee-black curls of hair in the course of a week. y-B.

Then the patient should be allowed to stir out from
thi inmost chamber only to re-enter it again after a stay
of a Muhurta (forty-eight minutes) in the outer chamber.
Thenceforth VaUtaila (described before) should be used
in anointing (Abhyanga) his body ; pasted barley in
rubbing (Udvartana) ; tepid milk in washing (Parisheka)
it ; and a decoction of Aja karna in rubbing (Utsddana)
the dirt of. Similarly well water (scented) with Us'ira
should be used for the purpose of bathing (Sndna) ;
Sandal pastes as unguents (Anulepana) and the expressed

Chap. XXlk.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

53S

juice of the A'malaka should be invariably mixed with
any kind of Yusha or supa (he may take). Soup and
black sesamum seeds boiled with milk and Yashti^
madhu should be used (in the preparation of the food).
These ru 4 es of diet and conduct should be observed for
ten consecutive days. 7 C.

The patient should stay in the second (outer)
chainber for a second ten days. Then he should be
made to come out and enter the third ^outmost) chamber
(veranda) and to remain there for ten days with a quiet
control over the mind and should be allowed to take
a short exposure to the sun and wind during this
period (of ten days). He should then be made to re-
enter again the inner compartment. 7 D.

The patient should not contemplate himself in a
mirror during this time owing to his enhanced personal
beauty and renounce all passions and anger for a further
period of ten days. This rule holds good in respect of
all kinds of Soma ; but there is this distinction that the
Soma plants which are found to trail upon the ground
or grow as small shrubs or in bushes should (themselves)
be taken (instead of their expressed juice being drunk)
and a dose of these would be four Mushtis^ and a
half. 7.

The expressed juice of the Ams'umdn ^Soma) should
be pressed and taken in a golien pot and that of the
Chandramih (Soma) in a silver one. By its use a man is
sure to develop the eight godly powers t and is thus able
to imitate the god Is'dna, The expressed juice of a
Soma plant belonging to any other species should be

* A Mushtt measure is equal to eight ToUs.
t The eight godly powers, according to some authorities, are ! —

nwnw iifwr i

536 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXlX.

taken in a copper or an earthen pot or in a (pot pre-
pared of a) piece of red-coloured and stretched skin.
A member of any of the three twice-born castes but
none of the S'udra class is privileged to drink this
ambrosial elixir (Soma\ In the fourth rponth (of
taking it) and under the auspices of a full moon a
Soma-drinker should be allowed to stir out of his
chamber with the auspiciousi rites done unto him and
to resume the daily avocations of his life after he had
worshipped the Brdhmanas in a holy place. 8.

Metrical Texts : -The use of the (expressed
juice of a) Soma plant, the lord of all medicinal herbs
is followed by rejuvenation of the system of its user
and enables him to witness ten thousand summers on
earth in the full enjoyment of a new (youthful) body.
Such a person bears a charmed life against fire, water,
poison and weapon and develops a muscular energy
in his limbs which would be in no way inferior to the
combined strength of a thousand excited (rutted) ele-
phants, of the Bhadrd class (which are the most fero-
cious and irrenstible) in their sixtieth year. Equipped
with such an excellent physique, he can easily and
without any opposition cross the Kshiroda (ocean) and
go up to the abode of S'akra (the king of the gods) and
roam to the extreme confines of Uttara (northern) Kuru
or to any other place he likes. He is invested with
a beauty of frame which belongs to Kandarpa (the god
of love) and his complexion (lustre) vies with the
beams of the full moon. The presence of such a
beautiful man gladdens the hearts of all, and the entire
Veda with all their allied branches* of knowledge

* The allied branches of the study of the Vedas are six in num

They are •fiWT aimw f*npli I

Chap. XXIX.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

537

instinctively dawn upon his consciousness. Like the
gods, he knows no failure in life and roams about in the
world in the full glory of divine majesty. 9.

Distinctive features of the Soma
PiantS: — A Soma plant of whatever species is fur-
nished wfth fifteen leaves which wax and wane with
the waxing and the waning of the moon. Thus one
leaf grows every day in the lighted fortnight attaining
the greatest number (fifteen) in the night of the full
moon and then the leaves begin to decrease in number
dropping one by one every day till the bare stem of
the creeper is left on the night of the new moon. 10.

Their description The Amsumin species
of the Soma is characterised by a smell like that of
clarified butter and has a bulb^ while the Rajata-prabha
is possessed of a bulb resembling a plantain in shape.
The Munjavdn puts forth leaves like those of a garlic
while the Chandramdh species is possessed of a golden
colour and is aquatic in its habitat. The Garuddhrita
and S^vetdksha species are yellowish (Pdndura) and look
like the cast-off skins of a snake and are usually
found to be pendent from the boughs of trees ii.

All other species are marked with parti-coloured
circular rings. Possession of fifteen leaves of variegated
colours, a bulb, a creeper-like appearance, and secretion
of milky juice are the general characteristics of all the
Soma plants. 12- A.

Their habitats S —The Himdlayas,“the Arvuda,
the Sahya, the Mahendra, the Malaya, the S'ri-Parvata,
the Deva-giri, the Deva-saha, the Pdripdtra, the Vindhya
mountains and lake Devasunda are the habitats of the
Soma plants. Somas, of the Chandramdh species are often
found to be floating here and there on the mighty stream
of the river Sindhu (Indus) which flows down at the foot

68

53^ . TH£ SUSHRUTA SAMHiTA [Chap, XXIX.

of the five large mountains lying to the north bank
beyond the Vitastd (river). The Munjavdn and the
Amsumin species may also be likewise found, in the
same locality while those known as the Gdyatri,
Traishtubha Pamkta, Jdgata, S'dmkara, afnd others
looking as beautiful as the moon are found to float on
the surface of the divine lake known as the little
Mdnasa in Kashmir. 12-B.

The Soma plants are invisible to the impious or to
the ungrateful as well to the unbeliever in the curative
virtues of medicine and to those spiteful to the
Brihmanas, 12.

Thus ends the Twenly-ninth Chapter of the Chikitbita Sihdnam in the
Sas'ruta Samhit^ which deals with the Prophylactic elixirs for the innate

maladies.

CHAPTER XXX.

Now We shall discourse on the tonic remedies which
remove mental and physical distress (Nivrtt'tA*

samtstpiya-RassCyana). i.

Metrical Text :~Even in this world mortals
may live happily, free from disease and care like the
gods in heaven if they (mortals) can secure the after-
mentioned drugs (of all^healing potency). 2.

Persons unfit for the use of Rasi^-

yana S —The (following) seven classes of persons, viz ,
the intemperate, the lazy, the indigent, the unwise, the
immoral (Vyasani),*' the sinful and the triflers of
medicine, are unfit to take these ambrosial (Rasdy'ana)
drugs on account of their respective ignorance, inacli-
yiiy, poverty, vascillation, intemperance, impiety and
inability to secure the genuine medicines, 3.

Names of all-healing drugs Now

we shall discourse on these drugs. They are Svita-
kdpoti, Krishna-kdpoti, Gonasi, Vdrdki^ Kanyd^
Ckhatrd, Ati chchatrd^ Karenu^ Ajd^ Chakrakd, Aiitya-
pamini, Suvarchald, Brahma-suvarchald^ S^rdvani,
Mahd'S*rdvani, Golomi^ Aja tomi and Mahd^Vegavati^
These are the names of the eighteen different kinds of
drugs of mighty potency. The mode of their use, their

U A technical term and is divided into two classes, via.,

(i.e., produced by pafsion or desire) and originated from

anger). The first group comprises hunting, dice-playing, day-sleep,
censuring, addiction to woman, intoxication, singing, dancing, playing on
mudcal instruments and idle wanderings. The second class comprises
wickedness, violence, malice, jealouay, enVy, extravagance, roughness in
language and assault, See Manu, Ch. 7. 47, 4$.

540

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. XXX.

therapeutical effects and the religious rites to be observed
in their connection, have been described in the Sdstras
and are identical with those of the Soma plants. In order
to use them a man should enter the (prescribed) chamber
(Agt(ra) and perform the (prescribed) Homa c&remonies.
A Kudava measure of the milky juice of the secreting
species of the plants should be taken once for all after
entering the chamber. 4.

Three twigs or branches, however, to the length of a
span of those of the non-secreting species having roots
should be taken for a single dose. The (whole of)
S’veta-kdpoti with its leaves and roots should be used.
A quantity of the severed pieces of either of the Gonasi,
Ajagari (Suvarchald) or Krishna-kdpoti species including
their thorns, and weighing a Musti (Sanakha-mushtika;*
should be boiled with (an adequate quantity of; milk
(an^ water). The milk thus cooked and prepared
should be passed through a piece of cloth and taken
only once duly consecrated. The milk cooked and
prepared with one of the Chakrakd\ species also
should be taken with milk only once, whereas (that of
one of) the Brahma-suvarchald species should be taken
for seven days in succession. 5.

Five Palas of any of the remaining species should
be boiled with an A'dhaka measure of milk and taken
down with one quarter left. This should then be strained
and the milk thus cooked should be taken in a single

* Some explain “Sanakha mustika” as what would be contained in
the hollow of a palm, with the finger nails [i.e., the fingers) extended.
But “Nakha” seems to refer to the thorns of the plants and ‘‘Mushli”a
Pala weight (i.e., eight Tol4s).

+ Gayi reads in place of W.’’ »nd

explains it as a preparation of one part of the powders of the fruit
of Kan^ak4 and two parts of rice cooked with milk.

Chap. XXX]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

541

dose and once only. The regimen of diet and conduct
is the same as in the case of Soma, until the patient
comes out of his prescribed chamber, with this difference
that his body should be anointed with butter (Nava-
nita). 6.*

Memorable Verses The use of any of

the aforesaid drugs rejuvenates the system, fills it
with the strength of a lion, invests it with a beautiful
shape, blesses the user with such powerful memory that
he can commit to memory anything once heard, and
ultimately extends his career to two thousand earthly
years. Crowned with diadems of celestial beauty, de-
corated, as if, with Angadas (bracelets), Kundalas (ear-
rings), crowns and heavenly wreathes (of flowers), Sandal
paste and dress, the users are enabled to traverse, like the
gods, the cloud-spangled high ways of heaven, unflinch-
ingly in their pursuits. Persons whose systems have
been fortified with these medicinal herbs (Oshadhis),
like the users of Soma go not by the roads on earth but
scale those inaccessible heights of heaven from whence
the pendent rain-clouds look down upon the soil below
and where the feathered wingers of the ethereal blue
frequently soar up to. 7.

Differenttating Traits:— Now we shall
describe the different traits of t^ese (all-healing) Osha-
dhis. The Ajagari* Oshadhi js found to put forth five
leaves which have a brown colour and are marked with
variegated ring-like patches. It looks like a snjike and
measures five Aratnis (a cubit of the middle length from
the elbow to the tip of the little finger) in length. The

* There is no mention of "Ajagari” in the list (para. 2) and (here
is no mention of "Suvarchald” in this descriptive list. It seems, therefore,
probable that “Ajagari” and “Suvarqhald" ate identical.

542 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. tChap. XXX.

S'veta-ksipoti is a leafless, gold-coloured, snake-shaped
plant with a root two fingers in length and is red
at the extremities. The Gonasi is a bulbous plant
possessed of two leaflets, red-coloured and is marked with
black rings. It measures two Aratnis in bfeight and
resembles a Gonasa (boa) snake in shape. The ISriabna-
kl^poti is a soft, hairy, milk-secreting plant and its
juice is possessed of a colour and a taste like that of
sugar-cane juice. The is bulbous and puts forth a

single leaflet; it is resplendent like broken pieces of black
antimony. It resembles a black lance hooded KobrA
(Krishna Sarpa) in shape and is possessed of mighty
potency. 8.

The Cbratrai and the Ati-chchhatr^ are bulbous
in their origin and are found to be attached to a
plant of the Sveta-kApoti species Both of them are
po.ssessed of the virtue of arresting death and. decay
and act as prophylactic against the Rakshas as (malig
nant spirits). A plant of the Kany{( species is found to
pilt forth a dozen leaflets beautifully coloured like the
breast-feathers of a peacock. It is bulbous in its origin
and exudes a gold- coloured juice. An Oshadhi plant
of the Karenn species abounds in milky juice and its
bulb resembles an elephant. It puts forth two leaves
which look like those of a Hasti-karna-paldsa tree. An
Oshadhi plant of the 4j8( species abounds in milky
juice, grows like a Kshupa or bushy plant and is white-
coloured. like the moon, a conch shell, or a Kunda
flower ; its bulb resembles the udder of a she-goat. An
Oshadhi plant of the Chakraki species is white-coloured,
put&forth flowers of variegated colours, grows in bushes,
resembles a Kdkddani plant in shape and size and is
possessed of the efficacy in warding off death and decay.
An Oshadhi plant of the A'ditya-parnini species grows

Chip. XX5C] CHIKITSA STHANAM. • §43

from roots (and has no bulb) and 5s furnished with five
red-coloured leaflets as soft as a piece of linen and which
always point towards the sun (change their direction
with the progress of that luminary in heavens) An
Oshadhi •plant of the Brahma-Suvarchali species, is
gold-coloured, abounds in milky juice, resemUles a
lotus plant in appearance, grows by the side of water
(/>., in marshy lands) and spreads in all directions. An
Oshadhi plant of the Mahat-S'rfitvani species bears flowers
like a Nilotpala and collyrium coloured fruit. The
stem of the Kshupa (bushy) plant measures an Aratni
and the leaf two fingers in length. It is gold-coloured
and abounds in milky juice. An Oshadhi plant of the
S'ratvani species, possesses all the preceding features,
(of the MahA s'rdvani) but is tinged with a yellow
colour. The Oshadhi known as the Golomi and the
Ajalomi are hairy and bulbous (in their origin). A
Vegavati Oshadhi plant puts forth leaves from its roots ;
its leaves are severed like those of a Hamsapddi creeper,
and move about violently (even* in the absence of any
wind), or it resembles a Samkha-pushpi creeper inwall its
features, looks like the cast off skin of a snake and grows
at the end of the rainy season in autumn). 9.

Mode of culling the above drugs

The first seven of the all-healing^shadi plants enumerat-
ed above should be culled by reciting the following
Mantra : —“We appease thee with the holy energy and
dignity of Mahendra, RAma, Krishna and of the Brahma-
nas and of cows. Exert your beneficial virtues for the
good of mankind^ The intelligent one should consecrate
all these Oshadhis with this Mantra. The lazy, the
impious, the ungrateful and the unbelieving invariably
fail to see and secure the Soma plants, or the drugs
possessed of similar virtues. The gods after having

544

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. XXX.

drunk the celestial ambrosia to their fill cast the residue
to the Somas and kindred plants as well as to the
moon, the lord of the Oshadhis. lo-A.

ThCir habitats The Brahma-suvanhald
species (of the Oshadhis) is found to grow in ?>nd about
the waters of the great river Indus and the laKe Deva-
sunda. The Aditya parnini species may b^ had in
those two regions at the end of winter, and Gonasi and
Ajagari at the beginning of the rains The KarenUy^^
Kanydy the Chhatrd^ the Ati-chchhatrd, the Golofni, the
Aja4omi, and the Mahd-s! rdvani varieties of the Osha-
dhis are found (in spring) in the lake of Kshudraka-
Mdnasa in Kashmir. The Krishna-sarpdkhyd and the
Gonasi species also are found in that locality during the
spring. The S'veta’kdpotl species is white coloured
and is found to grow on the ant-hills which cover a
space of three Yojanas on the other (viz^ the western)
side of the river Kausiki and to the east of the Sanjaya-
nti. The Oshadhi of the Vegavati species grows on
the Malaya hills and on the Nala setu. lO-B.

Any one of these Oshadhis should be taken after a
fast under the auspices of the full-moon in the month
of Kirtika. The regimen of diet and conduct is the
same as laid down in connection with Soma-Rasfiiyana
and the results have been already described to be the
same. loC.

The common habitats of all the

Oshadhis The Soma as well all the other
Oshadhi plants may be had on (the summits of) the
Arvuda mountains whose cloud-rending summits are
the favourite haunts of the gods and which abound in*
holy pools and fountains frequented by the gods, the
Siddhas and the holy Rishis, and whose large hollow
caves are reverberated with the thundering roars of

Chap. XXX.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 54^

Hon and which are moated on all sides by swift cours-
ing rivers, whose waters are perpetually tossed by
sportive elephants of the forests and whose brows are
effulgent with the lustres bf various brilliant metals
imbedded«in their hearts. lo.

These* ambrosial plants (as well as other drugs)
are to be sought in the rivers, the holy forests and
hermitages, as well as in lakes and on hills, since
this world is a bed of gems and is known to hold
priceless treasures in all places, ii.

Thus ends the Thirtieth Chapter of the Chikitsita Sthinam in the
Sus'ruta Samhitd which deals with the tonic remedies which have the
power of removing the mental and physical distresses.

69

CHAPTER XXXI.

Now we shall discourse on the medicinal uses (both
internal and external) of the Snehas^, oleaginous
substances (Snehaupayogika-Chikitsita). r.

A Sneha or an oleaginous substance forms the
essential factor of the physical organism, and the self-
conscious animated element (which contributes directly
to its vitality and makes life possible) abounds in
oleaginous principles; both arc consequently in constant
want of a Sneha. Snehas or oleaginous substances are
enjoined to be administered in food and drinks as well
as in Anuv^sana, Mastikya s'iro-vasti and Uttara-vasti
(urethral or vaginal enemas), crrhincs (Nasya\ ear-drops
(Karna-purana) and unguents (Abhyanga). 2.

There are four kinds of Snehas which, however, are
divided into two classes according to their origin : viz.,
vegetable and animal. Clarified batter prepared from
cow’s milk is the best of the animal Snehas, while
Sesamum oil is the best of the vegetable ones, 3

Now we shall describe the ends for which the
different vegetable oils should be used as well as the
modes in which they should be prepared and employed. 4.

The expressed oils prepared from, (the seeds of)
Lodhra, Eranda^ Kos'dnira, Danti^ Dravanti, Saptald^
S'amkhzni, Palds'a^ Vishdnikd, Gavdkshi, Kampillaka,
Sampdka and of Nilini act as purgatives. The oils
prepared from (the seeds of ) Jimutaka^ Kutaja, Kritave-
dhana, Ikshvdku (bitter gourd), Dhdmdrgava and of
Madana act as emetics. The expressed oils prepared
from (the seeds of) Vidanga, Kharamanjari^ Madhu-

* The Sneha is of four kinds, viz., clarified butter, oil, lard and
marrow, of which clarified butter and oil are generally used.

Chap. XXXI.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

54;

s*igrUi Surya-valli^ Pilu^ Siddhdrthaka and of Jyotishmati
act as errhines (S'iro-virechana). 5.

The expressed oils prepared from (the seeds of)
Karanja, Putika, Kritamdla^ Mdtulunga, Ingudi and of
KirdtadUkta are used in cases of Dttshta-vrana (malig-
nant ulcers). The expressed oils of Tuvaraka, Kapittha,
Kampillaka, Bhalldtaka and of Patola are used in cases
of Mahi-vyatdhi Ku:>htha, etc.). The expressed oils of
Trapusha^ Ervdruka, Karkdriika^ Tumbi and of Kush-
mdnda ara used in cases of Mutra^sanga (for diuretic
purposes). The expressed oils of Kapot.i-vamka^ Aval-
guja ani of Haritaki are used in cases of Sarkarat-
s'mari (gravels, stones, etc). Tiie expressed oils of
Kusumhha^ Sarshapa, Alast, Pichu niarda^ Atimuktaka
Bhdndiy Kaiu-tumbi and of Katabhi are used in cases of
Prameha (urinary complaints^ The expressed oils of
the fruits of Tdla, Ndrikela, Panasa, Mocha, Piydla,
Vilva, Madhuka, S leshmdtaka and of Aynrdtaka are
used in diseases due to the deranged Viyu acting in
concert with the deranged Pitta. The expressed oils
of Vibhitaka, Bhalldtaka and of Pinditaka are used in
Krishna-karma (blackening the cicatrix of a healed
ulcer, etc.). The expressed oils of S^ravana, Kanguka and
of Tuntuka are used in imparting a yellow colour (to a
cicatrix). The expressed oils, of the pith of S'ims^apd
and of the Aguru arc used in cases of Kushtha known as
Dadru (ring worm) and Kitima. 6-7.

The primary action of all kinds of Sneha (oil, clari-
fied butter, etcj is to subdue the aggravation of the
deranged Vdyu of the body, and the general virtues of
all kinds of (vegetable) oil have been described above. 8.

Now we shall describe the process of preparing drug-
decoctions and of medicating oils (therewith). Accord-
ing to several authorities^ the bark, roots and leaves,

548

THE SUSHRUTA SAMH[TA.

[Chap, XXXI.

etc., of the drugs to be used should be boiled with
water weighing four times their combined weight,
and should be taken down with three-fourihs of the
original water evaporated by boiling. Tliis is the rule
of preparing drug-decoctions (Kashiya''. Sik Prasrita
(one Prasrita being equal to sixteen Tol^s) weight of oil,
twenty-four Prasrita weights of the liquid (decoction
prepared before) and four Aksha measures (one Aksha
being equal two to Tolds) of pasted drugs (as Ealka) are
the proportions to be observed in cooking a medicated
oil. But this is not correct. Why? Because it is
not in conformity with the injunctions of the Scriptures
(officinal standard). We shall now proceed to explain
the different measures of Pala, Kudava, etc. 9-10.

Measures of Drug's : — The weight of twelve
middle-sized Dhdnya-mdshas (corns of paddy) make
one Suvarna-mishaka. Sixteen Suvarna-mdshakas make
one Suvarna. The weight of nineteen middle-sized
Niskpdvas (pulse) make one Dharana. Three Dharanas
and a half make one Karsha. Four Karshas make one
Kudava. Four Kudavas make one Prastha.* Four
Prasthas make one Adhaka. Four Adhakas make one
Drona. Hundred Palas make one Tuld. Twenty Tulds
make one Bhdra. This is the measure in respect of
dried substances. The quantity should be doubled in
cases of fresh vegetables and fluids. -f- ii.

* Thirty-two Palas make one Praslha in respect of water s but
in respect of non-oily substances a Prastba is equal to twenty Palas, where-
as in respect of fresh drugs it is equal to only sixteen Palas,

t Some drugs, vi*. Vdsf, Kutaja, Kushmdnda, Ptasa'rani
Vald, Amrita and Nimba, etc., ate invariably employed in their fresh
state and the practice is not to take them in double measures in spite of
their freshness. Two different kinds of measure have been adopted
in the Ayvivctlic Pharmacopoeia. One is called the E((li& lA *ikd the

Chap. XXXI.l

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

549

The Kashafya-PaCka Kalpa :~The bark,
roots and leaves, etc., of medicinal drugs should be
dried in the sun and taken in any of the aforesaid
measures, should be cut in small pieces, or pounded,
as the case may be, and soaked in a quantity of water*
weighing eight or sixteen times their combined weight.
They should then be boiled over a fire and the decoc-
tion should be taken down from the oven with only
a quarter part of the water left. This is the general
rule for preparing a decoction (Kashaiya). 12.

The Sncha-P^ka Kalpa One part of
the Sneha (oil, clarified butter, etc.), four parts of (any
one or more) liquidt substances, a fourth part of the
medicinal pastes (Kalka) should be boiled together.
This is the general rale for the preparation of a
medicated Sneha (oil, clarified butter, etc.). 13.

Alternative Methods As an altemaiive,
a Tuld measure of the bark, roots and leaves, etc. (as
the case may be) of the drugs to be decocted, should be
boiled with a Drona measure of water. The water in the
preparation should be boiled down to a quarter part of
its original quantity and then considered as cooked and

othei the Mstgadha measuie. MahajNhi Charaka has adopted the first,
but that adopted by Sub^futa is the second one.

* Walei weighing four lime^ as much as the drugs when the drugs ar^f
of a soft consistency and eight times as much when they are hard and
sixteen times as much when they are very hard,

t When there are more liquids to be used than one, the general
rule is that the total weight of all the liquids would be four times that
of the Snellfti if not otherwise directed. All this liquid part should,
however, be boiled away and the Sneha part should be left before the
Sneha is removed from the 6re and before it can be Bt for use. It should
be noted that the cooking of a Sneha should i ot be completed in one
day.— ?d,

550

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITa.

[Chap. XXXI.

prepared. A Kudava measure of oil should be boiled
and cooked with four times as much of the liquid
and a Pala measure of pasted drugs (Kalka). This
is another process of cooking medicated Snehas
(oil, etc.), 14. •

Memorable Verses : -The foregoing rules

should be adopted where no measures would be found
to have been specifically given of the Sneha, the liquid
and of the drugs, whereas in cases of specification, the
specific quantities should be taken. Water should be
used as the liquid, where no other liquid would be
mentioned by name (in connection with medicating a
Sneha, viz., oil, clarified butter, etc, by cooking). Both
for the decoction and paste (Kalka\ the drugs
mentioned in the respective list should be used in
preparing a medicated Sneha in the absence of any
explicit and specific injunction to that effect. 15.

Now we shall discuss the degrees of medically
cooking a Sneha (oil or Ghrita). Mild (BIridu), middling
or Intermediate (Madhyama) and hard (Khara) arc the
three degrees which the boiling process undergoes in
medically cooking a Sneha. A cooking is said to be
mild (Mridu-Pdka) when the oil is found to drop off
entirely from its drug-paste (Kalka) leaving it dry and
sapless; whereas in an act of middle-cooking (Madhyama-
^ Pika) the paste would be found to have become
pellucid and non-sticky like wax ; a cooking done
until the paste (in the Sneha^ assumes a little clear,
glossy, frothless, black colour is termed strong (Khara-
Pdka). A Sneha cooked beyond the last named degree
is called a burnt Sneha. A Sneha should, therefore, be
properly cooked. A mild’y cooked Sneha should be
administered in food and drinks. A middling-cooked
one for the purposes of errhines and anointments, while

Chap. XXXI.]

ClilKITSA STHANAM.

551

a strongly cooked one should be used for the purposes
of Vasti-Karma and as ear-drops* 16.

Memorable Verses:— The cooking of a
Ghrita should be considered medically complete as
soon as the froth and the sound would vanish and
the peculiar smell,, colour and taste of preparation
would be manifest. The medically cooking of an oil
resembles in all respects that of a Ghrita with this
exception that an abundance of froth appears on the
surface of the oil at the completion of the cooking. 17.

The process of taking a Sneha in-
ternally S - Now wc shall describe the process of
taking a Sneha internally, A man with an empty stomach
should be made to take a draught of a medicinal or
medicated oil or Ghrita, just as the god of day (sun) would
appear on the summit of the hill at dawn and lighten
up the horizon with the first shoots of his vermilion-
tinted golden rays. Rites of benediction should be
first done unto the patient before administering to
him the oil or the Ghrita in an adequate dose. After
that he should wash his mouth with warm water and
quietly stroll about with his shoes on. 18.

Metrical Texts The use of a potion of a
(medicated) Ghrita is recommended to patients
suffering from an extremely parched or dry condi-
tion of the organism, or from ulcers, or from the effects*
of a poison, or from those due to the actions of the
deranged Viyu and Pitta, as well as to persons of weak
memory and intellect. Potions of (medicated) oils
should be prescribed in aggravations of the Kapha and

* Charaka, on the contrary, bolds that a Khara (strongly cooked)
Sneha should be used in anointing the body, a middling-cooked one for
the purposes of drinks and Vasti karnia and a mildly cooked (Mridu)
one for the purposes of errhines.

555

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXXI.

of fat, as well as in cases of worms (in the intestines)
and incarcerated flatus (wind in the abdomen), or whefi
the patient is found to be habituated to the internal
use of any oil, or seeks the firmness of his body
(muscles). The use of lard is recommended t?» persons
emaciated with over-fatiguing physical labour, or to
persons whose blood and semen are greatly diminished
or to those suffering from an attack of Mahd-vyAdhi
(due to the vitiated condition of the blood), or to
persons of a voracious appetite (Mahdgni', or of Vitaja
(nervous) temperament, as well as to those possessed
of great physical strength. The use of marrow or of
medicated Ghritas mixed with appropriate drugs is
beneficial to men of strong digestive capacity (Dipta-
vahni\ or to those afflicted with a deranged Vayu, or
to those whose bowels are not easily moved, or who
are capable of undergoing a large amount of physical
hardship. Clarified butter, without any other thing
added thereto, should be administered in the affections of
the deranged Pitta ; whereas it should be mixed with
salt before use in the diseases due to the action of the
deranged VAyu and with the admixture of Yava-kshdra
and powdered Trikatu in the affections of the aggra-
vated and deranged Kapha. Oil or clarified butter
should be administered through the medium of one,
^two or more of the sixty three different combinations*
of the (six different) Rasas (flavour) according to
the nature and intensity of the aggravated Dosha
or Doshas involved in each case. 19-A.

Clear (filtered) oil, clarified butter, etc., should be
taken by a man habituated to its use and capable of
undergoing physical hardships during the months of

Vide UUftra-Tantta, Chapter LXIII.

Chap. XXXI. ]

CHIKITSA STIIANAM.

553

the year which are neither too hot nor tOQ cold* in-
asmuch as the use of clear or transparent oil or Ghrita’
is above being commendable. A Sneha should be taken
in the morning (lit. day-time) during the cold months of
the year ind in case of the joint aggravation of the bodily
Vdyu and Kapha ; whereas it should be taken in the
evening {\h. night) during summer and in cases of the
joint aggravation of the bodily Vdyu and Pitta. Potions
of oil or clarified butter taken in summer by a person
suffering from an aggravation of the bodily Viyu
and Pitta may bring on thirst, epileptic fits and
insanity. In the same manner draughts of oil or
clarified butter taken in winter by a person suffering
from an aggravation of the bodily Vdyu or Kapha
may be followed by a heaviness of the limbs, aver-
sion to food and;colic (Sula). If a patient feels thirsty
after taking a Sneha, he should take warm water, and
be made to vomit the Sneha with (further) draughts of
hot water in the event of the thirst still not subsiding.
Cooling plasters should be applied to his head and
a cold water bath should be prescribed. 19-B.

The DoSEgC 5 — The Dosage of a Sneha which
requires the quarter part of a day {ix., three hours)
to be digested, should be deemed appetising and bene-
ficial in slight aggravations of the bodily Doshas ; that
which requires half a day to be digested should be
regarded as invigorating, spermatopoietic, construct-
ive and beneficial in moderate aggravations of the

* Both Vrinda and Chakrapdni read this but with little difference.
Both of them read ^ in the cold season. But their

commentators accept the reading in the text, to be

a variant. We have the authority of Charaka, however, to accept the
^ reading of the text.

70

554

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. tChap. XXXI.

bodily Doshas. The dosage of a Sneha which takes
three-quarter parts of a day to be digested, acts as
a bodily emollient and should be prescribed in cases
of extreme aggravation of the bodily Doshas, while
the quantity which can only be digested in t^e course
of an entire day (twelve hours) should be considered
efficacious in all affections of the body and does not
produce physical lassitude, fainting fits and delirious
conditions. The measure or quantity of a Sneha which
takes a whole day and night to be digested without
undergoing any kind of vitiation (reactionary acidity)
in the stomach, proves curative even in cases of
Kushtha (cutaneous affections), insanity, poisoning
(effects of poison) and Apasm^ra (hysteric convulsions),
ascribed to the baneful influences of the malignant
stars. 19C.

The evil effects of Over-dosage A

patient should be made to take as much of the Sneha
as he would be able to easily digest inasmuch as an
excessive over-dose may prove fatal. The patient
should be made to vomit with draughts of hot water
in a case of over dose or abuse of a Sneha and in the
event of its continuing in an undigested or partially
digested state in the stomach. In cases of doubt-
ful digestion, similar potions of hot water should
be administered which would produce good eructa-
tions and bring on a fresh relish for food, 19-D.

When the Sneha begins to be digested, it is attended
with thirst, vertigo, lassitude, weariness, a disturbed state
of the mind and a burning sensation. When the Sneha
appears to have been fully digested the patient should
be affused with hot water, A gruel prepared with only
a small quantity of rice should be given lukewarm to the
patient (at this stage). As an alternative, a well-

Ch«p. XXXI.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 555

aromated soup (of Mudga, etc.) or meat-juice cooked
without the addition of any Sneha (oil pr Ghrita)
or with only a small admixture of clarified butter
should be given, or he may take Yavdgu (pure and
simple). 19-E.

A S/leha should be taken three, four, five or six
days consecutively ; used (continually) for more than a
week it becomes habituated to the user. A Sneha should
be taken with food (at the time of mid day meal) by a
weak, or an old man or an infant, or a thirsty person,
or one of a delicate constitution, or one averse to its use
in summer. 19-F.

Sadyah-Snchana :-The administration of
a potion composed of powdered Pippali and (Sain-
dhava) salt mixed with curd-cream and the four kinds
of oleaginous substances (Sneha) constitute what is
known as the Sadyah-Snehana it produces the
effects of the Sneha within a very short time). The
use of a YavAgu well-cooked* with the soup of half-
fried meat (instead of water) and a Sneha (clarified
butter), and mixed with honey acts as a Sadyah-
snehana. A Yavdgu prepared with milkf and a small
quantity of rice and taken lukewarm with clarified
butter produces the same result. The use of cow's
milk milched into a pot containing clarified butter
and sugar produces an instantaneous emulsive effect
(Sadyah-snehana), if taken by a man with a parch-
ed state of the organism. Clarified butter cooked
with three parts of the decoction of Yava, Kola and

* In place of (well-cooked), ChaktadaUa reads

(prepared with a small quantity of rice),
t In place of (prepared with milk), Cbakradatta reads

(prepared with an abundance of sesamum which, according
(p S'ivad^sa, would constitute three parts with only one part of rice),

SS6

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. XXXI.

Kulattha pulse (taken together) and one part each of
milk, curd, wine and clarified butter churned from milk
acts as an instantaneous demulcent (Sadyah-snehana)
and is hence recommended to kings and king like
personages. This potent emulsive measurg (Sadyah-
snehana) should be prescribed for the old, the' imbecile,
to females and to persons of sluggish appetite, as well
as to sensitive persons and in diseases due to a slight
aggravation of the bodily Doshas. 19-G.

Forbidden cases of Sneha-psina

The internal use of a Sneha is forbidden to persons
suffering from ascites, fever, delirium, alcoholism, aver-
sion to food and vomiting, as well as to weak,
corpulent, thirsty, fatigued, or intoxicated persons.
It is forbidden on a cloudy day, in an improper season
of the year, after the application of Vasti-measurcs,
purgatives and emetics and after premature parturition.
The internal use of a Sneha (oil or Ghrita) gives rise
to a host of maladies in the foregoing cases, or the
diseases become more serious or may even become
incurable. In cases of premature parturition, there
remains a quantity of mucus and vitiated lochia in
the womb ; therefore, stomachic (T^chana) and parch-
ing (Ruksha) drugs should be administered to females
after child-birth. After a period of ten days, however,
draughts of oil or clarified butter should be given
according to requirements. 19.

A dry or parched condition of the organism should
be inferred from a general dryness of the body, the hard
and knotty character of the fcecal matter (stools), a slug-
gish digestion with a burning sensation on the epigas-
trium (Uras) and an upward coursing of the Vdyu from
the abdomen (Koshtha) as well as from the weakness and
disQoloration of the body. Lassitude, a sense of heaviness

Chap. XXXI.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

SS7

in the limbs, the oozing out of the Sneha through the
lower orifices of the body and an aversion to any kind of
oleaginous substance are the indications which mark the
satisfactory action of an emulsive remedy in a human
organ isn^ while its abrupt excess or abuse is followed
by aversfon to food, salivation, a burning sensation about
the anus, dysentery and diarrhoea and such like symp-
toms. A condition of dryness in the organism should
be remedied with a Sneha, while an excess of the latter
should be corrected with meals of S^ydmdka or Kora-
diisha grains, as well as with milk-curd (Takra), levi-
gated sesamum paste (Pinyika) and powdered barley
(Saktu). 20-23.

The good effects of Sneha-p£(na

The bles£ings which attend a person who has duly
taken a Sneha are improved digestive capacity, regular
and satisfactory motions of the bowels, a growth of all
the vital piinciplcs of the body, strength and firmness of
the organs, improvement of complexion, a delayed old
age and the enjoyment of a hundred summers on earth.
The application of a Sneha is potent enough to increase
the strength and the digestive capacity of a weak person
suffering from impaired digestion, and a person having
his health and digestive capacity recouped (by the use
of a Sneha) does not yield to the evil effects of errors
of diet. 54-55* f

Thus ends the Thirty-first Chapter in the Chikilsita Slhdnam of the
Sus'iuta Samhitd which deals with the treatment of the diseases where
oleaginous medicines are useful.

CHAPTER XXXn.

Now we shall discourse on the medical treatment by
measures of fomentations^ diaphoretic measures, etc.

(SvedsC-vacharaniya). i.

Sveda^ (calorification, fomentation, diaphoretic
measures, etc.) may be divided into four groups such as,
the application of direct heat (T^pa-sveda), foment-
ation (Ushma-sveda\ poulticing (Upandha sveda) and
the application of heated fluids (Drava-sveda). All
kinds of diaphoretic measures (Sveda) belong to one
or the other of these groups. 2.

T^pa-SVeda: — Of these the Tdpa-sveda consists
In repeatedly applying heat to (any affected part of the
body of) a patient made to lie down (on a bed) with
the help of the palm of the hand, a piece of brass, an
Indian saucer, a piece of baked clay or sand, or a piece
of cloth after heating them over a fire of Khadira wood,
etc. 3.

UShma-SVCda : — A piece of stone, brick, iron,
or baked clay should be made red-hot and sprinkled
over with water or with sour gruel (Kdnjika). The
affected part of the body should be covered with (cotton
plugs soaked in) Alaktakaf and then fomented with

* The Sanskrit term “Sveda” is not properly rendered by the terms
fomentations, diaphoretic measures or any other such word or phrase.
Sveda is used to mean the application of heat in any possible way-*it
may be to cause or not to cause perspiration. Vapour baths, hot water
baths, applications of warm poultices, etc., are also included in the mean-
ing of the term Sveda. We have, however, for convenience sake, used
the term fomentation as a synonym of Sveda in general.

and explains that the cotton plug soaked in Alaktaka should be made
and placed over the affected part before applying the fomentation*

Chap. XXXII.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

559 ’

the above-named (heated) articles. As an alternative,
a metal saucer containing milk, curd, Dhdnydmla, meat-
soup and a decoction of the tender leaves of the Vdyu-
subduing plants (jointly or separately) should be heated
over a firqi The mouth of the saucer should be. covered
(with a piece of blanket or such other cloth)* and the
affected part of the body should be fomented with the
vapours rising therefrom. As an alternative, another
pitcher should be placed with its mouth downward over
the mouth of the above pitcher (containing the above-
named heated articles). Then an aperture should be
made in the side of the upper pitcher and a pipe to the
shape of an elephant’s trunk should be inserted into it.
The affected part of the body should then be fomented
with the vapour escaping through that pipe. 4.

Metrical Texts The mode of applying
heat to a patient suffering from any disease or
affection of the bodily Vdyu (disease of the nervous
system, etc.,) is as follows : — He should be first anointed
with oil, etc.,"! and wrapped up in a thick cloth. He
should then be made to sit in an easy posture. Heat
should then be applied through a pipe shaped as an
elephant’s trunk. The advantage of this mode of
fomentation is that the entire body of the patient may
be easily fomented without causing him any serious
trouble. The pipe should befhiade half a Vydmaf in
length with three bends or turnsj in its body to resemble

* The mouth of the pitcher should be covered only to mitigate and
regulate the heat.

t A Vyima is the length measured by the outstretched hands of a
man.

t The reasons for bending the lube arc to make the fomentation
delightful, in consequence of the vapour not passing in a straight course.

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. XXXII.

S6o

the trunk of an elephant.^ The use of a pipe made of
the materials (such as Kus'a, Kds'a, etc.) used in the
making of a Kilinji (basket) and resembling the trunk of
an elephant in shape is only recommended for the
purposes of Sveda 'heat-application). 5. t

A plot of ground commensurate with the length
of the patients body should be dug and heated
with fire of Khadira wood and then sprinkled over
with milk, water and Dhanyamla. The heated ground
should be then covered with a layer of leaves (of
the Vdyu-subduing plants) and the patient should be
made to lie down full stretched upon the (bed of)
leaves and thereby fomented.f As an alternative, a
stone slab should be heated and the fomentation
(Sveda) should be applied similarly to the patient by
making him lie down upon it after the ashes and
cinders have been removed 1 . As an alternative, the
patient should be seated inside a chamber with four
doors (one on each side) and fomented by lighting
up a good blazing fire (of Khadira wood) at all the
doors (simultaneously §. Another alternative is that the
patient should be laid on a mattress (made of Kus'a,
Kds'a, etc.) or on a similar bed as before and fomented
with the fumes of duly boiled paddy (and MAsha-
pulse, etc.) kept under the same mattress. In the
same manner, Sveda (fomentation) might be applied
with the help of heated cov-dung, ashes, husks of
paddy, weeds, etc. 7.

Upan^ha-Sveda (Poulticing) : — -The roots

of the Vdyu-subduing drugs should be pasted together

♦ This is called the “ NsCdi-SVeda
t This is called the ** Karshu-Bveda
t This is called the ‘‘ As'ma'ghana-sveda
§ This is called the Kuti-Sveda*'.

. Chap. XXXlI.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 561

with Amla (Kanjika) and mixed with an abundant
quantity of rock-salt and of Sneha (clarified butter, etc.).
The paste should be heated and applied lukewarm
to the affected part. The pastes of the drugs included
within tl^ Kdkolyddi^ the Elddi or the Surasddi groups
as well •as a paste of mustard seed, sesamum or
linseed, or Krisarat, Paiyasa (porridge) Dtka£rika£, or
Vesavafra, or the drugs of S'divana* (as described
under the treatment of VAta-Vy^dhi) should, be
similarly applied (lukewarm to the affected locality)
folded in a piece of thin linen. This is what is called
the Upana^ha'Sveda. 8.

Drava-Sveda (Diaphoresis with fluids) : — A
jar or a cauldron should be filled with a lukewarm
decoction of any of the VAyu-subduing drugs and
the patient should be immersed therein. In the same
way, the patient might be immersed in a tubful of warm
milk, meat-soup, soup (of Mudga or Mdsha pulse), oil,
DhdnyAmla (fermented or sour gruel), clarified butter,
lard, cow’s urine, etc.f The patient may also be
sprinkled over or washed with a tepid decoction (of
the above-mentioned drugs).5: This is what is called
the Drava-Sveda. 9-

Of the four forms of Sveda described above those
known as the Tdpa-Sveda and Ushma-Sveda pre-emi-
nently destroy the deranged Kapha, while the Upaniha-
Sveda subdues the deranged Vrfya of the body ;

* Drugs of the Kdkoly^di group should be used in cases of the
dominant deranged Pitta acting in concert with the deranged Vdyu ; those
of EUdi group in cases of the dominant deranged Kapha acting in concert
with the deranegd Vdyu and the S'dlvana, or sesamuih, linseed, etc., in
cases of a simple or complicated deranged Vdyu»

. t This is called the AvagjCha-Sveda.

This is called the ^Tarisheka-Sveda.’’

n

562

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. XXXII.

the Drava-Sveda, however, is beneficial in cases due to
the concerted action of the deranged Pitta with either
of the other two Doshas {viz., Vliyu and Eapha). lo-A.

The patient should be diaphorised by making him
put on warm clothing or exposing himself to iihe sun
or by becoming fatigued after a long walk, or by
wrestling, or some other physical exercise, load-carrying,
etc., or by arousing his anger in a case where the
deranged V^yu would be found to be subcharged with
the deranged fat or Kapha. lo.

Memorable Verses The four forms of
Sveda mentioned above may be employed in two
ways, viz. : — either to the whole body or to any
particular part of it. Sveda should be first employed
in cases of patients fit to be treated with errhines
(Nasyal, purgatives, emetics or with Vasti-measures.
It should be applied to the enciente in cases of
obstructed foetus (Mudha-garbha) unattended with any
other supervening distresses {ie., excessive discharge
of blood, etc.) after the extraction of the S'alya (the
obstructed foetus) from the womb, and after parturi-
tion, and in cases where pregnancy runs to its full and
natural term. Sveda should similarly be applied both
before and after the surgical operation in cases of
fistula-in-ano and stones, gravel, etc., (in the bladder)
and of haemorrhoids. Specific modes of applying
Sveda in other diseases should be duly described under
their respective heads, ii.

Men conversant with the rules of Sveda (fomenta-
tions, etc.'' should, under no circumstances, employ it
before rubbing or softening the body or the limb with a
Sneha (oil, etc.) inasmuch as a piece of wood is found
to break or burst immediately under the application of
hpat if not previously rubbed with a Sneha. 12— A.

Chap. XXXll.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 563

Effects of Sveda : — improved digestive capa-
city ^Agni-dipti), softness of the limbs, smoothness and
clearness of the skin, relish for food, clearness of the
bodily ducts or channels, absence of somnolence and
drowsineis and restored functions (free movements) of the
numbed t)one-joints are the benefits which result from an
application of Sveda. The Doshas (morbific principles)
having been moistened with a Sneha and lying inherent
in the root principles (Dhdtus) of the body or imbedded in
its ducts or channels or located in their specific seats
within the system, become liquefied and carried down
into the bowels ^Koshtha) by and after an application of
Sveda and are eventually totally eliminated from the
system (by means of correcting measures — D. R,). 12-B,

A perfect or satisfactory application of Sveda is
marked by a copious flow of perspiration, an abatement
or amelioration of the disease, a lightness of the body
and a desire for cool things and the softening of the
patient’s limbs, while the contrary effects result from
an imperfect or unsatisfactory application of the same*
An excessive application of Sveda would produce
pain in the joints, and a burning sensation (in the body).
It produces blisters, an aggravation of the Pitta, an
excited condition of the blood, epileptic fits, vertigo^
thirst, and fatigue. In such a case the evils should be
speedily remedied with cooling measures. 12.

Prohibited cases of Sveda Applica-
tions of Sveda should not be resorted to in cases of
persons suffering from jaundice, urinary complaints,
hcemorrhage, pulmonary consumption (Kshaya), ema-
ciation, indigestion, ascites (Udara),* thirst, v©mit-

* Vyinda evidently quotes this verse from Sus'ruta Samhiti but by
a little change in the versification he excludes cases of vomiting and
poisoning from the list and mentions only the cases of Dakodara

5^4 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. Chap. XXXII.

ingi dysentery, and from diseases due to the effects
of poison. It is also prohibited in respect of pregnant
women and intoxicated persons, inasmuch as an appli-
cation of Sveda proves fatal in these cases or tends to
impart an incurable character to the disease inflicting
an irreparable injury to the whole organ ism\ 13.

Mild Sveda may be applied (and that only in cases
of emergency) to the aforesaid persons suffering from
diseases amenable only to an application of Sveda, as
well as to the regions of the eyes, the heart (Hridaya)
and the scrotum. 14.

Sveda should be applied unto a patient in a covered
and windless place and after the complete digestion of
his ingested food, and after having anointed his body
with a Sneha. During the application of Sveda (to the
eyes and to the heart) the eyes of the patient should
be (first) covered with something cold [e g-, lotus leaves,
etc.) and the heart should be constantly touched with
something cold cold palms of the hand, etc.). 15.

After a full and complete application of Sveda, the
(body of the) patient should be well rubbed with a
Sneha (oil, etc.) and a hot bath should be prescribed.
The patient should then be made to keep his body well
covered (with warm clothes) and be removed to a wind-
less chamber (immediately afterward.s). The diet should
consist of such articles as would not produce any
internal secretion (in the channels of the system) and
he should observe, if necessary, the' other rules of
conduct (enjoined in such cases). 16.

(iiutead of Udara in general) as unfit for Sveda and this Is consistent
Svith'the treatment prescribed by Sus'rota himself in Chapter XIV,
Cbikitsita Slhdna.

Thus ends the Thirty-second Chapter in the Chikitsita Sthdnam of the
Sus'rota Sambitd which treats of the applications of Sveda-

CHAPTER XXXIIT.

I^ow ^we shall discourse on the treatment of the
distressed which prove amenable to the use of purga-
tives and emetics (Vamana-Virechana-
S^dhyopadrava). 1 .

The principal maxims to be followed are to augment
the loss or deficiency, to pacify the aggravation and
reduce the increment of the Doshas and maintain
them in a state of healthy equilibrium. Emetics and
purgatives are the principal remedies in cleansing the
system of all the Doshas (morbific principles). Now
hear me, therefore, discourse on the mode of their
administration. 2,

The body of the patient should be first anointed
with a Sneha (oil, etc.) and Sveda should then be applied
thereto. He should then be made to partake of meals
which would produce internal secretions from the
system, so that all the Doshas (morbific diathesis, etc.)
accumulated in the organism would be loosened and
dislodged from their seats. Thus having observed the
liquefaction and dislodgment of the Doshas (morbific
diathesis) from their locations, the physician should feed
the patient to his satisfactioif, if lie be found to be
sufficiently strong with a strong digestive capacity and
habituated to the use of emetics, but troubled with
a plethora of Doshas and subject to serious diseases
(Mahd'Vyddhi), telling him at the same time that an
Emetic medicine will be given to him on the day
following. 3.

Memorable Verse : — An emetic medicine
does its fullest action, when given to a man after having

566

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. XXXIII.

applied a Sneha and Sveda (to him) and after having
stirred up the Doshas of his body with the help of a
soft mucilaginous (Kapha-producing^* fluid and emol-
lient food so as to accelerate their easy expulsion
from the system 4. ¥

On the next morning, when it is neither too hot
nor too coldf the patient should be made to vomit
with an adequate dose of an emetic in any of the follow-
ing forms, viz., powder, pa te, decoction, (medicated)
oil or Ghrita as the case may be. Such things
as have a fetid or an obnoxious smell or sight
should be used for emetic purposes having regard to the
characteristic nature of the patient’s stomach (Koshtha),
the contrary being the rule in respect of the use of
purgatives. $.

Infants, old men, weak and timid persons as well
as those who are of a delicate constitution should be
first made to drink their full of milk, curd, milk-curd
(Takra) or a gruel (Yavigu)J: in diseases amenable
to emetics and in such quantities that the patient
feels it rising up to the throat. After the emetic has
been administred, the body of the patient should be
(gently) fomented for a short time with the heated palms
of the hands and the effect (of the emetic) observed.)
The dislodgment and passing of the Doshas from their
respective seats into the Kukshi (stomach ?) should

^ Vrinda reads in place of but they would ulti-

mately mean almost the same thing.

t Dallana says that some explains to mean ‘‘in

the proper seasons, viz., the rainy season, the Autumn and the Spring.^'
i The milk, the curd, the milk-curd and the gruel prescribed to
be taken in this case should, according to Dillana, be cither medicated
with emetic drugs or should be taken alone as an after-potion.

Chap.,XXXini CHIKITSA STHANAM. 567

be Inferred from the flow of perspiration (Sveda) that
would ensue. The patient should then be made to sit
on a seat as high as his knees and as soon as he would
feel the least tendency to vomit, the attendants should
be told tg catch hold of his waist, sides, back, throat
and forehead. Then a finger or the stem of (a leaf of)
a castor plant or of a lotus should be inserted down
his throat and the patient should be made to fully eject
the contents of his stomach until the symptoms of
satisfactory vomiting would fully appear. 6.

Metnorable Verses : — The symptoms of an
imperfect emesis are water-brash (Kaphapraseka), stick-
ing secretion or sensation of impurity in the regions of
the Hridaya (heart) and itching sensations. An excess-
ive discharge of the 1-itta, the loss of consciousness,
pains in the throat and in the region of the heart are the
features which mark excessive or over-vomiting. The
indications which characterise the perfect and satis-
factory action of an emetic remedy are the free emission
of Pitta after that of Kapha, a light and pleasing
sensation in the heart, the throat and the head, a
lightness of the body and the complete cessation of the
emission of Kapha (mucus). 7.

Thus having observed the symptoms of a satisfactory
emesis, the patient should be advised to inhale the
fumes (Dhuma) of a (burning) drug of either the
Snehana, Vaircchana or Sdmana (soothing) virtues in
such doses as he could conven iently take and to observe
the proper regimen of diet and conduct. 8.

WlemorablC Verses 5 —Then having washed
his body with tepid water and having peredved him to
be in a pure state of mind and body the patient should
be advised to take his evening meal with the soup of
Kulqttha or pf Mudga or of Adhaki or with the soup

568

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. XXXIII.

of the flesh of any JAngala animal.* A person treated
with emetics (at regular intervals) by cough, accumula-
tion cf Kapha in the throat, loss of voice, somnolence,
drowsiness, fetid smell in the mouth, evil effects of
poisoning (other supervening distresses of Kapl a — D. R.),
water-brash and lienteric diarrhoea (Grahani). The
(accumulated) Kapha of the system having been ejected
by vomiting under a course of emetic treatment, the
possibility of all Kapha-origined affections is removed,
just as a felled tree soon dries up together with all its
twigs, fruits and flowers. 9-10.

Cases where emesis is forbidden: —

Emesis or the exhibition of emetics is forbidden in cases
of Timira (cataract', upward determination of the
VAyu in the body (Urdhva-vata), Gulma, UdAvarta,
abdominal dropsy, enlargement of the spleen, worms
(in the intestines) and urinary complaints, as well as
in respect of fatigued, corpulent, thirsty, hungry,
emaciated and too old persons and of infants, Kshata-
kshina patients and those suffering from a loss of voice
and in respect of those also who are of studious habits
or are capable of being treated with a strong emetic and
that only with the greatest difficulty. It should be
never resorted to in cases of Hoemoptysis and obstinate
constipation of the bowels and in the case of an enciente
and after the application of a Niruha-vasti. It should
not be applied in an extremely dry or parched condition
of the organismf as well as in simple diseases due
to the Vdyu. ii.

* The diet of the patient who has taken an emetic should be very
carefully prescribed inasmuch as his digestive capacity is liable to become
very weak in such cases.

t Persons adlicted with cataract or blindness, Gulma, facial paralysis,
cotivulsion (^kshepaka), jaundice, ascites, haemorrhoids and corpulency

Chap. XXXIII.] CHIKITSA STHANAM.

569

To induce vomiting with an emetic medicine in the
(aforesaid) diseases in which it ought not to have been
resorted to is likely lo give an irrecoverable turn to
those diseases. Emetics should not, therefore, be applied
in such jjases. To induce vomiting, however, with the
help of the decoction of Madhuka (Yashti-madhu)*
is not forbidden even in these cases, if the patient be
sulTcring from indigestion or from an extremely aggra-
vated condition of the deranged Kapha as well as from
poisoning symptoms, r i - 1 2 .

Cases where emesis is recommend-
ed : — On the other hand, vomiting or the exhibition
of an emetic is recommended in cases of poisoning, in
wasting diseases ^^S'osha), in the derangements of the
breast-milk, in precarious or sluggi.sh (Vishama) appetite,
in insanity, in Apasmira (hysteric convulsions), in
Elephantiasis (S'lipada), in Viddrika, in tumours (Arvu-
da), in obesity, in Meha (urinary complaints), in cases of
slow chemical poisoning (Gara-dosha^ in the system,
in fever, in aversion to food, in scropfula (Apachi), in
mucous dysentery, in heart-disease, in distraction of the
mind, in erysipelas, in inflammatory abscesses (Vidradhi),
in indigestion, in water-brash, in nausea, in asthma,
in cough, in Pinasa (catarrh), in fetid smell of the
nostrils (Puti-ndsa\ in inflammations of the lips,
throat and mouth, f in (fetid) discharges from the
ears, in Adhi-jihvikd, Upa-jihvikd and Gala-s'undikd

as well as extremely old men and Kshata-kshina patients should not be
treated with emetics (lit. should not be caused to vomit). —D. R.

* Jcjjala explains Madhuka to mean honey. He means to say that
vomiting should be induced with honey and water.

t Some read here “Kushtha, Galaganda, Prameha and S'opha
(swelling)** but as Meha is mentioned above separately it seems to us that
that reading is not a good one.— Ed.

72

570 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. CCh#p. XXXIII.

(affections of the glottis and the thorax), in haermorrhage
from the lower channels, in the derangements due to the
bodily Kapha and in all affections of the location
of Kapha*. 1 3.

Mode of administering purga-
tives : — Purgatives should also be administered to a
patient after the due application of Sneha (oil, etc.) and
Sveda (for a second time) after the administration of an
emetic. O.i the day before the administration of the
purgative, the patient should be told that a purgative
should be given to him the next morning. He
should at this time be provided with a light repast
followed by potions of hot water and (the expressed
juice of) acid fruits. On the next morning an adequate
dose of the (purgative) medicine should be administered
after clearly ascertaining that the patient’s body has been
cleansed of all mucous .SleshmA) accumulations and in
the manner laid down in the Aturopakramaniya chapter
(Chapter XXXV. of tho Sutra-sthdna). 14.

Classification of Koshtha :-Koshtha

(bowels) may be grouped under three heads as mild or
easily movable (Mridu), middling or moderately consti-
pated (Madhya* and hard or constipated (Krura). The
first kind (Mridu) of the Koshtha should be ascribed to
the abundance of Pitta therein and can be moved even
with milk only ; the last (Krura) is ascribable to the
action of an abundance of Viyu and Eapha and
can be moved only with the greatest difficulty ;
while the second, Madhayama, should be held as the
product of a condition of equilibrium among the (three)
Doshas and this is the most general type. Purgatives

* DtIUna says that some commentstois do not read this part, bnt
they say that the necessity of applying emetics is mentioned in eaob
particular case where required.

atp. XXXIII.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

571

should be administered in small doses to persons of lax
bowels' (Mridu Koshtha), in moderate doses to those of
moderately constipated bowels (Madhayama Koshtha),
and in large doses to persons of extremely constipated
bowels (^rura Koshtha). After having taken a purga-
tive the "patient should think of nothing else but purging
and when passing his stool he should not go far from
his bed-side. 15.

Metrical Texts He should at this time lie
in a windless chamber, foregoing the use of cold water
and exposure to cold wind, and should not repress any
urging (towards stool) nor should he strain. Emission
of urine, stool, Pitta, the (purgative) medicine and lastly
of Kapha consecutively follow under a course of pur-
gative, in the same manner as an emission of saliva,
the (emetic) drug. Kapha, Pitta and lastly of V^yu are
consecutively ejected under the course of an emetic.
16-17.

Memorable Verses An aggravation of the
Kapha and Pitta, a burning sensation in the body, an
aversipn to food, heaviness of the limbs and impaired
digestion (lassitude — D. R.) arc the effects of an
improper application of a purgative. Heaviness of the
Kukshi and of the heart, itching and burning sensation,
and the retention of stool and urine are the symp-
toms which follow in the wake of a purgative medicine
which has failed to satisfactorily open and cleanse the
bowels. Loss of consciousness, prolapsus of the anus,
aggravation of the bodily Kapha and ^ula colic pain in
the intestines) result from an act of over-purging. A
sense of lightness about the region of the umbilicus*
and hilarity of the wind due to the discharge of the dis-

• In pUce of "*n«n’ some read “aniurt which means

"a Kns« of lightncM and lasaitada”.

572

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap, XXXIII.

tempers connected with the Kapha (mucus, stool, etc.''
and restoration of the bodily Viyu to its normal
condition due to the discharge of the (deranged; Vayu
(from the system) are the symptoms which mark the
satisfactory action of a purgative medicine. 18--A.

Diet No liquid food or Peya should be given
to the patient on the day in the event of his not
being properly purged and not being feebled (with pur-
ging'' and in the event of his impaired digestion (after
the use of a purgative\ A light and lukewarm Peya
should, however, be given to him in small doses, when-
ever he would feel weak and thirsty after the proper
exhibition of a purgative medicine. t?-B.

Benefits of proper purgation : —Clear

ness and expansion (Prasada) of the intellect, firmness
of the organs and of the Dhatus (root-principles! of the
body, increase of energy (Hala)^, improved digestive
capacity and a late or delayed old age are the blessings
which follow a proper administration of purgative re-
medies. The deranged Pitta of the system, having been
fully removed (with the help of a purgative), precludes the
possibility of the existence of any Pitta-origined com-
plaint, just as the waters of a tank or any other reservoir
of water, having been fully baled out, bar against the
possibility of the existence of all aquatic animals and
plants living therein. 18.

Persons who should not be purged :

— Exhibition of purgatives arc prohibit d in respect of
persons of impaired digestion, or of those tieated with an
excessive application of any emulsive remedy (Sneha-
Karma), or of those who are exceedingly corpulent, too
old, fatigued, thirsty or intoxicated, or of those suffering
from any ulcer. They are similarly prohibited in
* VrindA does not include “Bala'' (energy) in the list.

Chap. XXXIII.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

573

respect of frightened persons and Kshata-kshina pa-
tients or of those afflicted with haemorrhage from th2
downward orifices of the body or of persons with any
dart or foreign matter (^salya) lying imbedded in the
organism well as in respect of infants and enciente.

A purgative medicine should not be administered before
the digestion of a meal previously taken, neither in the
diseases due to an abuse of wine, nor in acute catarrh
and acute fever or to a newly parturient w^oman and
persons not previously treated with a Sneha (oil or
Ghrita). A mild purgative may, however, be adminis-
tered (in cases of emergency) to a person of extremely
Pitta-predominant temperament. Purgatives adminis-
tered by ignorant physicians to persons who ought
not to be purged (often) prove fatal. 19.

Persons who should be purged: —

The distempers of the body in which a purgative should
be exhibited with good results are : —fever, effects of slow
chemical poison (retained in the system), an aversion
to food, haemorrhoids, tumours (Arvuda), ascites
(Udara), glandular swellings (Granthi\ abscess (Vidra-
dhi), jaundice, hysteric convulsions (Apasmara), heart-
disease, Vata-rakla, vaginal or uterine diseases, fistula-
in-ano, vomiting, erysipelas (Visarpa), Gulma, pain
in the Pakvisaya (intestines), retention of stool, Visu-
chikd, Alasaka, strangury (Mutrdghata), cutaneous affec-
tions (Kushtha), Visphotaka (carbuncle, etc.), Prameha,
distension of the abdomen with the suppression of stool
and urine (Aniha), enlargement of the spleen, oede-
matous swellings (^opha), Vriddhi (enlargement of the
scrotum, etc.) and kindred complaints, ulcers inflicted by
weapons, alkaline scalds and burns, malignant ulcers,
(Dushta-vrana), inflammation of the eyes (Akshi-pika\
Kicha, Timira, conjunctivitis (Abhishyanda), burning

574

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. XXXIII.

sensations in the head, ears, eyes, nose, mouths, anus and
the penis, haemorrhage from the upper channels (Urdhva-
Rakta-pitta), worms, diseases of the Pittis'aya (bowels ?)
»>., the diseases which are peculiar to the seats of the
Pitta in the organism as well as any other disease due
to an aggravation of the Pitta. 20.

Metrical Texts Emetic and purgative
remedies, in spite of their possessing in common the
powers of motion (SaratvaX subtlety, keenness, ex-
pansiveness and heat-making properties, tend to
remove the injurious and deranged morbific principles
(Doshas) of the body in (two) different ways by
virtue of their respective inherent qualities (Prakriti)*.
A purgative, in the course of its digestion, carries down
with it all the Doshas from the system (loosened and
dislodged by virtue of its own specific properties). An
emetic, on the other hand, is not digested, owing to (its
lightness due to) its inherent extraordinary qualitiest,
but it soon forces its way up with the Doshas (to be)
removed. 21-22.

A strong purgative given to a man of loose or lax
bowels (Mridu-Koshtha) or of strong digestive capacity,
cannot remove all the Doshas fully owing to their being
suddenly and forcibly purged off. 23.

A purgative medicine, which is capable of being
digested and of expelling the Doshas from the body
in the time which a morning meal ordinarily takes to
be digested, should be regarded as pre-eminently the
best. 24.

* Dsllana quotes a different reading which means that emetic and
purgative remedies produce the wished-for result, if properly administered,
otherwise not.

t The extraordinary qualities of an emetic are those of the Viyu and
of the Agni.

Chap, xxxni,] CHIKITSA STHANAM.

575

The (aggravated) Doshas accumulated in a latge
quantity in the organism of a weak patient and found
to be dislodged from their seats should be gradually
expelled from the system, while soothing (S'amana)
remedies should be used in cases of the Doshas being
very slight, even if they be found to have been dislodged
from their seats. The aggravated Doshas matured and
spontaneously dislodged (from their seat or place of
accumulation in the system) should be purged off,
whether the patient be strong or weak, inasmuch as,
if neglected (and not expelled from the system'', they
(Doshas) tend to produce lasting troubles. 25-26,

A purgative should be administred to a patient of
impaired digestive capacity and extreme habitual con-
stipation of the bowels (Krura-koshtha) after having im-
proved his digestion with the admixture of rock-salt,
Yava-kshdra and clarified butler and after applying
Sneha and Sveda (as usual). A purgative remedy used
after a due application of Sneha and Sveda to the body,
leads to the looseness and dislodgment per force of the
aggravated Doshas from their seats, since they do not
adhere to the internal channels and passages just as a
drop of water does not adhere to a pot or vessel saturated
with a Sneha. An oleaginous purgative should not be
given to persons who have already taken internally*
an abundant quantity of Sneha, as it would tend
to make the aggravated Doshas of the body dis-
lodge from their seats and again adhere to the internal
channels and passages, 27-28.

An excessive quantity of Sneha should be used in
cases of poisoning, hurt, pustular eruptions (Pidakd),

• Viinda readi pl««e of Thw

means that the Sneha might have been used both inletnally and
externally.

576

THE SUSflRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. XXXUI.

oedema and cutaneous affections before the application
of purgatives or emetics. The body of a patient, habit-
uated to the use of oleaginous articles (Sneha), should
be first made dry (Ruksha). Sneha should then be used
again as usual and purgatives or emetics apjJlied. The
aggravated Doshas would be thereby expelled from the
system and the patient would grow stronger*. 29-30.

Mild emetics and purgatives should be given at the
outset to a person to be treated with such medicines,
who had never taken any purgative or emetic before.
Emetics and purgatives should then again be adminis-
tered to him, after thus finding out the state and nature
of his Koshtha (bowels). An emetic or purgative
medicine of tested efficacy and wffiich is pleasant,
aromatic, agreeable and small in dose but of mighty
potency should be given to a king; (in addition to these
qualities) the medicine should be such as would not
produce any serious injury. 31-32.

The body (health) of a patient to whom a purgative
or emetic medicine is administered without first applying
Sneha and Sveda thereto breaks up like a piece of sapless
wood at the time of bending it. The aggravated Doshas
dislodged from their seats in the organism through the
effects of Sneha and Sveda and stirred by emollient foodf
are easily expelled by emetics and purgatives. 33.

Thus ends the Thirty-third Chapter of the Chikitsita Sthilnam in the
Sus'ruta Samhitd which deals with the treatment of diseases amenable to
the use of emetics and purgatives.

* Vrinda reads in placo of This means

that the Doshas, so long obstructed by Snch.i, arc thereby expelled,
t Some explain to mean “with emollient meat-soup”.

CHAPTER XXXIV.

Now we shall discourse on the treatment of the dis-
orders ^suiting from an injudicious use of emetics or
purgatives (Vainana-Virechana--Vy^pach-«
Chikitsitam). i.

Their Classes : — Fifteen different kinds of
disorders may result from dm injudicious use of emetics
and purgatives owing to the ignorance of the physician
or of the patient. Of these (fifteen), the upward coursing
in casesof purgatives and the downward coursing in cases
of emetics are peculiar to each of them respectively.
The fourteen other remaining disorders (Vydpat) are
common to both. They arc Ssfvaseshaushadhatva
(continuance of the drug in the stomach), Jirnausha'
dhatva (complete digestion of the medicine), Hina-
doshstpahritatva (insufficient elimination of the Doshas
from the system) Adhika-doshafpahritatva (excessive
elimination of the Doshas from the system), Vlfta-sula
(Vdtaja colicj, Ayoga (insufficient dosage^, Ati-yog^
(over dosage), Jividina (haemorrhage), Adhmitna
(tympanites), Pari-kartiks( V^utiing pain in the anus, etc.),
Parisrfitva (oozing out of stools), Pravrfhiki (diarrhoea),
Hridayopasarana (rising of the Doshas towards the
heart) and Vibandha (suppression of stool and urine). 2,
Causes and Treatment An emetic taken

by a hungry or a weak person or by one possessed
of a very keen digestive capacity (Tikshnigni) or
of lax bowels (Mridu koshtha), naturally drops down
into the intestines in virtue of the identical nature and
intensity of their attributes, in the event of its being
retained in the stomach, even for a short while. A
failure of the medicine to produce the wished-for result

73

578

THt: SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. XXXIV.

and a further stirred or agitated condition of the ^gra-
vated Doshas are the effects thereof. In such a case
Sneha (and Sveda) should be again applied and a
stronger emetic administered. 3.

An obnoxious and large-dosed purgative t{.ken by
a person with a residue of a previous meal remaining
undigested (in the stomach) or with an aggravated
Kapha or with a disordered stomach (Amis'aya), is
forced upward and is ejected through the mouth. In
a person of disordered stomach the accumulations
(Kapha) in the stomach should be first speedily ejected
with an emetic and a stronger purgative should then
be administered. A case where the food remains still
undigested (in the intestines) should be treated (with
fastings and digestants) as in a case of mucous diarrhoea.
A pleasant or tasteful purgative should be given in a
moderate dose in the event of a previous one having
been ejected on account of its obnoxious taste and ab-
normal dosage. A third dose should not be given in
the event of the second also being not retained in the
stomach. At this stage, purging should be effected
with the help of a lambative (Leha) prepared with
honey, clarified butter and treacle. 4.

SsCvas'CShaudhatva (Evils of an unpurged
residue of a purgative or emetic) : — A small dose of
medicine, whether an emetic or a purgative, if it is
absorbed by the decanged Doshas of the body and
retained in the system, cannot produce the wished-for
result of cleansing the system. In such a case, it gives
rise to thirst, pain in the sides, vomiting, epileptic
fits, nausea, piercing or breaking pain in the joints,
aversion to food, impure eructations, and such like
symptoms. Thp patient in such a case should be made
to vomit the c^nicnts of his stomach with draughts of

Chap* XXXlV,]

CIIIKITSA STHANAM.

579

hot water. When a least residue of a purgative medicine
previously administered would be found to have been
retained in the stomach of a strong patient and with
extremely aggravated Doshas of the body, the patient,
if ther* be an insufficient purging, should be similarly
made to vomit. 5.

Jfrnaushadhatvam lEviis of a digested
purgative, etc.) : — A mild purgative or emetic or a
medicine administered in a small dose to a man of
extremely constipated bowels (Krura-koshtha) or of an
extremely keen digestive capacity (Tikshndgni), is like
food easily digested in the stomach (and therefore fails
to produce the wis^ed-for results). The aggravated
Doshas, being thus unexpelled by the (purgative or
emetic) medicine from the body, brings on fresh distem-
pers and loss of strdngth (Bala)* of the body. Under
the circumstances a stronger medicine or a larger dose
of the same should be administered to the patient. A
mild medicine as well as a medicine administered
without a previous application of Sneha and Sveda
subdues only a slight aggravation of the Doshas. 6.

Evils of insufficient or excessive
expulsion of the Doshas: —A nausea, a sense
of heaviness in the limbs, a .sticky sensation in the chest
and aggravation of the (existing) disease are the evils
which attend an insufficient ejection of any bodily Dosha
from the system after the administration of an emetic.
More satisfactory vomitings should be induced in such
cases with the help of an appropriate (and stronger)
medicine. Tympanites, heaviness of the head, sup-
pression or incarceration of VAyu (flatus), a cutting pain
(Pari-kartana) in the anus and aggravation of the (exist-
ing) disease, are the evils which result/ from an imper-

* For the metning of here see Chapt^ XV., Sutra-Sthina.

58o the SUSHRUtA SAMHITA. XXXIV.

feet or partial expulsion of the Doshas from the system
under the administration of a purgative remedy. The
remedy in such cases should consist in inducing stronger
purgings after a further application of Sneha and Sveda
to the patient. A mild medicine should be administered
on the third day to a strong-limbed patient, if thCre be a
large quantity of dislodged agitated Dosha in his
system. 7.

Vata-sula (Flatulent colic) : — The bodily Vdyu
become enraged or agitated by the use of parching
(Ruksha) medicines by a person who has not been treated
with a previous application of Sneha and Sveda or by
one who does not observe a total Jbstinence in sexual
matters. The Vayu thus enraged tends to produce a
kind of pain (S'ula) in the sides, waist (S'roni), back,
tenefons and the (principal) Marma (heart) and brings
on vertigo, epileptic fits and loss of consciousness. The
remedy under such circumstances consists in anointing
the patient’s body with oil or clarified butter, fomenting
it with (hot and half-boiled . paddy (Dhdnya-Sveda) . An
oil cooked with Yashti-madhu should then be employed
as an Anuvdsana-Vasti. 8-A.

AyOga (Partial and deficient medication): — A
mild or an insufficient dose of an emetic or purgative,
administered without a previous application of Sneha
and Sveda to the patient, fails to find an outlet
either through the upper or the lower fissures of the
body and hence brings about an aggravation of the
Doshas incarcerated in the organism and produces a loss
of strength (Bala), as well as tympanites with a catching
pain in the chest (Hridaya-graha), thirst, epileptic fits and
a burning sensation in the body. This is called Ayoga.
The remedy in such cases should consist in inducing,
without any de^^y, vomiting with powered Madana

chap. JCXXIV.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

581

fruit dissolved in a saline solution, or in moving the
bowels with a stronger purgative in the shape of
decoctions. 8-B.

The bodily Doshas are aggravated through deficient
or scanty vomitings under the action of an emetic drug
and expaiids through the entire organism, giving rise
to itching, swelling, cutaneous affections, pustular erup
tions, fever, aching of the limbs, piercing pain and such-
like symptoms. The remaining or uneliminated Doshas
should then be expelled with (adequate) medicines of
strong potency (Mahaushadhi). Similarly, insufficient
purgings under the action of a mild purgative, ad-
ministered without a previous application of Sneha
and Sveda to the patient, produce a numbed and drum-
like distension of the abdomen below the umbilicus,
causing a retention of the stool and flatus, and produce
(colic) pain (S'ula), itching and urticarious eruptions
(Mandala). The •remedy under these circumstances
should consist in employing emulsive measures (Sneha)
and a stronger purgative after having employed an
Asthdpana-Vasti . Draughts of hot water should be given
to the patient and the abdomen and the sides should
be fomented with the heated palms of the hands for
exciting or inducing purging in the event of an unsatis-
factory purging and of obnoxious matter not being
expelled from the system l^he purging (of Dosha)
would thus be induced. A second dose of a purgative
should be again administered in the evening with a due
consideration to the strength of the patient when the
first would be found to have been digested before produ-
cing a sufficient purging if the system of the patient be
still full of Doshas and rrorbid matter. In case of
failure of this also to remove the Doshas fexcreta), the
system of the patient should be first/treated with

5^2 THE SUSHROTA SAMHITA. CCh«P- XXXIV.

Sneha and Sveda after the lapse of ten days and should
then be again cleansed with a further dose of a purgative*.
Patients in whom purging can be induced only with
the greatest difficulty should be first treated with
Asthdpana. Sneha should again be applied ^d a strong
purgative should then be administered. 8.

Atl-yOgfa (Over-drugging with purgatives, etc.): —
Women, merchants, persons attending a king and
pious Brdhmanas learned in the Vedas (S'rotriya) are
often subjected to the necessity of repressing their
natural urgings of the body towards micturition, etc.,
out of a sense of delicacy, fear or greed. The VAyu in
their systems remains consequently aggravated and
accordingly purgatives fail to easily produce any effect
in their organism. Hence their system should be clean-
sed with purgatives preceded by Sveda (fomentations)
and a copious application of Sneha. An over-dose of a
pui^ative or a strong one admini.?tered to a person
copiously treated with Sneha and Sveda or to one
whose bowels are easily moved would exhibit the symp-
toms of an over-dosage (Ati-yoga) of purgatives.

Excessive emission of Pitta labile), loss of strength
(Bala) and an aggravation and augmentation of the
deranged W&yu follow from the over dosage (Ati-yoga)
of an emetic medicine. In such cases, the body of the
patient should bj anointed with clarified butter and he
should be bathed in cold water and made to take a
lambativef with sugar and honey with a due consider-
ation of the nature and intensity of the Doshas involved.
An over-dose of a purgative may bring on excessive

* DuUMWMys that the ayatem of the patient, in this cue, shonld be
daanted with an<xinetic or a purgative as the case may be.

t A different \ reading says that the patient should be fomented with
washings of rice tnlsed with honey.

Chap. XXXIV.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

583

emission of Kapha (mucus) mixed even with blood in
the end. In this case, too, loss of strength (Bala) and en-
ragement of the bodily Vdyu would be the consequence.
The patient in such a case should be sprinkled over
with or batj^ed in very cold water and vomiting should
be inducedVith potions of cold washings of rice mixed
with honey. Applications of Pichchhd-vasti and of
Anuvdsana enemetas with milk and clarified butter are
recommende 1 . The patient should also be made to
drink potions of the washings of rice mixed with the
drugs of the Priyangvddi group The diet should con-
sist of boiled rice with milk or meat soup. 9-10.

Jlv^d^na (Haemorrhage) due to excessive vomit-
ing : — In the event of an excessive use of an emetic
the patient may spit or vomit blood. In such a case
the tongue hangs out (of the mouth) and the eyes seem
to expand, and numbness of the jaws, thirst, hiccough,
fever and faintness are found to supervene. A potion of
goat’s blood, red Chandana, Us'ira, A^njana and the
powders of fried paddy mixed with water and sugar,
should be administered in these cases. As an alternative,
the patient should be made to take his food in the Peyd
form with the expressed juice of fruits (such as the
Dadimba^ etc.,) and with clarified butter, honey and
sugar, or a Peyd prepared with the sprouts of Vata, etc.
with honey, or one cooked with any drug having the
power of producing costiveness ; or he should be made
to take his food with milk or with the soup of the meat
of a Jdngala animal. Measures laid down in respect
of excessive bleeding or hsemorrhage should also be
resorted to u.

In a case of excessive protrusion or hanging down
of the tongue, the organ should be rubb^ with pow-
dered Trikatu and rock-salt or pasted wph a plaster of

584 the SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXXIV.

sesamum and grapes (DrikshA; and re-introduced into
its proper place and position after which some other
men should be made to taste any acid article in the
sight of the patient. In a case of the expansion of the
eyes they should be rubbed with clarified gutter and
(gently) pressed. Errhines and fomentations 'of the part
with drugs) antidotal to the deranged VAyu and Kapha,
are recommended in a case of a numbness or catching
pain of the jaw-bones in such cases. The other super-
vening distresses such as thirst etc, should be treated
with appropriate medicinal remedies. A faintness (under
the circumstances) should be broken with the (sweet)
sounds of a lute or a lyre. 12.

Jividfitna (Haemorrhage) due to excessive purging : -
An excess (Ati-yoga) of purging is marked, at the
outset, by a flow of watery mucus through the rectum,
lesembling the crest of a peacock's plume in colour,
This is followed by an emission of shreddy and blood-
streaked mucu? resembling the washings of meat,
succeeded by an oozing out of actual red blood
attended with a shivering, protrusion of the anus and all
the supervening distresses of emetics. The treatment
in such cases should be as in those of haemorrhs^e.
The protruded anus should be first lubricated (with
a Sneha) and subsequently fomented and re-introduced
into its proper place or it should be treated according
to the directions laid down in the chapter of Kshudra-
Roga*. The shivering should be treated with remedies
laid down in connection with Vdta-vyadlu. Remedies
in cases of a protrusion of the tongue, etc., have been
already described. Milk boiled (according to the K«hira-
pAka-vidhi) with Kds'mari fruit, Vadari fruit, Us^ira

* The remediai^measures for the treatment of Guda-bhrams'a, etc,,
^^der the Kshudra^oga, should be employed in such cases.

Chap. XXXIV.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

585

and Durvd grass subsequently cooled and mixed with
the cream of clarified butter and Anjana, should be
syringed into the rectum in the manner of an Asthi-
pana-Vasti in the case of an excessive flow of red
blood (lit. life-blood) from the bowels. Vasti should
be empteyed in such cases, with a decoction of the
drugs of the Nyngrodhddi group mixed with milk,
clarified butter, expressed juice of sugar-cane and (goafs)
blood. Remedies mentioned under haemoptysis (Rakta-
pitta) and bloody dysentery should be employed in cases
marked by spitting of life-blood (Jiva-sonita). Decoc-
tions of the drugs of the Nyagrodhddi group should be
given with food and drink. 13.

Jiva-^onita, how to be known A

piece of a linen or cotton should be soaked in (and dyed
with) the emitted blood where any doubt would arise
whether it is a case of arterial blood (Jiva-s'onita)
or one of Rakta pitta. The continuance of the dye or
red stain on the linen even after being washed with hot
water would conclusively establish its identity with the
arterial blood or Jiva-sonita. As an alternative, the
discharged blood mixed with barley-powder or any
other kind of food should be given to a dog to eat. If
it is eaten by the dog, it would at once establish the
identity of the emitted blood with the healthy arterial
blood of the organism. 14.

AdhmsCna (flatulent distention of the abdomen): —
If a person who is suffering from a plethora of the
Doshas in his system and who has not previously been
treated with a Sneha and whose bowels still contain the
undigested residue of a previous meal and (consequently)
an abundance of Vilyu therein, takes a (p^ative or an
emetic) which is neither emollient nor hoy the medicine
is likely to produce a flatulent distentiol of his abdo-

74

586 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. COwp. XXXIV.

^en (Aihmdna). It arrests the emission of flatus
(Vayu), stool and urine, makes the abdomen distended,
^gdi}ces a breaking pain in the sides, a pricking pain
fn the anps (Guda) and in the urinary bladder (Vasti)
lk§ well as a disrelish for food. This is called
Th? pgtient, in such a case, should be treated with
^dhftTvarti, appetising medicines and with Vasti
Btej^ures. 15.

PaP H&rtik£( (cutting pain in the anus, etc.)

Viyu and Pitta in the organism of an enfeebled
pgr^on gr pf a person whose bowels can be easily moved
or of one gf a dry and arid temperament or afflicted
with impaired digestive capacity, arc deranged end
a^reVi t§4 by the use of any extremely sharp, hot,
or dry (emetic or purgative) which give rise to
a sort of cutting, sawing pain (Parikartikd) in the
enus, ppnis, umbilical region and the neck of the
bladder (Vasti). The emission of flatus is arrested,
the Vdyu (wind) lies incarcerated in the abdomen and
feifsh for food vanishes. The remedy consists in em-
ploying a Fichchhif- Vasti with Yashti-madhu and black
Ipsamum pasted together and dissolved in clarified butter
and boney. The patient should be laved in cold water
and be given his food with milk. Anuvdsana-Vasti*
with the pream of clarified butter or with oil cooked
with Yashti-madhu should be employed. i6.

Paf Isr^va (Dysenteric stools) i-r-The Doshas and
the morbid matter accumulated in the system of a man
. of e)(tremely constipated bowels and almost saturated
WitH a plethora of Doshas (morbific diathesis) are stirred
up bflt are not fully emitted under the action of a mild

’ ^ In caseB a Pitta* predominance! the Vasti should be employed

with the cfeeinV hixiiet and in cases of a predomlntnce^

vHh oiV

Chap. XXXIV.] CJIIKITSA STHANAM.

587

.(emetic or purgative) medicine. The Doshas (conse-
quently) try to pass out of the body constantly but in
small quantities and bring on weakness, numbness and
rigidity of the abdomen, aversion to food and lassitude
of the limbs. The deranged Pitta (bile) and Kaphe
(mucus) are constantly emitted with pain (through the
anus) in such a case, and the disease is called ParisrtfVai.
Asthdpana-vasti with a decoction of Aja-kafna, Dhava,
Tinis’a and Palds'a saturated with honey is recomrnendfcd
in such cases After the subsidence of the bodily
Doshas involved in the case, the patient should be
treated with Sneha and Sams'odhana * (emetic of
purgative) remedies should again be employed. 17.

PravrfhiksC (Diarrhcea) : — A medicine (purgative
or emetic) administered to a person who has Seen
excessively treated with Sveda or with Sneha produ-
ces Fravtfhiklf in him by making him pass his stool
and flatus without any straining or by restraining
altc^ether those natural urgings respectively. Constant
passing of slimy, black, white or red-coloured mucus
(Kapha) with cramps, loud flatus and burning sensation
form the chief characteristics of this disease. Its medical
treatment should be similar to that of a case of
ParisrAva. 18.

Hrldayopasarana (Overwhelming the heart) ;
— Urgings towards vomiting or purging being injudf-
ciously checked by a person from ignorance, causes'
a downward or upward coursing of the . Doshas of the
body to and in the heart, thus pressing the greatest of thfe
Marmas and giving rise to an excruciating pain in that
locality.' The ’patient, in such a case, drops down
unconscious in a swoon with upturned eya^ violently

* Dallam teeomMcnds that a strong purgative dr Cihetic shuiilll be
employed. '

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXXIV.

588 ■

gushing his teeth and biting his tongue. An inexperienc-
ed physician usually abandons such a patient as lost, '
whereas the remedy in such cases consists in anointing his
body with a Sneha (oil or clarified butter) and fomenting
it with half-boiled and unhusked paddy (Dh^ny -Sveda).
Oil cooked with Yashti-madhu should be employed in
the manner of an Anuvisana Vasti, and strong errhines
(Nasya) should also be administered. After that the
patient should be made to vomit with draughts of the
washings of rice mixed with Yashti-madhu and Vastis*
should be employed in consideration of the preponder-
ance of the Dosha or Doshas involved in the case. 19.

Vibandha (retention of flatus, stool and urine): —
Use of cold water, exposure to cold winds and re-
sorting to cool places and such other conduct during
the action of an emetic or a purgative remedy in a
person tend to thicken the Doshas loosened and dis-
lodged from their seats by virtue of its potency, arrest
their out-flow, make them adhere to the internal passages
through which they pass and, by, affecting the ex-
cretions, give rise to a suppression of stool, urine and
Vdyu (flatus), attended with rumbling in the intestines,
fever, burning sensation and excruciating pain. The
patient should in such a case f be made to speedily vomit
the contents of his stomach, and the concomitant
symptoms (such as fever, etc.) should be treated with
appropriate medicinal remedies (as in the case of their
actual and respective attacks); Drugs efficacious in
subduing the Doshas confined in the lower cavity
(abdomen) of the body {Adhobhdga-hara) X sh.o\i\A be
employed for purgative purposes with the admixture of

* Dallana rcchs^mmends both Niruha and Snaihika Vastis in such cases,

.t This cvidcntli refers to the case of an abuse of an emetic.

t See Chapter ^XXIX* Sutra^Sthanam,

Chap. XXXIV.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

589

Saindhava, Kdnjika and cow’s urine in cases of the
retention of the stool, etc., due to an abuse of a purgative.
Proper Asthapana and AnuvAsana Vastis should be
prescribed in consideration of the nature and intensity
of the Dofhas involved in the case. The nature of the
diet should be judiciously determined according to the
nature of the Doshas The supervening distresses in
both the cases should be remedied with due considera-
tion of the nature of the Doshas originating them. 20.

The cutting pain in the anus in connection with
purging corresponds to the digging in the throat in a
case of vomiting. The oozing out of the faecal matter
downward (ParisrAva) in connection with a purgative
corresponds to the water-brash in the case of an emetic.
What diarrhoea (PravAhika) is to purging, a dry eruc-
tation is to vomiting. 2 r.

Memorable Verse The fifteen kinds of
distempers (Vydpat) described in the present chapter
originate through an excessive, injudicious or insufficient
use of purgatives or emetics. 22.

Thus ends the Thirty-fourth Chapter of the Cbikilsita Sthanam in the
Sus'ruta Sarohiti which deals with the treatment of the disorders resulting
from an injudicious use of purgatives and emetics.

CHAPTER XXXV.

Now we shall discourse on the dimensions and
classifications of a Netra and a Vasti (pipes, noz/.es and
apparatus) with their therapeutic applications (Netra*
Vasti- Framsfna-Fravibh^ga-Chikitsitam). i.

Sages of authority hold an application, of the Vasti
to be the best of all measures such as, the application of
a Sneha, etc.; and why ? Because on account of its
varied functions and of its being composed of the
various kinds of medicinal drugs a Vasti helps to restrain
(Samgraha\ pacify (Sam/amana) and cleanse (Sanis'o*
dhana) the different Doshas (morbific principles) of the
body. It helps the recreation and growth of fresh
semen, contributes to the building up of an emaciated
frame, reduces corpulency, invigorates eyesight, arrests
premature old age and tends to rejuvenate. A regular
and proper use of a Vasti tends to improve one’s com-
plexion and bodily strength, imparts longevity, contri-
butes to the growth of the body, ensures the enjoyment
of sound health and guards against the inroad 6f any
disease whatever. Applications of Vastis are highly
efficacious in cases of fever, dysentery, cataract, catarrh,
diseases of the head, Adhimantha, vomiting, facial
paralysis, epileptic fits, convulsions, (Akshepaka), hemi-
plegia, locomotor ataxy (EkAnga) and paraplegia
(Sarvdnga-Roga), tympanites, ascites or abdominal
dropsy, ^arkard (gravels or urinary concretions),
gastralgia (^ula^, scrotal tumours (including hydro-
cele, hernia, '-^^c.), Upadams'a, retention of stool
and urine (Anilm strangury (Mutra krichchhra), Gulma,
VAta-rakta, upwam coursing of urine, stool and VAyu,

Chap. XXXV,]

CHIKirSA STHANAM.

591

loss of semen, breast-milk and of catamanial fluid,
Hrid-graha (catching pain in the chest), Manydgraha
(wryneck), Hanu-graha (numbness of the jaws), haemor-
rhoids, As'mari (stone) and Mudha-garbha (false pre-
sentation and difficult labour). 2.

Memorable Verses — Applications ofVasti
are always efficacious in diseases due to the action of
the deranged Vdyu, Pitta and Kapha, in those due to
the vitiated condition of blood and in those brought on
by the concerted action of any two or all of them. 3.
Dimensions of the pipe The length of

the pipe of a Vasti should be made six fingers in respect
of an infant of one year and eight and ten fingers in
respect of a boy of eight and an adult of sixteen years
respectively, the girth of its calibre being respectively
equal to those of the small finger, the ring finger and
the middle finger respectively in the three afore-named
instances. The pipe should have Karnikds * or bulb-
like protrusions attached to it at one of the ends above a
space of one finger and a half, two fingers, and two
fingers and a half respectively in the three afore-said
forms of the apparatus. The girth of their mouths (to
be introduced into the rectum) should be respectively
made to equal those of the calibres of feathers of a crow,
a falcon and a peacock, and the girth of the channels of
the main body of the pipes Ihould respectively be such
as to let a pulse, a Mdska pulse and a Kaldya

pulse to pats through them. The quantity of the'fluid
with which an Asthdpana-Vasti should be charged
is equal respectively to two, four, and eight Prasritasf

* The Karnij^ils are attached to the pipes for guarding against their
thcust into the rectum. y

t A Trasrita measure is generally equal to Falas, ie,, sixteen
1'oUs* But here it has the particular meaning as given in th^ text«.

592

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. C^hap. XXXV.

(in volume). A Prasrita measure being here equal to
what can be contained in the hollow of the patienPs
own palms (in each particular case). 4.

Memorable Verse : — The length of the pipe
and the quantity of the fluid to charge with should
be gradually increased with the progress of thq patient’s
age and in consideration of his strength and. bodily
capacity. 5.

The pipe of a Vasti in respect of an adult above
twentyrfivc years of age, should be made twelve
fingers in length having a girth equal to that of his
thumb at its base and a girth equal to that of the small
finger at its mouth. At a distance of three fingers from
above the mouth the Karnikds should be fixed. The
bore should be such as to allow a feather of a vulture to
pass through it, while the fissure at the mouth would
have a girth to allow the stone of a Kola fruit or of a
boiled Kaldya pulse. The pipe should in all cases be
supplied with two KarnikAs at its root, for the purpose
of firmly securing it to the mouth of the Vasti (bladder).
The quantity of the fluid to charge with in the case of
an Asthipana Vasti is twelve Prasritas. The length of
the pipe in respect of persons above seventy years of
age should be like that in the preceding case but the
quantity of the fluid to charge with should be made as
in the case of a youth of sixteen. 6.

Materials Of the pipes:— The pipe should
be made either of gold, silver, copper, iron, brass,
ivory, horn, gems or wood. It should be straight,
smooth and firm, tapering at the top like the tuft of hair
in the tail of a cow, and bulbular (/> , not pointed) at
its mouth. \{^e Vasti should be (prepared with) the

* The Vast! is stalled from its being prepared with the bladder
(Vasti) of an animal. Dallana notes in tl^is connection that the bladdef

Chap. XXXV.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

593

bladder (Vasti) either of a full-grown ox, buffalo or a
sheep nor should it be soft (flexible) and firm, neither too
thick nor too thin and of adequate dimensions. 7.

Mctrica,! Text : — In the absence of a pipe, a
reed, bamboo, or horn might serve the purpose. In the
absence of the bladder of any of the foregoing animals,
the Vasti should be made of skin or of thick linen. 8.

Construction of the Vasti : —The bladder
(of which a Vasti should be made) should be cleansed,
tanned and dyed (disinfected). It should be softened
and repeatedly lubricated with a Sneha. It has
generally a wide mouth which should be bent and lightly
fitted to the butt end of the pipe (Netra). The mouth
of the bladder should then be tied above the (Karnikd).
The whole bladder should be heated with a piece of hot
iron (in order to polish the surface and remove the pores
therein, if any). The mouth of the bladder should then
be folded and again tied (below the Karnikd). The
whole should then be carefully preserved. The Asthd-
pana or the oily (Snaihika) Vasti should be applied,
as the case may be, with the help of such a Vasti. A
mild Vasti should be applied specially to infants and
old men, since a strong one is likely to injure their
health and strength, 9.

Vastismay be grouped undcf two heads — Nairuhika
(dry or oilless) and Snaihika (oleaginous). The term
Asthdpana is synonymous with Niruha, The Vasti known
as the Madhu-Tailika is only an alternative of a Niruha-
vasti. The terms Y dpana, Y ukta-ratha, and Siddha*vasti
convey also the same meaning, A Niraha-vasti is so
called from the fact of its expelling the Doshas (morbific

of an ox, buffalo, or a hog, should be used in the As^b^ipaoa and Anuvd-
sana measures, and the bladder of a goat or a sheep should be used in the
Uttara-vasti.

75

594

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. tCh«p. XXXV.

diatheses) from the system and from its curing the diseases
of the body ; while Asthtfpaua is so named from its virtue
of rejuvenating the organism or producing longevity. The
process of Madhn-tailika would be described in connec-
tion with the mode of applying a Niruha-vasti. lo.

The AauvSbBaiia is only an alternative of a Sneha-
Vasti, but (with this difference that) the quantity of the
fluid to charge with should be three-fourths, and the
amount of the good effect therefrom would also be three-
fourths. An Auuvtfsana vasti is so called from the fact
of its not injuring the system even in the event of its
being retained in the bowels a whole day, or from the
fact of its being adapted to daily application. The
Haitrit-vasti again which is applicable in all cases, is an
alternative to an Anuvdsana-vasti, but should be
charged with only a half part of the fluid of that used
in an Anuvdsana-vasti. ii.

metrical Texts A Niruha-vasti acts as
a cleanser of the system (^odhana). It is anti-fat
(Lekhana), emulsive (Snehana) and constructive (Vrim-
hana). Oleaginous matter (Sneha) may freely enter into
the organism when all its ducts and channels have been
previously cleansed by the application of a Niruha-
vasti. As water will freely run through channels
previously cleansed of all refuse matter, .so does an Anu-
vdsana tend to cleanse the organism of all Doshas
(morbific diatheses) and to increase the vitality of the
organism. A Sceha^vasti should, therefore, be applied
to a person previously purged of all Doshas by the
application of a Niruha-vasti. I2.

Both the Anuvdsana and the Asthap^na Vastis should
be regarded ifc;forbidden in cases of insanity, in the mental
conditions of t^or and grief, of a thirsty state of the
body, of ^version to food and of indigestion, jaundice
I

Chap. XXXV.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

595

[ (Pdndu), giddiness, delirium, epilepsy, vomiting,
Kushtha, Meha, ascites, obesity, asthma, cough, dryness
of the throat and oedema as well as in respect of a Kshata-
Kshina patient and a pregnant woman in (and before) the
third or tlje fourth month of her gestation, in the case of
a person s\iff*ering from dulness of appetite, impatient and
incapable of bearing the least pain as well as in respect
of infants, old men and persons emaciated by a bodily
distemper other than one due to Vdyu 13.

Metrical Text : — The Asthdpana-vasti should
be exclusively applied in cases of ascites, urinary
complaints (Meha), Kushtha and obesity. The appli-
cation of an Anuvdsna-yasti is entirely forbidden
in those cases inasmuch as it might make the disease
run into an incurable type, and a great amount of lassi-
tude of the organism would be the consequence. 14.

Medicine duly injected (through the rectum) with the
help of a Vasti remains in the intestines (Pakvds'aya), in
the region of the pelvis and below the umbilical region.
The potency of the Vasti (medicine) spreads over the
whole organism from the intestines (Pakvds'aya), just as
the potency of the water poured at the root of a tree tends
to permeate the whole tree (through its minutest cells
and fibres). The liquid part of the Vasti is emitted out
through the rectum either by' its^f or with the fcBcal
matter, etc.*, but its potency acts over the whole
organism through the intervention of the Apdna and
the other Vdyus. The potency of the Vasti in the
Pakvds'aya acts on the whole organism from top to toe,
like the sun in the heavens acting on the humidity (Rasa)

* SnkAntha Dutta in his commentary quotes this sloka, but he reads
there (with Kapha) in. the place of ^^th the foecal

matter, etc.). The reading in the text, however, is preferable inasmuch ae
Kapha ia {ocluded in Mala*

596

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. CChap. XXXV,

of the earth below. The Vasti, if duly applied, tends to
eliminate completely from the system all the Doshas
(morbific diatheses) accumulated in the regions of the
back^ waist and the abdomen (Koshtha). 1 5-A.

As the aggravation of all the Doshas (morbific
principles) of the body is principally dependent on the
derangement of the bodily YAyu ; an aggravated condi-
tion of the latter may hence lead to the dissolution of
the body, and consequently the application of a Vasti,
and nothing else, is the only means of coping with the
aggravation of the Vayu (by subduing and restoring
it to its normal condition\ just as the sea-coast is the
only barrier to the swollen and wind-agitated surf of
the sea. A well-applied Vasti contributes to the
growth, health, strength and longevity of the body and
to the improvement in its complexion, i 5.

The different defects of a Vasti Now

we shall deal with the defects and the evil effects which
are consequent upon the wrong and injudicious appli-
cation of a Vasti. The defects of wrongly handling a
Vasti (Pranidhina-dosha) are six in number, viz., the
pipe may shake or revolve ; it may also be pressed side-
wise or thrown upwards ; and it may sink down or may
be pressed slantingly. Excessive thickness, coarseness,
bending down, narrowness, cleavage, nearness or dis-
tance of the tying bands (Karniki\ narrowness or excess-
ive width of its internal aperture, excessive length or
extreme shortness are the eleven defects which the pipe
of a Vasti (Netra-dosha) may have. The five objection-
able features in the bladder (Vasti-dosha) are an excess-
ive flabbiness, narrowness, width of its internal aperture,
leakiness an imperfect bending at its mouth (neck).
Variation in^essures put upon a Vasti (Enema syringe)
during its application may be attended with any of the

Chap. XXXV.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

597

four objectionable features (Pidana-dosha), viz., over-
pressure (pressing the injection into the rectum with an
injuriously excessive force), under-pressure, repeated
pressures and pressure at long intervals. The eleven de-
fects in the ingredients of the Vasti (Dravya-dosha) are
insufiici««nt cooking, excessive or insufficient quantity,
extreme coldness, excessive heat, extreme keenness of
potency, excessive mildness, excess or want of oiliness
(Sneha), extreme thickness of consistency and over-
fluidity. Lying with the head raised up or hung down
or in a bent or sitting posture or resting on one’s
back or in a contracted posture or on one’s right
side are the seven defective postures (^ayysf-dosha)
in which a patient should never be laid during the
application of a Vasti. These are the twenty-four
defects which attend the wrong application of a
Vasti owing to the ignorance or inexperience of a
physician, while those which are the effects of the
injudiciousness of a patient are fifteen in number and
would be described in the chapter on Aturopadrava-
Chikitsita (Chapter XXXIX, Chikitsita-sthdna). i6.

The Sneha injected into the bowels by a Vasti is
obstructed in its passage and cannot consequently
leave the system but is retained in it through any of the
following eight causes, viz, ojbstruction of the food,
by the three Doshas, its admixture with the fcecal
matter (accumulated in the bowels), its being injected
too high up into the intestines, an omission to foment
(the patient’s body), using the Sneha in a cold state
or in a small quantity and lastly use of no meals or
of scanty meals by the patient previous to the
application of a Vasti. These (retentive c/iditions) are
due to the indiscretion of both the phy^cian and the
patient. Nine distressing symptoms (VyApad) namely

I

598

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. tCh»p. XXXV.

as a defective application of either the AnuvAsana or
the Asthdpana Vastis, distension of the abdomen,
(Adhmdna), a cutting pain in the region of the anus,
(Parikartikd) Dysenteric stools (ParisrAva), diarrhoea
(Pravdhikd), affecting the heart (Hridayaop?sarana),
catching pain in the limbs, over-dosage, haemorrhage
manifest themselves in consequence of any act of in-
discretion of the physician in attendance. 17.

Memorable Verse : — The seventy-six kinds
of the distressing symptoms (Vyipad) have been
briefly described above. Their symptoms and treat-
ment would be described in the following chapter. 18.

Thus ends the Thirty-fifth Chapter in the Chikitsita Slh^nam in the
Sus'ruta Samhit^ which deals with the dimensions, classificationri ai d
therapeutical applications of a Netra and a Vasti.

CHAPTER XXXVL

Now ^we shall discourse on the medical treat-
ment of* the mishaps which are consequent on an
injudicious application of the pipe and of the vasti

(Netravasti-Vaypach-Chikitsitam). i.

Metrical Text : — A displacement or retro-
version of the pipe during the application of a Vasti
produces a painful and bleeding ulcer in the rectum,
which should be treated as a recent or incidental
ulcer. An extremely up-turned or down-turned posture
of the pipe at the time gives rise to a pain in the
rectum which should be treated with Pitta-subduing
remedies and sprinkled with Snehas (oil, clarified
butter, etc.\ A slanting or one-sided posture of the
pipe after its introduction into the rectum causes its
mouth to be closed and thus prevents a complete
and satisfactory injection of the fluid (into the bowels).
Hence its mouth should be held straight (and steady)
by an experienced physician. The use of an excess-
ively thick or rough pipe or of one with a down-
turned or bent mouth, produces a bleeding and painful
ulcer in the rectum which shojald be remedied in the
manner mentioned above. The injection of a Vasti
proves abortive in the event of the Karnikd (attached
to the pipe) being too near the end of the pipe or
itself being broken or too small. These defects should,
therefore, be carefully avoided. In a case of the Karnik^
(attached to the*pipe) being at a greater distance from
the mouth of the pipe, it would hurt,^c1ie Guda
inarma(marma at the anus) and produce a considerable
bleeding therefrom. Pitta-subduing remedies and

6 oo

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. XXXVI.

Pichchhlla-Vastis should be employed in such a case.
The application of a Vasti with a pipe of small
length or narrow calibre produces pain, and the injected
fluid dribbles out (without entering into the rectum),
thus occasioning all the maladies* which a-ltend an
insufficient or abortive use of a Vastif. In the event
of the pipe being large and wide-calibred one, the
result would be that a large quantity of the fluid would
be at once injected into the bowels just as in a case of
Avapida-dosha (constant pressing). 2.

Disorders resulting from a defect-
ive bladder : — The cflfects which result from the
use of a bladder (Vasti) too large or too thick are
identical with those which follow from an imperfect
fitting of its neck with the pipe. A (proportionately)
smaller efficacy is obtained from the use of a small
bladder - capable (necessarily) of injecting a smaller
quantity of the medicinal fluid. An imperfectly fixed
bladder or the one with small pores therein produces
effects similar to those resulting from the use of a
cracked pipe. 3.

An injection made with considerable force by a
Vasti (Enema-syringe) enters the stomach (Amisaya)
which being forced higher up by the up-coursing
Vdyu in the organism is emitted through the mouth
and the nostrils. I Under the circumstances, the

♦ These are strangury (Mutra-krichchhra), suppression of urine (Mutrd-
gbata), etc.

t According to DalUn* the remedy in this case would be that
applicable in a case of Mutr^ghdla, etc. ; but Jejjata holds that the
remedy lies iri applying a Pichchhila Vasti as in the preceding case,

t An additional reading says that it causes vomiting, nausea,
epileptic fits and a burning sensation of the body. Vtinda supports this
additional reading. ^

Ckap. XXXViJ CHIKITSA STHANAM.

6oi

patient should be immediately pressed by the neck
and (his body) shaken. Strong purgatives and errhines
should be administered, and sprinkling him with cold
water should be prescribed. If a Vasti be applied with
lesser forte^ the medicinal fluid of the Vasti cannot
reach the* intestines (Pakvdsaya) and (consequently) fails
to produce the desired effect Hence it should be duly
pressed. If it be pressed at intervals, the wind (Viyu)
in the abdomen becomes enraged, and gives rise to
tympanites (Adhmdnaj and excruciating pain therein.
The medicinal treatment in such a case should be theap
plications of proper Vastis in consideration of the nature
of the aggravated Doshas involved therein If the pipe
be retained for an (unnecessarily) long time in the
rectum during the application of a Vasti, it tends to
increase the pain, and bring about an aggravation of the
disease. This should be remedied by a second appli-
cation of the Vasti charged with proper antidotal solutions
sufficient to cope with the intensity of the disease. 4.

The use of an insufficiently cooked Sneha (in a
Vasti) leaves a slimy sticky deposit on the inner
lining of the rectum accompanied by a local swelling
which should be remedied by the application of a
Sams'odhana-vasti and the exhibition of purgatives.*
The applicatioji of a Vasti of either kind (Asthdpana
and Anuvdsana) charged with a deficient or inadequate
quantity of a medicinal solution, proves abortive in all
instances ; whereas diarrhoea (Atisdra), fatigue and Andha
(distension of the abdomen with the retention of stool,
urine, etc.) result from the application of one chained
with an excessive quantity of the fluid. Tb,e applica-
tion of a Vasti charged with an extremely warm or

H * Qayaddsa reads and recommends that the purgatives to he used in
such a case should be devoid of any oleaginous substances (Sneha).

6o2

THE SUSHRUtA SAMHITA [Chap. XXXVI.

Strong solution produces epileptic fits, a burning sensa-
tion, diarrhoea and (an aggravated condition of the)
Pitta. The use of any extremely cold or mild medicine
for the purpose of a Vast! arrests the emission of the
flatus (VAyu\ and produces Adhmdna (distension of the
abdomen).* Antidotal measures should be auopted in
cases of the deficient or excessive quantity, etc The
fluid to be used in charging a Vasti should be thickened
in the event of its extremely attenuated consistency and
vice versa. The application of a Vasti charged with a
fluid consisting of an excessive quantity of Sneha
would produce a general inertness of the organism,
(dullness of organic functions), while one entirely
bereft of any Sneha would produce numbness of the
organism and a distension of the abdomen. The
remedy in either case consists in employing a Vasti
of the opposite kind an oily or non-oily Vasti

respectively). 5.

The application of a Vasti to a patient with his
head downward is attended with symptoms peculiar to
an act of over-pressing (the bladder of the Vasti), and
the remedy also would be similar. The application
of a Vasti to a patient with his head held up high
and erect would block the urethra, ?>., would suppress
the urine, in which case the patient should be treated
first with Sveda and then with an Uttara-vasti (urethral
syringe t which would give the patient much relief.
The injected fluid goes astray (within the abdomen)

♦ An additional reading says. that a dry (thickend ?) Niruhi-vasii
produces a slimy deposit in the rectum and in ihe pelvic region,
while one with its fluid of an extremely thin consistency would produce
only a Utile eiSpet and might produce diarrhoea.

t jejjata's reading of this passage does not include the application oi
Sveda but meant that the Uttara-vasti should be applied with a Sneha.^

t

Chap. XKXVL) CHIKITSA STHANAM. 603

and fails to enter into the intestines (PakvAs'aya) in
the event of the patient lying in a stooping posture
during the application of a Vasti. The VAyu in such
a case becomes aggravated and gives rise to pain in
the regior^p of the heart, abdomen and rectum. The
injected fluid fails to penetrate into the bowels in the
event of the patient lying on his back during the
application of a Vasti owing to the consequent obstruc*
tion of the passage. The bodily V^yu becomes in this
case agitated and enraged by the (introduction of the)
pipe (of the VastiJ. A contracted position of the body
or of both the thighs, during the application of a Vasti
prevents the full outflow of the injected medicine from
the intestines, owing to its being acted upon by
the bodily Vdyu. In a ca^e of the application of a
Vasti to a patient in a sitting posture, the fluid rolls
down without entering into the bowels; it cannot
consequently soothe the As'aya and thus proves abor-
tive. The injected medicine cannot fully enter into
the PakvAs'aya i intestines), when the Vasti is applied to
a patient lying on his right side, since the Pakvds'aya
is situated on the left side (of the abdomen). The
application of a Vasti is not recommended when the
patient lies on his face or in such other posture
since It is followed by an aggravation of the bodily
VAyu, which should be remedied by medicines chosen
according to the exigencies of each case. 6.

We shall describe hereafter (in the next chapter)
the dangers (Vyafpat) which attend the misapplication of
a Sneha vasti and the course of the medical treatment
to be adopted in each. The dangers (Vya^pat) attending
a deficient application ( Ayoga) of a 'Niruhaj^ Vasti with
their respective treatment are described here in this
chapter. 7.

604 the SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXXVI.

AyogQ, ■ — Cramps or colic pains (^ula) in the
intestines, and heaviness and distension of the abdomen
result from the application of a Vasti charged with a
medicinal solution either cold, inadequate in quantity,
or deficient in its therapeutic virtues. All these symp-
toms are included within the term Ayoga or/deficient ■
application of a Vasti which should be remedied by a
strong Vasti and a strong purgative. 8.

Distension of the abdomen and consequently an
excruciating pain (^ulai in the regions of the sides,
back, waist and the heart result from the applications of
a Vasti to a person who has taken a second meal before
the digestion of a previous one, or in the event of the
presence of a large accumulation of Doshas (in his
body;. If the Vasti be applied in a tepid state and in
a lai^e quantity just after a heavy meal, the results
would be the same. Similar results would follow
injections of cold medicinal solutions in large doses
saturated with only a small quantity of salt and Sneha
(oil or clarified butter as well as from those in a
person with a large accumulation of fcecal matter (in his
bowels . The remedy in all these cases should consLst
in the -application of a Vasti charged with stronger
medicinal solutions as well as of an AnuvAsana-
vasti. 9.

The Pitta and the Vdyu of the body are conjointly
aggravated by the application of a Vasti charged with
extremely parching, hot and saline solutions which give
rise to the distress, known as Parikartiki, attended v. ith
a sort of cutting pain in the pelvis and about the anus
and the region of the umbilicus. Applications of the
Piohohhil^vasti of a medicated Sneha cooked with the
drugs of the Madhura group should be the remedies in
these cases 10.

Chap. XXXVL] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 60$

The distress Known as Parisrifva attended with loss
of strength^ and bodily lassitude results from the appli-
cation of a Vasti charged with solutions of extremely
strong, acid and saline substances. Pitta begins to
secrete a^this stage, and produces a consequent burning
sensation in the anus. Applications of a Pichchhila*vasti
as well as a Vasti of clarified butter churned from miiJk
should be the remedy in these cases, ii.

The distress known as Pravathikrf or the passing of
bloody stools or painful motions, attended with colic
^^Sula) and a burning sensation, is the effect of an
excessively strong Asthdpana or AnuvAsana Vasti.
This disorder should be remedied by the application
of a Pichchhila-vasti, a diet of boiled rice saturated
with milk and with injections into the bowels, in the
manner of an Anuvdsana Vasti, of a medicated Sneha
(oil or clarified butter) cooked with the drugs of the
Madhura group. 1 2 .

The distress known as Hridayopasarana, accom-
panied with such symptoms as, aching pains in the
limbs, epilepsy, delirium, heaviness of the body and all
other discomforts peculiar to the action of the deranged
Vdyu, originates from the application of a Niruha-
vasti charged with extremely parching solutions as
well as from those of an .^nuvdsana- vasti in the
complicated diseases of the deranged bodily Vdyu.
The remedy in these cases consists in applying the
Sodhana Vasti charged with solutions efficacious in
subduing the actions of all the Doshas of the body. 13.

A breaking pain in the joints and the limbs,
numbness ( Anga-graba), yawning, shivering and lassitude
are the symptoms which follow the applications of a
Vasti inadequately charged, or charged with medicinal
solutions which are either too mild or too Ruksha (dry)

6o5 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXXVI.

in their potency, or applied in the case of a patient having
lain ill a iy of the objectionable postures at the time
of the application, or possessed of a dry or Vdyu-
predominating temperament. The remedy in these
Cases should consist in applying Sveda, anqjntmcnts
and appropriate Vastis. 14.

Symptoms which are known as Atiyoga, following
applications of Vastis charged with an inordinate
quantity of medicinal fluid or with extremely hot or
strong solutions as well as the application of Vastis
after an excessive application of Sveda (fomentation)
and in slight derangements of the bodily Doshas
should be treated identically as in cases laid d6wn
in connection with an Atiyoga (excessive use) of pur-
gatives. The use of a Fichchhila vasti in a cold
state is also recommended, as it would give the patient
much relief. 15.

Measures and remedies mentioned in respect of
Jivdddna thiemorrhage of the bowels) in connection
with an excessive use of purgatives should be employed
in the case cf similar symptoms (Jividatna) follow-
ing the excessive use of a Vasti. Applications of
Fichchhila- vasti charged with blood are likewise recom-
mended in t iese cases. 16.

The fore. oing nine kinds of distressing symptoms
(Vyrfpat) resulting from an injudicious applicatiott of
a Niruha-va .ti are also found to result from the inju-
dicious application of a Sneha-vasti. All the dis-
tresses (of (he injudicious applications of a Vasti) with
their sympt )ms and the course of medical treatment
to be adopted (in each case) have thus been described.
A discrete '‘and experienced physician should so act
as riot to induce these distresses (Vydpat) in connection
W}th the applications of a Vasti. 17-18,

ap. XXXVL]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

607

A purgative should be given after the lapse of a
fortnight from the date of the exhibition of an emetic
drug. An Asthdpana- vast! should be applied a week
after the date of purging. An Anuvd.sana-vasti should
also be qpplied on the very same day. 19.

Thus ends the Thirty-sixth Chapter of the Chikitsita Sthanam in the
Sus'ruia Samhild which treats of the medical treatment of the diseases
consequent on the injudicious applications of a Vasti.

CHAPTER XXXVn.

Now we shall discourse on the treatmept of an
Anuvdsana vast! and an Uttara vasti (AntlV^SEn*-
ottara-Vasti-ChIkitsIta). r.

Metrical Texts An AnuvAsana-vasti should
be applied to a patient fit to be treated therewith, seven
days after the administration of a purgative and after
he has regained his strength and taken his meal of
rice. Three-quarter parts of the medicinal solution
enjoined to be used in connection with a Niruha-vasti*
(dry or oilless; in consideration of the age and tempera-
ment of the patient form the (full) dose of a Sneha vasti
An enema (Vasti) should be applied after the emission of
stool, flatus and urine from the system, since they resist
the penetration of the Sneha into the bowels. A Sneha-
vasti (emulsive or oleaginous enema) should not be
applied to a person whose organism has not been
previously cleansed (by an appropriate emetic and
purgative). The potency of the Sneha would be able
to easily infiltrate into a system previously cleansed
in the manner before indicated. 2.

Now we shall describe (the process of preparing) the
several medicated oils in due order with reference to
the different Doshas which should b2 used as drink
and errhines and in charging a Sneha vasti and which
have the power of destroying a variety of diseases (if so
used). 3-A.

First Talla : — Drugs such as S athi, Pushkara,
Krishnd, Madam, Deva-ddru, S'atdhvd, Kusktha, Yashti-
madku, Vacha, VUva and Chitroka should be pounded
together, made into a paste and duly cooked with oiI^(of

Chap. XXXVII.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

609

four times their combined (weight) and milk weighing
twice and water, four times as much as the oil. The use
of this medicated oil as a Vasti-measure proves curative
in pacifying the incarcerated Y Ay u and in cases of hjem-
orrhoids, l^nteric diarrhoea (Grahani), tympanites with
retention bf stool aud urine, Vishama-jvara and the
affections of Vdyu (nervous disorders) in the waist
(lumbago), the thighs (sciatica), the back and the
abdomen. 3.

Second Tai la: — Vac/id, Pushkara^ Kushtha^ Eld,
Madana, Deva-ddru , Saindhava, Kdkoli, Kshira-Kdkoli^
Yashti-madhii, Medd, Mahd medd, Narddhipa (Aragva-
dha), Pdthd,Jivaka, Jivajiti, Bhdrgi, Chandana, Katphala,
Sarald (white Trivrit), A^furu, Vilva, V dlaka, As'va-
gandhd^ Chitraka, Vriddhi, Vidanga, Aragvadha, S'ydmd
Tfivrit, Pippali and Riddhi should be pasted together
and cooked with the proper quantity of oil, milk and
the decoction of the drugs of the (major) Pancha-mula
group. Anuvdsana-vastis of this kind are highly
efficacious in cases of Gulma, tympanites with suppressed
stool and urine, impaired digestion, haemorrhoids,
lienteric diarrhoea (Grahani), retentions of urine and
diseases due to the action of the deranged VAyu. 4.

Third Tai la S — Ckitrakd, Ativiskd, Pdthd,
Danti^ Vilva^ Vacha, Amis ha {Gu£gu/u\ Sarald (white
Trivrit), Ams'umaii {SAUparni), Rdsrid, Ntlini, Ckatur-
angula (Aragvadha), Chavya, Ajamodd, Kdkoli, the two
kinds of Medd, Deva-ddru, Jivaka, Rishavaka, Vars/id'
bhu, Aja-gandhd, S^atdhva, Haremi, As vagandhd, Man-
jishthd S'athi, Pushkara and Taskara ^Choraka) should
be pasted together and cooked with the proper quantity
of milk and oil. The oil thus prepared is hfghly effi-
cacious in the disorders of the deranged Vayu, In-
Injected into the bowels in the manner of (an Anuv^ana-

* 77

6lO THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. CChap. XXXVII.

vasti), it speedily cures Gridhrasi (sciatica), lameness,
haunch-back, Adhya vdta, urinary diseases, obstinate
constipation of the bowels (Udd-varta), impaired diges-
tion and weakness of the body. 5.

Fourth Taila A decoction of the drugs
Bhutika, Eranda^ Varskdbku, Rdsnd, Vdsaka,% Rohishay
the drugs of the Das^a-mula group, Sahd (Mudga-parni),
Bhdrgiy Shad-granthi (Vacha), Deva ddru, Valdy Ndga-
valdy Murudy Adva-gandhd, the two Amritd (Guduchi
and Haritaki), Sahdchara, Vari (^atd-vari), S'unthiy
Kdka-ndsdy Viddri YavUy MdshUy Atasiy Kola and
Kuldttha should be cooked in an adequate quantity of
oil with (a Kalka of) the drugs of the Jivaniya group
and a quantity of milk weighing four times as much
as the oil. The oil, if employed in the manner of a
Vasti, would prove beneficial in cases of diseases due to
the action of the deranged Vdyu localised in the regions
of the thighs, legs, coxey (Trika), sides (Pdrsva), balls of
the shoulders (Amsa) and in the hands, the head and
Manyi (nerves of the neck). 6.

Fifth Taila (with clarified butter) r-r-The drugs
Jivantiy Ativaldy Meddy the two kinds of Kdkoli, Jivakuy
Rishavakay Ativishdy Krishndy Kdka-ndsdy Vac/ia,
Deva-ddru, Rdsnd, Madana, Yashti-madhUy Sarald (while
Trivrit), S^atdvariy ChandanUy Svayam-guptd with an
adequate quantity of oil and clarified butter (in equal
parts) with a quantity of milk weighing eight times as
much as the combined weight of the oil and clarified
butter. This oil should be employed in the manner of
an AnuvAsana-vasti in cases of Gulma and retentions
of stool and urine with a distension of the abdomen.
It conquer^ the deranged Vdyu and Pitta of the body,
acts as an invigorating and constructive tonic, improves
digestion, increases strength and creates fresh

Chap. XXXVII.] ClilKITSA STHANAM. 6ll

semen. Used as an errhine or as a drink it tends to
alleviate all affections confined to the regions above
the clavicles. 7.

Sixth Sncha S — YashH-madhu^ TJs'ira^ Kddm-
arya^ Katuka, Utpala^ Chandana, S'ydmd,^ Padma-
Kdshtha ,%Jimuta^ Indrayava, Ativishd and Vdld (in equal
parts) should be pasted together and cooked with an ade-
quate quantity of clarified butter and oil, the oil weighing
a fourth part of the whole quantity of Sneha to which
should be added a quantity of milk weighing eight times
as much as the Sneha (oil and clarified butter added
together) with a decoction of the drugs of the Nyagro-
dhddi group. This (medicated Ghrita), used as a Vasti
proves efficacious in cases of Asrig-dara (menorrhagia),
erysipelas (Visarpa), Vdta-Rakta, abscess (Vidradhi),
fever, burning sensations in the body and all other dis-
orders due to the action of the deranged Pitta. 8.

Seventh Sneha A paste of Mnndla,
Utpala, Sdluka, the two kinds of SdrivA^ (Ananta-mula
and Syamalat^), Ndga-kes'ara, the two kinds of
Chandana (red and white), BhU'tiimbay Padma-vija^
Kas'eruka, Patola, Kaiuka^ Raktd (Manjishtha\ Gundrd,
Parpataka and Vdsaka (weighing one seer in all) should
be cooked with (sixteen seers of) the decoction of
Trina-mula\ with (four seers of) oil and with milk
twice as much as the oil. A variety of Pittaja diseases
yields to the curative efficacy of this medicated oil,
used as a Vasti, or as errhines, drink unguent. 9.

Eig'hth Sneha : — A paste composed of Tri-
phald, Ativishd^ Murvd^ Trivrit, Chitraka^ Vdsaka^

* Dallana explains * ** ^yimk as “ Priyangu ” and ‘yimuta ” as
“Mustaka.”

t Dallana explains “Trina mula” as “Trina-pancha mula** for which
see Ch. XKXVIII, Sulra-Sth^nam.

6I2

the: SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. CChap. XXXVIL

Nimba, Aragvadha, Shad-granthd (Vacha), Sapta^parna,
the two kinds of Haridrd, (Haridrd and Ddru-haridrji),
Guduchi, Indra-sura, (Indra-varuni), Pippali, Kushtha^
Sarshapa and Ndgara in equal parts (weighing one seer
in all), should be cooked with an adequate^ quantity
(four seers) of oil and (sixteen seers of) the dec6ction of
the drugs of the Surasddi group. Obesity, a feeling of
physical languor, itches, etc., as well as diseases due
to the deranged condition of Kapha, readily yield
to the use of this (medicated oil) employed as a medi-
cinal snuff (Nasya), a gargle (Gandusha), a drink, or
anointment, or as a Vasti. lo.

Ninth Sneha A paste 'weighing one seer in
all) composed of Pdthd, Ajamoda, S drmgashtd, Pippali^
Gaja-pippali, S'untki, Sarald (D. K. — Saptald) Aguru,
K^liya, Bhdrgi^ Chavya, Deva-ddru, Maricha, Eld,
Haritaki, Katuka, Pippali-mula, Katphala pounded
together and mixed with a decoction of the Valli * and
the Kantaka each weighing twice as much as the weight
of the oil, should be cooked with an adequate quantity
of sesamum or castor oil (weighing four seers). All
kinds of diseases due to a deranged condition of the
bodily Kapha readily yield to the use of this (medicated)
oil when employed in the manner of an Anuv^sana
enema (Vasti). ii.

Tenth Sneha : -A pasted compound of
Vidanga, Udichya, Saindhava salt, S'athi, Pushkara,
Chitraka, Katphala, Ativishd, Bhdrgi, Vacha, Kushtha,
Deva-ddru, Medd, Madana, Yashti-madhu, S'ydmd -f,

* The ‘‘Valli” and the “Kantaka” here evidently mean the “Valli-
pancha-mula’( and the ‘ Kantaka-Pancha-mula” respectively for which
see chapter XXXVIII. Sutra-Sthinam.

V Dallana explains “S"ydmd” as “Vriddha-ddraka” and “Renu’
as “Par pataka”.

Chap. XXXV11.1 CHIKITSA STHANAM. 613

Nichula (Jala-Vetasa), Ndgara^ Satdahvd, Nilini^ R&snd^
Kadali, Vdsaka, Renu, Vilva, Ajamoda, Pippali, Danti,
Chavya^ Naradhipa (Aragvadha) with the decoction
of the drugs of the Mushkakddi group, should be cooked
with an ^ adequate quantity of sesamum or castor
oil- The use of this oil in the manner of an Anuvisana-
vasti (enema) speedily proves curative in cases of
Plihodara (enlargement of the spleen), obstinate con-
stipation of the bowels, Vdta-Rakta, Gulma, retentions
of stool and urine with a fialulent distention of the
abdomen, in diseases due to the action of the deranged
Kapha, in urinary complaints, gravels in the bladder
(SarkarA) and in haemorrhoids. 12.

An Anuvdsna-vasti may be applied in all parts of
the day and night and even (if necessary) without
any previous exhibition of emetics and purgatives,
in the case of a patient in v/hose system the Vdyu has
been incarcerated and extremely aggravated. The
application of a Nirudha- vasti (enema) should, ‘however,
be made in respect of a person of an extremely dry
temperament, or in whose system the deranged and
aggravated VAyu extremely predominates, only after
his system had been made sufficiently emulcent
(Snigdha) by two or three injections with an Anu-
vdsana-vasti. But if his systfem be agitated only with
an extremely aggravated condition of his bodily VAyu,
a Nirudha-vasti (enema h charged with a medicinal solu-
tion and with a profuse quantity of Sneha added therewith,
may be applied even before applying a Sneha (Vasti).
On finding that the Nirudha-vasti has fully acted,
the physician should treat the patient with medicinal
solutions of oils prepared with Yashti-madhu and
Madana fruit respectively in the manner of an Anuvdsa-
na-vasti in cases of the aggravations of Vdyu, etc. 13.

6i4

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXXVII.

A -Vasti should not be applied in the night since the
Doshas of the system are (generally) aggravated at this
time and since the Sneha (of the Vasti; owing to
its potency is likely to give rise to a distention of the
abdomen attended with fever and heaviness of the
limbs. The mouths of the internal ducts of t*he body
remain dilated and the Doshas remain in their proper
places are not generally agitated), and the digestive
fire remains surcharged with the essence of the diges-
tive food during the day time, hence the potency (Ojas)
of a Sneha-vasti employed during the day time easily
spreads through the ducts of the body. An Anuvdsana-
vasti may be applied during (the early part of) the night
in summer in a case marked by a preponderance of the
deranged Pitta and a (consequent) weakness of the
Kapha, and an extremely parched condition of the orga-
nism, as well as in cases of the affections of VAyu
(Vdta-roga), Unfavourable symptoms such as a burning
sensation in the body, etc., arise from the application of
a Vasti in the day time during a preponderance of the
Pitta, or in summer. The physician should, therefore,
make such applications in the evening (Pradosha) in
such instances. 14.

Propertimefortheappllcatlonof the

Sneha-vasti:— A Sneha-vasti should be employed
during the day in spring and winter and in the evening
during summer and the rainy season, with a view to ward
off the dangers due to the misapplication in the internal
use of a Sneha.* It may, however, be applied at any
time during the day, or in the night in a case marked
by a preponderance of the deranged bodily Vdyu. 15.

In the serious stage of a disease an Anuvdsana-
enema should be applied after the patient has partaken

* See Chapter XXXI*j kitsiia-Slh^nam.

I

Chap. XXXVII.] CHIKITSA STHANAM.

615

of a second meal, having already digested his previous
one. The use of a Sneha-vasti is forbidden in an
empty stomach as it might otherwise send the injected
fluid higher up into the intestines owing to the empti-
ness an^ cleansed * (unencumbered) state of the sto-
mach. An application of the Anuvasana-vasti should be
made just after a meal, since the application of a Vasti
made during the continuance of a partially digested
or undigested meal in the stomach brings on fever.
An Anuv^sana enema should not, however, be applied
after the patient had taken his meal, richly saturated
or cooked with a Sneha (oil or clarified butter), since the
double introduction of the Sneha into the system
through the medium of food and the Vasti brings on
vertigo and epilepsy. The strength and complexion
of the patient suffer much by the application of an
Anuvasana-vasti after he has taken a dry (Ruksha) meal
containing no Sneha. A patient should, therefore, be
first fed with a diet saturated with a moderate quantity
of an oleaginous substance before being treated with an
Anuvisana-vasti. The patient before being treated
with an Anuvisana vasti should be fed with Mudga-
soup -j*, cow's milk and meat-essence to a quarter part I
less than the quantity he can ordinarily take. 16.

* Gayaddsa reads “ of and explains it

to mean ** owing to the potency of the Sneha in traversing through the
minutest channels of the body.”

t DalUna explains that the Mudga soup should be taken without
being mixed with any Sneha. He further says that the patient should be
given Mudga-soup, cow’s milk and meat -essence in accordance with
the aggravation of the deranged Kapha, Pitta and V^yu respectively.

X Dallana, on the authority of the older C6mment#ttors explains
Hat the patient should not be fed to his fill but only to three-fourths,
half and one- fourth of what he can ordinarily take according to his
digestive capacity.

6i6

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXXVII.

The mode of applying a Sneha-
vast! : — The body of the patient to be treated with
an Anuvasana vasti should be first anointed (with
a Sneha) and gently fomented with hot water. Then he
should be advised to take his meal in the prescribed
way and made to take a short walk. Thcn^ having
passed stools and urine, he should be treated with
the Sneha-vasti. The mode of applying (the apparatus)
is described under that of Niruha-vasti. He should
be kept silently lying on his back as long as it
would take to count a hundred words (V^k). The
potency (Virja) of the injected Sneha spreads through the
entire organism in the event of one’s lying with
outstretched limbs in the above manner after the
application of a Sneha-vasti. The patient should be
gently struck* three times on each of the soles and the
palms of his hands and on the buttocksf , The (patient
with his) bedding should be thrice raised (and shaken
with gentle jerks). After that he should be laid on a
bed stretched out at full length and be advised to speak
and exert himself as little as possible and conform to
a strict regimen of diet and conduct. 17-19.

A quantity of S'atdhvd and Saindhava should be
mixed with the Sneha (to be used in the Vasti) and (the
whole compound) applied lukewarm, inasmuch as the in-
jected Sneha would thereby easily flow back (without pro-
ducing any pain and burning sensation, etc.) and dribble

^ Dallana explains that the patient should be caught hold of by
his wrists and ankles and given the gentle jerks so as to allow the potency
of the Sneha spread through the organism.

t Some ex^plain that the buttocks of the patient should be
raised up with his bedding and bis couch. At any rate his buttocks
should be raised up in order to enable the injected Sneha to remain
inside the intestines and not to come out instantly.

Chap. XXXVII.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 617

down in due time after the application. If At any
time a quantity of the Sneha injected into the bowels
in the manner of an Anuvisana enema (Vasti) is instant*
ly driven back by the pressure of the incarcerated
abdominal VAyu, or the Viyu (air) of the bladder (Vasti),
or by an excessive heat, keenness (in potency), or an
over-dose of the injected fluid itself, or by the over dose
of the medicines (subsequently) added thereto, a Sneha-
vasti charged with a smaller dose of the Sneha should be
again applied, since a Sneha un-retained in the abdomen
fails to produce any emulsive effect. 20-21.

Retention of stool, urine and VAyu (flatus) is pro-
duced by using an insufficient quantity of Sneha in
an Anuvisana-vasti. A burning sensation in the body,
diarrhcea (PravAha) and fatigue accompanied with pain
set in as the natural resultants of an excessive Anuvisana
enema. The satisfactory nature of the application of
an Anuvdsana-vasti should be inferred from the timely
discharge of the injected Sneha with flatus and foecal
matter* out of the bowels of a patient without giving
rise to any distressing symptoms such as burning
and sucking + sensations, etc. 22.

The patient may be given a light t meal or diet
in the evening, in case he is possessed of a keen digestive
capacity§, subsequent to the ^digestion of a previous
meal and (should he feel hungry) after the discharging of
the injected Sneha. Tepid water boiled with Dhanydka

* It should be noted that the particle in the text means

that on the satisfactory action of an Anuv^sana*Vastu the injected S neha
may come out with urine as well.

t Dallana explains to mean thirst.

t **Light’* means both light in quantity as well as in quality.

§ Some commentators explain this couplet' to mean that a patient
of ordinary dig^tive capacity should be given a light food, whereas a
patieqt of keen digestive capacity may lal^e a full pne.

78

6i8

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. tChap. XXXVII.

and S'unthi should be given hot to the patient on the
(following) morning as it would sharpen his appetite
and produce a fresh relish for food. 23.

This is the procedure of applying a Sneha-*vasti.
Six, seven, eight or nine applications of Sneha-vastis
should in this manner be made in succession alternately
with those of a Nirudha-vasti. 24- A.

The Successive actions of the

Vastis : —The first application of the Vasti per-
meates the pelvic and the inguinal regions with the
emulcent essence of the injected Sneha. The second
tends to restore the V^yu in the cephalic part of the
body to its normal condition. The third contributes
to the improvement of bodily strength and complexion.
The fourth permeates the Rasa (lymph chyle) with its
own oily essence. In this way the fifth application
of a Vasti permeates the blood, the sixth the
flesh, the seventh the fat, the eighth the bones, and
the ninth the marrow with the oily essence. This
series of Vasti-applications repeated twice tends to
purify the semen from all its impure or unhealthy
constituents. 24.

A person treated with eighteen series (three hun^
dred and twenty-four in number) of such Sneha-vastis
and Niruha-vastis in the above mentioned way and
observing the prescribed rules of diet and conduct is
enabled to develop a muscular strength in no way
inferior to that of an elephant, and to live a sinless
life a thousand years, in the full enjoyment of his
intellectual faculties, god-like beauty and horsedike
swiftness. 25.

An excessive application of only one kind of Vasti,
either of a Sneha-vasti,or of a Niruha vasti, should be
avoided, since an excess of the first (Snefia-vasti) tends to

Chap. XXXVH.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 619

impair the di'^e^tivc capacity^ and to bring on an
aggravation of the deranged Kapha, while an excess of
the second (Niruha vasti) tends to aggravate the bcdily
V^yu. Hence an application of the Sneha-vasti should
[be followe 4 by one of the Niruha-vasti and versa^
in order to’avoid all apprehension of an aggravation of
Pitta, Kapha and Viyu. Daily applications of a Sneha-
vasti are not forbidden in respect of a person of parched
or dry (Ruksha) and Vayu-predominating temperament,
while in other instances they should be made on each
fourth day, so that the digestive capacity might not
bj thereby impiirei. The application of a moderate
quantity of Sncha with a Sneha-vasti is always beneficial
to persons of p irched or dry temperament. Similarly,
an application of the Niruhavasti in a small quantity
always proves beneficial to the persons who have been
already treated with a Sneha ( Vasti). 26.

Distresses from Sneha-vasti Now

we shall describe the distresses which are found to attend
(an abuse or excess of) a Sneha vasti. Various kinds of
distressing symptoms are produced by the application
of a Sneha vasti of a mild or weak potency in the case
of a patient whose stomach is filled with the aggravated
Doshas so that the Snchi cannot flow back, being over-
whelmed, as it would be, by the Aggravated Doshas. 27.

Specific Symptoms: -An astringent taste
in the mouth, yawning, shivering and Vishama-Jvara
witli the peculiar Vdyu origined distempers such as, pain
(in the limbs) arc the symptoms which mark the reten-
tion of the injected Sneha in the bowels over-whelmed

♦ Vrinda reads ‘

This means that the Pitta and th^ Kapha would be aggravat
ed by an excessive use of -n Sneha*vastt. The next couplet in the
text would belter support Vrinda’a reading. —Ed.

620

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXXVIl

by the action of the deranged Vs£yu. Fever, a burning
sensation (of the body), thirst, perspiration, a pungent
taste in the mouth and yellowness of the complexion,
urine and the eyes are the features which are due to the
retention of the injected Sneha in the bowels over-
whelmed by the action of the deranged Pitta. Water-
brash, a sweet taste in the mouth, heaviness of the limbs,
vomiting, difficult breathing, catarrhal fever (^ita-Jvara)
and an aversion to food are the indications due to the
retention of the injected Sneha in the bowels over-
powered by the action of the deranged Kapha. In these
cases, applications of (Sneha) Vastis and such other
remedial measures as are soothing to the Dosha or
Doshas (giving rise to the retention of the Sneha in the
bowels) should be adopted with due regard to the nature
and intensity of each. 28-29.

Cramps (Sula) and heaviness in the stomach
(Am&s'aya), suppression of the Vdyu (flatus), affec-
tion of the heart, a bad taste in the mouth, difficult
respiration, epileptic fits, vertigo and an aversion to
food are the symptoms which attend a retention of
the Sneh i in the bowels owing to the pressure of food
matter carried down into the abdomen of a person who
has been so treated after a heavy meal, and they should
be remedied first by fasting and then by appetising
measures. 30.

A languid feeling in the limbs attended with a dis-
tension of the abdomen, colic (S'ula), difficult breathing
and a sense of heaviness in the intestines mark the
retention of the injected Sneha surcharged with the
foecal matter of a person previously uncleansed by
proper remedies. The remedy in such cases consists
in the application of Niruha-vastis as well as Sneha-
vastis with the admixture of kecn-potencied drugs. 31.

Chap. XXXVIL]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

621

A scent of the Sneha in the mouth, cough, difficult
breathing, an aversion to food and dullness of all sense-
organs which become internally charged with a coating
of oil and a glossy appearance of the skin (mouth — D. R.)
mark ^n undesirably higher introduction of the Sneha
injecteci into the system previously cleansed (with proper
emetics and purgatives). Such a case should be
treated as a case of Ati-pidita (over pressure on the
bladder of the) enema and with the applications of
Asth^pana-vastis as well. 32.

An inadequate quantity of Sneha of a mild or weak
potency, injected cold with the help of an enema,
is not retained in the system, if not duly fomented
and cleansed before, but gives rise to scanty stools,
cramps (Sula), heaviness and distention in the region
of the intestines (Pakvdsaya) and (ultimate) suppres-
sion of stool, etc. Such cases should be speedily
remedied by the application of an Asthdpana as well
as by that of an Anuvdsana-vasti. 33.

A small quantity of Sneha of mild potency, injected
into the bowels of a patient taking only a small
quantity of food, fails to flow therefrom and gives rise
to a dullness of spirit, a tendency to vomit and a
sense of lassitude which should be remedied by the
application of Asth^panarvastis charged with (the
decoction of) S'odhaniya (cleansing) drugs and by the
application of Anuvdsana enemas charged with
Sneha boiled and cooked with those (S'odhaniya)
drugs. 34.

The Sneha of a Vast!-, if found to dribble down (from
the system) after the lapse of even a whole day and
night from the time of its application, witliout giving
rise to any physical discomfort, does no mischief but
exerts all the good effects of the application of the Vasti.

622

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXXVII.

Whereas, if digested, it produces but very little benefit to
the patient. The retention of the whole or of any por-
tion of the Sneha injected into the bowels of a patient
without producing any special physical discomfort
should be ascribed to an extremely parched Or dry
condition of his organism, and would not require any
special medical treatment. 35-36.

In case of a Sneha not flowing out from the bowels
within a period of twenty-four hours of its introduction
(and in case of its producing any supervening symp-
toms), corrective (S'odhana) remedies should be employ-
ed and all subsequent applications of Sneha should be
stopped. Thus we have finished describing the diseases
(Vy^patj and symptoms which result from the injudi-
cious use of Sneha (-Vastisj together with the nature of
the medical treatment to be employed in each of
them. 37.

Uttard«va.StiS : — Now we shall describe the
mode of applying an Dttara-vasti (injection into the
urethra of a male or of a female patients The pipe
to be used for the purpose lin the case of a male
patient) should be made to measure fourteen fingers
in length, measured by the patient’s own fingers. It
should be shaped like the stem of a Mdlati flower (in
girth) at its top-end and provided with an aperture
admitting the passage of a mustard seed. Several
authorities hold that the length of the pipe should
be equal to that of the penis (of the patient). The
largest dose of a Sneha to be used in connection with
an urethral injection Uttara-vasti) is only one Kun-
cha (Pala) ; and this should be determined with discretion
in respect of patients below twenty-five years of age.
There should be (two) Kamikfts (protrusions) in the
middle part of the pipe (Netra) in the case of a male.

Chap. XXX.Vn ] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 623

In the case of a female patient, however, the Karnikds
should be placed above a space of four fingers (from its
end). The whole pipe should be ten fingers in length
and should be made to suit the urethral channel (of the
patient) with an aperture sufficient to allow a Mudga-
pulse to^pass through it. 38.

In the case of a vaginal douche or injection (Vasti),
the pipe of the Uttara-vasti should be introduced to the
extent of four fingers only into the vaginal canal. Two
fingers only of the entire length of the pipe should be
inserted into the channel of the urethra in the case of
an adult woman, whereas, in the case of a young girl
of tender years, the pipe should be introduced to the
length of one finger only. Here it should be noted
that these measures are to be determined by the
standard of the patient's own fingers. A Prasrita mea-
sure of the Sneha by which is meant a quantity that would
be contained in the hollow of the palms of the patient’s
hand extending to the roots of the phalanx is the
largest dose to be used in both these instances. In the
case of p-itients of tender years the dosage should be
determined with discretion in each case. 39.

The Vasti (bladder of the enema) should be made of
the bladder of a hog, lamb, or, a goat, or in its absence,
of the skin of the neck of a bird, or of the leg
of a Driti ^a leathern bag for holding water), or of
any other soft skin. 40,

Mode of application The body of the
patient should be first treated with a Sneha and with
fomentation (Sveda\ and his bowels (As'aya,' should be
clean.sed. He should then be made to pirtake of a gruel
(YavAgu) mixed with milk and clarified butter according
to his digestive capacity. He should be made to sit on
^ cushion placed on even ground and as high as hi.s

624 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXXVII.

knee-joints. Lukewarm oil should be rubbed over the
region of the neck of the bladder, and the penis should
be (artificially) excited and made steady and straight.
The orifice or the channel of the urethra should be first
(dilated and) searched with the help of an indicator
(S'al^k^), and then the pipe of the Uttara-vastI lubri-
cated with clarified butter, should be gently and
gradually inserted therein to the extent of six
fingers. The Sneha should be injected into the ure-
thra by gently pressing the bladder of the Uttara-
vasti, and the pipe should then be gradually with-
drawn from the urethra. The patient should be made
to partake of a moderate quantity of boiled rice
with milk, Yusha (Mudga-soup, etc.), or meat-soup*
in the evening after the dribbling out of the injected
Sneha. Three or four injections should be thus
made with the help of an urethral enema (Uttara-
vasti). 41.

Vaginal Uttara-vastI A grown up fe-
male patient, (under the circumstances), should be laid
on her back with arched and up-drawn knees, and an
injection should be made into her vaginal canal (Yoni)
by an experienced physician (D. R. — carefully). The
pipe should be most gently pressed in the case of a girl
before menstruation. For the purpose of purifying
the uterus (Garbh^saya), double the ordinary (one
Prasrita) quantity of Sneha should be injected into the
vaginal canal (by means of a Vasti) with a pipe having
three Karnikis (protuberance) attached to it. 42-43.

In case the injected fluid does not come back (within
the prescribed time), a fresh Vasti (enema) should be

* Milk Yasha and meat-soup should be prescribed in esses of

predomioi^nce of K^pha, Pitta and V^yu respectively.— Dallapa.

, Clrp. XXXVIL]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

625

agajn .applied with (the decoctions of) the S'odhana*
(purifying) drugs, or a Varti (plug) prepared with the
Sodhana ^rugs should be injected into the rectum.
As ap alternative, an indicator (Eshani) should be
inserted into the mouth of the bladder, or the region
pf the Adomen below the umbilicus, and be firmly
pressed with a close fist, or medicinal plugs or sticks
(Varti) of the size of a. Mud^^a-pulsc, cardamom- seed
(Eld), or mustard-seed should be made up of Saindhava
and the leaves of the Aragvadha pasted with the ex-
pressed juice of Nir^undi and cow's urine, and these
plugs (Varti) should, according to the age of the
patient, be inserted (into the mouth of the bladder) with
(the top-end of) a rod or an indicator (Saldkd) for the
out-flow of the injected fluid. Another alternative is to
use a stick (^Varti) madcup of the pendant soot of a room
( Agdra-dhuma\ Vrihati, Pippali^ Madana'frxxit, Sain-
dhava salt and S'unthi pasted with S'ukta (a sort of
Kdnjika) and cow’s urine (in the preceding manner).
Other (similar) measures should be adopted for the
successful action of an Anuvjisana enema (Vasti)*
44-A.

A cold decoction of Yashti-madhu saturated with
honey and sugart or a decoction of the (bark of the)
milk-exuding trees (Kshiri-Vriksha\ or cold milk, should
again be injected into the bladder, in the event of there
being a burning sensation in that organ, 44.

Diseases such as derangements of the semen, or of
ovum, or difficult menstruation, excess or suppression

* The S'odhana drugs here are the Trina-pancha-mula and such other
drugs.— Dallana,

t According to Dallana a quantity of sugar and hohey should be
added in each of the three cases, vie., (i) the decoction of Yashti-
madhu, (a) that of the Kshiri trees, and (3) milk.

626 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. tChap. XXXVII.

of the monthly flow, diseases of the uterus and of the
vaginal canal, non-falling of the placenta, strangury and
other diseases of the urine, gravel, stones (As'mari), sper-
matorrhea (S'ukrotseka), cramps in the bladder, in the
groins and in the urethra and all other severe (diseases of
the bladder other than Meha, will all yield to*Lhe appli-
cation of an Uttara-vasti (urethral enema). Symptoms
which mark, or dangers which attend, a judicious or an
injudicious application of an Uttara-vasti are respect-
ively identical with those which characterise or attend
those of a Sneha-vasti. 45*46.

Thus ends the Thirty-seventh Chapter of the Chikitsita Sih^nam in the
Sns'iuta Samhiti \vhich deals with the Anuvdsana-vasti and the Uttaia«
vasth

CH.\PTER XXXVIII.

Now we shall discourse on the mode of applying
as well as on the treatment with a Nirudha-vasti
(NirucUiopakrama-Chlkitsitam). i.
Thetnode of preparing a Vast! The

application of an AnuvAsana-vasti (enema) should be
followed by that of one of the Astht^pana class. The
body of the patient should be first anointed (with
a Sneha) and fomented. Previous to the application of a
vasti, the bowels and bladder should be relieved of all
(foecal) accumulations (flatus and urine). The clyster
(Vasti) should he applied at noon in a well-cleansed cham*
ber, devoid of any gust of wind, and the patient should
be laid on hh left side on a spacious bed not furnished
with any pillows, but a little raised up there where his
buttocks would rest, and there should be attendants
at his feet. The patient should continue in a
cheerful mood with his left thigh held in an out-
stretched posture and the right one flexed, and
should refrain from speaking to any body. The diges-
tion of the ingested food taken by the patient is
necessary (before the application of the Vasti), The
physician having placed the pipe of the enema (Vasti)
upon his left foot should firmly press its Karnikd with
the first and the second toes of his right foot. One
half of the mouth of the Vasti should be kept con-
tracted by pressing it with the small and ring finger of his
left hand and the (other) half should be stretched with
the aid of his thumb, index and middle fingers, and thus
the medicinal solution should be poured into the bladder
(Vasti). The pipe should be held with the middle and
the index finger of the right hand. Care should be taken
pot to let the rnedicinal solution overflow from the suf-

628

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap, XXXVIII.

face of the pipe, nor to admit of even a bubble of air into
the bladder (of the enema), nor to produce its over-con-
traction nor dilatation during the process (of pouring the
hiedicine). The bladder filled with the proper quan-
tity of medicinal solution should then be heJ4 in the
left hand, and washed with the right hand. <Tt should
then be firmly tied (at the neck) just over the (surface
of the) medicinal solution with ligatures of two or three
rounds of thread. 2- A.

The mode of applying a Vasti The

Vasti should then be held up on the palm of the right
hand, its pipe gripped with the middle and index fingers
of the left hand, and the orifice closed with the thumb of
the same hand. The neck of the pipe should be previous-
ly lubricated with clarified butter, and gently introduced
into the rectum of the patient up to its Karnikd
(protuberance) along the line of spinal Column and
with its mouth up'turned. The patient should be asked
to take the same with care. 2.

Metrical Text : — The physician should then
hold the enema (Vasti) with his left hand and press
its bladder with his right. The injection (of the medi-
cinal solution contained in the enema) should be made
at once, neither too slowly nor too hurriedly. 3.

The pipe should then be withdrawn and removed,
and the patient should be asked to remain in the same
position for a period sufficient to utter thirty MdtrAs*

* According to Agnives'a the lime necessary for the tips of the fingers
to fall down upon the right thighs, i.^., the time required for a twinkling
of the eye (Nimesha) is called a Ms^trsC. Paris'ara says that the time
necessary to close and open the eye-lids (Nimesha and Unmesha) once,
while throwing the arm around the right thigh is called a M^trd. He
lias prescribed one hundred such Mdtrds in irespect of a patient of
fOhsti >ated bowels, and thirty-seven in respect of a of lax

Cbap. XXXVIII.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 629

from the time of injection* The patient should then be
asked to get up and sit on his legs for the full outflow
of the injected solution. The period of a Muhurta (about
forty-eight minutes) is usually required for a complete
outflow ^f the Niruha-vasti (from the bowels). 4.

Metrical Texts:— This method of applying
the Vasti should be continued three or four times
as required in each case by the physician, experienced
in the application of the same. It should be disconti-
nued after certain characteristic symptoms had been
fully developed and manifested (in the system of the
patient). Less is better than excess (in respect of
Vasti-applications and more so particularly in the case
of a patient of a delicate constitution. 5*

Symptoms of an inadequate and
excessive application of a Vasti The

emission of only a small quantity of flatus (Vayu), foecal
matter and (of the medicinal solution applied in) the
Vasti, as also the appearance of the supervening dis*
tresses of urinary disorders, an aversion to food and
physical lassitude indicate the inadequacy of the appli-
cation of the Vasti. Symptoms which have been
described before^ as marking an excessive use of
purgatives are also said to result from an excessive
application of a Niruha-vastf" 6 A.

Symptoms of a satisfactory appli-
cation of a Vast! : — A lightness of the body,
experienced in consequence of the successive and satis*
factory evacuations of stool, f Pitta (bilious matters),

bowels.*— Dallani^ The period of a Mdtrd has elsewhere been defined
M that required lo utter a short vowel.— JJef. •

* See Chapter XXXIII, Para. 18, Chititsita Sthanam.

t Satisfactory urination should also be understood as ,one of the.
symptoms of salj^factory application of a Niruha-vasti.—

630 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXXVIIL

Kapha (^lucus) and Vdyu (flatus) from the bowels, are
the salient features of a satisfactory application of a
Niruha-vasti (Su-nirudha). After the manifestation of
the foregoing symptoms the patfent should be advised
to bathe (in hot water) and to take meat-soup^^ (Rasa),
milk and pulse-soup (Yusha) in diseases due* to the
action of the deranged Vdyu, Pitta and Kapha respect-
ively. The essence (Rasa) of the meat of any Jdngala
animal may, however, be prescribed in all cases under
the circumstances, since it would produce no harm. Only
a quarter, a half or three-quarter part of the usual diet
should be prescribed according to the digestive capacity
of the patient, and the nature and intensity of the
Doshas involved in each case. 6-B.

The subsequent treatment should consist in apply-
ing a Sneha-vasti (oleaginous enema) according to
the nature and intensity of the underlying Doshas
in each case. A lightness of the body, sprightli-
ness of the mind, amelioration or abatement of the
disease, an emulsive condition of the organism, are
the features which mark the satisfactory application of
an Asthdpana as well as of an Anuvasana-vasti. 6-C.

The patient should be made to partake of his meal
with meat-soup on the day of his being treated with a
(Niruha) Vasti ; since there is an apprehension of the
Vdyu being greatly deranged and aggravated (by the
application of the Vasti). He should then be treated
with an Anuvdsana (Vasti) on the same day. There-
after the application of the Sneha-vasti should be
regulated ♦ with a regard to the state of the appetite
and the intensity of the deranged VAyu, and in the

* A second application of the Sneha-vasti should be madCi if
necessary, on the 2nd, 3rd, or 5th day with a due regard to the symptoms
mentioned in the text.

Chap. XXXVllt.J CHIKITSA StHANAM.

631

event of the Koshtka (stomach) being found to have been
stuffed with food. 6

A fresh and stronger Nirudha injection (Vasti),
composed of Yava-kshdra, cow’s urine, Kdnjika and the
S'odhanB (purifying) drugs, should be applied (into the
bowels) m the event of the previous one not passing out
within a Muhurta, since a Nirudha injection (Vasti)
long retained in the bowels by the enraged and aggra-
vated Vayu causes Sula (colic), an aversion to food,
fever and Aniha* (distension of the abdomen with
suppression of stool and urine), or may ultimately
have a fatal termination. 7.

The application of an Asthapana enema is for-
bidden after a meal as it may bring on an attack of
Visuchika* (D. R,~Ama), or of vomiting, or may tend
to aggravate the Doshas of the body. Hence an
Asthdpana-vasti (enema) should be applied only on
an empty stomach. The Doshas (in the system) of a
person He in a free and potent state at the close of the
process of digestion, and are easily and spontaneously
eliminated from the system (by the application of the
Asthdpana-vasti), when the stomach (Asaya) is not
further oppressed or stuffed with food. The digestive
fire {Jdthardgni) can not digest the food, if scattered or
diffused by the application of an Asthdpana-vasti
(into the bowels). Hence it is that an Asthdpana
injection should be made on an empty stomach. The
application of a Niruha-vasti (which is not applicable
in all cases) should, however, be determined with a
regard to the exigencies of the case, since the strength of
the aggravated Doshas of the body abate with the evacua-

* Both VrindA and Chakradatta read (rumbling sounds in

the intestines) in place of

632 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. ICkiiip. XJtXyiH.

' ^

tions of the bowels (as well as with the elimination of
all filthy matters from the system). 8. ,

Drugrs to be used in a Niruha-*

vast! : — The following drugs and articles, or as many
of them as would be available, such as, all J[cinds* ^of
milk, acid group (Kanjika, etc.\ urine, Sneba (olea-
ginous substances), the drug decoctions (Kashiiya), meat-
soup (Rasa), salts, Phala (Triphald), honey, S^atdhvd,
Sarshapa, Vacha, Eld, TrikaUi, Rdsnd, Sarala, Deva-
ddru, Rajani, Yashti-madhu, Hingti, Kushtha, the drugs
of the Sams'odhana (corrective) group (Trivrit, etc.),
Katuka, Sugar, Musta, Usira, Chandana, Saihi,
Man/ishthd, Madana, Chandd Trdyamdnd, Rasdnjana,
(dried) Vilva fruit, Yamdni, Phalini, htdra yava, Yava^
Kdkoli, Kshira-kdkolt , Jivaka, Rishabhaka, Medd, Mahd-
medd, Riddhi, Vriddhi and MadhuHkdy should be used
in charging a Nirudha-vasti. 9.

Formula of the Niruha-vasti In the

case of a healthy person (marked by an equilibrium
of Viyu, Pitta and Kapha), the solution to be injected
should be composed of four parts of the decoction of
drugs* and one part (a fifth part of the entire com-
pound) of the Sneha (any oleaginous substance). In
any case marked by a preponderance of the deranged
Va(yu, the Sneha should measure a quarter part of the
whole, one-sixth in a case of a preponderance of the
deranged Pitta and an eighth part in a case of the
deranged Kapha. In a case of aggravation of all the
(three) Doshas, the Kalka should measure an eighth
part (of the entire quantity of the medicinal solution
to . be injected), and the following drugs or articles,

* DalUna means to say that of the whole compound weighing
twelve Ptastita measures (twenty-four Palas), there should be four
Pcasriia weights (8 Palas) of the docoction, and so on.

633

Ctap.*XXXVtII.] CHIKITSA STHANAM.

viz,y salt, honey, cow’s urine, Phala (Madana), milk,
acid group (KAnjika, etc.) and extract of meat, in
charging a Nirudha-Vasti should, as regards dosage,
be determined by a due consideration of the require-
ments in each case. When the Kalka, the Sneha,
and tlfe decoction would be well mixed together,
the solution for injection should be considered to
have been well prepared The application of such a
solution would be supposed to produce the wished-for
results. lO-A,

The process of preparation An

Aksha measure (two ToIjIs) of Saindhava salt should
be first mixed with the palms of the hand on a plate with
two Prasrita (thirty-two Tolds) measures of honey, to
which Sneha (oil, etc.) should be gradually added. When
well dissolved, the pastes of (Madana) Phala should be
added thereto. The drugs to be used as the Kalka in
proportion to the prescribed parts should then be finely
powdered and mixed with the preceding compound. The
whole should then be well stirred in a deep vessel with a
ladle (Khaja) * so as not to make it too thick, nor
too thin. The compound thus prepared should be
mixed with five Prasrita measures of the well-filtered
drug decoction (prescribed in each case) and with cow’s
urine, meat-essence, milk and acid articles (Kdnjika,
etc.) according to the nature of the Doshas involved
in the case. lO.

DVc(-das1a PrasrItI : —Now we shall describe
the (recipe and preparation of) Vastis (technically)
called the '‘Dvi-dasa^Prasrita'’ (weighing twelve
Prasritas), Ai Aksha measure (two Tolds) o^ Saindhava
salt should be rubbed with two Prasritas (thirty-two
TolAs) of honey to which should be added three Prasritas

* The hand would serve the purpose of a ladle best in this case.

8o

634 the SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. tCh»p. XXXVII .

of a Sneha (oleaginous substance). The whole should
then be stirred and when the Sneha would be well
mixed, a Prasrita measure of a medicinal Kalka, four
Prasritas of a decoction, and two Prasritas of medicinal
after-throws (powdered drugs thrown to or ^ast in a
medicinal compound at the close of its (Jecoction)
should be added to it. In this way an enema solution
should be made to measure twelve Prasritas in all and
is hence called **Dvi(-da^a- Prasrita”. This should be
regarded as the rule in respect of a full dose and the
physician may reduce the numbers of Prasritas (if
required). This kind of variation according to the age of
the patient, in the quantity of each drug of a Niruha-Vasti
which commences with the Saindhava salt and ends with
the liquid Kashdya) has always been observed by
the physician aspiring after success (in prescribing a
Vastil. rr.

Classification of Vastis according- to
the range of their therapeutic applica-
tions : -Now we shall deal with the classifica-
tion of (Nirudha) enemas (according to the difference
in their therapeutic ranges) which, when applied with
due consideration of the aggravated Doshas (acting
as the exciting factors), will conquer many a
disease. 1 2.

A decoction should be prepared with one Pala of
each of Sampdka, Ruvu, Varshdbhu, As'va-gandhd,
Nis^d-ckchhada (Sathi), Pancha-mula, Void, Rdsnd,
Guduc/ti and Deva-ddru and Madana fruit eight (two
Palas) in number (boiled together and reduced to a
quarter part of the original quantity of water). After
that a paste (Kalka) composed of Mdgadhikd, Atnbhoda,
(MustA), Havushd, Mist (anisi), Saindhava, Vatsdkva,
Pripanpt. IJgrd (Vacha), Yashtydhva, and Rasdnpanc^

Ch«p. XXXVIIl.] CHIKITSA STHANAM. 635

being mixed with honey, etc,,* should be dissolved in
the preceding medicinal decoction and injected lukewarm
(into the bowels) in the manner of an Asthdpana-Vasti.
Pain in the back, the thighs and in the regions
of the sacrum (Trika), stone, retention of stool, urine
and flatys, diarrhoea (Grahani), Haemorrhoids and
diseases due to the action of the deranged Vl(yU,
readily yield to the curative efficacy of such injections,
by which also, the blood, muscles and the strength are
improved. 13.

A decoction duly prepared with Guducki, TriphalA,
Rdsnd,Dad a-mula and Vald weighing one Pala f each,
and a pulverised compound consisting of Priyangu,
Rasdnjana, Satndhava, S'ata-pushpd, Vachd, Krtsknd,
Yamdni, Kushtha, Vilva fruit and treacle each weighing
an Aksha (two Tolds) and half a Pala of pulverised
Madam fruit, should be injected into the bowels (in the
manner of an Asthdpana enema injection), stirred and
mixed with an adequate quantity of honey, oil, clarified
butter, milk, ^ukta, Kanjika, Mastu (curd-cream) and
cow’s urinej. Strength, energy, vigour, complexion,
digestive capacity, verility and vital duration of the
user would be increased by its application, and all
derangements of the bodily V^yu would yield to its
curative efficacy. It is one of the best rejuvenating
agents. 14. f

A decoction should be made by boiling together
the drugs of the Kshudra-Panchoftnula group, Musta,

* Honey, Snehe, milk, Kinjike, con’s urine, meet -juice, etc.,
should be taken.

t Dalltna take Pala in the senu of meat (Md^sam).

t The quantity of honey, oil, and clarified butter, should be
as before, that of S'ukta, Kinjika, Mastu and urine half a Pala each, and
that of milk two Palas.--i>«f/a«M.

636

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap- XXXVIII.

Tri-phald^ Utpala^ Vdsaka^ Sdrivd, Manjishthd^
Rdsnd^ Renu^ and Parushaka each weighing one Pala.
A compound of S' ringdtaka^ Atma-giiptd^ Gaja-pippali^
Kes'ara, Aguru, Chandana, Viddri^ Misi (anisi),
Manjishthd^ Sydrnd, Indra-yava^ SaindJmva-salty
Madana-Phala^ Yashti-madhu^ Padma-kdshthck pasted
together, should be dis.^,olved in the preceding decoc-
tion which should be mixed and stirred with milk,
honey and clarified butter and injected cold without the
addition of any acid substance, in the manner of an
Asthapana enema (Vasti). It should be applied in
liquid form. A burning sensation of the body,
menorrhoea (Asrig-dara), Haemorrhage, Pittaja-gulma,
Pittaja-fever, yield to the curative efficacy of such a
medicinal injection (Vasti). 1 5.

A decoction should be duly prepared with Lodhra^
Rakta<handana^ Manjishthdy Rdsnd, Anantd^ Vald^
Riddhiy Sdrivd, Vrisha, Kds'maryya, Medd, Madhuka
(Yashti-madhu), Padmaka, the drugs included in the
Sthir^di (minor Pancha-mula) and the Trina-Pattcha’^
mula groups, each weighing three Karshas (six Tolds).
Then a paste composed of Jivaka, Rishahhaka KdkoH^
Kshira Kdkoli, Riddhi, Yashti-madhu, Utpala, Prapaun-
darika, Jivanti, Medd, Renu (Parpataka), Parushaka^
(S'atdvari), Misi, Saindhava, Vatsaka, Us'ira,
Padmaka, Kas'eru and sugar pasted together should be
mixed with the preceding decoction made into a fluid
solution with an adequate quantity of milk, honey, and
clarified butter and other fluid substances^ other than

* Dallana recommsnds the use of meat-juice (one Pala) and sugar-cane
juice (two Palag) as the liquefacient agents in this preparation. It should
also be noted that coldness and non-addition of any acid substances
are recommended as the injection is to be applied in cases of diseases due
to the derangement of Pitta*

Chap. XXXVIIL] CHIKITSA STHANAM.

637

strong add ones (Kdnjika, etc.). It should then be
injected well cooled in the manner of an Asthdpana-
Vasti. It would undoubtedly prove curative in cases of
Gulma, menorrheegia (Asrig-dara\ heart diseases,
Jaundice^ Vishama jvara, Haemorrhage (Rakta-pitta),
dysentery;, and other Pittaja ailments. 16.

A compound of Vald, Madaita fruit, Sarshapa^
Saindhava^ Deva-ddru, Kushtha^ Eld, Pippali, Vilva and
S*unthi (weighing three Palas in all) pounded together
and mixed with the decoction of Bhadrd, Nimba,
Kulattha pulse, Arka^ Kos* dtaki, Amrita, (Guduchi),
Dtva-ddru^ Sdrivd, Vrihati, Pdthd, Miirvd, Aragvadha
and Ar2//^zy<^-secds (weighing sixteen Palas in all) cooked
with water (one hundred and twenty-eight Palas) should
be injected in the manner of an AsthApana-Vasti, with
the addition of an adequate quantity of mustard oil,
honey, alkali, cow’s urine, sesamum oil and water (three
Palas). This would speedily conquer an attack of
Chlorosis (Kdmala), Jaundice, Meha, obesity, impaired
digestion, aversion to food, goitre, slow poisoning,
(Gara visha), elephantiasis, Udara, or of any disorders
due to the deranged Kapha. 17.

Musta, Saindhava, Deva~ddru^ Pdthd, Pippali and
Indra-yava^ pounded together, and made into
a paste with the admixture of the decoction
prepared with such drugs ^s Das'a-mula, Haridrd,
Vilva, Patola, Triphald, and Deva-ddru, should be
stirred and saturated with oil, Yava-kshdra and honey
and reduced to a soluble fluidity by adding (an adequate
quantity of) cow’s urine, Madana-phala and Kdnjika.
The solution thus prepared should be injected (into the
rectum of the patient) in the manner of an AsthApana
enema-injection and this would prove curative in cases
of Jaundice, deranged Kapha, alcoholism, lassitude,

638

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXXVIII.

suppression of flatus (Vdyu) and of urine, in cases of
there being any rumbling sounds in the intestines
(Atopa), and Gulma and in diseases due to worms. 18.

Madana-pkala, Yashti-madku, Vacha, Deva-ddru,
Sarshapa, Pippali-tnula, Saindhava salt (Sindhuttha),
Yamditi, Mist Indra-yavas)\o\A 6 be pounded together
and made into a paste with the admixture of the decoc-
tion prepared with a Pala measure each of Vdsaka,
As'ma bheda, Varshdbku, Dkdnya, Eranda-mula, Das' a-
mula, Void, Murvd, Yava, Kola, Nis'a-ckchhada (Sathi),
Kulattha, Vilva, and Bhu-nimba and dissolved in an
adequate quantity of honey and the expressed juice of
sugar-cane, milk, oil, clarified butter, meat-essence,
and the urine (of a cow) by stirring them together.
The solution thus prepared should be speedily injected
in the manner of an Asthdpana injection into the
rectum of a patient suffering from a disease marked
by the concerted action of two or more of the deranged
Doshas. Diseases such as Gridhrasi, S'arkarA, Ashthili
Tuni and Gulma may be rapidly cured with this
injection (Vasti) 19.

Madana fruit, Yashti-madhu, il/fjt (anisi), Saindhava,
Priyangu and Indra-yava pounded together and made
into a paste with the decoction of the drugs, one Pala
each of Rdsnd, Aragvadha, Varshdbku, Kaluka, Udira,
Mustaka, Trdyamdnd, Amrita (Guduchi), Raktd (Man-
jishthi), Pancha-tnula, Vibhitaka and Vald should be
duly mixed with (an adequate quantity) of Rasdnjana,
extract of meat (Rasa', honey, Sauvira and the
expressed juice of the Drdkshd. The solution thus pre-
pared should be injected lukewarm into the bowels of
the patient in the manner of an Asthdpana-Vasti. It
adds to the growth of flesh, creates fresh semen and
Ojas, improves the digestive capacity and the strength

Chip. XXXVIIIO CHIKITSA STHANAM.

639

of the body, imparts longevity and cures and conquers
the following diseases, m., Gulma, Menorrhagia,
Erysipelas (Visarpa)^ Strangury, Kshata-kskaya,
Vishama-jvara, Haemorrhoids, Diarrhoea (Grahani),
Vdta-kumdali, catching pain due to the incarceration of
the V^ytt in the regions of the thighs, knee-joints, head
and bladder (Vasti), obstinate constipation of the bowels,
(Uddvarta) and the other distempers of the bodily
Vdyu, Vata-rakta, ^arkard (gravels in the bladder),
Ashthild, cramp in the groins, Udara, aversion to food,
Rakta-pitta (Haemorrhage), affections of the deranged
Kapha, Insanity, Prameha, distension of the abdomen
(Adhmdna), catching pain at the heart (Hrid-graha). 20.

A Vasti composed of the decoction of the Vdyu-
subduing drugs mixed with Trivrit^, Saindhava and
Kdnjika (or the expressed juice of acid fruits) should be
applied lukewarm in cases due to the aggravation of
the bodily Viyu, Similarly, a Vasti composed of the
decoctions of the drugs included within the Nyagrodhddi
group mixed with sugar, clarified butter, powders of
those included within the Kdkolyddi group should be
applied in diseases due to the aggravation of the Pitta.
A Vasti composed of the decoction of the drugs of the
Aragvadhddi group saturated with the pulverised com-
pound of those included withiji the Pippalyddi group,
should be employed with (an adequate quantity of) cow's
urine, added thereto in a case of the aggravation of
Kapha. A Vasti composed of a copious quantity of the
decoction of Kshira-Vrikshas mixed with (an adequate
quantity of) the expressed juice of the sugar-cane, milk,

According to Dallana, “Trivrii** should be understood to mean the
same as Traivrita mentioned in the treatment of Mahd vdta-vyddhf
(aee Chapter V., Para. 25, Chlkitslta Sthdnam),

640

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXXVIH.

sugar, and clarified butter should be applied in a cold
state in cases marked by a vitiated condition of the
blood of the system. 21 — 24.

^odhana (corrective) Vastls The

drugs of the S'odhana group .^possessed of <^;orrective
therapeutic properties) should be pounded together and
mixed with an admixture of their ow'ii decoction. The
solution thus formed should be mixed with Saindhava
and Sneha and stirred with ladle. It should then be
injected into the bowels of the patient. This is called
the S'odhana-Vasti"^. 25.

Lekhana-VastI : —The powders of the drugs
of the Ushakddi group should be mixed with the
decoction of Triphald and with cow’s urine, honey and
Yava-kshdra. The whole solution should be applied as
a Vast! and is called the Lekhana-Vasti. 26.

Vrimhana-^Vastl A paste composed of
the drugs of the 3fad/iura {KikolyAdi) group mixed with
the decoction of the drugs possessed of tonic and
constructive properties (Vrimhana drugs) should be
injected into the bowels with clarified butter and the
extract of meat added thereto. It is called the
Vrimhana-Vasti. 27.

Y^ji-karana-Vastl The seeds of the
Atmaguptd should be pounded and mixed with the decoc-
tion of (the roots of) the Uchchatd together with (the con-
tents of) the egg of a sparrow (Chataka) and an adequate
quantity of milk, clarified butter and sugar. The
solution should be injected into the bowels in the manner
of a Vasti and is called the Vayi-karana-Vasti (aphro-
disiac). 28.

* According to Dallana, four Pala weights of\honey, one Pala of milk,
one Pala and a half of cow^s urine, and four Pala and a half of Kdnjika,
sfiould be added to this solution.

Chap. XXXVIll.] CHIKITSA StHANAM.

641

Pichchhila-Vasti S— Milk cooked with
Viddri* * * § Airdvati^ S'elu, Sdlmali and the tender sprouts
of Dhanvana should be used as a Vasti with the blood
and honey (added to it) ;t it is called the Pichchhila-
Vasti. • The fresh blood of a bufifalo, hog, sheep, or of
a cat, or the contents of a newly laid (hen’s) eggj iriay
be used for the purpose. 29-30.

Cr^hl-Vasti :-A paste of the drugs of the
Ambasktkddi group, dissolved in a decoction of those of
the Priyangvddi group and mixed with honey and
clarified butter, may be used as a Vasti and is called
the Grihi-Vasti. 31.

Sneha-Vasti A Sneha-Vasti should be
prepared by duly cooking the drugs of one or two of the
above groups with a Sneha. 32.

Sterile women should be treated with a Vasti con-
sisting of the S'ata-pdka-Vala-Taila or the Traivrita-
Ghrita (as described beforc)§ after being cleansed
(S'odhana) in due succession. 33.

Strong enemas (possessed of keen medicinal potency)
should be employed in respect of extremely strong

* Both Vrinda and Chakrapdni read Vadari ” in place of Viddri”,
and their annotators mean to say that the tender sprouts of all trees,
viz.^ Vadari, etc., should be used.

t Vrinda does not recommend ‘¥ addition of honey ; he reads
1^® Vasti should be in a cold state), in place of
h evident from the reading of Dallana’s commentary,
as quoted by S'rikantha Datta, that honey should be added.

t Both Vrinda and Chakrapdni read in place of which

means that the newly spilt blood of a goat should be added to the list and
hen’s egg should be eliminated therefrom.

§ Vald-Taila Has been mentioned in the treatment cflf Mudha-garbha
(Chapter XV, Chikitsita Sthdnani) and the Traivrita-Ghrita has been
described in the treatment of Mahd-Vdtavyddhi (Chapter V, Chikitsita
Sthdnam).

Si

642

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHtTA. [Chap. XXXVIII.

patients^ and those of moderate potency should be
employed in respect of persons possessed of a middling
sort of bodily strength, while weak persons should be
treated with Vastis (enemas) of mild potency. An
experienced physician should thus apply Vastis (enemas)
with due regard to the nature of the season, the Strength
of the patient, the nature and intensity of the disease
under treatment and of the Doshas involved therein
and to the nature of the potency of the ingredients
to be used in charging the Vasti (enema).* 34,

Loosening or disintegrating (Utkles'ana — lit. irri-
tating) enemas {ie., those possessed of the virtue of dis-
lodging and disintegrating the accumulated Doshas in the
system) should be employed at the outset and corrective
ones (Doslia-liara) should then be employed, while those
exerting a soothing influence on the organism (Sam-
S^amana) should be employed last of all towards the
close of the treatment 35.

Different Vastis An Utklesana (disinte-
grating) Vasti consists of castor seeds, Yashti-madhu,
Pippaliy Saindhava^ Vacha, Habushd and Phala (TriphaU
— Madana-phala, according to others) pasted together.
A Dosha-hara-yasti (corrective enema) consists (of a
solution) of Yaskti-madhu, Kutaja seeds and Madana-
phala with Kdnjika and cow’s urine. A Sam^odhaiia-
Va8ti!(soothing enema) consists of Priyangu^ Yashti-
madhu^ Musta and Rasdnjana with cow’s milk. 36 — 38.

mkdhu^-Talllka Vasti : — Now we shall de-
scribe in short the process of applying a MsfdllU-Tailika

* S'ivad^sa,^ the commentator of Chakradatta, quotes two additional
lines as being incorporated in Sus'ruta’s text which, when translated,
would be as follows Better use a Vasti of milder potency but never use
on of strong potency than what is necessary and thi.s is recommended
especially in cases of delicate persons. —

Chap, XXXVIII.] CHIKITSA STHANAM.

(^43

Vasti (.enema) which should be resorted to only in
respect of kings or king- like personages as well as in
respect of women, old men, infants and persons of
delicate constitutions for the purposes of eliminating the
Doshas (accumulated in the organism) and of improving
the strength and complexion. The use of this remedy
does not entail any strict observance of continence
or df any particular rules, diet, conduct, or conveyance
on the part of the patient, nor is it attended with any
possible complication though it is quite on a par with
any other kind of Vasti as regards its excellent and
highly beneficial therapeutic virtues. It may thus be
applied at any time by an experienced physician in the
manner of a Nirudha-Vasti (enema) whenever the patient
wishes to be treated therewith. Equal parts of honey,
oil and the decoction of castor roots, half a Pala of
S'ata-pushpd, a quarter Pala of Santdhava, and one
entire Madana fruit should be mixed together by stirring
the whole with a ladle. The whole compound thus
prepared should be injected lukewarm into the rectum
of the patient. This measure is called the

Tailika- V asti. * 39-

Yukta-ratha & Dosha-hara Vastis

The Yukta-ratha Vasti consists in injecting a medicinal
solution surcharged with Vacha, Madhuka (honey), f oil,
meat-essence, Saindhava, Pipf)ali, Madana fruit, and the
decoction (of Eranda) into the bowels of a patient.

* The quantity of the fluid should be nine Prasritas in ail cases of the
HMhu-TaiUka Vasti and such-like Vastis (enemas).-—

t Vacha, salt, Madana-phala, Pippali, each should be one Karsha ;
honey abd oil four Prasritas and two Karshas each, and the decoction of
Eranda roots four Prasritas and two Karshas.— Z>d//aisae *

In the text we find **Madhaka’* which generally means Yashti-madhu.
Here, however, it should mean ‘Tiioiiey”. This js evident from Dallana’s
CO mmentary.

^644 TilK SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. XXXVIll.

A compound of Deva-ddru, Vard (Triphald), Rdsnd,
S'ata^pushpd, Vacha, honey, asafoetida and Saindhava
salt, used together as a Vasti, is called the Dosha-hara
Vasti. 40-41*

Si€lClhdL-*V€l.8ti S — This Vasti should be prepared
with tht decoction of Pancha-mula, mixed ^ith oil,
honey and a paste of S'atdhvd, Pippali and Saindhava
salt. Similar Vastis consisting of a decoction of Yava,
Kola and Kulattha, and mixed with a paste of Pippali,
Saindhava^ Yashti-madhu and honey may also be used .
This kind of Vasti is called a Siddha-Vasti. 42-43.

Must^dika- Vasti A Pala measure of each
of the following drugs, viz., Mustd, Pdthd, Amritd
(Guduchi), Tiktd, Vald, Rdsnd, Punamavd, Manjishthd,
Aragvadha, Us’ira, Trdyamdnd, Gokshura as well as
of those included within the group of minor (Svalpa)
Pancha-mula, and eight Madana fruits should be boiled
with an Adhaka measure of water down to its quarter
part. The decoction thus prepared should again be
boiled with the admixture of a Prastha measure of
milk. The boiling should be continued till the watery
part is completely evaporated and the milk alone is left
behind. It should be then strained (through a piece of
cloth). This (cooked) milk should be mixed with honey,
clarified butter,* and the extract of meat of any Jdngala
animal, each measuring a quarter of the (above-prepared
milk) and a Karsha measure each of the following
drugs, viz., powdered S'atdhvd, Phalini (Priyangu\
Yashti-madhu, Vatsaka, Rasdnjana and Saindhava.
The application of the above in the manner of a Vasti
proves curative in Vdta-rakta, urinary complaints
(Prameha), ‘Edema, Haemorrhoids, Gulma, retention

* According to Dallana, however, a Fain measure of each of honey
Itnd ctariBed bultef should be add^d.

Chap. XXXVIII.] CHIKITSA STHANAM.

645

of urine, Haemorrhage (Rakta-Pitta), Erysipelas, fever,
and a looseness of the bowels. It acts as an aphrodisiac
and vitalising tonic ; it also invigorates the eye-sight and
is anti colic in its action It is known as the Muststdi-
Vasti and is the best of all the Asthdpana enemas. 44.

A judicious physician may prepare, in the light
of the principle laid down in connection with the
preparation and application of Vastis in general,
hundreds of different other kinds of Vastis (enemas')
with a due consideration of the virtues of their re-
.spectivc ingredients v^fugs) and the nature of the
disease under treatment. Applications of Vastis are
forbidden during the continuance of an undigested meal
in the stomach. Proper rules of diet and conduct should
be observed, and day-sleep should not be indulged in,
after being treated with a Vasti. 45*46.

The compound Ma'dhu-Tailika Vasti is so called
from the facts of its being principally composed of
Madhu (honey) and Taila (oil) The term Yukta-Eatha
Vasti owes its nomenclature to the fact of its imposing
no restriction as regards riding in caniages (Rathas),
or on horses and elephants after their application. The
Siddha-Vasti derives its name from the uniform success
(Siddhi) which attends its application in a large
number of cases of bodily distempers and from its
irresistible power in improving the strength and com-
plexion of the body. Midliu-Tailika Vastis are recom-
mended to persons of easy and luxurious habits as well
as in respect of those whose bowels can be easily moved,
or who are in the habit of being daily treated with
emulsive measures (Sneha-karma) and whose organisms
are marked by scanty accumulations of the bodily
Doshas. A Siddha- asti does not produce any distress
pr discomfort, since it is mild in potency and is applied

646 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. XXXVIII.

in only three quarters of the usual dose (nine Prasritas
only) and does not entail any strict observance of the
regimen of diet and conduct (such as the previous
administration of emetics and purgatives, etc.), and
since it produces a satisfactory result by a single appli-
cation, 47. f

Thus ends the Thirty-eighth Chapter of the Chikilsita Slhdnam in the
Sus'ruta Samhit^ which deals with Niruha-Vastis.

CHAPTER XXXIX.

Now we shall discourse on the treatment of distress-
ing sym{)toms* which are manifested in a patient

(Aturopadrava-Chikitsitam). i.

The digestive fire (Kskys^gni) of a person naturally
grows dull*f after the exhibition of emetics and purga-
tives, after the administration of a Niruha-Vasti, after the
internal application of a Sneha and after blood-letting.
It is further lessened by the eating of extremely heavy
(difficult of digestion) articles of fare, just as a low or dull
fire is extinguished by a heavy load of fuel. Light
meals taken in small quantities, on the other hand, in-
crease the digestive fire under these circumstances, just
as light fuel in small quantities serves to re-k indie a
low fire. 2.

The quantity of diet should be proportionate to the
Dosha (morbific diathesis) eliminated from the organism.
The quantity of the Dosha or Doshas eliminated consists
of three measures, viz,, one Prastha^ half an Adhaka
or an Adhaka (at most). The first is the lowest, the
second is the intermediate and the last named measure
(one Adhaka) should be deemed as the highest quantity
(of the Dosha that can be eliminated under the circum-
stances). 3.

Yav^gu (gruel) prepared with a small quantity of rice
(Tandula) should be given once, twice or thrice respect-

* By “distressing symptoms” nre generally meant those complications
that follow the exhibition of emetics, purgatives, Vasiis, etc.

t We have been^told that the digestive fire is kindled by t^he exhibition
of emetics, purgatives, etc., but here we are told just the reverse. The
solution is that the digestive fire is ultimately' kindled by these measures,
whereas, immediately after the exhibition, it becomes dull and sluggish.

1- The Trastha measure here means thirteen Palas and a half.

648

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. tChap. XXXIX.

ively in cases of the eliminated Dosha being a Prastha,
half an Adhaka or an Adhaka in quantity, 4.

After this a quarter part of the quantity of rice or
grain otherwise deemed proper and adequate for the
patient, should be cooked in the form of Vilspi. The
rice or the grain (used in the preparation) shoifid be well
boiled, without the addition of any Sneha (oil or clarified
butter) or salt, 5.

It should then be (passed through a piece of cloth
and) made non-slimy, and should be taken in the
above-prescribed manner with a clear (pure) soup of
Mudga'^\x\?>Q, The patient should then be given a diet
measuring half the quantity of his usual one. The food,
in this case, should be well saturated with any oleaginous
substance (Sneha). The meal of the patient in the next
stage should consist of well-boiled rice measuring three
parts only of his usual diet and should be made palatable
to the taste and sufficient to stimulate the sense-organs.
The meal in this case, should be taken with the trans-
parent surface of clarified butter {Ghrita-manda), After
this period the patient should be allowed to take his full
meal with well-prepared soups of venison, etc. 6-7.

The above order of taking one fourth, half and three-
fourths of the usual meal applies in cases of deficient,
intermediate (moderate), or satisfactory action of a
purgative, ,8.

PeyAs, taken in an aggravated condition of the de-
ranged Pitta, and Kapha, or by a person addicted to
drinking habits or subsequent to a deficient exhibition
of emetics and purgatives, may give rise to an increased
(mucous)* secretion (Abhishyanda) in the organism.
Tarpana measures (demulcent food) should, therefore, be
deemed beneficial in these instances. 9.

A person is likely to fast from any of the following

Chap, JtXXIXO CHIKITSA STHANAM.

649

causes, pain, unattainment of wished-for objects,
penance, bereavement, and mental distraction,- Rules
enjoined to be observed after a course of purgatives
should as well be adhered to in such cases, 10,

An half an Adhaka and a Prastha measure

should similarly be the quantity of excretion in con-
nection with a course of purgatives under the three
different degrees of its action. But some are of opinion
that there may be no fixed quantity of excretion
in this case, since purgation should not be considered
satisfactory until the S'leshma i^mucus) of the system
has come out. * A purgation should be considered
satisfactory when the S'leshmd coines out and in that
case no more purgative should be given. The strength
(Bala) of a patient has been laid down to be of three
degrees, consequently the rules of diet and conduct
should be similarly determined. A strong patient
should observe the regimen of diet only once, one of
middling strength (Madhya-bala) twice, while a weak
patient thrice. Certain authorities, however, assert that
this order of diet should be observed by the patients with
an impaired, intermediate and keen digestion, ii.

Lest the Doshas might become aggravated by the
appetite already kindled by the observation of the rules
of diet prescribed for the purpose, the patient should
be made to take his meal in the following order at this
stage. Sweet and bitter articles of fare should be
partaken of at the outset of a meal, followed by olea-
ginous, acid, saline and pungent food. After this, sweet,
acid and saline food should again be taken followed by

* Here a line i» not found in the printed edition <5f the Sus'ruta
Samhitd, which is evident from Dallana’s commentary and supported by
S'rikantha Datta in his commentary on Vrinda. The line is as follows
if "1

82

6S0 THE SUSHRtiTA SAMttiTA. tCI>«P- XXXIX.

articles of sweet and bitter tastes. Dry (Ruksha) and
demulcent food should be enjoined in succession in the
course of a meal. The meals of a healthy person should
then be prescribed. 12.

Light diet should be given for a week a^er the
internal use of a Sneha and after the exhibition of
emetics. A patient should observe a proper regimen
of recoupment of his health, after having been subjected
to a course of blood letting or treated with a course of
S'odhana remedy (purgative). Intervals of three days
should be allowed between two successive applications
of a Vasti and the period of the third interval thus
allowed, should be determined according to the require-
ments of each case.* 13.

A patient suffering from an ulcer (Vrana) or recently
treated with emulsive measures (Sneha-karma) or cleans-
ing (emetics or purgatives) measures, or afflicted with
any affection of the eyes or with fever attended with
dysentery (JvaratisAra) resembles a vessel of unbaked
clay fitted with oil, ix,, such a patient is greatly liable
to the derangement of the Doshas. 14.

An irascible mood or fit of anger (in such a person)
agitates his Pitta and produces Pitta origined distem-
pers physical labour and grief cause a distracted
state of the mind ; and gratification of sexual desires
(in such a state) brings on such dangerous diseases as
convulsions, epileptic fits, paralysis, aching pain in the
limbs, swelling about the anus, cough, hiccup and

* Some commentators explain this verse to mean that the patient
should obaerve^the rules of diet and conduct (prescribed hereafter) for a
period of three days after each application of a Vasti, but after the third
application the rules of diet and conduct should be determined according
to requirements.

t The Fitta^origined distempers are thirst, burning sensation, etc*

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

Chap. XXXIX.J

651

emission of blood-streaked semen and haemorrhi^e
from the vagina. 15- A.

Day-sleep under the circumstances, gives rise to the
affections of the deranged Kapha, viz., enlargement of
the spleen (Plihodara), catarrh, jaundice, edema, fever,
loss of consciousness, a sense of physical langour, in-
digestion, an aversion to food, and causes the patient to
become overwhelmed with the quality of Tamas which
produces in him a desire for sleep. 15-B.

Talking in a loud voice aggravates the Vdyu and is
attended with such grave consequences as pain in the
head, blindness, inertness, loss of the faculty of smell,
dumbness, deafness, dislocation of the jaw-bones (Hanu-
moksha), Adhi-mantha, facial paralysis, paralysis of the
eye-balls (Netra-stambha), thirst, cough, insomnia, shak-
ing of the teeth and similar other distempers (due to an
aggravation of the Viyu). 15 C.

Riding (on horse-back, etc.) under the circumstances
may cause vomitings, swoons, vertigo, a sense of
fatigue, stiffness of limbs, and the serious functional
derangements of the sense organs. A long continuance
in a sitting posture or bathing may give rise to pain in
the region of the pelvis ; while, on the contrary, excess-
ive walking under the circumstances aggravates the
Vdyu and is attended with pain in the knee-joints, atro-
phy of the thighs, edematous swellings of the localities,
or the form of disease known as Pdda-harsha (sensitive-
ness in the feet). 1 5-D.

The use of cold water and other cold things* (such as
paste of Sandal, etc.) under the circumstances tends to
aggravate the bodily VAyu and brings on an aching

• In place of Gayadiea reads

which means the use of cold fQo4 and driifk. This reading seems to be
belter.— Igor,

6^2 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. XXXIX.

pain in the limbs, ^ula (gastralgia), sluffedness of the
injested food in the stomach (Vishtambha) and infla-
tion of the abdomen (Adhm^na) and shivering. An
undue exposure to the sun and wind produces fever
and discoloration of the complexion , The use of any
unwholesome and incompatible diet as well as fc^d taken
before the complete digestion of the previous meal
tends to produce serious distempers and may ulti-
mately result in death. The use of incongenial fare
undoubtedly leads to the deterioration of the strength
and complexion of the body. A man of irregular and
intemperate habits, who eats voraciously like an animal,
suffers from indigestion which is the cause (source)
of a number of physical distempers. 15.

In all these instances the real cause of the distress
should be first ascertained, which should be then remedied
with proper antidotal measures and remedies. 16,

Articles of Diet : — A diet consisting of
cooked S has hti gxdL.\i\ (Tandula) or matured S'dli rice,
Mudga pulse as well as (the soup of the flesh of) an
Ena, Ldva, hare, peacock, Tittiri, or deer, and such
other light food should be given to a patient after the
exhibition of emetics and purgatives. 17.

Thus' ends the Thirty-ninth Chapter of the Chikitsiln Sthinam in the
^us'ruta Samhitd which deals with the treatment of distressing symptoms
which are manifested in a patient.

CHAPTER XL.

Now we shall discourse on the treatment which
consists ^in employing the (inhalation of) medicated
fumes, snuffs, (errhines) and gargles (Dhumd."*

Nasya-Kavala-Craha-Chikitsita). i.

Dhuma (fumes) may be divided into five groups,*
vis,, Prayogika (capable of being daily used), Snehana
(soothing), Vairechana (expectorant),*]* Kdsaghna (anti-
cough) and VAmaniya (emetic). 2.

Materials Of different Dhuma-varti :
— The drugs of the Elddi group, excepting Kushtha
and Tagara, should be pasted together. A space of
eight fingers out of the entire length of a stem of S'ara
weed twelve fingers long should be covered with a piece
of silk cloth and plastered with the coat of the preced-
ing paste. This stick should be burnt and used in the
Prtiyogika Dhuma pdna. The pith (pulp) of oleaginous
fruits, wax and resin, Guggulu, etc., with the admix-
ture of a Sneha (oil or clarified butter; should be used
in the Snehana-Dhuma. The drugs included into ^iro-
Virechana group should be used in Vairechana Dhuma.
Vrikati, Kanta-kdrikd, Trikatu, Kdsa-marda, Hingu,
Ingudi-bark^^ Manah-s'ild, Guduchi, and Karkata-s* ringi
and such other drugs which allay cough should be used
in the Kt^saghna-Dhnma. Nerves, skin, horns, hoops,
shells of a crab, dried fish, dry meat or worms, etc., and

* Cbarkka, however, divides Dhuma into three classes only— vta.,
Ptjyogika, Snaihika and Vairechanaka, and includes the Kdsa-hara into
the Priyogika, and Vimaniya into the Vairechana Dhuma, ,

+ The term Vairechana here means S'iro-Virechana by means of fumes.

t Some commentators mean to explain Ingudi and

pardamom instead of as Ingudi-bayk. This seems to be better,

6S4 the SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. CChap. XL.

such other emetic drugs should be used in the Vi(ma*

niya-Dhuma. 3.

Formation of the pipe used In

Dhuma-Prfna S--The pipe to be used in respect
of an inhaler should be made of one or othgr of the
same substances* of which the pipes of enem«t-syringes
(Vasti-Netra) are made. The girth of such a pipe
should be equal to that of the small finger at its mouth
with an inner aperture or calibre as large as a Kaldya
pulse, and its girth at the root or base should
be equal to that of the thumb, while the girth of the
inner apertureor near (at the root) should be sufficiently
large to allow the Dhuma-Varti (made of S'ara weed) to
fit in. The length of the pipe should be forty-eight
fingersf in respect of a Prdyogika, thirty-two fingers in
respect of a Snehana, twenty-four fingers in respect of a
Vairechana, sixteen fingers in respect of a Kdsaghna
(anti-cough) and Vdmaniya (emetic) Dhuma. The girth
of the aperture (channel) should be equal to that of a
stone of the Kola fruit in respect of the tube to be used
in the last two cases (Kdsaghna and VAmaniya), The
tube to be employed in fumigating an ulcer should
be eight fingers in length and equal to a Kaldya pulse
in outer girth, while the girth of the inner orifice should
be sufficient to allow a Kulattha pulse to pass in. 4.

The medicinal stick (Varti) should be lubricated

* See Ohapter XXXVi Para. 7 , Chikitsita Sth^na.

t Charaka’s description of the pipes, (Chapter V, SMokasth^na) cor-
responds closely to that of Sus'ruta, except in the case of PrAyogika pipci
where Charaka’s reading is somewhat ambiguous. There it may be
construed to mean thirty-six as well as forty-eight fingers, Jatu-karna,
however, explicitly asserts forty-eight fingers to be the length of the pipe
in question, Vrinda is in a fix, and solves the difficulties by explaining that
in cases of an aggravation of Kapha and an abundance of Doshas, the
length of the pipe should be thirty-six fingers,

Chap. XL ]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

655

with a Sneha (clarified butter, etc). It should then be
attached to one end of the pipe (Netra) and lighted.
The patient should sit in an easy and comfortable
posture, maintain a cheerful frame of mind and carefully
inhale the medicinal fumes with his eyes cast down
straight towards the ground. 5.

Metrical Texts : — The fumes should be first
inhaled through the mouth and then through the nostrils ;
whether inhaled through the mouth or the nostrils they
should be invariably exhaled through the mouth. In-
haled through the mouth, they should not by any means
be exhaled through the nostrils, as such a course (of
exhaling through the nostrils) would act wrongly and
impair the eye-sight. 6.

The fumes (Dhuma) should be specially inhaled
through the nostrils, in connection with a Prslyogika
inhalation, while they may be inhaled both through the
mouth and the nostrils in Snehana-Dhuma. They
should be inhaled through the nostrils alone in an act
of Vairechana inhalation and through the mouth only in
the two remaining cases (Vtfmaniyaand Kaphaghna). 7.

Mode of inhalation in an act of Fr^yo-
gika inhalation, the stick (Varti) should be dried in shady
places protected from the wind. The stem of the S'ara
weed inside the Varti should then be removed. The Varti
should then be lighted with a live charcoal and fixed to
the end of the pipe (Netra) and then the patient should be
asked to inhale the fumes. The same method should be
followed in respect of Snehana and Vairechana ones. In
the other cases of smoking (Ki^saghna and Vshuaniya)
the fumigating drugs (Varti) should be placed over a bed
of smokeless burning charcoal contained in an earthen
saucer. Another saucer furnished with an aperture at
its top or middle should be fitted over the former saucer

656 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Ch«p. XL.

and the inhaling pipe should be fitted into this aperture,
and the fumes should be inhaled (through the mouth). On
the subsidence of the fumes the remaining portion of the
stick should be cast into the fire and the patient should
continue to inhale the fumes till the complete elimina-

(I

tion of the aggravated Doshas from his organisfn. This
is the rule and means of inhalation (Dhuma-pina), 8.

Prohibitive Cases Any kind of smok-
ing (Dhuma-pAna) is forbidden to a person afflicted
with anger, fear, bereavement, fatigue, and in a heated
state of the body and after fasting. It is also forbidden
in cases of poisoning, haemorrhage (Rakta pitta),
alcoholism, swooning, burning sensation of the body,
thirst, jaundice, dryness of the palate, vomiting, head-
disease, eructation, Timira, urinary complaints (Pra-
meha), abdominal enlargement with dropsy (Udara),
inflation of the abdomen and Urddha vata.and in respect
of infants, old and enfeebled persons, as well as of those
treated with purgatives and Asthipana-vasti. It is also
forbidden to enciente women, those suffering from in-
somnia or a parched condition of the body as well as to
those suffering from any kind of cachexia or from
Urah-kshata. An act of inhaling (smoke) is also pro-
hibited after taking a potion of honey, clarified butter,
curd, and milk, fish, wine or gruel (Yavdgu) as well as
during the continuance of a small quantity of Kapha
in the organism. 9.

Metrical Text Medicated fumes inhaled in
an improper season in the above-mentioned prohi-
bited cases) bring on vertigo, fainting fits, diseases of the
head and serious injury to the eyes, ears, nose and the
tongue, ib.

Time of Smokingf S— The first three kinds of
inhalations should be resorted to at the close of the

Cb«p. XL ]

CHIRITSA STHANAM.

657

following twelve physical functions and acts, viz.
sneezing, cleansing the teeth, snuffing, bathing, eating,
sleeping in the day, coition, vomiting, micturition,
passing stools, fits of anger and surgical operations.
A Snehana-Dhuma should be smoked after sneezing,
micturition, passing stools, coition or after a fit of
anger. Similarly, a Vairechana-Dhnma should be
smoked after bathing, vomiting and sleeping in the day
time, while a Prrfyogika-Dhuma should be smoked
after cleansing the teeth, snuffing, bathing, eating and
after a surgical operation, ii.

The therapeutic effects of Dhuma-
piCna Smoking the Snehana-Dhama subdues the
deranged and aggravated Vdyu of the body owing to
the existence of the Sneha with which it is charged,
as well as to a consequent sticky coating being
deposited in the organism. The Vairechana-Dhuma
facilitates the loosening and flowing out of the mucus
(Kapha) owing to its dryness, non-viscidness (Vais'adya),
keenness and heat-making potency. While the
Prs(yogika-Dhnma tends to loosen the accumulation of
mucus (Kapha) and helps its expulsion from the system
by virtue of its being possessed of common therapeutic
properties with both of the two preceding kinds (of
Dhuma). 12.

Memorable Verse's -inhalation of (medi-
cated) fumes removes the cloudening of the faculties of
the organs of sense-perception and imparts distinctness
of the speech and firmness to the teeth, hair of the head
and to beard. It cleanses the mouth and fills it with
an aroma. 13.

The inhalation of medicated fumes guards*against an
attack of cough, asthma, an aversion to food and clumsy
sensation in tbe mouth, hoarseness, excessive salivation,

83

658

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. XL.

nausea,* somnolence, sleep, numbness of the jaws and
of the nerves (Sn^yu) on the back of the neck (Many^),
catarrh, diseases of the head, ear ache, inflammation of the
eyes, and any affection of the mouth due to an aggrava-
tion of the deranged Vdyu and Kapha. 14, ^

It behoves a physician to be fully acquainted with
the effects of satisfactory and excessive smoking
(Dhuma-pdna). Properly administered, it is followed
by a distinct alleviation of the disease (under treat-
ment) ; while its excessive use is followed by a positive
^gravation or non-amelioration of the disease and is
likely to produce a dryness of the palate and the throat,
a burning sensation in the body, thirst, fainting fits,
vertigo, delirium, alcoholism, affection of the ears, nose
and eyes, impairment of vision, and weakness of the
body. 1$.

Mode of Smoking : -The Prrfyogika-Dhuma

should be smoked thrice at a time either through the
mouth or through the nostrils and may be repeated thrice
or four times (according to the strength of the patient and
the itensity of the Dosha). The Snaihika-Dhunia should
be inhaled until the appearance of tears in the eyes.
While the Vairechanika-Dhuma should be smoked till
the beginning of the elimination of the Doshas from the
system. The Vetmaniya-Dhuma should be smoked by a
patient after he has taken a gruel of huskless sesamum
(Tila-Tandula), and the Kisaghna-Dhuma should be
inhaled between morsels of food.f Fumigation of an
ulcer should be made by means of a tube attached
to (the orifice of) a covered saucer. Fumigation alle-

* According to Vrinda’s commentator we have here '* Sneezing and a
sudden obstruction of breath’’ as an additional text.

t Dallana quotes a different reading which would mean that the
K^aghna-Dhuma should he inhaled after taking n^eals,

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

Chap. XL.]

659

viates the pain in an ulcer, arrests its discharge and
makes it clean and non-viscid. i6-

Metrical Text : — The processes of inhalation
and fumigation have been briefly described above. Now
I shall ^lly describe the processes of using medicinal
snuffs (Nasya). 17.

On Snuffs and Errhines:— The term
“Nasya” (Snuff) is so called from the fact of its being
composed of the powders of any drugs or of any
Sneha (oleaginous substance) cooked with such drug
or drugs, to be stuffed into the nostrils. It may be
broadly divided into two kinds, vis . : — ^iro-Virechana
(errhines) and Snehana (contributor of oleaginous
principles) ; and may, however, be further grouped under
five specific heads, viz. Nasya, ^iro-Virechana,
Px’atiluarsha (a medicated Sneha poured into the
nostrils to be discharged into the mouth), Avapida
(the expressed juice of any drug put into the nostrils
in drops by pressing it with the palms then and there)
and Pradhamaua (a medicinal snuff blown into the
nostrils with the help of a blowpipe). Of these, the
Nasya (snuff) S'iro-Virechana (errhines) are pre-emi-
nently the most effective. Pratimarsha is a Nasya while
Avapida and Pradhamana are Siro-Virechana (errhines).
Thus it is that the term Nasya employed in the above
five senses. The term Nasya, in the specific sense, is
particularly used with reference to the snuffing of any
Sneha (oleaginous substance) with a view to make up
the deficient oily matter in the brain in the case of
a patient complaining of a sense of void or emptiness
in the head or^to impart tone to the nerves arjd muscles
of the neck, shoulders and chest, or to invigorate the
eye-sight. This should be prepared with a Sneha
(oleaginous substance) cooked with the drugs possessed

66o

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. XL.

of the virtue of subduing the deranged Vdyu and Pitta
and should be snuffed in by a patient affected in the
head ' through the overwhelming preponderance of the
deranged Vdyu and in cases of the falling off of the
teeth and hair of the head and beard, in# Karna-
Kshveda, acute ear-ache, Timira (cataract),* loss of
voice, disease of the nose, dryness of the mouth, Ava-
Vihuka, premature greyness of the hair and wrinkling
of the skin and other dangerous complications due to
the deranged Vdyu and Pitta as well as in similar other
affections of the mouth. i8,

^irO-VIrechana : — Powders of the S'iro-Vire-
chana drugs* or any Sneha cooked with those drugsf
should be employed in the event of there being an ac-
cumulation of Kapha (mucus) in the region of the
palate, throat, or head of a patient, as well as in cases
of an aversion to food, head-ache, heaviness of the head,
Pinasa (coryza), Ardhdvabhedaka (hemicrania), worms,
Pratis'y^ya (catarrh), loss of the faculty of smell,
hysteric convulsion (ApasmAra) and in similar other
diseases of the super-clavicular regions due to the action
of the deranged Kapha. 19.

These two kinds of Nasya (snuffs) should be ad-
ministered before meals. To a patient affected with
diseases of Kaphaja origin they should be adminis-
tered in the morning, while one suffering from any
Fittaja complaint should use them at noon and one

• The S'ito-Virechana drugs are Pippali, Vidanga, S'igtu, Siddhir-
thaka, Apdmdrga, etc. See Sutrashdoa, Chapter XXXIX.

t S'tikantha Datta, commentator of Vrinda, says that Gayi reads
etc., from wliich it is evident that he pre-
scribed only the Sneha cooked with the S'iro-Virechana drugs as S'ito-
Virechana Nasya.

Cbap« XL.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

66l

afSicted with any distemper of the deranged YijVL
should use them in the afternoon.* 20.

Before the application of a S'iro-Virechana (crrhine)
the patient should be asked to cleanse his mouth with
a tooth-tjvig and by smoking. Then the regions of
the neckf cheek and forehead should be fomented and
softened with the application of heated palms, the
patient himself being laid on his back in a dustless
chamber not exposed to the sun and the wind. His
head should be kept a little hung back with his arms
and legs fully stretched out and expanded and a com-
press should be tied over the eyes. Then the phy-
sician should lift up with the fore-finger of his left
hand the tip of the nose of the patient and slowly drop
with his right hand a continuous jet of (medicated) Sneha
into the cleansed channels of the (patient’s) nostrils.
The oil to be so used should be made lukewarm (D. R.
—made lukewarm in the sun) and kept in a golden,
silver, copper, or earthen receptacle or in an oyster
shell and poured down into the nostrils of the patient
by means of an oyster shell (D.R.— pipe) or (by pressing)
a cotton plug (soaked in that oil). Care should be taken
that the oil does not get into the eyes (while being
poured into the nostrilsi.f 21.

Metrical Texts : ^The patient should refrain
from shaking his head or indulging in a fit of anger or

* In respect of healthy patients, the Nasya should be adminls*
tered at noon in winter, in the morning in spring and autumn, and in
the afternoon in summer, while in the rainy season, they should be
administered at a time when the sun wduld be visible in the sky.—
Vriddka^ Vdg^hata*

t The commentator of Vrinda adds two more conditfons— the
patient should be made to pass stools and urine before the application of
the Nasya and that the Nasya should be applied at a time when the sky
would be free from clouds.

662

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA

[Chap. XL.

speaking, sneezing or laughing at the time of any oily
snuff (Sneha-Nasya) being administered unto him, as
it may otherwise badly interfere with its reaching
down to the desired spot or may bring on an attack
of cough or coryza (catarrh) or any affection, the
head or of the eyes 22. •

Doses of a Sneha-Nasya Eight drops

of oil trickling down the two upper phalanges of the fore-
fingers should be regarded as the proper quantity for
the smallest (lit. — first'i dose. A Sukti measure (thirty-
two drops) is the intermediate (lit. — second) dose and a
PAni-^ukti measure (sixty-four drops) is the highest
(lit. — third) dose. These are the three doses (of Sneha-
Nasya) which should be dcrtermined in proportion to the
strength of the patient and of the disease under treat-
ment. An oily snuff should never be swallowed. 23.

Metrical Text An oily snuff (Sneha-Nasya)
should be hawked in so as to flow along the girths
(SringAtaka) of the nostrils and immediately spit out (by
the patient), without retaining it in the mouth for a
moment, as it may otherwise (irritate the mucous mem-
branes of the throat, etc., and) aggravate the local
Kapha. 24,

The region of the neck and the cheeks, etc., of the
patient should be fomented again after the use of the
oily snuff [Sneha-Nasya) and the patient should be
made to smoke, and partake of a meal not composed of
any phlegmagogic articles ( Anabhishyandi). He should
then be advised as to regimen of conduct, etc. (to be subse-
quently observed). Washing the head, exposure to the
sun, dust ai\d smoke, the use of any intoxicating liquor or
of any other liquid or oleaginous substance, indulgence
in a fit of anger and excessive driving, etc., are strictly
prohibited (after the application of Sneha-Nasya). 25,

Chap. XL ]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

663

Effects of proper, excessive, or
deficient application of aSneha-Nasya

(M.-T.) : — The effects of proper and excessive
applications of (oily) snuffs will now be described.
Lightness of the head, sound and refreshing sleep, the
state of losing easily awakened, alleviation of the disease,
hilarity of the mind and a gladsome activity of the
sense-organs in performing their respective functions, are
the symptoms which attend a proper and satisfactory
application (of an oleaginous medicinal snuff). Sali-
vation, heaviness of the head, and dulness of the
sense organs are the symptoms which result from an
excessive application of a Sneha (Nasya) and the
remedy in such cases consists in employing the parch-
ing measures or medicines. A case of deficient appli-
cation (of a Sneha-Nasya) is marked by the functional
derangements of the sense-organs* and a dryness
(Rukshatd) of the system without any indication of
the amelioration of the disease. The remedy, in such
cases, consists in a fresh application of the (oleaginous)
snuff. 26.

The proper doses of an oleaginous errhine (^iro-
Vireka) should be four, six or eight drops in accordance
with the strength (of the disease and of the patient
under treatment). 27-

The fra ners of the Ayurveda have particularly classi-
fied the effects of the application (of a Sneha-Nasya) into
three classes, viz.y proper or satisfactory, deficient and
excessive. The head being satisfactorily cleared (by
the satisfactory application (of an oleaginous errhine)
is marked by a sense of lightness in the head, clearness
of the channels (of the mouth, throat, no^rils, etc.),

^Gayi’s reading, according toDallana, as well S'rikantha’s reading is
which means the fuiictional derangement of the local

664

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Ch*p. XL.

an amelioratipn of the disease under treatment, healthy
and vigorous workings of the sense-organs and an
exhilarating sensation of the body and of the mind.
Itching, clumsiness of the mouth), heaviness, satura-
tion of the local channels (of the mouth, throat, etc.)
with mucous coatings are the symptoms which mark
the deficient action of (an oleaginous) errhine. A dis-
charge through the nostrils of Mastulunga (the brain
matter), an j^gravation of the Viyu, dulness of the
sense-organs and a sense of void or emptiness in the
head are the indications which mark an excessive appli-
cation of un (oleaginous) errhine. 28.

Measures and remedies possessed of the virtue of
subduing the deranged Kapha and Vdyu should be (re-
spectively) employed in cases of excessive and deficient
applications of (an oleaginous) errhine (Nasya), while in
the case of a proper and satisfactory application the
patient should be made to snuff in a quantity of clarified
butter on each alternate day or at an interval of two days
for one, two or three weeks in succession or for any longer
period as considered proper according to the exigency of
the case. In a case of an overwhelming aggravation of
the Viyu, the patient may be made to use the snuff (of
clarified butter) even twice a day. 29.

Avapf da- Nasya The Avapida-Nasya, like
the Siro-Virechana Nasya, should be administered to a
person bitten by a snake, or lying in a comatose or
unconscious state or suffering from a disease of the head
due to its being oppressed with an accumulation of fat
and mucus (Abhisyanda). An Avpida-Nasya should be
administered to a patient by pasting any of the (fresh)
Siro-Vireckana drugs and putting a few drops therefrom
into the nostrils of the patient. In cases of a distraction
of the mind or of a disease of a parasitic or^in or pf

Chap. XL.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM.

665

patients suffering from the effects of poisoning the fine
powder 'of the ^iro-Virechana drugs) should (by means
of a pipe) be blown into the nostrils of the patient
Sugar, the expressed juice of the sugar-cane, milk, clari-
fied butter or an extract of meat should be (similarly)
administered in the case of a weak patient or of one
suffering from an attack of Rakta-Pitta. 30.

Metrical Texts A Sneha (oil or clarified
butter) cooked with the pasted drugs (of the ^iro-Vire-
chana group) would be as beneficial as the powder
(Kalka) of those drugs for the purpose of an errhine in
respect of a weak, emaciated, timid, delicate or female
patient. 31.

Forbidden Cases : —A fasting person, or one
who has just taken his meal, or one suffering from an
acute catarrh or coryza of a virulent type, an enciente
woman, a man found to be still under the influence of an
intoxicating liquor or who has taken a Sneha (oleagin-
ous substance), water or any other liquid, or one suffering
from indigestion or who has been treated with an enema
(Vasti), one in an angry and excited state of mind or
afflicted with thirst or who is suffering from the effects of
any slow chemical poison (Gara) or fatigued or over-
whelmed with grief as well as an infant, an old man, one
who has voluntarily repressed any njrtural urging of the
body or one about to take a full bath (Sirah-Sndna) should
be regarded unfit for treatment with (any kind of medi-
cinal) snuffs (Nasya). Snuffing and smoke inhalation
should not be resorted to in the event of the sky being
(unseasonably) overcast with clouds at a time when such
phenomena do not usually or ordinarily happen. 32- A.

A deficient or an excessive application 0/ snuffs (at
one time), or its extreme heat or coldness, a sudden or de
layed application of the same (into the nostrils), drooping

84

666

THE SU8HR0TA -SAMHITA.

[Chap. XL.

posture of the head or its movements during the appli-
cation, the fact of its being used while the patient would
be taking his meals, or its application in any forbidden
case may produce such distressing symptoms as thirst
eructations, etc., due to the action of the aggravated or
decreased Doshas of the body. 32. ,

Metrical Texts ■ — The evils which are usually
found to attend an abuse of medicinal snuffs (Nasya)
or errhines (S'iro-vireka) may be grouped into two classes
—those incidental to the aggravation (Utkles'a) of the
Doshas or to the loss or waste (Ksliaya) of the same.
The distempers due to an aggravation of the Doshas
should he remedied with soothing (S'amana) and correct-
ive ^S'odhana) measures and remedies, while those
resulting from the loss or waste of the Doshas should be
remedied with such drugs and remedies as would make
up the decreased Doshas (of the system). 33.

Pratimarsha Nasya when to be
used ■ —The Pratimarsha form of snuff should be
resorted to on any of the following fourteen different
occasions, w>.:— after quitting the bed in the morning,
after cleansing the teeth, on the occasion of going out
of the house, after having been fatigued with physical
exercise, after sexual intercourse and a journey, after
defecation and urination, after the use of gargles (Kavala)
and collyrium (Anjana), in an empty stomach, after
vomiting, just after a day-sleep and in the evening. 34.

Their Effects A Pratimarsha snuff used by
a person just after rising from his bed tends to remove
the waxy mucus (Mala) accumulated in the nostrils during
the night and brings on a cheerful state of the mind, when
used after having cleansed the teeth, it imparts a sweet
aroma to the mouth and makes the . teeth steady and
firm (in their sockets). When used by a man on the

ClMip. XL.]

CHIKITSA STHANAM,

667

occasion of his going out of the house, it acts as a
safeguard against the troubles of smoke and dust
(assailing him on the road) owing to the consequent
moist mucous secretion in the nostrils. When used
after the^ exertion of physical exercise, coition or a
journey, rft serves to remove the sense of consequent
fatigue, and when used after micturition or defecation
it tends to remove the dulness or heaviness of vision.
When applied after gargling or after an application of
collyrium (along the eyelids) it serves to invigorate
the eye-sight. When applied on an empty stomach, it
cleanses the internal channels of the body and imparts a
lightness to it. Taken after an act of emesis it tends
to cleanse the mucous (S'leshmi) deposit on the beds of
the internal ducts of the body and thus brings on a
fresh appetite for food. When taken after a day-sleep
it tends to remove the sense of drowsiness and physical
heaviness and purges the filthy accumulations (in the
nose, etc.) thus bringing about a concentrated state of
the mind. When taken in the evening it brings on a
good sleep and an easy awakening. 35.

Metrical Texts The quantity of Sneha
which, being lightly snuffed in, reaches down into the
cavity of the mouth, should be deemed adequate for a
dose of the Pratimarsha (kind of qpuff*). The benefit
of using a snuff may be perceived in a variety of ways,
as it tends to cure the diseases peculiar to the super-
clavicular regions of the body, removes the cloudening

* One drop or two, or the quantity neceswry to bring about a
diaruption of the Doabas, ia the doae of a Pratinanha Naaya according
to Vriddba-Vdgabhata. *

The four forms of Nasya-Kanaa (medicinal) snuffs, should be
prcMribed for patients above seven years of age. Pratimarsha is recoin*
mended in Gulma,—

668

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. XL.

or dulness of the sense-organs, imparts a sweet aroma to
the mouth, and strength to the teeth, jaw bones,
head, neck, Trika, arms and the chest, and guards
against an attack of baldness, Vyanga, premature grey-
ness of the hair and the premature appearance of
wrinkles or furrows. 36-37. ,

Specific use of Sneha-Nasya This
snuff should consist of oil in a case marked by (the con-
certed actions of the deranged) Kapha and Vdyu, while
it should consist of VaSli (lard) in a case involving the
action of the VAyu alone. Similarly clarified butter
should be used as a snuff in a case of a Pittaja disorder,
while the snuff should consist of Majjd (marrow) in a
case marked by (the concerted actions of the deranged)
Vdyu and Pitta. The four different modes of using
.snuff have thus been described in all of which oil may
be used as not being hostile in its action as regards the
seats of Kapha within the organism. 38.

Kava.l£l"£(raha : — Now we shall describe the
process of using medicinal gargles (Kavala) which may
be divided into four kinds, viz . : — The Snehi (oleaginous),
PrasAdi (soothing), ^dhi (purifying) and the Ropana
(healing). The oleaginous (Snehi) gargle should be
surcharged with any oleaginous substance and should
be prescribed tepid in a case marked by the action
of the deranged V^yu, while cold and sweet articles
should be employed in preparing a soothing (Prasstdi)
gargle and should be prescribed in cases of the de-
ranged Pitta. The purifying (^odhana) gargles should
be composed of acid, pungent and saline drugs which
are parching and heat-making* in their potency and

* Vrinda does not include ‘patching’ while Chakradatta does not
inclade ‘heat-making’ as the conditions of this kind of Ravain in their
lespective collection?.

Cbftp* KL«]

CHIKITSA ‘STHANAM,

669

should be employed lukewarm (for corrective purposes)
in diseases due to the action of the deranged Kapha.
The healing (Ropana) gargles should be composed of
bitter, astringent, sweet, pungent heat-making* articles
and should be employed in cases of ulceration (of the
mouth). ,The therapeutic virtues and applications of the
four different kinds of gargle (Kavala) have thus been
(jescribed (above). 39-40.

The neck, cheeks and the forehead of the patient to
be treated with gargles should be \first) fomented and
softened and he should be made to take (into his mouth)
Trikatu, Vacka, mustard-seeds, Haritaki and rock-salt
pasted together and dissolved in any of the follow-
ing articles, : — oil, ^ukta. Surd, alkali, (cow’s) urine
or honey, and made lukewarm (before use as a
gargle). 41.

Kavala and Gandusha— distln^^ulsh-

ed (M. T.) ; —The quantity which can be easily and
conveniently rolled out in the mouth is the proper dose
in respect of a Kavala, whereas the one which cannot be
so (easily and conveniently) rolled out in the mouth is
called a Gandusha. 42.

Kavala— how long It should be re-
tained A gaigle (Kavala) should be so long heldt
in the mouth by a patient till thfc aggravated Dosha^ *
would accumulate in the regions of the cheeks§
and would secrete copiously through the nostrils and

* Chakfadatta does not include ‘pungency* and ‘heat-making potency*
as conditions of this kind of Kavala.

t Vrinda here reads should be rolled out

(in the mouth)*.

X “Dosha** here means ‘Kapha*. *

S Viinda reads which »e»»s till the

Posha accumulates in the regions of the throat and the cheeks,

6/0

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Otap. XL.

the eyes, after which the gargle (Kavala) should be every
time removed and fresh ones should be taken and kept
(similarly) in the mouth. The patient should during
the use of a Kavala sit in an erect posture without
allowing the mind to be in the least distracted. 43.

Metrical Texts : — Gargles (Kavala) should be
similarly prepared with Sneha, milk, honey, curd, urine,
meatijuice or Amla (Kinjika) mixed with the decoction
(of any drug) or hot water prescribed according to the
nature and intensity of the bodily Dosha or Doshas
involved in the case. An amelioration of the disease,
a sense of lightness and of purity in the mouth, a
cheerful frame of mind and an exhilarating vigour in
the organs of sense are the features which mark an
act of perfect or satisfactory gargling (Kavala),
whereas a sense of physical lassitude, salivation and a
(consequent) defect in the sense of taste are the traits
which mark deficient gargling. Thirst, an aversion
to food, dryness of the mouth, a sense of fatigue and an
inflammation of the mouth are the symptoms which
attend an act of excessive gargling. These symptoms
undoubtedly arise in due proportion to the nature and
intensity of the corrective drugs used. 44-45.

Sesamum, Nilotpala, clarified butter, sugar, milk
.and honey* used as a gargle (Gandusha) alleviates
the (consequent) burning sensation of a burn inside the
mouth. 46.

The process of using medicinal gargles (Kavala) in
general have thus been briefly described.

* Commentators, on the authority of Videha, hold that garglet
should be used with these articles either collectively or separately in cases
of burning in the ofouth by an excessive use of an (tHrslI or sqch other

Mticles,

Ctap. XL.] CHIKITSA* STHANAM. 67I

Pratl8£(rana -A PratisArana remedy may be
of four kinds, vis., that prepared with a Ealka (paste),
Basa-kriyit, honey and with powders. Prepared with
the appropriate drugs, such a compound should be rubbed
gently Tjith the tip of a finger in a case of an affection of
the mouth. An intelligent Physician may exercise his
discretion in selecting the drugs to be used in the pre-
paration of such a remedy. The symptoms of a satisfac-
tory or unsatisfactory PratisArana should be respectively
identical with those of a Kavala. The ranges of thera-
peutic applications are also co extensive in both the
cases. In other words the diseases of the mouth which
yield to the use of medicinal gargles, equally prove
amenable to that of PratisArana remedies. The diet in
both the cases should be composed of light and non-
phlegmagogic articles of food. 47.

Thus ends the Fortieth Chapter of the Chikitsita Sthinam in the
Susruta Samhitd which deals with the inhalation of medicinal fumes,
snuffs, and gargles.

Here ends the Chikitsita Sthdnam

THE

SUSHRUTA SAMHITA

KALPA-STHANAM

(Section on Toxicology).

CHAPTER L

Now we shall discourse on the mode of preserving
food and drink from the effects of poison (Afina."
piIna-RaksheC-Kalpa). i

Dhanvantari, the King of KAs^i, the foremost in
virtue and religion and whose commands brook no
disobedience or contradiction, instructed his disciples,
Sus'ruta and others (in the following words), 2.

Powerful enemies and even the servants and rela-
tions of the sovereign in a fit of anger to avenge them-
selves on the sovereign sometimes concoct poisonous
compounds and administer the same to him, powerful
though he may be, by taking advantage of any defect or
weak point in him. Sometimes the ladies (of the royal
house-hold) are found to administer to the king various
preparations (of food and drink), which often prove to be
poisonous^ from a foolish motive of securing his affection
and good graces thereby, and sometimes it is found that
by the embrace of a poisoned girl (VisharKanyif),*

* A g^irl slowly habituated to taking poison or poisoned food is
called a Vislia*Kail7i> such a girl presented to a king a pretending
friend of the state often managed to hug her royal victim into her fatal
embrace. The poison operates through the perspiration, proving almost
instantaneously fatal through the act of dalUancef

»5

674 the SUSHRUxk SAMHITA. '•

he dies almost instantaneously. Hence it is the im*
perative duty of a royal physician to guard the person
of the king against poisoning. 3.

The. minds of men are restless and uncontrollable
like an unbroken horse. Faith is a rare thing in the
human society and hence a crowned head should never
believe any one* in this world. 4.

The necessary Qualifications of a
Superintendent of the Royai Kitchen :

— A king should appoint a physician for the royal
kitchen (to superintend the preparations of the royal
fare). He should be well-paid and possess the follow-
ing qualifications. He should come of a respect-
able family, should be virtuous in conduct, fondly
attached to the person of his sovereign, and always
watchful of the health of the king. He should be
greedless, straight-forward, god-fearing, grateful, of
handsome features, and devoid of irascibility, rough-
ness, vanity, arrogance and laziness. He should be
forbearing, self-controlled, cleanly, compassionate, well-
behaved, intelligent, capable of bearing fatigue, well-
ipeaning, devoted, of good address, clever, skilful,
smart, artless, energetic and marked with all the neces-
sary qualifications (of a physician; as described before.
He should be fully provided with all kinds of
medicine and be highly esteemed by the members of
his profession. 5.

The necessary features of a Royal
kitchen : — The Boyal kitchen should be a spacious
chamber occupying an auspicious (south-east) corner of
the royal mansion and built on a commendable site.
The vessels and utensils (to be used in a royal kitchen)
should be kept scrupulously clean. The kitchen should

* A Royal Physician is an honourable exception in this r pect*

ChAp. I.]

KALPA^STHANAM.

675

be kept dean, well lighted by means of a large number of
windows and guarded with nets and fret works (against
the intrusion of crows, etc.). None but the trusted and
proved friends and relatives should have access to the
royal k tchen, or hold any appointment therein. Highly
inflammable articles (such as hay, straw, etc.) should not
be stacked in the royal kitchen whose ceiling should be
covered with a canopy The Fire-god should be (daily)
worshipped therein. The head or managar of the royal
cooks should generally possess the same qualifications
as those of a physician. The bearers and cooks in the
royal kitchen should have their nails and hair clipped
off and should bear turbans. They should be cleanly,
civil, clever, obedient, good-looking, each charged with
separate duties, good-tempered, composed in their
behaviour, well-bathed, greedless, determined, and
prompt in executing the orders of their superiors. A
physician of the royal kitchen should be very cautious
and circumspect in the discharge of his duties, since
food is the main stay of life, and the sole contributor to
the safe continuance of the body. Every one employed
in a royal kitchen such as, bearers, servers, cooks, soup-
makers, cake-makers (confectioners), should be placed
under the direct control and supervision of the physi*
cian of the kitchen. 6. '

Characteristic features of a poison-
er : — An intelligent physician well qualified to ascertain
the true state of one's feelings from the speech, conduct,
demeanour and distortions of the face, would be able to
discover the true culprit (poisoner) from the following
external indications. A giver of poison dops not speak
nor does he answer when a question is put to him. lie
swoons or breaks off suddenly in the middle of his
statement, and talks incoherently and indistinctly like a

6^6

TH£ ^USHRtilrA SAkHlTA

tChap. i.

fooh He is found suddenly and listlessly to press the
joints of his fingers or to scratch the earth, to laugh and
to shiver. He will look ftightened at the sight of others
(indifferently), and will cut (straw or hay) with his finger-
nails, and his colour changes constantly. He wi^l scratch
his head in an agonised and confused state, and will
look this way and that, trying to slip away by a back or
side door, thus betraying his guilty conscience by his
confusion. 7.

An innocent man, unjustly arraigned before the royal
tribunal might from fear or precipation, become (confused
and) liable to make untrue statements (and thus be
unjustly convicted). Hence the king should first of all
test the sincerity and fidelity of his servants ascertaining
the non-poisonous character of the boiled rice, drink,
tooth-twigs, unguents, combs, cosmetics, infusions,
washes, anointments (with sandal pastes, etc.), garlands
(of flowers, etc), clothes, bedding, armour, ornaments,
shoes, foot cushions, the backs of horses and elephants and
snuffs (Nasya), Dhuma (tobacco smoking), collyrium and
such other things (reserved for the use of the king). 8-9.

Indications of poisoned food and
drinky etc* : — The indications by which the
poisonous character of food, drink, etc. (to be used by
a king) may be detected are described first and the
medical treatment is dealt with secondly. A portion
of the food prepared for the royal use should be first
given to crows and flies and its poisonous character
should be presumed, if they instantaneously die on
partaking of the same. Poisoned food burns making
loud cracks, and when cast into the fire it assumes the
colour of a peacock’s throat, becomes unbearable, bums
in severed and disjointed flames and emits irritating
fumes and it cannot be speedily extinguished. The

i*

KALPA-iiTHANAM.

67f

eyes of a Chakora bird are instantaneously affected
by looking at such poisoned food and a Jivajivaka dies
under a similar condition. The note of the cuckoo
becomes hoarse and a Krauncha (heron) becomes '
excited.^ A peacock moves about and becomes sprightly,
and a ^uka and a Sdriki scream (in fear). A swan
cackles violently and a Bhringarija (of the swallow
class) raises its inarticutate voice. A Prishata (a species
of spotted deer) sheds tears and a monkey passes
stools. Hence these birds and animals should be kept
in the royal palace for show and entertainment as well
as for the protection of the sovereign master. lO.

The vapours arising from poisoned food when served
for use give rise to a pain in the cardiac region and pro-
duce headache and restlessness of the eyes. As an
antidote, a preparation of Kushtha^ Rdmatha (asafoetida),
Nalada and honey mixed together should be used as an
Anjana (along the eye-lids) and a medical compound of
the same drugs should be snuffed into the nostrils. A
plaster composed of S'irisha, turmeric, and sandal
pasted together or simply a sandal paste should be used
over the region of the heart in such cases ii.

A poison affecting the palms of the hands, produces
a burning sensation in them and leads to the falling off
of the finger-nails. The remedy in such cases consists
in applying a plaster of Syamd*^ Jkdra, Gopa soma and
Utpala pasted together. I2.

Poisoned food partaken of through ignorance or

* Some expUio as ; others explain it as

*'Priyanga”« Dallana expUioa **lDdra’^ to mean *'lndra-Viruni’^ *'Gopa’*
to mean “SArivP* and ‘^Soma” to mean “Guduchi”. Otkers, however,
take ^*Indra*Gopa*’ as one word and explain it to mean a kind of insect
known by that name, and they take Soma*' to mean *'Soma<«lati In the
ordinary sente of the word.

6;S THE SUSHRliVA SA^HlTA tChpp- *•

folly, produces a stone-like swelling and numbness of the
tongue, a loss of the faculty of taste and a pricking
burning pain in that organ attended with copious mu-
cous salivation. The measures and remedies already
laid down in connection with the treatment oii cases of
poisonous vapours as well as those to be hereinafter
described in connection with the use of a poisoned
tooth twig should be adopted. 13.

Food mixed with poison, when it reaches the
Amsls'aya (stomach), gives rise to epileptic fits, vomiting,
dysenteric stools (Atis^ra), distention of the abdomen, a
burning sensation, shivering and a. derangement of
the sense-organs. Under such circumstances an emetic
consisting of Madana, Aldvu, Vimbi and Kos'dtaki
pasted together and administered through the medium
of milk, cutd and Udasvit or with rice-washings

should be understood as the proper remedy. 14.

Food mixed with poison, if it reaches the Pakvd-
s'aya (intestines), gives rise to a burning sensation (in
the body), epileptic fits, dysenteric stools (Atisira),
derangements of the organs of sense-perception, rumbling
sounds in the abdomen and emaciation, and makes the
complexion (of the sufferer) yellow. In such a case a
pprgative composed of clarified butter and Nilini
fruits should be the first remedy. As an alternative,
remedies to be described lateron (in the next chapter)
in connection with the effects of Dashi-Visha (slow
chemical poison) should be adopted and used, saturated
with milk-curd (Dadhi) or honey. 1 5,

All liquid substances such as wine, milk, water, etc.,
if anywise poisoned, are found to be marked with
variegated stripes on their* surface and become covered

* The eoloun of the different poisoned articles vary in each case and
this is elaborately desaribed by Vdgbhata in his Sarnhit^.

Chap. I.] KALPA-STHANAM. 679

over with froth and bubbles. Shadows are not reflected
in such (poisoned) liquids and if they ever are, they look
doubled, net-like (porous) thin and distorted. 16.

Preparations of potherbs, soups, boiled rice and
cooked meat are instantaneously decomposed, and
become ] 3 utrid, tasteless and omit little odour when in
contact with poison. All kinds of food become tasteless,
smellless and colourless when in contact with poison.
Ripe fruit, under such conditions, is speedily decomposed
and the unripe ones are found to get prematurely
ripe. 17—18

If the tooth-twig be anyway charged with poison its
brush-like end is withered and shattered and if used
gives rise to a swelling of the lips and the tongue and
about the gums. In such a case, the swollen part should
be first rubbed (with any leaf of rough fibre) and then
gently rubbed with a plaster composed of Dhdtaki
flowers, Pathyd, stones of Jambuline (black-berry) and
honey pasted together. As an alternative, the pait
should be gently rubbed and dusted over with a plaster
of powdered Amkotha roots or Sapt a-chchada bark pr
seeds of Sirisha, pasted together with honey. The
same remedies should be applied in the cases of affec-
tions due to the use of a poisoned tongue-cleanser or a
poisoned gargle (Kavala). 12—20.

Poisoned articles for Abhyanga (oils and unguents)
look thick, slimy or discoloured and produce, when
used, eruptions on the skin which suppurate and exude
a characteristic secretion attended with pain, perspira-
tion, fever and bursting of the flesh. The remedy in
such a case consists in sprinkling cold water* over the
body of the patient and in applying a plaster of sandal
wood, Tagara, KusAtha, Udtra, Vempatrikd (leaves of
bamboo), Soma-valU, Afnritd^ S^vita-padma (lotus),

680 THE SUSHRuVajSAMHITA. tChap. I.

Kdliyaka and cardamom pasted tc^ether (with cold
water), A potion of the same drugs mixed with the
urine of a cow and the expressed juice of Kapittha is
equally commended in the present instance. Symptoms
which mark the use of poisoned armour, garments,
bedding, cosmetic, washes, infusions, anointments, etc.
and the remedies for these are identical with those
consequent upon the use of poisoned unguents. 21-22.

A poisoned plaster (if applied to the head) leads to
the falling off of the hair and to violent headache, bleeding
through the mouth and the nostrils, etc., and the appear-
ance of glands on the head. The remedy in such a case
consists in the application of a plaster made of black
earth treated (Bhdvita) several times with the bile of a
Rishya (a species of deer), clarified butter and the ex-
pressed juice of S'ydmd, Pdlindi (Trivrit) and Tandu-
liyaka (in succession). The expressed juice of Mdlati
(flower) or of Mushika-parni, fluid-secretions of fresh
cow-dung and house-soot as external applications are
also beneficial in such cases. 23.

In cases of poisoning through head-unguents or
through a poisoned turban, cap garland of fllowers,
or bathing water, measures and remedies as laid down
in connection with a case of poisoned Anulepana should
be adopted and applied. In a case of poisoning through
cosmetics applied to the face, i the local skin assumes
a bluish or tawny brown colour covered with eruptions
like those in cases of Padmini-kantakaand the symptoms
peculiar to a case of using a poisoned unguent become
manifest. The remedy in such a case consists in the ap-
plication of a plaster composed of (white) sandal wood,
clarified butter, Payasyd, Yashti madhu. Phanji, (Bh4rgi),
Vandkujiva and Panamavd. A potion of honey and
clarified butter is also beneficial in this case. 24-25,

Chap. L]

KALPA-Si-HANAM.

68l

A poisoned elephant usually exhibits such symptoms
as restlessness, copious salivation and redness of the
eyes. The buttocks, the penis, the anal region and the
scrotum of its rider coming in contact with the body of
such an ^ephant are marked by eruptions. Under such
conditions both the animal and its rider should be medi-
cally treated with the remedies laid down in the
treatment of poisoning through an unguent. 26.

A poisoned snulF (Nasya) or poisoned smoke (Dhuma)
produces bleeding from the mouth and nose, etc., pain
in the head, a discharge of mucus and a derangement
of the functions of the sense-organs. The remedy in
such cases consists in drinking and snuffing* a potion of
clarified butter duly cooked with the milk of a cow
or such other animal together with AtivisAd, Vacha and
Mallikd flower (as Kalka). A poisoned garland ( of
flowers) is characterised by the loss of odour and by
the fading and discolouring of its natural colour, and
when smelt produces headache and lachrymation. Re-
medies laid down under the heads of poisoning through
vapour (Dhuma) and through cosmetics for the face
(Mukha lepa) should be used and applied. 27-28.

The act of applying poisoned oil into the cavity of
the ears impairs the faculty of hearing and gives rise to
swelling and pain in that locality and to the secretion
(of pus) from the affected organs. T&e filling up of the
cavity of the ears with a compound of clarified butter,
honey and the expressed juice of Vakuputrd (^tdvari)+

* Dallana explains this couplet to mean that clarified butter cooked
with milk and Ativishd should be given for drink, and that looked with
Vacha and M^lati flower as an errhine.

t Dallana says that some read and explain

to mean l"*

86

682

THE SUSHRtfrA SAMHITA.

[Chap. I,

or with the juice of Sotna-valka in a cold state prove
curative in such cases. 29.

The use of a poisoned Anjana (collyrium) to the
eyes is attended with copious lachrymation, deposit of
an increased quantity of waxy mucus (in tl^p corners
of the eyes), a burning sensation, pain (in th* affected
organs), impairment of the sight and even blindness.
In such a case the patient should be made to drink a
potion of fresh clarified butter (Sadyo-ghrita)* alone or
with pasted Pippali which would act as a Tarpana
(soother). Anjana prepared with the expressed juice of
Mesha s'ringi, V aruna-\)'ax\i, Mushkaka or Ajakama or
with Samudra-phenaY> 3 ^si& 6 . with the bile (Pitta) of a cow
should be applied to the eyes, or the one prepared
with the (expressed juice of the) flower of Kapittha,
Mesha-s^ringi, Bhalldtaka, Bandhuka and Amkotha
separately. 30.

The case which is incidental to the use of a paste of
poisoned sandals, is marked by a swelling in the legs,
secretion from the affected organs, complete anesthesia
of the diseased locality and the appearance of vesciles
thereon. Those due to the use of poisoned shoes or
foot-stools exhibit symptoms identical with those of
the above case and the medical treatment in all of
these cases should be one and the same. Ornaments
charged with poison lose their former lustre and give
rise to swelling, suppuration and the cracking of the
parts they are worn on. The treatment in these cases
due to the use of poisoned sandals and ornaments
should be similar to the one advised in connection
•

* Some arc inclined to take an adverb meaning ^'instantly”

fold modifying meaning thereby that clariBed butler should be

instantly taken*

KALPA-STVANAM.

Chap. I.]

683

with that due to the use of poisoned unguents
(Abhyanga). 31-32.

General Treatment The symptoms
which characterise cases of poisoning commencing with
"poisoning through poisoned smoke" and ending with
that due tp the use of "poisoned ornaments” should be
remedied with an eye to each of the specific and charac-
teristic indications, and the medicine known as the
Mahl(-Sllgandlii Agada to be described hereafter should
be administered as drink, unguent, snuff and Anjana.
Purgatives or emetics should be exhibited and even
strong venesection should be speedily resorted to in

cases where bleeding would be beneficial. 33-34.

The drugs known as Mushikd and Ajaruhd should
be tied round the wrists of a king as prophylactics to
guard against the effects of poisoned food, since either
of these two drugs (in virtue of their specific properties)
tends to neutralise the operativeness of the poison . A
king surrounded by his devoted friends shall cover his
chest (with drugs of heart-protecting virtues) and shall
drink those preparations of clarified butter, which
are respectively known as the Ajeya and the Amrita
Ghritas* He should drink regularly every day such
wholesome cordials as honey, clarified butter, curd,
milk and cold water and use in his food the meat and

soup of the flesh of a peacock, nfungoose, Gk>dhd (a
species of lizard), or Prishata deer. 35 — A.

The mode of preparing the Soup

The flesh of a Godha, mungoose, or deer should be
cooked and spiced with pasted Pdlindi (Trivrit), Yashti-
tnadhu and sugar. The flesh of a peacock should be
similarly cooked and spiced with sugar, * Ativishd

* See Kalpa-Sthina, Chapter 11. Para 27 , and Chapter Vll.
para s, respectively.

684 the SUSHRIJTA SAMHITA.i [Cb^p. I.

and ^nihi and that of a Prishata deer with Pippali and
S'untki. The soup of S^imbi taken with honey
and clarified butter should, similarly, be deemed
beneficial (as being possessed of similar antitoxic
properties). An intelligent king should always use
food and drink of poison-destroying properties.
In a case of imbibed poison, the heart should be
protected (with a covering of anti-poisonous drugs)
and the patient should be made to vomit (the contents
of his stomach) with a potion composed of sugar,
Pippali^ Yashti-madku, honey and the expressed juice
of sugar-cane dissolved in water. 35-36.

♦ Thus ends the first Chapter of the Kalpa«slh^na in the Sus'ruia
Samhitd which deals with the mode of protecting food and drink (from
the effectf of poison).

CHAPTER 11.

Now we shall discourse on the chapter which treats
of the ^indications (effects, nature and operations) of
Sthdvara (vegetable and mineral) poisons (SthSlVd^rd-*

Visha-Vijn^niyam). i.

Sth^vara-poison : Its Source (M. T.)—

There are two kinds of poison viz.^ that obtained from
immobile things (StWvara) and that obtained from
mobile creatures (Jangama). The sources of the
Sthivara (vegetable and mineral) poison are ten, while
those of the Jangama (animal) poison are sixteen in
number. The ten sources from which a Sth^vara
poison may be obtained are roots, leaves, fruits, flowers,
bark, milky exudations, pith (Sdra\ gum (NiryAsa),
bulb and a mineral or metal (DhAtu). 2-3.

Names of the different Vegetable and
Mineral poisons : — KlUaka, As'va-mdra, Gunjd,
Subandha^y Gar^araka^ Karaghdta, V idyuch-chkikhd
and Vijayd are the eight root-poisons. V isha-Patrikd,
Lamhd, Avaraddruka^ Karambha and Makd-Karambha
are the five leaf*poi8ons. The fruits of Kumudvati,
Renukd^ Karambha^ Mahd-Karambka, Karkotaka^
Venuka, Khadyotaka, Charmari^ Ibhagandhd, Sarpa-
ghdti, Nandana and Sdta-pdkay numbering twelve in all,
are the twelve fruit-poisona The flowers of Vetra,
Kadamba^ Vallija {Ndrdcha---D, R), Karambfia and
MahdKafambha are the five flower-poisons. The bark,
pith and gum of Antra^pdchakuy Kariariya,^ Sauriyakay
Kara-ghdtay Kafambha^ Nandana and Vardtaka are

Lambd, According to Gayt— R.

686

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHlTA.

[Chap. n.

the seven bark'poisons, pith-poisons and gnm-poisons-
The milky exudations of Kumudaghni, Snuhi and
/dla-Kshiri are poisons and are known as the three
Kshira-Vishas, PhenAs'ma-bhasma ( white arsenic )
and Haritdla ( yellew orpiment ) are the two mineral
poisons, Kdla~kuta, Vatsa-ndbha, Sarshapaka, Bdlaka^
Kardatnaka, Vairdtaka,Mustaka, S'ringi-visha, Prapaun-
darika, Mulaka, Hdldhala, Mahd-visha and Karkataka,
numbering thirteen in all, are the bnlb-poisons Thus
the number of poisons obtained from the vegetable
and mineral world (SthAvara) amount to fifty-five in
all. 4-1 1.

MetriCdil Text : —There are four kinds of
Vatsa-ndbha poisons, two kinds of Mustaka and six
kinds of Sarshapaka. The remaining ones have no
different species, 12.

Effects Of poison on the human or-
ganism : — Eoot poisons or poisonous roots produce
a twisting pain in the limbs, delirium and loss of
consciousness. A leaf-poison or poisonous leaf gives
rise to yawning, difficult breathing and a twisting pain
in the limbs. A fruit poison is attended with a
swelling of the scrotum, a burning sensation in the body
and an aversion to food. A fiower-poison gives rise to
vomiting, distensions of the abdomen and loss of cons-
sciousness. A bark-poison, or pith-poison, or gum-poison
is marked by a fetour in the mouth, roughness of the
body, headache and a secretion of Kapha (mucus from
the mouth). The effects of the poisonous milky exud-
ations (of a tree, plant or creeper) are foaming from
the mouth, loose stools (diarrhoea) and a curvature
(drawing back! of the tongue, whereas a mineral poison
gives rise to pain in the heart, fainting and a burning
sensation in the region of the palate. All these are

Chap. 11 .] KALPA iSTHANAM. 687

slow poisons proving fatal only after a considerable
length of time. 13.

Effects of Bulb-poisons:— Now we shall
describe in full the respective effects of the bulb-poisons
which are very strong (.Tikshna) in their actions The
bulb-pgison known as the Ksilakuta produces complete
anesthesia, shivering and numbness. Paralysis of the
neck and yellowness of the stool, urine and of the
eye balls are the symptoms produced in a case of
Vatsanibha-poisoiiing. Retention of stool and urine
(Andha), disorders of the palate and the appearance of
glands are the effects of a case of Sarshapa poisoning.
Loss of speech and weakness of the neck are the
symptoms in a case of Fsflaka poisoning. Water-brash
loose stools (diarrhoea) and a yellowness of the eyes
mark a case of Kardamaka-poisoning. Pain in the limbs
and diseases of the head are produced in a case of
Vairfi^taka•poisoning. Shivering and a numbness of the
limbs are the effects of a case of Mustaka-poisoning.
Lassitude, a burning sensation in the body and an en-
largement of the abdomen mark a case of S'ringi-visha-
p^isoning. An enlargement of the abdomen and
redness of the eyes are the symptoms of Pundarika-
poisoning. A discolouring of the complexion, vomiting
hic-cough, swelling and a loss of consciousness are the
effects of the Mulaka-poison. Difficult breathing and
a tawny brown colour of the skin mark a case of
hala-poisoning. Aneurysm (Granthi) on the region of
the heart and a piercing pain in the same are the symp
toms in a case of Mahat-visha-poisoning; while a case of
Earkataka-poisoning is marked by laughing, gushing
of the teeth and jumping up (without any cause). 14

Specific properties of the above-

namect Blllb-polsons:— These thirteen kinds of

688 THE SUSHRUTA* SAMHITA, [Ch»p. H.

bulbous poisons should be deemed as very strong*
in their potency and they possess the following ten
properties in common. They are parching (Ruksha)
and heat-making (Ushna: in their potency. They are
sharp (Tikshna) and subtle (Sukshma) *>., ha^e the
power of penetrating into the minutest capillaries ,of
the body and are instantaneous {A^a) in their effects.
They first permeate the whole organism and become
subsequently digested (Vyaviyi) and disintegrate the root-
principles of the body (Vikis'i). They are non-viscid
(Vis'ada), light in potency (Laghu) and indigestible
( Apdki). 1 5.

A poison aggravates the bodily Viyu in virtue of its
parching quality and vitiates the blood and the Pitta
through its heat-generating property. It overwhelms
the mind (produces unconsciousness) and tends to
disintegrate the limbs and muscles in virtue of its sharp-
ness and penetrates into and deranges the minutest capi-
llaries owing to its extreme subtile essence. It proves
speedily fatal owing to its speedy activity and spreads
through the entire organism (which is the very nature of
a drug") on account of its rapid permeating or expansive
quality. It annihilates the root-principles (Dhdtus) as
well as the Doshas and the Malas (excreta) of the body
through the power of disintregation, and does not
addhere to any spot therein owing to its non-viscidness.
It baffles the efficacies of other drugs and thus becomes
unremediable on account of the extreme lightness (of
its potency), and it cannot be easily assimilated owing
to its innate indigestibility. It thus proves trouble-
some for a long time. 16.

The text has ‘‘Ugra-viryini’* (strong in potency). Gayi re

“Agia-Viryinl” (of great poteney).

QW . H.] KALPA STHANAM. 669

A poison of whatsoever sort, whether animal,
^^etable, or chemical, which proves almost instan-
taneously fatal (within a day) should be regarded as
possessed of all the ten aforesaid qualities, 17.

Definition of Dushi-visha (weak and
slow poison): — A poison whether animal, vegetable
or chemical, not fully eliminated from the system and
partially inherent therein, enfeebled, of course by anti-
poisonous remedies^ is designated a Dushi-visha (weak
and slow poison) which is even extended to those
the keenness of potency whereof is enfeebled by the
sun, the fire and the wind, as well as to those which
are found to be naturally devoid of some of the ten
aforesaid natural qualities of a poison. A Dushi visha,
owing to its enfeebled or attenuated virtue and as a
necessary consequence of its being covered over with
the bodily Kapha, ceases to be fatal though retained in*
the system for a number of years. 18.

Symptoms of weak and slow poison-
ing :-A person afflicted with any sort of Buslii*
Visha develops such symptoms as, looseness of
stool (diarrhoea), a discoloured complexion, fetor in
the body, bad taste in the mouth, thirst, epileptic fits,
vomiting (D. R.— vertigo), lassitude, confused speech
and all the symptoms of Dushypdara* A Dushi-
Visha lodged in the ijxuf^aya (stomach) gives rise to
diseases due to the combined action of the VAyu and
Kapha; seated in the Pakvidaya (intestines) it brings on
diseases due to the deranged condition of the Viiyu and
Pitta and leads to the falling off of the hair. The patient
becomes rapidly atwphied, and looks like a wingless
bird. When it attacks the Basa, etc.f of the system

M &e Chiptec VII. p«ra lO, Nidlna- 8 th<na.

Are the seven fundftmental principles of the body,

87

690 THE SUSHRdxA SAlilMITA. tChap. 11.

it produces the diseases* peculiar to the root or vital .
principles of the body. Its action on the body becomes
aggravated on a cloudy day and by exposure to cold
and wind. 19-21.

Premonitory Symptoms of Oushi-

ViSha poisoning : — Now hear me first describe
the premonitory symptoms (of its aggravation). They
are as follow : -Sleepiness, heaviness (of the limbs),
yawning, a sense of looseness (in the joints), horripi-
lation and aching of the limbs. These are followed
by a sense of intoxicdtion after meals, indigestion,
disrelish for food, eruptions of circular patches (Man-
dala) on the skin, urticaria (Kotha), fainting fits, loss of
the vital principles of the organism (^D. R— loss of fleshl,
swelling of the face and the extremities (D.R.— Atro-
phy of the hands and legs), ascites (Dakodara), vomiting,
epileptic fits, Vishama-jvara, high-fever and an un-
quenchchable thirst. Moreover, some of these poisons
produce insanity. Some of them are characterised by
an obstinate constipation of the bowels (Andha), others,
by an involuntary emission of semen while a few others
produce confused speech, Kushtha (leprosy), or some
other similar disease. 22.

Derivative Meaning of ‘‘ Dushl-

Vlsha’*:-A constant use of some particular timc.f
place and diet as well as constant and regular day-sleep
tends (slowly) to poison the fundamental root-principles

* See Chapter xxvii, Sutra Stbdna.

t By “ the particular time” i* meant a cloudy and windy day
aa well aw the lainy season. By “the particular place” Is meant a
marshy country, and by "the particular dlcf’.is meant wine, sesamum,
Kulaltha-pulse, etc. as well as physical exercise, sexual intercourse,
^ts of anger, etc,

Chap. It] . ; KALPA STHANAM,

(Dhlttas) of the body and this (slow) poison is conse-
quently known as the Dasbi-Visha. 23

Symptoms of the dllTerent stagces
of SthsCvara poisoning in the first stage
of a . case poisoning by a Sthivara (vegetable or

mineral) poison, the tongue becomes dark brown and
numbed, and epileptic fits and hard breathing follow in its
wake. The second stage is marked by such symptoms
as shivering, perspiration burning sensation, itching
and pain in the body ; when seated in the Amis’aya
(stomach) it causes pain in the region of the heart. The
third stage is marked by a dryness of the palate and
severe (colic) pain in the stomach. The eyes become
discoloured, yellow-tinted and swollen. When seated
in the PakvAs'aya (intestines) it produces hic-cough,
cough, and a sort of pricking pain and rumbling sound
in the Antra (intestines). The fourth stage is marked
by an extreme heaviness of the head. The fifth stage
is marked by salivation, discolouring of the body and
a breaking pain in the joints. It is marked also by
the aggravation of all the Doshas and pain in the
Pakvddhdna (intestines ?), The sixth stage is charac-
terised by loss of consciousness or excessive diarrhoea ;
while the seventh stage is marked by a breaking pain
in the back, the shoulders and the waist and a complete
stoppage (of respiration)*. 24.

Treatment : — In the first stage the patient
should be made to vomit and to drink cold water after
that. Then an Agada (Anti-poisonous remedy) mixed
with honey and clarified butter should be given him.
In the second stage, the patient should be first made to
vomit as in the preceding stage and then a purgative

* The seven stages of the poisoning are due to the poisoning of the
seven fiindamantal root'principles (Dlultns) of the body in succession.

6 ^^ THE SUSriRUT ^A SAMHltA. tCh«p. H.

should be given him. Anti-poisonous potions, medi-
cated snuffs (Nasya) and Anjanas possessed of similar
virtues are beneficial in the third stage. An anti-
poisonous potion through the vehicle of a Sneha (clari-
fied butter) is efficacious in the fourth stage. In the
fifth stage the patient should be given an anfipoison-
ous medicine with the decoction of Yashti-madku
and honey. In the sixth stage the treatment should be
as in a case of diarrhoea (Atisdra) and the use of
a medicated snuff in the form of an Avapida is
recommended. The latter remedy (Avapida-Nasya)
should be applied in the seventh stage as well and the
scalp after being shaved in the shape of a K 4 ka-pada*
(crow’s claw) should alsof be incised with a small
incision. The incised flesh and the (vitiated) blood
should also be removed. 25.

KoShsCtakysCdi Yavdg^U After adopting
the respective measures enjoined in respect of the
several stages of poisoning, the patient should, in the
interval of any two stages be made to drink in a cold
state a gruel (Yavigu) prepared with the decoctions of
Koshdtaki (Ghoshs ), Agnika {h)2iTao6i\ Pdthd, Surya-
vain, Amritd, Abkayd,S'trisha, Kinihi, S'elu, Girydkvd,
(white Aparijitd), the two kinds of Rajani, the two kinds
of Pmamavd, Harenu, Trikatu, Sdrivd, and Bald (D.R.
Sdrivd and Utpala) mixed with honey and clarified
butter. This is beneficial in both the cases of (animal
and vegetable) poisoning. 26,

* The peiticulM form of tbeving the heir, in which the pert of
the iCelp from end ebove the foreheed onljr i< theved it technicelly

ceiled e Kdk»rpada.

t The perticle "idi” neeos thet the meetnrei leid down in reipect of
the treetment of e Jengeme poiion vie. beeting the patient on the
heed, forehead, etc., ihonld alto be retorted to.

Chap. It.]

KALPA ^THANAM.

69^

Ajcya-Ghrlta. — Clarified butter should be duly
cooked with an adequate quantity of water and the
Kalka of Yashti-tnadhu, Tagara, Kushtha, Bhadra-ddru,
Harem, Punndga, Eld, Ela-vdluka, Ndga kes'ara, Utpala,
sugar, Vidanga, Chandana, Patra, Priyangu, Dhyd-
maka, t^e two kinds Haridrd, the two kinds of Vrihati,
the two kinds of Sdrivd, Sthird (Sila-parni) and Sahd
(Pri^ni-parni). It is called the It

speedily destroys all kinds of poison in the system and
is infallible in its efficacy. 27,

ViShs(rl**Agada : — A patient afflicted with the
effects of Dnshi-Visha inherent in the system should be
first fomented and cleansed by both emetics and purga-
tives. The following anti -poisonous Agada (medicine)
should then be taken daily. The recipe of this Agada
is as follows : — Pippali, Dhydmaka, Mdmsi, Sdvara
(Lodhra), Paripelava*, Suvatchikd, small Eld, Toya
(Bilaka) and Suvama-Gairika should be taketi with
honey. It destroys, when taken, the Dushi-Visha (slow
chemical poisoning) in the system. It is called the
Vishlhri- Agada and its efficacy extends also to cases of
all other kinds of poisoning. 28.

Treatment of the Supervening
Symptoms of poisoning:— Cases of fever,
burning sensation in the body, hic-cough, constipation
of the bowels, loss of semen, swfelling, diarrhoea, epi-
leptic fits, heart-disease, ascites, insanity, shivering,
and such other supervening symptoms (consequent
on the effects of a Dushi-Visha inherent in the
system) should be treated with remedies laid down
under the respective heads of the aforesaid diseases
in accompaniment with (suitable) antt-poisonous
medicines. 29.

* "Fatiiwlava” meant eithei "Dhanytka” or "KaivatUa-Mnttska”.

694 SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. tChap. 11.

PrOg^nOSlS S— A case of Dushi-Visha poisoning
in a prudent and judicious person, and of recent growth
is easily cured, while palliation is the only relief that
can be offered in a case of more than a year’s standing.
In an enfeebled and intemperate patient, it should
be considered as incurable. 30. #

Thus ends the sceond Chapter of the Kalpa Slhina in the Sus'ruta
Samhiti which treats of the Sthdvara and jangama poisons.

CHAPTER III.

Now we shall discourse on the subject of ^the nature,
virtue, etc. of) animal poisons (JangaiTia.~Vi8h£i-

vljnilniya). i.

We have briefly said before that there are sixteen
situations of poison in the bodies of venomous animals.
Now we shall deal with them in detail. 2.

LOCa.tion8 : — An animal poison is usually
situated in the following parts, viZy the sight, breath,
teeth, nails, urine, stool, semen, saliva, menstrual blood,
stings, belching* anus, bones, bile, bristles (^uka) and
in the dead body of an animal. 3.

Of these, the venom of celestial serpents lies in their
sight and breath, that of the terrestrial ones in their
fangs while that of cats, dogs, monkeys, Makara
(alligators?). Frogs, Pdka-matsyas (a kind of insect),
lizards (Godhi), mollusks (Snails), Prachaldkas (a kind
of insect), domestic lizards, four-legged insects and of
any other species of flies such as mosquitoes, etc , lies
in their teeth and nails. 4.

The venom of a Chipita, Pichchataka, Kashdya-
vdsika, Sarshapa-vdsika, Totaka,^ Varchalvkita, Kaun-
dilyaka and such-like insects lies in their urine and
excreta. The poison of a mouse or rat lies in its semen,
while that of a Luid (spider) lies in its saliva, urine,
excreta, fangs, nails, semen and menstrual fluid
(ovum\ 5 — 6.

The venom ot a scorpion, VisVambhara, Rdjiva-fish,
Uchchitinga ^cricket) and a sea-scorpion lies in their

Ynddha-Vi^bhaU reads Alaji-S^onite in place of **Visardf^ita,*’

6g6

THE SUSHRUtA SAMHITA.

[Chap. HI.

saliva. The venom of a Chitra-^irah, Sariva, Kurdis'ata,
Diruka, Arimedaka and ^drikd-mukha, lies in their
fangs, belching, stool and urine. The venom of a fly,
a Kanabha and leeches lies in their fangs. The poison
lies in the bones of an animal killed by any pcison, as
well as in those of a snake, a Varati and 'a fish*
The poison lies in the bile of a ^akuli, a Rakta-riji and
a Chiraki fish. The poison lies in the bristles ^^uka)
and the head of a Sukshma-tunda, an Uchchitinga
(cricket), a wasp, a centipede (Satapadi), a ^uka, a Vala
bhika, a ^ringi and a bee. The dead body of a snake
or an insect is poisonous in itself. Animals not includ-
ed in the above list should be deemed as belonging to
the fang-venomed species the poison lies in their
fangs. 7— II.

Memorable Verses : — The enemies of a
sovereign poison the pastures, water, roads, food-stuff's
and smoke (Dhuma) of their country and even charge
the atmosphere with poison in the event of his making
incursions into their country. The poisonous nature
of the foregoing things should be ascertained from
the following 'features and should be duly purified
(before use). 12-A.

Characteristic Features and Purifi-
cations of poisoned water, etc :-A sheet

of poisoned water becomes slimy, strong- smelling, frothy
and marked with (black-coloured) lines on the surface
Frogs and fish living in the water die without any
apparent cause. Birds and beasts that live (in the
water and) on its shores roam about wildly in confusion
(from the effects of poison), and a man, a horse or an
elephant, by bathing in this (poisoned) water is afflicted

* Some reed (Vareti fish) as one word— the ijame of a

species of fis^.

Chap. III.] KALFA S'^HANAM. 697

with vomiting, fainting, fever, a burning sensation
and swelling of the limbs. These disorders (in men
and animals) should be immediately attended to
and remedied and no pains should be spared to puHfy
such pgisoned water. The cold ashes, of Dhava,
As^va-karna^ Asana, Pdribhadra, Pdtald, Siddhaka^
Mokshaka^ Rdja-druma and Somavalka burnt together,
should be cast into the poisoned pool or tank, whereby
its water would be purified ; as an alternative, an
Anjali-measure (half a seer) of the said ashes cast in a
Ghata measuren (sixty-four seers) of the required water
would lead to its purification, 12-B.

A poisoned ground or stone-slab, landing stage
or desert country gives rise to swellings in those parts
of the bodies of men, bullocks, horses, asses, camels
and elephants that may chance to come in contact
with them. In such cases a burning sensation is felt in
the affected parts and the hair and nails (of these
parts) fall off*. In these cases, the poisoned surface
should be purified by sprinkling it over with a solution
of Ananta and Sarva gandfm (the scented drugs) dis-
solved in wine (Surd)f, or with (an adequate quantity
of) black clayj dissolved in water or with the deccc
tion of Vida^ga, Pdthd, and Katab/ii. 12. C,

Poisoned hay or fodder or any^ther poisoned food-
stuff produces lassitude, fainting, vomiting, diarrhcea or
even death (of the animal partaking thereof). Such cases
should be treated with proper anti-poisonous medicines

* JejjatA explains *Ghata* as a pitcher, a pitcher-ful of water.

t Dallana holds thakthe use of the plural number here^in **
means that honey, treacle, etc. should also be used with wine.

t Dallana says that some read ' earth of an ant-hiir in place of *black
clay for its anti -poisonous properties.

88

698 THE SUSHKU*rA SAMHITA. (G «p- III.

according to the indications of each case. As an alter-
native, drums and other musical instruments smeared
with plasters of anti-poisonous compounds (Agadas)*
shdlild be beaten and sounded (round them). Equal parts
of silver (Tifra), mercury {Sutdra) and Indra-Gop^ insects
with Kuru- FrW<2*f" equal in weight tch that of the
entire preceding compound, pasted wrth the bile of a
Kapila (brown) cow, should be used as a paste over the
musical instruments (in such cases). The sounds of
such drums, etc. (pasted with such anti-poisonous drugs)
are said to destroy the effects of even the most dreadful
poison . I 2 -D.

Poisons of the Atmosphere and its

purification ; — The dropping of birds from the
skies to the earth below in a tired condition is a
distinct indication of the wind and the smoke
(of the atmosphere l being charged with poison. It is
further attended with an attack of cough, catarrh,
head ache, and of severe eye-diseases among persons in-
haling the same wind and smoke. In such cases the
(poisoned) atmosphere should be purified by burning
quantities of Ldkshd, Haridrd, Ati-vishd, Abhayd,
Abda (Musta), Renuka, Eld, Dala (Teja-Patra), Valka
(cinnamon), Kushtha and Priangu in the open ground.
The fumes of these drugs would purify the Anila (air)
and the Dhuma (smoke) from the poison they had been
charged with 12.

Mythological origin of poison (Visha):

— It is stated in the Scriptures that a demon named
Kaitabba obstructed in various ways, the work of
the self-origined Brahmi when he was engaged in
creating this world. At this the omnipotent god grew

* See Chapter VII, Kalpa-Stbdna.

t according to Dallana. 'Bhadia-mnsta' according to others.

Chap. III.]

KALPAaSTHANAM.

699

extremely wrathful. The vehement wrath of the god
gradually swollen and inflamed, at last emanated in
physical forms from his mouth and reduced the mighty,
death-like, roaring fiend to ashes. But the energy of
that terrific wrath went on increasing even after the
destruction of the demon, at the sight of which the
gods were greatly depressed in spirit The term Vista
(poison) is so called from the fact of its filling the gods
with Vishdda (depression of spirits). After that the god
of creation, having finished his (self imposed) task of
creating this world, cast that wrath both into the mobile
and the immobile creations Just as the atmospheric
water which is of imperceptible and undeveloped taste,
acquires the specific taste of the ground or soil it
falls upon, so it is the very nature of the (tasteless) Visha
that it partakes of the specific taste (Rasa) of a thing or
animal in which it exists 13

Properties of poisons All the sharp
and violent qualities are present in poison. Hence
poisons should be considered as aggravating and and
deranging all the Doshas of the body. The Doshas
aggravated and charged with poison forego their own
specific functions. Hence poison can never be digested
or assimilated in the system. It stops the power of
inhaling. Expiration (exhalation of the breath) becomes
impossible owing to the internal pstssages having been
choked by the deranged Kapha. Consequently a
poisoned person drops down in an unconscious state
even when life is still present within his body. 14.

Nature and Location of Snake-

poison S — The gpison of a snake like the semen in
an adult ti^ale lies diffused all through its* organism.
As semen is gathered up, dislodged and subsequently
ennitted through the urethra by being agitated (by

700 THE SUSHRUtA SAMHITA. tCh»p. III.

contact with woman, etc.), so the poison in a snake is
gathered up and secreted through the holes of its
fangs under the conditions of anger and agitation. The
fangs being hook-shaped, a snake cannot secrete its
poison without lowering its hood just after a bite. 1$.

General treatment of poisoning:—
Since a poison of whatever sort is extremely keen,
sharp and heat-making in its poteney, a copious sprink-
ling with cold water should be used in all cases of
poisoning. But since the poison of an insect is mild
and not too much heat-making in its potency and as
it engenders a large quantity of Viyu and Kapha in the
organism, measures of fomentation vSveda) are not
forbidden in a case of insect-bite. A bite by a
strongly poisoned insect, however, should be treated as
a snake-bite to all intents and purposes. i6.

The poison of a venomed dart or of a snake-
bite courses through the whole organism of the victim
but it is its nature that it returns to the place of hurt
and bite respectively. A man eating, from culpable
gluttony, the flesh of such an animal, just dead (from the
effects of poison), is afflicted with symptoms and diseases
peculiar to the specific pathogenetic virtues of the poison
with which the dead body is charged, and, in the long
run, meets with his doom. Hence the flesh of an
animal killed by a venomed dart or a snake bite (should
be considered as fatal as the poison itself and) should
not be taken immediately after its death. The flesh of
such an animal, however, may be eaten after a period of
forty eight minutes (Muhurta) from its death after the
portions of (the liurt and the bite have been removed. 17.

Symptoms Of taking poison Inter-
nally Whoever passes a black sooty stool with loud
flatus, or sheds hot tears and drops down with agony,

Chap. Ill,] KALPA-SfHANAM. ;or

and whose complexion becomes discoloured, and whose
mouth becomes filled with foam, should be considered as
afflicted with poison taken internally (Visha-pita). The
heart of such a man (dying from the effects of internal
poisoniag) cannot be burnt in fire; since the poison
from its'very nature lies extended in the whole viscera
of the heart, the seat of cognition*. i8.

Fatal bites : - a man bitten by a snake in any
of the vulnerable parts of the body, or near (the root of)
an As^vattkva tree, or a temple, at the cremation ground
or on an ant-hill, or at the meeting of day and night, or
at the crossings of roads or under the influence of the
Bharani or Maghd asterisms (astral mansions) should be
given up as lost. The poison of a hooded cobra
(Darvri-kara proves instantaneously fatal. All poisons
become doubly strong and operative in summer
(Ushna)-j*. In cases of persons suffering from indigestion,
urinary complaints, or from the effects of deranged Pitta
or oppressed with the heat of the sun (sun stroke) as
well as infants, old men, invalids, emaciated persons,
pregnant women, men of timid disposition, or of a dry
temperament, or oppressed with hunger, or bitten on a
cloudy day, the poisons become doubly strong and
operative. 19-20.

On the other hand, a snake bittjn person, into whose
body an incision is unattended with bleeding, or on
whose body the strokes of lashes leave no marks, nor

* In the Charaka Samhiti also we come across identical ex-
pressions of opinion as to the seat of poison in the dead body of an
animal or man, dying from poison from a poisoned dart or snake-bile or
from poison administered internally. See chapter xxiii, clhkitsi-sth^na —
Charaka Samhiti.

t In place of some read This would mea^ “if

hiltejt in the upper part of the body.”

702 THE SUSHRUrA SAMHITA. [Chap. IIL

does horripilation appsar even after a copious pouring
of cold water on the body, should be likewise given up
as lost. A case of snake-bite in which the tongue of the
victim is found to be coated white and whose hair falls
off (on the slightest pull), the bridge of whose jiose be-
comes bent and the voice hoarse, where there as lock-
jaw and the appearance of a blackish-red swelling
about the bite, — such a case should be given up as
hopeless. 21 22.

The case in which thick, long lumps of mucus are ex-
pectorated accompanied by bleeding from both the
upward and the downward orifices of the body with
distinct impression of all the fangs on the bitten part,
should be given up by the physician. 23.

A case of snake-bite marked by the symptoms of
an insane state like that of a drunkard and accom-
panied by severe distressing symptoms (Upadrava),
as well as loss of voice and complexion and an absence
of the circulation of blood* and by other fatal symptoms
should be abandoned and no action need be taken
therein. 24.

Thus ends the third Chapter of the Ktlpa>Sth^na in the Sus'ruta
Samhitd which treats of animal poisons.

* The text has “Avegi”. Kdrtika explains it to mean “with sup-
pression of the natural urgings, m.. of stool, urine, etc.

CHAPTER IV.

Now we shall discourse on the Chapter which
treats ot the specific features of the poison of a snake-
bite (Sarpa-dashta-VIsha-ViJn^nlya). i.

Having laid himself prostrate at the feet of the holy
and wise Dhanvantari, the master of all the S'Astras,
Susruta addressed him as follows -.—^‘Enlighten and
illumineus, O Lord, on the number and classification
of snakes, on the nature of their poison and on the
distinguishing marks of their respective bites’*, where-
upon Dhanvantari, the foremost of all physicians replied
as follows : — Innumerable are the families of serpents,
of which Takshaka and Vdsuki are the foremost and the
most renowned. These are supposed to carry the earth*
with the oceans, mountains and the islands on their
heads and are as powerful and furious as the blazing
fire, fed upon the libations of clarified butter. 1 make
obeisance to those who constantly roar, bring down
rain, scorch the whole world (with the heat of their
hundred-headed venom) and are capable of destroying
the universe with their angry looks and poisonous breath.
It is fruitless, O Susruta, to enter into a discourse on
the treatment of their bites as ihey are beyond the
curative virtues of all terrestrial remedies. 2-A.

ClASSlflCSitiOll S — I shall, however, describe in
due order, the classification of the terrestrial snakes
whose poison lies in their fangs wherewith they bite the
human beings (and other animals). They a#e eighty in
number, classified into five main genera, namely, the

* In the Hindu mythology the earth is supposed to rest on the
heads of snakes, the inmates of the inf<;inal region*

THE SUSHRtMTA SAMHITA. [Ch»P>

Darvi-kara (hooded), Mandali (hoodless and painted
tvith circular patches or rings of varied colours on
their skin), BiQimtCn (hoodless and striped), Nirvisha
(non-venomous or slightly venomous) and Vaikarauja
(hybrid species). The last named is also, in i s turn,
divided into three sub-divisions only, m«., the Darvi-kara
(hooded), the Mandali (hoodless and ring-marked) and
the Rdjimdn (striped ones). 2.

Of these there are twenty six kinds of Darvi-kara
snakes, twenty-two of the Mandali species, ten of the
RAji-mdn class, twelve of the Nirvisha (non-venomous)
species and three of the Vaikaranja (hybrid) species.
Snakes born of Vaikaranja parents are of variegated
colours (Chitra) and are of seven different species (three
of these being Mandali (marked with rings) and (four)
Rdjila (marked with stripes). 3.

Classification of snake-bites A

snake trampled under foot, or in a fit of anger or hunger,
or anywise terrified or attacked, or out of its innate
malicious nature, will bite a man or an animal. The bites
of these snakes highly enraged as they are, are grouped
under three heads by men conversant with their nature,
vi»., Sarpita (deep-punctured), Badita (superficially
punctured) and Nirvisha (non-venomous) bites. Some of
the authorities on snake bites, however, add a fourth kind
vi»^ Sarping&bhihata (coming in contact with the body
of a serpent). 4* A.

Their specific Symptoms The bite in

which one, two or more marks (punctures) of fangs of
considerable depth are found on the affected part
attended with a slight bleeding as well as those which
are extremely slender and owe their origin to the turning
aside and lowering of its mouth (head) immediately after
the bite and are attended with swelling and the charac-

Chap. IV.]

KALPA STgANAM.

705

teristic changes the system of the victim) should be
known as the Sarpiti bite. A (superficial) puncture (or
punctures) made b/ the fangs of a snake and the affected
part being attended with reddish, bluish, whitish or
yellowishjines or stripes is called theEidita bite, which
is characterised by the presence of a very small quantity
of venom in the punctured wound. A Nirvisha (non-
venomous) bite is marked by the presence of one or more
fang marks, an absence of swelling and the presence of
slightly vitiated blood at the spot and is not attended
with any change in the normal (physiological) condition
of the person bitten. The contact of a snake with the
body of a naturally timid person may cause the aggra-
vation of his bodily VAyu and produce a swelling of the
part. Such a man is said to be SarpafngaJbhihata*
(affected by the touch of a snake). 4.

A bite by a diseased or agitated snake or by an
extremely old or young one, should be considered as
considerably less venomous. The poison of a snake
is inoperative in a country resorted to by the celestial
Garuda (the king of birds), or by the gods, Yakshas,
Siddhas and Brahmarshis, as well as in one in which
there are drugs of anti-venomous virtues. 5.

Characteristic features of the dif-
ferent Species of snakes Those having

hooJs and^ marked with spots resembling a wheel or a
plough, an umbrella or a cross (Svastika) or a goad
(Amkus'a) on their heads and are extremely swift,
should be known as the Darvi-kara snakes. Tho.se
which arc large and slow and marked with parti-coloured

* It should be noted her% that coming in contact with thorns and
nails, etc., if unnoticed, miy aho produce in the minds of persons the fear
of having been bitten by a snake and may thus produce the effects of
such poisoning.

89

7o6

THE SUSHRyXA SAMHITA.

fCluip, IV.

ring-like or circular spots on their skin, and have the
glow of the sun or hre should be known as Mandali
snakes, while those which are glossy and whose bodies
are painted with parti coloured horizontal, perpendi-
cular and lateral stripes, should be known as the
Bl^jiman species 6. „

Features of the different Castes
amongCSt snakes:— The snakes whose skin is
lustrous like a pearl or silver, is coloured yellow and looks
like gold and emits a sweet smell, should be regarded
as belonging to the Brsihmana species of snakes. Those
which are glossy, extremely irritable in their nature
and marked with spots on their skin resembling the
discs of the sun and moon, or of the shape of a conch-
shell (Ambuja) or an umbrella, should be regarded
as belonging to the Kshatriya species. The snakes of
the Vaitfya caste are coloured black or red or blackish
grey or ash-coloured or pigeon-coloured and are
(crooked or hard in their structures) like a Vajra. The
snakes which resemble a buffalo or a leopard in colour
and lustre or are rough-skinned or are possessed of a
colour other than the preceding ones should be consi-
dered as belonging to the ^adra class. 7.

The poison of all hooded snakes (Phani) deranges
and aggravates the bodily Vdyn, that of the Mandali
(circular spotted) species aggravates the Pitta, while
that of the Rijimdn (striped) class aggravates the bodily
Kapha. The poison of a snake of hybrid (Vaikaranja)
origin aggravates the two particular Doshas of the body
which its parents would have separately aggravated — a
fact which helps us to ascertain the species to which its
parents belong. 8.

Particular habits of different kinds

of snakes :— Now hear me describe the special

Ob«p IV. 1 Kalpa stjsanam. foy

habits of each of these families of snakes. A snake of
the RAjimAn species, is found abroad in the fourth or
the last quarter of the night, the Mandali snakes are
found to be out in the three preceding watches, while
the Darv^kara snakes are found to be abroad (in quest
of prey) only in the day time. g.

A Darvi-kara snake of tender age, a middle-aged
Rdjimin snake and an old Mandali snake are as fatal
as personified death. A snake of extremely tender
age, as weH as the one roughly handled by a
mungoose, or oppressed with water, as well as an
extremely old and emaciated one, or one which is
extremely frightened or has recently cast off its slough
should be considered as mild-venomed. lO-ii.

Names of the different Species of
Darvi-karaSnakeS Snakes known as Krishna-
Sarpa, Mah 4 -krishna, Krishnodara, ^veta-kapota, Val 4
haka, MahA-Sarpa, ^ankha-pAla, LohitAksha, Gave-
dhuka, Parisarpa Khanda-phana, Kakuda, Padma,
MahA-Padma, Darbha-pushpa, Dadhi-mukha, Pundarika,
Bhrukuti-mukha, Vishkira, PushpAbhikirna, Giri-sarpa,
Riju-sarpa, Svetodara, MahA-s'iras, Alagarda and As'i-
visha belong to the family of DarvikAra snakes. i2

Names of the different Species of
Mandali Snakes: — Snakes kq^wn as Adarsha-
mandala, ^veta-mandala, Rakta-mandala, Chitra-man*
dala, Prishata, Rodhra-pushpa, MilinJaka, Gonasa, Vrid-
dha-gonasa, Panasa, MahA-panasa, Venu patraka, ^is'uka,
Madana, PAlimhira, Pingala, Tantuka, Pusbpa pAndu,
Shadga, Agnika, Vabhru, KashAya, Kalusha, PArAvata,
HastAbharana, Chitraka and Enipada belong to the
family of the Mandali species of snakes. 13.

Names of the different species of

RtCjimsCn Snakes : — Snakes known as Pundk'

7 o8

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. IV.

rika, Rdji-chitra, Angula-rdji, Vindu-rAji, Kardamaka,
Trina soshakas, Sarshapaka, ^veta-hanUjDarbha-pushpa,
Chakraka,Godhumaka, KikvisAda belong to the £s(jim8kn
family of snakes. 14 *

Names of the different specjes of
Nirvisha snakes ; — The Galagoli, Suka-patra,
Ajagara, Divyaka, Varshihika, Pushpa-sakali, Jyoti-
ratha, Kshirika, Pushpaka, Ahi-patdka, AndhAhika,
Gaurdhika and the Vrikshe saya belong to the Nirvisha
(non-venomous) group of snakes, 15.

Names and Origin of the different
species of Vaikaranja snakes The Vai-

karanja snakes are the cross-bred of the above first
three species, viz., Darvi-kara, etc , and are known as
MdkuH, Potagala and Snigdha-raji. Those born of a
Krishna-sarpa father and Gonasi mother or the contrary
are known as Mdkuli, A Rdjila father and Gonasi
mother or the contrary bring forth a (hybrid species
known as the) Potagala, and a Krishna-sarpa father
and a Rdjimati mother or the contrary produce a
Snigdha-rdji snake. According to several authorities,
the poison of a snake of the first of these three hybrid
subfamilies partakes of the nature of that of its father
while that of the remaining two partakes of the nature
of their mother. 16.

Sub«-familie8 of the Vaikaranja

Snakes : — Seven other sub-families arise out of the
three aforesaid families of Vaikaranja snakes and are
known as DivyeUka, Lodhra pushp ika, RAji chitraka,
Potagala, Pushpibhikirna, Darbha pushpa and Vellitaka.
Of these tjie first three species resemble the Rijila and
the last four resemble the Mandali species of snakes.
Thus we have finished describing the eighty different
families of snakes. 17.

Chap. IV,}

KALPA SffHANAM.

709

Characteristic features of Male
and female snakes The eyes, the tongue,

the mouth arid the head of a male serpent are large,
while those oC*a female snake are small. Those which
partakg of both these features and are mild-venomed
and not (easily) irritable, should be considered as
hermaphrodite (Napumsaka). 18.

Now we shall describe the general features of snake-
bites : — ^Why does snake-poison prove instantaneously
fatal like a sharp sword, thunder-bolt or fire? Why is it
that a case of snake bite, if neglected even for a very
short time (Muhurta) at the outset, terminates in the death
of the patient without (even) giving him an opportunity
of speaking ? 19-20

From the general characteristics of the bites, it
should be presumed that they may be divided into three
kinds. We shall, therefore, describe in detail the specific
features of the bites of these three kinds (instead of all
of them separately). It will be both beneficial to the
patient and will leave no room for the confusion of the
physician. From the specific features of these three
kinds of snake bites should be inferred all other snake-
bites. 21.

Specific symptoms of a bite by a
Darvi-kara snake: — a bij^ck colour of the skin,
eyes, nails, tooth, urine and stool and the seat of the
bite, roughness of the body and heaviness of the head,
pain in the joints, weakness of the back, neck and waist,
yawning, shivering, hoarseness of the voice, a rattling
sound in the throat, lassitude, dry eructation, cough and
difficult breathings hiccough, upward course of the bodily
VAyu, pain (S'ula) and consequeat aching of the
limbs, thirst, excessive salivation, foaming in the mouth,
choking of the external orifices of the body (such as

^10 tHE SU8HRUTA SAMfilTA. CCh*p. IV.

the mouth and the nostrils) and peculiar pains (such
as the pricking, piercing pain in the body) due to the
aggravation of the bodily Viyu, — these are the specific
symptoms of a bite by a snake of the Darvi-kara
species. 22 . ,

Specific symptoms of a bite by a
Mandali snake : -Yellowness of the skin, etc.,
longing for cold, a sensation as if the whole interior is
being burnt with scorching vapours, extreme burning
sensation in the body, thirst, a sensation of intoxication,
delirium, fever, haemorrhage through both the upper and
the lower channels, sloughing of the flesh, swelling and
suppuration in the affected part, a jaundiced sight, a
rapid aggravation (of the Pitta) and the presence of
various sorts of pain peculiar to the derangement of the
of the bodily Pitta, — these are the specific symptoms of
a bite by a snake of the Mandali species. 23.

Specific symptoms of a bite by a
RdJImdn snake Whiteness of the skin, etc.,
I^ita-Jvara (catarrhal fever), horripilation, a numbne'^s
of the limbs, a swelling about the seat of the bite, flow-
ing out of dense phlegm (from the mouth), vomiting,
constant itching of the eyes, a swelling of and a rattling
sound in the throat, obstruction of breath, delirium,
peculiar pain and troubles characteristic of the deranged
Kapha in the body,— these are the specific symptoms of
a bite by a snake of the Bl^nuln species. 24.

Specific symptoms of bites by
snakes of different sexes and ages,

etCi S — The sight or the pupils of the eyes of a person
bitten by a male snake, is turned upward. A bite by
a female serpent exhibits such smyptoms as downcast
eyes and appearance of veins on the forehead, while
that by a hermaphrodite (Napumsaka) snake makes the

Ch*p. IV.J

K ALFA AN AM.

711

patient look sidelong. A person bitten by a pregnant
snake produces yellowness of the face and tympanites.
A bite by a newly delivered snake causes ^ula (painX
bloody urination and an attack of tonsilites^^Upa-jihvikA)
in the^ victim. A person bitten by a hungry serpent
craves /or food. A bite by an old serpent is marked by
a slow and mild character of the different stages of
poisoning. A bite by a snake of tender age is marked
by a rapid setting of the characteristic poisonous symp-
toms which are found to be mild in their nature. A
bite by a non-venomous serpent is marked by the
absence of any of the specific symptoms of poisoning.
According to several authorities, a bite by a blind
serpent brings on blindness in its train. An Ajagara
(Boa-constructor) is found to actually swallow up the
body of its prey, to which should be ascribed the death
of the victim in such a case (resulting from the crushing
of bones and strangulation) and not to the effects of any
poison . A person bitten by a snake of instantaneously
fatal poison, drops down dead at the moment of the bite
as if struck by a sharp weapon or by lightning. 25.

Symptoms of the different stages
of poisoning from the bites of a Darvi-
kara Snake The poison of all species of snakes
(snake-bites) produces seven distii^ct stages of transfor-
mation (in the organism of a person bitten by one of
them). The poison of a snake of the Darvi-kara species
affects and vitiates the blood (vascular system) in the first
stage of its course or its physiological transformation in
the body. The blood thereby turns black, imparting its
hue to the complexion and giving rise to a sort of creep-
ing sensation in the body, as if ants have been creeping
over it. In the second stage the poison affects the
principle of flesh, turns it deep black and prodaees

713 THE SUSHRUTA SAMUITA. IV.

swellings and Granthis all over the body. In the third
stage it invades the principle of Med^s (adipose tissues ?)
in the body, giving rise to a «ort of mucous discharge
from the seat of bite, heaviness in the hea(4. perspiration
and numbness of the eyes. In the fourth stage the
poison enters the Koshtha (abdomen?) and aggravates
the Doshas, especially Kapha, producing somnolence,
water brash and a breaking sensation in the joints. In
the fifth stage, it penetrates into the principle of bone,
deranges the Friina (vital principle) and impairs the
Agni (digestive fire), giving rise to hiccough, a burning
sensation in the body and a breaking pain in the joints.
In the sixth stage, it enters the principle of Majjan
(marrow) and greatly deranges the Grahani (the large
intestines y) giving rise to a sense of heaviness of the
limbs, dysentery, pain in the heart and epileptic fits.
In the seventh stage it permeates the principle of
semen, extremely aggravates the vital nerve-governing
V 4 yu known as the Vydna, dislodges the Kapha even
from the minutest capillaries, producing secretions of
lump-like phlegm from the mouth, a breaking pain in
the waist and the back, impaired functions of the mind
and of the body, excessive salivation, perspiration and
a suppression of breath 26.

Different stages of poisoning from
the bites of a Mandali Snake: -in the

first stage of bite by a Handali snake, the poison
affects the blood (vascular system), which being thus
vitiated produces shivering (lit. coldness' followed by a
burning .sensation in the body and pallor (yellowness)
of the skin. In the second stage the poisoti contamin-
ates the flesfh which causes an extreme yellowness of
complexion attended with a burning sensation in the
body and yellowness about the seat of the bite. In the

Chap. IV.J

KALV/i STIIANAM.

713

third stage, the poison affects the principle of Medas
(adipose tissues) producing numbness of the eyes, thirst,
slimy exudation from the wound i^bite) and perspiration
as in the case •of a bite by a Darvi kara snake described
before.^ In the fourth stage, it enters the Koshtha (cavity
of the ^unk) and produces fever. In the fifth stage, it
produces a burning sensation throughout the whole
organism. The sixth and the seventh stages are
identical with those of the foregoing (Darvi-kara
bite). 27.

Different stages of poisoning from
the bite of a RsCjiman Snake The poison
of a Bsijimail snake in the first stage of poisoning,
vitiates the blood whicht is turned pale yellow pro-
ducing the appearance of goose skin of the victim
who looks white. In the second stage, it contaminates
the flesh, giving rise to an extreme paleness of com-
plexion, prostration and swelling of the head. In the
third stage, it affects the principle of Medas, giving rise
to haziness of the eyes, deposit of filthy matter on the
teeth, perspiraion and secretions from the nostrils and
the eyes. In the fourth stage, it enters the Koshtha
(abdominal cavity) and produces paralysis of the nerves
of the neck (Manyd) and heaviness of the head. In
the fifth stage, it gives rise to loss of speech and brings
on S'ita-Jvara (catarrhal fever). The sixth and the
seventh stages of the poisoning are identical with the
preceding kind. 28.

Memorable Verses:— A snake-poison is
found to successively attack the seven Kalis or facio
described before (in Chapter IV. Sdrira Sjhdna', and
gives rise respectively to the seven stages of poisoning.
The interval of time during which a deadly poison leaves
a preceding Kali and, carried forward by the bodily

90

714 the SUSHRUT/. SAMHITA. [Chftp. IV.

Vdyo, attacks the succeeding one, is called its Veg^n**
tara (the intervening stage). 29-30.

Different Stages of poisoning in
cases of lower animals: — A lower animal
bitten by a snake first becomes swelled up an( looks
steadfast and distresse d.In the second stage ofr poison-
ing, salivation, horripilation and pain in the heart set in.
The third stage is marked by pain in the head and
drooping of the neck and of the shoulder. In the
fourth stage, it shivers, gnashas its teeth, drops down
unconscious and expires. Some experts hold that
there are only three stages of poisoning in the case
of a lower animal, the fourth being included there-
in. 31.

Different Stages of poisoning in
cases of birds : — A bird, bitten by a snake, looks
stead-fast and becomes unconscious in the first stage of
poisoning. The second stage is marked by an extreme
agitated condition of the bird and the third stage ends
in death. According to several authorities there is
only a single stage of poisoning in the case of a bird.
A snake-poison cannot penetrate far into the body of a
cat, mungoose, etc. 32-33.

Thus ends the fourth Chapter of the Kalpa Sth^nnin in the Sus'ruta
Samhitd which treats of the specific features of the poison of a snake-
bite.

CHAPTER V.

Now we shall discourse on the Chapter which deals
with t^ medical treatment of snake-bites (Sarpa--

dashta Kaipa-Chikitsitam).

General treatment of Snake-bites

In all cases of snake bites ligatures of cloth, skin, soft
fibre or any other soft article (consecrated with the
proper Mantras), should first of all be bound four
fingers apart above the seat of the bite in the event of
its occurring in the extremities, inasmuch as such a
proceeding would arrest the further (upward) course of
the poison in the body. As an alternative, the seat of
the bite should be incisioned, bled and cauterized where
such a ligature would be found to be impossible. Inci-
sion, cauterization, and sucking (of the poisoned blood
from the seat of the bite) should be highly recommend-
ed in all cases of snake-bites. The cavity of the mouth
should be filled with a linen* before sucking (the blood
from the wound). It would do the man bitten by a
snake an immense good if he could bite the serpent
that had bitten him or failing that, bite a clod of earth
without any loss of time. 2-3.

The seat of the bite by a Mandali snake should not;
however, be cauterized inasmuch as the preponderant
Pittaja character of the poison, aggravated by the appli-
cation of the heat, might lead to its speedy expansion
or coursing in the system. 4.

Mantras : — A physician well-versed in the
Mantras of anti-venomous potency should bind a

* DalknA recommends burnt earth or the earth of an ant-hill or aah
for the purpose of Slling up the mouth before sucking the poisoned blood.

7i6

THE SUSHRUTt\ SAMHITA.

[Chap. V.

ligature of cord consecrated with appropriate Mantras
which would arrest a further spread of the poison.
The Mantras full of occult energy of perfect truth
and divine communion, disclosed by 'the Devarshis
and Brahmarshis of yore, never fail to eliminate the
poison from the system, and hold their own even
in cases of deadliest poisons. Elimination of the poison
with the help of Mantras, full of the energy of Brahmi,
of truth and austerities, is more rapid than under the
effects of drugs. 5. A.

A man, while learning the Mantras, should forego
sexual intercourse, animal diet, wine, honey, etc., should
be self-controlled and clean in body and spirit and
(before learning the Mantras) shall lie on a mattress
of Kus'a-grass. For the successful application of his
newly acquired knowledge (Mantras', he shall devo-
tedly worship the gods with offerings of perfumes,
garlands of flowers, edibles, (animal) oblations, etc., and
with the appropriate Mantras sacred to them as well as
with burnt offerings, since a Mantra chanted by a man
in an unclean spirit or body, or accented or uttered in-
correctly will not take effect. The medicinal compounds
of anti-venomous drugs should also be employed in such
cases. 5 .

Blood-letting in Snake-bite :~A skill-
ful physician should open the veins round the seat of
the bite and bleed the affected part. The veins of the
fore-head and the extremities should be opened in the
case where the poison would be found to have spread
through the whole organism. The poison will be found
to have been fully eliminated with the passage of the
blood (from* the incisioned wound). Hence bleeding
should be resorted to as it is the best remedy in a case
of snake-bite. 6- A.

Chap. V.]

KALPA STHANAM.

717

Plasters of anti-poisonous drugs (Agada) should be
applied all round the seat of the bite after scarifying it,
which should be sprikled with water mixed with (red)
Sandal wood and Us'ira or with their decoction. The
appropr^te Agada compounds (according to the nature
of the bke) should be administered through the medium
of milk, honey and clarified butter, etc. In the absence
of these, the patient should be made to take (a solution
of) the black earth of an ant-hill (dissolved in water).
As an alternative, (a paste of) Koviddra, Sirisha, Arka
and Katabhi should be prescribed for him. The patient
should not be allowed to take oil, the soup of Kulattha-
pulse, wine and Sauviraka. The patient should be
made to vomit with the help of any other suitable
liquid available, since vomiting in most cases leads to
the elimination of the poison from the system. 6.

Specific treatment of the bite by a
hooded (Darvi-kara) Snake : — In the case
of a bite by a hooded (Darvi-kara) snake, bleeding
by opening the veins should be resorted to in the
first stage of poisoning. In the second stage, the
patient should be made to drink an Agada compound
with honey and clarified butter. In the third stage,
anti-poisonous snuffs (Nasya) and collyrium (Anjana)
should be employed. In the fourth stj^e, the patient
should be made to vomit, and medicated Yavdgu
(gruel) mentioned before (in connection with vegetable
poison — ^see Chapter II, para. 26, Kalpasthdna) should
then be given him for drink. In the fifth and the
sixth stages, after the administration of cooling
measures, strong purgatives and emetics should be
administered and the foregoing medicated Yavdgu
(gruel) should be administered to the patient. In the
seventh stage, strong medicated Avapida-snuflfs and

7i8

THE SUSHRUf A SAMHITA.

[Ch»p. V.

strong collyrium of anti-venomous efficacy should be
employed for the purification (purging) of the head.
Superficial incisions like the marks of crow’s feet should
be made on the scalp and the affected flfesh and blood
should be removed. 7. ' «

Specific treatment of bites* by a
Mandali Snake : —in the first stage of a case of
poisoning by the bite of a Mandali snake, the treat-
ment is the same as in the corresponding stage of a
Darvi-kara (cobra) bite. In the second stage, an Agada
compound should be given with honey and clarified
butter and after making the patient vomit the preced-
ing medicated YavAgu (gruel) should be administerd to
him. In the third stage, after the exhibition of drastic
purgatives and brisk emetics, a proper and suitable medi-
cated gruel should be administered. In the fourth and
the fifth stages, the treatment would be the same as in
the corresponding stages of a Darvi-kara (cobra) bite.
In the sixth stage, the drugs of theMadhura (KAkolyAdi)
Gana taken with milk prove efficacious. In the
seventh stage, anti-venomous ^gada compound in
the shape of Avapida ( snuff ) would neutralise the
effects of poison. 8.

Specific treatment of RiCjiman-

blteS : — In the first stage of a case of Bl(jiman-bite,
bleeding should be resorted to and an Agada should be
administered with milk and honey. In the second stage,
emetics and an anti-venomous Agada should be given
to the patient. In the third, fourth and fifth stages, the
treatment should be the same as in the corresponding
stages of a c ise of Darvi-kara-bite. In the sixth stage,
the use of the strongest (anti-venomous) collyrium and in
the seventh stage, that of an Avapida (snui!) of similar
virtue should be prescribed. 9.

Ch«p. V.] KALPA STHANAM. 7 1

">

Contra-indication to biood-iettingr
In cases of Snake-bites in the case of an

infant, an old man, or an enciente woman having been
bitten by a snake, all the foregoing remedies in milder
doses wjth the exception of blood-letting should be em-
ployed according to the requirements of the case. lo.

Dosage of Coiiyrium, etc., to be re-
sorted to in cases of different beasts

and birds S — The quantity of medicated coiiyrium
(Anjana) to be used and blood to be let out in the case
of a goat or a sheep bitten by a snake should be equal
to those laid down in connection with a similar human
patient, while the quantity should be doubled in the
case of a cow or a horse. In the case of a camel or a
buffalo it should be trebled, while in the case of an
elephant, it should be quadrupled. Birds of what
soever species in a similar predicament should, howevei,
be treated only with sprays of cold water and cooling
medicated plasters, ii.

General dosage of medicines In
CSlSeS of Snake-bites in cases of snake-bites,
coiiyrium to the weight of one Mishaka (MAshd) should
be used at a time. The dosage of medicated snuff
(Nasya), potions and emetics being respectively double,
quadruple and eight times thereof. But a wise physi-
cian should treat a case of snake bite with a full regard
to the nature of the country, season, temperament, as
well as to the intensity and the particular stage of
poisoning the case has reached. 12-13.

We have described the anti-venomous measures and
remedies applicable to the different stages of poisoning
(by a snake-bite). We shall now deal with* the specific
treatment of poisoning of either kind according to the
physical symptoms developed in the patient. BIo<>d*

720 THE SUSHRyTA SAMHITA, tChap. V.

letting should be speedily resorted to in the case where
the poisoned limb had become discoloured, rigid, swollen
and painful. Curd, Takra, honey, clarified butter and
meat-soups should then be given to the patient affected
with a poison marked by a preponderance o^ the ag-
gravated Vatyu and by a craving for food. A person
affected with a poison marked by a predominance of
the aggravated Pitta would have thirst, epileptic fits,
perspiration and a burning sensation in the body and
should be treated with shampooing with cold hands
and with cold baths, and cooling medicinal plasters. A
person affected with a poison marked by a predomi-
nance of the aggravated Kapha and bitten in the winter
would have cold salivation, epileptic fits and intoxica-
tion and should be treated with strong emetics. 14.

Specific treatment of the different
Supervening Symptoms : -Purgatives

should be exhibited in the event of the patient being
oppressed with such symptoms as pain and burning
sensation in the abdomen, Adhmdna (tympanites), reten-
tion of urine, stool and flatus, painful urination and
other troubles of the deranged Pitta. Collyrium should
be applied (along the eyelids) in the case of a swelling
of the eyeballs, somnolence, discolouring of the eye,
cloudiness of vision and discoloured appearance of all
objects. The head of the patient should be cleansed
(purged) with medicinal errhines (Nasya) in the case of
pain and a heaviness of the head, lassitude, lock-jaw,
constriction of the throat (Gala-graha) and violent
wryneck (Manyd-stambha). Powders of such drugs of
the S'iro-virechana group as are of strong potency, in the
shape of Prkdhamana Nasya should be blown into the
nostrils of the patient suffering from the effects of poison-
ing in the case wheresuch symptoms as loss of conscious-

Chap. V.] KALPA S^HANAM. 721

ness, upturned eyes and drooping of the neck would set
in. The veins of his forehead and of the extremities
should be instantly opened. When such opening of th^
veins would not f)e attended with (the desired) bleeding ^
superficial incisions in the shape of cow's feet (Kdka-'
pada) shotild be made by an experienced surgeon . on
the scalp of the patient. These failing, the incisioned _
bits of flesh mixed with blood should be removed
and the decoction or powders of a Charma-vriksha
(Bhurja patra) should be applied to the incisions.
Dundubhis (small drums) smeared with anti-venomous
plasters should be sounded around the patient. The
patient thus restored to consciousness should be treated
with both purgatives and emetics. A complete elimi-
nation of the poison from the system is a very difficult
task but it is indespensably necessary, since the least
remnant of the poison may again be aggravated in
course of time and cause lassitude, discolouring of the
complexion, fever, cough, headache, swelling, emaciation,
(^osha), cataract, blindness, catarrh (Pratisyiya), aveV*'
sion to food and nasal catarrh (Pinasa). These diseases
and any other supervening symptoms of poisoning
should be treated according to the injunctions laid down
under their specific heads with a careful consideration
of the Dosha or Doshas involved in each case. 15. :

The ligature should then be removed, the seat of the.
bite incisioned and an Agada plaster should be applied
there, so inasmuch as the poison is found to be lodged in
a condensed form (in the puncture of the fangs) and
is likely to be afterwards aggravated (if not fully
eliminated). 16. "" , ^

Remedy for aggravated Doshas due

to poison: — if the Vitya of the body be found to be
in an aggravated condition, even after a careful elinai?

9 '

722 THE SUSHRUffA SAMHITA. tChap. V.

nation of the poison from the system with the help of
suitable Mantras, measures and medicinal remedies,
it should be pacified and restored to its normal con-
diiton with any Vdyu-pacifying Sneha, kc,, other than
oil. The use of fish, Kulattha-sou'^ and acid^* articles
(fermented rice-gruel, etc.) is forbidden. The aggravated
Flttft in such a case should be remedied with the appli-
cation of a Sneha-Vasti and with the decoction of drugs
prescribed in cases of Piltaja fever, while the deranged
Kapha should be corrected with Kapha-subduing
remedies or with (the decoction of) the drugs of the
Ara^adhidi Gana mixed with honey, or with a diet
consisting of bitter and parching (Ruksha) articles of
food. 17.

A person found to be unconscious from the effects of
a fall pom an uneven ground or from the top of a tree
or precipice as well as a drowned man rescued uncon-
scious, or one in a state of suspended animation owing
to strangulation should be treated according to the
injunctions and with remedies laid down in connection
with the treatment of persons who have become uncon-
scious from the effects of poisoning (mentioned in the
present chapter). 18.

If a deep seated incision (Prachchhita) in, or an
extremely tight fastening fArishta^ around the seat of
the bite, or an application of extremely irritant plasters
or any such other application thereon gives rise to a
local swelling which emits a bad smell and slimy matter
it should be inferred from these that the inherent poison
in such a case has putrefied the flesh of the affected
part which,can be made amenable to medicine only
with the greatest difficulty. 19- A

Sypmtoms of wounds from poison-
ed darts, etc : The poisonous character of

Chap. V.]

KALPA STIiANAM.

a dart or of an arrow with which a person has been
pierced (Digdha-viddha) should be inferred from the
following symptoms, vis,^ flow of black coloured blood
from an immediately inflicted wound, suppuration, a
constant ^burning sensation (in the incidental ulcer) and
sloughing^of black coloured, putrefied and morbid flesh
mixed with a mucopurulent discharge from the wound,
and thirst, vertigo, epileptic fits, a burning sensation in
the body and fever. 19.

Treatment of a poisoned wound:— In

a case where all the above symptoms of poisoning are
present whether in a case of snake-bite or of a bite by
a spider (Lutd), or in a case of being pierced with a
venomed arrow, or in a case of poisoning of any kind,
where putrefaction has set in, the putrid flesh of the
incidental ulcer should be judiciously removed and the
vitiated blood of the locality should be speedily extract-
ed by applying leeches thereto. The system of the
patient should then be cleansed with purgatives and
emetics and the affected part of his body should be
profusely sprayed or washed with the decoction (of the
bark) of a Kshiri-Vriksha A poultice prepared with
the anti venomous drugs of cool potency mixed with
clarified butter (washed a hundred times and) placed
inside the folds of linen should also be applied. In the
event of its being caused by the insertion or introduc-
tion of a bone* of any animal, the bone of which is
poisonous in itself, the measures and remedies laid
down above as well as those prescribed under the treat-
ment of the 'Titta-poisoning'' should be adopted and
used; 20.

•

* DalUna holds that by the word **bone’’ to the text should be un*
derstood all the different sources of poison, fasces, urine, nail, tooth,
bristle, etc., of an animal.

^24 the SUSH^tUTA SAMHITA. tCh*p. V.

Recipe of different Agfadas mahd-

gfada : — The powders of Trivrit, Vi/afyd, Yashti-
tnadhu, the two kinds of Haridrd, Raktd (Manjishthi),
Natendra (Aragvadha), the five kinds of officinal salt
and pasted with honey, should be placed inside

a horn. This Agada or anti-poisonous compound used
as snuff (Nasya), collyrium and anointment acts as a good
neutraliser of poison. It is irresistible in its potency and
is of mighty efficacy. It is called the Mahtigada. 21.

AJitdgada:-A compound made of powdered
V'idanga, Pdthd, Tri-phald, Ajamoda, Hingu, Chakra
(Tagara), Tri katu, the five kinds of officinal salt and
Chitraka, pasted with honey, should be kept for a fort-
night inside a cow’s horn covered with a lid of the same
material. This anti-venomous compound (Agada) Is
known as the Ajitdgada and is efficacious in cases of
both vegetable and animal poisoning. 22.

TsCrkShysCgcada. : — A compound made of the
fine powders of Prapaundarika, Deva-ddru, Mustd, Kdld-
msdrjfd, Katu-rohini, Sthauneyaka, Dhydmaka, Pad-
maia, Punndga, TdltYa, Suvarchikd, Kutannata, Eld,
white Sindhu-vdra, S'aileya, Kushtha, Tagara, Priyangu,
Lodhra, Jala {Bdlaka), Svarna-Gairika, Mdgadka, (red)
Chandana and Saindhava salt, taken in equal parts
and pasted with honey, should be kept inside a horn.
This Agada is called the Tdrkshydgada and is capable
of neutralising the effects even of the poison of a
.Takshaka. 23.

RlShfllbhlCsada : — A compound made of the
powders of Mdnsi, Tri-phald, Murat^, Manjishthd,
Yaskti-madhu, Padmaka, Vidanga, TdliYa, Sugan 4 hik 4 ,
Eld, . Ttak, Kushtha, Tejapatra, Chandana, Bhdrgi,
Patola,KinUU (Apdmdrga), Pdthd, Mrigddam,Karkatikd,
pura (Guggulu), Pdlindi, Ad oka, Kramska and flowers

KALPA^STHANAM. 72$

of Surasi and of Bhalldtaka^ well pasted with honey
and with the bile of a boar (Variha), Godhd, Peacock,
^allaka, cat, Prishata (deer) and of mungoose, should be
preserved inside a horn. This anti-venomous medicine
is called the Bishabhstgada. Snakes never visit the
house of the fortunate and mighty one wherein this
well prepared remedy is preserved. Venomous insects
dare not come within the precincts of such a mansion
and even their poison loses its quickness and fatal
character. The sound of trumpets and drums, smeared
wiih this compound and blown upon and beaten, tend
immediately to destroy the effects of poison. If a
poisoned patient would only look at the banner
plastered with this Agada the poison from his system
would be thereby eliminated. 24

Sanjivana Ag'a€ia:-A compound made of
the powders of Ldkshd, Harenu, Nalada, Priyangu, the
two kinds of S*igru, Yashti-madku^ Priihvikd (Eld) and
Haridrd, pasted with honey and clarified butter, should
be preserved inside a cow’s horn and covered in the
above manner. This anti venomous medicine is called
the Sanjivana Agada and should be used as snuflf,
collyrium and drink. It is capable of restoring even a
man apparently dead (by poisoning) to life. 25.

Darvl-kara* RsCjlIa-Vishahara-Aga-

da: — An Agada consisting of the powders of S’hshmd-
taka, Katphala, Mdtulunga, S'vetd, Girikvd, Kinihi, sugar
and Tanduliya should be regarded as the best remedy in
cases of poisoning by Darvi Icara or Rdjila-bites. 26.

Mandll-Visliahara Agada: -One part
t&cho{ DrdkshdfSugandhd, Naga vriitikd* and Samangd

* Dailana says that in place of **Sugandhd Na^-vrittikd*’ some read
^^Sugandbi Naga-mrittik^” which means ‘Hhe sareet-scented earth of the
moonlain” known to be possessed of anlUpoisonous virtues.

726 THE SOSHRUTA SAMHITA. [Chap. V.

(Vardha krdnti), two parts each of the following drugs,
viz., — leaves of SurasA, Vilva, Kapittha, and of Dddima,
and half a part each of the following, viz. : (leaves of)
black Sindhuvdra, Amkotha and Gairikq, should be
powdered together and mixed with honey. This anti-
venomous medicine (Agada) is highly efficacious es-
pecially in the case of poisoning by a Mandali bite. 27.

Vain^a>tvag£(di Agada:— An Agada should
be prepared with the scrapings of green bamboo
(Vams'a-tvak), Amalaka. Kapittha, Tri-katu, Haimavati,
Kushtha, Karanja-sttis, Tagara and S'irisha flowers,
pasted with cow’s bile. Used as a plaster, snuff or
collyrium, it destroys the poison of a spider, mouse,
serpent or any other (poisonous) insect. Used as a
collyrium (over the eye-lids), as a plaster over the
umbilical region, or as a Varti (plug), it removes the
obstruction of stool, urine and Vdyu (flatus, e'c.), or of a
foetus in the womb. Used as a snuff* or a collyrium, its
curative potency is manifest even in such dangerous
eye-diseases as Kicha, Arman, Kotha, Patala and
Pushpa. 28.

Pancha-^irisha Agada:— A potion con

sisting of a decoction cf the roots, flowers, bark, seeds
and sprouts of a S'irisha tree, taken with honey,
the five officinal kinds of salt and a profuse quantity
of powdered Trikutu, proves speedily efficacious in a
case of poisoning by an insect-bite. 29.

Sarva-KlCmika Agada : — An Agada pre-
pared with Kushtha, Tri-katu, Ddrvi, Madhuka (flower),
the two kinds of salt (Saindhava and Sfluvarchala),
Mdlati (flower), Ndgapushpa and all the drugs of the
Madhura (KdkolyAdi) group and pasted with the juice
of Kapittha and mixed with honey and sugar^estroys all
sorts of poison specially that of a mouse (Mushika). 30.

ch«p. V.] kalpa-sIhanam. 727

Ekasara Agada The following, "drugs viz.,
Somardji seeds and Somardji flowers,* Katdbhiy Sindhu-
vdra, Choraka, Varuna, Kushtha, Sarpa-gandhd, Saptald,
Punamavd, flo’wers of S'irisha, Aragvada and of Arka,
S'ydmd, Ambashthd, Vidanga, Antra, As'mantaka, black
earth and Kuravaka comprise the Ekasara Ag ada..
These should be applied singlyt or in combination of
two or three to destroy the effects of poison, 31.

Thu- ends the fifth Chapter of the Kalpa-S^thdna in the Sas'ruta
Samhild which deals with the medical treatment of snake-bites.

• Some explain to mean ‘Somaraji, Phala (Madana)

and Pasbpa (Niga-kes'ara).’

t Some explain to mean that the Agada should

be used “once, twice or thrice” according to the requirements in each
care.

CHAPTER VI.

Now we shall discourse on cases of rat-p«ison-

ing (Mushika-kalpa). i.

Different varieties of rats (M. Text) :

— Now hear me enumerate the names of the different
families of Mushika (rats) briefly referred to before as
having their poison in their semen, classified according
to their different names, features and the medical treat-
ment to be employed for the neutralisation of the effects
of their poison. They are eighteen in number nd are
named as follows Ldlana, Putraka, Krishna, Hamsira,
Chikkira, Chhuchhundara, Alasa, Kashdya-da^ana,
Kulinga, Ajita, Chapala, Kapila, Kokila, Aruna, Mahd-
Krishna, S'veta, Mahd-Kapila and Kapotdbha. 2 ^

Generai symptoms of rat-poisonx^

ins' : — The blood of any part of a human body
coming in contact with the semen of any of these
different classes of rats or scratched with their nails,
teeth, etc., previously besmeared with their semen
(S'ukra) is vitiated and gives rise to the appearance of
Granthi (nodes), swelling, Mandala, eruptions of circular
erythematous patches on the skin, Karnikd (eruptions
of patches resembling the calycle of a lotus flower),
pimples (pustules) violent and acute erysipelas, Kitima
(keloid tumours), breaking pain in the joints, extreme
pain (in the body), fever, violent epileptic fits, anemia,
aversion to food, difficult breathing, shivering and
horripilation^ 2.

Specific symptoms and treatment
of rat" poison I nn^ -The general symptoms of
rat-poisoning have been briefly described above^,. Now

Chap, yi,J

KALPA SpUNAM. 729

hear me specially describe the symptoms of the bites
by the different families of rats (Mushika). A bite by
a rat of the L^an a class is marked by a copious flow
of saliva, hic-cough and vomiting. The patient in
such case should be made to use a lambative made
of the roots of Tanduliyaka mixed with honey. A bite
by a rat of the Fntraka family is marked by a sense
of physical langour, yellowness of the complexion and
the appearance of nodular glands (Granthi) resembling
young rats. A compound of S’irisha and Ingudi pasted
together and mixed with honey should be given to
the patient as a lambative in this case. A bite by a rat
of the Erishiiif (black) class in foul weather and more
especially on a cloudy day is characterised by the
vomiting of blood. A pasted compound of S'irisha
fruit and Kushtha with the washings of the ashes of
Kim^uka (flower) should be given to the patient in
such a case. 3-A.

A bite by a rat of the Hansira species brings on an
aversion to food, yawning and horripilation. In such
a case emetics should be first given to the patient who
should be then made to drink a decoction of the drugs
of the Aragvadhddi group. A bite by a rat of the
Ohikkira class is accompanied by headache, swelling,
hic-cough and vomiting. In such a case an emetic con-
sisting of the decoction of Jdlini, Madana fruit and
Amkotka should be prescribed. A bite by a venomous
Mushika of the Ckhnclicliltlindara (mole) species gives
rise to diarrhoea (watery stool), numbness of the muscles
of the neck and yawning. In this case an alkaline
compound prepared of the ashes of the dry plants of
barley (Yava-ndla), Rishahhi (Atma-guptd) and Vrihati
should be prescribed*. 3*6.

* DiffarSOt r6adlllS«-*A bite by • Mushika of the Chhucbehhundata

92

7S0 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. tChap. VI,

A bite by a rat of the Alasa species is characterised
by a numbness of the neck, an upward coursing of the
VAyu, fever and pain at the seat of the bite. In this
case the patient should be made to take ^the Mahligada

with honey and clarified butter as a lambative. A bite

0

by a rat of the Eashdya-dasana species is marked by
somnolence or excessive sleep, atrophy (Sosha) of the
heart and a general emaciation of the body. In such a
case a lambative made of the bark, pith and fruit (seeds)
of S’irisha mixed with honey should be given to the
patient to lick. A bite by a rat of the Kulinga species
is marked by pain, swelling and stripe-like marks about
the seat of the bite, the remedy consisting in a lambative
made of the two kinds of Sahd (Mudga-parni and Mdsha-
parni) and Sindhuvdra pasted together and mixed with
honey. 3-C.

A bite by a rat of the Ajita species is characterised
by vomiting, epileptic fits (fainting), a catching pain
at the heart (Hrid-graha) and blackness of the eyes.
The patient in such a case should be made to lick a
compound made of (the roots of) Pdlindi (Trivrit)
pasted with the milky juice of Snuhi and mixed with
honey. A bite by a rat of the Chapala species is
marked by vomiting, epileptic fits and thirst, and the
remedy in this case should consist of a lambative
made of Tri-pkald, Bkadra-kdshtha (Deva-ddru) and
Jaiitndnsi (D.R.— Yava) pasted together and mixed with
honey, A bite by a rat of the Eapila species is follow-
ed by Kotha (putrefaction) of the bite, appearance

clan produces thisst, vonuting, fever, weakness, numbness ot the mnseles
of the neck, m{Uing, abscess on the back. Ion of the tense of smell and
Visttchiki. A compound of Chavya, Harttaki, S'untbl, Vidai^ Ffppal!,
S'vetaka'Seedt and the ashes of (the plants oO Viihati poundad tagathM
and ndaed srith honey diottld be prescribed in this case.— Qayadisst

Clap. VL] KALPA SSfHANAM. 731

of nodular glands (Granthi) and fever. The remedy
consists in the use of a lambative made of Tri-phald,
S'vetd* (white AparAjitA) and Punamavd pasted
together and Jicked with honey. A bite by a rat of
the.So dla species is attended with high fever, an in-
tolerably burning sensation in the body and the appear-
ance of nodular glands (Granthi). Clarified butter duly
cooked with the decoction of Varshdbhu and Nilini
(Indigo plants) should be administered in such a case. 3-D.

A bite by a rat of the Aruna (vermilion coloured)
species is marked by an extremely aggravated condi-
tion of the bodily VAyu and the symptoms peculiar to
it. A bite by a rat of the Mahl^krislina (extremely
black) species leads to an aggravated condition of the
Pitta, while a bite by one of the Mahll-ffveta class
ushers in an aggravation of the bodily Kapha. The
blood of a person is vitiated by the bite of a rat of the
MahA-kapila family, while the bite by one of the
Sapota species leads to the derangement of all the
four principles viz., the three Doshas (Viyu, Pitta and
Kapha) as well as of the blood. Their bites are accom-
panied by a violent swelling of the affected locality, the
appearance of nodular glands (Granthi) and such other
erythematous and eczematous growths as Mandala,
Karniki and Pidakd (Pustules). 3-E.

Three Prastha measuresf each of clarified butter,
curd and milk should be duly cooked with the duly
prepared decoction of Karanja, Aragvadka, Tri-katu,

* Some explains “S'feti Punantavi” to mean “white PunainavA”
Gayadisa reads “S'reshthi” in place of “S'vet 4 * in which case also the
white species of Fttnarnav^ is evidently meant.

t According to Dallana, the recipe of this Ghrita is. as follows
One Prutha each of clarified batter, card and milk, two Palas each of
etc., and rixteen seers of water to be boiled down to fonr
seers, the drugs of the Kalka we^lhing one seer in all.

THE SUSHRQTA SAMHITA.. lCI»p. VI

Vrikati, Ams'umati and Sthird (KdkoH), and with
Trivrit, Tila, ^»»f*/rf(Gulancha), Chakra, Sarpa-gandhd,
(black) earth* (of an ant-hill) and the barks of KapitOia
and Dddima as Kalka. The whole should be duly cooked
over a gentle fire. The Ghrita thus prepare^ would
destroy the poison of the five kinds of rats viz^, Aruna,
etc. As an alternative, clarified butter duly cooked
with the expressed juice of Kdkddani and Kdka-mdchi
should be given to the patient in such cases. A wise
physician shall have recourse to bleeding or venesection
in these cases and the system of the patient should be
cleansed by purgatives and emetics. 3.

General Treatment: —The general measures
to be adopted in the case of a bite by a rat of what-
soever class are as follows The seat of the bite
should be first cauterized (with boiling clarified butter),
and blood-letting should be resorted to (by opening
the veins of the patient). The seat of the bite should
then be marked with superficial incisions and a plaster of
S'irisha, Rajani, Kushtha, Kumkuma and Amrita (Gula-
ncha) should be applied. The patient should be made
to vomit with the decoction of Jdlini or with that of
Sukdkhyd and Amkotha boiled together. The (powdered)
roots of S'ukdkhya, Koddvati, Madana fruits and Deva-
ddli fruits should be administered with curd for the
elimination by vomiting the (internal) poison (if any).
The patient should be made to take (with curd) the
compound consisting of Phala (Madana), Vacha, Deva-
ddli and Kushtha pasted with the urine of a cow (as
an emetic). This remedy neutralises the effects of the
poison of all species of venomous rats. 4.-A.

A compound composed of Trivrit, Danti and TV/-
* la place of wme tteadt

while Jejjete reads

Obtp. VL]

KALPA SgrHANAM.

733

phald should (if necessary) be employed as a purgative
(in such a case). A compound prepared with the pith
of Sirisha and the pulp of its fruits should be used (if
necessary) as an errhine (S'iro-virechana). The watery
secretipn of fresh cow-dung mixed with a profuse
quantity of (powdered) Tri-katu should be used as
collyrium. The patient should be made to lick a
compound prepared with the expressed juice of the fruits
of Kapitiha and with honey and the serous secretion of
(fresh) cow-dung, or a lambative made of Rasdnjana,
Haridrd, Indra^yava, Katuki and Ati-vishd with honey
should be given to the patient in the morning. A potion
of medicated clarified butter duly cooked with the roots
of Tanduliyaka should be given to the patient for drink.
As an alternative, clarified butter, duly cooked with
the five parts (W-s., roots, bark, fruits, leaves and
flowers) of a Kapittha tree or with the roots of Ashphotd^
should be prescribed, 4.

The poison of a venomous Mushika (rat or mole)
even though (apparently) eliminated from the system
may sometimes still be aggravated in cloudy days or in
foul weather. In such a case, all the above measures as
well as the remedies laid down under the treatment of
Buslli-viaha should be resorted to. The round protrud-
ing edges (Karniki) of an ulcer, incidental to a rat-bite,
whether benumbed or painful, should be excised (D.R. —
made to suppurate) and should be treated with purify-
ing or cleasing remedies according to the deranged
Dosha or Doshas involved in each case. 5-6.

Causes of Rabies: — The bodily V^yu in
conjunction with the (aggravated) Kapha of a jackal,
dog, wolf, bear, tiger or of any other sifch ferocious
beast affects the sensory nerves of these animals
and overwhelms their instinct and consciousness. The

7H

THE SUSHRUTf SAMHITA. *

[ai»p. VI.

tails, jaw-bones (D. R. — neck) and shoulders of such
infurated animals naturally droop down, attended with
a copious flow of saliva from their mouths. The beasts
in such a state of frenzy, blinded and deafened by rage,
roam about and bite each other. 7- A. *

Symptoms of Hydrophobia The limb

or part of the body of a person bitten by such a rabid
and (consequently) poisonous animal loses its sensi-
bility of touch, and a copious flow of dark sooty blood
is emitted from the seat of the bite. The patient in
such a case generally exhibits all the symptoms which
mark a case of poisoning by a venomed arrow. 7-B.

Prognosis : —A person bitten by a rabid ani-
mal barks and howls like the animal by which he is
bitten, imitates it in many other ways and, bereft of
the specific functions and faculties of a human subject,
ultimately dies. If a person, bitten by a rabid animal,
sees its (imaginary; image reflected in water or in a
mirror, he should be deemed to have reached an unfavour-
able stage of the disease. 7-C.

Symptoms of Jala-tretsa if the patient
in such a case becomes exceedingly frightened at the
sight or mention of the very name of water, he
should be understood to have been afflicted with
Jala-tn(sa (Hydrophobia) and be deemed to have been
doomed. Such a case of Jala-trdsa (water-scare) even in
an unbitten person or in a healthy person, if frightened
(by such a scare), whether waking or in sleep, should
be regarded as a fatal symptom. 7.

Treatment : —In the case of a bite by a rabid
animal, the seat of the bite should be profusely bled
(by pressing 'it) so as to let out all the (vitiated) blood.
It should then be cauterized with (boiling) clarified
butter amil pasted with any of the aforesaid Agada,

Ch«p. VI.]

KALPA STHANAH.

735

or the patient should be made to drink a potion of
matured clarified butter. Clarified butter mixed with the
milky exudation of an Arka plant, as well as a com-
pound of white Punamavd* and Dhuttura\ should be
prescribed for the patient as an errhine. 8-A,

Treatment of bites by rabid dogs

A compound of pasted sesamum mixed with its oil,
treacle and the (milky) juice of a Rupikd plant eliminates
the poison of a rabid dog (Alarka) from the system as a
gale of wind drives a pack of clouds before it. A quan-
tity of rice, two Tolds (one Karsha) in weight of the roots
of S'ara-pumkha and half a Karsha weight of Dhuttura
(roots) should be pasted together with the washings of
rice. The paste should be covered with (seven) Dhus-
tura leaves and baked (on the fire) in the shape of an
Apupaka (cake). The cake thus prepared should be
given, at the proper time of taking a medicine, to a person
bitten by a rabid dog for a complete nullification of the
poison. But the use of these cakes is attended with
certain other troubles at the time of their digestion and
these troubles become subdued by a retiring to in a dry
but cool chamber away from water. The patient (after
the subsidence of the troubles) should be bathed the
next day and a diet of boiled S^dli or Shashtika rice
with tepid milkj: should be prescribe^ for him. On the
third and on the fifth day, the aforesaid anti-vencmous
compound should again be administered in half doses to
the patient for the elimination of the poison. 8-B.

* Some explain **S'vetd Punarnavi’’ to mean *‘white Punarnav4'\ bat
others explain it to mean **S'vet^ (Katabhi) and Punarnav4’\

t Some commentators prescribe the roots of Dhusiura to be taken»
white others hold that its fruits should be used.

t Dallana says that in place of Gayadfba reads

that is to say, the diet should be tahen with clarified butleit

736

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

o

[Ch»p, VI.

The person in whom the poison (of a rabid dog or
jackal, etc.) is spontaneously aggravated has no chance
of recovery. Hence the poison should be artificially
aggravated (and then remedied) before reaihing that stage
of aggravation. The patient should be bathed*' at the
crossing of roads or on the bank of a river with'pitcher-
fuls of water containing gems and medicinal drugs and
consecrated with the appropriate Mantra. Offerings of
cooked and uncooked meat, cakes and levigated pastes
of sesamum as well as garlands of flowers of variegated
colours should be made to the god (and the following
Mantra should be recited). “O thou Yaksha, lord of
Alarka, who art also the lord of all dogs, speedily makest
me free from the poison of the rabid dog that has bitten
me.” Strong purgatives and emetics should be ad-
ministered to the patient after having bathed him in the
above manner, since the poison in a patient with an un-
cleansed organism may sometimes be aggravated, even
after the healing of the incidental ulcer. 8.

The poison of a (rabid) dog, etc., lies in the teeth
and tends to aggravate the Pitta and the VAyu and
hence the patient bitten by such animals is found to
imitate their cries and nature. A patient afflicted with
such poison cannot be saved even with the greatest care.
The seat of a scratch made by the nails or teeth of any
of those animals should be rubbed (and the poisoned
blood should be let out). It should then be sprinkled
over with tepid oil, since the poison in this case
aggravates only the Vdyu of the system. 9-10

Tbii (eading of Gayaddn seema to be the better one, aa the uae of
clarified batter aueb caaea ia aupported by the coatom of out country.

Thua enda the rixth Chapter of the Kalpa-athdna in the Su'trnta
Samhitd which dealt with the aymptoma and treatment! of rat-poiaon.

CHAPTER VII.

Nov^ we shall discourse on the Chapter which treats of
the sounds of a (medicated) drum, etc., possessed of anti-
venomous virtues (Dundhubhi-Svaniya). i.

KshsCr^fg'ada: — The woods of Dhava, As'va-
iama, Tznis'a^ Folds' Pichu-marda^ Pdtali^ Pdribkad-
raka^ Amra^ V dumbara^ Karahdtakoy Afyuna, Kakubha^
Satja, Kapitana^ S' leshmdtaka^ Amkotha^ Amalaka,
Pragraha^ Kutaja^ S' ami, Kapittha, As' vmantaka, Arka,
Chira-vilva, Mahd-vrikska, Arushkara, Aralu^ Madhuka^
AfadAu^s^igru, S'dka, Goji, Murvd, Tilvaka, Ikshuraka,
Gopa-ghantd and ArimeddP should be taken (in equal
parts) and burnt down to ashes. The said ashes
should be dissolved in the urine of a cow and filtered
(through a piece of linen) in the manner of preparing
an alkali. This alkaline solution should then be duly-
boiled (till it would assume a transparent blood red
hue and slimy character), and the powders of Pippali-
mula, Tanduliyaka^ Vatdnga, Chochaka, Manjishthd^
Karanja, Hasti-Pippali, Maricha, Utpala, Sdrivd,
Vidanga, Griho'dhuma (soot of a rootti), Anantd, Soma^
Saraldf Vdhlika, Guhd, Kos^dtnra, white mustard seeds,
Varuna^ Lavana, Plaksha, Nichula, Vardhamdna, Van-
jula^ Putra-dreni, Sapta-pama, Dandaka, Ela-vdluka^
Ndga-danii^ Ativiskd^ Abhayd^ Bhadra^ddru Kushtha,

* Tho plants of thm sbonld be taken in full ue. witjji their leaves,

toots, branches, etc. The prepared ash should be dissolved in cow’s urine
weighing times the combined weight of the ashes. Dallana saya that
Gayadisa does not read * **Slrisha, Pichomarda, Kakubha, Arushkara and^
M.adha<fS'igra” in the list.

93

738 THE SUSHROTA SAMHITA. [Chap. VII.

Haridrd and Vachd together with pulverised (dead)
iron (taken in equal parts)* should be added to it Then
it should be boiled again and preserved in an iron
pitcher after it had been duly prepared in the manner
of an alkali. 2. *

Metrical Texts :—Dundhubhis (drums), ban-
ners and the gate ways of houses should be smeared with
this alkaline preparation, hearing the sound as well as
the sight and touch whereof would lead to the complete
elimination of the poison from the system of the
patient This medicine is known as the Kshsfrsf*
gada which is equally efficacious in cases of S'arkard
(gravel), stones in the bladder, Haemorrhoids, VAta-
Gulma, cough, S'ula (colic), Udara (abdominal dropsy),
indigestion, Grahani, extreme aversion to food, general
oedema of the body and violent asthma. The remedy
is applicable in all cases of poisoning of whatsoever
type and acts as a sure antidote to the poison of the
serpents headed by the dreadful Takshaka. 3.

Kaly^naka Ghrlta:— An adequate quantity
of clarified better duly cooked with (the decoction and
Kalka of) the drugs known as Vidanga^ Tri-phald,
Danti^ Bhadra-ddru^ Harenu^ Tdlida patra, Manjishthd,
Kedara^ Utpala^ Padmaka^ Dddima, Mdlati flower,
the two kinds of Rajani, the two kinds of Sdrivdy
the two kinds of Sthird, Priyangu, Tagara^ Kushtha^
the two kinds of Vrihati^ Ela vdluka^ sandal wood and

* The total weight of these powders to be added should be one
thirtieth part of the prepared alkaline solution. Dallana says that
GayadAsa eout^ts only thirty and he does not read **Maricha, Soma» Guhi,

Lavana> Chakra and Ala in the text. We do not» however^ find Chakra
and Ala in the text. {We havci on the other hand, the names of some more
drugs which are believed to be mere interpolations from the marginal notes
of some manuscripts.

Ch«p. VII.] KALPA STHANAM. 739

Gavdkshi, is known as the Ealyifnaka Ghrita. The
curative efficacy of this Ghrita extends to cases of
poisoning, Grahdpasmira (hysteria due to the influence
of malignant stars and planets), Jaundice, Gara dosha
(slow chemical poisoning), asthma, sluggishness of
appetite, fever and cough. It is commended to con-
sumptive patients, as well as to men suffering from
scantiness of semen and women afflicted with
sterility. 4.

Amrlta Ghrita An adequate quantity of
clarified butter duly cooked with the seeds of Apdmirga
and of the two kinds of S'vetA, S^irisha, and KdkamdcJii
(previously) pasted with the urine of a cow is known
as the Amrita-Ghrita. It embraces within the pale of
its therapeutic virtues all cases of poisoning and is
capable of bringing back an apparently dead man to
life. 5.

MahsC-sugandhi Agada The follow-
ing drugs viz., (red) sandal wood, Aguru, Kushtka,
Tagara, Tila~pamika, Prapaundarika, Nalada, Sarala,
Deva-ddru, Bhadra-dri (white sandal wood), Yava-
phald, Bhdrgi, Ntli, Sugandhikd, Kdleyaka, Padmaka,
Madhuka, Ndgara, Jatd (a variety of JatA-mAmsi),
Punndga, Eld, Elavdlu, Gairika, Dhydtnaka, Bald,
Toya, Satjarasa, Mdtnsi, Sitapushpd, Hannukd, Tdlida~
pair a, small Eld, Priyangu, Kutaiiiiata, S' dila pushpa,
S'aileya, Patra, Kdldnu-Sdrivd, Tri-katu, S'ita-s'iva,*
Kdstnarya, Katu-rohini, Somardji\Ati-visha, Prithvikd,
Indra-vdruni, Us'ira, Varuna, Musta, Nakha, Kustum-
buru, the two kinds of S'vetd, f the two kinds of

* DilIUm explain! “S'ita-s'iva” to mean “camphot”. Others explain
it to mean “S'aml”

t The text hat “S'veUi” in the dual nombet meaning the two kinds of
“S'veti’ Vtk; white Vaeha and white Apar^jiti. Daiiana gives only

740 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. ^ [Ch*P- VIl.

Haridtd, Sthauneya, Ldkshd, the five kinds of officinal
salts, Kumuda, Utpala, Padtna, flower of Aria, flowers
and fruits of Champaka, Adoka, Sumanas, Tilaka
(sesamum), Pdtali, Sdlmali, S'elu, S'irisha, Surasi,
Trina-s'uli and of Sindhuvdra, flowers of Dhava, As'va-
kama, and Tinisa, Guggula, Kumkuma, Vimbi, ^arpd-
kshi and Gandha-Ndkuli should be carefully collected
and pasted with honey, clarified butter and the bile
of a cow and should be kept inside a horn (or a
receptacle made of that material). This medicine, which
is the best of all anti-venomous medicinal preparations,
would rescue from the jaws of death, a patient even
with drooped down shoulders and sunk and upturned
eyes. It is capable of destroying in a moment the
irresistible fire like poison even of the dreadful infuriated
Visuki, the king of serpents. This Agada which con-
sists of eighty-five ingredients is calleJ the Mahii-
sagandhi Agada and is the most potent of all anti-
venomous remedies. It should constantly be in the
possession of a king. Smeared with the present
preparation he is sure to be a favourite with all his
subjects and to shine with his sovereign majesty even
amidst his enemies. 6.

A physician well versed in the natures of poisons,
should adopt all remedial measures excepting the heat-
engendering ones in all types of poisoning. But this
rule would not be applicable in a case of insect- bite in-
asmuch as the poison of an insect is cool in its potency
and hence would be aggravated by the application of
any cooling measures. 7.

*‘Vachf ' a* Its ^;nonym, which shows he takes the word in the singular
number and not in the dual as in the printed text. This appears to be
tha correct reading, for otherwise the pumber of the drugs in the list would
he more than eighty-five.

Chap, vn.]

3

KALPA STHANAM.

741

Rules of diet and conduct Whole-
some diets which have been enumerated in the chapter
on Anup4na-Vidhi, should be prescribed in cases of
poisoning after .a due consideration of the nature, habit,
and tei^erament of the patient who should be warned
against ,the use of unwholesome ones. The use of
Fhinita (liquid treacle), S'igru, Sauvira^ the taking of
meals before the digestion of the previous ones, the
group of Nava-DhAnya (unmatured corn), wine, sesa-
mum, oil and Kulattha-^\x\^^, sleep in the day time,
sexual intercourse, physical exercise, fits of anger and
exposure to the sun are forbidden in the case of a
poisoned patient. 8.

Symptoms of elimination of poison :

— 'The restoration of the deranged Doshas and of the
vital principles (DhAtus of the body) to their normal
state, a natural craving for food and drink, the normal
colour and condition of the tongue and of the urine
and the normal state and functions of the mind and of
the sense-organs in a poisoned patient would indicate
the full and complete elimination of the poison from
his system. 9.

Thus ends the Seventh Chapter of the Kalpa-Sthina in the Sus'ruta
Samhitd which treats of the sounds of medicated drums, etc.

CHAPTER Vni.

Now we shall discourse on insects, i.e. the ny^asures,
etc. to be adopted in cases of insect-bite, etc. (KitSl*"

Kalpa). I.

Various kinds of worms and insects (Kita) germi-
nate from the semen, fecal matter, urine, putrid eggs
and putrid carcases of serpents which are marked by
Vdtaja, Pittaja (Agneya) and Kaphaja (Ambuja) tem-
peraments. The poisons of these vermin which are
nothing but insects (Kita), are apt to be most dangerous
in the long run on account of their being acted upon by
the Doshas and may be divided into four* groups. *2.

Insects of VsCtaJa Temperament

The eighteen classes of insects known as the Kumbhi-
nasa, Tundikeri, ^ringi, ^ata-Kuliraka, Uchchitinga,
Agnindma, Chichchitioga, Mayurikd, Avartaka,
Urabhra, Sarikd-mukha, Vaidala, Sardva-kurda,
Abhirdji, Parusha, Chitra-sirshaka, Sata bdhu and
the Rakta-rdji are possessed of a Vaftaja temperament
and their poison tends to aggravate and derange the
bodily Viyu and produce the specific diseases due
thereto. 3.

Insects of Pittaja Temperament:—

The twenty-four families of insects known as the Kaun-
dilyaka, Kanabhaka, Varati (asp), Patra-vrischika,
Vindsikd, Brahmanikd, Vindula (D.R.- Viluta), Bhramara,

* Dallana says that the four groups are to be determined according
to the origin ol the insects fiom the semen, etc. of a Darvi-kara, Mandali,
Rijila, or a Vaikaranja serpent. To us it seems, however, that the groups
should be Vdtaja, Pittaja, Kaphaja and Sannipdtaja.

Chap. Vin.]

KALPA STHANAM.

745

Vihyaki, Pichcbita, Kumbhi, Varchah-kita, Arime-
daka, Padma-kita, Dundubhika, Makara, ^ata-p<Waka
(centipede), Panchdlaka, PSka-matsya, Krishna-tunda,
Gardabhi, Klita, Krimi-Sardi and the Utkles'aka are of
a fiery i. e. Pittaja temperament and their poison tends
to derange and aggravate the bodily Pitta and produce
the specific diseases due to the derangement of that
Dosha. 4.

Insects of Kaphaja Temperament :

—The thirteen families of insects known as the Vis’vam-
bhara, Pancha-s'ukla, Pancha-krishna, Kokila, Saireyaka
Prachalaka, Valabha, Kitima, Suchi-mukhi, Krishna-
Godhd, KashAya-VAsika, Kita-gardabhaka and the
Trotaka are possessed of Saumya i.e., Kaphaja tempera-
ment, and their poison aggravates and deranges the
Kapha and produces the specific diseases which owe
their origin to the deranged condition of that Dosha. 5.

insects of SannipsCtika Tempera-
ment : — The twelve kinds of insects known as the
Tungi-n4sa, Vichilaka, Tdlaka, VAhaka, Koshthdgiri,
Krimikara, Mandala-Puchchhaka, Tunga-ndbha, Sarsha-
pika, Avalguli, Sambuka and the Angi-kita are danger-
ously fatal in their bite. A person or an animal bitten
by any of these dangerous insects exhibits stages and
symptoms similar to those of a case of a snake-bite and
their poison tends to derange and aggravate the three
Doshas (Slfnilipittika) of the body and produce the
specific symptoms thereof. 6-A.

Symptoms of their bite:— The seat of
the bite seems as if on fire or being burnt with strong
alkali and is characterised by a red, yellow, white or
Vermillion colour. The symptoms which *are developed
in the etitire course of the poisoning (or are found to
supervene) in cases of their bites are fever, breaking

744 the SUSHRtlTA SAMHITA.* [Ch»p. Vlll,

and aching pain (in the limbs), horripilation, vomiting,
thirst, a burning sensation in the body, loss of conscious-
ness, yawning, shaking of the limbs, difficult breath-
ing, hic-cough, (sometimes) a burning ‘and (at others)
a cold sensation (in the seat of the bite), eruption of
pustules, swelling (in the affected locality), apjXiarance
of nodular glands (Granthi), circular erythematous
patches (Mandala) on the skin, ring-worm. Erysipelas,
Kitima (Keloid Tumour) and KamikA (round about
the seat of the bite) as well as any other symptoms
peculiar to the Dosha aggravated by the poison of each
species. 6.

The other characteristic features of the poison of
these (fatal and strong-poisoned) insects should be
speedily ascertained by comparing the symptoms of
aggravation of the Dushi-Visha (consequent thereon)
and by examining the effets of the application of
different anti-poisonous plasters as well. 7.

These are the characteristic features of sharp-poison-
ed insects ; now hear me describe those of the mild-
poisoned ones. The symptoms which are manifest in
the case of a bite by such an insect are salivation
(Praseka), an aversion to food, vomiting, heaviness in
the head, a slight sensation of cold and the appearance of
pustules and urticaria according to the deranged Dosha
aggravated by the species of the biting insect. 8.

The pulverised bodies of these insects possessing, aS
they do, the characteri.stic features of Dushi-Visha or
enfeebled poison (ly^^g inherent in a human system) is
turned into a Qara or chemical (combinative or. resultant)
poison, if administered (internally) with an^ medicine
or externally with any plaster^ 9.

We shall henceforth describe the distinctive traits
of one insect from another of the same species according

Chap. VIIL] ^ KALPA STHANAM. 745

to the classification and general characteristics and
incurability of their bi es. 9.

The Kanabha class of Insects :~The

Trikaritaka, Kuni, Hasti-kaksha and the Apardjita are
the four kinds of insects that belong to the Kanabha
group^and are extremely painful in their bites giving
rise to swelling, aching in the limbs, heaviness of the
body and a black aspect at the seat of the bite. 10.

The Gaudheyaka class of Insects:—

The five kinds of insects known as the Prati-surya,
Pinga-bhdsa, Bahu-varna, Mahd-siras and the Nirupama
belong to the Gaudheyaka class. The stages and the
symptoms of a bite by an insect of this group are often
identical with (or mistaken for) a snake bite and are
marked by all its characteristic pain and the appearance
of dreadful Granthis (nodular glands) of varied colours
and shapes, ii.

The six kinds of insects known as the Gala-goli,
SVeta-krishnd, Rakta-rdji^ Rakta-mandala, Sarva-s'vetd,
and the Sarshapikd belong to one and the same species,
A bite by any of these insects excepting by a Sarshapikd
is attended with a burning sensation and slimy exud-
ation from and swelling in the seat of the bite, that of
the Sarshapikd being accompanied by an attack of
dysentery (Atisdra) and pain at the heart. 12.

data-padl (centipede): — The S'ata-padi (centi-
pede) species is divided into eight kinds, viz.^ the Parushja
(rough), Krishna (black), Chitra (of variegated colours),
Kapilikd (tawny brown), Pitaka (yellow), Raktd (red),
SVetd (white) and the Agni-prabhd (resembling fire
in virtue). ^A bite by any of these insects is attended
with swelling, pain and a burning sensatiomin the heart.
A bite by one of the SVetA or the Agni-prabhd species
is marked by all the aforesaid symptoms as well as by

94

746. THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. ^ [ClMp. Vlll.

f

violent epileptic fits, an intolerable burning sensation
and eruptions of white pustules (Fidakcl). 13.

Manduka (frogs):— The Sandukas (frogs) are
divided in eight different species viz.^ the Krishna, Sira,
Kuhaka, Hatita, Rakta, Yava-varnibha, Bhrikuti and the
Kotika A bite by any of these is accompanied*'by an
itching sensation in the seat of the bite and a now of
yellow-coloured foam from the mouth. . A bite by one of
the Bhrikuti or Kotika species gives rise to the aforesaid
symptoms as well as a burning sensation, vomiting and
a severe attack of epileptic fits in addition thereto. 14.

A bite by one of the Vis'vambliara species of insects
is followed by Sita-jvara (catarrhal fever) and an eruption
of white pimples (Pidakd) in the shape of mustard seeds
round about the seat of the bite. A bite by one of the
Ahinduka species is marked by piercing pain, a burning
sensation, itching and swelling (in the affected locality),
as well as by delirium. A bite (contact) by one of the
Kandnmakd species is followed by a yellowness of
the complexion, vomiting, dysentery and fever, etc.
A bite by one of the S'aka-vrinta or such like species
is attended with itching and Kotha (urticaria) and the
bristles of the insects are found to be adhering to the
affected locality. 15.

PIpilIkst (Ants) : — There are six kinds of PipilikA
(ants) viz., the Sthula-s'irshA, SamvdhikA, BrAhmanikA,
KapilikA and the Chitra-varnA. A bite by any of these
is attended with imflammatory swelling and a burning
sensation (in the seat of the bite) resembling those
produced by contact with fire. 16.

MakShfkeC (stinging flies):— Flies (MakshikA)
may be divided into six species viz., the KAntArikA,
KrishnA, PingalikA, MadhulikA, KAshAyi and the SthAlikA.
A' bite by any of these is accompanied by swelling and a

Chip. VlII. J $

KALPA §THANAM.

747

burning sensation. A bite by one of the SthalikA
or the Kdshdyi species, however, is marked by the
preceding symptoms as well as by the eruption of
pustules (Pidakd), with supervening symptoms in addi-
tion thereto, 17.

Ma^kSlS (Mosquitoes): — Mosquitoes (Mas'akas)
are divided into five species, vts., the Sdmudra, Paii-
mandala, Hasti-mas'aka, Krishna and the Parvatiya.
A mosquito (Mas'aka)-bite is characterised by a severe
itching and swelling of the affected locality ; while the
symptoms which mark a bite by a Parvatiya one are
similar to those of a bite by fatally venomous insects,
and a sting of the points of their antennae is followed
by the appearance of pustules (Pidaki) attended with
a burning sensation and suppuration therein, when
scratched by the finger nails. The characteristic features
of a bite by Jalankas (leeches) with the mode of
treatment thereof have already been described 18,
Memorable Verses The poisons of the
Gaudheyaka, Sthdlikd, Svetd, Agni-samprabhd, Bhrikuti
and the Kotika belonging to their respective classes
are incurable. 19.

Contact with the dead body, stool or urine of a
venomous animal is accompanied by itching dnd a
burning sensation, pricking pain, eruption of Pidakd
(pustules), ulcers and Kotha as well as by a sljmy and
painful exudation. The local skin is found to suppurate
and the treatment would be the same as in the case of a
wound by an envenomed arrow, 20.

A bite which is neither depressed nor raised, but
very much swollen with pain (round about), but un-
attended with any pain in the seat its*elf just after
the bite, should be regarded as not easily amenable to
any medical remedy. 3 i.

748 THE SUSHRUTA: SAMHITA. ’ [Cb^P-

A bite by an insect of strong and acute poison
should be treated as a snake- bite and the three-fold
remedies to be employed in snake-bites according to
the three fold divisions of snakes should also be em-
ployed in these cases. The measures of fomanting,
plastering and hot washing would prove efficacious in
these cases, except in the event of an insect-bitten
patient having been found to have been fainting away
on account of suppuration and sloughing in the seat of
the bite, in which case all kinds of cleansing (emetic,
purgative, etc.) and anti-poisonous measures should be
adopted. 22-23.

Plasters of S'irisha, Katuka, Kushtha^ Vacha,
Rajam, Saindhava, milk, marrow, lard (Vasi), clarified
butter, S'unthi^ Pippali and Deva-ddru in the form of
Utkdrikd (poultice-likc preparation) should be used in
fomenting (the seat of the bite). As an alternative, the
fomentation with the drugs of the S^dla-parnyddi Gana
in the same (UtkdrikA) form should be considered
equally efficacious in the case. 24.

In the case of a Scorpion bite, the affected part should
not be fomented. It might, however, be fumigated with
vapours of the drugs to be dealt with later on. The
medftinal remedies (Agadas) applicable in the several
cases are here separately described. 25-26.

Recipes of remedies in different
CftSes : — An anti-venomous compound (Agada) con-
sisting oi Kushtha^ Chakra {Tsigsira), Vachd, Vi/va roots,
Pdthd, Suvarchikd, house-soot and the two kinds of
Hartdrd is efficacious in the case of a bite by a Trikan-
taka insect. ^An Agada consisting of house -soot,

Chakra, Kushtpa and the seeds of Palds^a destroys the
poison of a Gala-goli insect. An Agada composed of
Kumkuma, Tagara, S*igru, Padmaka and the two kinds

Chap. VIII. 1 , KALPA lijTHANAM. 749

of Rafaniy pasted with water, proves curative in the case
of a bite by a S'ata-padi (centipede) An Agada consist-
ing of Mesha'S* ringi, Vachd, Pdthd, Nichula, Rohini,
and Bdlaka is. efficacious in all kinds of Manduka-
poisonigg. An Agada consisting of Vacha.As'va-gandhd^
Ati-baldf Bald, Atiguhd (S 41 a-parni) and Aguhd ^Pris'ni-
parni) nullifies the poison of a Visvambhara insect.
An Agada consisting of S'irisha, Tamara, Kushtha, the
two kinds of HaridrA, Amd u-mati and the two kinds of
SahA destroys the poison of an Ahinduka insect. Cooling
measures should be adopted in the night time in the
case of a Kandumaka-bite, since the poison which is
aggravated by the sun’s rays in the day does not
prove amenable to any remedy, if applied at that lime.
An Agada consisting of Chakra, Kushtha and ApA^
mArga is efficacious in a case of Suka-vrinta^bite. As
an alternative, the earth of a black ant-hill pasted with
the expressed juice of Bhringa would prove efficacious in
such cases. A plaster prepared with the earth of a
black ant-hill and the urine of a cow proves curative
in cases of bites of flies, ants and mosquitoes. The
treatment of a case of a bite by a Prati-suryaka is the
same as that of a snake-bite. 27-36.

Origin and Classification of Scor-
pions : — Scorpions arc divided into three classe, viz,,
the mild-poisoned ones (Manda-vilha), those whose
poison is neither mild nor strong (Madhya-visha), and
the strong-poisoned ones (Mahd-visha). Scorpions
germinating from cow-dung^ or from any other rotten
substances are Manda-visha. Those which germinate
from (decomposed) wood or (decayed) bricks are
Madhya-visha (with poison neither mild hor strong);

* Dallana says that by cow-dung (Gomaya) is meant the dung, the
urine etc. of not only a cow, but of a buffalo, etc. as well

750 THE SUSHRU^A SAMHITA. » tChap. Vlll.

while those which originate from the decmposed carcase
of a snake or from any other poisonous putrid organic
matter are Tikshna-visha (strong-poisoned). The first
group of scorpions includes twelve different species,
the second three and the third and last fifteen, thus
making thirty* species in all. 37-38. >

Specific traits and Characteristics
of mild-poisoned Scorpions -.—Scorpions
which are black (Krishna) or dark- brown (S'ydva) or of
variegated colours (Karbura) or yellow (PAndu) or
coloured like the urine of a cow or rough or dark blue
(Mechaka) or white or red or greenish (S'ddvala) or
red mixed with white (Rakta-s'veta)t or provided with
hair on their bodies (Romas'a) should be regarded as
Manda-visha ( mild poisoned ones). A bite by a
scorpion of this species is accompained by pain (in the
seat of the bite), shivering, numbness of the limbs and a
flow of blackish blood (from the punctures of the bite).
In the case of a bite at any of the extremities, the pain
courses upward, accompained by a burning sensation,
perspiration, swelling of the bitten part and fever. 39
Madhya-visha Scorpions -.—Scorpions of
the Madhya-visha (mild-poisoned) class are red (Rakta)
or yellow (Pita), or tawny (Kapila). All of them arc
ash-coloured in their belly and provided with three
joints or links. They germinate from the stool, excreta,
eggs and putrid carcases of the three (aforesaid) groups
of snakes and respectively partake of the nature of the

* According to Gtyftdisa tbe total number of the three classes of
scorpions would be twenty-seven, of which the first (mild -poisoned) class
consists of eleve^n, the second consists of three and the third of thirteen.

t In place of “white, red and whitish red” some read “white, red
and little red” (Arakta),” while others make it “white in the abdomen
(S'velodara), red and white.”

Ch»p. Vin.J ^ KALPA STIIANAM. 751

)

serpent whose fecal matter, etc. they originate from.
A. bite by a scorpion of this species is accompanied
by a swelling of the tongue, an incapacity of deglutition
and violent epileptic fits. 40.

Tikshna-visha Scorpions The keen-
poisoned (Tikshna-visha) scorpions are either white or

0

parti-coloured (Chitra) or blackish (S'yAmala) or reddish
white (Rakta-sVeta) or red-bellied or blue-bellied or
reddish or bluish yellow or reddish blue or bluish
white; others are reddish brown and are (further divided
into four classes), viz., three-jointed (like those of the
previous class) or one-jointed or two-jointed or jointless.
The poison of this group of scorpions, varying in colour
and shape, is extremely dreadful and should be regarded
as the veritable robber of vitality. They germinate from
the putrified dead body of a snake or any poisoned
animal. A bite by a member of any of these families
produces those physiological transformations in the
body of its victims which mark the different stages of a
snake-bite, and gives rise to pustular eruptions (Sphota)
on the skin accompanied by vertigo, a burning sensation
(in the body), fever and excessive discharge of black-
coloured blood from the channels (mouth and nostrils,
etc.). And hence their bite proves so rapidly fatal, 41,

Treatment of Scorpion-bites A

bite by a scorpion of the middlc-venomed or strong-
venomed class should be treated as a case of snake-
bite to all intents and purposes. In a case of a bite by
a mild-venomed one, the affected seat should be sprink-
led over with the Chakra-Taila or with a tepid oil duly
cooked with the drugs of the Viddryddi group, The
affected locality shodld be (repeatedly) fomented with
the application of poultices in the Utkdrikd form pre-
pare 4 with ^pti-venomous drugs (S'irisha,etc.). The seat

752

THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA.

[Chap. VIII.

of the bite should then be marked with superficial

incisions (scratches) and should be gently rubbed

(Prati-sdrana) with powders of Haridfd, Saindhava^

Trikatu and the fruit and flower of S'irisha. The

1

tender leaves of Surasd pasted with the juice of Mdtu-
lunga and the urine of a cow in a lukewarm slate, or
lukewarm (i.e., fresh) cow-dung should be employed in
plastering and fomenting the affected part. Potions of
clarified butter mixed with honey, milk mixed with a
profuse quantity of sugar and honey, treacle mixed
with cold water and perfumed with Chatur-jdtaka, or
cold milk mixed with treacle should be recommended
as drinks. Fumigation (Dhupana) with the compound
made of the feathers of the tail of a cock or a peacock,
Saindhava, oil and clarified butter pasted together and
burnt is a speedy destroyer of scorpion-poison. As an
alternative, the fumes (Dhuma) of a compound made
up of Kusumbha flow'er, the two kinds of Rajani and
Kodrava straw mixed with clarified butter applied to
the region of the arms speedily destroys the poison of
a venomous insect in general and of a scorpion in
particular. 42.

Spider-bites : — Cases of Lutat (venomous
spider)-bite (lit. — poison of a LutA) are the most difficult
to diagnose and cure. The diagnosis of such a case
puzzles the head of many an experienced physician,
while novices in the art of healing find it a very difficult
matter. In a case of doubt or of conflicting indications
pointing equally both to the venomous and non-venom-
ous character of the bite, a physician should employ
anti-poisonous remedies of such a character as would
not prove hostile (to the natural temperament and vital
principles of the patient’s system nor to the course of
food and drink he is enjoined to take or naturally takes),

Chap. VIII ]

KALPA , STIIANAM.

753

since the Agadas are applicable only in cases of poison-
ing and, applied otherwise in healthy non-poisoned
persons, would produce all kinds of discomfort. Hence
it is incumbent on a physician to gather conclusive
evidence of the poisonous nature of the bite at the very
outset/’ A physician, failing to ascertion the existence
of poison, proves more fatal in many cases than the bite
itself. 43.

Development of Lutsf-poison As

the first sprouting of a tree does not enable a man to
correctly ascertain the species, so the poison of a venom-
ous spider in its first stage of incubation into the body,
does not develop any specific symptoms sufficiently
potent to throw any light on its nature, nor does it give
any hint as to its correct diagonosis. A spider (Luta)-
poison latent in a human organism, is marked by a slight
itching sensation in the seat of the bite, as if the poison
were shifting from one place to another* in that loca-
lity, by the presence of Kotha (urticaria\ and by an
indistinctness of colour on the first day of its incuba-
tion, On the second day the seat of the bite becomes
swollen at the end and sunk in the middle and the
characteristic marks of biting show themselves. On
the third day the specific symptoms (fever, shivering,
etc.) of the poison of the animal set in. On the
fourth day the poison is aggravated. On the fifth day
the symptoms and disorders peculiar to its aggravated
condition are present. On the sixth day the poison
begins to course througli the organism and envolopes the
Marmas (or the vulnerable parts). On the seventh day

• Id place of “Pfachala” Gayaddsa reads "Prabala,” i.i., strong
and says that the poison becomes stronger and stronger with the lapse
of lim?.

95

754 THE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. f [Chap. VIII.

the poison is diffused throughout the whole organism,
becomes extremely aggravated and proves fatal. 44.

Potency : — The poison of spiders (Lut^) which
are acutely and violently venomous proves fatal in the
course of a week. That of a middle-poiso nous one, would
take a little more time in order to prove fat^l, while
a bite by one of the mild-poisonous brings death within
a fortnight. Hence a physician should try his best
with anti-venomous remedies for the complete nulli-
fication of the poison immediately after the bite. 45.

LOCSltlon : — A spider is found to secrete seven
kinds of poison through the seven different parts or
principles of its body, saliva (LdlA), nails (claws),
urine, fangs, ovum (Rajas), fecal matter and semen,
and such poison is either keen or mild in its potency,
or follows a middle path between the two keen and
mild). 46.

Characteristics of poison accord-
ing to its seat in the body of a spi-
der S — The poison which is secreted with the saliva
(of a spider) gives rise to non-shiftting superficial
Kotha (urticaria) attended with itching and slight
pain. The poison from a scratch with the tips of its
claws, is attended with swelling, itching, horripilation
and a sense as if fumes had been escaping from the
body. Any part of the body coming in contact with
the urine of a spider is marked by a (slight) blackness
of skin in the middle of the point of contact and red-
ness at its edge, and the affected part is cracked. In a
case of fang-poison (actual bite) the seat of the bite is
marked by fixed circular patches and becomes indurated
and discoloured. The poison in this case is strong.
A part of the body touched with the Rajas, semen, or
with fecal matter of a (venomous) spider is marked by

Chap. VIIL] • KALPA gXHANAM. 755

eruptions of pustules which assume a yellow colour like
that of a ripe AtuUaka or Pilu. 47.

Thus far we have described the effects of spider-
(Lut&)-poison •according to its seat in the body of the
insect*ind to the period of its aggravation. Now we
shall describe the mythological account of the origin of
these insects and the curable and incurable natures of
their bites together with the course of medical treatment
to be followed in each case. 48.

Mythological account of the origin

of LutSl Once upon a time, it is said, king
VisVamitra went to the hermitage of the holy Vasishtha
and by his actions aro.used the wrath of the holy sage.
Drops of perspiration were thereupon produced on
the forehead of that holy and celestially brilliant sage
and trickled down on the stacks of hay culled and
gathered (,Luna) by the holy sages for the use of the
(celestial) cow, and behold ! they (the drops of sweat)
were transformed into innumerable dreadful and venom-
ous spiders (Luti) which, up to this day, are found to
infest the articles of royal use for the iniquity of
that royal sage (Vis'vdmitra). They are called liUt^s
(spiders) from the fact of their being germinated from
the drops of per.spiration of the holy sage Vas'ishtha
fallen on the culled (Luna) stacks of hay and they are
sixteen in number. 49.

The different names of spiders and
the general symptoms of their bites :

The poison of spiders is divided into two classes cui-
able with difficulty and incurable. Of the sixteen kinds
of spiders, the bites or poisons of eight may be cured
with the greatest difficulty, while those of the remaining
eight are incurable. The Tri-mandal^, ^vetA, Kapils,
Pitikd, Ala vishd, Mutra-vishd, Raktd and the Kasand

756 THE SUSHKOTA SAMHITA. , [Ch«p. VHI.

are the eight species of spiders which belong to the first
group. A bite by any of them is attended with an
aching pain in the head, pain and itching about the
seat of the bite and the symptoms and disorders peculiar
to the aggravated VAyu and Kapha. The Sauvarnikd,
Lija-varnA, Jdlini, Eni-padi, Krishna-varni, Agni Varni,
KAkdndd and the M4li-gun4 belong to the second group
and their bites are marked by bleeding, fever, a burning
sensation, dysentery and disorders due to the concerted
action of all the three deranged Doslias of the body,
and the bitten part putrefies. Eruptions of various sorts
and pustules and large circular patches as well as large,
soft and shifting swellings, red or brown in colour,
appear on the skin about the aflfected part. These are
the general features of spider (Lut4)-bites. Now we
shall describe the characteristic symptoms which are
developed by bites of the several classes of spiders and
the course of medical treatment to be adopted in
each case, 50-51.

Specific symptoms of spider-bites
and their treatment A bite by a spider
of the Tri-mandaltf species is marked by a flow of
black-coloured blood from the bite which is transformed
into an open ulcer. It is also attended with deafness,
impaired or cloudy vision and a burning sensation
in the eyes. In such cases, a compound consisting
of Arka roots, Rajani, Ndkuli and Pris'ni-pamikd
should be employed as snuff as well as in drink (P4na),
enemas (Vastis) and ointments etc. A bite by a spider
of the ^vetd species is followed by the eruption of
white-cploured pustules attended with itching, burning
sensation, epileptic fits, fever, erysipelas and pain in
and secretion from the bite. An Agada consisting of
Chandana, Rdsnd, Eld, Harenu, Nala, Vanjula, Kushtha,

Chap. VIII.]

KALPA STHANAM.

m

Ldmajjaka, Chakra and Nalada is efficacious in such
a case. A bite by a Kapilat spider is characterised by
eruptions of copper-coloured pustules of an indurated
nature accompanied by a sense of heaviness in the
head, a burning sensation, vertigo and darkness of
vision* (Timira). The remedy in such a case consists
of an * anti-poisonous Agada composed of Padmaka^
Kushtha^ Eld^ Karanja, Kakubha-hdixk^ S^third^ Arka-
parnit Apdmdrga, Durvd and Brdhmi, A case of
bite by a Pitika( spider is marked by an eruption
of hard pustules, vomiting, fever, colic (^ula) and
redness of the eyes, and the remedy consists in the
application of an Agada^ composed of Kutaja, Us'ira^
Kinihi^ S'elu^ Kadamba and Kakubha-hd^xV. A case of
bite by an illa-visha spider is marked by the bright
red colour of the scat of the bite, eruption of pustules
like mustard seeds, parchedness of the palate and a
burning sensation in the body. The remedy in such
a case should consist of an Agada composed of Priyangu^
Hrivera, Kushtha, Ldmajja, Vanjula, S'aiapushpd and
the sprouts of the Pippala and the Va^atxeos, The case
of bite by a spider of the Mutra-vishfii class is attended
with putrefaction (of the affected locdlityX erysipelas,
a flow of blackish blood (from the seat of the bite),
cough, difficult breathing, vomiting, epileptic fits, fever
and a burning sensation. The remedy in such a case
consists in Manah-s'ild, A/a, Yas/iti-mad/iu, Kushiha,
Chandana^ Padmaka and Ldmajja pasted together and
mixed with honey. The case of bite by a spider of the
Rakta( species is marked by eruptions of yellow-coloured
pustules full of blood and coloured red in the extremities
(round the scat of the bite), with a burning sensation
and slimy secretion. The Agada in such a case should
be prepared with Toy a (BAlaka) Chandana, Us^ira^

7S8 tHE SUSHRUTA SAMHITA. ^ CChap. VIII.

i

Padmaka and the bark of Arjuna, S'tlu and Amrdtaka.
A bite by a spider of the^ Easansf class is attended
with a flow of slimy cold blood (from the bite),
and with cough and difficult breathing, Jhe treatment
being the same as in the case of a bite by a spi^der of
the Ratki class. 52*59.

A bite by a spider (Lutd) of the Erishnst class
smells of fecal matter and is attended with a scanty flow
of blood, as well as with fever, epileptic fits, vomiting,
burning sensation, cough and difficult breathing. The
treatment of such a patient should be taken in hand
without holding out any definite hope of recovery and
the remedy in this case should consist of an Agada
composed of Eld, Chakra, sarpdkshi, Gandha-ndkuli,
Chandana and the drugs known as the Mahd-sugandhi
(as described in the Dundubhi-svaniya chapter). The
case of bite by an Agni varni spider is marked by a
burning sensation in the scat of the bite, excessive
secretion (of blood), fever, a sort of sucking pain,
itching, horripilation, a burning sensation in the body
and eruptions of pustules. In a case of this type, the
patient may be treated with the Agada prescribed for
the treatment of a bite by a spider of the Krishnd class
but no hopes should be held out. 60-61.

CenerStl Remedies S — An Agada made of
Sdrivd, UsHra, Yashti madhu, Chandana, Utpala and
Padmaka may be used with advantage in cases of
spider-bites of all types. The bark of S^leshmdtaka and
Kshirapippala should be deemed equally efficacious in
all cases of spider-bites, and these may be employed
in any shape, viz., as snuflf, potion, unguent, etc. 62.

We have described (the symptoms and the treatment
of the bites of) the eight classes of spiders which can be
cured with difficulty. Tiiose of the two classes (of the

Chap. VIII.] • KALPA^ STHANAM. 759

other group whose bites are generally incurable) have
also been described above, as being sometimes found
amenable to medicine (with the greatest difficulty).
Now hear m^ describe (the symptoms and the treat-
ment yf the bites of) the remaining six species which
are incyrable. 63. A.

Specific Symptoms Of the incurable
cases of Spider-bites : — A bite by a spider of
the Sauvarnika species is marked by swelling and a
frothy secretion and a fishy smell from the scat of the
bite, and is followed by cough, difficult breathing, fever,
thirst and violent fainting fits. A bite by a La(ja-varns(
spider is marked by a flow of flesh-smelling and fetid
blood from its seat as well as by a burning sensation,
dysentery, fainting fits and pain in the head. A c^^se of
bite by a spider of the Jatlini species is very severe and
is marked by a cracking of the seat of the bite which
is striped with lines as well as by numbness, difficult
breathing, parchedness of the palato and continued
dizziness of the head. The bite by an Eni-padi spider
resembles the seeds of black sesamum in shape and is
marked by thirst, fever, fainting fits, vomiting, cough
and difficult breathing. A bite by a Katkindaki
spider is marked by an excruciating pain and a
reddish-yellow colour at its seat. A bite by a MrfW-
guni spider is characterised by a cracking of the
seat of the bite in several parts and is marked by a
red colour, smoky smell, extreme pain, fever and
epileptic fits. 63.

Treatment of the incurable cases of spider-bites
should, however, be taken in hand by a wise physician
with a due consideration of the aggravate*d Dosha or
Doshas in each case with the exception of making
incisions (chheda-karma). 64* A,

76o

THE SUSHRI4TA SAMHITA. ^ CChap. Vlll.

Surg^ical Treatments in all cases of the
curable types of spider-bites, the affected part should
at once be cut open and removed with a Vriddhi-
patra instrument and the incisioned part should then be
cauterised with a red-hot Jambvoshtha instrument in
the absence of any fever or such like distressing symp-
toms and in the event of its not occurring in any of the
vulnable parts of the body (Marmas). The act of
cauterisation should be continued until the patient
himself (through pain) prohibits the continuation of the
same. If the affected part is found to be attended with
a slight swelling, it should be cut open and removed.
It should then be plastered with a paste of the (Mahd-
sugandhi and such other) Agada mixed with Saindhava
and honey or wiih the paste of Priyrngu, Haridrd^
Kushtha^ Samangd and Yashti madhu, A potion com-
posed of the decoction of Sdrivd^ the two kinds of
Yashti-madhu^^ Drdkshdy Payasyd^ Kskira^morata,
Viddri and Gokshura mixed with honey should be
administered to the patient. The affected part should
be washed with a cold decoction of the bark of the
Kshiri-vrikshas, Any other distressing symptoms
should be remedied with anti-poisonous measures with an
eye to the deranged Doshas involved in the case. 64.

Any of the (ten-fold)* remedial measures of Nasya
(snuff), medicated collyrium, unguents (Abhyanjana\
potions (Pdna) Dhuma (fumigation), Avapida form
of snuff, gargling, emesis, purging and blood-letting
by the application of leeches should be adopted
in a case of spider- bite according to its require-
ments. 65.^

* Mention of Madhuka twice in the list shows that one part each of
both the kinds Yashti-madhu (liquorice)— grown on lands and in water-
should be lakeq.

Chap. VIIL]

761

KALPA STHANAM.

All cases of bites by any insect or by any snake^
and ulcers incidental to those bites should be carefully
treated with measures and remedies laid down in
connection with snake-bites as long as the stage of
inflammation and suppuration would last. The growths
(if an/) of pappillae (Karnika) around the seat of the
bite sliould be removed after the subsidence of the
swelling by the application of a plaster consisting of
Nimba leaves,^ Trivrit^ Danfi, KusumhJia flower,
honey, Gtiggulu, Saindhava salt, Kinva and the dung of
a pigeon pasted together, and such diet as would not
aggravate the effects of poison should be carefully pre-
scribed. The papiliatous growths (Karnika) due to the
poison of any kind should be scratched with a proper
surgical instrument in the event of their being hard and
painless and shoiPd then be plastered with a paste of
purifying (Sodhaniya) drugs (such as Nimba leaves, etc.)
mixed with honey. 66.

The specific features and treatment of the bites b\'
the one hundred and sixty-seven types of insect arc
iu>w described. The subjects mentioned but not included
within these one hundred and twenty chapters (from the
(ommcncemcnt of the book) would be dealt with in
detail in the latter part of the present treatise (Uttara
Tantaral 67 6S.

We have not heard of a holici -Jiscourse than the
medical science on account of the eternal and imperish-
able character of the Ayurveda (the science of life)
from its tested merit and its beneficial effects upon the
created beings and since it is always worshipped by the

whole human race for the fact of its fully explaining

•

* CJayadstsa reads “S'ikhi” (Lilngalaki) and “Vamsfc” (scrapings of
bamboo) in place of PNimba-patra”. He also reads “Danla” (tooth of
a cow) in place of “Kinvad’

96

[Chap. VIIL

762 THE SUS*HRUTA SAMhUTA. ^

t

the import of words delineation of its specific sub-
jects). Who ever stores up in his memory and acts up to
these sacred and worshipful injunctions on the science
of life propounded, as it is, by the nectar-origined
sage (Dhanvantari), the preceptor of all physicians and
equal to the celestial Indra in respect of majesty, enjoys
happiness both in this world and in the next. 69.

Thus ends the eighth Chapter of the Kalj)asthana in the Su.s'ruta
Samhita which treats of the measures to he adopted in the case of an
insect-bite.

Here ends the Kalpa Sthana.
