॥

00042185

OS) ama eae र
 MOT .TO BE 131६2

0८77 OF THE LIBRARY.
~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~

as

Bees

THE

F ASIATIC SOCIETY OF BOMBAY

मि 2 PR GB 4

५१

‘Se

= Town Hall, Bombay,

& LE शकक FEE REX

Digitized with financial assistance from the
Government of Maharashtra

on 05 October, 2018

THE

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST

{29} a

000
HENRY FROWDE

Oxrorp UNIVERSITY PREss WAREHOUSE

AMEN CORNER, E.C.

THE

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST

BY VARIOUS ORIENTAL SCHOLARS

AND EDITED BY

F. MAX MULLER

VOL. XXIX

@rferd
AT THE CLARENDON PRESS

1886

{ All rights reserved

THE GRIHYA-SUTRAS
RULES OF VEDIC DOMESTIC CEREMONIES

TRANSLATED BY

HERMANN OLDENBERG

PART I

SANKHAYANA-GR/JHYA-SUTRA
ASVALAYANA-GRIHYA-SUTRA
PARASKARA-GR/JHYA-SUTRA
KHADIRA-GRIJHYA-SUTRA

@rford
AT THE CLARENDON PRESS

1886

[ Ad rights reserved

TA A
00042185

CONTENTS.

SANKHAYANA-GRJHYA-SUTRA.

PAGE
InrropucTioN 2. wwe ll 3

TRANSLATION et gee! pale ¢ wi, “Sn Sis ~ - „ॐ ॐ 72

ASVALAVANA-GRIHVA-SUTRA.

INTRODUCTION = © च च ew te el , 78583

TRANSLATION 2. + च we ew 59

PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

INTRODUCTION च च च + च ५ we ww 263
TRANSLATION + च च च + च च , ग ज . 269

KHADIRA-GR/JHYA-SUTRA.

INTRODUCTION ©) eee . . आग

TRANSLATION ५ a 75

Transliteration of Oriental Alphabets adopted for the Trans-
lations of the Sacred Books of the East . . 3 . , 437

*,* The Second Volume will contain a GenzraL IntTRopucTION
to the Grzhya-Sfittras.

SANK HAYANA-GR/HYA-
SUTRA.

[29] B

INTRODUCTION

TO THE
SANKHAVANA-GR/HVA-SUTRA.

THE Grihya-sitra ascribed to SAnkhdyana, which has
been edited and translated into German by myself in the
XVth volume of the Indische Studien, is based on the first
of the four Vedas, the Rig-veda in the Bashkala recension},
and among the Brahmawa texts, on the Kaushitaka. Its
reputed author, whom we ordinarily find called by his family
name, SAnkhayana, had the proper name Suyagiia. This
we may infer from the lists of Vedic teachers given in
different Grzhya texts where they describe the Tarpaza
ceremony. Though in these lists the order of names
varies very much, yet the two names Suyagiia and Sankha-
yana are constantly placed side by side, so that this fact
alone would render it probable that they belonged to the
same person. Thus we read in the Sankhayana-Grzhya
IV, 10=VI, 1:

Kaholam Kaushitakim, Mahakaushitakis, Suyagiiam
Sankhayanam, Asvalayanam, Aitareyam, Mahaitareyam.

Here we have grouped together the two Brahmawa
authors (with the fictitious doubles, the great Kaushitaki,
the great Aitareya) and the two corresponding Satra
authors belonging to the two chief branches of the Rig-
veda literature; first comes one Brahmava author (for
Kahola Kaushitaki is one person) with the Stra author
connected with him, then the second Siatra author and the
corresponding Brahmawa teacher.

In the Sambavya-Grihya (Indische Studien, XV, 154) the
corresponding passage runs thus:

Gargya- Gautama- Sakalya- Babhravya- Miazdattavya

ग See IV, 5, 9.
B2

4 sANKHAYANA-GRITIVA-SUTRA.

[sic]- Maxdikeyak Suyagiia- Samkhy4dyana- Gatukar-
ayeyah [sic] Paimga [sic]- Sambavy’-Aitareyaz.

The same Gvzhya still more explicitly bears witness to
the name of Suyagiia Sankhayana, by adding at the end
of the list from which these names are quoted the following
words: Suyagiia Sakhayanas [sic] tvz[pya]tu, i.e. ‘May Su-
yagiia Sankhayana satiate himself (with the water offering).’

In the Asvalayana-Grihya III, 4, we read;

Kaholaw Kaushitakaaz Mahdkaushitakam Paingyam
Mahapaingyam Suyagiam Sankhayanam Aitareyam
Mahaitareyam.

We may also quote here a Karika given by Narayana?
in his great commentary on the Sankhayana-Grzhya
(I, 7, 10):

Atrdravipradinam yad adhvaryud kurute kvatit?

matam tan na Suyagfiasya, mathitaz so ’tra nekkhati.

It would perhaps be hazardous to claim for the author of
this Karika the authority of an independent witness, for
very likely he may have derived his knowledge from the
lists of teachers which we have quoted before. But at all
events the concordance of the three Gr7hya texts furnishes
a proof which, I think, cannot be set aside by another
testimony which we must mention now. At the end of the
Kaushitaki-Aravyaka (Adhyaya 15) we find a Vamsa or
list of the teachers by whom the knowledge contained in that
Aranyaka is supposed to have been handed down. The
opening words of this list run thus:

‘Om! Now follows the Vamsa. Adoration to the
Brahman! Adoration to the teachers! We have learnt
(this text) from Guvdakhya Sankhayana, Guvakhya
Sankhayana from Kahola Kaushitaki, Kahola Kaushitaki
from Uddalaka Aruni, &c.’

It is a very natural supposition that the author of this
list intended to begin with the name of the Doctor
eponymus, if we may say so, of the Sdtras of his school, and
then to proceed to name the Doctor eponymus of the
Brahmazas, and after him the more ancient teachers and

ग Manuscr. Chambers 712 (Berlin Royal Library), fol. 12b.
2 Comp. Paraskara-Grihya I, 2, 5: aravipradanam eke.

INTRODUCTION. 5

sages. But whether the author of this passage really sup-
posed this Guv4khya Sankhayana to be the author of the
Sankhdyana-sitras, or not, we shall be justified in following
rather the unanimous statements of the texts previously
quoted, and in accepting in accordance with them, as the
full name of our Sftrak4ra, the name Suyagita Sankhayana,
The Grzhya-sitra which has been here translated pre-
supposes, as all Grzhya-sitras do, the existence of the
Srauta-sitra, with which it is intimately connected and
which is referred to in the Grzhya in several instances},
Here the question arises whether the Grzhya-stitra was
composed by the same author to whom the authorship of
the Srauta-sitra belongs, so that the two texts form to-
gether, and would, in the conception of their author, be
intended to form, one great body of Sitras, or, on the other
hand, whether the Grzhya-sitra is a later addition to the
Srauta-sitra. On this question I have ventured, in the
preface to my German edition of Sankhayana, to offer a few
remarks which, however, I feel bound to say do not seem to
myself quite decisive. I there pointed out that the-Grzhya-
sitra contains a few aphorisms which we should rather expect
would have found their place in the Srauta-sdtra, if the two
texts were composed by the same author and on a common
plan*. But, apart from the possibility that in a work of such
considerable extent as that collection of Sdtras would be,
such trifling incongruences or irregularities might very
easily escape the attention even of a very careful author,
there is still another objection that may be urged against
the inference drawn by me from such passages. It can be
shown £ that the Gvzhya texts which we possess are based
to some extent on one common original, from which they
have taken verbatim, or nearly verbatim, a certain number
of aphorisms. Thus if we were to suppose that Sankhayana,

1 See, for instance, Grzhya I, 16, 1 (Srauta IV, 16, 2).

2 Indische Studien, vol. xv, pp. 11, 12.

> The Stitras with reference to which I made that observation are I, 8, 143
14, 13-15; Il,15,10. Comp. Srauta-stitra IJ, 7, 12; 1V, 21.

* I intend to give some proofs of this in the General Introduction to the
Grihya-sitras which will be given in the second volume of these translations,

6 SANKHAYANA-GRIHY A-SUTRA.
or whosoever the author of this Grihya-sitra may have
been, found the aphorisms on which I once based my argu-
ment, in that original text, this would explain the occur-
rence of those passages in a portion of the great body of
Satras different from that in which we should expect to
meet them. Now several of the passages in question recur
identically in other Gvzhya texts, so that we may infer
indeed that they are taken from that lost original, and we
have no means to judge whether the other similar passages
are not taken from it also. I believe, therefore, that the
opinion which I once pronounced regarding the relation in
which the two Sitra texts stand to each other, cannot be
vindicated, and that it is better to leave that question un-
answered until perhaps further discoveries throw a new light
on it. <

For the reconstruction of the correct text of the Sankha-
yana-Grzhya, and occasionally also for its interpretation, it
is of considerable importance that we possess, besides the
Devanagari MSS. of the text and of the commentaries, a
South Indian MS. written in the Grantha character (MS.
Whish 78 in the library of the Royal Asiatic Society,
London) which contains a Grzhya based on that of Sankha-
yana and following it, during the greater part of the work,
nearly word for word). It is designated in the MS., at the
end of the single Adhydyas, as ‘ Kaushitaka-Grzhya.’ It
therefore professes to follow the teaching of the same Brah-
maza which is adhered to also by the ऽप school of
Sankhayana. A metrical commentary, which in the MS.
follows after the text, names in its opening Sloka a teacher
Sambavya as the author of this Sitra. The Sloka runs thus:

Natva Kaushitakataryam Sambavyam sdtrake7ttamam
grihyam tadiyam samkshipya vyakhydsye bahuvismrztam.

(‘Having bowed to the most excellent author of Sdtras,
to Sambavya, the Afarya belonging to the Kaushitaka
school, I shall compose a short commentary on his Grzhya,
which has been forgotten by many.’)

The name of this Sambavya does not occur among the

1 Comp. the statements given with regard to that text in my German edition
of Sankhayana, Indische Studien, XV, 4 seq. ५

INTRODUCTION, 7

teachers enumerated in the description of the Tarpawa
ceremony, neither in Saakhd4yana IV, 10, nor in Asvala-
yana III, 4; but in the list of the SAmbavya-Grihya itself
it is found (see above, p. 4); and besides it seems to me
also to be mentioned in Asvaldyana-Grihya IV, 8, 24, in
which passage it will scarcely be considered too bold to
conjecture SAmbavya instead of SAmvatya.

Though the MS. of the SAmbavya-Grzhya is very con-
fused, and full of blunders of all sorts, yet it deserves to be
attentively studied by all scholars who are accustomed to
look, if not in theory yet in practice, on the agreement of
a few Vedic text MSS., or of a few Indian commentaries,
as if it had a claim to an unassailable authority to which
European Orientalists would have no right to deny their
faith, In the S4nkhA4yana-Grvihya a number of passages
are found in which corrupt readings or perverse explana-
tions are supported by all the Sankhdyana MSS. and
by all the Sankhayana commentaries, and if, by a rare
and fortunate chance, the Sambavya Grantha MS., which
is unaffected by the blunders of the Devandgart MSS.,
had not been discovered in the south of the peninsula,
these readings and explanations would seem to rest on the
unanimous agreement of tradition. Perhaps it seems un-
necessary to dwell on this point, for very few Orientalists,
if any, would be prepared to assert that Indian tradition is
infallible. But when looking over many of the editions
and translations of the Vedic texts, even such as have been
published in the last years, one finds plentiful occasion to
observe that-in hundreds of passages tradition has been
practically treated, by scholars of very high merit, as if it
had an authority not very far removed from infallibility.
A case like that of which we have to speak here, in which
a whole set of MSS., and occasionally also of commentaries,
can be tested by a MS. ofa nearly related text, written in
a different character and in a distant part of India, will
strengthen our belief that we are right in judging for our-
selves, even if that judgment should oppose itself to such
authorities as Narayawa or Ramasandra or Gayarama.

Perhaps it will not be out of place to add here, as an

8 sANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

illustration of these remarks, a few observations on one of
the passages in which the rejection of the traditional San-
khayana reading, together with the traditional Sankhayana
explanation, is confirmed by the SAmbavya MS., though
no doubt, even without the aid of that MS., we ought to
have formed the right conclusions for ourselves. At S4n-
khayana II, 4, 1.2 the traditional reading is:

Mama vrate hridayam te dadhdmi mama /ittam anu
kittam te astu ] mama va#am ekamana gushasva Brzhas-
patish ‘v4 niyunaktu mahyam iti kamasya brahma-
Aaryasyasav iti.

Sankhayana is treating here of the Upanayana, or the
initiation of the student who is received by a teacher and
intends to study the Veda with him. The teacher on that
occasion is to pronounce the Mantra which we have just
transcribed, and which translated into English would run
thus:

‘Under my will I take thy heart ; after my mind shall thy
mind follow; in my word thou shalt rejoice with all thy
heart; may Brzhaspati join thee to me.’ ‘Of the Brahma-
karya of Kama (or lust), N. N.!’

The MSS. give the end of the passage as we have printed
it above, kimasya brahmakaryasyds4v iti. This
Narayaza explains in the following way. Brahmakarya
here means the observances which the student has to keep
through certain periods of time before the different texts
which he has to learn can be taught him, First comes
the Savitri verse, for which he prepares himself by observ-
ing the sAvitra vrata; this lasts either one year, or three
days, or the SAvitri can also be taught him immediately
(see chap. 5, 1-3). Then follows the sukriya vrata, of
three days, or twelve days, or one year, or any other period
of time according to the teacher’s pleasure (chap. 11, 10);
by this vrata the student is enabled to study the main
portion of the Veda. Finally come the sakvara, vratika,
aupanishada observances, each of which has to last one
year, and which refer to the different parts of the Aranyaka
(see chap. 11, 7 1 seq., and the sixth book). Now the formula
of which we treat here refers principally to the savitra

INTRODUCTION. 9

vrata. The teacher announces to the student how long
he has to keep that vrata. He says (Sdtra 1), ‘May Bri-
haspati join thee to me (Sfitra 2) for a brahmaéarya (1.6. a
vrata) of such and such (kamasya) a time (one year, three
days, &c.), N.N.!’ Kama (the pleasure) would thus stand
here as an expletive which was to be replaced in each single
case by the indication of the real space of time that de-
pended on the teacher's pleasure (‘...niyunaktu mahyas
samvatsarikasya trairatrikasya vinvakshikasya va savitrasya
brahmafaryasy4mukamukasarmann iti vakyasamyogo €<
yak’). The same should take place at the corresponding -
forms of Upanayana which had to precede the entrance of the
student upon the sukriya, sakvara, &c. observances. This is
the explanation of Narayawa, with which Ramafandra and
all the other commentaries agree. It will scarcely be neces-
sary to observe that the singular use of kama, on which this
traditional explanation rests, is neither in accordance with
the meaning of the word, nor supported by any parallel texts.
So, even before I had the opportunity of collating the Sam-
bavya MS., I had no doubt that the system of the Vratas
has nothing at all to do with our Sitra, and that its text
should be made intelligible by a slight alteration touch-
ing only the quantity of the a in two syllables, by writing,
Kamasya brahmakary asy as4v iti (thou art the
Brahmafarin of Kama, N.N.!), as we read in Asvalayana I,
20,8, kasya brahmakaryasi, prazasya brahmakary
asi. Afterwards I found that the Grantha MS. of Sambavya
gives the very reading which I had conjectured.

Passages like this are not very rare in the Grzhya-sitras.
In the other Siitras we are not in the same favourable
position of possessing a MS. which enables us, as the
Grantha MS. of Sambavya does, to test their text.

We cannot conclude these introductory remarks without
speaking of the later additions tacked on at the end of
the original body of the SAankh4yana-Grihya-sitras1.
There are unmistakable indications that the fifth and
sixth books are later additions. The fifth book is

1 Comp. the remarks in my German edition of Saikhayana, Ind. Studien,
XV, 7.

Io SANK HAYANA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

designated as a parisish¢a in a Ké4rik& quoted by

Narayana: £
parisish¢4d Avasathye pArvavatikrame Aaruk
Vaisvanardyagnaye sagnaye?! tantumate tatha.

(* According to the Parisish/a, if one of the half-monthly
sacrifices has been omitted, a mess of rice should be offered
on the sacred domestic fire to Agni Vaisvanara and to
Agni Tantumat.’)

The passages of the ‘ Parisish’a’ here referred to are the
two first aphorisms of V, 4:

‘ Now if a half-monthly sacrifice has not been performed,
one or the other of them, then a mess of rice (is to be
offered)—

‘With (the words), “To Agni Vaisvanara svaha! To
Agni Tantumat 5५412 1" ”

There are, besides, several passages in which Narayaza
himself mentions the fifth book under the designation of
Pariseshadhydya*. And even if we had not the authority of
the Karika and of Narayava, the contents alone of the fifth
book would raise our suspicion against its genuineness.
The matter ordinarily treated of in the Grzhya texts is
brought to an end in Adhyayas I-IV; in the fifth book
we find diverse supplementary additions on points dis-
cussed before; rules, which no doubt would have been given
at their proper place, had the fifth book been composed at
the same time, and by the same author, as the preceding
books*. Besides, we find different prayaskitta oblations
treated of, and a description of two ceremonies which are
mentioned, as far as I know, in no other Grzhya-siitra,
but belong to the rites frequently described in such works
as Puravas, Parisish¢as, and later Dharma texts: the con-
secration of ponds or wells (chap. 2), and the consecration
of gardens (chap. 3).

There can thus be little doubt as to the secondary
character of the fifth book. And this alone suffices to

1 vagnaye the MS.

2 Nirayaa on I, 9, 3; 10, 2.

$ The Paddhati inserts the paraphrase of several of these rules into the
explanation of the first Adhy aya,

INTRODUCTION, It

furnish an important argument in favour of the same view
with regard to the sixth book also. This view is further-
more supported by the opening invocation in that book,
addressed to Brahman and to a number of mythological
beings and Vedic sages and teachers. It is evident that
by such an invocation this book is characterised as a sepa-
rate treatise, presupposing of course the main body of the
Sankhayana-sitras, but not forming part of it in the same
sense in which, for instance, the second or the third Adhyaya
does. The object of that treatise is the exposition of the
ritual connected with the study of the Rahasya texts. The
sixth book, composed no doubt by a later adherent of the
Sankhayana school, returns, in fact, to, and enlarges on,
matters that have already found their proper place in the
original Grzhya-sitra at II, 12, and partly also at IV, 7.

SANKHAYANA-GR/HYVA-SUTRA.

AvuyAdya J, Kuawpa 1.

1. Now henceforth we shall declare the Paka-
yagitas.

2. When (a pupil) is going to return (from his
teacher), let him keep that fire (as his domestic fire)
on which he has put the last piece of wood (as
required by the regulations for a student),

3. Or (he should keep) his nuptial fire.

1, 1. The ceremonies to be treated of are defined here as the
Paikayagiias (i.e. oblations of cooked offerings) just as in the
opening sentence of the Pairaskara-Grehya they are called grzhya-
sthalipikas. This is indeed the most characteristic form of
offerings belonging to the domain of the Grrhya ritual, though it
would not be correct to state that the Grzhya-sGtras treat exclu-
sively of sacrificial ceremonies of this kind.

2. As to the duty of the Vedic student of putting every day
a piece of wood on the sacred fire of his teacher, see below, II, 6, 8,
and compare the Grzhya-samgraha-parisishfa II, 58. According
10 a Karika given by Narayava, and the Karmapradipa (I, 6, 13),
the prescription of this Sfitra regarding the time for the kindling
of the sacred fire refers exclusively to the case of ४१४६ १३8३ (be-
trothal). Comp. also Dr. Bloomfield’s note on the Gréhya-sam-
graha-parisish/a I, 76 (Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlandischen
Gesellschaft, XXXV, 560). In the K4rika it is stated that if the
betrothed girl dies after the fire has been kindled, but before the
marriage, the sacrificer is not to forsake his fire, but to marry
another girl; if he cannot find a bride, he should make the fire
enter into himself according to the rules given by Sankhdyana-
Grihya ४, 1, and himself become uttarasramin, i.e. enter one of
the two final Asramas.

I ADHYAYA, I KHANDA, 8. 13

4. Some declare (that the domestic fire should be
kindled) at the time of the division of the inheritance.

5. Or that after the death of the householder the
eldest one himself (should kindle it).

6. (It should be kindled) on the day of the new
moon of the month of Vaisdkha or on another (new
moon day).

7. Some say (that the fire should be kindled)
according to the (sacrificer’s) wishes under the (cor-
responding) constellation.

8. He should light his fire at one of the following
places, viz. in the house of a Vaisya who is rich in

5. Nardyaza: ‘If the fire has not been kindled at the time
stated above, then, after the householder... i.e. the father, even
if he should not have performed the Adhana, or the elder brother
has died, the eldest son (or the son who after his elder brother’s
death has become the eldest), after he has performed the Sapiadika-
rama (for the dead father or brother; see below, IV, 3, and the ninth
chapter of the Parisishfa [book V]), even if he has not divided the
inheritance with his younger brothers (so that the time stated in the
fourth SQtra would not have arrived), should kindle the fire him-
self, i.e. without an officiating priest (rztvig).... Or the Sttra
should be divided into two; prete va grzhapatau (or after the
death of the householder), and svayam gydy4n (the eminent one
himself), i.e. of Brahmawas, Kshatriyas, and Vaisyas a gydyan,
which means a most eminent person, 2 Braéhmaza, performs the
Pakayagzias himself; for the two other castes the Pakayagitas have
to be performed through an officiating priest: this is the meaning
of this svayam (himself). I have given this note of Narayana as
a specimen of the entirely arbitrary and obviously misleading expla-
nations which are unfortunately so frequently found in this author,
as indeed in most of the other Satra commentators. As to the
true meaning of this svayam I still adhere to the explanation
which I proposed in my German edition of the text (p. 118), that
in case no division of the inheritance takes place, the sacred fire
should be kindled on behalf of all the joint-proprietors, but that
only the eldest brother should act personally (svayam).

8. Or, ‘at (the fire of) a person rich in cattle, in the house of-
a Vaisya, &c.? The commentators (see p. 118 of the German

14 SANKHAYANA-GRIHYA SOTRA.

cattle, at a frying-pan, or (at the fire of) one who
offers many sacrifices.

9. Some say that (the fire should be fetched from
one of the above-mentioned places) in the evening
and in the morning.

10. The inauguration (of the fire) by an evening
offering should be learnt from the Adhvaryus, ac-
cording to (my) teacher.

11. In the morning he shall offer a full oblation
with a verse sacred to Vishzu, or silently.

12. The time for setting it (ie. the domestic fire)
in a blaze and for sacrificing on it has been explained
by (the rules given with regard to) the Agnihotra.

edition) differ as to whether in purupasu-vi/kula one or two
alternatives are contained, and it is interesting to see that the
Sfitra authors themselves differed in this respect ; Paraskara (I, 2, 3);
when declaring from what place the fire should be fetched, speaks
of the house of a Vaisya rich in cattle ; Asvalayana, on the contrary,
who in the Grzhya-sfitra does not expressly treat of the kindling of
the domestic fire, in the corresponding passage of the Srauta-sftra
(II, 2, 1), gives the rule that the dakshizAgni is to be fetched
‘from the house of a Vaisya or from a rich person.’

9-11. I now differ from the opinion which I pronounced in my
German edition with regard to the relation in which these three
50025 stand to each other. I think they ought to be understood
thus: 9. Some teachers say that the fetching of the fire from its
yoni, as taught in Sfitra 8, ought to be done twice ; in the evening,
so that the fire, after the necessary rites have been performed, goes
out, and then again in the morning. 10. But my (the author’s)
teacher (comp. as to 8 व7$ 44, Katy4yana’s Srauta-sfitra I, 3, 7;
Professor Garbe’s note on Vaitdna-sfitra 1, 3) is of opinion that
the fire should be fetched only once, and that with this fire the
ceremonies which are taught by the Adhvaryus are to be per-
formed in the evening (see, for instance, Katy. IV, 7. 8, which
passage is paraphrased here by Narayama). 411. In the morning
(according to the same teacher, not, as I once understood this
passage, according to the eke referred to in Sfitra 9), a full obla-
tion is to be offered, &c.

12, Srauta-sitra II, 6, 2 seq.

I ADHVAYA, 2 KHANDA, 2. 15

13. And ‘invested with the sacrificial cord, &c.,
all these rules, as far as they are applicable, should
be applied (here also) in consequence of the unity
of the ritual.

14. With regard to this they quote also (the
following Sloka) :

75. ‘The kinds of Pakayag#as, the kinds of Ha-
viryagzas, and again the kinds of Soma sacrifices,

‘ Twenty-one by number, these are proclaimed to
be the kinds of sacrifice.’

Kuanpa 2.

1. At the end of the sacrificial acts (follows) the
distribution of food to Brahmawas.

2. Voice, (pleasantness of) form, age, learning,
moral character, (right) conduct are the qualities
(required in the Bréhmawas who are to be invited
thereto).

13. Srauta-sitra I, 1, 6. 7: yagiopavitt devakarmaxi karoti,
praéinavitt pitrydzi, &c. The unity of the ritual of course means
the unity of the two great domains of the Srauta and Grzhya ritual.

15. With regard to the twenty-one kinds of sacrifice compare,
for instance, Gautama VIII, 18-20; Max Miiller, Z.D.M.G.
IX, p. Ixxiii; Weber, Indische Studien, X, 326. The seven
kinds of Padkayagiias are the Ash/aka sacrifices (see below, III,
12 seq.), the sacrifices offered at each Parvan (I, 3), the Sraddha
(or funeral) sacrifices (IV, ए seq.), the sacrifice of the Srdvant
full moon (IV, 1g), of the Agrahdyant (IV, 17 seq.), of the
Kaitrt (IV, 19), and of the Asvayugt (IV,16). The seven Havis
sacrifices (belonging, as is the case also with the third division of
sacrifices, to the Srauta ritual) are the Agnyddheya, the Agnihotra,
the sacrifices of the full and new moon, the Agrayana, the three
Katurmasya sacrifices, the NirGdapasubandha, and the Sautra-
maf. The seven kinds of Soma sacrifices (of which the more
ancient texts mention only three or four 52751125, see Weber,
Indische Studien, IX, 120) are the Agnish/oma, the Atyagnish/oma,
the Ukthya, the Shodasin, the Atirétra, the Aptoryama.

16 SANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

3. Learning, however, outweighs every (other
qualification).

4. A learned one should not be passed over.

5. ‘The threefold (knowledge, viz. that) which
refers to the deities, that which refers to the Atman,
and that which refers to sacrifice,

‘(Handed down) in the Mantras and in the Brdah-
maza: this is called learning.

6. ‘A performer of the sacred rights, a man who
has studied (the Veda), who is old in learning and
devoted to austerities :

‘He who gives food (even) once to such (a Brah-
maza), hunger will not befall that man any more.

7. ‘Whatsoever deity he may wish to satiate at
any sacrifice,

‘Destining it to that (deity) in his mind, he shall
give (the food) to a person like that.

8. ‘An oblation deposited in a person like that
will never miss its way to the deity;

‘Treasure of men, vessel of gods (in which they
receive what is given to them) he is called.’

Kuanpa 3.
1. Now (follow) the ceremonies of the days of the
new and full moon.
He fasts.
2. In the morning, when the sun shines on the

3, 1. Most probably this rule should be divided into two Sfitras,
so that atha darsapfirzamasau would stand as the heading of
the chapter; comp. below, chap. 18, 7, atha daturthikarma;
chap. 24,1, atha gatakarma, &c.

2. ‘If this is expressly stated, the oblation is to be made in
night-time ; for instance, at the Vastoshpatiya ceremony it is stated,
“The tenth oblation of the Sthalipaka, to Agni Svish/akrit at
night’ (see below, III, 4, 8). Ndarayava.

I ADHYAYA, 3 KHANDA, 4. 17

top of the great trees, that is the most auspicious
time for all kinds of sacrifices, unless there be a
special rule.

3. With a genial mind, clean, on a pure, protected
spot, having cooked a full, thin mess of rice, he
offers that cooked oblation to the deities of the
festivals of the new and full moon, distributing it in
the due way.

4. In the oblations of cooked food the acts of
taking (the intended oblation), of putting it down
(near the fire), and of sprinkling it (with water) are
performed with regard to the deities of the (re-
spective) Mantras. 7 anal

3. On vighana, which I have translated thin, see the note in
the German edition, pp. 119 seq.

The deities of the festivals of the new and full moon (i. e. of the
rites which in the Srauta ritual correspond to that taught here) are,
at the full moon, Agni and Agnishomau, at the new moon, Agni,
Vishvu, and Indrégni, who are preceded in both cases by Agni
and Soma as the deities of the two 4gyabhagas (see below, ch. 9,-7),
and followed by Agni Svish/akr7t. For more detailed statements
see Hillebrandt, Das altindische Neu- und Vollmondsopfer (Jena,
1879), pp. 102 seq.

4. For instance, the taking of the portion of food destined to
Agni should be performed with the Mantra: Agnaye tva gush-
tam grthnami, &c. A number of ceremonies common to the
Sth4lipaka ritual and to the ordinary ritual of Agya oblations, such
as the strewing of Kusa grass round the fire, the ceremonies
regarding the Pavitras (strainers), &c., have to be supplied here
from the Agya ritual given below (ch. 7 seq.); this may be looked upon
as an argument in favour of our conjecture which will be stated in
the preface (vol. ii of the Grzhya-sfitras), that our text, as probably
is the case also with the Paraskara-sfitra, is based on an original,
the opening sentences of which are preserved to us in Sankh. I,
5, 1-5==Paraskara I, 4, 1-5, so that the first chapters of Sankha-
yana, and among them the exposition of the festivals of the full
and new moon, would have been prefixed to the original commence-
ment of the text.

[29] ८

~

18 SANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

5. And the rules about the portions to be cut off
(from the sacrificial food, are valid).

6. But before the sacrifices of the new and full
moon one should make offerings to the deities of
the Anvarambhaziya ceremony.

47. The time for the new moon sacrifice is not
elapsed until the full moon, nor that for the full
moon sacrifice until the new moon.

8. And some say that the morning oblation may
be made at the time of the evening oblation, in the
case of danger.

9. But the time is fixed, as at the Agnihotra an
expiation has been prescribed for him who has
neglected the time.

10. At the two daily oblations one should use as
sacrificial food either rice or barley or grains.

11. In case thesg are not at hand, other (sorts of
sacrificial food are) not prohibited.

12. Some say that if he uses grains, he should
wash them.

13. With the other (kinds of food) no such pre-
paration takes place.

5. Onthe avadanadharmés comp. Weber, Indische Studien, X,
95; Hillebrandt, Neu- und Vollmondsopfer, pp. 122 seqq.

6. The Anvarambhazty4-ishéi is the sacrifice taught in the
Srauta texts which is to be performed before the sacrificer for the
first time offers the Darsapfrzamasa sacrifice. See Weber, Indische
Studien, ॐ, 330; Hillebrandt, loc. cit. p. 185. The deities of this
ceremony are Agnivishv(, Sarasvati, and Sarasvat.

4. Comp. the expiatory sacrifice prescribed in the Parisish/a book,
V, 4.

8. The text here passes over from the two monthly sacrifices to
the two daily ones, which correspond to the Agnihotra of the
Srauta ritual. %

I ADHYVAYA, 4 KHANDA, 2. 19

14. In the evening (he makes the oblation) to
Agni, in the morning to Sarya,

15. And after both silently to Pragdpati.

16. Some (say that) before the first oblation a
piece of wood (is to be put on the fire).

17. The sprinkling with water as indicated (in the.
Srauta-sitra).

Kuawpa 4,

7. When he has risen in the morning and has
sipped water, let him daily repeat his recital.

2. (This consists of, or is accompanied by, the
following texts:) the two verses, ‘To-day, god
Savitar’ (Rig-veda V, 82, 4-5); the hymn, ‘Go
away, Manasaspati’ (X, 164); the hymn, ‘Right
and truth’ (X, 190); the verses, ‘Look down, ye
Adityas, to the end of the hymn (VIII, 47, 11-18);

14, 15. These are the same deities who are worshipped also at
the Agnihotra.

17. Srauta-s(tra IT, 6, 9-11. Comp. ए. 120 of the German edition.

4, 7. The Paddhati of Ramadandra understands svadhy4yam
adhfyfta as a prescription to perform the daily Brahmayagzia(comp.,
for instance, Asvalayana-Grehya III, 2; Apastamba I, 11, 22 564),
which consists in the recitation of portions of the Veda; the hymns
and verses stated in Sfitra 2 are, according to the same authority,
to be repeated immediately after the recitation of the svidhyaya
(‘svadhyd4yanantaram’). Ndarayava, on the contrary, considers that
the svadhy4ya prescribed in Sfitra 1 consists of those very hymns
and verses which are indicated in the second 52. As to the
Brahmayagiia, he says that the 4a at the end of the second Stitra
may be referred to it (‘the word 4a means that texts procuring a
long life, such as Rig-veda I, 89, should be murmured, or an in-
junction of the Brahmayagiia is intended’). At all events it is very
difficult to believe that the recitation of the texts stated in this chapter
should be quite independent from the daily Brahmayagfia. About
the performance of the Brahmayagfa in our days comp. the note of
Professor Biihler, Sacred Books of the East, vol. ii, p. 43.

Cc 2

20 sANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

the verse, ‘O Indra, the best treasures’ (II, 21, 6);
the verse, ‘The swan dwelling in purity’ (IV, 40, 5);
the verse, ‘Adoration to the great ones’ (I, 27, 13);
the verse, ‘What we fear, Indra’ (VIII, 50, 13); the
verse, ‘And of the sleep’ (I, 120, 12); the verse, ‘He
who says to me, O king’ (II, 28, 10); the hymn,
‘Let glory be mine, Agni’ (X, 128); 4nd the five
verses, ‘Bliss may create for us’ (४, 51, 77 seq.).

Kuanpa 5,

1. There are four kinds of Pakayagiias, viz. the
Huta, the Auuta, the Prauuta, and the PrAsita.

2, On the following five occasions, viz. the wed-
ding, the tonsure (of the child’s head), the initiation
(of the BrahmaZArin), the cutting of the beard, and
the parting of the hair, (on these occasions) in the
outer hall—

3. To a place that has been smeared (with cow-
dung), which is elevated, and which has been
sprinkled (with water), he carries forward the fire,

4. Having kindled it by rubbing, according to
some teachers, at his marriage.

5. During the northern course of the sun, in the

5, 1. This Sitra and the following ones down to the fifth are
identical with Paraskara I, 4, 1-5; it seems to me that we have
here before us the opening Sitras of a lost text from which this
passage has been copied both by Sankhdyana and Paraskara.
Comp. the preface of the second volume of the Grzhya-sfitras,

With regard to the fourfold division of Pakayagiias stated here
comp. below, chap. ro, 7.

2. Comp. the Karika quoted by Narayana, ‘vivahadishu bahyo
एणा mandape fa tad ishyata iti.’

3. On the Agni-pravayana comp. the details given in the Grhya-
samgraha-parisish/a (Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlandischen
Gesellschaft, vol. xxxv), I, 64-69.

1 ADHYAYA, 6 KHANDA, 5. 21

time of the increasing moon, on an auspicious day
he shall seize the hand of a girl,

‘6. Who should possess (the auspicious) charac-
teristics (required),

7. Whose limbs should be proportionate,

8. Whose hair should be smooth,

9. Who should also have at her neck two curls
turned to the right.

10. (Of such a girl) he shall know that she will
give birth to six men,

Kuanpa 6.

1. If he will acquire a wife, let him recite over
the wooers (whom he sends to the girl's father)
when they go away, the verse, ‘ Thornless’ (Rig-
veda X, 85, 23).

2. When they arrive, they take flowers, fruits,
barley, and a pot of water.

3. e[hey say thrice, ‘Here I am, sir!’

4. When these words have been uttered, they
ask the girl in marriage, reciting the clan names,
the dwellers turning their faces to the east, the
visitors to the west.

5. When the matter pleases both sides, let them
touch a full vessel into which have been put flowers,¥ -

9

9. On fvartau comp. the note in the German edition, p. 121.

6, 1. ‘ The wooers, i.e. his own father, &c.’ Narayana.

3. ‘When the father of the suitor and the others, together with
their Addrya, have arrived at the house of him who is to give away
the girl, they station themselves in the hall, and the father of the
suitor says thrice, “Here am I, N.N. (amukasarman), Sir)”—in
these words he announces himself three times . . . . For at the
house of the person who gives the girl away, there arrive also, in

order to see the festivities, many other people. In order to dis-
tinguish himself from these, he pronounces his name.’ Niarayaza.

22 SANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

fried grain, fruits, barley, and gold, and let them
recite (the formula), ‘Undisturbed art thou, the
undisturbable vigour of the gods, not cursed, pro-
tecting against a curse, unexposed to a curse.
Might I straightway attain to truth. Put me into
prosperity.’

6. With the verse, ‘Offspring may produce us’
(Rig-veda X, 85, 43), the Afarya of the girl's
(family), standing up, places (the vessel) on her
head (saying), ‘Offspring I put into thee, cattle.
I put into thee, splendour and holy lustre I put
into thee.’

Kuawpa 7,

1. When assent has been declared (by the girl’s
father, the bridegroom) sacrifices.

2. He besmears a quadrangular space with cow-
dung.

3. (Let him consider in the ceremonies fo be
performed,) of the two eastern intermediate direc-
tions, the southern one as that to which (the rites)
should be directed, if the rites belong to the Manes,

6. The position of the words as well as the sense favours com-
bining the genitive kanyayaA with 444rya, not with mftr-
dhani, though Ramaéandra says that the varapakshaAarya is to
be understood.

7, 1 seq. Here follows a description of the sacrifice which is to
be performed when the girl’s father has declared his assent
(pratisrute) to give her away in marriage: this is the general
model for all Grzhya sacrifices.—‘ Varo guhoti,’ Narayama.

3. ‘He here states an exception to the rule, “ The ceremonies
sacred to the Manes are directed towards the south” (Srauta-sfitra
I, 1, 14)... . He should consider the south-eastern direction,
sacred to Agni, as that to which the ceremonies are to be directed
(prazim p&rvam kalpayet) which are sacred to the Manes, such as

I ADHYAYA, 7 KHANDA, II. 23

4. The northern one, if the rites belong to the
gods,

5. Or rather the east (itself) according to some
(teachers).

.6. He draws in the middle (of the sacrificial
ground) a line from south to north,

7. Upwards from this, turned upwards, to the
south one line, in the middle one, to the north one.

8. These he sprinkles (with water),

9. Carries forward the fire with the verse, ‘I
carry forward Agni with genial mind; may he be
the assembler of goods. Do no harm to us, to the
old nor to the young; be a saviour to us, to men
and animals,’

10. Or (he carries it forward) silently,

11. Then he wipes with his wet hand three
times around the fire, turning his right side to it.
This they call SamOuana (sweeping together).

prescribed in the Sftra, ‘Let him make oblations every month to
the Fathers” (IV, 1, 1)... . He states an exception to the rule,
“The ceremonies sacred to the gods are directed towards the east”
(Sraut. I, 1, 13) .... The northern of the two eastern inter-
mediate directions, sacred to 15478, should be considered as that to
which the ceremonies sacred to the gods, such as oblations, &c.,
are to be directed.’—Comp. Asvalayana-Sraut. J, 12, 4.

6-7. See the quotations from Ramafandra’s and Ndardyaza’s
commentaries, ए, 123 of the German edition, An illustration of the
form of the sthazdila with the lines drawn thereon is given by
Dr. Bloomfield in his note on the Grzhya-samgraha-parisish/a I, 52
seq.; instead of the three lines, however, which are here prescribed
in Sftra 7, there are four indicated in accordance with the doctrine
of that Parisishfa and of Gobhila himself, which are stated to be
sacred to Prithivi, Pragapati, Indra, and Soma, while the line turned
from south to north is sacred to Agni. }

9. On the Agnipramayana (carrying forward of the fire) see the
Grthya-samgraha-parisishéa I, 64-69. ,

24 SANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

12. Once, turning his left side to it, in the rites
belonging to the Manes.

Kuawpa 8.

1. Now (follows) the strewing (of grass) around
(the fire).

2. He strews eastward-pointed Kusa grass around
it, in three layers or in five layers,

3. Beginning on the east side, then to the west,
then to the west.

4. He covers the roots (of the grass-blades) with
the points.

5. And all kinds of rites are to be performed
beginning south, ending north.

6. He places the Brahman south with the words,
ए प्रण Buuvan Svaz, ।

7. Adorns him with flowers,

8. Carries forward on the north side the Prawita
waters with the words, ‘Who carries ye forward ?’—

9. Takes up with the left hand the Kusa blades,
and arranges them (on the ground) with the right
hand,

8, x. Comp. the passages quoted in Professor Eggeling’s note on
Satapatha Br. I, 1, 1, 22.

6. Ordinarily there was no real Brahman present, and his place
was filled by a bundle of Kusa grass that represented him. Nara-
yana states that this bundle should consist of fifty blades of Kusa
grass. Comp. also the Grzhya-samgraha-parisish/a I, 89-90.

8. Comp. the passages quoted by Dr. Bloomfield, Zeitschrift der
Deutschen Morgenland. Gesellschaft, vol. xxxv, p. 565, note 2.

9. This Sftra shows that the paristaraza, though already
treated of in Sdtras 1-4, is not to be performed till after the ‘ carry-
ing forward’ of the Prazité water. Comp. Narayaza’s note on Sftra
x (p. 123 of the German edition). That this is indeed the order
of the different acts is confirmed by Paraskara I, 1, 2.

1 ADHYAyA, 8 KHANDA, 21. 25

10. Bending his right knee,

11. The left when worshipping the Manes.

12. The strewing around (of the grass) is not
necessary in the Agya offerings,

13. Nor in the standing offerings, according to
Mazdikeya.

14. He now measures off with the span (of his
hand) two Kusa blades, which are not unequal, with
unbroken points, bearing no young shoots in them,
and severs them (from their roots) with a Kusa
blade, saying, ‘ Purifiers are ye.’

15. There aretwo orthree (of these Kusa strainers).

16. He holds them with their points to the east
and sprinkles them (with water, saying), ‘ Belonging
to Vishzu.’

17. With the two Kusa blades he sprinkles (water)
around the fire three times, keeping his right side
turned towards it,

18, Takes up the Agya pot with the words, ‘Milk
of the cows art thou;’

19. Puts it on the fire with the words, ‘ For sap
thee;’

20. Takes it from the fire towards the north with
the words, ‘ For juice thee;’

21. And holding the two (Kusa) strainers with
their points to the north, seizing them on both sides `

13. ‘In the standing offerings, such as the Vaisvadeva sacrifice in
the morning and in the evening.’ N4rayana. ^

14-16. Vagasaneyi Samhita I, 722.

18. Vag. Samh. IV, 3a.

19. Vag. Samh. I, 22 0.

20. Vag. Samh. I, 3०५.

21. Vag. Samh. I, 12b.—The division of Sfttras 21 and 22
should be after iti, not, as the Indian tradition has it, after
rasmibhiz.

26 sANKHAYVANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

with his two thumbs and fourth fingers, he bends
them down, the points upwards, and dips them into
the Agya with the words,

‘By the impulse of Savitar I purify thee with
this uninjured purifier, with the rays of the good
sun.

22, (This) preparation of the Agya (takes place)
each time.

23. Let him not offer (Agya) which has not been
(thus) prepared. र

24. Also the waters in the Sruva spoon (he puri-
fies) with the words, ‘(By the impulse) of Savitar
(I purify) you.’

25. This (is called) the PrawirA and the Prox-
sHant water.

KHANpA 9.

1. The Sruva spoon (serves as) a vessel.

2. According to the purpose the properties (of
the different things to be used at each oblation)
should be chosen.

3. Taking up Kusa blades with the left, and the

24, 25. Ramakandra: ‘He pours water into the Sruva and
purifies this also, as he had done with the Agya (Stra 21)... .
He then pours a little portion of that water on to the Prazita water
(see above, 5009 8), and with the rest, which is called the Prok-
shani water, he sprinkles the sacrificial food, the fuel, and the
Barlffs.’

9, 1. ‘When no special rule is stated, the Sruva is to be under-
stood as the vessel (for the offering), Thereby the rule, “The
Guhfi is the vessel” (Srauta-sfitra III, 19, 5) is abolished (for the
Grihya 71168} Narayana.

3. The manner of holding the Sruva in which the Agya is, is
described by Katya4yana, Sraut. I, 10, 6 seq., Stenzler’s note on
Paraskara I, 1, 4. :

I ADHYAVA, 9 KHANDA, 19. 27

Sruva at its bottom with the right hand, with the
words, ‘ The hand of Vishzu art thou’—

4. He offers with the Sruva the Agya oblations

5. Beginning from the north-west side of the fire
he offers (the Agya) unintermittingly on the south
side (of the fire) with (the verse), ‘Thou Agni art
full of foresight’ (Rig-veda I, 31, 10).

6. Beginning from the south-west side of the fire
he unintermittingly offers on the north side with
(the verse), ‘To:whom these snowy mountains’
(Rig-veda X, 121, 4)

7. To Agni belongs the northern Agya portion
to Soma the southern.

8. In the middle (are made) the other oblations,

9. (With the words,) ‘Agni is the begetter; may he
give to me N.N. as my wife; svaha!

‘Soma is rich in wives; may he make me rich in
wives by N.N.; svaha!

‘Pdshan is rich in kindred; may he make me rich
in kindred by the father, the mother, the brothers of
N. N.; svaha!’

10. At the Agya oblations the offering of the two
Agya portions and of the Svishéakvzt oblation is not
standing,

4. As to the characteristics of Agya (sacrificial butter), which is
the substance offered at most of the Grzhya sacrifices, comp. the state-
ments of the Grzhya-samgraha-parisish/a I, 105 seq.

5. Avikéhinnam (unintermittingly) is explained in N&r.’s com-
mentary by ekadh4araya

8 seq. Here are indicated the chief oblations of this sacrifice
(anya ahutaya# pradhanabhata/, Nar.), or the Avapa (the inser-
tion, Sfitra 12) which comes between the standing introductory and
concluding oblations.

to. On Svish/akr7t, comp. Weber, Indische Studien, IX, 217.

28 sANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

1t. Nor in the standing oblations, according to
Mazdikeya.

12. The place for the insertion is the interval
between the Mahavydhrtis, the general expiation,
and the oblation to Pragapati.

11. See chap. 8, 13.

12. This Satra prescribes where the 4vapa, 1.6. the special cha-
racteristical offerings of each sacrifice, is to be inserted between
the regular offerings that belong to the standing model. The
same subject is treated of in the Srauta-sfitra in the two rules, I,
16, 3 and 4: ‘Whatsoever is offered between the two Agya por-
tions and the Svish/akrvt, that is called ४४३82; this is the chief part
(pradhana) (of the sacrifice); the other (oblations) are subordinate
thereto (tadangani).’ The position of the 4vapa among the other
oblations is indicated by Paraskara in the following rule (I, 5, 6):
‘Between the general expiation and the oblation to Pragapati, this
is the place for the 4vapa. (The word vivahe at the end of this
Stitra seems to me to belong not to this rule, but to Sfitra 7.) Our
SAtra is identical with that of Paraskara word for word; only instead
of sarvaprayasfitta, as Paraskara has, we read here, mahavya-
hritisarvaprayasditta, This means, I believe, that the 4v4pa,
preceded and followed by the Mahavyahriti oblations (comp. below,
I, 12, 13), should be placed between the Sarvaprdyaséitta and the
Pragapatya oblation. The oblations made with the Mahavyahrctayas
are four in number ; the corresponding formulas are: 0704 svaha,
bhuvad 5४21128, sv4h svaha, 6007 bhuvad’ 5४३१ svaha (comp.
below, chap. 12,12). The Sarvaprayassitta (general expiation) con-
sists of two oblations, one with the three Mahavy4hrztayas, the other
with the verse ayas 44gne, quoted in the Srauta-sGtra ITI, 19, 3,
and in Asvalayana’s Srauta-siitra I, 11,13. (On the Sarvaprayasditta
in the Srauta ritual, compare Hillebrandt, Neu- und Vollmonds-
opfer, p. 166.) The Prigapatya oblation is performed with the
formula Pragdpataye sviha. The discussions of Nardyama on
this SQtra (see p. 125 of the German edition) evidently fail to bring
out the true meaning of the text; according to this commentator
the oblations follow each other in this order : the two Agyabhigas,
the principal oblations (pradhindhutaya’), the Svish/akrzt, the four
Mahavyahriti oblations, the two Sarvaprayasfitta oblations, the
Pragdpatya oblation. Finally we may mention the corrupt form in
which the corresponding passage of the Sambavya-sfitra is pre-

I ADHYAVA, 9 KHANDA, 19. 29

13. If the oblation consists in Agya, let him seize
the Kusa blades in his left hand with his right
hand at their points and with the left at their roots,
and let him wet their points (with Agya) in the
Sruva, the middle and the roots in the Agya pot;

14. In the oblations of cooked food, however, the
points in the Srué, the middle in the Sruva, the roots
in the Agya 7०६.

15. When he then has thrown them (into the fire)
with the words, ‘Agni’s garment art thou,’

16. And has put on (the fire) three pieces of
wood,

17. (Water) is sprinkled round (the fire) as stated
above.

18. Oblations for which only the deities are in-
dicated, but no texts prescribed, are to be made
merely with the word SvAuA, ‘To such and such a
deity svaha! To such and such a deity svaha!’

19. The ritual (here) declared of the sacrifice (to

served in the MS. There the two Sfitras 10 and 11 are placed
before the Mantra in Sitra 9. This Mantra then is given down to
svaheti, then follows 4gyena, which seems to me to form part
of the same 5012, and to refer to the oblations to which the Mantra
belongs. Then the MS. goes on: mah4dvyahrztishu sarvapra-
yaskittadram (sic) etad 4vapasthanam 4gyahavishi vyahrz-
tishu sarvaprayasdittaram (the syllables prayashittaram
seem to be expunged) svish/akrzto sthalipake. In the com-
mentary I find the following Slokas, which I give exactly as they are
read in the MS.; tisr7nam vyahrittnam ka prayaskittahutir
api yad antaram tad 4papdsthanam sarpifpradhanake.
sthalipake vyahrztizam yat tat svish/akrztottaram वपत
nam pradhanadnam nanadaivatakfandasdm yas tu [9125
tad avapasthanam itadyate budhaif tatas tat tam ma ara-
bhya prayaskittahutiz kramat.

17. See above, chap. 8, 17.

19. This Sfitra, though reckoned in the Indian tradition to

30 SANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SUTRA,

be performed) when (the father’s) assent (to give
away his daughter) has been declared—

Kuawpa 10.

1. Forms the standard for all sacrifices that pro-
cure happiness,

2. And for all Agya offerings, ;

3. For the sacrifice of animals which are tied to a
branch,

4. And for the offerings of boiled (rice) grains and
of cooked food.

5. These are performed, all the offerings of cooked
food, without ९1२५४६64 and ANnuyAea oblations, with-
out (the invocation of) the IzA, without Nicapa reci-
tation, and without SAMIDHEN? verses.

6. There are also the following Slokas:

chap. 9, seems to me clearly to belong to the next chapter, and to
contain the subject, to which the predicate is given in r0, 1. For
pratisrute, see chap. 7, 1.

10, 1. ‘As in the Srauta ritual the sacrifice of the full and new
moon forms the standard for the 15745, the pasubandha, &c., thus
the pratisrut-kalpa is the standard for the vikrztis of the Smarta
ritual, such as the gatakarman (chap. 24), &c.’ Narayana.

3. ‘It is the standard of the sacrifices prescribed in the rules,
“The animal (offered) to the teacher is sacred to Agni; to an offi-
ciating priest, to Brzhaspati, &c.”’ Narafyava. This refers to the
sacrifice of animals which forms part of the Arghya ceremony; see
II, 15, 4 seq.

4. Karfinam pakayagranam ka. Narayana,

5. On the five Prayagas and the three Anuy4gas (introductory

oblations and oblations following on the principal offerings) pre-
scribed in the Srauta ritual, comp. Hillebrandt’s Neu- und Voll-
mondsopfer, pp. 94 seq., 134 seq. On the 118, see ibid., 122 seq. ;
on nigada, Weber’s Ind. Studien, IX, 217, &c.; on the Samidhent
verses, Hillebrandt, loc. cit., pp. 74 seq. On this Sfitra compare
also the passage in Katyayana’s Srauta-sfitra, VI, 70, 22 seq.

J ADHYAYA, II KHANDA, 2. 31

(/¢. ‘(An oblation is called) Huta, (if made) by the
performing of the Agnihotra; Anuta (i.e. unsacri-
ficed, if) by the Bali offering; PRanuta (i.e. sacrificed
up, if) by a sacrifice to the Manes; PrAsiva (1. €. tasted,
if) deposited as an offering in a Brahmavza.

8. ‘Without raising his knees, with spread knees
let him always offer his oblation ; for the god§ never
accept an offering (that has been made holding the
hand) not between (the knees).

g. ‘But when he has repeated a text sacred to
Rudra, to the Rakshas, to the Manes, to the Asuras,
or that contains an imprecation, let him touch water,
and so also when he has touched his own body,’

Kuawopa 11,

1, Now when the bride is to be carried away (to
the bridegroom’s house) that night, or on the next,
or on the third night,

2. On that night, when (the darkness of) night is
gone, they wash the girl up to her head with (water
that has been-made fragrant by) all sorts of herbs
and the choicest fruits together with scents ;

4. Comp. chap. 5, 1.

8. Comp. the Grzhya-samgraha-parisish/a I, 46, and the note,
Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenl. Gesellschaft, XXXV, 556.
Narayana: dakshizam b&hum ganvor antare kritvety
27124, sarvadd sarvasminn api karmaazi havir homadra-
vyam guhuyat.

9. This verse is found also in the Karmapradipa III, 8, 4.

11, 1. The ceremony described in this chapter is called Indrazi-
karman. The goddess एताव is mentioned in Sftra 4 among the
deities to whom Agya oblations are made.

2. Nisdkéle, nisd madhyastham praharadvayam, tasmin k4le atite.
Narayana.

On the anvarambha, comp. Weber’s Indische Studien, IX, 224.

32 SANKUAYANA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

3. They put on her a newly-dyed garment or (a
new one) which has not yet been washed ;

4. Then (the AZarya of the bride’s family) makes
the girl sit down behind the fire, and while she takes
hold of him he sacrifices with the Mahavydhr‘tis,
and then he makes Agya oblations to Agni, to Soma,
to Pragdpati, to Mitra, to Varuza, to Indra, to
Indrazi, to the Gandharva, to Bhaga, to Pdshan,
to Tvash/ar, to Bvzhaspati, to the king Pratydnika.

5. After they have regaled four or eight women,
who are not widows, with lumps of vegetables,
Sura, and food, these should perform a dance four
times.

6. The same deities (they worship also) on behalf
of the man,

7. And Vaisravama and 1587137

8. Then follows the distribution of food to Brah-

mazas.

Kuanopa 12.

1. The bridegroom, who has bathed and for
whom auspicious ceremonies have been performed,
is escorted by happy young women, who are not
widows, to the girl’s house.

2. To these he shall not behave unobsequiously,
except where forbidden food or a transgression is
concerned.

3. Having obtained their permission, he then
gives her the garment with (the verse), ‘ The Raibhi
was’ (Rig-veda X, 85, 6).

4. The ‘king Pratyanika’ has given origin to a very curious
misunderstanding in the Sambavya-Grzhya and its commentary; see
p. 127 of the German edition.

I ADHYAYA, 12 KHANDA, 9. ` 33

4. With (the verse), ‘Mind was the cushion’
(ibid. 7) he takes up the salve-box.

5. The verse for the anointing is, ‘May the Visve
१९५१५ anoint (or, unite),’ (ibid. 47.)

6. ‘As this (has protected) Sa#i the beloved
one, and Aditi the mother of noble sons, and
^ 0818 who was free from widowhood, may it
thus here protect thee, N. N.!’—with these words
(the bridegroom) gives her into her right hand the
quill of a porcupine (and) a string of three twisted
threads,

भ. With the verse, ‘Shape by shape’ (Rig-veda
VI, 47, 18) a mirror into the left.

8. Her relations tie (to her body) a red and
black, woollen or linen cord with three (amulet)
gems, with the verse, ‘Dark-blue and red’ (Rig-
veda X, 85, 28).

9. With the verse, ‘Full of honey the herbs’
(Rig-veda IV, 57, 3), (the bridegroom) ties (to her
body) Madhtka flowers.

12, 5. On the ceremony of ‘salving together’ (samazigana),
comp. Paraskara I, 4, 14; Gobhila II, 2, &c. Professor Stenzler
is certainly wrong in translating Pdaraskara’s samafgayati by
‘heisst sie beide zusammentreten’ (according to Gayardma’s expli-
cation, sammukhikaroti). It is clear from Sankhayana, that a
real anointing of bridegroom and bride took place. This was per-
formed, according to Gobhila, by the ‘ audaka’ (this seems to be the
same person that is mentioned in Paraskara I, 8, 3), of whom it is
said, pazigraham (i.e. the bridegroom) mardhadese ’vasizkati,
tathetaram. N4rayava, on the contrary, in his note on our pas-
sage, says that it is the bridegroom who anoints the eyes of the
girl with the verse quoted. But the word sam-afigana, and the
obvious meaning of the whole rite, make it rather probable that
both were anointed, and that this was done by a third person.

6. Comp. below, chap. 22, 8, where the use of a porcupine’s
quill is prescribed at the simantonnayana ceremony; and see
chap. 22, 10.

(29] D

34 SANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA,

10. At the wedding one cow, when the Argha
ceremony has been performed; in the house one
cow: these are the two Madhuparka cows.

17. (The bridegroom) makes the girl sit down
behind the fire, and while she takes hold of him he
makes three oblations with the Mahavyahz“tis.

10. As to the meaning of arhayitva I differ from the opinion of
Narayana (see his note on p. 127 of the German edition), who takes
gdm as the object of this verb (gam arhayitva pdgayitva mata
rudrazim ity rikam gapitva [comp. Paraskara I, 3, 27]). The real
meaning of arhayati is, to perform the Argha ceremony for a
guest. Evidently in this Stitra two different occasions are stated
on which the Argha reception, eventually with the killing of a cow,
should be performed; firstly, the bridegroom should be so received
in the house of the bride’s father; secondly, when the newly-
married people have arrived at their own house, an Argha reception
should there be offered to them, perhaps, as the commentaries
state, by the Atarya. १

11. According to Narayana it is the ^ द्वा#2 who performs the
rite prescribed in this Sfitra; Ramafandra, on the contrary, refers it
to the bridegroom, which seems to me right. Comp. Gobhila II, 7.

In Sankhayana’s description of the wedding ceremonies the point
at which the bride passes over from the paternal power into that
of her new husband is not expressly indicated. P&raskara (I, 4, 15)
clearly indicates it (pitraé prattém Adaya), and in the Parisish/a of
the Asvaldyana-Grthya this act of handing over the girl is treated
of in detail (I, 22). On this depends the description in the Prayo-
garatna, fol. 69; comp. also Colebrooke’s Miscell. Essays, I, 210.
The Paddhati of Ramakandra does not fail to mention the
kanyapradana, but I do not think that the succession of the
different rites is stated there correctly. According to the Paddhati
the bridegroom goes to the house of the girl’s father, and there,
after the madhuparka has been offered, the bride is given over
to him; he then (labdhavadhtikaZ) goes (chap. 12, 1), accom-
panied by young women, to the kautukagdra, where the cere-
monies described in chap. 12, 3 seq. take place. Pdraskara, on
the contrary, describes the handing over of the garments, the
anointing, &c., as preceding the giving over of the girl, and
indeed it is scarcely possible to see in the acts of dressing, adorn-
ing the girl, &c., in which both the bridegroom and her relations

1 ADHYAYA, 73 KHANDA, 4. 35

12. A fourth (oblation) with (the three Mahavyé-
129) together is to be understood from this rule.

13. In this way, where no express rule is stated,
in all sacrifices that procure happiness, one is to

sacrifice before and afterwards with these same
(Mahavyéhr‘tis).

Kuawpa 13.

1. ‘Be queen with thy father-in-law, with this
verse (Rig-veda X, 85, 46) her father or brother
sacrifices with a sword’s point on her head, or with
the Sruva, standing while she is sitting, with his
face turned to the west, while her face is turned to
the east.

2. ‘I seize thy hand for the sake of happiness’
(Rig-veda X, 85, 36), with these words (the bride-
groom) seizes with his right hand her right hand
with the thumb, both hands being turned with the
palms upwards, he standing while she is sitting, with
his face turned to the west, while her face is turned
to the east.

3. And when he has murmured the following five
verses,

4. (He continues thus,) ‘This am I, that art thou;

take part, anything but preparatory performances that precede
the decisive moment. The sacrifice, on the contrary, which the
bridegroom performs, according to chap. t2, rz, in common with
his bride, seems to presuppose that he has already received her
from her father; and the ceremonies described in chap. 13, the
pazigrahana, the pronouncing of the Mantra, chap. 13, 4, which
reminds one of the Roman formula ubi tu Gaius, the seven
steps—all that should be understood not as intended to establish
the power of the husband over his wife, but as presupposing that
power and showing an exercise of it.

13, 4. Narayana states that here four Brahmamas should repeat

D2

36 SANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

that art thou, this am I; the heaven I, the earth thou;
the Azé art thou, the SAdman I. So be thou devoted
to me.

‘Well! Let us here marry. Let us beget off-
spring. Let us acquire many sons who may reach
old age.’

5. (The A&arya) fills, with the words bhdr
bhuvad svah, a new water-pot,

6. Throws into it (branches) with milky sap and
leaves, of a tree the name of which is masculine,
together with Kusa grass,

7. And gold, according to some (teachers),

8. And hands it over to a student who observes
silence.

9. They should walk round this Sthey4 water,
(placed) to the north-east, so that they turn their
right sides towards it.

the ऽप} hymn (Rig-veda X, 85) to the bride. That, according
to Sankhayana, that hymn is recited at the wedding, is clear from
chap. 14, 12.

6. Sakshfrant sapalasant sakusan. N§&rdyaza’s commen-
tary divides sa kus4n, and refers sa to the 89712. But this
sa would be superfluous, and the substantive to which sakshiran
and sapalas4n are to be referred, is, as both the nature of the
case and the corresponding passages show, sakhan and not
kusdn. Comp. the Srauta-sfitra IV, 17,5: paldsasakham sapa-
18527 nikhaya, and a passage concerning the very rite here
described, Asvaldyana-parisish/a I, 24: audumbaryarddhaya
(read, 8707982) sakhaya sapalasaya sahiramzyapavitraya
saddrvapavitraya. The MS. of the Sadmbavya-sftra has sa-
15111747 palasan sakusan.

9. ‘The Stheya water has to be so placed that when the bride
and the bridegroom walk (their seven steps, see chap. 14, 5 seq.),
their right sides are turned towards it’ Ndardyava. Comp., re-
garding the Stheya water and its bearer, the Gréhya-samgraha-
parisish/a II, 26. 30. 35.

I ADHYAYA, 14 KHANDA, 2. 37

10. And after (the A#arya) has placed a stone
towards the northern direction,

717. (The bridegroom) makes her rise with the
words, ‘Come, thou joyful one,’

12. And makes her tread with the tip of her right
foot on the stone, with the words, ‘Come, tread on
the stone; like a stone be firm. Tread the foes
down; overcome the enemies.’

13. He then leads her round the fire so that their
right sides are turned to it,

14. And gives her a second garment with the
same text (chap. 12, { 3).

15. Her father or brother pours out of a basket
fried grain mixed with Sami leaves into her joined
hands.

16. The spreading under, the sprinkling over, and
the second sprinkling over (are done) with Agya.

17. She sacrifices those (fried grains).

Kuaypa 14.
1, ‘This woman, strewing grains, prays thus, “ May
I bring bliss to my relations; may my husband live
long. Svah4!”’—while the husband murmurs (this)
text, she sacrifices standing.
2. (All the ceremonies,) beginning from the tread-

17. I believe that the words forming this Sftra, ta% guhoti, are
taken from the same lost old Grzhya text which Sankhdyana has
followed word for word also in I, 5, 1-5 and elsewhere. This is
made probable by the comparison of Paraskara I, 6, 2. The
author of our text, while literally adopting the words of his original,
has not quite succeeded in welding them together with his own
statements ; thus the sacrifice of grains is treated of in this Sitra
and in the first Sfitra of the next chapter, as if there were two
different acts, while indeed it is one and the same.

14, 2. The treading on the stone is prescribed in chap. 13, 12.

38 SANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

ing upon the stone, (are repeated) in the same way
for a second time, :

3. And in the same way a third time.

4. Silently, if they like, a fourth time.

5. (The Afarya?) makes (them) step forward in
a north-eastern direction seven steps (with the
words),

6. ‘ For sap with one step, for juice with two steps,
for the prospering of wealth with three steps, for
comfort with four steps, for cattle with five steps,
for the seasons with six steps. Friend be with
seven steps.’

7. (The Afarya?) ‘appeases’ those (foot-steps)
with water.

8. With the three Apohish¢siya verses (Rig-veda
X, 9, 1-3) he wipes (them) with the Stheya water,

g. And sprinkles it on their heads.

10. (The bridegroom then) says, ‘I give you
a cow.

1x. Let him give something to the Brahmavas
each time at the Sthalipakas and other rites;

To him who knows the Sdrya hymn the
bride's shift.

5, भृ. According to Narayana it is the teacher who makes them
walk the seven steps; the Paddhati says that the bridegroom or
the Af#arya causes her to do so. Comp. Paraskara I, 8, 1; Asva-
layana I, 7,19, &c

8. Comp. chap. 13, 9.

9. Probably we should read mardhanf (acc. dual.), not m(r-
dhani, Asvaliyana has sirasf. Of course the heads of both the
bridegroom and the bride were sprinkled with water ; comp. Asva-
layana I, 7, 20, &c

12, The Saryé hymn is Rig-veda X, 85. Comp. the note above
on chap. 13,

I ADHYAYA, 15 KHANDA, 3. 39

13. A cow is the optional gift to be given by
a Brahmaza,

14. A village by a Raganya,

15. A horse by a Vaisya.

16. A hundred (cows) with a chariot (he gives to
a father) who has only daughters.

17. To those versed in the sacrificial rites he
gives a horse.

Kuawpa 15.

1. The three verses, ‘I loosen thee’ (Rig-veda X,
85, 24), when she departs from the house.

2. ‘The living one they bewail’ (Rig-veda X,
40, 10), if she begins to cry.

3. The wife then smears the axle of the chariot
with clarified butter with this (verse), ‘They feasted,
they got drunk’ (Rig-veda 1, 82, 2),

~न

13-15. These Sftras, treating of the fee for the sacrifice, are
identical with Paraskara I, 8, 15-18. Apparently they are taken
from the same lost original from which several identical passages
in the Satras of Paraskara and Sankhayana seem to be derived
(see the notes on chap. 5, 1; 13, 7). They stand rather out of
place here, for they return to the same subject which had already
been treated of in Stra 10, though in that Sftra, as very frequently
is the case in our text and in similar ones, only the case of the
bridegroom being a Brahmaza has been taken notice of.

16. Comp. the passages quoted by Professor Stenzler on Para-
skara I, 8,18. Narayava has the following note: ‘To a duhitrz-
mat, i.e. to the father of a girl who has no brother, he shall give
a hundred cows and besides a chariot, in order to destroy the guilt
brought about by marrying a girl who has no brother.’ Possibly
we should here emancipate ourselves from the authority of the
commentators, and explain duhitr7mat ‘he who gives his
daughter in marriage,’ the bride’s father. Comp. Apastamba Il,
7, 18; II, 13,12; Weber, Indische Studien, V, 343, note 2.

15, 3. Probably the use of this verse on this occasion rests on the
assonance of its opening word akshan and aksha (rathaksha).

40 sANKHAYANA-GRIHVA-SUTRA.

4. And with the two (verses), ‘Pure are thy
wheels,’ ‘ Thy two wheels’ (Rig-veda X, 85, 12. 16);
of the two wheels the first with the first (verse)
and the second with the second (verse),

5. And the two bulls.

6. After (the wife?) has put, with this (verse),
‘In the box of the wheel’ (Rig-veda VIII, 80, 7),
a branch of a fruit-bearing tree into each of the
holes destined for the pins,

7. Or, if (such branches) are (already) fixed, has
recited (that verse) over them,

8. They then harness the two bulls with the two
(verses), ‘Harnessed be thy right one’ (Rig-veda I,
82, 5-6), (the bridegroom) reciting the half-verse,
‘White the two bulls’ (Rig-veda >, 85,10), over
them when they have been harnessed.

9. Now should any part of the chariot break or
burst, let him take the girl to the house of one who
keeps the sacred fires,

10. And repair (the damage) with the verse,
‘Cover thyself with the Khadiras’ (Rig-veda III,
53, 19).

11. A knot with the verse, ‘Him like a horse’
(Rig-veda X, 143, 2).

12. He then murmurs the five verses, ‘ May pros-
perity give us’ (Rig-veda V, 51, 11-15).

13. ‘Adorned with Kimsuka flowers’ (Rig-veda X,
85, 20), when she mounts the chariot;

14. ‘May no waylayers meet us’ (ibid. 32), at
a cross-way ;

15. ‘Which the woman's’ (ibid. 31), near a cemetery;

16. The half-verse, ‘O tree with thy hundred

6. See Nardyana’s note on samyagarta, p. 129 of the German
edition.

I ADHYAYA, 16 KHANDA, 3. 41

branches’ (Rig-veda III, 8, 11), he mutters near a
big tree;

17. ‘The good protectress’ (Rig-veda X, 63, 10),
when she ascends a ship;

18. ‘Carrying stones’ (Rig-veda X, 53, 8), when
she crosses a river;

19. Optionally (he) also (murmurs the same verse,
if that is done) with the harnessed chariot ;

20. ‘Up may your wave’ (Rig-veda III, 33, 13), at
deep places (in the river) ;

21. And (at such places) let her not look out.

22. The seven verses, ‘Here may delight’ (Rig-
veda X, 85, 27 seq.), when she has reached the house,
omitting the verses already employed.

Kuanpa 16.

1. ‘A bull’s hide’—this has been declared.

2. On that hide the husband makes her sit down
and sacrifices, while she takes hold of him, four obla-
tions (with the following formulas),

3. ‘With god Agni, with the earth-world of the
worlds, and the Rig-veda of the Vedas: therewith
I appease thee, N. N., svaha!

‘With god Vayu, with the air-world of the worlds,

16, 1. In chap. 15, 22 it is said that the bride arrives at the
house; in 16, 12, that she enters the house. Probably we are to
understand, therefore, that the sacrifice prescribed in this chapter,
Sfitras 2 seq., is performed before the house, like the Vastosh-
patiya karman (below, IJ, 4). The words, ‘has been declared,’
refer to the Srauta-sfitra (IV, 16, 2), ‘Having spread a red bull’s
skin, with the neck to the north or to the east, with the hair out-
side, behind the fire, they sit down,’ &c.

2, On anvarambha comp. the quotation in the note on
chap. IT, 2.

42 sSANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

with the Yagur-veda of the Vedas: therewith I ap-
pease thee, N.N., 5५218

‘With god Sfrya, with the heaven-world of the
worlds, with the SAma-veda of the Vedas: therewith
I appease thee, वि. N., svaha!

‘With god Kandra, with the world of the quarters
(of the horizon) of the worlds, with the Brahma-
veda of the Vedas: therewith I appease thee, N.N.,
svaha '

4. Or, ‘Bhas! What harm dwells in thee, bring-
ing death to thy husband, death to thy husband’s
brother, that I make death-bringing to thy para-
mour, N.N., svaha!’—thus the first (of the before-
mentioned formulas) may be joined with the first
Mahiavydahrvti, the second with the second, the third
with the third, the fourth with (the three Maha-
४8112115) together.

5. With (the verse), ‘With no evil eye’ (Rig-
veda X, 85, 44), let him besmear (her) eyes with
Agya salve.

6. (The bridegroom,) having touched the ends of
her hair with the three (verses), ‘How may us the
resplendent one...’ (Rig-veda IV, 31, 1-3),

7. And having quickly recited the four verses,
‘And those divine medicines’ (Rig-veda VIII, 18, 8),
at the end (of that text) with the word sv4ha (pours
out) the remainder on (her) head.

8. Here some place a boy of good birth on both
sides, in her lap, with this (verse), ‘Into thy womb’
(see below, chap. 19, 6),

8. It should be noted that the verse 4 te yonim is quoted here
only with the Pratika, while its full text is given below, chap. 19, 6.
Can the Sfitras describing this ceremony with the kum4ra ubha-
yatah-sugata be a later addition?

I ADHYAYA, 17 KHANDA, 9. 43

g. Or also silently.

10. Into this (boy’s) joined hands (the bridegroom)
gives fruits and causes (the Brahmavas) to wish an
auspicious day.

11, Thus she becomes the mother of male children.

12. With the rest of the hymn, ‘Stay ye here
both’ (Rig-veda X, 85, 42 seq.), they make them
enter the house.

Kuawpa 17,

1. With the verse, ‘I praised Dadhikravan’ (Rig-
veda IV, 39, 6), let them drink together curds.

2, Let them sit silent, when the sun has set, until
the polar-star appears.

3. He shows her the polar-star with the words, ``
‘Firm be thou, thriving with me!’

4. Let her say, ‘I see the polar-star; may I obtain
offspring.’

5. Through a period of three nights let them
refrain from conjugal intercourse.

6. Let them sleep on the ground.

7. Let them eat together boiled rice with curds,
with the thrée verses, ‘ Drink and satiate yourselves’
(Rig-veda VIII, 35, 10).

8. Let them serve the nuptial fire in the evening
and in the morning with the words, ‘To Agni svaha!
To Agni Svishéakrzt svaha !’

9. ‘Let the two men Mitra and Varumza, let the
two men, the Asvins both, let the man Indra and
also Agni make a man grow in me. Svaha!’—with

17, 2, 3. 1 have changed in the translation the division of these
525; the native authorities divide after dhruvadarsanat, while
I propose to divide after astamite.

44 sSANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

(these words she offers) the first oblation if she is
desirous of pregnancy.

10. For ten days they are not to set out (from
home).

Kuawpa 18.

1. Now the rites of the fourth day.

2. When the three nights have elapsed, he makes
offerings of cooked food (with the texts),

3. ‘Agni! Thou art expiation; thou art the ex-
piation of the gods. What substance dwells in her
that brings death to her husband, that drive away
from her.

‘Vayu! Thou art expiation; thou art the expiation
of the gods. What substance dwells in her that
brings sonlessness, that drive away from her.

‘Stirya! Thou art expiation; thou art the expia-
tion of the gods. What substance dwells in her
that brings destruction to the cattle, that drive away
from her.

‘To god Aryaman the girls have made sacrifice,
to Agni; may he, god Aryaman, loosen her from
this, and not from that place.

‘To god Varuza the girls have made sacrifice, to
Agni; may he, god Varuza, &c.

‘To god Pishan the girls have made sacrifice, to
Agni; may he, god Pishan, &c.’

4. The seventh oblation with the verse, ‘ Praga-
pati’ (Rig-veda X, 121, 10).

5. The eighth to (Agni) Svish/akrit.

18, 3. As to preto muzsdtu mAmutasé compare Paraskara I,
6, 2: preto muvkatu ma pated. This passage shows what
itak and amuta& refer to. Comp. Professor Weber's note 3 at
Indische Studien, V, 347.

I ADHYAYA, 19 KHANDA, 6. 45

Kuawpa 19.

1. Let him pound the root of the Adhydzd4 plant
and sprinkle it at the time of her monthly period
with the two (verses), ‘Speed away from here; a
husband has she’ ( Rig-veda X, 85, 21. 22), with
svaha at the end of each, into her right nostril.

2. ‘The mouth of the Gandharva Visvavasu art
thou’—with these words let him touch her, when he
is about to cohabit with her.

3. When he has finished, let him murmur,

4. ‘Into thy breath I put the sperm, N.N.!’

5. Or, ‘As the earth is pregnant with Agni, as
the heaven is with Indra pregnant, as Vayu dwells
in the womb of the regions (of the earth), thus I place
an embryo into thy womb, N.N.!’

6. Or, ‘May a male embryo enter thy womb, as
an arrow the quiver; may a man be born here, a
son after ten months.

‘Give birth to a male child; may after him
(another) male be born; their. mother shalt thou
be, of the born, and (to others) mayst thou give birth.

‘In the male verily, in the man dwells the sperm ;
he shall pour it forth into the woman: thus has
said Dhatar, thus Pragapati has said.

‘Pragapati has created him, Savitar has shaped
him. Imparting* birth of females to other (women) ,
may he put here a man.

‘From the auspicious sperms which the men pro-

19, 6. The first verse is that quoted already at chap. 16, 8.
The text of the verses quoted in this Sitra is very corrupt; see the
notes on p. 36 of the German edition.

46 SANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

duce for us, produce thou a son; be a well-breeding
cow.

‘Roar, be strong, put into her an embryo, achieve
it; a male, thou male, put into her; to generation
we call thee,

‘Open thy womb; take in the man’s sperm; may
a male child be begotten in the womb. Him thou
shalt bear; (having dwelt) ten months in the womb
may he be born, the most excellent of his kin.’

Kuyanpa 20,

1. In the third month the Pumsavana (i.e. the
ceremony to secure the birth of a male child),

2. Under (the Nakshatra) Pushya or Sravamza.

3. Having pounded a Soma stalk, or a Kusa
needle, or the last shoot of a Nyagrodha trunk, or
the part of a sacrificial post which is exposed to
the fire,

4. Or (having taken) after the completion of a
sacrifice the remnants from the Guha ladle,

5. Let him sprinkle it into her right nostril with
the four verses, ‘By Agni may good’ (Rig-veda I,
I, 3), ‘ That sperm to us’ (III, 4, 9), ‘May he succeed
who lights fire’ (V, 37, 2), ‘Of tawny shape’ (11, 3, 9),
with Svaha at the end (of each verse).

20, 3. On sunga compare the note of Nardyama and the verse
quoted from the Karmapradfpa, ए. 131 of the German edition.

On kusakan/aka Narayana says, kusakanfakam kuso
darbhas tasya kanz/fakahk 59. (sia, MS. Berol. Orient. fol.
602) tim va peshayitva. Ido not understand why the commen-
tators of Paraskara, whom Professor Stenzler has followed in his
translation of Par. I, 14, 4, make kaz/aka equal to 019.

5. Nasto dakshizata& stands here asin chap. 19,1. Asva-
layana I, 13, 6 has dakshiazasy4m nasika&y4m, and so has also

I ADHYAYA, 22 KHANDA, 7. 47

Kuawpa 21.

1. In the fourth month the Garbharakshama (i.e.
the ceremony for the protection of the embryo),

2. Sacrificing six oblations from a mess of cooked
food with (the six verses of the hymn), ‘ Agni, joined
with the prayer’ (Rig-veda X, 162),

3. With (the verses), ‘From thy eyes, thy nose’
(Rig-veda X, 163), verse by verse besmearing her
limbs with Agya salve.

Kuanpa 22,

1. In the seventh month, at her first pregnancy,
the Simantonnayana (or parting of the hair).

2. He causes her, after she has bathed and put
on a (new) garment which has not yet been washed,
to sit down behind the fire.

3. He sacrifices, while she takes hold of him, with
the Mahavyahr‘tis.

4. He cooks a mess of food,

5. According to some (teachers) boiled rice with
Mudga beans.

6. The implements used and the Nakshatra should
be of male gender.

7. (He then sacrifices with the following texts,)
‘May Dhatar give to his worshipper further life and
safety ; may we obtain the favour of the god whose
laws are truthful.

‘Dhatar disposes of offspring and wealth; Dhatar
has created this whole world; Dhatar will give a

Paraskara I, 13. Comp. the natthukamma treated of in the
Pali Buddhist texts (Mahavagga VI, 13) and in the medical
literature.

48 SANKHAY ANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

son to the sacrificer: to him you shall sacrifice, an
offering rich in ghee.’

(Besides) with the three verses, ‘ Negamesha, fly
away’ (Rig-veda Khailika sikta, after X, 184, vol. vi,
p- 31), and in the sixth place the verse, ‘ Pragdpati’
(Rig-veda X, 121, 10).

8. (The husband then) parts her hair, upwards,
beginning from the middle, with a porcupine’s quill
that has three white spots, or with a Darbha needle
together with unripe Udumbara fruits, with the
words, ‘Bhar bhuva/ 5५2."

9. He lays down (the thing he has used) in her lap,

10. Ties (the fruits) to a string of three twisted
threads and fastens them to her neck with the words,
‘Rich in sap is this tree; like the sappy one be thou
fruitful.’

11. (The husband) then says to lute-players, ‘Sing
ye the king—

12. ‘Or if anybody else is still more valiant.’

13. Having poured fried grain into a water-pot,
let him cause her to drink it with the six verses,

22, 8. Comp. above, chap. 12, 6.

10. Nardyava: tisy7bhis tantubhir vr7tte sGtre udumba-
raphalani... gale... badhnati. Ihave translated accordingly.
Paraskara I, 15, 6 uses the same expression trivrzt. Professor
Stenzler there translates it, on the authority of Gayarama, ‘dreifache
Haarflechte,’ and says in his note on that passage that, according
to Sankhayana, he would have to tie the things with a threefold
string to the neck of the woman, as if Sankhdyana’s statement
were different from that of Paraskara. But both authors have the
same word, and only the commentators differ in their explanations
thereof. >

11, Asvalayana more explicitly says (I, 14, 6), Somam rag4-
nam samgayet4m iti.

13. In my German translation there is a mistake which should
be corrected. Ihave there referred shalrzka to the verses RAk4m

I ADHYAYA, 24 KHANDA, I. 49

‘May Vishzu take care of thy womb, ‘I call Raka’
(Rig-veda X, 184, 1; II, 32, 4-8).

14. Let him then touch her (with the words),

15. ‘The winged one art thou, the Garutmat;
the Trivvzt (stoma) is thy head, the Gayatra thy
eye, the metres thy limbs, the Yagus thy name, the*
SAman thy body.’

16. Let him cause her to sing merrily,

17. Wearing, if she likes, many gold ornaments.

18. A bull is the fee for the sacrifice.

Kuawpa 28.

1. Let him pound the roots of the plants kakAtant,
mafakafatani, kosdtakt, of the egg-plant, and of the
indigo plant, and besmear (therewith) the place in
which she is going to be confined, in order to drive
away the Rakshas.

Kuawpa 24.

1. Now the Gatakarman (i.e. ceremony for the
new-born child).

aham, which are actually only five in number. The six verses
are Vishzur yonim, &c., and the five verses mentioned,

15. Vagasaneyi Samhita XII, 4.

16, 17. Narayama: modamanim harshayukt4m tam man-
galikair gitair gayayet.. .mahahemavatim bahvabha-
ranayuktam va gayayet.

24, x. Comp. Dr. Speijer’s essay on the Gatakarman (Leiden,
1872), Ndrayaza observes that, as it is prescribed below (chap.
25, 4) that a mess of food is to be cooked in the sQtikagni, here
the sitik4gni is established, and sacrifice is performed therein.
The Sfitra 1, 25, 4, from which it is to be inferred that the sfiti-
14871 should be kept, is considered, accordingly, as a Gwapaka
(see Professor Bihler’s notes on Apastamba I, 11, 7; Gautama

[29] E

50 SANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA,

2. Let (the father) breathe three times on the
new-born child and then draw in his breath with the
words, ‘ Draw in your breath with the €, breathe
within with the Yagus, breathe forth with the Sdman.’

3. Let him mix together butter and honey, milk
curds and water, or grind together rice and barley,
and give it to eat (to the child) thrice from gold (i.e.
from a golden vessel or with a golden spoon),

4. With (the verse), ‘I administer to thee honey
food for the festival, the wisdom (“veda”) raised by
Savitar the bountiful; long-living, protected by the
gods, live a hundred autumns in this world, N. N.!’—
(with these words) he gives him a name beginning
with a sonant, with a semivowel in it, consisting
of two syllables, or of four syllables, or also of
six syllables; he should take a kvzt (suffix), not a
taddhita.

5. That (name only) his father and his mother
should know.

6. On the tenth day a name for common use,
which is pleasing to the Brahmazas.

7. Let him pulverise black and white and red
hairs of a black ox, intermix (that powder) with
those four substances (see Sitra 3), and give it to
eat (to the child) four times: such (is the opinion
of) Mazdfkeya,

I, 31; Ndrdyava’s note on chap. 25, 4, p- 133 of the German
edition).

2. Abhyavanya should be corrected into abhyap4nya, as in
IV, 18, 1 nearly all the MSS. read nivata instead of nipata. The
Sambavya MS. reads in the text, trir abhyanydnuprazya; in
the commentary trir azyapadzyanuprazy4. Comp., on the ter-
minology of the different vital airs, Speijer, Gatakarma, p. 64 seq.;
Eggeling, 5. ए. E., vol. xii, p. 20.

I 4४६, 25 KHANDA, I. 51

8. If he likes (let him do so) with the words,
(28104 The Rig-veda I lay into thee, N. N., svaha!

‘Bhuvad! The Yagur-veda I lay into thee, N.N.,
svaha!

‘Svak! The SAma-veda I lay into thee, N.N.,
svaha!

‘Bhar bhuvak 5४३. Vakovakya (colloquies), Iti-
1858, and Puraza—Om! All the Vedas I lay into
thee, पि. N., svah4!’

g. The production of intelligence (is performed)
by thrice saying in his right ear, ‘Speech!’

10. And let him recite over (the child the follow-
ing text), ‘Speech, the goddess, united with mind,
together with breath, the child, uttered by Indra—
may she rejoice in thee, the goddess, for the sake of
joy, the great one, the sweet sounding, the music,
full of music, the flowing, self-produced.’

11. Let him tie a piece of gold to a hempen string,

12. And bind it to (the child’s) right hand until
(the mother) gets up (from childbed).

13. After the tenth day let him give it to the
Brahmazas,

14. Or keep it himself.

Kuyawpa 25.

1. After ten days the getting up (of the mother
from childbed).

8. Veti vikalparthe. bhfr vrgvedam ityddidaturbhir mantrair
asdv ity atra pfirveva (read pfirvavat?) kumdrandmagrahazapfr-
vakam kumaram prasayet. Nardyama.

12. Balasya dakshize haste. Ndardyaa.

25, 1, After ten days the impurity (asauda) that falls on the
mother at her confinement, ceases; see Gautama XIV, 16; Manu
V, 62; Vasish/ha IV, 21.

E2

sANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

on
we

2. Father and mother with washed heads, wearing
(new) clothes which have not yet been washed;

3. And so also the child.

4. Let (the father) cook a mess of food in that
same fire that has been kept from her confinement,

5. And let him make oblations to the Tithi of
(the child's) birth and to three constellations with
their (presiding) deities.

6. Let him place in the middle the oblation to
that constellation under which (the child) is born;
the deity, however, is constantly to precede (the
corresponding Nakshatra).

7. (He then makes two other oblations with the
verses,) ‘(May) this Agni, the excellent one, (give)
thee to-day life for (our) prayers; give us life that
we may live long,—(and,) ‘ Life-giving, Agni, be
strong by Havis; may thy face and thy seat be full
of ghee; drinking ghee, the sweet honey of the
cow, protect, as a father (protects) his son, here
पि. चि. The tenth oblation of the mess of cooked
food with the verse, ‘Thou, Soma, givest bliss to
the old one’ (Rig-veda I, 91, 7).

8. Having pronounced aloud (the child’s) name,

9. And caused the Brahmazas to say auspicious
words,

10. And having sacrificed in the same way every
month to the Tithi of (the child’s) birth,

11. He sacrifices, when one year has expired, on
the (ordinary) domestic fire.

4. Comp. the note on chap. 24, 1.

7. The first Mantra is corrupt; in the Asvalayana-Srauta-sfitra
(II, 10, 4) its text runs thus, dyush /e visvato dadhad ayam
agnir varenyah, &c. Comp. Atharva-veda VII, 53, 6.

11, ‘The words “every month” (Sfitra 10) retain their value

I ADHYAYA, 26 KHANDA, 20. 53

Kuanpa 26.

To Agni, to the Kvttikas.
To PragApati, to Rohit.
To Soma, to Mrigasiras.
To Rudra, to the Ardras.
To Aditi, to the two Punarvasus.
To Brzhaspati, to Pushya.
To the Serpents, to the Asleshas,
- To the Manes, to the Maghds.
9. To Bhaga, to the two Phalgunis.
10. To Aryaman, to the two Phalgunis.
11. To Savitar, to Hasta.
12. To Tvash/éar, to Kitra.
13. To Vayu, to Svati.
14. To Indra and Agni, to the two Vis&khas.
15. To Mitra, to Anuradha.
16. To Indra, to Gyesh¢ha.
17. To Nirvti, to Mala.
` 28. To the Waters, to the Ashadas.
19. To the Visve devas, to the ^ 51885.
20. To Brahman, to Abhigit.

SOW AK pa

(here also). Thus the s@tik4gni is to be kept through one year.
After the lapse of that year one should sacrifice every month on
the domestic fire as long as his life lasts. -As it is said “in the
‘domestic fire,” the sfitikagni is not to be kept any longer.’
Narayana.

26,1. This chapter is not found in the Sambavya-Grzhya, and
Narayana expressly designates it as kshepaka khazda. It is
a sort of appendix to the Sfitras 25, 5. 6; a sacrifice having there
been prescribed to three Nakshatras with their presiding deities, an
enumeration of the Nakshatras and deities is here given. Compare,
on similar lists, Weber’s second article on the Nakshatras (Abhand-
lungen der Berliner Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1861), pp. 289

seq., 315, 367 seq.

54 sANKUAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

21. To Vishzu, to Sravaza.

22, To the Vasus, to the Dhanish¢fas.

23. To Varuza, to Satabhishag.

24. To Aga ekapad, to the Prosh¢dapadas.

25. To Ahi budhnya, to the Prosh¢Aapadas.
26. To Pishan, to Revatt.

27. To the two Asvins, to the two Asvinis.
28. To Yama, to the Bharavzis.

Kuawpa 27.

1. In the sixth month the Annaprasana (i.e. the
first feeding with solid food).

2. Goat’s flesh, if he is desirous of nourishment,

3. Flesh of partridge, if desirous of holy lustre,

4. Fish, if desirous of swiftness,

5. Boiled rice with ghee, if desirous of splendour—

6. (Such) food, prepared with milk curds, honey,
and ghee, he should give (to the child) to eat.

7. After he has made oblations with (the verses),
‘Lord of food, give us food, painless and strong ;
bring forward the giver; bestow power on us, on
men and animals ;’ ‘Whatsoever’ (Rig-veda IV, 12,
4); ‘Even of great’ (ibid. 5), ‘Him, Agni, (lead) to
long life and splendour; sharp strength (mayst thou),
Varuza, king Soma, protection may Aditi, like a

27, 2-6. These rules stand here, in the beginning of the chapter,
as introductory remarks; the act of feeding itself (Sitra 10) does
not follow till after the sacrifice and the other performances pre-
scribed in 50795 7-9.

3. This rule evidently rests on the allusion of taittira (partridge
flesh) to the Taittiriya school.

7. Both metre and construction show that the Pada imam
Agna ayushe ४21९856 is incomplete; the Sambavya-Grvhya and
Taitt. Samhita IL, 3, 10, 3 add kr7dhi after vardase.

1 ADHYAYA, 28 KHANDA, 9. 55

mother, afford to him, and all the gods that he may
reach old age’—

8. And has recited over (the child) the verse,
‘ Powers of life, Agni’ (Rig-veda IX, 66, 19),

9. And has set him down on northward pointed
Kusa grass with (the verse), ‘ Be soft, O earth’ (Rig-
veda I, 22, 15)—

10. The act of feeding is performed with the
Mahavyéhritis.

11. Let the mother eat the remnant.

Kuayopa 28.

1, After one year the A(dakarman (i.e, the ton-
sure of the child's head);

2. Or in the third year;

3. In the fifth for a Kshatriya ;

4. In the seventh for a Vaisya.

5. Having placed the fire (in the outer hall; see
chap. 5, 2)—

6. And having filled vessels with rice and barley,
sesamum seeds and beans,

7. And having put down northwards bull-dung
and a layer of Kusa grass for receiving the hair,
a mirror, fresh butter, and a razor of copper,

8. He pours cold water into warm with (the verse),
‘Mix yourselves, ye holy ones, with your waves, ye
honied ones, mixing milk with honey, ye lovely ones,
for the obtaining of wealth.’

9. ‘May the waters moisten thee for life, for old
age and splendour. The threefold age of Gamad-
agni, Kasyapa’s threefold age, the threefold age of

28, 1. Kfi/akarman literally means, the preparing of the lock
or the locks (left when the rest of the hair is shaven).

56 sANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

Agastya, the threefold age that belongs to the gods,
that threefold age I produce for thee! N. वि. !’—with
these words he sprinkles the right part of his hair
three times with lukewarm water.

10. Having loosened the tangled locks, according
to some (teachers), with a porcupine’s quill,

rr. And having anointed (his hair) with fresh butter,

12. He puts a young Kusa shoot among (the
hairs) with the words, ‘ Herb, protect him!’

13. Having touched the hair and the Kusa shoot
with the mirror,

14. He takes up the copper razor with the words,
‘Sharpness art thou; the axe is thy father. Dono
harm to him!’

15. With (the words), ‘The razor with which in
the beginning Savitar, the knowing one, has shaven
the beard of king Varuza, and with which Dhatar
Brzhaspati has shaven Indra’s head, with that, ye
Brahmamas, shave this (head) to-day; blessed with
long life, with old age be this man N.N.!’ he cuts
the tips of the hairs and the Kusa shoot.

16. In the same way a second time; in the same
way a third time.

17. In the same way twice on the left side.

18. Under the armpits a sixth and a seventh time
at the Godanakarman (ceremony of shaving the
beard).

19. The GodAnakarman is identical with the
Atdakarman,

15. The parallel texts show that instead of Brzhaspatir we
have to read Brzhaspater, instead of adya, asya. So the correct
translation would be, ‘. . . with what Dhatar has shaven Brehas-
pati’s and Indra’s head, with that do ye Brahmamas shave this head
of this (child).’

I ADHYAYA, 28 KHANDA, 24. 57

20. (It is to be performed) in the sixteenth or in
the eighteenth year.

21. Atthe third turn of shaving, however, he gives
a cow and a garment that has not yet been washed.

22. Silently the rites (are performed) for girls.

23. To the north-east, in a place covered with
herbs, or in the neighbourhood of water they bury
the hairs in the earth.

24. To the barber the vessels of grain. To the
barber the vessels of grain.

24. See Sftra 6.

58 SANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SUTRA,

^ प्र ४६४4 II, Kuawna 1.

In the eighth year after the conception let him
initiate a Brahmaza,
2. With an antelope-skin,

1, 1. With regard to the standing terminology of the Upanayana,
or the initiation of the student, we may observe that upa-ni does
not mean, as, for instance, Professor Stenzler seems to understand
it, ‘to introduce a student to his teacher.’ Thus Paraskara’s Sfitra
II, 2, 1, ash/€varsham bréhmazam upanayet, &c., is trans-
lated by that distinguished scholar, ‘Den achtjahrigen Brahmana
soll er (beim Lehrer) einfiihren,’ &c. (comp. also Asvalayana-
Grzhya I, 19, 1). The texts clearly point to another translation of
upa-ni, for they show that the person that introduces the student
(upanayati or upanayate; the middle is used very frequently,
for instance, Satapatha Brahmaza XI, 5, 4,1; Sankh. II, 1, 25) is
not the father or a relation of the youth who could be supposed to
lead him to the teacher, but the teacher himself; he introduces
(upanayati) him to the brahmakarya, or introduces him with
himself, and the student enters upon (upaiti) the brahmafarya,
or enters with (upaiti) the teacher; he who has thus entered upon
studentship, is consequently designated as upeta (Sankh., IV, 8, 1;
Paraskara III, 10, ro), and for the initiation, which is usually called
upanayana, occasionally also the word ४ 47 2.11 is used (see the
Manava-Grrhya I, 22, quoted by Professor Jolly in his article, Das
Dharma-s&tra des Vishvu, p. 79). The following passages may be
quoted here as supporting our opinion on this terminology. At
Satapatha Brahmawa XI, 5, 3, 13 Saueya says to Uddalaka Aruzi,
‘I will enter (as a student) with the reverend One’ (upayani bha-
gavantam); and Arumi replies, ‘Come, enter (with me)!’ (ehy
upehi), ‘and he initiated him’ (tam hopaninye). Ibid. XI, 5, 4, 16
it is stated that according to some a teacher who has initiated a
Brahmama as a student (brahmazam brahmaéaryam upaniya) should
abstain from sexual intercourse, for a student who enters upon stu-
dentship (yo brahmaéaryam upaiti) becomes, as it were, a garbha,
&c. Finally we may add that the Buddhist terminology regarding
the entering into the order or upon a life of righteousness is clearly
connected with that followed, for instance, in the dialogue between

IE ADHYAYA, 1 KHANDA, 9. 59

3. Or in the tenth year after the conception.

4. In the eleventh year after the conception a
Kshatriya with the skin of a spotted deer,

5. In the twelfth year after the conception a
Vaisya with a cow-hide.

6. Until the sixteenth year the time has not passed
for a Brahmaza,

7. Until the twenty-second for a Kshatriya,

8. Until the twenty-fourth for a Vaisya.

9. After that (time has passed), they become
patitasAvitrika (men who have lost their right of
learning the Savitri).

Saukeya and Aruni, As Saukeya there says, upayani bhaga-
vantam, we frequently read in the Pali books expressions like this,
upemi Buddham saramam dhammaw Aapi anuttaram, &c.
(Dhammap. A//hakatha, p. 97, ed. Fausbdll), and as Aruni replies,
ehy upehi, Buddha says to those who wish to be ordained, ehi
bhikkhu, svakkhato dhammo, fara brahmakariyam, &c.
(Mahaivagga I, 6, 32, &c.; S.B.E,, vol. xiii, p. 74, note).

The counting of the years not from the birth but from the
conception occurs both in the Brahmanical and in the Buddhist
ordinances, comp. H. O., Buddha, sein Leben, seine Lehre, seine
Gemeinde, p. 354, note 1. Several Grzhya texts (for instance, Asv.
I, 19, 1. 2) admit both ways of counting the years. The number
of years given for the Upanayana of persons of the three castes
(Brahmazas 8-16, Kshatriyas 11-22, Vaisyas 12-24) is evidently
derived from the number of syllables of the three metres which are
so very frequently stated to correspond to the three castes, to the
three gods or categories of gods (Agni, Indra, Visve devas) &c.,
viz. the Gayatri, the Trish/ubh, and the Gagati. This is a very
curious example, showing how in India phantastical speculations
like those regarding the mystical qualities of the metres, were strong
enough to influence the customs and institutions of real life.

9 seq. All these are standing expressions recurring nearly iden-
tically in most of the Grehya and Dharma-sitras. In the rule
ˆ contained in 5002. 13 a number of the parallel texts have vivah-

eyuh or vivahayeyu4, others have vyavahareyu&. Comp.
Vasish/ha XI, 7g; Indische Studien, vol. x, p. 21.

60 SANKHAVANA-GRIHVA-SOTRA.

10. Let them not initiate such men,

11. Nor teach them,

12. Nor perform sacrifices for them,

13. Nor have intercourse with them.

14. Or (let them initiate students of) all (castes)
wearing a (new) garment that has not yet been
washed.

And wearing a girdle.

15. The girdle of a Brahmaza (shall be) made of
117८2 grass,

16. That of a Kshatriya (shall be) a bowstring,

17. That of a Vaisya a woollen thread.

18. The staff of a Brahmavza (shall be) made of
Palasa or of Bilva wood,

19. That of a Kshatriya of Nyagrodha wood,

20. That of a Vaisya of Udumbara wood.

21. That of the Brahmawa shall reach the tip of
the nose,

22. That of the Kshatriya the forehead,

23. That of the Vaisya the hair.

24. Or all (sorts of staffs are to be used) by (men
of) all (castes),

25. Whatsoever (the student) wears at his initia~-
tion, is at the disposal of the teacher.

14. This Sfitra should rather be divided into two, as indicated
in the translation. As tothe mekhala(girdle)comp. below, chap. 2, I.

21. There is no doubt that prazasammito (which Nardyaxa
explains thus, ‘praza is the wind [or breath]; [the staff should]
reach to the place where the wind leaves the body, i.e. to the tip
of the nose’) should either be corrected into, or explained as,
ghrazasammito; the Sadmbavya MS. has ghrazdntiko brah-
mazasya. Comp. Gautama I, 26, &c. The parallel texts agree
in assigning the longer staff to the higher, not as Sankhayana
does, to the lower caste.

II ADHYAYA, 2 KHANDA, I. 61

26. Having had him shaved all round (his head)
he should initiate him.

27. After (the student) has washed and adorned
himself,

28. (And) after (the teacher) has sacrificed, both
station themselves behind the fire, the teacher with
his face turned to the east, the other with his face
to the west.

29. Let him initiate him standing while (the other
also) stands.

30. [‘The firm, powerful eye of Mitra, glorious
splendour, strong and prosperous, a chaste, flowing
vesture, this skin I put on, a valiant (man).’]

Kuawpa 2.

1. ‘Here has come to us, protecting (us) from
evil words, purifying our kin as a purifier, clothing
herself, by (the power of) inhalation and exhalation,
with strength, this friendly goddess, this blessed
girdle’—with these words, three times repeated,
he ties the girdle from left to right thrice round.

26. After the introductory remarks given in the preceding Sitras
the ritual itself of the Upanayana is now described.

28. Narayaza: hutva ’nddesaparibhashatak (see above, I, 12, 13)
purastatsamgiakam hutva agnim sthapitignim (see above, I, 5, 2)
gaghanena ... tish/Aatah.

30. This Stra is wanting in most of the MSS. (see the note,
ए. 48 of the German edition). It contains the Mantra with which
the Agina (the hide mentioned in Sftras 2, 4, 5 of this chapter) is
put on. Nardyavza gives the Mantra which he says is taken from
the Madhyandina-Grchya (in the Paraskara-Grvhya it is not found),
after chap. 2, 3, and he states that the corresponding act to which
it belongs has its place after the rites concerning the girdle
(chap. 2, 7) and the sacrificial cord (2, 3).

62 SANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

2. (There should be) one knot, or also three, or
also five.

3. He adjusts the sacrificial cord with (the words),
‘ The sacrificial cord art thou. With the cord of
the sacrifice I invest thee,’

4. He fills the two hollows of (his own and the
student’s) joined hands (with water), and then says
to him: ‘What is thy name ?’

5. ‘lam N.N,, sir, says the other,

6. ‘Descending from the same ९७115 ?’ says the
teacher.

7. ‘Descending from the same 51115, sir, says
the other.

2, 2. Ramafandra: ‘ Let him make one, or three, or five knots,
according to (the student’s) Arsheya,’ i.e. accordingly as he belongs
to a family that invokes, in the Pravara ceremony, one, or three,
or five Azshis as their ancestors. Comp. Weber, Indische Studien,
vol. x, p. 79.

3. On the sacrificial cord (upavita) comp. the Grzhya-samgraha-
parisishéa II, 48 seq.

4. Narayana: Afdrya Atmano manavakasya kafgalt udakena
pirayitva, &c.

6, 7. A similar dialogue between the teacher and the student at
the Upanayana is given in the Kausika-s(tra (ap. Weber, Indische
Studien, X, 71). The student there says, ‘Make me an Arsheya
(a descendant of the zshis) and one who has relations, and ini-
tiate me.’ And the teacher replies, ‘I make thee an Arsheya and
one who has relations, and J initiate thee.’ As in this passage of
the Kausika-sfitra the teacher is represented as having the power
of making, by the Upanayana ceremony, an Arsheya of the stu-
dent, thus, according to the view expressed by Professor Weber
(loc. ला.» ए. 72 seq.), Sankhayana would even give it into the
teacher's power to make the student his saman4rsheya, i.e. to
extend his own Arsheya on as many pupils as he likes. Professor
Weber understands the sixth Stra so that the teacher would have
to say, samAnarsheyo bhavan brfhi (Narayava: bhavan छी
hiti brahmafdri bhavan brohity ata [Sitra 8] simhdvalokananya-
yenatranushagyate. According to Ramagandra’s Paddhati he is

II ADHYAYA, 2 KHANDA, I5. 63

8. ‘Declare (that thou art) a student, sir.’

9. ‘I am a student, sir, says the other.

10. With the words, ‘Bhfir bhuvaé svah’ (the
teacher) sprinkles thrice with his joined hands (water)
on the joined hands (of the student),

11. And seizing (the student’s) hands with (his
own) hands, holding the right uppermost, he murmurs,

12. ‘By the impulse of the god Savitar, with the
arms of the two Asvins, with 0512115 hands I
initiate thee, N. NY

13. Those who are desirous of a host (of adherents,
he should initiate) with (the verse), ‘ Thee, (the
lord) of hosts’ (Rig-veda II, 23, 1)

14. Warriors with (the verse), ‘Come here, do not
come to harm’ (Rig-veda VIII, 20, 1).

15. Sick persons with the Mahavyahrttis,

only to say samanarsheya). The student answers, samdn-
arsheyo ‘ham bho; Professor Weber, who supplies the imperative
25411, translates this, ‘ May I have the same Arsheya, sir I

I think it more natural to simply translate the teacher’s question,
‘Art thou sam4narsheya?’ (or, supplying bhavan brfhi from
5009. 8, ‘Declare that thou art sam4n4rsheya’), and the student’s
reply, ‘I am saman4rsheya, sir!’ Thus we ought possibly to
consider these formulas, which state a fictitious, ideal samanar-
sheyatva of the teacher and the students as a trace, and as far
as I can see as the only trace, of an ancient rule requiring a real
samanarsheyatva of teacher and student. As long as the ritual
differences between the different Gotras, of which, as is well known,
only a few traces have survived in the Vedic tradition, had retained
their full importance, it can indeed scarcely have been considered
as admissible that a young Brahmaza should be confided to the
guidance of a teacher who sacrificed and invoked the gods in
another way than the customs of the pupil’s own family required.

11. Narayaza: dakshinottarabhyam dakshiza uttara upari yayos
tau dakshizottarau, &c.

64 sANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

Kuawpa 3.

1. ‘Bhaga has seized thy hand, Savitar has seized
thy hand, Pdshan has seized thy hand, Aryaman
has seized thy hand. Mitra art thou by right,
Agni is thy teacher, and I, N.N., both of us.
Agni, I give this student in charge to thee. Indra,
I give this student in charge to thee. Sun, I give
this student in charge to thee. Visve devas, I give
this student in charge to.you, for the sake of long
life, of blessed offspring and strength, of increase of
wealth, of mastership of all Vedas, of renown, of bliss.’

2. ‘In Indra’s course I move; in the sun’s course
I move after him’—with these words he turns round
from left to right,

3. And grasping down with the span of his right
hand over (the student's) right shoulder he touches
the place of his heart with the words, ‘May I be
dear to thy inviolate heart.’

8, 1. Nardyaza: ‘Instead of asau (N.N.) he puts the name of
the student in the vocative case.’ I think rather that the teacher
here pronounced his own name. Comp. asav aham bho, chap.
2, 5, &c., and the Mantra in Paraskara II, 2, 20.

The text of the Mantra shows that the Addrya here seizes the
hand of the Brahmaéarin; comp. Asvalayana I, 20, 4-6, where it
is stated that he seizes the student’s hand together with the thumb,
quite in the way prescribed for the wedding at Sankh. I, 13, 2.
Comp. also Paraskara II, 2, 17. Narayaza: mazavakasya grehita-
sampu/a evakaryo Bhagas ta imam mantram gapan, &c.

2. Literally, ‘he turns round, following his right arm.’ रका
yana here has the following note, ‘ Akaryo ba/for dakshizam bahum
hastam aindrim 4vrztam iti mantrez4nvavartayet. ayam arthah,
ववा imam mantram gaptva tam bafum ka vakayitva pradakshind-
vartam karayet.’ I believe that the commentator here, as he fre-
quently does, instead of interpreting the text of Sankhayana, fathers

II ADHYAYA, 4 KHANDA, 4. 65

4. Having silently turned round from right to
left, :

5. And then laying his hand with the fingers up-
wards on his (i.e. the student’s) heart, he murmurs:

, Kuawpa 4.

1. ‘Under my will I take thy heart; my mind shall
thy mind follow; in my word thou shalt rejoice with
all thy heart; may Brvzhaspati join thee to me.’

2. ‘Thou art the BrahmaZéarin of Kama, N.N.!’

3. With the same text (see chap. 3, 2) he turns
round as before,

4. And touching with the span of his right hand
(the student's) right shoulder, he murmurs:

on him statements belonging to other Sfitras, in this case probably
to Asvalayana J, 20, 9. As our text has not anvavartya but
anvavrétya, and in the Mantra not 4vartasva but A4varte, we
must conclude that he turned round himself, and, as far as the
statements of the text go, did not cause the pupil to do so.

5. The gesture is the same as that prescribed in the Paraskara-
Grehya I, 8, 8 to the bridegroom at the wedding; the Mantra there
is identical with Sankh. II, 4,1, the only difference consisting in
the name of the god who is invoked to unite the two: at the
wedding this is Pragapati, of course, because he is ‘lord of off-
spring,’ at the Upanayana, Brzhaspati, the Brahman kar’ गोः
among the gods. It is very natural that at the Upanayana and at
the Vivaha, which both are destined to establish an intimate union
between two persons hitherto strangers to each other, a number of
identical rites should occur, for instance, the seizing of the hand;
see the note on Sfitra 1.

4, 1. Comp. Parask. I, 8, 8, and the note on chap. 3, 3. See
also Atharva-veda VI, 94, 2.

2. As to Kadmasya brahmafary asi, see my remarks in the
Introduction, p. 9.

3. He turns round as described, chap. 3, 2. Néardyama here
also explains parydvrztya parydvartanam karayitva. See
our note above, loc. cit,

{29} F

66 SANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

5. ‘A student art thou. Puton fuel. Eat water.
Do the service. Do not’ sleep in the day-time.
Keep silence till the putting on of fuel,’

6. With (the words), ‘Thine, Agni, is this piece
of wood,’ he puts the fuel on (the fire), or silently.

Kuawopa 5.

1. After one year (the teacher) recites the Savitri
(to the student), ।

2. (Or) after three nights,

3. Or immediately.

4. Let him recite a Gdyatri to a Brahmaza,

5. A Trish¢tubh to a Kshatriya,

6. A Gagati to a Vaisya.

7. But let it be anyhow a verse sacred to Savitar.

8. They seat themselves to the north of the fire,

g. The teacher with his face turned eastward, the
other westward.

5. According to Narayana the student correspondingly answers,
to the teacher’s word, ‘A student art thou,’ ‘I will’ (asani), to
‘Put on fuel,’ ‘I will put it on,’ &c. Eating water means sipping
water after having eased oneself. On the putting on of
fuel, comp. $ 6 and chap. ro. The whole formula given in
this ऽप is already found in the Satapatha Brahmava XI, 5,
4, 5

5, 7. The study of the Veda is opened by the Savitri. Comp.
Satapatha Brahmavza, loc. cit., §§ 6 seq.

4-6. The GAyatri which the teacher shall recite to a Brah-
mana is the same verse of which it is said below, chap. 7, 11, that
it belongs to Visvamitra (Rig-veda III, 62, ro); the Trish/ubh
which is taught to the Kshatriya is a verse ascribed to Hirazya-
stipa, Rig-veda I, 35, 2; the Gagati which is to be repeated to a
Vaisya is Rig-veda IV, 40, 5, belonging to Vamadeva, or Rig-veda
I, 35, 9, belonging to HiramyastGpa. See the note on chap. 7, 10.

9. The same position is prescribed, in the same words, for the
study of the main part of the Veda, below, chap. 7, 3; during

II ADHYAYA, 6 KHANDA, 2. 67

710. After (the student) has said, ‘ Recite, sir!’—

11, The teacher, having pronounced the word
Om, then causes the other one to say, ‘Recite the
SAvitri, sir!’

12. He then recites the SAvitrt to him, the verse
‘That glorious (splendour) of Savitar’ (Rig-veda
III, 62, 10); (firstly) pada by pada, (then) hemistich
by hemistich, (and finally) without a stop.

Kuawpa 6,

1. ‘Waters are ye by name; happy ones are ye
by name; sappy ones are ye by name; undecaying
ones are ye by name; fearless ones are ye by name;
immortal ones are ye by name. Of you, being such,
may I partake; receive me into your favour’—with
these words (the teacher) makes the student sip
water three times,

2. And hands over to him the staff with the five

the study of the Aranyaka the position is slightly different (VI, 3, 2).
According to Nardyava this SQtra would contain a nishedha of
the 50185 828 and 829 of the Rig-veda-Pratisékhya (p. ccxcii of
Professor Max Miiller’s edition).

10, x1. The Indian tradition divides these Sfitras after 4681724,
so that the words adhthi bho would have to be pronounced by
the teacher. Thus also Narayaza explains, A4arya adhihi bho 3
iti mazavakam uktva, &c. In my opinion it is the student or
the students who say adhihi bho. Thus the Pratisdkhya (Sdtra
831, ed. Max Miiller) says, ‘ They invite him with the words adhihi
bho 3, all the students the teacher, having embraced his feet.’
Comp. also below, IV, 8, 12, the greater part of which Sfttra is
word for word identical with these rules; VI, 3,6; Gautama I, 46;
Gobhila IT, ro, 38.

6, 7, 2, Ramagandra: ८. . . with this Mantra which the teacher
tells him, and which he (the student) pronounces, he sips water

F2

68 sANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SOUTRA.

verses, ‘Blessing may give us’ (Rig-veda V, 51,
11-15).

3. An optional gift is the fee for the sacrifice.

4. After (the teacher) has led him round the fire,
turning his right side towards it, (the student) goes
through the village to beg food.

5. (Let him beg,) however, of his mother first,

6. Or of a woman who will not refuse.

7. Having announced the alms to his teacher,
he may eat (the food himself) with the master’s
permission.

8. The daily putting on of fuel, the going for
alms, the sleeping on the ground, and obedience to
the teacher: these are the standing duties of a
student.

three times . . . He (the teacher) then gives him again the
staff, which he had given him before silently.’ I do not think that
this double handing over of the staff agrees with the real meaning
of the text; Gobhila also (II, 10) and Asvalayana (I, 22, x) pre-
scribe the dazdapraddna after the repetition of the Savitrt,
without mentioning that the same had been already done before;
Paraskara II, 2, 11 speaks of the handing over of the staff before
the recital of the Savitri, and does not state that it should be re-
peated afterwards.

All these ceremonies, the teaching of the Savitri as well as the
dandapradana, were considered as forming part of the Upana-
yana, even though a longer or shorter space of time (chap. 5, 1-3)
might elapse between the first arrival of the student at the teacher’s
house and the performing of these rites. This follows from chap.
11, Sitras 2-4.

2. These five verses have already occurred above at I, 15, 12.

3. Comp. I, 14, 13-15

4 seq. On the student’s begging of alms compare the more
detailed rules in Paraskara II, 5; Apastamba J, 3, &c

4. Comp. the passages quoted by Professor Biihler on Apas-
tamba I, 3, 31 (S. B. ए. vol. ii, p. 12)

II ADHYAYA, 7.KHANDA, 7. 69

——— -_-__-्‌~-~~{~{~{~{~{~-~~- ~~~] ~~~]

९ प्^524 7,

7. Now (follows the exposition) of the study of
the Veda.

2. Both sit down to the north of the fire,

3. The teacher with his face to the east, the other
one to the west.

4. After (the student) has reverentially saluted
the teacher’s feet and has sprinkled his (own) hands
(with water),

5. And has kneeled down with his right knee on
young Kusa shoots at their roots,

6. And has grasped round (those Kusa shoots) in
their middle with his hands, holding the right upper-
most,

7. The teacher, having seized them at their tops

7, 1. Narayava: ‘Now (atha), i.e. after the observance of the
Sukriya vrata,’ &c. On the Sukriya vrata which has to be under-
gone before the Anuvafana treated of in this chapter can be per-
formed, see the note on chap. 4, 1, and below, chap. 11, 9. One
would have expected that in the arrangement of Sankhayana the
rites belonging to the Sukriya vrata would precede the exposition
of the Anuvasana. Perhaps it was in consequence of the exact
analogy of the Sukriya with the Sdkvara, Vratika, Aupanishada
vratas, that the description of the former has been postponed till.the
latter had to be treated of.

Ramafandra’s Paddhati has the following remark here, ‘Now
the way of studying the Veda, called Anuvafana, is set forth. This
can be done only after the Sukriya vrata has been enjoined on
the student; before that nothing but the Savitri can be taught to
him.’

2 seq. Comp. above, chap. 2, 8 seq.

4. The way in which this reverential salutation should be per-
formed is described below, IV, 12, 7 seq.

6. On dakshizottarabhy4m, see chap. 2, rr and Narayama's
note there.

70 SANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

with his left hand, and with his right hand sprinkling
them with water, then makes the other say:

8. ‘ Recite the Savitri, sir!’ says the other.

g. ‘I recite the Savitri to thee!’ says the teacher.

10. ‘Recite the Gayatri, sir!’ says the other.

‘I recite the Gayatri to thee!’ says the teacher.

11. ‘ Recite the verse of Visvamitra, sir!’ says the
other.

‘I recite the verse of Visvamitra to thee!’ says
the teacher.

12. ‘Recite the Rishis, sir!’ says the other.

‘T recite the Ashis to thee!’ says the teacher.

13. ‘ Recite the deities, sir!’ says the other.

‘I recite the deities to thee!’ says the teacher.

14. ‘Recite the metres, sir!’ says the other.

‘T recite the metres to thee!’ says the teacher.

15. ‘Recite the Sruti, sir!’ says the other.

‘I recite the Sruti to thee!’ says the teacher.

16. ‘ Recite the Smr‘ti, sir!’ says the other.

‘I recite the Smrzti to thee!’ says the teacher.

17. ‘ Recite faith and insight, sir!’ says the other.

‘I recite faith and insight to thee!’ says the
teacher.

8 seq. Comp. Weber’s Indische Studien, vol. x, p. 131 seq.

10. Comp. the note on chap. 5, 4-6. Nardyava states, in
accordance with these Sftras of the fifth chapter, that in case the
student belongs to the second or third caste, an Uha (i.e. a corre-
sponding alteration of the formulas; from the Srauta-sitra, VI, 1, 3
the definition is quoted here sabdavikdram fham bruvate) takes
place. If he is a Kshatriya, he has to say, ‘ Recite the Trish/ubh,
sir !’—‘ Recite the verse of Hirazyastipa (Rig-veda I, 35, 2), sirl’
A Vaisya has to say, ‘Recite the Gagati, sir !’—‘ Recite the verse
of Hirazyastfipa (or, of Vamadeva, Rig-veda I, 35, 9 or IV, 40, 5),
sir!’ ४

17. Comp. Indische Studien, X, 132, note 1.

11 ADHYAYA, 7 KHANDA, 19. 71

18. In that way, according to what Avshi each
hymn belongs to and what its deity and its metre is,
thus (with the corresponding indications of “shi,
&c.) let him recite each hymn;

19. Or also, if he does not know the 5115,
deities, and metres, the teacher recites this verse,
‘That glorious (splendour) of Savitar’ (Rig-veda
III, 62, 10), pada by 7842, hemistich by hemistich,
(and finally) without a stop, and says, when he has
finished, ‘This (verse belongs to Savitar; it is a
GAayatri; Visvamitra is its A7zshi).’

18-20. I do not think that Professor Weber (Indische Studien,
X, 132) has quite exactly rendered the meaning of these Sitras
when he says, ‘ The teacher then (i. €. after the formula of Sftra 17
has been pronounced) teaches him first the Rzshi, the deity, and the
metre of each Mantra, In case he does not know them himself for
a Mantra, he recites the holy Savitri (tat Savitur varezyam). After
this he teaches him in due order either (1) the single Ashis, i.e, the
hymns belonging to each Ashi, or (2) the single Anuvakas,’ &c.—
It does not seem quite probable to me that the student should have
had to learn first the &shis, deities, and metres of the whole
Veda, before the text of the hymns was taught him; I rather believe
that hymn by hymn the indication of the Z/shis, &c. preceded the
anuvafana of the text itself, and with this opinion the statement
of Nardyana agrees, ‘Evam pfirvoktena prakarena rishidevatakhan-
dahpdrvakam tam tam Agnim fla ityadikam mantram mAazavaka-
yadaryo snubrhyat.*

19. According to Narayaza by esheti (literally, ‘This [is the
26 ) it is meant that the teacher, after having recited the Savitri
in the three ways mentioned, should say to the student, ‘ This Re& is
in the Gayatrt metre. If recited pada by pada, it has three pAdas.
Thus also this Ark, if recited hemistich by hemistich, has two
Avasdnas (pauses), the first at the end of the hemistich, the second
at the end of the third 4arawa (or 802). Thus also this ९1९ is
recited without stopping ; at the end of the three £aramas, or of the
twenty-four syllables, the pause (avasina) should be made. Thus I
recite to thee the Savitri; I recite to thee the Gayatri; I recite to
thee the verse of Visvamitra”’ ‘ For,’ adds NarS¥aza, ‘if the Gayatri
has been recited, the whole complex of the Veda being of that very

72 SANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA,

20. Let him thus recite (the hymns belonging to)
each Ashi, or (each) Anuvaka ;

21. Of the short hymns (in the tenth Mazdala) an
Anuvaka,

22. Or as much as the master may think fit.

23. Or optionally he may recite the first and last
hymn of (each) Azshi,

24. Or of (each) Anuvaka,

25. (Or) one (verse) of the beginning of each
hymn.

26. The teacher may optionally say at the begin-
ning of the hymn, ‘ This is the commencement.’

27. This has been (further) explained in (the
treatise about) the Azshisvadhyaya.

substance, a complete knowledge thereof has been produced.’ The
commentator then indicates a shorter form for the teacher’s words
which our Stitra prescribes by esheti, ‘This verse belongs to
Savitar; it is a Gayatri; its Rishi is Visvamitra.’

21. The Kshudrasitktas are the hymns Rig-veda X, 129-191.

24 seq. This seems to be an abridged method by which students
who had not the intention of becoming Vedic scholars, and probably
chiefly students of the Kshatriya and Vaisya caste, could fulfil their
duty of learning the Veda; a student who knew the first and last
hymn of a रा, or of an Anuvika, was, as would seem from these
50735, by a sort of fiction considered as though he had known the
whole portion belonging to that Avshi, or the whole Anuvaka.

27. Narayana explains Reshisvadhydya by mantrasamhita.
He says, ^ The Anuvaéana which has been declared here, is to be
understood also with regard to the svidhydya, i.e. to the Samhita
of the Mantras.’ I think there is a blunder in the MS., and instead
of tad apisvadhydye ... gieyam we ought to read tad r7shi-
svidhydye ...gmeyam. In this case we should have to trans-
Jate the quoted passage, ‘ . . . is to be understood with regard to
the R7shisvadhy ya, 1. €. to, &c.’—I think, however, that the true
meaning of the Sitra is different from what Narayana believes it to
be. The expression vy4khyatam apparently conveys a reference
to another treatise i@ which the rules regarding the Avshisvadhydya
would seem to have been fully set forth. The Srauta-sitra contains

II ADHYAYA, 8 KHANDA, I. 73

28. When (the lesson) is finished, he takes the
young Kusa shoots, makes of cow-dung a pit at
their roots, and sprinkles water on the Kusa (shoots)
for each hymn.

29. For the rest of the day standing and fasting.

Kuanpa 8,

1. In the afternoon, having obtained by begging
fried barley grains, he shall sacrifice them with his
hand on the fire according to the rites of the Agya
oblations with the text, ‘The lord of the seat, the

no passage which could be the one here referred to; we may
suppose, therefore, that either a chapter of a Pratisékhya is quoted
here, or a separate treatise on the special subject of the Rzshisva-
dhyaya. References to such treatises are found in the Sftra texts
in several instances, of which the most important is that.in the
Gobhila-Grzhya I, 5, 13, ‘On what day the moon becomes full, the
knowledge thereof is contained in a'special text; that one either
should study or ascertain when the Parvan is from those who have
studied it’

28. Narayana: ‘First stand the Mantras, then the Braéhmama,
because it contains the viniyoga (the ritual use of the Mantras),
then the Smrvti texts such as Manu, &c, When he has repeated
these texts to the student, after the end of the Anuvdéana, the
teacher should take from the student the Kusa blades which had
been taken up before for the sake of the Anuvaéana (see Sfitras 5
seq.),’ &c.—The teacher is made the subject of this rule also by
Ramaandra. On yathasfiiktam Narayana observes that accord-
ing to some teachers these water oblations were directed to the
Rishis of the different hymns (rzshin uddisyeti ke&it), This state-
Ment seems to be countenanced by IV, 6, 6. Comp. the note
below on IV, 9, ब.

2b. ‘This rule concerns the Brahmaéfrin’ Narayana. See also
Asvalayana I, 22, 11.

8,1. This is the Anupravazaniyahoma treated of by Asvalayana at
I, 22, 12 seq. There it is stated that this sacrifice should be per-
formed as well after the recitation of the Savitri as after the other

74 SANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

wonderful’ (Rig-veda I, 18, 6 seq.), verse by verse,
down to the end of the hymn,

2. Causing the teacher by (the gift of) food to
pronounce auspicious wishes.

Kuanpa 9.

1. In the forest, with a piece of wood in his hand,
seated, he performs the Sandhya (or twilight devo-
tion) constantly, observing silence, turning his face
north-west, to the region between the chief (west)
point and the intermediate (north-western) point (of
the horizon), until the stars appear,

2. Murmuring, when (the twilight) has passed,
the Mah4vyahrvtis, the Savitri, and the auspicious
hymns,

3. In the same way in the morning, turning his
face to the east, standing, until the disk of the sun
appears.

10, 1. When (the sun) has risen, the study (of the
Veda) goes on.

portions of the Veda, for instance, as the commentary there has it,
after the Mahindmnts, the Mahavrata, and the Upanishad have
been recited. Ndrdyava indicates the time of this sacrifice in the
words, ‘On that same fast-day (chap. 7, 29) in the afternoon.’

2. ‘He shall, by pronouncing such words as svasti bhavanto
bruvantu, dispose the teacher favourably so that he may say
svastil’ Narayana.

9, 1. On the Sandhya ceremony comp. chiefly Baudhayana II, 7.
Samitp4wi of course is not samyatap4zi, as Narayawa explains
it. On anvash/amadesa comp. Professor Stenzler’s note on
Asvalayana III, 7, 4.

2. The Svastyayanas are texts such as Rig-veda I, 89; IV, 31.

10, 1. This Satra evidently should be placed at the end of the
ninth chapter; comp. IV, 6, 9. The fact that, as the commentary
observes, the words nityam vagyatah (chap. 9, Satra 1) are to be

Il ADHYAYA, 10 KHANDA, 4. 75

Kuawpa 10.

2, Every day in the evening and in the morning,

3. He establishes the fire (in its proper place), =
wipes (with his hand the ground) round (it), sprin-
kles (water) round (it), bends his right knee,

4. (And puts fuel on the fire with the texts,) ‘To
Agni I have brought a piece of wood, to the great
G&tavedas; may he, Gatavedas, give faith and
insight to me. Svaha!

‘Firewood art thou; may we prosper. Fuel art
thou; splendour art thou; put splendour into me.
Sv4ha!

‘Being inflamed make me prosperous in offspring
and wealth. Svaha!

‘Thine is this fuel, Agni; thereby thou shalt grow
and gain vigour. And may we grow and gain
vigour, Svaha!’

supplied here also points in the same direction, That this Sdtra
has nothing to do with the Agnipariary4, of which the tenth
chapter treats, becomes evident also from Ramaandra’s Paddhati.

4. Narayana: samidham iti mantralingat samidham homaf,
mantrapréthaktvat karmaprzthaktvam iti nyayat.

In the Atharva-veda XIX, 64, 7 the MSS. have Agne samidham
aharsham. Professors Roth and Whitney have conjectured in this
passage agre instead of Agne. It is shown by our passage and
the corresponding ones in the other Siitras that the true reading is
Agnaye. Instead of ahdrsham we should read aharsham, as
all the parallel texts have. In the passage ‘Firewood art thou;
might we prosper,’ there is a play upon words untranslatable in
English, ‘edhossy edhishimahi.’ Perhaps instead of samiddho
1187 samardhaya we should read samr¢ddho mam samar-
dhaya. As the Mantra referred to the Samidh-offering,samr7ddha
could very easily be supplanted by the participle of sam-idh. In
the parallel texts indicated p. 139 of the German edition it should
be, Vag. Samh. II, 14a.

76 SANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

5. Having then sprinkled (water) round (the fire),

6. He approaches the fire with the verse, ‘May
Agni (vouchsafe) to me faith and insight, not-for-
getting (what I have learned) and memory; may

“this praiseful Gatavedas give blessing to us.’

[7. He makes with ashes the tripuzdfra sign
(the sign of three strokes) which is set forth in the
(treatise on the) Sauparzavrata, which is revealed,
which agrees with the tradition handed down by the
ancients, with the five formulas ‘ The threefold age’
(see above, I, 28, 9), one by one, on five (places),
viz. the forehead, the heart, the right shoulder and
the left, and then on the back.]

8. He who approaches the fire after having sacri-
ficed thus, studies of these Vedas, one, two, three,
or all. ।

Kuayopa 11.

1. Now (follows) the directing to the (special)
observances.

2. The rules for it have been explained by the
initiation.

3. He does not recite the Savitri.

4. This Sttra is wanting in one of the Haug MSS. and in the
Sambavya MS.; Rimaégandra’s Paddhati takes no notice of it. I
take it for a later addition. It should be noticed that the words
dakshizaskandhe . .. 4a pavikasu form a half Sloka.

11, x. On the four Vratas, of which the Sukriya precedes the
study of the main part of the Veda, the Sikvara, Vratika, and
Aupanishada that of the different sections of the Aranyaka, see the
note on chap. 7, x and the Introduction, p. 8. On the name of
the Sukriya Ramaéandra says, sukriyasabdo vedavast, tatsam-
bandhad vratam api sukriyam.

2, 4. See the note on chap. 6, 1. 2.

II ADHYAYA, II KHANDA, 13. 77

4. Some say that the handing over of the staff
forms the end (of this ceremony).

5. During the northern course of the sun, in the
time of the increasing moon—

6. The teacher having abstained through one day
and one night from sexual intercourse and from
eating flesh— “

7. With the exclusion of the fourteenth day and
of the eighth (of the half-month),

8. And of the first and last, according to some
(teachers), ।

9. Or on what day else the constellation seems
lucky to him, on that day he shall direct (the student)
to the duties of holiness according to the Sukriya
rite.

10. Let him observe (those) duties through three
days, or twelve days, or one year, or as long as the
master may think fit.

11. The Sakvara (observance), however, (is to be
kept) one year.

12. (So also) the Vratika and Aupanishada (ob-
servances),

13. When the time has elapsed, when the duties

4. On the davdapradana, see chap. 6, 2.

6. The pleonasm brahmakaryam upetya... brahmasart
should be removed by expunging brahma4art, which is omitted in
the Sambavya text. Comp. chap. 12, ऽप, 8; VI, 7, 2.

4. Comp. below, IV, 7, 7.

9. In the Simbavya text this Stra has a fuller form. It runs
there thus, ‘ . . . he shall direct (the student) to the duties of holi-
ness according to the Sukriya rite, the teacher saying, “Be a Sukriya-
brahmaAarin ;” the other one replying, “I will be a Sukriya-brah-
maAarin.” Thus also at the other observances he shall pronounce
each time the name of the observance to which he directs him.’

10. Comp. above, II, 5, 7.

13. The Samyu Barhaspatya, i.e. the verse beginning with the

78 SANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

have been observed, when the Veda has been studied
down to the Samyu-Barhaspatya-(hymn), let (the
teacher then), should he intend to instruct (the
student) in the secret (part of the Veda), ascertain
the time (through which the student has to observe
the special rites) and the rules to be observed, from
the (special) directions (that are handed down on this
subject).

Kuawpa 12.

1. After (the student) has eaten something in the
morning, in the afternoon, to the north-east—

words tak kham yor 4 vrinimahe, is the last verse of the Rig-
veda in the Bashkala redaction. See below, the note on IV, gs, 9.

On kalaniyamam, see Nardyama’s note, pp. 140 seq. of the
German edition.

12, 1 seq. The Indian tradition (with the exception only, as far
as is known to me, of the Sdmbavya commentary) refers the
ceremonies described in this chapter, like those treated of in chap.
11, as well to the Sukriya as to the Sdkvara and the other Vratas.
This is not correct. ‘The eleventh chapter gives the rites common
to the four Vratas; the Sukriya vrata is connected with no special
ceremonies beside those, so that the exposition of this Vrata is
brought to an end in that chapter. The last Sétra of chap. 11
marks the transition to the special rites which are peculiar to the
three othes Vratas, and are connected with the character of mystical
secrecy attributed to the Aramyaka, and thus it is with the exclusion
of the Sukriya that the twelfth chapter refers only to those Vratas.
The difference which we have pointed out between the two chapters
finds its characteristic expression in 50045 9 and ri of chap. 11,
compared with chap. 12, 13. 14; in the former Sitras the state-
ments there given are expressly extended to the Sukriya, the
Sakvara, the Vratika, and the Aupanishada, while in the latter
passage mention is made first of the Mahanamnis, i.e. the text
corresponding to the Sakvara vrata, and then the uttara#i pra-
karaz4ni (the following sections) are referred to, i.e. the Mahavrata
and the Upanishad, so that the Sukriya vrata or the texts, the study
of which is entered upon by that Vrata, are left out here.

There is a good deal of confusion in the several commentaries

II ADHYAYA, 12 KHANDA; 2. 79

2. Having sacrificed, the teacher then asks him
with regard to those deities to whom he has been
given in charge (see above, chap. 3, 1), ‘Hast thou
fulfilled the duties of holiness before Agni, Indra,
the Sun, and the Visve devAs ?’

with regard to the succession of the different ceremonies taught in
this chapter. They all agree in stating that after the lapse of the
year through which the Vrata is kept, a ceremony is performed
called Uddikshawik4, i.e. the giving up of the Diksh4, or pre-
paratory observance. This Uddikshamika consists chiefly in the
teacher’s ascertaining whether the student has fulfilled the duties
involved by the Vrata (see Sitras 2 and 3). Besides that, there is
no doubt that a repetition of the Upanayana (chap. 11, 2) also
formed part of the preparatory rites for the study of the Aranyaka.
As to the way in which these different ceremonies and the other
rites described in this chapter would have to be arranged according
to our text, it is perhaps best to follow the statements given in an
epitome from the balavabodhanartham R7shidaivatakhando-
paddhati (MS. Berol. Chambers, 199 2, fols. 13-16) ; the slight con-
fusion therein is not difficult to get rid of. There we read, ‘ The
Sakvara, however, is to be kept one year (chap. 11, 11). When
the Uddikshazika has been performed, and three nights (chap. 12,
6) or one day 4nd one night (ibid. 7) have elapsed, the Upanayana
should be performed as above (chap. 11, 2); with this difference
that at the end of the formula mama vrate, &c. (chap. 4, 1) one
should say, “ May Brzhaspati join thee to me for the holy observ-
ance of the Sakvara through one year, © Devadatta!” (On this
formula, resting on a misunderstanding of chap. 4, Sfitra 2, see the
Introduction, p. 8.) The rest is the same as at the Sukriya. Then,
when the year (chap. 11, 11) has elapsed, and the Uddikshazika has
been performed, and the three days or the night have passed (chap.
12, 6. 7), he should go out of the village... andin the north-eastern
direction,’ &c. (here follows the description of how the secret
doctrines should be taught to the student, according to Sankh. V1).
The confusion showing itself in the double mention of the Uddik-
shaika, before and after the Upanayana, should no doubt be put
to the account of the excerptor or perhaps even of the MS.; what
the meaning’ of the original Paddhati was is sufficiently shown in
the remarks on the following Vratas, for instance, on the Vratika
(fol. 16), ‘Now follows the Vratika vrata. It lasts one year (chap.

80 SANKHAYANA GRIHYA-SOTRA.

3. If he answers, ‘I have fulfilled them, sir !’—

4. The teacher three times envelops, from the left
to the right, with a fresh garment the face (of the
student) who is standing behind the fire, in front of
the teacher, with his face to the east.

5. He turns the skirt (of that garment) upwards so
that it cannot slip down,

6. (And says:) ‘Leaving off for three days the
putting on of fuel, the going for alms, the sleeping
on the ground, and the obedience to the teacher,
fast in the forest, in a god’s house or in a place
where Agnihotra is performed,-keeping silence, with
earnest care.’

1r, 12). When the Sakvara has reached its end [here we find
added at the margin of the MS., “ After the Uddikshawika has been
performed.” These words ought not to be received into the text;
in the corresponding passage on the Aupanishada vrata they are
not found] he performs the whole ceremony, beginning from the
smearing (of the Sthazdila with cow-dung), the drawing of the
lines, &c., as at the Upanayana ५. , and then, when one year
has elapsed, he performs the Uddikshawika, arid tMe rules [given
in chap. 12, 9 seq.] are observed as above.’ I think that here
the meaning of the text is correctly represented; first comes
the Upanayana, then follows the Vrata lasting one year, then the
Uddikshavika. After this ceremony the teacher gives to the
student the directions mentioned in chap. 12, 16 ; then follow the
three days, or the one night (chap. 12, 6. 7), and finally they both
go out of the village to the north-east, and in the forest they recite
the Rahasya.

On the whole ceremonies connected with the study of the Ara-
nyaka the sixth book should be compared.

5. Narayana: Vastrasya 02486 prantabhaga[m] uparish/t kritva
tatha badhniyad yatha na sambhrasyeta adhastan na patati tatha
vidheya7.

6. The things which the student here is ordered to leave off for
three days are the same that are mentioned above, chap. 6, 8, as his
standing duties. According to Narayaza this would be the Adesa
mentioned in chap. 11, 13.

Il ADHYAYA, 12 KHANDA, 19. 81

7. Here some (teachers) prescribe the same ob-
servances only for one night, during which he is to
stand.

8. The teacher refrains from eating flesh and from
sexual intercourse.

9. When those three days or that night has
elapsed, going out from the village he shall avoid to
look at the following (persons or things) that form
impediments for the study (of the Veda):

10. Raw flesh, a 27८22, a woman that has
lately been confined, or that has her courses, blood,
persons whose hands have been cut off, cemeteries,
and all sorts of corpse-like (animals ?) which enter
(their dens ?) with the mouth first (?), keeping them
away from the place where he dwells.

8. Comp. chap. rr, 6.

ro. With Satika is meant a woman during the first ten days
after her confinement, for which period the asaufa lasts.—A pa-
hasta is rendered by Nadrayava by AAinnahasta; the comment
on the SAmbavya-Gr:hya mentions 4yudhankitahastams ha.
The translation of the last words of this Sitra (sarvani 4a sava-
ripdmi yany 4sye na [or 4syena?] praviseyud svasya vasan
nirasan) is absolutely uncertain. Ndrdyaa says that such animals
as lions, serpents, &c. are designated in common use as savar-
pazi. (This literally means, ‘ having the form of acorpse.’ Imme-
diately afterwards Narayama gives a nearly identical explanation of
savarfipa as different from the one stated first. So perhaps we
may conjecture that his first explanation rests on a reading sarpa-
1070371; comp. the reading sarvarfipa of Paraskara.) Of these
the animals entering their dwelling-places with the mouth first
(asyena) are to be understood here as forming, when looked at, an
impediment for the study. Ndrdyava then says that other authori-
ties understand sava in the sense of a dead human body; then
savarip4zi are beings having the form thereof (tadrfipazi), such as
dogs, jackals, &c. The words yany asyena praviseyuA signify
that the study is impeded also on the sight of lions, tigers, &c.; for
these enter their dwelling-places with their faces first (? anu-
mukhai# krztva). The words svasya vasdn nirasan mean,

[29] G

82 sANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA,

11. Going out (from the village) in a north-eastern
direction the teacher sits down on a clean spot,
turning his face to the east.

12, When the sun has risen, he recites, in the
way prescribed for the Veda-study, (the Aranyaka
texts to the student) who is to keep silence and who
wears a turban.

_ 13. This rule is to be observed only for the
Mahanamni verses.

14. At the sections however that follow (after the
Mahanamnis) the other one hears while the teacher
recites them for himself.

15. He gives (to the teacher) the turban, a vessel,
a good cow.

16, (The teacher accepts the gifts) with the verses,

according to Nar., ‘when he—i.e. the teacher—goes out of his
dwelling-place”’ Ramafandra says that savarfipa either means
lions, snakes, and other dangerous animals, or nails, horns, and
other such things that fall off or are severed from the body.
The text of the Sambavya MS. is sarvanzi ka syfimartpani
yavanya (?) praviseyuA, which the commentary explains, sarvams
ka bhakshyavargams ka. I think there can be little doubt
that the text of Sankhdyana is correct (except that some doubt
will remain as 10 asyena or asye na), the more so as the
passage reoccurs, nearly identically, below at VI, 1, 4.5. As to
the translation we can only go so far as to venture the opinion
that the Sinkhdyana text does not admit the interpretation given by
Gayarima, and accepted by Professor Stenzler (who compares
Apastamba I, 11, 27; Gautama XVI, 4r) in Paraskara II, 11, 3 for
sarvarapa, which consequently should, in our opinion, be rejected
also in that passage of Paraskara. For ascertaining the true mean-
ing of savarfpa we shall have to wait until new parallel passages
have been discovered.

12. The rules for the Anuvasana have been given above in
chap. 7.

13. The Mahanamni verses are given in the fourth Aranyaka of
the Aitareyinas, See Sacred Books of the East, I, p. xliii.

II ADHYAYA, 13 KHANDA, 7. 83

‘Thou him’ (Rig-veda I, 18, 5), and, ‘High in the
sky’ (Rig-veda X, 107, 2), or (he accepts them) all
with the Prawava (i.e. the syllable On).

17. Here some prepare a mess of rice for the
Visve devas at all sections (ofthe Arazyaka) ;

18. For the gods to whom he has been given in
charge, according to Mazddkeya.

Kuyawpa 18.

1. Now (follow) the rules regarding the staff.

2. Let him not leave a passage between himself
and the staff.

3. Now should any one of these things, viz. staff,
girdle, or sacrificial cord, break or rend, the same
penance (takes place) therefore which (has Leen
prescribed) at the wedding with regard to the
chariot.

4. If the girdle cannot be repaired, he makes
another and speaks over it (the following verses) :

5. ‘Thou who knowest the distinction of pure and
impure, divine protectress Sarasvati, O girdle, pro-
long my vow unimpaired, unbroken.

‘Thou, Agni, art the pure bearer of vows. Agni,
carry hither the gods to our sacrifice and our oblation.

‘ Bearing the vows, the infallible protector of vows,
be our messenger, undecaying and mighty. Giving
treasures, merciful, Agni, protect us, that we may
live, Gatavedas!’

6. And he ties the sacrificial cord to the staff.

7. Here it is said also:

18. Comp. the second Sfitra of this chapter.
13, 3. See above, I, 1g, 9 seq.

G2

84 SANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

8. ‘Let him sacrifice the sacrificial cord and the
staff, the girdle and also the skin in water after
the completion of his vow with a Varuma-verse or
with the essence (of the Vedas, i.e. the syllable Om).’

Kuawpa 14.

1. Now (follows) the Vaisvadeva (sacrifice).

2. The rite of the sacrifice has been explained.

3. Let him pour oblations of prepared Vaisvadeva
food in the evening and in the morning into the
(sacred) domestic fire.

4.‘To Agni svaha! To Soma svaha! To
Indra and Agni svaha! To Vishzu svaha! To
Bharadvaga Dhanvantari svaha! To the Visve
devas svaha! To Pragdpati svaha! To Aditi
svaha! To Anumati svaha! To Agni Svish/akrit

8. Narayana here quotes Rig-veda I, 24, 6, which is the first
verse in the Rig-veda addressed to Varuwa (i.e. to Varuza alone,
not to Mitra and ए भाप, &c.).

14, 1. The rules regarding the Vaisvadeva sacrifice stand here,
as I have already pointed out in the German edition, ए. 742, in
a very strange position amid the matter that concerns the student,
and before the description of the ceremony that concludes stu-
dentship (the Samavartana; III, 1). On the first word of the
chapter, atha, Narayaza observes that thereby the householder
is marked as the subject of the following rules. It seems rather
forced to explain the position of this chapter, as Nardyawa does,
by pointing out that in some cases, for instance when the teacher
is away on a journey, a student also can eventually be called
upon to perform the Vaisvadeva sacrifice (comp. below, chap.
77, 3).

2. This ऽप shows, according to Nar4yama, that the Vaisva-
deva offering does not follow the ordinary type of sacrifice (the
Pratisrute homakalpa, as it is termed above, I, 9, 19), but the
form described in the Agnik4ryaprakarama, above, chap. 10,
3 seq.

II ADHYAYA, 14 KITANDA, 8. 85

svaha ’—having thus offered the oblations belonging
to those deities,

5. He then shall offer Balis (i.e. portions of food)
in the centre of the floor to the same deities; (then
another Bali with the words,) ‘Adoration to Brahman
and to the Brahmawas!’ and (with the verse),
‘Vastoshpati, accept us’ (Rig-veda VII, 54, 1) in the
centre of the floor to Vastoshpati.

6. He then distributes Balis, from the left to the
right, through the different quarters (of the horizon,
to the presiding deities) in due order (with the
words), ८

7. ‘Adoration to Indra and to those belonging to
Indra! Adoration to Yama and to those belonging
to Yama! Adoration to Varuza and to those be-
longing to Varuza! Adoration to Soma and to those
belonging to Soma! Adoration to Bvzhaspati and to
those belonging to Brvzhaspati

8. Then (turned) towards the disk of the sun,
‘Adoration to Aditi and to the Adityas! Adoration

5. ‘He shall offer a Bali to those deities, 1. €. to those ten deities
to whom he has sacrificed, to Agni, &c. (see 50072. 4), addressing
them with the word, “Adoration (to such and such a deity”)—
because in the other cases the word “ adoration” (nama/) has been
prescribed for the Bali” Néarayaza.

6, 7. The distribution of Balis begins in the east, which is the
part of the horizon sacred to Indra; it then proceeds to the
south, the west, the north, which are sacred respectively to Yama,
Varuza, and Soma. Finally the Bali belonging to Brzhaspati
and the Barhaspatyas is offered, according to Narayana, to the
north-east.

8. The commentators (see p. 142 of the German edition) differ
as to whether 4dityamazdala means the disk of the sun towards
which this Bali should be offered, or a place or an apartment of
circular form (Adityamazdalaripe mandaligare, as in my opinion
we ought to correct the reading in Narayaza’s note).

86 sANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SOUTRA,
to the Nakshatras, to seasons, to months, to half-
months, to days and nights, to years!’

9. ‘To Pushan, the path-maker; to Dhatar, to
Vidhatar, and to the Maruts’ — (thus) on the
thresholds.

10. To Vishzu on the grindstone.

11. ‘To the tree’—(thus) in the mortar.

12. ‘To the herbs’— (thus) where the herbs are
kept.

13. ‘To Parganya, to the waters’——(thus) near
the water-pot.

14. ‘Adoration to Sri’—(thus) in the bed at the
head, ‘to Bhadrakali’ at the foot.

15. In the privy, ‘Adoration to Sarvannabhati!’

16. Then (he throws a Bali) into the air, in the
evening with the words,‘ To the night-walkers,’ in the
morning with the words, ‘To the day-walkers,’ and
with the verse,‘ Which gods’ (Rig-veda I, 139, 11).

17. To the unknown deities to the north, and to
Dhanapati (i.e. the Lord of treasures).

18. With the sacrificial cord suspended over the
right shoulder he pours out the remnant to the south
with the verse, ‘They whom the fire has burnt’
(Rig-veda X, 15, 14).

19. When he has made his offerings to gods,
fathers (i.e. Manes), and men, let him give food to a
Srotriya (i.e. to a learned Brahmaza).

20, Or let him give alms (of food) to a student.

21. Let him immediately afterwards offer food to
a female under his protection, to a pregnant woman,
to boys, and to old people.

21. Comp. Bohtlingk-Roth s. ४, suvasini, and Professor Biihier’s
note on Gautama V, 25.

. ण ADHYAYA, 15 KHANDA, 3. 87

22. Let him throw (some food) on the ground for
the dogs, for the dog-butchers, and for the birds.

23. Let him eat nothing without having cut off
(and offered as a Bali) a portion thereof.

(Let him) not (eat) alone

25. Nor before (the others)

26. With regard thereto it has been said also in
the Azz, ‘In vain the fool gains food’ (Rig-veda X,

117, 6).

Kuanpa 15.

1. Should any one of the six persons (mentioned
in the Srauta-sQtra and in the 50.85 4-9) to
whom the Arghya reception is due, visit (him), let
him make (ready) a cow, a goat, or what (sort of
food) he thinks most like (thereto).

2. Let the Argha not be without flesh.

3. On the occasion of a sacrifice and of a wedding
let (the guest) say, ‘ Make it (ready).’

22, 23. Probably these Sfitras should be divided after iti.

23. ‘Parvam means, he should not eat before his relations
(bandhubhya’ pirvam prathamata’).’ Ndrdyama.

15, 1.° This SQtra presupposes the Srauta-sitra IV, 21, 1: ‘To
six persons the Argha reception is due, viz. to the teacher, to an
officiating priest, to the father-in-law, to a king, to a Snataka, to
a friend.’ Here the fourth person mentioned is the svasura,
while in the Grzhya text the expression vaivahya is used. It is
difficult not to believe that both words are used in the same sense,
and accordingly Narayava says vivahyak svasurak, Comp. Professor
Stenzler’s note on Paraskara I, 3, 13 Apastamba 1, 8,7; Gau-
tama V, 27.

Samanyatamam sadrisatamam mashadikam (mikhadikam the
MS.) annam. Narayana.

2, 2. These 50725 are identical with Paraskara I, 3, 29. 30.
The following Sfitra of Paraskara stands in the Sankhayana text as

88 sANKHAVANA-GRIIIVA-SUTRA.

4. The animal (offered) to the teacher is sacred to
Agni;

5. If offered to an officiating priest, to Bryzhaspati ;

6. If to the father-in-law, to Pragdpati ;

7. If toa king, to Indra ;

8. If to a friend, to Mitra;

9. If to a Sndtaka, to Indra and Agni;

to. Even if he performs more than one Soma
sacrifice during a year, let only priests who have
received (from him) the Arghya reception officiate
for him, not such who have not received it.

11. Here it is said also:

Satra 10. Probably Paraskara here represents the text which both
Sftrakaras follow, more exactly, and the enumeration given by
Sinkhayana in 50025 4-9 of the different categories of Arghyas
with the corresponding deities, is an addition to that original stock
of rules.

Apparently the two Satras 2 and 3 stand in contradiction to each
other, as 502 2 seems to prescribe that at the Argha meal in
every case flesh should be given to the guest, and Sfitra 3 specifies
only two occasions on which the killing of the Argha cow cannot
be dispensed with. Perhaps the meaning is this, that it is not
necessary, except in the cases of a sacrifice and of a wedding, to
kill a cow expressly for that purpose, but that in any case, even if
the cow offered to the guest be declined by him, the host should
take care that some flesh be served at that meal. So says Nardyana
in his note on Asvalayana-Grihya I, 24, 33, ‘Pasukarazapakshe
tanmamsena bhoganam, utsarganapakshe mamsintarema,’ Similarly
the Buddhists distinguish between eating flesh and eating the flesh
of an animal expressly killed in order to entertain that very guest.

6. The literal translation of vaivahya would be ‘a person related
by marriage.’ But comp. the note on Sfitra 1.

8. Priya of course does not mean g4matar, as is stated in a
number of commentaries. Gobhila says, priyostithiz.

11, Other persons, for instance a king, can claim the Argha re-
ception not more than once a year. Comp. Apastamba Il, 8, 73
Gautama V, 28, 29, &c.

II ADHYAYA, 17 KHANDA, I. 89

Kuawpa 16.

1, ‘At the Madhuparka and at the Soma sacrifice,
at the sacred rites for fathers (Manes) and gods
only animals may be killed, not elsewhere: thus
has Manu said. ।

2. ‘Both his teacher and his father, and also a
friend who does not stay in his house as a guest:
whatever these dispose, that let him do; such is
the established custom.

3. ‘Let him not consider as a guest a person
living in the same village, or one that comes in
returning from a journey; (but let him consider as a
guest only) one who has arrived at his house where
the wife or the fires (of the host) are.

4. ‘(The fire of) the Agnihotra, bulls, and a guest
that has come in at the right time, children and
persons of noble families: these burn up him who
neglects them.

5. ‘A bull, the Agnihotra, and a student, these
three prosper only if they eat; there is no prosperity
for them, if they do not eat.

6. ‘Day by day the domestic deities approach
the man who performs the domestic rites, in order
to receive their share; (that) let him pour out
to them.

Kuanpa 17.

1. ‘Even ifa man constantly gather grass and per-
form the Agnihotra, a Brahmaza who stays (in his

16, 3. Comp. Gautama V, 40, &c.
4. On the right time for the arrival of a guest, see Gautama,
loc. cit,

go SANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

house) without receiving honour takes away all his
good works.

2. ‘One should give (even) if it were only a
water-pot; one should sacrifice (even) if it were a
piece of wood; (even) down to one hymn or to one
Anuvaka the Brahmayagva is enjoined.

3. ‘When ona journey let him not fast; (during
that time) the wife keeps the vow. Let his son, his
brother, or his wife, or his pupil offer the Bali
oblation.

4. ‘Those who perform this Vaisvadeva sacrifice
in the evening and in the morning, they will prosper
in wealth and (long) life, in fame and offspring.’

Kuawnpa 18.

1. A student who is going to set out ona journey,
speaks thus to his teacher: ^

2. ‘Of inhalation and exhalation’—(this he says)
in a low voice; ‘Om, I will dwell’—this aloud.

3. (The teacher) in a low voice (replies), ‘To
inhalation and exhalation I, the wide-extended one,
resort with thee. To the protecting god I give thee
in charge. God Savitar; this student belongs to
thee; I give him in charge to thee; protect him;
do not forsake him.’

4. ‘Om, hail!’ the teacher aloud. ‘Hail!’ the
teacher aloud.

Here ends the Second Adhyaya.

18, 2. Perhaps vatsyami (I will dwell) is a sort of euphemism
for pravatsy4mi (I will go away).

III ADHYAYA, I KHANDA, 10. 97

AvuyAya III, स प्^ 24 1.

1. A bath (shall be taken by the student) when he
is going to return home (from his teacher).

2. ‘A bull's hide’—this has been declared. On
that hide he makes him sit down and have his hair
and beard cut and the hair of the body and the
nails.

3. Having had (the cut-off hair-ends, &c.) thrown
away together with rice and barley, with sesamum-
seed and mustard-seed, with Apamarga and Sada-
pushpi flowers,

4. Having sprinkled him (with water) with the
Apohish¢/iya-hymn (Rig-veda X, 9),

5. Having adorned him,

6. Having dressed him with two garments with
(the verse), ‘The garments both of you’ (Rig-veda
I, 152, 1),

7. He then-puts on him a golden ornament (with
the words), ‘Giving life and vigour’ (Vagasaneyi
Samhita XXXIV, 50).

8. With (the verse), ‘Mine, Agni, be vigour’
(Rig-veda X, 128, 1), the veiling (of the head is
done).

9. With (the verse), ‘House by house the shining
one’ (Rig-veda I, 123, 4) (he takes) the parasol,

10. With (the verse), ‘ Rise up’ (Rig-veda X, 18,
6), the shoes,

1, 2, Comp. above, J, 16, 1, and the note there.
4. Narayana says here, enam manavakam abhishifya abhishekam
snanam kdrayitva. Comp. Paraskara II, 6, 9 seq.

92 ` SANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

11. With (the verse), ‘Long be thy hook’ (Rig-
veda VIII, 17, 10) he takes a bamboo staff.

12. Let him sit that day in solitude.

13. With (the verses), ‘O tree! with strong limbs,’
and, ‘A ruler indeed’ (Rig-veda VI, 47, 26; >, 152, 1)
let him mount the chariot.

14. (Before returning home) let him first approach
a place where they will perform Argha for him with
a cow or a goat.

15. Orlet him return (making his start) from cows
or from a fruit-bearing tree.

16. With (the verses), ‘Indra, give us best goods,’
and, ‘Be friendly, O earth’ (Rig-veda II, 21, 6;
I, 22, 15) he descends (from the chariot).

17. Let him eat that day his favourite food.

18. To his teacher he shall give (that) pair of
garments, the turban, ear-rings and jewel, staff and
shoes, and the parasol.

Kuawpa 2.

1. Ifhe wishes to have a house built, he draws with
an Udumbara branch three times a line round (the
building-ground) with (the words), ‘ Here I include
the dwellings for the sake of food,’ and sacrifices in
(its) centre on an elevated spot,

2. (With the texts,) ‘Who art thou? Whose art

12. Pratilina evidently means the same thing that is so often
expressed in the Buddhist texts by pa/isallina.

18. The pair of garments are those referred to in Stra 6; on
the turban see 503. 8. On staff and shoes comp. Sfitras 10, 11;
on the parasol, 5003 9.

2, 1 seqq. On the house of the Vedic Indians, comp. Zimmer,
Altindisches Leben, pp. 148 seqq.

1 ADHYAYA, 2 KHANDA, 9. 93

thou? To whom do I sacrifice thee, desirous of
(dwelling in the) village? Svaha! र

‘Thou art the gods’ share on this (earth). From
here have sprung the fathers who have passed away.
The ruler has sacrificed, desirous of (dwelling in the)
village, not omitting anything that belongs to the
gods. Svaha!’

3. Having had the pits for the posts dug,

4. He pours water-gruel into them,

5- And with (the verse), ‘This branch of the
immortal one I erect, a stream of honey, promoting
wealth. The child, the young one, cries to it; the
cow shall low to it, the unceasingly fertile one’—he
puts an Udumbara branch which has been besmeared
with ghee into the pit for the right door-post.

6. ‘This branch of the world I establish, a: stream
of honey, promoting wealth. The child, the young
one, cries to it; the cow shall low to it that has a
young calf ’—thus to the left.

7. In the same way at the two (pits) to the south,.
to the west, and to the north.

8. With (the verse), ‘This branch of this tree,
that drops ghee, I erect in the immortal. The child,
the young one, cries to it; cows shall flock to it,
unceasingly fertile ones’—he erects the chief post.

9. ‘May the young child come to it, may
the calf....; may they come to it with a cup of
Parisrut, with pots of curds.

9. On parisrut, see Zimmer, Altindisches Leben, p. 281. The
words bhuvanas pari give no sense; Paraskara probably gives
the true reading, 4 vatso gagadaih saha (III, 4, 4; comp. 6072.
8: ४2505 ka Rudran Adityan Tsdnam gagadaiz saha; gagada is
explained in Gayarama’s commentary by anuga, anudara). The
word gagada of course was exposed to all sorts of corruptions ;

94 SANKHAVANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA,

Kuyawpa 3,

1. ‘Stand here, O post, firm, rich in horses and
cows,....; stand safely, dropping ghee; stand
here, fixed in the ground, prosperous, long-lasting (?),
amid the prosperity of people who satiate themselves.
May the malevolent ones not reach thee!

‘Hither are called the cows; hither are called
goats and sheep; and the sweet essence (?) of food
is called hither to our house.

‘Stand fast in the Rathantara; recline on the
Vamadevya; establish thyself on the Brzhat’—with
(these texts) he touches the chief post.

2. When the house has been built conformably
(to its proper dimensions), he touches the posts.

3. The two (posts) to the east with (the words),
‘Truth and faith '

4. Those to the south with (the words), ‘ Sacrifice
and gift!’

5. Those to the west with (the words), ‘ Strength
and power!’

6. Those to the north with (the words), ‘The
Brahman and the Kshatra!

7. ‘Fortune the pinnacle, law the chief post!

thus the text of Asvalayana has gdyatam saka; the Atharva-veda
(IIL, 12, 7) gagata saha; and from this gagat to the bhuvana
found in our text the way is not very long.

3, 1. According to Ndrayama the verse given in chap. 2, 9 forms
one Mantra with those in 3,1. The meaning of silamavatt is
uncertain. The word reoccurs in Rig-veda X, 75, 8. Pdraskara
(III, 4, 4) has sGnvetavati. On tilvila, comp. Rig-veda V, 62,
4. The following word is quite uncertain both as to its reading
and its meaning. Comp. p. 143 seq. of the German edition. On
kildla, comp. Zimmer, loc. cit. p. 281.

4. Comp. Paraskara III, 4, 18.

III ADHYAYA, 4 KHAWpA, 8. 95

8. ‘Day and night the two door-jambs!’

9. ‘The year the roof!’

10. With (the verse), ‘A bull, an ocean’ (Rig-veda
V, 47, 3) let him bury an anointed stone under the
pinnacle.

Kuyanpa 4.

1. At the sacrifice to Vastoshpati—

2. Having established the (sacred) domestic fire
outside with (the words), ‘I place (here) Agni with
genial mind; may he be the assembler of goods.
Do no harm to us, to the old nor to the young;
be a saviour to us, to men and animals !’—

3. Having put a new water-pot on fresh eastward-
pointed Kusa-grass,

4. And spoken over it (the words), ‘ Unhurt be
our men, may our riches not be squandered !’—

5. He sacrifices three oblations in the forenoon
with the Stotriya text of the Rathantara with re-
petition and Kakubh-forming ;

6. (Three oblations with the Stotriya) of the
Vamadevya at midday;

7. Of the Brzhat in the afternoon ;

8. The four Mahavydhvztis, the three verses,
‘ Vastoshpati!’ (Rig-veda VII, 54, 1-3), (the single
verses,) ‘ Driving away calamity,’ (and) ‘Vastoshpati,

4, 1. The sacrifice to Vastoshpati is celebrated when the sacri-
ficer enters his new house.

2, Comp. above, I, 7, 9.

5-7. On the way of reciting a Pragatha, so as to form three
verses, see Indische Studien, VIII, 25; Zeitschrift der deutschen
Morg. Gesellschaft, XXXVIII, 476. The Stotriya of the Rathan-
tara is Rig-veda VII, 32, 22 seq.; that of the Vamadevya, IV, 31,
1-3; that of the Brzhat, VI, 46, 1 seq.

96 sANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

a firm post’ (Rig-veda VII, 55,1; VIII, 17, 14), and
to (Agni) Svishfakvzt a tenth oblation of cooked
food at night.

9. Taking with himself his eldest son and his wife,
carrying grain, let him enter (the house with the
words),

‘Indra’s house is blessed, wealthy, protecting ;
that I enter with my wife, with offspring, with cattle,
with increase of wealth, with everything that is
mine.

Kuanpa 5.

1. ‘To every able one, to every blissful one, to
you I turn for the sake of safety, of peace. Free
from danger may we be. May the village give me
in charge to the forest. All! give me in charge to
the great one, —thus (he speaks) when leaving the
village.

2. ‘May the forest give me in charge to the village.
Great one! give me in charge to the all’—thus
(he speaks) when entering the village, not without
(carrying) something (with himself, such as fuel,

` flowers, &c.)

3. I enter the blessed, joyful house, which does
not bring death to men; manly (I enter) that which
is rich in men. Bringing refreshment, dropping
ghee (we enter the house) in which I shall joyfully
rest’—this verse is constantly to be pronounced
(when he enters the house).

5,3. For anyeshv aham we should read perhaps yeshv aham.
Asvalayana-Sraut. II, 5, 17 has teshv aham.

Ill ADHYAYA, 7 KHANDA, 5. 97

Kuawpa 6.

1. One who has not set up the (sacred Srauta)
fires, when setting out on a journey, looks at his
house.

2. (He murmurs the text,) ‘Do ye both, Mitra and
Varuza, protect this house for me; unscathed, un-
disturbed, may Pishan guard it till our return;’

3. And murmurs (the verse), ‘Upon the path we
have entered’ (Rig-veda VI, 51, 16).

Kuanpa 7,

1. When he then returns from his journey, he
looks at his house (and says),

2. ‘House, do not fear, do not tremble ; bringing
strength we come back. Bringing strength, joyful
and wise, I come back to thee, to the house, rejoicing
in my mind.

‘That of which the traveller thinks, that in which
dwells much joy, that I call the house. May it know
us as we know it.

‘Hither are called the cows; hither are called
goats and sheep; and the sweet essence (?) of food-
is called hither to our house.’

3. Having approached the (sacred) domestic fire
with the verse, ‘This Agni is glorious to us, this is
highly glorious. Worshipping him (?) may we suffer
no harm; may he bring us to supremity ’—

4. Let him pronounce auspicious words.

5. When accepting the water for washing the feet
he says, ‘The milk of Virag art thou; may I obtain

7,2. On kflala, see chap. 3, 1.
5. Padya #178& is the Virag metre, so far as it consists of

[29] प्र

98 sANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

the milk of Virag; in me (may) the milk of Padya
Virag (dwell) !’

Kuayopa 8.

1. When one who has not set up the (sacred
Srauta) fires, is going to partake of the first-fruits
(of the harvest), let him sacrifice to the Agrayana
deities with (Agni) Svish¢akvzt as the fourth, and
with the word SvAuA, on his (sacred) domestic fire.

2. Having recited over (the food) which he is
going to eat (the formula), ‘To Pragdpati I draw
thee, the proper portion, for luck to me, for glory to
me, for food to me!’—

3. He thrice eats of it, sprinkling it with water,
with (the verse), ‘From the good you have led us to
the better, ye gods! Through thee, the nourishment,
may we obtain thee. Thus enter into us, O potion,
bringing refreshment; be a saviour to us, to men
and animals!’

4. With (the verse), ‘This art thou, breath; the
truth I speak. This art thou; from all directions
thou hast entered (into all beings). Thou driving
away old age and sickness from my body be at home
with me. Do not forsake us, Indra !’—he touches the
place of the heart ;

Padas; in this connection, of course, the phrase is intended besides
to convey the meaning of ‘the splendour which dwells in the feet.’
Comp. Paraskara I, 3, 12 and Professor Stenzler’s note there. My
German translation of this 5002 of Sankhayana rests on a misun-
derstanding.

8,3. The Agrayaneshfi is the corresponding rite of the Srauta
ritual. Comp. Indische Studien, X, 343. The deities of that
sacrifice are Indra and Agni; ‘the Visve devas; Heaven and
Earth.

3. In the text read for tvaya gvasena, tvayasvasena,

गा ADHYAvyA, IO KHANDA, I. 99

5. With (the words), ‘The navel art thou; do not
fear; the knot of the breathing powers art thou; do
not loosen thyself,’ (he touches) the navel;

6. With the verse, ‘ Bliss with our ears’ (Rig-veda
1, 89, 8), (he touches) the limbs as stated (in that
verse)

7. Worshipping the sun with the verse, ‘ Yonder
eye’ (Rig-veda VII, 66, 16).-

Kuanpa 9.

1. ‘May the noisy (goddesses) keep you away
from slaughtering hosts. May the entire share,
O cows, that belongs to this lord of cows, suffer no
harm among you—(and)

‘May Ptishan go after our cows’ (Rig-veda VI,
54, 5)—this he shall speak over the cows when they
go away (to their pasture-grounds).

‘May Pishan hold’ (Rig-veda VI, 54, 10), when
they run about

‘May they whose udder with its four holes is
full of sweet and ghee, be milk-givers to us; (may
they be) many in our stable, rich in ghee’—and,
‘The cows have come’ (Rig-veda VI, 28), when they
have come back.

4. The last (verse) when he puts them in (into
the stable).

5. The hymn, ‘Refreshing wind’ (Rig-veda X,
169), (he recites over the cows), when they are gone
into the stable.

1684724 10.

1. The new moon that follows after the Phalguna
9,1. The noisy ones are the winds; comp. the passage of

Sankhayana-Srauta-sfitra, quoted p. 144 of the German edition.
H2

100 sANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SUTRA,

full moon, falls under (the Nakshatra) Revati: on
that (new moon day) he shall have the marks made
(on his cattle),

2. With (the words), ‘Thou art the world, thou-
sandfold prospering. To Indra may exertion (?)
give thee. Inviolate art thou, unhurt, sap, food,
protection. For as many (cows) I shall do this
now, for more (than these) may I do it in the latest
year.’

3. Of that (cow) that calves first let him sacrifice
the biestings with the two verses,‘ Yearly the milk of
the cow’ (Rig-veda X, 87, 17. 18).

4. If she brings forth twin-calves, let him sacrifice
with the Mahavyahv‘tis, and give the mother of the
twins (to the Brahmawzas).

Kuanpa 11.

1. Now (follows) the V7zshotsarga (i.e. setting a
bull at liberty).

2. On the Karttika full moon day or on that
day of the Asvayuga (month) that falls under (the
Nakshatra) Revati—

3. He sacrifices, after having kindled amid the
cows a well-inflamed fire, Agya oblations (with the
words),

4. ‘Here is delight; take delight here. Svaha!

10, 2. The reading of tva sramo dadat is doubtful. See the
Various Readings in the German edition.

11, 7. A part of this chapter is nearly identical with the corre-
sponding section of the Ka/haka-grzhya; see Jolly’s article, Das
Dharma-sfitra des Vishwu, &c. (Sitzung der philos. philol. Classe der
Bairischen Academie, 7 Juni, 1879), p. 39. Comp. also Paraskara
III, 9; Vishvu LXXXVI, and Jolly’s remarks, in Deutsche Rund-
schau X, p. 428.

Ill ADHYAYA, TI KHANDA, 16. IOI

Here is still-standing; here is (your) own still-
standing. Svaha!

‘I have let the calf join its mother. May the
calf, sucking its mother’s breast, support increase of
wealth among us. Svaha!’

5. With the verse, ‘May Pishan go after our
cows’ (Rig-veda VI, 54, 5) he sacrifices from (a mess
of sacrificial food) belonging to Pdshan.

6. Having murmured the Rudra-(hymns),

7. (He takes) a one-coloured, two-coloured, or
three-coloured (bull),

8. Or one that protects the herd,

9. Or that is protected by the herd,

10. Or it may also be red

11. It should have all its limbs complete, and be
the finest (bull) in the herd.

12. Having adorned that (bull),

13. And the four best young cows of the herd,
having adorned those too, ।

14. (He says,) ‘This young (bull) I give you as
your husband; sporting with him, your lover, walk
about. Do not desert us (?), being joined (with us)
from your birth. In increase of wealth, in food may
we rejoice. Svaha!’

15. When (the bull) is in the midst (of the cows),
he recites over (them), ‘ Refreshing, &c. (Rig-veda
X, 169, 1 seq.) down to the end of the Anuvaka.

16. With the milk of all of them he shall cook milk-
rice and feed Brahmazas with it.

6. Rig-veda I, 43. 1143 I, 33; VII, 46.

14. The translation ‘do not desert us,’ rests on the conjecture
mAvasthata; see the Various Readings, and the note on p. 145
of the German edition.

102 SANK HAYANA-GRIHYA-SOUTRA.

Kuawpa 12.

1. After the Agrahdyamt (or the full moon day of
the month Margasirsha) (follow) the three Ashéak4s
in the second fortnight (of the Margasirsha and of the
two following months).

2. At the first of these he sacrifices vegetables,

3. With (the verse), ‘She who shone forth first is
this (earth); she walks, having entered into this
(earth). The wife has brought forth (children), the
new-creating mother. May the three powers follow
her. Svaha!’

4. Now (the oblation for Agni) Svish¢akrt,

5. With (the verses), ‘She in whom Yama, the
son of Vivasvat, and all gods are contained, the
Ashéak& whose face is turned to all sides, she has
satiated my desires.

‘They call thy teeth “the pressing-stones ;” thy

12,1. On the Ash/aka festivals, of which some texts reckon
three, while others have four, comp. Weber, Naxatra (second
article), pp. 337, 341 seq.; Biihler, S. B. E., II, ए. 214; Ludwig,
Rig-veda, vol. iv, pp. 424 seq.; Atharva-veda III, 19. The last
Ashvaka, which is celebrated in the dark fortnight of Magha, is
called Ekash/aka; this Ash/aka is called the ‘ wife of the year,’ ‘the
image of the year,’ ‘the disposer of the days.’ If the Phalguna
month is reckoned as the first of the year, this Ash/aka precedes
the year’s beginning only by a few days; there are also some Vedic
passages which point to the Ekash/aka’s following shortly after the
beginning of the year; see Weber, loc. cit., p. 342.

3. Instead of navakrit the parallel texts (except the Mantrabrah-
mama II, 2, 12) have navagat, which is explained by nftanaviva-
havatf (Ludwig, loc. cit.); the ‘three powers’ are understood by
Madhava (in the commentary on Taitt. Savh. IV, 3, 11) as Agni,
Sfrya, and andra.

5. After pavamanaA there is evidently a word wanting that

III ADHYAYA, 713 KHANDA, 4. 103

udder is (Soma) Pavam4na;.... are the months
and half-months. Adoration to thee, O glad-faced
one! 52178."

Kuaynpa 13.

1. At the middle (Ash/aka) and in the middle of
the rainy season,

2. The four Mahavydhz‘tis (and) the four (verses),
‘They who have thirsted’ (Rig-veda X, 15, 9 seq.):
having quickly recited (these verses) he shall sacri-
fice the omentum ;

3. Or (he shall do so) with the verse, ‘Carry the
omentum, GAtavedas, to the Manes, where thou
knowest them in the world of virtue. May streams
of fat flow to them; may the wishes of the sacrificer
be fulfilled. Svaha!’

4. (Then follow) the four Mahavy4hvztis (and)
the four (verses), ‘They who have thirsted’ (see
Sdtra 2): (thus is offered) an eightfold oblation of
cooked food, together with the cut-off portions.

indicated the limb of the Ash/aka’s body identified with the months
and half-months,

13, r. On madhyavarsha, comp. Weber, loc. cit., pp. 331,
337. Ndrayava understands not ‘in the middle of the rainy
season,’ but ‘in the middle of the year ’ (see his note, ए. 146 of the
German edition). I cannot help thinking that the word madhy4-
varshe, given by the MSS. here and in Paraskara III, 3, 13, and
explained by Narayana, is a corrupt reading which we should
correct into maghyavarshe (‘the festival celebrated during the
rainy season under the Nakshatra Maghas’), or something like that.
The MSS. of Asvalayana-Grzhya II, 5, 9 have maghyavarsham, ma-
ghavarsham, m4dhyavarsham. Vishnu (LXXVI, 1, comp. LXXVIII,
52, and Professor Jolly’s note, Sacred Books of the East, VII,
ए. 240) mentions ‘the three Ash/akas, the three Anvash/akds,
a MAagha day which falls on the thirteenth of the dark half of
the month Praush/rapada.’ Comp. Manu III, 273, varshdsu ka
maghasu 4a; Yagwavalkya I, 260.

104 sANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

5. Or, ‘Interposed are the mountains; interposed
is the wide earth to me. With the sky and all the
points of the horizon I interpose another one instead
of the father. To N.N. svaha!

‘Interposed to me are the seasons, and days and
nights, the twilight’s children. With the months
and half-months I interpose another one instead of
the father. To N.N. svaha!

‘With the standing ones, with the streaming ones,
with the small ones that flow about: with the waters,
the supporters of all I interpose another one instead
of the father. To N.N. svaha!

‘Wherein my mother has done amiss, going astray,
faithless to her husband, that sperm may my father
take as his own; may another one fall off from the
mother. To N.N. svahé!’—these four (verses)
instead of the Mahavyahr‘tis, if (the sacrificer) is an
illegitimate child.

6. Or milk-rice (should be offered).

7. On the next day the Anvash¢éakya ceremony
(i.e. ceremony following the Ash¢aka) in accordance
with the rite of the Pizdapitr7yagiia.

Kuawpa 14.

1. On the last (Ashéaka) he sacrifices cakes,
2. With the words, ‘The Ukthya and the AtirAtra,
the Sadya#kri together with the metre—Ash/aka!

5. Instead of ‘N.N.’ (the text has the feminine amushyai) the
sacrificer inserts the name of his mother. For m4s4s, ardham4-
sas I propose to read, masais, ardhamasais.

4. On Anvash/akya, comp. Biihier, S. B. E., XIV, p. 55; Jolly,
106. cit., ए. 59.

71 ADHYAYA, I4 KHANDA, 6. 105

Preparer of cakes! Adoration to thee, O glad-faced
one. Sv4ha!’

3. A cowora goat is the:animal (to be sacrificed),
or a mess of cooked food (should be offered).

4. Or he may optionally offer food to a cow.

5. Or he may optionally burn down brushwood in
the forest and say, ‘ This is my Ashéaké.’

6. But let him not neglect to do (one of these
things). But let him not neglect to do (one of these
things).

Here ends the Third Adhy4ya.

14, 3-6. This is one of the passages which the author has taken
unchanged from a more ancient Sfitra; see Asv, II, 4, 8-11;
Gobhila IV, 1 (end of the chapter), The 5085 do not refer, as
their pozition would seem to indicate, to the third, but to the
second Ashéakéa.

5. Comp. Weber, loc. cit., p. 342, note 1.

106 sANKHAVANA-GRIHVA-SOTRA.

एप्प IV, Kuawopa 1.

1. Let him offer (Sraddha oblations) every month
to the fathers.

2. Having invited an uneven number of Braéh-
71187185, versed in the Veda, at least three, to sit
down as (representing) the fathers,

1, 1. Khandas 1-4 contain the rules regarding the Sraddha obla-
tions directed to the Manes. The dinners offered in connection
with these Sraddha sacrifices to Brahmazas and also—though
of this of course no notice is taken in Vedic texts—to Sramanas
stood in the first line among the exhibitions of liberality of lay
people towards priests and monks. Thus we find among the
stock phrases that constantly reoccur in the Pali Pisakas, the men-
tion of Samamas and Brahmamas ‘who have eaten the food given
to them out of faith’ (saddhadeyy4ni bhoganani bhuzgitva)—
wherein the ‘food given out of faith’ (saddhddeyya) either chiefly
or exclusively means the Sraddha dinners, which are so called
because the sacrificer gives them ‘full of faith’ (sraddhasam-
anvita, Manu III, 275) to the Braéhmavas and through them to
the Manes.

The principal form of Sraddha is that treated of in chap. 1,
which is designated in other texts (see, for instance, Asvalayana-
Grihya IV, 7,1) as parvaza sraddha. There are, however,
besides the parvan of the new moon, other times also considered
as admissible for the performing of this monthly Sraddha; see
Gautama XV, 2 seq.; Apastamba II, 16, &c.; and comp. on the
Sraddhas in general the passages quoted by Professor Jolly, Das
Dharma-sitra des Vishzu (Sitzung der Bair. Akademie, phil. Classe,
4 Juni, 1879), pp. 46 seq. ; Max Miiller, ‘India, what can it teach
us?’ pp. 234 seq., 374 seq.

2. ‘As the fathers” means: he invites the youngest, middle-
aged, and eldest Brahmazas to sit down in the place of the father,
the grandfather, and the great-grandfather’ (Narayawa). A similar
explanation of pitvzvat is mentioned by Narayava on Asvaldyana-

IV ADHYAYA, I KHANDA, 8. 107

3. And having strewn sesamum into an uneven
number of water-pots,

4. He shall pour them out over the hands of the
Brahmazas, assigning (this gift) to them with the
words, ‘N. N.! This to thee!’

5. After this they should be adorned ;

6. And after he has (respectfully) spoken to them,
and has put food into the fire,

7. Assigning (the food) to them with the words,
‘N.N.! This to thee!’ he shall cause them to eat.

8. While they are eating, he shall murmur the
Mahavyéhr‘tis, the Savitri, the Madhuvattya-verses
(Rig-veda I, 90, 6 seq.), and verses addressed to
the Manes and to (Soma) Pavamana.

Grthya IV, 7,2. My German translation of this Satra ought to be
altered accordingly.

Besides the Brahmazas mentioned in this Sftra, who represent
the fathers, according to all the commentaries, other Brahmanas
had to be invited as representing the Visve devas. Narayana gives
detailed statements as to the number of the paitr7ka and of the
daivika Brahmaaas to be invited, and though at first sight a Euro-
pean reader would rather be inclined to doubt whether at the
Sriddha ceremony, as the author of the text intended to describe
it, any Brahmavzas at all had to be present except the paitr/kas,
the Sfitra 2, 5 shows that the commentators are quite right in their
statements regarding both categories of Brihmavas.

5-7. It would be more natural to alter the division of the
Sfitras, so as to bring 4mantrya in the fifth,annaw fa in the
seventh 502. In this case we should have to translate:
5. After this, having (respectfully) spoken to them who have been
adorned (by him with flowers, ornaments, &c.); 6. And having
put (food) into the fire, 7. And having assigned the food to them,
&c., he shall cause them to eat.—The respectful address mentioned
in the fifth Sfitra consists, according to Narayana, in the announce-
ment, ‘ Ye Brihmazas, I will put (food) into the fire!’ (comp. Asv.-
Grthya IV, 7, 18), which he subsequently does with the formulas,
‘To Agni Kavyavahana svaha! To Soma Pitrzmat svaha! To
Yama Angirasvat Pitr?mat svaha!’ Comp. Baudhayana II, 14, 8.

108 sANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SUTRA,

9. When they have finished with eating, he shall
offer the lumps (of flour).

10. Before (their dinner he shall offer) the lumps,
according to some (teachers).

11. Behind (these he places the lumps) for their
wives, putting something between (these and the
preceding ones).

12. To the Brahmazas he shall announce the
remnants.

13. The rites of the putting (of food) into the
fire (see Sdtra 6), &c. have been declared (in the
Srauta-sitra) by the Pixdapitrzyagia.

Kuawpa 2.

1. Now (follows) the Ekoddish/éa (i.e. the Sraddha
ceremony directed to a single dead person),

2. With one strainer,

3. One (pot of) Argha-water,

4. One lump (of flour).

5. No inviting (takes place here), nor the putting

9. As to the way in which the Pizdas should be offered, Nara-
yana refers to the Srauta-sQtra (IV, 4). ।

10, 11. Pizddn evidently belongs to the tenth Sitra, not, as the
Indian tradition takes it, to the eleventh. Between the Pindas of
the fathers and those belonging to the mothers he puts, according
to Narayava, for instance, Darbha grass.

x3. Srauta-sfitra IV, 3 seq.

2,1. Eka uddish/o yasmin srféddhe tad ekoddish/am
(Nar.). This is the kind of Sraddha sacrifice which is to be per-
formed for one twice-born during the first year after his death ; see
Manu III, 247; Yagiavalkya I, 250.

3. This rule about the Argha water corresponds to those given
with regard to the Parvava Sraddha in the Sfitras 3 and 4 of the
preceding chapter.

5 ‘Because the 4vahana (inviting) is forbidden here, it follows

IV ADHYAYA, 3 KHANDA, I. 709

(of food) into the fire, nor (do) the Visve १८०३७ (take
part in this ceremony). ‘ Relished ?’—thus are they
to be asked whether they are satiated. ‘May it
approach (the fathers),’ instead of ‘imperishable.’

6. ‘Be satisfied,’ when sending them away.

7. Thus through one year, when one has died.

8. And (then) omission of the fourth one.

Kuawpa 3.

1. Now (follows) the Sapivdikarama (i.e. reception
of a dead person into the community of Pizda-
offerings with the other Manes).

that it must take place at the Parvaza Sraddha’ (Nar.). According
to Ramafandra’s Paddhati he shall say to the Brahmamas, ‘I will
invite hither the fathers;’ and when they give their consent, he
invites them with Rig-veda X, 16,12. Comp. Yagfavalkya I, 232
seq.,&c. Regarding the Visve devas comp. the note on chap. 1, 2;
as to the tr’ptaprasna (the question whether they are satiated)
comp. Manu III, 251; ४९, I, 240. At the Parvava Sraddha,
after the Brahmawas have finished their dinner and rinsed their
mouths, and after the Pizdas have been offered, the sacrificer says,
‘May what has been given at this Sréddha to our father N.N.,
who belongs to the gotra N.N., be imperishable!’ (comp. Yagi. I,
242.) This phrase is to be altered at the Ekgddish/a Sraddha in
the way indicated in this Sdtra.

8. After the Ekoddish/a Sraddha has been performed for a dead
person during the first year after his death, he is to be admitted, by
the Sapixdikaraza ceremony, among the other Manes, and receives
thenceforward his Pivda together with them at the ordinary Par-
vana 9404112. As the ritual of this Sraddha requires that the
number of the ‘fathers’ worshipped should be three, the accession
of a new person makes necessary the omission of the pra-pra-
pitamaha, who has now become fourth among the fathers.

3, 1. It appears to me that this whole chapter is a later addition
to the original text. The last Sftra of the preceding chapter,
treating of the omission of the fourth ‘father,’ which forms, as
shown in the preceding note, a consequence of the Sapindikarana,

110 SANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

2. When one year has elapsed, or three half-
months,

3. Or on a day when something good happens,

4. He fills four water-pots with sesamum, scents,
and water, ।

5. Three for the fathers, one for the (newly) dead
person,

6. And pours the pot that belongs to the (newly)
dead person out into the pots of the fathers with
the two verses, ‘They who commonly’ (Vagasaneyi
Samhita XIX, 45. 46).

7. Thus also the lump (of flour).

8. This is the Sapizdikaraza.

Kuanpa 4.

1. Now (follows) the Abhyudayika (i.e. the Srad-
dha ceremony referring to good luck).

supposes this ceremony to be known and to require no special
explanation. Had the intention of the author been to treat of the
Sapizdikaraza, this would have been the right place for mentioning
the Aaturthavisarga, and not, as we really read it, the end of the
chapter treating of the Ekoddish/a. As pointing in the same direc-
tion I will mention that the Simbavya-Grzhya, while giving the
first, second, and fourth chapter of this Adhyaya, omits the third.
Finally it seems decisive to me that the fifth (Parisish/a) book of
the Sankhiyana-Grzhya treats of the Sapizdikarama in a whole
chapter (V, 9), which shows that the text itself, as the author of
the Parisish/a read it, gave no exposition of this ceremony.

2. Narayana says that tripaksha means either three pakshas,
i. €. one month and a half, or one paksha deficient by three days,
1. €. twelve days. We need not say that the latter explanation is
inadmissible ; it evidently rests on a wrong conclusion drawn from
a passage of another Sfitra quoted by him, in which it is stated that
the Sapizdikaraza should be performed samvatsarante dva-
dasahe v4.

4,1. The Abhyudayika Sraddha has to be performed on such

Iv ADHYAYA, 4 KHANDA, 14. 17

2. In the fortnight of the increasing moon, on an
auspicious day,

3. After the sacrifice to the mothers has been
performed,

4. And an even number of (Brahmazas) versed in
the Veda have been invited to sit down;

5. In the forenoon ;

6. The rite is performed from left to right.

7. The murmuring with the omission of the verses
belonging to the Manes.

8. The Darbha blades are straight.

9. Barley is to be used instead of sesamum.

10. The lumps are mixed with curds, jujube fruits,
fried grain.

11, On inviting (the Manes, he should say), ‘ The
N&ndimukha (glad-faced ?) Manes will I invite.

12. ‘May the N&andimukha Manes be rejoiced,’
instead of ‘imperishable.’

13. ‘The Nandimukha Manes will I make speak,’
when he makes (the Brahmavas) speak.

14. ‘(Was it) well done ?’—thus are they to be
asked whether they are satiated.

occasions as the birth of a son, the marriage of > son or a daughter,
the performance of ceremonies such as the namakarman, 4da-
karman, &c. See Yagfavalkya I, 249.

3. A Srdddha ceremony directed to the mothers here precedes
that consecrated to the fathers.

6. Professor Stenzler’s translation of Yagfavalkya, loc. cit. (pra-
dakshiztivritka = die Ehrfurcht beobachtend), has to be corrected
according to this Sfitra.

4. See chap. 1, 8. g. See chap. 1, 3.

11. Concerning the ‘invitation’ (4vahana)see the note on chap. 2, 5.

12. See chap. 2, 5 and the note there.

„ 13. ‘ When he causes them to say Svadha.’ Narayana. Comp.
Asv.-Grzhya IV, 7, 30.
14. Comp. chap. 2, 5.

112 sANKHAYANA-GRIHVA-SOTRA.

15. The rest is the same (as in the other kinds of
Sraddha rites), as far as it is not prohihited (by
contrary rules).

Kuawpa 5.

1. Now (follows) the U pAkaraza (i.e. the ceremony
by which the annual course of study is opened).

2. When the herbs appear, under the Nakshatra
Hasta or Sravaza,

3. Let him make oblations of the flour of fried
barley and of grains, mixed with curds and ghee,
with the (whole) Veda, verse by verse: thus say
some (teachers).

4. Or with the first verses of the Sfktas and
Anuvakas,

5. With the first verses of the Adhyayas and of
the sections belonging to the (different) Ashis, ac-
cording to Mazdikeya.

6. But Kaushitaki has said :

7. ‘I praise Agni the Purohita’ (Rig-veda I, 1, 1),
this one verse,

8. ‘The Kushumbhaka (mungoose ?) has said it;’
‘If thou criest, O bird, announce luck to us ;’ ‘Sung
by Gamadagni;’ ‘In thy abode the whole world rests;’

5, 1. As to the Upakaraza, see the statements of Professor
Weber in his second article on the Nakshatras, Abhandlungen der
Berliner Akademie, 1861, p. 338, and of Professor Bihler in his
notes on Apastamba, 8. 2. E., II, pp. 1710, 111.

2. The Nakshatra ७2४28 is evidently considered as particu-
larly fit for this occasion because of its name containing an allusion
to sruti, &c.

4. 1 have followed Nardyaxa, but perhaps I ought to have trans-
lated, ‘Saktas or Anuvakas,’ and in the fifth Stra, ‘Adhya4yas or
the sections, &c.’

IV ADHYAYA, 5 KHANDA, 13. 113

‘Come to our sacrifice, O you that are worthy of
sacrifice, with care ;’ ‘Whosoever, be he ours, be he
alien ;’ ‘Look on, look about ;’ ‘Come here, Agni,
the Maruts’ friend;’ ‘The oblation, O king, cooked
for thee :’ each time two verses,

9. ‘ That blessing and bliss we choose’—this one
verse (the first and last verse of each Mazdala).

10, (Taking something) of the remnants of the
sacrificed (food) they partake of that sacrificial food
with this (verse), ‘I praised Dadhikravan’ (Rig-
veda IV, 39, 6).

11. They sip water, sit down,

12, Murmur the Mahavydahr‘tis, the Savitri, and
the auspicious hymns commencing from the beginning
of the Veda,

13. And cause the teacher to pronounce auspicious
wishes.

g. According to Kaushitaki, the oblations are made with the first
and last rzkas of each Mandala. The last 774 of the tenth Mandala
quoted here, tak kham yor 2 vrinimahe, is different from the
verse with which our Samhita (the Sakala Samhita of the Rig-veda)
closes. It is well known that tak kham yor 4 vrinimahe is the
last verse in the Bashkala Sakha which was adopted by the Sankha-
yana school (comp. Indische Studien, IV, 431; Weber, Verzeich-
niss der Berliner Sanskrit-Handschriften, p. 314, &c.; Indische
Literaturgeschichte, second edition, Nachtrag, p. 2). It was also
known long since that the Bashkala Sakha of the Rig-veda con-
tains eight hymns more than the Sakala Sikha. The A’arazavyfha
Bhashya (comp. Dr. von Schroeder’s Introduction to his excellent
edition of the Maitrayant Samhita, vol. i, p. xxiv), known to me
through the kindness of Professor Weber, tells which eight hymns
these are. There it is said (folio 22 of Professor Weber’s MS.)
that in the Bashkala Samhita there followed after VIII, 48 the first
two of the Valakhilya hymns, after VIII, 94 the Valakhilya hymns
3-7, and at the end of the whole collection the so-called samgvana
hymn (see Professor Max Miiller’s edition, vol. vi, p. 32), which ends
with the very verse quoted in our Sfitra, tak kham yor 4 ए
nimahe.,

{29} I

114 sANKHAVANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

14. Of this (ceremony) it is also said,

15. ‘Desirous (of acquiring) for the hymns in-
exhaustible vigour, reverence, and also soundness,
the ९७11715, by the power of their austerities, have
discovered the Upakarman.

16. ‘ Therefore a constant performer of the six
kinds of works should, in order that his Mantras
might be successful, perform the Upakarman—so they
say—if he wishes for success of his (holy) works.

17. ‘At the time of the Updkarman and of the
Utsarga an interruption (of the Veda-study) shall
take place for (three days and) three nights, likewise
at the Ash¢akds for one day and one night, and so on
the last night of each season,”

Kuawpa 6.

x. On the first day of the bright fortnight of
Magha,

2. To the north-east,

3. In a place covered with herbs,

4. Having murmured the hymns sacred to the
Sun, ‘Upwards that Gatavedas’ (Rig-veda I, 50),
‘The bright face of the gods’ (I, 115), ‘ Adoration
to Mitra’s (eye)’ (X, 37), ‘From the sky (where he
dwells) may 50798 protect us’ (X, 158),

16. The six kinds of works are, performing sacrifices (yagana),
officiating at the sacrifices of others (yagana), studying the Veda
(adhyayana), teaching the Veda to others(adhydpana), giving (dana),
and accepting gifts (pratigraha). Narayana.

17. Concerning the Utsarga, see chap. 6. This Sloka occurs
also Manu IV, 779 with the reading kshepazam instead of ksha-
pazam (‘kshapazam Ahandasam virama anadhydyah,’ Nardyana).
Kshapaam is correct.

6, 1. This Khanda treats of the Utsarga, i.e. the ceremony per-
formed at the end of the term.

Iv ADHYAVA, 7 KHANDA, 7. 115

5. And having thrown clods of earth (on the
ground) to the different quarters (of the horizon),
from the left to the right, with the hymn, ‘A ruler
indeed’ (Rig-veda X, 152), verse by verse,

6. And having satiated (with water) the /?shis, the
metres, the deities, faith and insight, and the fathers
man by man,

7. They interrupt (the study of) the hymns for
six months and a half,

8. Or for five and a half.

9. But if they (wish to) recite them (nevertheless),
let the recitation go on after a pause of one day and
one night.

Kuanpa 7.

1. Now the interruption (of the Veda recitation) :—

2. In the case of prodigies until the same time
(next day),

3. And in the case of other miracles ;

4. In the case of lightning, thunder, and rains
(the recitation shall be interrupted) till the twilight
has thrice passed;

5. At a Sraddha-dinner for one day ;

6. If a death (of relations) or birth has happened,
for ten days ;

7. On the fourteenth days (of the fortnights), the
new moon days, and the Ash¢aka days,

6. On the tarpava, comp. chaps. 9 and 10,

7, 2. The translation of 4kalam given in my German edition
(Wahrend der betreffenden Zeit) is wrong: comp. the commentary
there quoted at p. 150; Gautama XVI, 22; Professor Stenzler’s
note on Paraskara II, 11, 2.

6. Agham sapizdasodakayor maranam. Nar*yana.

4. According to Narayana the 4a at the end of this Satra would

12

116 sSANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA,

8. And on misty days.

9. And when the teacher has died, for ten days ;

10. When he has heard of it, for three days ;

11. And (on the death) of those whose family-
head he is. ‘i

12, On receiving (gifts) as at the Sraddha.

13. On (the death of) a fellow-student ;

14. When he has followed (the funeral of) a dead
person,

15. And when he has laid down the lumps of
flour to the fathers.

16. At night ;

17. During twilight ;

18. On the full and change of the moon;

19. After sunset ;

20. In the neighbourhood of a 60472. ;

21. When the sound of a Saman is heard ;

22. Ona burial ground ;

be intended to convey the meaning that on the pratipad days of
each fortnight the study should also be interrupted.

8. The translation of nabhya is quite conjectural. Narayana
gives a different meaning to this word; comp. p. 150 of the
German edition.

11. Akaryaputradayah. Narayana.

21. The reason why the recitation of the Rig-veda is forbidden
when the sound of a Sdman is heard, becomes manifest, for in-
stance, from Apastamba I, 10, 7, where the discontinuance of the
Veda-study is prescribed when the barking of dogs, the braying of
asses, the cry of a wolf, &c., the sound of musical instruments, of
weeping, and of a Saman is heard. Loud sounds like these would
disturb the recitation of Rk or Yagus texts. A very curious opi-
nion has been recently brought forward by Professor Aufrecht (see
his edition of the Rig-veda, second edition, vol. ii, p. xxxviii) that
the incompatibility of the recitation of Rr hymns and of Simans
‘beruht auf der Kenntniss von der Willkiir und der zum Theil
unwiirdigen Weise, in welcher der alte Text des Rig-veda in diesem
Gesangbuche (i.e. the Simavedardika) behandelt ist.’

IV ADHYAYA, 7 KHANDA, 47. 117

23. In a wilderness which belongs to the village ;

24. In a village where a corpse is ;

25. On seeing forbidden sights ;

26. On hearing what is forbidden ;

27. On smelling a foul smell ;

28. If a high wind blows;

29. If a cloud emits (heavy) rain;

30. On a carriage road ;

31. And while the sound of a lute is heard ;

32. While being on a chariot ;

33. (In the neighbourhood) of a dog as (in that)
of a Sidra;

34. Having climbed up a tree;

35. Having descended into a pit;

36. (Immersed) in water ;

37. While anybody cries ;

38. While suffering bodily pain ;

39. While he is naked;

40. Whilst impure with the remnants of food ;

41. On a bridge ;

42. On the occasion of the shaving of the hair
and the beard until the bath;

43. While being rubbed ;

44. While bathing ;

45. When having sexual intercourse ;

46. While being anointed;

47. (In the neighbourhood) of a man who has to
touch corpses (a corpse-bearer, &c.), of a woman that
has recently been confined, or that has her courses,
as (in the neighbourhood) of a Sidra ;

23. Gramarazye gramam (read, grama?) evdranyam vanam tatra
nadhtyita. Narayana.

29. Except during the rainy season. Narayana.

45. Nardyava also understands maithuna, and I think that the
German translation ought to be corrected accordingly.

118 SANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

48. With veiled hands;

49. In an army ;

50. In presence of a Brdhmaza who has not had
his meal, and of cows (that have eaten nothing) ;

51. When (these impediments) have passed, let
them (continue to) recite (the Veda).

52. Should any of these cases arise against his
will, let him (continue to) recite after having held his
breath and looked at the sun.

53. (The same rules hold good,) except (those
regarding) lightning, thunder, and rain, for (the study
of) the Kalpa. During the five months and a half
(they have to behave) as while it rains.

54. Thereof it is also said,

55. ‘Food, water, roots and fruits, and whatsoever
else Sraddha-food there may be: even when he has
(only) accepted thereof, the study should be inter-
rupted; the Brahmaza’s hand is his mouth; so it is
taught.’

53. I think that this Satra contains two different rules which
have to be separated, viz. 7. vidyutstanayitnuvarshavargam
kalpe; 2. varshavad ardhashash/keshu. The first of these
rules would extend the cases of anadhydya mentioned in this
chapter to the study of the Kalpa-sitra, except the cases of light-
ning, rain, &c. The second would refer to the five months and a
half following on the Utsarga ceremony (comp. chap. 6, 8), and
would imply that during this time the same texts are to be studied
or not, according as their study is allowed or forbidden during
rainfall: i.e. the study of the Samhita is to be discontinued, while
that of the Kalpa is allowed to go on. RAmafandra and Naré-
yana differ from this interpretation; see p. 151 of the German
edition.

55- Comp. Manu IV, 117; Vasish/za XIII, 16.

Iv ADHYAYA, 8 KHANDA, 16. 7119

Kuawpa 8,

1. And to (students) who have been duly initiated
he shall set forth (the Veda) ;

2. The teacher sitting to the east or to the north,
the other one to the south, with his face turned to
the north.

3. Or two (students shall be so seated).

4. But more (than two) as there is room (for them).

5. He should not sit on a high seat in presence of
a Guru,

6. Nor on the same seat (with him),

7. Nor with outstretched feet,

8. Nor stretching his arms under his knees,

9. Nor leaning his body (against a support),

10. Nor forming with his feet a lap,

11. Nor holding his feet like an axe.

12. After (the student) has said, ‘Recite, sir!’ the
teacher shall cause him to pronounce the syllable Om.

13. ‘Om,’ replies the other.

14. Thereafter let him recite uninterruptedly.

15. When he has recited, he embraces (his teacher's
feet),

16. Says, ‘We have finished, sir!’ and (goes away)
according to his business.

8, 7. Nydyena sishyadharmeza upeta/ praiptas tebhyah sishyebhyo
vartayed adhyayanam 4faryah pravartayet. Ndardyaza,

x1. Karanam kudharikarhpam kritva na pashed ity arthah,
Nardyana.

12. The words adhthi bho (recite, sir!) are pronounced by
the student ; this follows from the passages quoted in the note on
II, 5, 10. Ndarayama states that those words are pronounced by the
teacher (a4aryo guru# sishyam adhydpanartham adhthi bho 3 iti
sabdam uktva ...).

120 . SANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

17. (He shall say,) ‘Leave! Pause meanwhile!’
according to some (teachers). ।

18. Let no one step between (a teacher and
students) who study.

19. Let no one change his place during the
recitation.

20. Should any fault be committed, let him fast
three days, or one day and one night, repeat the
Savitri as long as he can, and give something to the
Bréhmawas; then after an interruption of one day
and one night the study should go on.

Kuawpa 9.

Having bathed
2. And having submerged himself at the time
prescribed for the bath, he satiates the deities :

19. The translation of 4tmanam vipariharet is conjectural ;
comp. also Nardyana’s note, p. 151 of the German edition.

9, 1. It is not expressly stated in our text for what occasion the
tarpana (i.e. satiating of deities, Rzshis, &c. with water-offerings),
which is treated of in chap. 9-10, shall be prescribed. The com-
parison of Baudhayana II, 9 might perhaps lead us to believe that
the ceremony in question is to be performed whenever the sacrificer
takes 2 bath. But the two texts which are most closely connected
with ours, the Sdmbavya and Asvalayana Grzhyas, seem to point
clearly to another conclusion. The Sambavya-sfitra transposes
the rules about the tarpaza to the place which would correspond
to Sfitra II, 7, 28 of our text. The passage of the Sambavya-
sitra runs thus: mile kuzdam kritva yathoktam adbhis
parishiifaty athemas (so the MS.) tarpayati Agnif# Prag4-
patir Viripaksha&, &c. It ends: pitarak pitimah4s pra-
pitamahas Paila# 2100724 Kaushitakah (sic) Kahodaya
Kaushitakaye svadhastv iti pratipurushas (sic) pitréms
tarpayitvad. The last words are taken from the Sitra IV, 6,
6 of our text. Thus there can be no doubt that Simbavya
intended to prescribe the tarpaza for the conclusion of the

IV ADHYAYA, 9 KHANDA, 3. - 121

3. ‘Agni may satiate himself; Vayu may satiate
himself ; Sfrya may satiate himself; Vishzu may
satiate himself; PragApati may satiate himself; Virf-
paksha may satiate himself; Sahasréksha may satiate
himself; Soma, Brahman, the Vedas, the gods, the
Rishis, and all the metres, the word Om, the word
Vasuar, the Mahavydhr‘tis, the SAvitri, the sacri-
fices, heaven and earth, the Nakshatras, the air,
days and nights, the numbers, the twilights, the
oceans, the rivers, the mountains, fields, herbs, trees
Gandharvas and Apsaras, the serpents, the birds
the Siddhas, the SAdhyas, the Vipras, the Yakshas
the Rakshas, the beings that have these (Rakshas,
&c.) at their end, may satiate themselves.

‘I satiate the Sruti; I satiate the Smvzti; I
satiate the firmness; I satiate the delight ; I satiate

vedadhyayana, The same can be said of Asvalayana, who also
by the position which he assigns to the tarpaza sections (III, 4)
brings it into a similar connection with the vedddhyayana (see
Nar4yaza’s commentary on Asv., loc. cit.), We may also refer to
the treatise about the study of the Arazyaka, which is appended to
the Sinkhiyana-Grchya as its sixth book; there the tarpava is
mentioned quite in the same connection (VI, 6, 16 seq.). I believe,
therefore, that in our text, chapters 9 and 70 have found their place
here as a sort of supplementary addition to chap. 6, 6, just as in
the first book the list of Nakshatras seems likewise appended to
the Sfitra I, 25, 5.

According to Narayava, sndtaA in the first Sfitra would refer to
the bath which forms part of the Sam4vartana ceremony (see III,
1, 1), so that it would be the Grzhastha, who has taken the Sama-
vartana bath, to whom the following rules refer.

3. Comp. the similar lists of Asvalayana, Grzhya II, 4; SAm-
bavya, quoted in my German edition of Sankhdyana, p. 153; and
Baudhayana II, 9 (S. B. E., vol. xiv, pp. 252 seq.). The last
seems to be the most modern.

It should be observed that the section of the list contained in
this Stra, as well as that given below, chap. 10, 3, is divided into

122 SANKHAYANA-GRIHYVA-SOTRA,

the success; I satiate the thought; I satiate belief
and insight, and the memory, cows and Brahmauzas,
movable and immovable things. All beings may
satiate themselves !’—so far with the sacrificial cord
suspended over the left shoulder.

Kuawpa 10.

1. Now with the sacrificial cord suspended over
the right shoulder,

2. Looking in the direction that belongs to the
Manes (i.e. the south) :

3. ‘The (७1015) of the hundred (९7425), the
(Rishis) of the middle (Mazdalas), Grztsamada,
Visvamitra, Gamadagni, Vamadeva, Atri, Bharad-
vaga, Vasish¢fa, the Pragathas, the (९5115) of the
Pavamana hymns, the (९715) of the short hymns
and of the long hymns, Sumantu, Gaimini, Vai-
sampayana, Paila, the Sitras, the Bhashyas, Gargya,
Babhru, Babhravya, Mazdu, Maxdavya, Gargi V4-

two parts, in the first of which the name of the being to be wor-
shipped is given in the nominative case, with the verb tr7pyatu,
while in the second it stands in the accusative, with the verb tar-
paydmi. The first part of this section contains the names of gods
and of divine beings, such as the rivers, the mountains, &c.; in the
second part are found abstract qualities or notions, such as mati,
dhrti, sruti. Similarly in chapter 10, 3 the Vedic poets, a few
ancient teachers, and wise women, such as Garg? or Sulabha, form
the first part of the list, and then follow, in the accusative case, the
names of such doctors as Sankhayana, Asvalayana, Sakalya. In
Asvaliyana’s Satra of the first of our two sections only the first
part reoccurs, the second is omitted, while the second section is
found there in its entirety, with the same difference of names
given in the nominative and accusative cases. The conjectures,
however, which I had once based on this difference (see my German
edition, pp. 152, 153) as to the distinction of a more ancient part of
the list, and of later supplements, are perhaps too hazardous.

IV ADHYAYA, II KHANDA, 10. 123

Aaknavi, Vadava Pratitheyi, Sulabh4 Maitreyi (may
satiate themselves).

‘(I satiate) Kahola Kaushitaki, Mahakaushitaki,
Suyagita Sankhayana, Asvalayana, Aitareya, Mahai-~
tareya, Bharadvaga, Gatikarzya, Paingya, Maha-
paingya, Bashkala, Gargya, Sakalya, Mazddkeya,
Mahddamatra, Audavahi, Mahaudavahi, Sauydmi,
Saunaki, SAakapdzi, Gautami; and whatsoever other
teachers there are, may they all satiate themselves.

4. ‘The fathers man by man.

5. ‘The ancestry of the father may satiate itself.

6. ‘The ancestry of the mother may satiate itself.’

Kuaypa 11,

1. Let him not look at a naked woman, except
during sexual intercourse,

2. Nor (look) at the sun while it rises or sets,

3. At an enemy,

4. At an evil-doer,

5. Ata person that has to touch dead bodies.

6. Let him not talk with a woman who has recently
been confined or who has her courses,

7. Nor with those (mentioned before).

8. Let him not eat food from which its strength is
taken away.

g. Let him not do his work with implements
wasted by use.

10, Let him not eat together (with his wife),

11, 1 seq. Rules of conduct for a Snataka, i.e. a man who has
completed his studentship.

7. Etaid pQrvoktaiZ andptadibhir na samvadet, Narayana.

10. Nardyaza states that ‘ with his wife’ is to be supplied to this
50४9, which indeed is rendered probable through the comparison
of Gautama IX, 32; Manu IV, 43, &c.

124 SANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

11. Nor remnants (of food).

12. Remnants of (food belonging to the) Manes,
gods, guests, and servants he may eat.

13. Gleaning ears of corn, receiving alms unasked
for, or for which he has asked the good, performing
sacrifices for others, are the means of livelihood ;

14. (Of these) each preceding one is the more
respectable.

15. Orif (his livelihood) cannot be gained (in one
of the ways mentioned), let him follow the occupation
of a Vaisya.

16. (He shall be) careful about his duties towards
Manes and gods.

17. In due time (he shall) have intercourse with
his wife.

18. He shall not lie down (to sleep) in the day-time,

19. Nor during the first or the last watch of the
night.

20. Let him not sit on the bare ground.

21. He shall constantly perform the prescribed
duties regarding the use of water.

22. (And constantly) have his sacrificial cord sus-
pended over his left shoulder.

23. Let him not abandon his teacher,

24. Except on (his teacher's) command,

25. Or with (his) permission.

Kuawpa 12.

1. Every day he shall respectfully salute his
teacher,

11. Here also Nd&rayava understands bharydya bhukta-
sesham.

15. Comp. Professor Bihler’s note on Gautama ॐ, 5, S. B. E.,
vol. ४, p. 225.

19. RatreA pfirvaprahare ratreh paskimaprahare fa, Ndrdyaza.

IV ADHYAYA, 12 KHANDA, 15. 125

2. And his Gurus,

3. A Srotriya when meeting him,

4. When he returns from a journey, (also) one
who is not a Srotriya.

5. In the words, ‘I am N.N,, sir!’ pronouncing
his own name, crossing his hands (so as to seize
with his right hand the right foot, and with his left
hand the left of the other person).

6. (The person who has been thus saluted, in reply
addressing him with his name,) ‘N.N.!’ and seizing
his hands, pronounces a wish to him.

7. Let him not go to a sacrifice without being
chosen (thereto).

8. And let him beware of (doing) wrong.

9. Let him not go to assemblies of people.

10. If he has come upon (such assemblies), let
him not point out (anything evil) against (any-
body).

11. He shall not be a reviler, nor slanderous, nor
a wanderer from house to house, nor a prattler.

12. He shall not walk alone,

13. Nor naked,

14. Nor with veiled hands.

15. Gods’-houses (he shall walk round) keeping
the right side turned to them.

12, 5. Narayana: ‘As to how that respectful salutation (abhi-
vadana) should be performed, he says . . . with his own right hand
he touches the right foot of the Adarya or other person (whom he
salutes), and with his left hand the left foot (comp. Manu II, 72)
(and says), “I am N.N. (amukasarman) of the Gotra N.N,, sir!
I offer my respectful salutation !”’

6. ‘The AZarya or other person seizes the hands of the saluting
person,’ &c. Narayana.

to. See Niarayaza’s commentary, p. 154 of the German
edition.

126 sANKHAYANA-GRIHYVA-SOTRA.

16. Let him not run.

17. Let him not spit.

18. Let him not scratch himself.

19. Let him not look on urine and excrements.

20. Let him sit with veiled head,

21. Not on the bare (ground),

22. If he has only one garment, suspending his
sacrificial cord on his ear,

23. Not turning his face to the sun,

24. Nor his rump,

25. In the day-time with his face to the north, at
night to the south.

26. He shall not (eject) phlegm into water, nor in
the neighbourhood (of water).

27. He shall not climb up a tree.

28. He shall not look down into a well.

29. He shall not go to an execution-place,

30. And in no case to a cemetery.

31. Let him bathe day by day with his clothes on.

32. When he has bathed, let him put on another
garment before he is dry.

Kuanpa 13.

1. Under (the Nakshatra) Rohivi he shall have
the ploughing done.

2. Before it is done, he shall offer at the eastern
boundary of his field a Bali to Heaven and Earth.

3. With a verse sacred to Heaven and Earth and
with the words, ‘Adoration to Heaven and Earth!’
(he performs his) worship (to Heaven and Earth).

16. According to Narayaza we should have to supply, ‘ while it
is raining,’ which is countenanced by a number of parallel texts,
for instance, Asv.-Grzhya III, 9, 6.

IV ADHYAYA, 15 KHANDA, 2. 127

4. When the plough is being put into motion first,
let a Brahmavza touch the plough reciting this (verse),
‘For luck may us the plough-shares’ (Rig-veda IV,
57, 8).

5. ‘Through the lord of the field’—with (this
hymn) (Rig-veda IV, 57), verse by verse, to the
different directions (of the sky), from left to right,
worship is done.

Kuanpa 14.

1. When going to cross water, he performs the
Svastyayana (ceremony for lucky progress).

2. He sacrifices thrice with his joined hands full
of water into the waters, with the words, ‘ Adoration
to the Sea, the child of the reed! Adoration to
Varuma, the lord of righteousness! Adoration to all
rivers !’—

3. Murmuring, ‘May Visvakarman, the father of
them all, relish the food offered.’

4. Against the stream for flowing (waters); up
into the air for standing ones.

5. Should he while crossing apprehend any danger,
let him murmur the hymn of Vasish/fa, ‘ The eldest
of which is the sea’ (Rig-veda VII, 49); this (will
serve to him as) a boat.

Kuawpa 15.

1. The Sravaza (oblation) he offers on the full
moon day that falls under (the Nakshatra) Sravish-
thas, of the flour of fried barley, or of cooked food,

2. With (the words), ‘To Vishzu svaha! To (the
Nakshatra) Sravava svahi! To the full moon of
Sravaza svaha! To the rainy season svaha!’

128 sANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

3. Having established the (sacred) domestic fire
outside, and having mixed together fried grain and
the flour of fried barley with butter, he sacrifices—

4. With (the words), ‘To the Lord of the celestial
Serpents svaha! To the celestial Serpents svaha!’

5. Having placed to the north of the fire a new
water-pot on eastward-pointed, fresh Kusa grass,

6. With (the words), ‘May the Lord of the celestial
Serpents wash himself! May the celestial ‘Serpents
wash themselves !’—he pours water into it.

7. With (the words), ‘May the Lord of the celestial
Serpents comb himself! May the celestial Serpents
comb themselves!’—he makes movements with a
comb.

8. With (the words), ‘May the Lord of the celestial
Serpents paint himself! May the celestial Serpents
paint themselves! ’—he pours out portions of paint.

9. With (the words), ‘May the Lord of the celestial
Serpents tie (this) to (himself)! May the celestial
Serpents tie (this) to themselves!’—he offers flowers.

10. With (the words), ‘May the Lord of the celes-
tial Serpents clothe himself! May the celestial
Serpents clothe themselves !’—he offers a thread.

11. With (the words), ‘May the Lord of the celes-
tial Serpents anoint (his eyelashes)! May the celestial
Serpents anoint (their eyelashes)!’—he spirts out
(small portions of collyrium) with a young Kusa
shoot.

12. With (the words), ‘May the Lord of the celes-
tial Serpents look (at himself)! May the celestial
Serpents look (at themselves)!’—he makes them
look in a mirror.

15, 7. For this signification of phaza, comp. Xullavagga V, 2, 3.

IV ADHYAYA, 15 KHANDA, 22. 129

13. With (the words), ‘Lord of the celestial Ser-
pents, this is thy Bali! Celestial Serpents, this is
your Bali!’—he makes a Bali-offering.

14. In the same way for the aérial (Serpents).

15. For those dwelling in the directions (of the
horizon).

16. For the terrestrial ones.

17. (He repeats these Mantras) thrice each time,
the first (part) with higher voice each time,

18. The second (part) with lower voice each time.

19. In this way he shall offer day by day with the
spoon, in small portions, a Bali of the flour of fried
barley with water, down to the Pratyavarohaza (or
the ceremony of the ‘redescent’), at night, keeping
silence. °

20. And (his wife) shall put (it) down silently.

21. The close of the ceremony is the same as the
beginning.

22. With (the verse), ‘The good protectress’ (Rig-
veda X, 63, 10), let him ascend the (high) couch.

17,18. The text has uddaistardm—ukfaistaram, and niz-
aistardm—nifkaistardm. Nardyaza(comp.the text of his scholion,
p. 155 of the German edition) understands this in a different way ;
he says that in the water-pot mentioned in the fifth Sitra two
different sthinas are to be distinguished, a higher part of it anda
lower (uttaradharataya). Now when the sacrificer, for instance, as
prescribed in Sftra 6, invites the Lord of the celestial Serpents, and
the celestial Serpents to wash themselves, the pouring out of water
would have to be performed first thrice for the Lord of the celes-
tial Serpents in the higher place, then thrice for the celestial Ser-
pents in the lower place.

19. On the Pratyavarohava see chap. 17.

20. Nardyava : vigyamayukta yagamanapatni evam balidravy4-
dikam upasddayet.

22, ‘From the Srivamt till the Agrah4yani (see chap. 17, 7) one
shall not sleep on the ground out of fear of the snakes.’ Nardyaza.

{29} K

130 SANKHAYANA-GRIHYa-SOTRA.

Kuaypa 16.

r. On the full moon day of Asvayuga a milk-rice
oblation to Indra.

2. Having sacrificed Agya with (the words), ‘To
the two Asvins svah4! To the two Asvayug svaha!
To the full moon of Asvayuga svaha! To the autumn
svaha! To Pasupati svaha! To the tawny one
svaha ! '"—

3. He shall sacrifice a mixture of curds and butter
with this hymn, ‘The cows came hither’ (Rig-veda
VI, 28), verse by verse.

4. That night they let the calves join their mothers.

5. Then feeding of the Brahmazas.

Kuanpa 17,

1. On the Agrahdyawt full moon day he shall re-
descend,

2. (Or) under (the Nakshatra) Rohivi, or under
the Prosh¢fapadas.

3. In the morning, having taken a handfull of Sami
leaves, Madhfka flowers, reeds, Apdmarga plants,
and of Sirisha, Udumbara, Kusa shoots, and jujube
fruits, and an earth-clod (taken) out of a furrow,

4. Having put (all that) into a water-pot,

16, 3. Ghritamisram dadhi préshatakam. Nardyaza. Comp.
the Gr/hya-samgraha II, 59.

17, 1. The Pratyavarohawa (i.e. redescent) here described is
the ceremony performed at the end of the time during which
sleeping on high bedsteads is prescribed (chap. 15, 22). Beginning
from the Sravazi full moon till the Pratyavarohava, the offerings to
the Serpents mentioned above have to be repeated every day
(chap. 1g, 19); the Pratyavarohama is the concluding ceremony of
these rites devoted to the Serpents.

Iv ADHYAYA, 18 KHANDA, 3. 131

5. And, after he has quickly repeated the Maha-
vyahvztis and the Savitri, having repeatedly immersed ,
(it) therein with this hymn, ‘May he burn away
from us pain’ (Rig-veda I, 97), he shall drive away
the evil from the persons standing under his protec-
tion, from left to right, and pour out (the water) to
the north.

6. A Madhuparka is the fee for the sacrifice.

Kuawpa 18.

1. ‘May summer, winter and spring, autumn and
rainy season be well-ordered to us. May we be
under the safe protection of these seasons, and may
they last (to us) through a hundred years. Svaha!

‘Beat away, Owhite one, with thy foot, with the fore-
foot and with the hind-foot, these seven daughters
of Varuza and all that belong to the king's tribe.
Svaha !

‘To the white one, thé son of Vidarva svaha! To
Vidarva svaha! To Takshaka Vaisdleya svaha! To
Visala svaha !'—with (these words) he sacrifices (obla-
tions) of Agya.

2. ‘May a good winter, a good spring, a good
summer be bestowed (on us). May the rains be to
us happy rains ; may the autumns be blessed to us.’

3. With (the verse), ‘Blessing on us, Mitra’ (Rig-
veda I, 90, 9), he sweeps (the floor) with a Palasa
branch,

5. Saranyebhyo gréhebhyah (read, grzhyebhya4) sarvebhyah
sakasdt, &c. Narayana.

18, 1. This chapter continues the description of the Pratyavaro-
hava begun in the preceding chapter.

RagabandhavaiA, as our text has, should be corrected into
ragabandhavi4£; comp. Asv. I, 3, 3.

K 2

132 SANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

4. Sprinkles (it with water) with (the verse), ‘From
the sea the wave’ (Rig-veda IV, 58, r)

5. And spreads out a layer (of straw) with (the
verse), ‘Be soft, O earth’ (Rig-veda I, 22, 15)

6. They then lie down on their sides, the eldest
one to the right hand—

7. With (the words), ‘In the Brahman I establish
myself, in the Kshatra,’ on (their) right (sides) ;

8. With (the words), ‘Among the horses I establish
myself, among the cows,’ on (their) left (sides) ;

9. With (the words), ‘ Among the cattle I establish
myself, in prosperity,’ on (their) right (sides) ;

10. With (the words), ‘ Among offspring I establish
myself, in food,’ on (their) left (sides).

tr. With (the verse), ‘Arise, the living’ (Rig-
veda I, 113, 16), they arise.

12. During that night they lie on that layer.

13. Afterwards where they like.

Kuawpa 19.

1. On the full moon day of Aaitra,

2. (Taking) jujube leaves, and making of meal
(1112065) of couples of animals as it happens.

3. A figure with prominent navel to Indra and
Agni.

4. Balls to Rudra.

5. According to custom the Nakshatras and
(their ?) images (?). According to custom the
Nakshatras and (their ?) images (?)

Here ends the Fourth Adhydya.
19, 2-5. Several points in the translation of these Sfitras are

uncertain, See the extracts from the commentary of Nardyaza,
pp. 156 seq. of the German edition.

Vv ADHYAYA, I KHANDA, 7: 133

ApvuvAya V, Kuayopa 1.

1. Now when he intends to set out on a journey,
he makes (his sacred) fire enter into himself, (or) into
the two kindling sticks, or into (an ordinary) log of
wood,

2. Once with (the text), ‘Come, enter into my
Pramas,’ twice silently.

3. Or with (the verse), ‘This is thy womb’ (Rig-
veda III, 29, 10) he warms the two kindling sticks,

4. Or an (ordinary log of) wood.

5. And before sunset the kindling (by attrition),

6. And at the time of the Vaisvadeva sacrifice.

7. Having carried a common fire to a place that has
been smeared (with cowdung), which is elevated, and

1,1. The ceremony of Samarohaza, by which the duties
towards the sacred fire are suspended, by causing the fire to ‘enter’
into the sacrificer’s body, or into the two Arazis, or into another
piece of wood, is already mentioned in several passages of the
Brahmaza texts; comp. the quotations given by Professor Weber,
Indische Studien, IX, 311. Comp. besides Asvalayana-Srauta-sdtra
III, 10; Sankhdyana-Sraut. II, 17. The Samérohawa into the
sacrificer’s own body is done by warming the hands at the sacred
fire; see Asv., loc. cit., Stttra 6. In the Sankhayana-Srauta-sitra
the corresponding rule, which regards there of course the Ahitagni,
runs thus, ‘If he performs the Samarohaza, he warms his hands at
the Garhapatya fire, and then touches his Prazas with the words,
“Come, enter into my Prazas.”’ On the two other cases, see the
Sfitras 3 and 4. Sfitras 2, 3, § are taken word for word from the
Srauta-shtra,

2, This Sfitra refers only to the case where he causes the fire
to enter into himself. 5

5. Comp. the commentary on Asv.-Sraut., loc. cit.8. He makes
the fire redescend from his body or from the Arazis by performing
the Manthana (kindling the fire by attrition of the Aravis).

7. The Mantra alluded to here is given in the Srauta-sitra. It

134 SANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

which has been sprinkled (with water), he makes (the
sacred fire) redescend (from its receptacle, with the
formula), ‘ Redescend !’

8. If the fire goes out, he sacrifices the two
Sarvaprayasfitta oblations (oblations for general
expiation) and (other oblations) with (the formulas),
‘Protect us, Agni, that we may prosper. Svaha!
Protect us that we may obtain all wealth. Svaha!
The sacrifice protect, O resplendent one! Svaha!
Protect everything, O hundredfold wise one.
Svaha!’

9. In the case of a breach of his vow let him fast
and sacrifice (an oblation) of Agya with (the verse),

‘Thou, Agni, art the lord of the vow’ (Rig-veda
VIII, प, 1).

Kuawnpa 2.

1. Now about (the consecration of) ponds, wells,
and tanks,

2. In the bright fortnight, or on an auspicious
Tithi,

2. Having cooked barley-grains with milk,

4. He shall sacrifice with the two (verses), ‘Thou

runs thus, ‘Redescend, © Gatavedas; carry again offerings to the
gods, knowing us. Long life, offspring, wealth bestow on us;
uninjured shine in our dwelling!’

8-9. These Sitras stand in no connection with the Samarohana
treated of before.

On the two Sarvapriayasfitta oblations see above, I, 9, 12 and the
note there.

The vow spoken of in Satra 9 Narayawa refers to the restrictions
regarding the food which the sacrificer and his wife are to eat on
the Upavasatha days, connected with the festivals of the full and
new moon.

2, 7 seq. Comp. Asvaldyana-Parisish/a IV, 9.

V ADHYAYA, 3 KHANDA, 3. 135

hast us, Agni’ (Rig-veda IV, 7, 4. 5), (and with the
verses), ‘We propitiate thy wrath’ (I, 24, 14), ‘ This
my prayer, Varuza’ (I, 25, 19), ‘Loosen the highest,
Varuna’ (I, 24, 15), ‘This prayer of the man who
exercises himself’ (VII, 42, 3),

5. (And with the words), ‘The domestic one, he
who goes away from the house, the refreshing one,
he who goes into the kennel, he who dwells in the
kennel, he who comes out of it, the greedy one, the
destroyer of enemies’—to the different directions (of
the horizon), beginning with that belonging to Va-
ruza (1. €. the west), from left to right.

6. In the centre he makes oblations with milk with
(the verses), ‘Having eyes all around’ (Rig-veda
X, 81, 3), ‘ This has Vishvu’ (Rig-veda I, 22, 17),

7. Plunging (into the water) with (the verse),
* Whatever here’ (Rig-veda VII, 89, 5).

8. A cow and a pair of clothes is the fee for the
sacrifice.

9. Then feeding of the Brahmazas,

Kuanpa ॐ.

1. Now at (the consecration of) a garden: having
established the (sacred) fire (in that garden),

2. (And) having prepared a mess of cooked food,

3. He shall sacrifice with (the formulas), ‘To

5. These are names of Agni dwelling in the waters; see
Péraskara II, 6, 10; Mantrabrahmaza I, 7, 1. Sever. of the
names are here misspelled ; thus Grzhya, Apagrziya should be, no
doubt, Gohya, Upagohya, which is the reading given in Paraskara,
loc. cit.

3, x seqq. Comp. Asvalayana-Parisish/a IV, 10. Nardyava uses
for the ceremony here described the expressions Ardmapratish/A4,
Aramotsarga.

136 sANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA,

Vishzu sv4hé! To Indra and Agni svaha! To
Visvakarman svahaé!’ (and with the verses), ‘Whom
the men’ (Rig-veda III, 8, 6 seq.), verse by verse.
4. He recites over (the garden), ‘O tree with thy
hundred branches’ (Rig-veda ITI, 8, 11).
5. The fee for the sacrifice is gold.

Kuyanpa 4.

1. Now if a half-monthly sacrifice has not been
performed, one or the other of them, then a mess of
rice (is to be offered as an expiation),

2. With (the words), ‘To Agni Vaisvanara svaha!
To Agni Tantumat svaha!’

3. In the case of an intermission of the (morning
or evening) oblations—

4. (He shall make expiatory oblations), in the
evening with (the formula), ‘Enlightener of the
darkness, adoration! Svaha!’

5. In the morning with (the formula), ‘ Enlightener
of the morning, adoration! Svaha!’

6. After he has sacrificed as many oblations as there
had been sacrifices (left out), the sacrifice (itself goes
on) as (stated) above.

Kuawopa 5.

1. If a dove or an owl sits down (on his house),
2. Let him sacrifice with (the hymn), ‘O gods, the
dove’ (Rig-veda X, 165), verse by verse.

4, 6. Nardyaza: ‘After he has thus taken and sacrificed as many
Sruvas full of Agya as there were sacrifices omitted through his
guilt, the morning and evening sacrifices have to be performed as
(stated) above ({, 3, 10) with oblations of rice or barley.’

V ADHYAYA, 7 KHANDA, 2. 137

3. If he has seen a bad dream or an occurrence
boding misfortune, ;

4. Or when the cawing of a crow is heard in (the
dead of) night,

5. And in the case of other prodigies,

6. Let him cook rice-grains with milk,

7. With the milk of a cow that has a calf of the
same colour (with her own),

8. But in no case of a black (cow),

g. And let him sacrifice with the night-hymn (Rig-
veda X, 127), verse by verse.

10. Having eaten the remnants of those oblations
with the Mahavyahritis,

11. And having recited over his ears (the verse),
‘Blessing with our ears’ (Rig-veda I, 89, 8),

12. And over himself (the verse), ‘May a hundred
autumns be before us, ye gods’ (ibid. 9),

13. He shall give something to the Brahmazas.

Kuanpa 6.

1. When a disease has befallen him,

2. Let him offer boiled rice-grains with Gave-
dhukaé-grass with (the hymn), ‘Thesé (prayers) to
Rudra, the strong one, with braided hair’ (Rig-veda
I, 114), verse by verse.

Kuawpa 7%.

1. If (his wife) gives birth to a child, without the
Simantonnayana having been performed,

2. (Or if) the Gatakarman has not been performed
(for the child),

7, 1. On the Simantonnayana, see I, 22.
2. The Gatakarman has been described I, 24.

138 sSANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

3. He places, when ten days have elapsed since
(the delivery), the little child in the mother’s lap,

4. And after he has sacrificed with the Maha-
vyahrttis, the sacrifice (that had been omitted, is
performed) as (stated) above.

{प 8.

1. If a post puts forth shoots,

2. Let him prepare a mess of cooked food and
offer the boiled rice with the two (verses), ‘In that
way bringing forth deeds’ (Srauta-sditra III, 17, 1),
‘Of tawny shape, weighty, a giver of vigour’ (Rig-
veda IT, 3, 9).

3. Should the pot for the Prawita water, the Agya-
pot, or any other earthen (vessel) be damaged and
leak,

4. He sacrifices the two Sarvaprayasfitta obla-
tions and recites the three verses, ‘He who without’
(Rig-veda VIII, 1, 12 seq.), over the broken (vessel).

5. Should the two (Kusa blades which are used as)
strainers be spoiled before the completion of the
sacrifice,

6. Let him sacrifice the Sarvaprayaséitta and make
new ones with (the verse), ‘In the water, Agni’ (Rig-
veda VIII, 43, 9).

Kuanpa 9.

1. Now (follows) the Sapizdikarama.

3. On the ten days, comp. I, 25, 1 and the note there.
8, 3. On the Prawita water, see above, I, 8, 8. 25.

4. Comp.', 9, 12 and the note there.

5. See I, 8, 14 seqq. 6. See Satra 4.
9, 1 seqq. Comp. above, IV, 3 and the notes there.

V ADHYAYA, IO KHANDA, 3. 139

2. Let him fill four water-pots (for the Manes)
from the father upwards,

3. And prepare in the same way lumps (of flour),

4. And let him distribute the first lump on the
(other) three with (the verses), ‘ They who commonly,
concordantly (dwell) in Yama’s realm, the fathers :
for them be space, freedom, adoration, sacrifice esta-
blished among the gods.

‘They who commonly, harmoniously (dwell), the
living among the living, mine: may their prosperity
fall to my lot in this world through a hundred
years’ —

And with the two (verses), ‘Equal the design’
(Rig-veda X, 191, 3. 4).

5. In the same way the vessels with Argha water.

6. In the same way for the mother, for a brother,
and for a wife that has died before (her husband),
adding (the lump belonging to that person) to those
(other) lumps.

Kuanpa 10.

1. If the bees make honey in his house,

2. Let him fast and sacrifice a hundred and eight
pieces of Udumbara wood, which are besmeared with
curds, honey, and ghee, with the two (verses), ‘ No
(harm) to us in our offspring’ (Rig-veda I, 114, 8. 9).

3. And let him murmur the hymn, ‘ For welfare
may Indra and Agni’ (Rig-veda VII, 35); and (the
same hymn should be used) at all (ceremonies), such

2. On these four vessels, see IV, 3, 4 seq.

5. These are the vessels mentioned in the second Sitra.

10, 3. This is a supplementary rule belonging to the exposition
of the general type of sacrifice. On the ‘ Pratisruta’ sacrifice, see
I, tb I seqq- ? I 9, 19.

140 SANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

as that of the sacrifice after assent has been declared
(see above, I, 7, 1).

4. After he has sacrificed seventeen one span long
pieces of Paldsa wood, he then seizes the Sruva.

5. Fifteen at the full and new moon sacrifices.

6. At the Ash¢aka ceremony in the middle of the
rainy season there may optionally be three (pieces of
wood) ; the sacrifice as at the Pitr7yagia.

Kuanpa 11.

1. If an anthill arises in his house, the house
should be abandoned.

2. Then, after having fasted three nights (and
days), he should perform the great expiation.

Here ends the Fifth Adhy4ya.

4. See I, 9, 1. 3.

6. Comp. III, 13, 1 with the note.

11, 2. Nardyama understands the ‘great expiation’ as a rite
directed to Ganesa and to the planets (comp. Yag#avalkya I,
2476 seq., 292, &c.); that this ceremony was known already to the
author of this Sitra seems very doubtful. Another ‘mahasAnti’ is
frequently mentioned in the Kausika-sfitra (quoted in Béhtlingk-
Roth's Dictionary); comp. my German edition of Sankhdyana,
P. 159.

Vi ADHYAYA, I KHANDA, 5 7141

ApvuyAya VI, Kuawopa 1.

1. Now, after having paid reverence to Brah-
man, to the Brahmarv/shi, to (those who descend
from) Brahman’s womb, to Indra, Pragdpati, Vasish-
tha, Vamadeva, Kahola Kaushitaki, Mahdkaushitaki,
Suyagiia Sankhayana, Asvalayana, Aitareya, Mahai-
tareya, Katydyana, Satydyana, Sakalya, Babhru, Ba-
bhravya, Mazdu, Mazdavya, and to all the teachers of
the past, we will henceforth explain the rules for the
Aranyaka as forming the subject of Svadhydya (pri-
vate recitation of a text). :

2. The teacher abstains through one day and one
night from sexual intercourse and from eating flesh.

3. Raw flesh, a Kanzdala, a woman that has lately
been confined, or that has her courses,, seeing blood
or persons whose hands have been cut off: (these
persons and things he shall know form) impediments
for the study.

4. And of the corpse-like (animals ?).

5. Those which enter (their dens?) with the
mouth first (?)

1, 7 seqq. Comp. the general remarks on this sixth book in the
Introduction, ए. 11.

For the names in the opening invocation, comp. above, IV, 10;
on the Vratas and the study of the different Aranyaka sections chiefly
treated of in this book, see above, II, 1x. 12, and the Introduction,
p. 8.

2. Comp. II, 11, 6.

3-5. Comp. II, 12, 10, and the note of Narayana, p. 160 of the

German edition.

142 SANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

6. When he has vomited, or when his beard has
been shaved,

7. When he has eaten flesh or partaken of a
Sraddha or birth dinner,

8. During the days that immediately follow on
(days of) study in the village,

g. Three nights (and days), if (he has been) put
out of order,

10. (Or has been violently) seized by others,

11. And during the second half of the days that
precede (?) the Parvan days,

12. And if fire-flames, lightning, thunder, (heavy)
rains, and great clouds appear,

13. And if a storm (blows) that carries away
pebbles, as long as that lasts.

2, 1. During four months after the full moon of
Ashadsa let him not study.

2. Especially the Sakvari verses (are concerned
by what has been declared). Such are the rules.

KuHawpa 2.

3. Let them go to a clean spot in the north-eastern
direction, that receives its light from the east.

4. The drawing of water (should be done) before
sunrise,

6. Comp. IV, 7, 42. See also Ait. Aranyaka V, 3) 9.

7. Comp. IV, 7, 5.

2, 2. It seems to me that this Sfitra should be divided into two
(after sakvaryaz), so that the words iti niyam4A’ would corres-
pond to iti bhashikam, chap. 2, 13.

3. Comp. II, 12, rz. Perhaps the Petersburg Dictionary is
Tight in proposing for praggyotisham the translation, vor
Anbruch des Lichtes. Ndrdyaza says, prék purastdt gyotir
yasmin tam... pradesam.

VI ADHYAYA, 3 KHANDA, 2. 143

5. And the entering into the circle with this verse,
‘She who smells of salve’ (Rig-veda X, 146, 6).

6. The circle should have its entrance to the east
or to the north; it should be (praised as) excellent
among the people, not too spacious, not too narrow.

भृ. The final expiation (should extend) to the
Vamadevya.

8. And the invitation to resume the recitation (is
done in the following way) :

9. After they have sipped water that stands out-
side the circle,

10. Let them resume the recftation, having per-
formed the expiation.

11. If the vessel used in the expiation is damaged,
sprinkling (with water forms) the expiatory act (to
be performed for it).

12. (That) sprinkling, however, (one should per-
form) holding gold or a bunch of Darbha grass in
his hand.

13. So far what pertains to the general rules.

Kuanpa 3.

1. Now after they have entered the circle—

2. The teacher sits down with his face to the
east, the others, according to their rank, (sit down)
towards the south, with their faces to the north.

5. The Mawdala is a circular space marked by a line of water.

6. Iam doubtful whether we should read va ganagriyam and
translate as I have done in accordance with the note of Narayana,
or if the reading should be vasgan4grtyam, ‘not in the presence
of people,’ so that ganagriya would mean ganandm agre.

भृ. On the expiation (श्राप) comp. chap. 3, 12.

3, 2, 3. Comp. IV, 8, 2-4.

144 SANKHAYANA-GRIHVA-SOTRA.

3. If that is impossible, with their faces to all
directions.

4. Let them expect the rising of the sun,

5. And when they behold it in its splendour,

6. Let them with (the words), ‘ Recite, sir!’ seize
with their hands, holding the right hand uppermost,
the feet of the teacher, which have been washed,
with the right (hand) the right (foot), with the left
the left,

7. And having then put (the hands) into the
vessel used for the expiation, into water in which
pieces of Dirva sstalks are, let them begin their
study, when their hands have ceased to drip.

8. This is the rite. But when they are tired, let
one of them bring it about that the vessel used for
the expiation be not empty.

g. And all (should do so) at the beginning and
the end of (each) Adhy4ya.

10. (All) that is done continuously, without inter-
ruption,

11. Now the expiation.

12. The syllable Om, the Mahavydahv‘tis, the
Savitri, the Rathantara, the Bvzhat, the Vamadevya;
Brzhat and Rathantara with repetition and Kakubh-
forming.

6. Comp. above, II, 5, 10, &c.

7. The translation of apinvam4naif p4zibhih is conjectural.
Narayaza’s explanation of apinvamana by asamsr/sh/a is in-
admissible.

to. Narayana explains this Satra in the following way. If it is
impossible, for any reason, to recite the whole text, only the begin-
ning and the concluding words of each Adhydya (see Sfitra 9) are
to be repeated; and these should be recited without interruption so
as to form one continual text.

12. Comp. above, IIT, 4, 5.

VI ADHYAYA, 4 KHANDA, I. 145

13. These (holy words and verses) are (thus)
made to attain (the number of) ten

14. ‘Of decades consists the Virag’—thus says
the Brahmaza.

Kuawpa 4.

1. ‘Unerring mind, vigorous eye (is) the sun, the
noblest of the stars. Inauguration, do no harm to
me !’—with (these words) they look at Savitr7 (i.e.
the sun).

13. The Gayatrf is one verse; the Rathantara and the Brzhat
are Pragathas which are changed in the usual way into Trzkas; the
Vamadevya is one Trz#a: thus the number of ten is obtained.

14. Kaush. Brahmana 17, 33 19, 5.

4, 1. The formula ‘Adabdham mana4&,’ &c. has to be recited
before each of the single Aramyaka texts (the Sakvart verses, the
Mahdvrata, &c.); to this formula are added, before or after it, as the
case may be, other texts specified in the Sfitras 2-8. Of these there
can be no doubt about the meaning of Sftras 7, 8, treating of
the introductory formulas of the Samhita section (Kaush. Ar
VII-VIII) and of the Mantha section (ibid. IX): before the
text adabdham, &c. are to be added, in the first case the for-
mula r7tam vadishydmi, &c., in the second case two 2९688
addressed to Savitrz. These formulas and verses have been re-
ceived into the Aranyaka text and are found there in the order here
stated, at the beginning of books VII and IX. The meaning
of the words samhitandm tu pfirvam (Sftra 7) having thus
been established, I can see no reason why we should not inter-
pret the words sakvarfzdm tu pfrvam (Sitra 3) quite in the
same way. Thus the introductory benediction for the recital of
the Sakvari verses would consist, firstly of the verses stated in
50012 4, then of the formula adabdham, &c.; those verses
would have to be repeated again after the Sakvari verses (end of
Sftra 4). The recitation of the Mahavrata (025 1, 2) and of
the Upanishads (Sfitra 5) is preceded by adabdham, &c., and
then by the four verses stated in Sfitra 2, The interpretation which
Nardyaza gives of this 502 is not quite the same as that which
I have here proposed; see p. 163 of the German edition.

{29] L

146 sANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

2. One (verse), ‘You both the gladdening one’
(Rig-veda X, 131, 4), and the three (verses), ‘ Bless-
ing to us on the paths’ (Rig-veda X, 63, 15-17)
(are to be repeated before the recitation) of the
Mah4vrata (chapter).

3. But (at that) of the Sakvari (verses) before
(the formula mentioned in the first Satra) :

4. The three Trzéas, ‘To him, the thirsty one’
(Rig-veda VI, 42, 1-3), ‘The wealthiest (Soma), 0
wealthy one’ (VI, 44, 1-3), ‘ Him who does no harm
to you’ (VI, 44, 4-6), (the verse), ‘To him, to him
the sap of the herb’ (VI, 42, 4), (and the verse),
‘Verily thou art a hero’ (VIII, 81, 28)—thus for the
Sakvari (verses) before and afterwards.

5. Now for the Upanishad (texts)—

6. The same (recitation) as for the Mahavrata.

7. For the Samzhitas, however, before (the text
given in the first Sdtra the formula has to be
recited), ‘I shall speak right, I shall speak truth
(&c.)’—this is the difference (in the case of the
Samzhitds).

8. Now for the Mantha the two verses (have to
be recited) before (the formula given in the first
Sitra), ‘This we entreat of Savitar,’ ‘ That glorious
(splendour) of Savitar’ (Rig-veda ४, 82,1; III,
62, 10).

4. According to the reading of some MSS. we should have to
translate, or (the verse), ‘ Verily,’ &c

7. On the Samhitas (Kaush. Ar. VII, VIII) see Max Miller, Rig-
veda Pratisikhya, pp. 4 seq.; Ait. Arawyaka III (pp. 305 seqq., ed
Bibl. Ind.; Sacred Books of the East, I, pp. 247 seq.)

8. Regarding the description of the Mantha sacrifice (Kaush. Ar
IX) which has to be performed by one who wishes to attain great-
ness, comp. Satap. Brahmaza XIV, 9, 2; (047. Up. V, 2, 4;
Sacred Books of the East, I, p. 75.

VI ADHYAYA, 5 KHANDA, 3. 147

9. With (the formula), ‘ Unerring mind’ (see Sfitra
1), then follow the expiatory formulas that belong
to the (different) sections.

10, (All) this on one day.

Kuaypa 5.

Khazda 4, 11. Now if the time for rising has
come, they drive away (all) evil,

12. Perform the standing expiation,

13. And look at the sun with (the words), ‘ From
here I take out the brightness (?).’

Khazda 5,1. ‘That (I place) within myself’—
with (these words they turn their thoughts to the
universal) Self that is placed (within themselves ?)—
three times repeated (?)

2. With (the formula), ‘May happiness rejoice in
me and glory; may happiness rejoice with me and
glory ;—

3. ‘ Together with Indra, with the hosts, with power,
with glory, with strength I will rise’—he rises up.

11, 12. Narayavza has the following note: ‘The evil which is
attached to their body, such as dirt, they drive away, i.e. they
remove it by means of their reciting (of the sacred texts), and then
they perform the standing expiation which has been declared
above, which begins with the syllable Om and with the Maha-
vyahritis’ (see chap. 3, 12).

. 5, 1. Narayana says that dadhe is supplied to this Mantra from
the preceding Stra, and so indeed the Mantra is given in the
Aitareya recension. The translation of abhinihitam trir hitam
is merely tentative; see Narayama’s note, p. 165, of the German
edition. Perhaps abhinihitam should be taken in its grammatical
value, and the Sitra should be translated, ‘That (I place) into
myself (Atmani)”—with these words (they look) at themselves,
pronouncing (the word 4tmani) with Abhinidhana, three times
repeated (2) On abhinidhina, comp. Professor Max Miiller’s
edition of the Rig-veda Pratisakhya, pp. cxvii seqq.

L2

148 SANKHAYANA-GRITYA-SOTRA.

4. ‘May happiness rise to me; may glory rise to
me ’—when he has risen.

5. ‘Hereby I shake off the hater, the rival, the
evil one, and the bringer of misfortune ’'—with (this
formula) having shaken the end of the garment,—

6. The hymn, ‘Away those to the east’ (Rig-veda
X, 131), the two (verses), ‘And may Indra have
mercy upon us’ (II, 41, 11. 12), the one (verse), ‘ Of
what we are in fear, O Indra’ (VIII, 50, 13)—(when
these texts have been murmured), they look with
(the verse), ‘A ruler indeed, great art thou’ (X,
152, 1) to the east; with (the verse), ‘The giver of
bliss’ (X, 152, 2) to the south, turned to the right;
with (the verse), ‘Away the Rakshas’ (X, 152, 3)
to the west; with (the verse), ‘Destroy, O Indra,
our’ (X, 152, 4) to the north, turned to the left;
with (the verse), ‘Away, O Indra’ (X, 152, 5) to the
sky, turned to the right.

Kuanpa 6.

1. Having worshipped the Sun with (the verses),
‘Savityz from the west,’ ‘This eye’ (Rig-veda X,
36,14; VII, 66, 16),

2. They turn away, come back, sit down.

3. With (the words), ‘As the water is appeased ’—
they draw water out of the vessel used for the
expiation,

4. Pour it out on the ground,

5. Spread (some) of that (water over the ground)
with (the words), ‘As the earth (is appeased),’—

6, 2. Ndrayana explains vydvartamanaA by pardvartamé-
nadharmayuktaf,
5. Perhaps we should read asy4m (scil. przthivydm) abhi-

VI ADHYAYA, 6 KHANDA, 16. 149

6. He (then) smears it on his right shoulder with
(the words), ‘ Thus may peace dwell in me.’

7. In the same way a second time.

8. In the same way a third time.

9. ‘Piece by piece thou art produced; piece by
piece thou risest up; bring welfare to us, O house !’—
with (this text they) take pieces of Darva stalks (out
of the vessel of water), put them on their heads,

10. (And make water-offerings with the formulas),
‘May Agni satiate himself; may VA4yu satiate him-
self; may Sdrya satiate himself; may Vishzu satiate
himself; may PragApati satiate himself; may Vird-
paksha satiate himself; may Sahasraksha satiate
himself; may all beings satiate themselves.’

11. (Then) Sumantu, Gaimini, Vaisampayana, Paila,
and the other teachers (receive their offerings).

12. (Then) every one (worships in the same way)
his fathers.

13. With (the text), ‘To the sea you’ (Sraut. IV,
11, 11) they pour out the water,

14. Murmur the Vamadevya,

15. And separate according to their pleasure

16. (The final benedictory formula runs thus),
‘Through the power of wisdom, of Sruti and Smv“ti,
as handed down by tradition, through (that power)
which has its measure in (the Vedic texts) that have
been gone through(?), and which is possessed of

karshanti, and translate, ‘they draw (lines of that water) on this
(earth).’

6. Nfradyaza says that all the students are to do so.

7०. Comp. above, IV,9. On the way in which this Tarpaza is
to be performed, Narayana refers to the Sdtra II, 7, 5

11. Comp. above, IV, 10.

12. Comp. above, IV, 10, 4-6. -

150 sANKHAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

undisputed firmness, may peace be with us in welfare.
Adoration be to gods, Avshis, Manes, and men! May
they whom we have adored, make happy life, beauty,
health, peace, incolumity, imperishableness, vigour,
splendour, glory, power, holy lustre, renown, age,
offspring, cattle, adoration, increase. From wrongly
spoken, wrongly used (prayer), from everything that
is deficient or excessive, for the good of gods and
Rishis, may the Brahman and Truth protect me;
may the Brahman and Truth protect me!’

End of the Sixth Adhyaya.

End of the Sankhdyana - Gvzhya.

ASVALAYANA-GR/HYA-
SUTRA.

INTRODUCTION
TO THE

ASVALAYANA-GR/HVA-SOUTRA.

Most of the questions referring to the Grzhya-sitra of
Asvalayana will be treated of more conveniently in con-
nection with the different subjects which we shall have to
discuss in our General Introduction to the Grzhya-sdtras.
Here I wish only to call attention to a well-known passage
of Shadgurusishya, in which that commentator gives some
statements on the works composed by Asvalayana and by
his teacher Saunaka. As an important point in that
passage has, as far as I can see, been misunderstood by
several eminent scholars, I may perhaps be allowed here to
try and correct that misunderstanding, though the point
stands in a less direct connection with the Grzhya-sftra than
with another side of the literary activity of Asvalayana.

Shadgurusishya!, before speaking of Asvalayana, makes
the following statements with regard to Asvaldyana’s
teacher, Saunaka. ‘There was,’ he says, ‘the Sakala
Samhita (of the Rig-veda), and the Bashkala Sashita ;
following these two Samhitas and the twenty-one Brah-
mavas, adopting principally the Aitareyaka and supple-
menting it by the other texts, he who was revered by
the whole number of great Rzshis composed the first
Kalpa-sfitra.” He then goes on to speak of Asvalayana—
‘ Saunaka’s pupil was the venerable Asvalayana. He who
knew everything he had learnt from that teacher, com-
posed a Sfitra and announced (to Saunaka that he had
done so)*” Saunaka then destroyed his own Sitra, and

ee ~~~ ~~~

५ See Max Miiller’s History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, pp. 230 5९4१. ;
Indische Studien, I, 102.
2 This seems to me to be the meaning of sfitram kritva nyavedayat;

154 AsVALAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA,

determined that Asvalayana’s Sitra should be adopted by
the students of that Vedic Sakha. Thus, says Shadguru-
sishya, there were twelve works of Saunaka by which a
correct knowledge of the Rig-veda was preserved, and three
works of Asvalayana. Saunaka’s dasa granthds were,
the five Anukramavis, the two Vidhanas, the Barhaddai-
vata, the Pratisakhya, and a Smarta work’. Asvalayana,
on the other hand, composed the Srauta-sitra in twelve
Adhyayas, the Grzhya in four Adhydyas, and the fourth
Aranyaka: this is Asvalayana’s great Sdtra composition”.

Here we have an interesting and important statement by
which the authorship of a part of the Aitareydrazyaka,
which would thus be separated from the rest of that text,
is ascribed, not to Mahiddsa Aitareya, but to an author of
what may be called the historical period of Vedic antiquity,
to Asvalayana.

But what is the fourth Aravyaka to which this passage
refers? Is it the text which is now sct down, for instance,
in Dr. Ragendralala Mitra’s edition, as the fourth Ara-
nyaka of the Aitareyinas?

Before we give an answer to this question, attention must
be called to other passages referring, as it could seem, to
another part, namely, the fifth part of the Aranyaka.

Sayaza, in his great commentary on the Rig-veda, very
frequently quotes the pa##amarazyaka as belonging
to Saunaka. Thus in vol. i, p.112, ed. Max Miller, he says:
pazkamaravyaka aushvihatr7kasitir iti khazde Saunakena
sitritam surdpakvztnum dtaya iti trizy endra 5812510 rayim
iti dve iti. There is indeed in the fifth Aravyaka a chapter
beginning with the words aushvzihi trzkasitiZ, in which the
words quoted by Sayavza occur*. Similar quotations, in

the case is similar to that where a pupil goes on his rounds for alms and
announces (nivedayati) to his teacher what he has received. Prof. Max Miiller
translates these words differently; according to him they mean that Asvalayana
‘made a Sitra and taught it,

* Comp. Prof. Biihler’s article in ‘the Journal As. Soc. of Bengal, 1866,
Pp. 149 seqq.

2 Dvadasadhydyakam siitram katushkam grihyam eva 4a daturthdranyakame
Aeti hy Asvalayanasitrakam.

5 See p. 448 of Dr, Ragendralala Mitra’s edition in the Bibliotheca Indica.

INTRODUCTION, 155

which the fifth Arazyaka is assigned to Saunaka, are found
in Sayava’s commentary on the Aranyaka itself; see, for
instance, p. 97, line 19, p. 116, line 3.

Thus it seems that the authorship of both the fourth and
the fifth Arazyaka was ascribed to teachers belonging to
the Sdtra period of Vedic literature, viz. to Saunaka and
to Asvalayana respectively. And so we find the case
stated by both Professor Weber, in his ‘ Vorlesungen iiber
indische Literaturgeschichte', and Dr. Ragendralala Mitra,
in the Introduction to his edition of the Aitareya Ara-
2,

But we must ask ourselves: Are the two books of the
Aranyaka collection, ascribed to those two authors, really
two different books? It is a surprising fact that Shadgu-
tusishya, while speaking of Asvalayana’s authorship of the
fourth book, and while at the same time intending, as he
evidently does, to give a complete list of Saunaka’s compo-
sitions, does not mention the fifth Arazyaka among the
works of that author. In order to account for this omission
the conjecture seems to suggest itself that Shadgurusishya,
when speaking of the fourth Aravyaka as belonging to
Asvalayana, means the same work which Sayaza sets down
as the fifth, and which he ascribes to Saunaka. At first
sight this conjecture may seem perhaps rather hazardous
or unnatural ; however I believe that, if we compare the two
texts themselves which are concerned, we shall find it very
probable and even evident. What do those two Aranvyaka
books contain? The fourth is very short: it does not fill
more than one page in the printed edition. Its contents
consist exclusively of the text of the Mah4namni or Sak-
vari verses, which seem to belong to a not less remote

1 and edition, p. 53: Obwohl wir fiir das vierte Buch des letztern (i.e. of the
Aitareya Arazyaka) sogar die directe Nachricht haben, dass es dem Asvala-
yana, dem Schiiler eines Saunaka angehért, so wie auch femner fir das fiinfte
Buch desselben dieser Saunaka selbst als Urheber gegolten zu haben scheint,
nach dem was Colebrooke Misc. Ess. I, 47 n. dariiber berichtet.

2 P11: If this assumption be admitted, the proper conclusion to be arrived
at would also be that the whole of the fifth Book belongs to Saunaka, and
the whole of the fourth Book to Asvalayana. P.12: The writings of both
Asvaliyana and Saunaka which occur in the Arazyaka, etc

156 AsvALAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA,

antiquity than the average of the Rig-veda hymns. They
can indeed be considered as forming part of the Rig-veda
Samhita, and it is only on account of the peculiar mystical
holiness ascribed to these verses, that they were not studied
in the village but in the forest’, and were consequently
received not into the body of the Saszhit4 itself, but into
the Arazyaka. They are referred to in all Brahmava texts,
and perhaps we can even go so far as to pronounce our
opinion that some passages of the Rig-veda hymns them-
selves allude to the Sakvart verses :

yak khakvarishu brihata ravevendre sushmam ada-
dhata Vasishz/ah (Rig-veda VII, 33, 4)

vikim tvah posham Aste pupushvan gayatram tvo gayati
sakvarishu (Rig-veda X, 71, 11).

So much for the fourth Aravyaka. The fifth contains a
description of the Mahavrata ceremony. To the same sub-
ject also the first book is devoted, with the difference that
the first book is composed in the Brahmaza style, the fifth
in the Sdtra style *.

Now which of these two books can it be that Shadgu-
rusishya reckons as belonging to the ‘ Asvalayanasiitraka?’
It is impossible that it should be the fourth, for the Maha-
namni verses never were considered by Indian theologians
as the work of a human author; they shared in the apau-
rusheyatva of the Veda, and to say that they have been
composed by Asvalayana, would be inconsistent with the
most firmly established principles of the literary history of
the Veda both as conceived by the Indians and by our-
selves. And even if we were to admit that the Maha-
namni verses can have been assigned, by an author like
Shadgurusishya, to Asvalayana,—and we cannot admit

1 See Sankhayana-Grehya II, 12, 13.

3 Thus Sayawa, in his note on V, 1, 1, says: Nanu prathamaravyake=pi atha
mahavratam Indro vai Vritram hatvetyadina mahavrataprayogosbhihitaf,
pa#dame spi tasyaivabhidhane punaruktif syat. ndyam doshaA, sitrabrahmama-
rfipeva tayor vibhedat. pasamaranyakam rishiproktam sitram, prathama-
tazyakan ty apaurusheyam brahmavam. ata eva tatrarthavadaprapa#sena
sahita vidhayaz sriyante, pa##ame tu na ko py arthavddossti.... arasya
cvaitad adhyeyam ity abhipretyadhyetaéra 4razyakande > ntarbhavyadbtyate.

INTRODUCTION. 157

this,—there is no possibility whatever that he can have
used the expression ‘Asvalayanasitrakam’ with regard
to the Mahanamnis; to apply the designation of a Sitra
to the Mahanamnit hymn would be no less absurd than to
apply it to any Sakta whatever of the Rik-Samhita. On
the other hand, the fifth book of the Arazyaka is a Sdtra ;
“it is the only part of the whole body of the Arazyaka
collection which is composed in the Sitra style. And it
treats of a special part of the Rig-veda ritual the rest of
which is embodied in its entirety, with the omission only of
that very part, in the two great Satras of Asvalayana.
There seems to me, therefore, to be little doubt as to
the fifth Arazyaka really being the text referred to by
Shadgurusishya, though I do not know how to explain his
setting down this book as the fourth. And I may add
that there is a passage, hitherto, as far as I know, un-
noticed, in Sdyava’s Sama-veda commentary, in which that
author directly assigns the fifth Arawyaka fot, as in the
Rig-veda commentary, to Saunaka, but to Asvaldyana.
Sdyava there says!: yatha bahvr7tim adhydpaka maha-
vrataprayogapratipadakam Asvalayananirmitam kalpa-
sitram arazye=dhiyamanak pawtkamam d4ravyakam
iti vedatvena vyavaharanti.

Instead of asserting, therefore, that of the two last
Aranyakas of the Aitareyinas the one is ascribed to Sau-
naka, the other to Asvalayana, we must state the case
otherwise: not two Aravyakas were, according to Sdyava
and Shadgurusishya, composed by those Sdtrakdras, but
one, viz. the fifth, which forms a sort of supplement to the
great body of the Sdtras of that Karava, and which is
ascribed either to Saunaka or to Asvalayana. Perhaps
further research will enable us to decide whether that
Satra portion of the Aravyaka, or we may say quite as
well, that Aranyaka portion of the 50६2, belongs to the
author of the Srauta-sitra, or should be considered as a
remnant of a more ancient composition, of which the por-
tion studied in the forest has survived, while the portion

+ Sama-veda (Bibl. Indica), vol. i, ए, 19.

158 ASVALAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

which was taught in the village was superseded by the
more recent Asvalayana-sitra.

There would be still many questions with which an In-
troduction to Asvalayana would have to deal; thus the
relation between Asvalayana and Saunaka, which we had
intended to treat of here with reference to a special point,
would have to be further discussed with regard to several
other of its bearings, and the results which follow therefrom
as to the position of Asvalayana in the history of Vedic
literature would have to be stated. But we prefer to re-
serve the discussion of these questions for the General
Introduction to the Grihya-sitras,

ASVALAYANA-GR/HYA-SUTRA.

ApuyAya I, KawoikA 1.

The (rites) based on the spreading (of the three
sacred fires) have been declared; we shall declare the
Grthya (rites).

2. There are three (kinds of) Pakayag#as, the
hutas, (i.e. the sacrifices) offered over the fire; over
something that is not the fire, the prahutas; and
at the feeding of Brahmavas, those offered in the
Brahman

3. And they quote also Az#as, ‘He who with a
piece of wood or with an oblation, or with knowledge
(“veda”).

1, x. The spreading (vitana or, as it is also called, vihara or
४151818) of the sacred fires is the taking of two of the three sacri-
ficial fires, the Ahavantya fire and the Dakshizdgni, out of the
Gfrhapatya fire (see, for instance, Weber’s Indische Studien, IX
216 seq.). The rites based on, or connected with the vitana, are
the rites forming the subject of the Srauta ritual, which are to be per-
formed with the three fires.

2. Comp. Sinkhayana-Gr¢hya I, 5,1; I, 10, 7. The division here
is somewhat different from that given by Sankhdyana; what San-
khayana calls ahuta,is here prahuta (‘sacrificed up’); the prahutas
of Sankhdyana form here no special category; the prdsitas of San-
khayana are the brahmani huts of Asvalayana, Thus Asvaliyana
has three categories, while Sankhayana (and quite in the same way
Paraskara I, 4, 1) gives four. Ndrdyaza mentions as an example
of prahuta sacrifices the baliharava prescribed below, J, 2, 3.

3. Rig-veda VIII, 19, 5, ‘The mortal who with a piece of wood,
or with an oblation, or with knowledge worships Agni, who with
adoration (worships him) offering rich sacrifices,’ &c,

160 ASVALAYANA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

4. Even he who only puts a piece of wood (on the
fire) full of belief, should think, ‘ Here I offer a sacri-
fice ; adoration to that (deity) !’

(The € quoted above then says), ‘ He who with
an oblation’—and, ‘He who with knowledge;’ even by
learning only satisfaction is produced (in the gods).

Seeing this the Ashi has said, ‘To him who does
not keep away from himself the cows, to him who longs
for cows, who dwells in the sky, speak a wonderful
word, sweeter than ghee and honey.’ Thereby he
means, ‘ This my word, sweeter than ghee and honey,
is satisfaction (to the god) ; may it be sweeter.’

(And another Azshi says), ‘To thee, O Agni, by
this 2:4 we offer an oblation prepared by our heart;
may these be oxen, bulls, and cows.’ (Thereby he
means), ‘ They are my oxen, bulls, and cows (which
I offer to the god), they who study this text, reciting
it for themselves (as their Svadhy4ya).’

(And further on the ९ quoted above says), ‘He.
who (worships Agni) with adoration, offering rich
sacrifices.’ ‘ Verily also by the performing of adora-
tion (the gods may be worshipped) ; for the gods are
not beyond the performing of adoration ; adoration
verily is sacrifice’-—thus runs a Brahmava.

4. The words of the #74, ‘with an oblation,’ are here repeated,
the Vedic instrumental 4huti being replaced and explained by the
regular form ahutya.

The following दर is taken from the eighth Mandala, 24, 20.
The god compared there with a rutting bull is Indra.

The following verse is Rig-veda VI, 16, 47; we may doubt as to
the correctness of the explanation given in our text, by which te te
is referred to the persons studying the hymns of the Ashi. All these
quotations of course are meant to show that the knowledge of the
Veda and the performing of namas (adoration) is equivalent to a
real sacrifice. :

I ADHYAYA, 2 KANDIKA, 6. 161

{^ णा 2.

1. Now he should make oblations in the evening
and in the morning of prepared sacrificial food,

2. To the deities of the Agnihotra, to Soma
Vanaspati, to Agni and Soma, to Indra and Agni,
to Heaven and Earth, to Dhanvantari, to Indra, to
the Visve devas, to Brahman.

3. He says 9 ४212, and then he offers the Balis—

4. To those same deities, to the waters, to the
herbs and trees, to the house, to the domestic deities,
to the deities of the ground (on which the house
stands)

5. To Indra and Indra’s men, to Yama and
Yama’s men, to Varuza and Varuza’s men, to Soma
and Soma’s men—these (oblations he makes) to the
different quarters (of the horizon, of which those are
the presiding deities).

6. To Brahman and Brahman’s men in the
middle,

1. This is the Vaisvadeva sacrifice; comp. SAankha4yana-Grzhya
II, 14, &c.

2. The deities of the Agnihotra are Sftrya, Agni, and Pragépati

On Soma Vanaspati see the quotations given in Béhtlingk-Roth’s
Dictionary s. v. vanaspati,

3. I think the division of the Satras should be altered, so that
svaheti would belong to Satra 2, and the third Sitra would consist
only of the words atha baliharazam. In this case we should
have to translate, :

(1) Now he should make oblations, &c.

(2) With the words, ‘To the deities of the Agnihotra (i.e. to
Agni, to Strya, to Pragapati), to Soma Vanaspati, &c.,
svaba !’

(3) Then (follows) the offering of the Balis.

Comp. Sankh.-Grzhya H, 14, 4. 5, which passage seems to con-
firm the view expressed here.

5- Manu EI, 87.

[29] M

162 AsvALAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

7. To the Visve devAs, to all day-walking beings—
thus by day;

8. To the night-walking (beings)—thus at night.

9. To the Rakshas—thus to the north.

10. ‘Svadha to the fathers (i.e. Manes)’—with
these words he should pour out the remnants to the
south, with the sacrificial cord suspended over the
right shoulder.

KanpikA 8.

1. Now wherever he intends to perform a sacrifice,
let him besmear (with cowdung) a surface of the
dimension at least of an arrow on each side; let him
draw six lines thereon, one turned to the north, to
the west (of the spot on which the fire is to be
placed); two (lines) turned to the east, at the two
different ends (of the line mentioned first); three
(lines) in the middle (of those two); let him sprinkle
that (place with water), establish the (sacred) fire
(thereon), put (two or three pieces of fuel) on it, wipe
(the ground) round (the fire), strew (grass) round (it),
to the east, to the south, to the west, to the north,
ending (each time) in the north. Then (follows)
silently the sprinkling (of water) round (the fire).

2, With two (Kusa blades used as) strainers the
purifying of the Agya (is done).

3. Having taken two Kusa blades with unbroken
tops, which do not bear a young shoot in them, of
the measure of a Span, at their two ends with his

3, 7. Comp. Sankh.-Grzhya I, 7, 6 seq., where the statements
regarding the lines to be drawn are somewhat different, and the note
there. 1

3. Comp. the description of this act of purifying the Agya, which
is in some points more detailed, in Sankh.-Grzhya I, 8, 14~21.

I ADHYAYA, 3 KANDIKA, IO. 163

thumbs and fourth fingers, with his hands turned
with the inside upwards, he purifies (the Agya, from
the west) to the east, with (the words), ‘By the
impulse of Savitv7 I purify thee with this uninjured
purifier, with the rays of the good sun’—once with
this formula, twice silently.

4. The strewing (of grass) round (the fire) may be
done or not done in the Agya offerings.

5. So also the two Agya portions (may optionally
be sacrificed) in the Pakayagaias.

6. And the (assistance of a) Brahman (is optional),
except at the sacrifice to Dhanvantari and at the
sacrifice of the spit-ox (offered to Rudra).

7. Let him sacrifice with (the words), ‘To such
and such a deity sv4ha!’

8. If there is no rule (as to the deities to whom
the sacrifice belongs, they are) Agni, Indra, Pragé-
pati, the Visve devas, Brahman.

9. (Different Pakayagias, when) offered at the
same time, should have the same Barhis (sacrificial
grass), the same fuel, the same Agya, and the same
(oblation to Agni) Svish/akrtt.

10. With reference thereto the following sacrificial
stanza is sung:

‘He who has to perform (different) Pakayagéas,
should offer them with the same Agya, the same

4. Comp. Sankh.-Grzhya I, 8, 12.

5. On the two Agyabhagas offered to Agni and Soma comp.
below, chap. 10, 13; Sankh.-Grzhya I, 9, 5 seq.

6, Comp. on these exceptions the Sftras below, I, 12, 7; IV,
8, 715.

4, Comp. Sankh.-Grchya I, 9, 18.

9. On the oblation to Agni Svish/akrit, see Indische Studien,
IX, 217.

M2

164 ASVALAYANA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

Barhis, and the same Svish¢akrzt, even if the deity
(of those sacrifices) is not the same.’

KawoikA 4,

1. During the northern course of the sun, in the
time of the increasing moon, under an auspicious
Nakshatra the tonsure (of the child’s head), the
initiation (of a Brahmaéarin), the cutting of the
beard, and marriage (should be celebrated).

2. According to some (teachers), marriage (may
be celebrated) at any time.

3. Before those (ceremonies) let him sacrifice four
Agya oblations—

4. With the three (verses), ‘Agni, thou purifiest
life’ (Rig-veda IX, 66, 10 seq.), and with (the one
verse), ‘ Pragdpati, no other one than thou’ (Rig-veda
X, 127, 10).

5. Or with the Vyahrvtis.

6. According to some (teachers), the one and the
other.

7. Nosuch(oblations),according to some (teachers).

8. At the marriage the fourth oblation with the
verse, ‘Thou (O Agni) art Aryaman towards the girls’
(Rig-veda V, 3, 2).

Kanpika 5.

1. Let him first examine the family (of the intended
bride or bridegroom), as it has been said above,

4, 1. Sankh.-Grshya I, 5, 2-5.

5. With the words, bhiZ, bhuva&, 5४24, and with the three
words together.

6. Thus eight oblations are offered, four with the four Azkas
quoted in the fourth Sitra, and four with the Vyahritis.

4. Neither the oblations with the Azkas nor those with the
वाया.

5, 1. Srauta-sitra IX, 3, 20, ‘Who on their mother’s as well as

I ADHYAYA, 5 KANDIKA, 5. 165

‘Those who on the mother’s and on the father’s
side.’

2. Let him give the girl to a (young man) endowed
with intelligence

3. Let him marry a girl that shows the character-
istics of intelligence, beauty, and moral conduct, and
who is free from disease.

4. As the characteristics (mentioned in the pre-
ceding Sfitra) are difficult to discern, let him make
eight lumps (of earth), recite over the lumps the
following formula, ‘ Right has been born first, in the
beginning; on the right truth is founded. For
what (destiny) this girl is born, that may she attain
here. What is true may that be seen, and let him
say to the girl, ‘Take one of these.’

5. If she chooses the (lump of earth taken) from a
field that yields two crops (in one year), he may

_know, ‘ Her offspring will be rich in food.’ If from
a cow-stable, rich in cattle. If from the earth of a
Vedi (altar), rich in holy lustre. If from a pool
which does not dry up, rich in everything. If from
a gambling-place, addicted to gambling. If from a
place where four roads meet, wandering to different
directions. If from a barren spot, poor. If from a
burial-ground, (she will) bring death to her husband.

on their father’s side through ten generations are endowed with
knowledge, austerity, and meritorious works,’ &c.

4. I prefer the reading of the Bibliotheca Indica edition, counte-
nanced by Narayana’s commentary, durvigvey4ni lakshananfti,
&c. The Jumps are to be taken from the eight places mentioned
in Sutra 5.

5. No doubt the correct reading is not that given by Narayana
and accepted by Professor Stenzler, dvipravragint, but vipra-
vraginf, as four of Professor Stenzler’s MSS. read (see his Variae
‘Lectiones, p. 48, and the Petersburg Dictionary s. v. vipravragin).

166 AsVALAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA,

Kavoikd 6.

1. (The father) may give away the girl, having
decked her with ornaments, pouring out a libation of
water: this is the wedding (called) Brahma. A son
born by her (after a wedding of this kind) brings
purification to twelve descendants and to twelve
ancestors on both (the husband’s and the wife's)
sides.

2. He may give her, having decked her with orna-
ments, to an officiating priest, whilst a sacrifice with
the three (Srauta) fires is going on: this (is the wed-
ding called) Daiva. (A son) brings purification to ten
descendants and to ten ancestors on both sides.

3. They fulfil the law together : this (is the wedding
called) Pragapatya. (A son) brings purification to
eight descendants and to eight ancestors on both
sides.

4. He may marry her after having given a bull
and a cow (to the girl's father): this (is the wedding
called) Arsha. (A son) brings purification to seven
descendants and to seven ancestors on both sides.

5. He may marry her, after a mutual agreement
has been made (between the lover and the damsel) :
this (is the wedding called) Gandharva

6. He may marry her after gladdening (her father)
by money: this (is the wedding called) Asura.

6, x. Comp. Vasishtha I, 30; Apastamba II, 1,17; Baudhayana
1, 20, 2.

2. Vasishtha I, 313 Apastamba Il, 11, 19; Baudhayana I, 20, 5.

3. Baudhayana I, 20, 3

4. Wasishéha I, 32; Apastamba II, 11, 18; Baudhayana I, 20,

5. ४251902 I, 33; Apastamba II, 11, 20; Baudhayana I, 20, 6

6. Vasish‘ha I, 35 (where this rite is designated as Manusha) ;
Apastamba II, 12, 1; Baudhayana I, 20, 7.

I ADHYAYA, 7 KANDIKA, 5. 167

7. He may carry her off while (her relatives) sleep
or pay no attention: this (is the wedding called)
72915442.

8. He may carry her off, killing (her relatives) and
cleaving (their) heads, while she weeps and they weep :
this (is the wedding called) Rakshasa.

Kawopikd 7.

1. Now various indeed are the customs of the
(different) countries and the customs of the (different)
villages: those one should observe at the wedding.

2. What, however, is commonly accepted, that we
shall state.

3. Having placed to the west of the fire a mill-
stone, to the north-east (of the fire) a water-pot, he
should sacrifice, while she takes hold of him. Stand-
ing, with his face turned to the west, while she is
sitting and turns her face to the east, he should with
(the formula), ‘I seize thy hand for the sake of
happiness’ seize her thumb if he desires that only
male children may be born to him;

4. Her other fingers, (if he is) desirous of female
(children) ;

5. The hand on the hair-side together with the

7. Baudhdyana I, 20, 9.

8. Vasish/Aa I, 34 (where this rite is called Kshatra) ; Apastamba
Il, 21, 2; Baudhdyana I, 20, 8. The text of this Sdtra seems to be
based on a hemistich hatva bhittva 4a sirshani rudadbhyo
rudatim haret; comp. Manu III, 33.

7, 3. Professor Stenzler is evidently right in taking asm4nam as
in apposition to dr7shadam. Nérdyaza says, drzshat prasiddha
वरात tatputraka4. tatrobhayo# pratish/kdpanam siddham.

The sacrifice is that prescribed in Sankh.-Grshya I, 12, 11. 12.
Regarding the rite that follows, comp. Sankh.-Grzhya I, 13, 2.

168 ASVALAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

thumb, (if) desirous of both (male and female
children).

6. Leading her three times round the fire and the
water-pot, so that their right sides are turned towards
(the fire, &c.), he murmurs, ‘This am I, that art
thou; that art thou, this am .I; the heaven J, the
earth thou; the Sdman I, the ट्ट thou. Come!
Let us here marry. Let us beget offspring.
Loving, bright, with genial mind may we live a
hundred autumns.’

7. Each time after he has lead her (so) round, he
makes her tread on the stone with (the words), ‘ Tread
on this stone; like a stone be firm. Overcome the
enemies; tread the foes down.’

8. Having ‘spread under’ (i.e. having first poured
Agya over her hands), her brother or a person acting
in her brother's place pours fried grain twice over
the wife’s joined hands.

g. Three times for descendants of Gamadagni.

10. He pours again (Agya) over (what has been
left of) the sacrificial food,

17. And over what has been cut off.

12. This is the rule about the portions to be cut off.

13. ‘Togod Aryaman the girls have made sacrifice,

6. Sinkh4yana-Grvhya I, 13, 4. 9. 13.

4, Sinkhayana-Grzhya I, 13, 12.

8. Sankhayana-Grchya I, 13, 15. 16.

9. The two portions of fried grain poured over the bride’s hands,
together with the first (upastaraza) and the second (pratyabhigha-
tama) pouring out of Agya, constitute the four Avattas, or portions
cut off from the Havis. The descendants of Gamadagni were
pavkavattinas, ie. they used to cut off five such portions (see
Katydyana I, 9, 3; Weber, Indische Studien, X, 95); so they had
to pour out the fried grain three times.

13. Sénkhdyana-Grshya I, 18, 3; 13,173 14, 1.

1 ADHYAYA, 7 KANDIKA, 19. 169

to Agni; may he, god Aryaman, loosen her from this,
and not from that place, Svaha!

‘To god Varuxa the girls have made sacrifice, to
Agni; may he, god Varuza, &c.

‘To god 7091311 the girls have made sacrifice, to
Agni; may he, god Pashan, &c,’—with (these verses
recited by the bridegroom) she should sacrifice (the
fried grain) without opening her joined hands, as if
(she did so) with the (spoon called) पट,

14. Without that leading round (the fire, she sacri-
fices grain) with the neb of a basket towards herself
silently a fourth time.

15. Some lead the bride round each time after the
fried grain has been poured out: thus the two last
oblations do not follow immediately on each other.

16. He then loosens her two locks of hair, if they
are made, (i.e. if) two tufts of wool are bound round
her hair on the two sides,—

17. With (the व्य), ‘I release thee from the band
of Varuza’ (Rig-veda X, 85, 24).

18. The left one with the following (72).

19. He then causes her to step forward in a north-
eastern direction seven steps with (the words), ‘ For
sap with one step, for juice with two steps, for thriv-
ing of wealth with three steps, for comfort with four
steps, for offspring with five steps, for the seasons

14, 15. According to those teachers whose opinion is related in
5085 6-14, the leading round the fire, the treading on the stone,
and the offering of fried grain (with the three parts of the Mantra,
Sfitra 13) are repeated thrice ; then follows the offering prescribed in
5072. 14, so that the last two offerings follow immediately on each
other. This is not the case, if in the first three instances the order
of the different rites is inverted, as stated in Satra 15.

In ऽप्य 14. Nardyava explains sirpapu/a by koza.

1g. Sdnkha4yana-Grihya I, 14, 5. 6; 13, 2; Paraskara I, 8, 1.

170 AsvALAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

with six steps. Be friend with seven steps. So be
thou devoted to me. Let us acquire many sons
who may reach old age!’

20. Joining together their two heads, (the bride-
groom? the Aédrya?) sprinkles them (with water)
from the water-pot.

21. And she should dwell that night in the house
of an old Brahmawza woman whose husband is alive
and whose children are alive.

22. When she sees the polar-star, the star Arun-
dhati, and the seven zshis (ursa major), let her
break the silence (and say), ‘May my husband live
and I get offspring.’

Kawoika 8.

1. If (the newly-married couple) have to make a
journey (to their new home), let him cause her to
mount the chariot with the (verse), ‘May Pfishan
lead thee from here holding thy hand’ (Rig-veda X,
85, 26).

2. With the hemistich, ‘Carrying stones (the river)
streams; hold fast each other’ (Rig-veda X, 53, 8)
let him cause her to ascend a ship.

3. With the following (hemistich) let him make
her descend (from it).

4. (He pronounces the verse), ‘The living one
they bewail’ (Rig-veda X, 40, 10), if she weeps.

5. They constantly carry the nuptial fire in front.

20. Sankhayana-Grthya I, 14, 9; Paraskara I, 8, 5.

22. Sankhayana-Grchya I, 17, 2 seq.; Paraskara I, 8, 19.
8, x. Sankhdyana-Grthya I, 15, 13.

2. Sankhayana-Grshya I, 15, 17. 18.

4. Sankhayana-Grshya I, 15, 2.

1 ADHYAYA, 8 KanDIKA, 13. 171

6. At lovely places, trees, and cross-ways let him
murmur (the verse), ‘May no waylayers meet us’
(Rig-veda X, 85, 32).

7. At every dwelling-place (on their way) let him
look at the lookers on, with (the verse), ‘Good luck
brings this woman’ (Rig-veda X, 85, 33).

8. With (the verse), ‘Here may delight fulfil itself
to thee through offspring’ (Rig-veda X, 85, 27) he
should make her enter the house.

9. Having given its place to the nuptial fire, and
having spread to the west of it a bull’s hide with the
neck to the east, with the hair outside, he makes
oblations, while she is sitting on that (hide) and takes
hold of him, with the four (verses), ‘May Pragdpati
create offspring to us’ (Rig-veda X, 85, 43 seq.),
verse by verse, and with (the verse), ‘May all the
gods unite’ (Rig-veda X, 85, 47), he partakes of
curds and gives (thereof) to her, or he besmears
their two hearts with the rest of the Agya (of which
he has sacrificed).

10, From that time they should eat no saline food,
they should be chaste, wear ornaments, sleep on the
ground three nights or twelve nights ;

11, Or one year, (according to) some (teachers) ;
thus, they say, a Ashi will be born (as their son).

12. When he has fulfilled (this) observance (and
has had intercourse with his wife), he should give
the bride’s shift to (the Brahmaza) who knows the
50192 hymn (Rig-veda X, 85);

13. Food to the Brdhmazas;

6. Sankhayana-Grehya I, 15, 14.

8. Sankhayana-Grchya I, 15, 22; 16, 12.
g. Sankhayana-Grthya I, 16, २. 2,

x2, Sankhayana-Grehya I, 14, 12.

172 AsVALAYANA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

14. Then he should cause them to’ pronounce
auspicious words.

KawplkA 9.

1. Beginning from the seizing of (the bride’s)
hand (i.e. from the wedding), he should worship the
domestic (fire) himself, or his wife, or also his son, or
his daughter, or a pupil.

2. (The fire) should be kept constantly.

3. When it goes out, however, the wife should
fast: thus (say) some (teachers).

4. The time for setting it in a blaze and for
sacrificing in it has been explained by (the rules
given with regard to) the Agnihotra,

5. And the sacrificial food, except meat.

6. But if he likes he may (perform the sacrifice)
with rice, barley, or sesamum.

7. He should sacrifice in the evening with (the
formula), ‘To Agni svaha!’ in the morning with
(the formula), ‘To Sirya svaha!’ Silently the
second (oblations) both times.

KawpikA 10,

1. Now the oblations of cooked food on the (two)
Parvan (i. e. the new and full moon) days.
.2. The fasting (which takes place) thereat has
been declared by (the corresponding rules regarding)
the Darsaptrvzamasa sacrifices.

9, 1. Comp. Sankhayana-Grchya II, 17, 3.

4. Sankh4yana-Grvzhya I, 1, 12; Asvaldyana-Srauta II, 2.

5. Asvaldyana-Srauta II, 3, 1 seq. Ndrdyana: By the prohibi-
tion of meat which is expressed in the words ‘ Except meat,’ it is to
be understood that the food to be sacrificed, as stated in other Sastras,
may likewise be chosen.

I ADHYAYA, 10 KANDIKA, 12. 173

3. And (so has been declared) the binding together
of the fuel and of the Barhis,

4. And the deities (to whom those oblations
belong), with the exception of the Upamsuydga
(offerings at which the formulas are repeated with
low voice), and of Indra and Mahendra.

5. Other deities (may be worshipped) according
to the wishes (which the sacrificer connects with
his offerings).

6. For each single deity he pours out four hands-
ful (of rice, barley, &c.), placing two purifiers (i.e.

_Kusa blades, on the vessel), with (the formula),
‘Agreeable to such and such (a deity) I pour thee
out.’

7. He then sprinkles them (those four portions of
Havis with water) in the same way as he had poured
them out, with (the formula), ‘Agreeable to such and
such (a deity) I sprinkle thee.’

8. When (the rice or barley grains) have been
husked and cleansed from the husks three times, let
him cook (the four portions) separately,

g. Or throwing (them) together.

10. If he cooks them separately, let him touch the
grains, after he has separated them, (and say,) ‘ This
to this god; this to this god.’

11. But if he (cooks the portions) throwing (them)
together, he should (touch and) sacrifice them, after
he has put (the single portions) into different vessels.

12. The portions of sacrificial food, when they

10, 3. See Asvaldyana-Srauta I,.3, 28 Scholion; Katy.-Srauta
Il, 7, 22.

4. See Hillebrandt, Das altindische Neu- und Vollmondsopfer,
ए. 1113; my note on Sinkhdyana-Grvhya I, 3, 3.

12. In the Mantra we have a similar play upon words (iddha,

174 AsVALAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

have been cooked, he sprinkles (with Aya), takes
them ffom the fire towards the north, places them
on the Barhis, and sprinkles the fuel with Agya
with the formula, ‘ This fuel is thy self, Gatavedas ;
thereby burn thou and increase, and, O burning
One, make us increase and through offspring, cattle,
holy lustre, and nourishment make us prosper.
Svaha!’

13. Having silently poured out the two Agharas
(or Agya oblations poured out with the Sruva, the
one from north-west to south-east, the other from
south-west to north-east), he should sacrifice the two
Agya portions with (the formulas), ‘To Agni
svaha! To Soma svaha!’— ;

14. The northern one belonging to Agni, the
southern one to Soma

15. It is understood (in the Sruti), ‘The two eyes
indeed of the sacrifice are the Aya portions,

Therefore of a man who is sitting with his
face to the west the southern (i.e. right) eye is
northern, the northern (1. €. left) eye is southern.’

17. In the middle (of the two Agya portions he

lit, or burning, and samedhaya, make us prosper) as jp Sankh.-
Grthya II, ro, 4.

13. Paraskara I, 5, 3; Sankh.-Grzhya I, 9, 5 seq.

14. Sankh.-Grrhya I, 9, 7.

15. Professor Stenzler here very pertinently refers to Satapatha
Brahmaza I, 6, 3, 38.

16. It is doubtful whether this paragraph should be considered
as forming part of the quotation from the Sruti. The object of
this passage is, in my opinion, to explain why the southern Agya~-
bhaga belongs to Soma, who,is the presiding deity of the north
and the northern Agyabhaga to Agni, the presiding deity of the
south-east. Professor Stenzler’s opinion about this paragraph is
somewhat different.

17. Sankh.-Grzhyad, 9, 8

I ADHYAYA, 10 KANDIKA, 25. 175

sacrifices the other) Havis, or more to the west,
finishing (the oblations) in the east or in the ‘north.
18. To the north-east the oblation to (Agni)
Svishéakrit.
19. He cuts off (the Avadana portions) from the
Havis from the middle and from the eastern part ;
20. From the middle, the eastern part and the
western part (the portions have to be cut off) by
those who make five Avadanas;
21. From the northern side the portion for Svish-
takrit. । ~
22. Here he omits the second pouring (of Agya)
over (what is left of) the sacrificial food.
23. ‘What I have done too much in this ceremony,*
or what I have done here too little, all that may
.Agni Svish/akrzt,.he who knows it, make well sacri-
ficed and well offered for me. To Agni Svishéakz7t,
to him who offers the oblations for general expiation,
sé that they are well offered, to him who makes us
. succeed in what we desire! Make us in all that we
desire successful! Svaha!’
24. He pours out the full vessel on the Barhis.
25. This is the Avabhvttha.

19, 20. See above, the note onI, 7, 9 about the Avadana portions
and the peculiar custom of the descendants of Gamadagni with
regard to them.

22. Comp. above, I, 7, 10. . ‘Here’ means, at the Svish/akrt
oblation.

23. Comp. Paraskara I, 2, 11; Satapatha Brahmana XIV, 9,
4,24. On the oblations for general expiation (sarvaprayaséitta~
huti) comp. Sankh.-Grzhya I, 9, 12, and the note.

24. *A full vessel which has been put down before, he should
now pour out on the Barhis.’ Narayana.

25. This pouring out of the vessel holds here the place of the
-Avabhritha bath at the end of the Soma sacrifice. See Weber,
Indische Studien, X, 393 seq. v

176 ASVALAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA,

26. This is the standard form of the Pakayagiias.
27. What has been left of the Havis is the fee for
the sacrifice.

KawoikA 11.

1. Now (follows) the ritual of the animal sacrifice.

2. Having prepared to the north of the fire the
place for the SAmitra fire, having given drink (to
the animal which he is going to sacrifice), having
washed the animal, having placed it to the east (of
the fire) with its face to the west, having made
oblations with the two ९435, ‘Agni as our mes-
senger’ (Rig-veda I, 12, 7 seq.), let him touch (the
animal) from behind with a fresh branch on which
there are leaves, with (the formula), ‘Agreeable to
such and such (a deity) I touch thee.’

3. He sprinkles it from before with water in which
rice and barley are, with (the formula), ‘Agreeable to
such and such (a deity) I sprinkle thee.’

4. Having given (to the animal) to drink of that
(water), he should pour out the rest (of it) along its
right fore-foot.

5. Having carried fire round (it), performing that
act only (without repeating a corresponding Mantra),
they lead it to the north.

6. In front of it they carry a fire-brand.

11, 2. The Samitra fire (literally, the fire of the Samitr7, who
prepares the flesh of the immolated animal) is the one mentioned
below in Siitras 7 and 10. Comp. Indische Studien, X, 345.
‘I touch thee’ is upakaromi; comp. Katydyana-Srauta-sQtra
VI, 3, 19. 26.

6. It seems that this fire-brand is the same which had been
carried round the animal, according to Sitra 5. Comp. Katy4yana-
Srauta-sfitra VI, 5, 2-5.

I ADHYAYA, II KANDIKA, 12. 177

7. This is the Samitra (fire).

8. With the two Vapdsrapami ladles the ‘per-
former’ touches the animal.

9. The sacrificer (touches) the performer.

10. To the west of the Samitra (fire) he (the
Samitrvz) kills (the animal), the head of which is
turned to the east or to the west, the feet to the
north; and having placed a grass-blade on his side
of the (animal’s) navel, (the ‘ performer’) draws out
the omentum, cuts off the omentum, seizes it with
the two Agnisrapazis, sprinkles it with water, warms
it at the SAmitra (fire), takes it before that fire,
roasts it, being seated to the south, goes round (the
two fires), and sacrifices it.

11. At the same fire they cook a mess of food.

12. Having cut off the eleven Avadanas (or por-
tions which have to be cut off) from the animal, from
all its limbs, having boiled them at the Samitra (fire),

4. Comp. Sfitra 2.

8. On the two Vapdsrapants, comp. Katydyana-Srauta-sfitra
VI, 5, 7; Indische Studien, X, 345. The act which is here attri-
buted to the kartrz (‘performer’), belongs in the Srauta ritual to
the incumbencies of the Pratiprasthatrz.

to. On the way in which animals had to be killed at sacrifices,
see Weber’s Indische Studien, IX, 222 seq.

On the position of the head and the feet of the victim, comp. Katya-
yana-Srauta-sitra VI, 5, 16. 17.

According to Katyayana VI, 6, 8 seq. a grass-blade is placed on
the dead animal’s body before the navel (agreza nabhim); through
that grass-blade he cuts into the body and draws out the omentum.

‘That fire’ is, according to Narayana, not the Sdmitra but the
Aupasana fire. In the same way in the Srauta ritual the warming
of the omentum is performed at the Samitra, the boiling at the
Ahavantya fire. Katyayana VI, 6, 13. 16.

11. The Aup4sana fire is referred to.

12. The eleven portions are indicated by Katydyana, Srauta-sfitra
VI, 7, 6.

{29] N

178 AsVALAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

and having warmed the heart ona spit, let him sacri-
fice first from the mess of cooked food (mentioned in
5072 11);

13. Or together with the Avadana portions.

14. From each of the (eleven) Avadanas he cuts
off two portions.

15. They perform the rites only (without corre-
sponding Mantras) with the heart's spit (i.e. the spit
on which the heart had been; see Sitra 12).

Kawnpikaé 12.

1. At a Xaitya sacrifice he should before the
Svishfakv7t (offering) offer a Bali to the Xaitya.

2. If, however, (the Kaitya) is distant, (he should
send his Bali) through a leaf-messenger.

14. ‘A Pafavattin cuts off three portions. Having performed the
Upastarama and the Pratyabhigharama (the first and second pouring
out of Agya) he sacrifices (the cut-off portions), Ndrayana.

15. On the rites regarding the spit, see Katyayana VI, 10, 1 seq.;
Indische Studien, X, 346.

12, 1. There seems to be no doubt that Professor Stenzler is
right in giving to Aaitya in this chapter its ordinary meaning of
religious shrine (‘Denkmal’). The text shows that the Xaitya
sacrifice was not offered like other sacrifices at the sacrificer’s home,
but that in some cases the offering would have to be sent, at least
symbolically, to distant places. This confirms Professor Stenzler’s
translation of Aaitya. Ndarayaza explains £aitya by Aitte bhava,
and says, ‘If he makes a vow to a certain deity, saying, “If I
obtain such and such a desire, I shall offer to thee an Agya sacrifice,
or a Sthalfpaka, or an animal”’—and if he then obtains what he
had wished for and performs that sacrifice to that deity : this is a
kaitya sacrifice.” J do not know anything that supports this
statement as to the meaning of daitya.

2. ‘He should make of a leaf a messenger and a carrying-pole.’
Narayana.

It is not clear whether besides this image of a messenger there
was also a real messenger who had to carry the Bali to the Kaitya,

I ADHYAYa, 13 KANDIKA, 2. 179

3. With the £, ‘Where thou knowest, O tree’
(Rig-veda V, 5, 10), let him make two lumps (of
food), put them on a carrying-pole, hand them over
to the messenger, and say to him, ‘ Carry this Bali to
that (Kaitya),’

4. (He gives him the lump) which is destined for
the messenger, with (the words), ‘ This to thee.’

5. If there is anything dangerous between (them
and the 21४2), (he gives him) some weapon also.

6. If a navigable river is between (them and
the Xaitya, he gives him) also something like a
raft with (the words), ‘ Hereby thou shalt cross.’

7, At the Dhanvantari sacrifice let him offer first
a Bali to the Purohita, between the Brahman and
the fire.

KanpikA 13.

1. The Upanishad (treats of) the Garbhalam-
bhana, the Pussavana, and the Anavalobhana (i.e.
the ceremonies for securing the conception of a child,
the male gender of the child, and for preventing
disturbances which could endanger the embryo).

2. If he does not study (that Upanishad), he

or whether the whole rite was purely symbolical, and based on
the principle: In sacris ficta pro veris accipiuntur.

3. Comp. Paraskara III, r1, 10.

6. Paraskara III, 11, 11,

4. Comp. above, chap. 3, 6.

13, 1. Nardyavza evidently did not know the Upanishad here re-
ferred to; he states that it belongs to another Sdkha. Comp.
Professor Max Miiller’s note on Brzhad Aranyaka VI, 4, 24
(S. B.E., vol. xv, ए. 222).

2. ‘He should give her the two beans as a symbol of the
testicles, and the barley grain as a symbol of the penis.’ Narayana.

N 2

180 AsVALAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

should in the third month of her pregnancy, under
(the Nakshatra) Tishya, give to eat (to the wife),
after she has fasted, in curds from a cow which has
a calf of the same colour (with herself), two beans
and one barley grain for each handful of curds.

3. To his question, ‘What dost thou drink ?
What dost thou drink?’ she should thrice reply,
‘Generation of a male child! Generation of a male
child!’

4. Thus three handfuls (of curds).

5. He then inserts into her right nostril, in the
shadow of a round apartment, (the sap of) an herb
which is not faded,

6. According to some (teachers) with the PragAvat
and Givaputra hymas.

7. Having sacrificed of a mess of cooked food
sacred to Pragapati, he should touch the place of
her heart with the (verse,) ‘What is hidden, O thou
whose hair is well parted, in thy heart, in Pragdpati,
that I know; such is my belief. May I not fall
into distress that comes from sons.’

5. Narayana (comp. also the Prayogaratna, folio 40; Asvalaya-
niya-Grrhya-Parisish’a I, 25; MS. Chambers 667) separates this
rite from the ceremony described in धऽ 2-4. He says that
90725 2-4—as indeed is evidently the case—refer to the Pumsa-
vana, and in 5002. 5 begins the Anavalobhana (comp. garbhara-
kshama, Sankh. I, 21). To me it seems more probable that the
text describes one continuous ceremony. There is no difficulty in
supposing that of the Anavalobhana, though it is mentioned in
Sfitra 1, no description is given in the following Sfitras, the same
being the case undoubtedly with regard to the Garbhalambhana,
of which a description is found in the Asv.-Parisishéa I, 25.

6. Two texts commencing 4 te garbho yonim etu and Agnir
etu prathama4. See Stenzler’s Various Readings, p. 48, and the
Bibliotheca Indica edition, p. 61.

- I ADHYAYA, I4 KANDIKA, 7. 181

^ 14.

1. In the fourth month of pregnancy the Siman-
tonnayana (or parting of the hair, is performed).

2. In the fortnight of the increasing moon, when
the moon stands in conjunction with a Nakshatra
(that has a name) of masculine gender—

3. Then he gives its place to the fire, and having
spread to the west of it a bull’s hide with the neck
to the east, with the hair outside, (he makes obla-
tions,) while (his wife) is sitting on that (hide) and
takes hold of him, with the two (verses), ‘May
Dhatv7 give to his worshipper,’ with the two verses,
‘I invoke R4kaé’ (Rig-veda II, 32, 4 seq.), and with
(the texts), ‘Negamesha,’ and, ‘ Pragdpati, no other
one than thou’ (Rig-veda X, 121, Io).

4. He then three times parts her hair upwards
(i.e. beginning from the front) with a bunch con-
taining an even number of unripe fruits, and with
a porcupine’s quill that has three white spots, and
with three bunches of Kusa grass, with (the words),
‘Bhar, bhuvad, svar, om!’

5. Or four times.

6. He gives orders to two lute-players, ‘Sing
king Soma,’

7. (They sing,) ‘May Soma our king bless the
human race. Settled is the wheel of N.N.'—(heré
they name) the river near which they dwell.

14, 3. Comp. above, chap. 8,9. Regarding the two verses Dhata
dadatu dasushe, see Sankh.-Grrhya J, 22,7. The Negamesha
hymn is Rig-veda Khailika sfkta, vol. vi, p. 31, ed. Max Miiller,

4. Comp. Paraskara 1, rg, 8. The G&tha there is somewhat
different. I cannot see why in the Avsvalayana redaction of it
nivish/adakrasau should not be explained, conformably to the

182 AsvALAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

8. And whatever aged Brahmaza woman, whose
husbands and children are alive, tell them, that let
them do.

9. A bull is the fee for the sacrifice.

Kawypika 15.

1, When a son has been born, (the father) should,
before other people touch him, give him to eat from
gold (i.e. from a golden vessel or with a golden
spoon) butter and honey with which he has ground
gold(-dust), with (the verse), ‘I administer to thee
the wisdom (‘veda’) of honey, of ghee, raised by
Savityz the bountiful. Long-living, protected by
the gods, live a hundred autumns in this world!’

2. Approaching (his mouth) to (the child’s) two
ears he murmurs the ‘production of intelligence :’
‘Intelligence may give to thee god Savitr7, intelli-
gence may goddess Sarasvatt, intelligence may give
to thee the two divine Asvins, wreathed with lotus.’

3. He touches (the child’s) two shoulders with
(the verse), ‘Be a stone, be an axe, be insuperable
gold. Thou indeed art the Veda, called son; so
live a hundred autumns’—and with (the verses),
‘Indra, give the best treasures’ (Rig-veda II, 21, 6),
‘Bestow on us, O bountiful one, O speedy one’
(Rig-veda III, 36, ro).

4. And let them give him a name beginning with

regular Sandhi laws, as nivish/akakr& asau. The wheel of
course means the dominion.

15, 1. Comp. Asv.-Grihya-Parisishfa I, 26. I follow Professor
Stenzler, who corrects maghon4m into maghon4; comp. Sankh.-
Grihya I, 24, 4.

3. Vedo may as well be the nominative of veda as that of
vedas (‘ property’).

I ADHYAYA, 16 KANDIKA, 5. 183

a sonant, with a semivowel in it, with the Visarga at
its end, consisting of two syllables,

5. Or of four syllables ;

6. Of two syllables, if he is desirous of firm posi-
tion; of four syllables, if he is desirous of holy
lustre ;

7. But in every case with an even number (of
syllables) for men, an uneven for women.

8. And let him also find out (for the child) a name
to be used at respectful salutations (such as that due
to the Aé#4rya at the ceremony of the initiation) ;
that his mother and his father (alone) should know
till his initiation.

9. When he returns from a journey, he embraces
his son’s head and murmurs, ‘From limb by limb
thou art produced; out of the heart thou art born.
Thou indeed art the self called son; so live a hun-
dred autumns!’—(thus) he kisses him three times
on his head.

10. The rite only (without the Mantra is per-
formed) for a girl.

Kawoixd 16.

1. In the sixth month the Annaprdsana (i.e. the
first feeding with solid food).

2. Goat’s flesh, if he is desirous of nourishment,

3. Flesh of partridge, if desirous of holy lustre,

4. Boiled rice with ghee, if desirous of splendour:

5. (Such) food, mixed with curds, honey and ghee
he should give (to the child) to eat with (the verse),
‘Lord of food, give us food painless and strong;

16, 1 seq. Comp. Sankk.-Grzhya I, 27, 1 seq. The two texts
are nearly word for word identical.

184 AsVALAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA,

bring forward the giver; bestow power on us, on
men and animals,’
6. The rite only (without the Mantra) for a girl.

KawnpikaA 17.

1. In the third year the A’aula (i.e. the tonsure
of the child’s head), or according to the custom of
the family.

2. To the north of the fire he places vessels which
are filled respectively, with rice, barley, beans, and
sesamum seeds ;

3. To the west (the boy) for whom the ceremony
shall be performed, in his mother’s lap, bull-dung in
a new vessel, and Sami leaves are placed.

4. To the south of the mother the father (is
seated) holding twenty-one bunches of Kusa grass.

5. Or the Brahman should hold them.

6. To the west of (the boy) for whom the cere-
mony is to be performed, (the father) stations him-
self and pours cold and warm water together with
(the words), ‘With warm water, O V4yu, come
hither !’

7. Taking of that (water), (and) fresh butter, or
(some) drops of curds, he three times moistens (the
boy's) head, from the left to the right, with (the
formula), ‘May Aditi cut thy hair; may the waters
moisten thee for vigour !’

8. Into the right part (of the hair) he puts each

4. He cuts off the hair four times on the right side (Sfitras 10-
14), three times on the left side (Sitra 15); each time three Kusa
bunches are required. This is the reason why twenty-one bunches
are prescribed,

8. Each of the four times and of the three times respectively that
he cuts off the hair; see the preceding note.

I ADHYAVA, 17 KANDIKA, 16. 185

time three Kusa bunches, with the points towards
(the boy) himself, with (the words), ‘Herb! protect
him!’

9. (With the words,) ‘Axe! do no harm to him!’
he presses a copper razor (on the Kusa blades),

10, And cuts (the hair) with (the verse), ‘The
razor with which in the beginning Savitvz the
knowing one has shaved (the beard) of king Soma
and of Varuva, with that, ye Brahmawas, shave now
his (hair), that he may be blessed with long life, with
old age.’

11. Each time that he has cut, he gives (the hairs)
with their points to the east, together with Sami
leaves, to the mother. She puts them down on the
bull-dung.

12. ‘With what Dhatrz has shaven (the head) of
Brzhaspati, Agni and Indra, for the sake of long life,
with that I shave thy (head) for the sake of long life,
of glory, and of welfare’—thus a second time.

13. ‘ By what he may at night further see the sun,
and see it long, with that I shave thy (head) for the
sake of long life, of glory, and of welfare’-—thus a
third time.

14. With all (the indicated) Mantras a fourth
time. .

15. Thus three times on the left side (of the
head).

16, Let him wipe off the edge of the razor with
(the words), ‘If thou shavest, as a shaver, his hair
with the razor, the wounding, the well-shaped, purify
his head, but do not take away his life.’

13. Instead of yena bhftyas ka ratryam, Paraskara (II, 1, 16)
has, yena bhfiris €2.78 divam,
१6. Comp. Paraskara II, 1, 19; Atharva-veda VIII, 2, 17.

186 ASVALAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

17. Let him give orders to the barber, ‘ With luke-
warm water doing what has to be done with water,
without doing harm to him, arrange (his hair) well.’

18. Let him have the arrangement of the hair
made according to the custom of his family.

19. The rite only (without the Mantras) for a
girl.

{^ कणा 18.

1. Thereby the God4nakarman (i.e. the ceremony
of shaving the beard, is declared).

2. In the sixteenth year.

3. Instead of the word ‘hair’ he should (each time
that it occurs in the Mantras) put the word ‘ beard.’

4. Here they moisten the beard.

5. (The Mantra is), ‘ Purify his head and his face,
but do not take away his life.’

6. He gives orders (to the barber with the words),
‘Arrange his hair, his beard, the hair of his body,
and his nails, ending in the north.’

7. Having bathed and silently stood during the
rest of the day, let him break his silence in the
presence of his teacher, (saying to him,) ‘I give an
optional gift (to thee).’

8. An ox and a cow is the sacrificial fee.

18. On these family customs, see Grzhya-samgraha-parisishéa II,
40; Roth, Zur Literatur und Geschichte des Weda, p. 120; Max
कपाल, History of A. S.L., p. 54seq.; Weber, Indische Studien, X, 95.

18, 4. See above, chap. 17, 7.

5. See chap. 17, 16.

6. According to Nardyama, he says to the barber (chap. r7, 17),
‘With lukewarm water doing what has to be done with water,
without doing harm to him, arrange his hair, his beard, the hair of
his body, and his nails, ending in the north.’

7, 8. On restrictions like that contained in the eighth SAtra as to
the object in which the vara (optional gift) had to consist, see
Weber, Indische Studien, V, 343.

I ADHYAYA, 19 KANDIKA, 12. 187

g. Let (the teacher) impose (on the youth the
observances declared below) for one year.

^ श्ण 19.

1, In the eighth year let him initiate a Bradhmaza,

2. Or in the eighth year after the conception ;

3. In the eleventh a Kshatriya;

4. In the twelfth a Vaisya.

5. Until the sixteenth (year) the time has not
passed for a Bréhmaza ;

6. Until the twenty-second for a Kshatriya ;

7. Until the twenty-fourth for a Vaisya.

8. After that (time has passed), they become pati-
tasavitrika (ie. they have lost their right of learning
the Savitri).

9. No one should initiate such men, nor teach
them, nor perform sacrifices for them, nor have inter-
course with them.

10. (Let him initiate) the youth who is adorned
and whose (hair on the) head is arranged, who wears
a (new) garment that has not yet been washed, or
an antelope-skin, if he is a Braéhmava, the skin of
a spotted deer, if a Kshatriya, a goat's skin, if a
Vaisya.

1x. If they put on garments, they should put on
dyed (garments): the Brahmaza a reddish yellow
one, the’ Kshatriya a light red one, the Vaisya a
yellow one.

12. Their girdles are: that of a Brahmaza made
of Muzga grass, that of a Kshatriya a bow-string,
that of a Vaisya woollen.

9. See below, chap. 22, 22.
19, 10, By the ‘arranging of the hair’ the cutting of the hair is
implied, as is seen from chap. 22, 22.

188 AsVALAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

13. Their staffs are: that of a Brahmawa of 21858.
wood, that of a Kshatriya of Udumbara wood, that
of a Vaisya of Bilva wood.

KawnpikA 20,

1. Or all (sorts of staffs are to be used) by (men
of) all (castes).

2. While (the student) takes hold of him, the
teacher sacrifices and then stations himself to the
north of the fire, with his face turned to the east.

3. To the east (of the fire) with his face to the
west the other one.

4. (The teacher then) fills‘the two hollows of (his
own and the student’s) joined hands with water, and
with the verse, ‘That we choose of Savitzz’ (Rig-
veda V, 82, 1) he makes with the full (hollow of his
own hands the water) flow down on the full (hollow
of) his, (i.e. the student’s hands.) Having (thus)
poured (the water over his hands) he should with his
(own) hand seize his (i.e. the student’s) hand together
with the thumb, with (the formula), ‘ By the impulse
of the god Savitr7, with the arms of the two Asvins,
with Pdshan’s hands I seize thy hand, N.N.!’

5. With (the words), ‘Savitr7 has seized thy hand
N.N.!’ a second time

6. With (the words), ‘Agni is thy teacher, N.N.!’
a third time

7. He should cause him to look at the sun while
the teacher says, ‘God Savitvz, this is thy Brahma-
Aarin; protect him; may he not die.’

20, 2. He offers the oblations prescribed above, chap. 1, 4,
3 seq.

I ADHYAYA, 21 KANDIKA, 2, 189

8. (And further the teacher says), ‘Whose Brah-
maéérin art thou? The breath’s Brahmaéérin art
thou. Who does initiate thee, and whom (does he
initiate)? To whom shall I give thee in charge?’

* 9. With the half verse, ‘A youth, well attired,
dressed came hither’ (Rig-veda III, 8, 4) he should
cause him to turn round from the left to the right.

10. Reaching with his two hands over his (i.e. the
student's) shoulders (the teacher) should touch the
place of his heart with the following (half verse).

11. Having wiped the ground round the fire, the
student should put on a piece of wood silently,
‘Silence indeed is what belongs to Pragdpati. The
student becomes belonging to Pragdépati’—this is
understood (in the Sruti).

KawoikA 21.

1. Some (do this) with a Mantra: ‘To Agni I
have brought a piece of wood, to the great GAta-
vedas. Through that piece of wood increase thou,
O Agni; through the Brahman (may) we (increase).
99212 !’

2. Having put the fuel (on the fire) and having

11, On the wiping of the ground round the fire, comp. above,
chap. 3, 1; Sankhayana-Grshya I, 7, 11. Ndardya#a here has the
following remarks, which I can scarcely believe to express the real
* meaning of this Sftra: ‘ Here the wiping of the ground round the
fire is out of place, because the Samskaras for the fire have already
been performed. As to that, it should be observed that the wiping is
mentioned here in order that, when fuel is put on the fire in the
evening and in the morning, the sprinkling of water and the wiping
may be perfarmed. But on this occasion (at the Upanayana) the
student does not perform the wiping, &c., and silently puts a piece
of wood on that fire.’

190 ASVALAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

touched the fire, he three times wipes off his face
with (the words), ‘ With splendour I anoint myself.’

3. ‘For with splendour does he anoint himself’ —
this is understood (in the Sruti).

4. ‘On me may Agni bestow insight, on me
offspring, on me splendour.

‘On me may Indra bestow insight, on me offspring,
on me strength (indriya).

‘On me may Sarya bestow insight, on me offspring,
on me radiance.

‘What thy splendour is, Agni, may I thereby be-
come resplendent.

‘What thy vigour is, Agni, may I thereby become
vigorous.

‘What thy consuming poweris, Agni, may I thereby
obtain consuming power’—with (these formulas) he
should approach the fire, bend his knee, embrace
(the teacher’s feet), and say to him, ‘Recite, sir!
The Savitri, sir, recite!’

5. Seizing with his (i.e. the student's) garment and
with (his own) hands (the student’s) hands (the
teacher) recites the Savitri, (firstly) Pada by Pada,
(then) hemistich by hemistich, (and finally) the whole
(verse).

6. He should make him recite (the Savitri) as far
as he is able.

7. On the place of his (i.e. the student's) heart (the
teacher) lays his hand with the fingers upwards, with
{the formula), ‘Into my will I take thy heart; after
my mind shall thy mind follow; in my word thou
shalt rejoice with all thy will; may Brzhaspati join
thee to me.’

I ADHYAYA, 22 KANDIKA, 12. 191

< ^ णा 22,

1. Having tied the girdle round him and given him
the staff, he should impose the (observances of the)
Brahmaéarya on him—

2. (With the words), ‘A Brahmaéérin thou art.
Eat water. Do the service. Do not sleep in the
day-time. Devoted to the teacher study the Veda.’

3. Twelve years lasts the Brahmaéarya for (each)
Veda, or until he has learnt it

4. Let him beg (food) in the evening and in the
morning.

5. Let him put fuel on (the fire) in the evening
and in the morning

6. Let him beg first of a man who will not refuse

7. Or of a woman who will not refuse.

8. (In begging he should use the words), ‘Sir,
give food!’

9. Or, ‘(Sir, give) Anupravaéantya (food).’

10. That (which he has received) he should an-
nounce to his teacher,

11. He should stand the rest of the day

12. After sunset (the student) should cook the
Brahmaudana (or boiled rice with which the Brah-
mavas are to be fed) for the Anupravaéaniya sacrifice
(the sacrifice to be performed after a part of the
Veda has been studied), and should announce to the
teacher (that it is ready).

22, 9. Food for the Anupravaanfya offering; see Sutra 12.

10. Sdnkhayana-Grrbya II, 6, 7; Paraskara II, 5, 8

12. ‘The student should, according to the rules for the Pakayagitas,
cook the Anupravasanfya food and announce it to the teacher in
the words, “ The food is cooked.”’ N&rdyana.

192 AsVALAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

13. The teacher should sacrifice, while the student
takes hold of him, with the verse, ‘The wonderful
lord of the abode’ (Rig-veda I, 18, 6).

14. A second time with the SAvitri—

15. And whatever else has been studied after-
wards.

16. A third time to the Avshis.

17. A fourth time (the oblation) to (Agni) Svi-
shéakrt.

18. Having given food to the Brahmazas he
should cause them to pronounce the end of the
Veda (study).

19. From that time (the student) should eat no
saline food; he should observe chastity, and should
sleep on the ground through three nights, or twelve
nights, or one year.

20. When he has fulfilled those observances, (the
teacher) performs (for him) the ‘ production of intel-
ligence,’ (in the following way):

21. While (the student) towards an unobjectionable
direction (of the horizon) sprinkles thrice (water)
from the left to the right with a water-pot round a

15. Narayaza mentions as such texts especially those belonging
to the Aranyaka, viz. the Mahandmnyas, the Mahavrata, and the
Upanishad. But there isno reason why we should not think quite
as well of the Rig-veda 32701718 itself.

18. ‘He should say, “Sirs! Pronounce the end of the Veda
(study).” And they should reply, “ May an end of the Veda (study)
be made.”’ Narayana. `

20. Comp. above, chap. 15, 2.

21. ‘ The objectionable directions are three, the south, the south-
east, the south-west.’ Nardyaza.

Susravas, which I have translated by ‘glorious,’ at the same
time means, ‘endowed with good hearing,’ i.e. successful in study.
The student therefore by the’same word prays for glory and for
success in Vedic learning.

I ADHYAYA, 23 KANWDIKA, I. 193

Palasa (tree) with one root, or round a Kusa bunch,
if there is no 7221852, (the teacher) causes him to say,
‘O glorious one, thou art glorious. As thou, O
glorious one, art glorious, thus, O glorious one, lead.
me to glory. As thou art the preserver of the
treasure of sacrifice for the gods, thus may I become
the preserver of the treasure of the Veda for men.’

22. Thereby, beginning with his having the hair
cut, and ending with the giving in charge, the impos-
ing of observances has been declared.

23. Thus for one who has not been initiated
before.

24. Now as regards one who has been initiated
, before:

25. The cutting of the hair is optional,

26. And the ‘ production of intelligence.’

27. On the giving in charge there are no express
rules (in this case) ;

28. And on the time.

29. (He should recite to him) as the SAvitrt (the
kik), ‘That we choose of god Savitvz’ (Rig-veda ४,
82, 1). ‘i

KanoikA 23.

1. He chooses priests (for officiating at a sacrifice)
with neither deficient nor superfluous limbs, ‘who on

22. The rules stated above for the Upanayana, beginning with
the prescription regarding the cutting of the hair (given chap. 19,
10 in the words, ‘ whose [hair on the] head is arranged ;’ see the
note there), and ending with the ceremony prescribed chap. 20, 8,
are to be extended also to other cases of the imposing of a vow,
such, for instance, as that mentioned chap. 18, 9.

25. See chap. 19, Io. 26. See above, Sitra 29.

27. See chap. 20, 8. 28. See chap. 4, I.

2g. Instead of the ordinary Savitri, Rig-veda III, 62, 10.

23, 1. Comp. Srauta-sitra IX, 3, 20; Grzhya-sfitra I, 5, 1.

[29] 0

194 AsvaLAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

the mother’s and on the father’s side (&c.),’ as it has
been said above.

2. Let him choose young men as officiating priests :
thus (declare) some (teachers).

3. He chooses first the Brahman, then the Hot?z,
then the Adhvaryu, then the Udgatrz.

4. Or all who officiate at the Ahina sacrifices and
at those lasting one day.

5. The Kaushitakinas prescribe the Sadasya as
the seventeenth, saying, ‘He is the looker-on at the
performances.’

6. This has been said in the two Azéas, ‘He whom
the officiating priests, performing (the sacrifice) in
many ways’ (Rig-veda VIII, 58, 1. 2).

7. He chooses the Hotz first. °

8. With (the formula), ‘Agni is my Hotz? ; he is my
Hotrz; I choose thee N. N. as my Hotv2’ (he chooses)
the Hotz.

4. The Ahina sacrifices are those which last more than one day,
but not more than twelve days. (Indische Studien, IX, 373; X,
355-) The priests officiating at such sacrifices are the sixteen
stated in the Srauta-sitra IV, 7, 6. 7. Those besides the sixteen,
though they are chosen (saty api varave) for taking part in the
sacred performances, have not the rank of r7tvigas (officiating
priests); such are the Sadasya, the Samitrz, and the Kamasd-
dhvaryavah (schol. Srautas. loc. cit.). See Max Miiller’s History of
A.S. L., pp. 450, 469 seq. As to the Sadasya, however, there was "
some difference of opinion (see the next Sitra).

5. On the office of the Sadasya, see Indische Studien, X, 136, 144.

6. The two Azkas quoted here belong to the tenth among the
Valakhilya hymns, a hymn omitted in many of the Rig-veda MSS.
They give no special confirmation to the rules stated in our text,
but contain only a general allusion to the unity of the sacrifice,
which the various priests perform in many various ways.

7. ‘If the four (chief) priests have to be chosen, the choosing of
the Brahmawa stands first in order (see above, Sitra 3); if all (the
sixteen), then the choosing of the Hotrz stands first in order.’
Narfyana.

I ADHYAYA, 23 KANDIKA, 19. 195

9. With (the formula), ‘Kandramas (the moon) is
my Brahman; he is my Brahman; I choose thee
N.N. as my Brahman’ (he chooses) the Brahman.

10. With (the formula), ‘Aditya (the sun) is my
Adhvaryu; (he is my Adhvaryu, &c.)’—the Adh-
varyu.

11, With (the formula), ‘ Parganya is my Udgatrz;
(he is my Udgatrz, &c.)’—the Udgatrz.

12, With (the formula), ‘The waters are my reciters
of what belongs to the Hotrakas’—the Hotrakas.

13. With (the formula), ‘The rays are my Kama-
sadhvaryus’—the KamasAdhvaryus.

14. With (the formula), ‘The ether is my Sada-
sya ’—the Sadasya.

15. He whom he has chosen should murmur, ‘A
great thing thou hast told me; splendour thouhast told
me ; fortune thou hast told me; glory thou hast told
me ; praise thou hast told me; success thou hast told
me ; enjoyment thou hast told me ; satiating thou hast
told me; everything thou hast told me.’

16. Having murmured (this formula), the Hotr7
declares his assent (in the words), ‘Agni is thy
प्ण; he is thy प्रर; thy human Hotr7 am I’

17. ‘Kandramas (the moon) is thy Brahman; he
is thy Brahman (&c.)’—thus the Brahman.

18. In the same way the others according to the
prescriptions (given above).

19. And if (the priest who accepts the invitation)

12. The twelve priests of the sixteen (see § 4 note) who do not
stand at the head of one of the four categories. Those at the head
are enumerated in the Sutras 8-11.

13, 14. See above, § 4 note.

19. Priests who only perform the Agnyadheya for a person, are,
according 10 Narayaza’s note on this Satra, not considered as

02

196 AsvVALAY ANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

is going to perform the sacrifice (for the inviting
person, he should add), ‘May that bless me; may
that enter upon me; may I thereby enjoy (bliss).’
20. The functions of an officiating priest are not
to be exercised, if abandoned (by another priest), or
at an Ahina sacrifice with small sacrificial fee, or for
a person that is sick, or suffering, or affected with
consumption, or decried among the people in his
village, or of despised extraction: for such persons
(the functions of a Rztvig should not be exercised).
21. He (who is chosen as a Aetvig) should ask
the Somapravaka, ‘What sacrifice is it? Who are

performing a sacrifice for him; consequently the formula given
here is only to be used by priests who are elected for a Soma
sacrifice. Stenzler translates, ‘So spricht er, wenn er das Opfer
durch sie vollziehen lassen will’ But this would be yakshya-
manaA, not yagayishyan.

20. The tradition takes nifadakshizasya as in apposition to
ahfnasya, and I have translated accordingly. But I cannot help
thinking that the two words should be separated, so that we should
have to translate, ‘or at an Ahina, or for a person that gives small
sacrificial fee. Thus the Brahmana quoted by Apastamba (see
the commentary on the Pafikavimsa Braéhmama, vol. i, p. 6, ed.
Bibl. Indica) gives the following questions which the Ritvig to be
chosen should ask, ‘Is it no Ahina sacrifice? Is the Ritvig office
not abandoned by others? Is the sacrificial fee plentiful?’ It isa
very singular fact, that on the one hand the assistance of a number
of Ritvigas was unanimously declared necessary for the perform-
ance of an Ahina sacrifice, while on the other hand it was considered
objectionable, at least among some of the Vedic schools, to officiate
at such a sacrifice. See Weber’s Indische Studien, X, 150, 151.

On anudesyabhisasta Narayana says, sadesinabhisastasyaivam.
eke. anye tu sraddhe pratishiddhasyety ahu#. It seems to me that
anudesya (or rather Anudesya?) in Sankhayana-Sraut. V, 1, 10
(Indische Studien, X, 147) means the same, though the commentary
on that Sitra ascribes a different meaning to that word.

21. The Somapravaka is the messenger who invites the priests
on behalf of the sacrificer to officiate at his intended Soma sacrifice.
Comp. Indische Studien, IX, 308.

1 ADHYAYVA, 24 KANDIKA, 7. 197

the priests officiating? What is the fee for the
sacrifice ?’

22. If (all the conditions) are favourable, he should
accept.

23. Let (the officiating priests) eat no flesh nor
have intercourse with a wife until the completion of
the sacrifice.

24. ‘ By this prayer, O Agni, increase’ (Rig-veda
I, 31, 18)—with (this verse) let him offer (at the end
of the sacrifice) an oblation of Agya in (his own)
DakshizAgni, and go away where he likes;

25. In the same way one who has not set up
the (Srauta) fires, in his (sacred) domestic fire with
this Azz, ‘ Forgive us, O Agni, this sin’ (Rig-veda
I, 31, 16).

KawoikA 24,

1. When he has chosen the Atvigas, he should
offer the Madhuparka (i. €. honey-mixture) to them
(in the way described in Sfitras 5 and following) ;

2. Toa Snataka, when he comes to his house;

3. And to a king ; =

4. And for a teacher, the father-in-law, a paternal
uncle, and a maternal uncle.

5. He pours honey into curds,

6. Or butter, if he can get no honey.

7. A seat, the water for washing the feet, the
Arghya water (i. e. perfumed water into which flowers
have been thrown), the water for sipping, the honey-

24, 1 seqq. Comp, Sankhayana-Grzhya II, 15. The second
Sdtra is paraphrased by Narayana thus, ‘To a person that has
performed the Samavartana (see below, ITI, 8), when he comes on
that day to his house with the intention of forming a matrimonial
alliance,’

198 ASVALAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA,

mixture, a cow: every one of these things they
announce three times (to the guest).

8. With (the verse), ‘I am the highest one among
my people, as the sun among the thunderbolts. Here
I tread on him whosoever infests me’—he should
sit down on the seat (made of) northward-pointed
(grass).

g. Or (he should do so) after he has trodden
on it.

10. He should make (his host) wash his feet.

11. The right foot he should stretch out first to a
Brahmaza,

12. The left to a Sddra.

13. When his feet have been washed, he receives
the Arghya water in the hollow of his joined hands
and then sips the water destined thereto, with (the
formula), ‘Thou art the first layer for Ambrosia.’

14. He looks at the Madhuparka when it is
brought to him, with (the formula), ‘I look at thee
with Mitra’s eye.’

15. He accepts it with his joined hands with (the
formula), ‘ By the impulse of the god Savitvz, with
the arms of the two Asvins, with the hands of 72051131
I accept thee.’ He then takes it into his left hand,
looks at it with the three verses, ‘ Honey the winds
to the righteous one’ (Rig-veda I, 90, 6 seqq.), stirs
it about three times from left to right with the fourth
finger and the thumb, and wipes (his fingers) with
(the formula), ‘May the Vasus eat thee with the
Gayatri metre’—to the east;

16. With (the formula), ‘ May the Rudras eat thee
with the Trish¢ubh metre ’—to the south;

17. With (the formula), ‘May the Adityas eat
thee with the Gagati metre ’—to the west ;

I ADHYAYA, 24 KANDIKA, 32. 199

18. With (the formula), ‘May the Visve devas eat
thee with the Anush/ubh metre ’—to the north.

19. With (the formula), ‘To the beings thee’—he
three times takes (some of the Madhuparka sub-
stance) out of the middle of it.

20. With (the formula), ‘The milk of Virdg art-
thou ’—he should partake thereof the first time,

21. With, ‘The milk of Virag may I obtain ’—the
second time,

22. With, ‘In me (may) the milk of Padyé Virag
(dwell) ’—the third time

23. (He should) not (eat) the whole (Madhuparka).

24. He should not satiate himself.

25. Toa Brahmama, to the north, he should give
the remainder.

26. If that cannot be done, (he should throw it)
into water.

27. Or (he may eat) the whole (Madhuparka).

28. He then makes a rinsing of his mouth follow
(on the eating of the Madhuparka) with the water
destined thereto, with (the formula), ‘Thou art the
covering of Ambrosia.’

29. With (the formula), ‘Truth! Glory! Fortune!
May fortune rest on me !’—a second time.

30. When he has sipped water, they announce to
him the cow.

31. Having murmured, ‘Destroyed is my sin; my
sin is destroyed,’ (he says,) ‘Om, do it,’ if he chooses
to have her killed.

32. Having murmured, ‘The mother of the Ru-
dras, the daughter of the Vasus’ (Rig-veda VIII,

22, On Pady4 Virdg, see the note on Sankhayana-Grvhya III, 7, 5.
28. Comp. above, Sitra 13.

200 ASVALAYANA-GRIHYA-SOUTRA.

107, 15), (he says,) ‘Om, let her loose,’ if he chooses
to let her loose.

33. Let the Madhuparka not be without flesh,
without flesh.

End of the First Adhydya.

33. Comp. Sankhayana-Grchya II, 15, 2.

II ADHYAYA, I KANDIKA, 9. 201
= 9

ApuyAyva II, लाद 1.

1. On the full moon day of the Sravaza month
the Sravava ceremony (is performed).

2. Having filled a new jug with flour of fried
barley, he lays (this jug) and a spoon for offering
the Balis on new strings of a carrying pole (and thus
suspends them)

3. Having prepared fried barley grains, he smears
half of them with butter.

4. After sunset he prepares a mess of cooked food
anda cake in one dish and sacrifices (the cooked food)
with the four verses, ‘Agni, lead us on a good path
to wealth’ (Rig-veda I, 189, 1 seqq.), verse by verse,
and with his hand the (cake) in one dish with (the
formula), ‘To the steady One, the earth-demon,
svaha !’

5. (The cake) should be (entirely) immersed (into
the butter), or its back should be visible.

6. With (the verse), ‘Agni, do not deliver us to
evil’ (Rig-veda I, 189, 5) he sacrifices over it (the
butter) in which it had lain.

7. With (the verse), ‘May the steeds at our invo-
cation be for a blessing to us’ (Rig-veda VII, 38, 7)
(he sacrifices) the besmeared grains with his joined
hands,

8. The other (grains) he should give to his people.

9. Out of the jug he fills the spoon with flour,

1, 1, Narayama’s observation that the Sravaza full moon can fall
also under certain other Nakshatras than Sravama itself, furnishes
no reason why we should think here of solar months, as Prof.
Stenzler proposes.

4, 8. See above, Sfitra 3. 9. See above, Sitra 1.

202 ASVALAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

goes out (of the house) to the east, pours water on
the ground on a clean spot, sacrifices with (the
formula), ‘To the divine hosts of the serpents
svaha!’ and does reverence to them with (the
formula), ‘ The serpents which are terrestrial, which
are aerial, which are celestial, which dwell in the
directions (of the horizon)—to them I have brought
this Bali; to them I give over this Bali’

10. Having gone round (the Bali) from left to
right, he sits down to the west of the Bali with (the
words), ‘The serpent art thou; the lord of the
creeping serpents art thou; by food thou protectest
men, by cake the serpents, by sacrifice the gods.
To me, being in thee, the serpents being in thee
should do no harm. I give over the firm one
(i.e. the spoon) to thee.’

11. ‘Firm one, ( give) N. N. (in charge) to thee!
Firm one, (I give) N. N. (in charge) to thee !’—
with (these words he gives) his people, man by man,
(in charge to the serpent god) ; +

‘ Firm one, I give myself in charge to thee !'—
with these words himself at the end.

13. Let no one step between it (i.e. the Bali, and
the sacrificer), until the giving in charge has been
performed.

14. With (the formula), ‘To the divine hosts of
the serpents svaha!’—let him offer the Bali in the
evening and in the morning, till the Pratyavarohana
(i. €. the ceremony of the ‘ redescent’)

15. Some count (the days till the Pratyavarohaza)

14. On the Pratyavarohaza, see the third chapter of this
Adhyaya.

15. I.e.two Bali offerings for each day, one for the morning and
one for the evening.

II ADHVAYA, 2 KANDIKA, 4. 203

and offer the corresponding number of Balis already
on that day (on which the Sravaw4 ceremony is
performed),

KawopikA 2.

1. On the full moon day of Asvayuga the Asvayugt
ceremony (is performed).

2. Having adorned the house, having bathed and
put on clean garments, they should pour out a mess
of cooked food for Pasupati, and should sacrifice it
with (the formula), ‘ To Pasupati, to Siva, to Samkara,
to Prishataka svaha!’

3. He should sacrifice with his joined hands a
mixture of curds and butter (pvshataka) with (the
formula), ‘May what is deficient be made full to me;
may what is full not decay to me. To Prdshdtaka
svaha!’

4. ‘United with the seasons, united with the
manners, united with Indra and Agni, svaha!

‘ United with the seasons, united with the manners,
united with the Visve devas, svaha!

‘United with the seasons, united with the manners,
united with Heaven and Earth, svah4 !’—with (these
formulas) a mess of cooked food is offered at the

2, 2. ‘The plural ^ They should sacrifice it” means, that while
the sacrifice is performed by the householder, his sons and the
other persons belonging to the house should touch him.’ Narayaza.

4. The Agrayava sacrifice, which is offered when the sacrificer is
going to partake of the first-fruits of the harvest, is treated of, with
relation to a sacrificer who keeps the Srauta fires, in the Srauta-
sitra II, 9. This Siitra in my opinion should be understood as a
supplementary addition to that chapter. Narayana refers the rule
here given to the case of arly incident or danger (Apad) which pre-
vents the sacrificer from performing the ceremony in its fuller
form, as prescribed in the Srauta-sitra.

204 AsvALAYANA-GRIHYVA-SOTRA,

Agrayaza sacrifice by one who has set up the (sacred
Srauta) fires.

5. Also by one who has not set up the (Srauta)
fires (the same offering is performed) in the (sacred)
domestic fire.

Kawpikad 3.

1. On the full moon of Margasirsha the ‘rede-
scent’ (is performed)—on the fourteenth (Tithi),

2. Or on (the Tithi ग. चल full moon (itself).

3. Having again renovated the house by (giving a
new) coating (to the walls), by spreading out (a new
roof), and by levelling (the floor), they should sacrifice
after sunset (oblations) of milk-rice with (the texts),
+ Beat away, O white one, with thy foot, with the fore-
foot and with the hind-foot, these seven daughters
of Varuza and all that belong to the king’s tribe.
Svaha!

‘Within the dominion of the white one no serpent
has killed anything. To the white one, the son of
Vidarva, adoration! Svaha!’

4. Here no oblation to (Agni) Svish¢akrzt (is
made).

5. ‘May we be secure from Prag&pati’s sons’—
thus he murmurs while looking at the fire.

3, 1. On the ceremony of ‘ redescent,’ comp. Sankhayana-Grzhya
IV, 17; Paraskara III, 2. The fourteenth Tithi of the bright fort-
night, preceding the full moon, is referred to.

3. ‘Again’ refers to chap. 2, 2. As to the words ‘they should
sacrifice,’ comp. the note on the same Sitra. The first Mantra
reoccurs in Sankhayana-Grzhya IV, 18, 1. The text of the second
should be, na vai svetasyadhydare, &c.; comp. Paraskara II,
14; 5. 4

5. The serpents are the children of Kasyapa (i.e. Pragapati) and
Kadri; see Mahabharata I, 1074 seqq.

II ADHYAYA, 4 KAnDIKA, I. 205

6. (Saying), ‘Be happy and friendly to us’—he
should think in his mind of the winter.

7. To the west of the fire is a well-spread layer (of
straw); on that he should sit down, murmur (the
verse), ‘Be soft, O earth’ (Rig-veda I, 22, 15), and
lie down (on that layer) with his people, with the
head to the east and the face to the north.

8. The others, as there is room.

9. Or following on each other from the eldest to
the youngest.

10. Those who know the Mantras, should murmur
the Mantras.

11. Arising (they should) three times (murmur the
verse), ‘From that place may the gods bless us’
(Rig-veda I, 22, 16).

12. The same (verse) a fourth time with their
faces to the south, to the west, and to the north.

13. Having arisen, having murmured the hymns
sacred to the Sun and the auspicious hymns, having
prepared food and given to the Brahmazas to eat,
he should cause (them) to pronounce auspicious
words.

Kawolka 4.

1, On the eighth days of the four dark fortnights
of (the two seasons of) winter and Sisira the Ash¢akas
(are celebrated).

to. ‘ The Mantras beginning from “Be soft, O earth” (Siatra 7)
down to the auspicious hymns (Sitra 13).’ Narayaza. ^

11. It follows from Sitra 12 that they are to turn here their faces
to the east.

12. They mutter one Pada of that verse, which is in the Gayatri
metre, turned towards each of the three directions.

4, 1. Comp. Sankhayana-Grzhya III, 12 seqq. The four

206 ASVALAYANA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

2. Or on one (of these days).

3. The day before, he should offer to the Fathers
(i.e. Manes) —

4. Boiled rice, boiled rice with sesamum seeds,
rice-milk—

5. Or cakes made of four Sardvas (€ ground
grain)—

6. Sacrificing with the eight (verses), ‘May the
lower (Fathers) and the higher arise’ (Rig-veda X,15,
I seqq.), or with as many (verses) as he likes.

7. Then on the next day the 45118185 (are
celebrated) with an animal (sacrifice) and with a mess
of cooked food.

8. He may also give grass to an ox,

9. Or he may burn down brushwood with fire—

10. With (the words), ‘This is my Ashéaka.’

11. But he should not omit celebrating the Ash-
taka.

12. This (Ash¢aka) some state to be sacred to the
Visve devas, some to Agni, some to the Sun, some
to Pragdpati, some state that the Night is its deity,
some that the Nakshatras are, some that the Seasons
are, some that the Fathers are, some that cattle is.

13. Having killed the animal according to the

months of Hemanta and Sisira are M4rgasirsha, Pausha, Magha,
and Phalguna.

2. The statement of the Prayogaratna that in case the sacrificer
should celebrate only one Ash/aka festival, the Ash/aka of the
Magha month is to be selected, well agrees with the designation of
this Ash/aka as ‘the one Ashfaka’ (ekash/aka); see Weber,
Naxatra II, 341 seq.; Indische Studien, XV, 145.

7 seqq. Comp. the nearly identical passage in Sinkhayana-Grrhya
III, 14, 3 seqq. and the note there. Asvalayana evidently gives
these rules not as regarding one special Ash/aka but all of them.

13. Comp. above, I, 11, 1. 2. ro. As to the Mantra, comp.
Sankhayana III, 13, 3.

Il ADHYAYA, 4 KANDIKA, 14. 207

ritual of the animal sacrifice, omitting the sprinkling
(with water) and the touching of the animal with a
fresh branch, he should draw out the omentum and
sacrifice it with (the verse), ‘Carry the omentum,
G&atavedas, to the Fathers, where thou knowest
them resting afar. May streams of fat flow to them ;
may all these wishes be fulfilled. Sv4ha!’

14. Then (follow oblations) of the Avadana por-
tions and the cooked food, two with (the two verses),
‘Agni, lead us on a good path to wealth’ (Rig-veda
I, 189, 1 seq.), (and other oblations with the texts),
‘May summer, winter, the seasons be happy to us,
happy the rainy season, safe to us the autumn. The
year be our lord who gives breath to us; may days
and nights produce long life. Svaha!

‘Peaceful be the earth, happy the air, may the
goddess Heaven give us safety. Happy be the
quarters (of the horizon), the intermediate quarters,
the upper quarters ; may the waters, the lightnings
protect us from all sides. 5५६18 !

‘May the waters, the rays carry our prayers (to
the gods); may the creator, may the ocean turn
away evil; may the past and the future, (may) all
be safe to me. Protected by Brahman may I pour
forth songs. Svaha!

‘May all the Adityas and the divine Vasus, the
Rudras, the protectors, the Maruts sit down (here).
May Pragdpati, the abounding one, the highest
ruler, bestow vigour, offspring, immortality on me.
Svaha!

‘ Pragdpati, no other one than Thou (Rig-veda X,
727, 10).

14. I read, as Prof. Stenzler and the Petersburg Dictionary do,
svara ksharazi. Comp. Paraskara III, 3, 6.

208 AsvALAYANA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

15. The eighth (oblation) is that to (Agni) Svi-
shfakrit.

16. He should give to the Brahmawas to eat:
this has beén said.

Kawoikd 5.

1. On the following day the Anvash/éakya (i. €. the
ceremony following the ^ 51148158, is performed).

2. Having prepared (a portion) of that same meat,
having established the fire on a surface inclined
towards the south, having fenced it in, and made a
door on the north side of the enclosure, having
strewn round (the fire) three times sacrificial grass
with its roots, without tossing it, turning the left
side towards the fire, he should put down the things
to be offered, boiled rice, boiled rice with sesamum
seeds, rice-milk, meal-pap with curds, and meal-pap
with honey.

3. (The ceremony should be performed) according
to the ritual of the Pizdapitrzyagiia.

4. Having sacrificed (of those sorts of food) with
the exception of the meal-pap with honey, let him
give (lumps of those substances) to the Fathers..

5. And to (their) wives, with the addition of rum
and the scum of boiled rice.

6. Some (place the lumps to be offered) into pits,
into two or into six.

16, See above, chap. 3, 13.

5, 2, The meat is that of the animal killed on the Ash/aka day ;
see chap. 4, 13.

3. This ritual is given in the Srauta-sdtra II, 6 seq.

4. He sacrifices the two oblations prescribed in the Srauta-sitra
II, 6, 12, to Soma pitrémat and to Agni kavyavahana.

II ADHYAYA, 6 KANDIKA, 1. 209

7. In those situated to the east he should give
(the offerings) to the Fathers.

8. In those to the west, to the wives.

9. Thereby the ceremony celebrated in the rainy
season on the Magha day, in the dark fortnight after
the fuil moon of Praush¢/apada (has been declared),

10, And thus he should offer (a celebration like
the Anvash¢akya) to the Fathers every month,
observing uneven numbers (i.e. selecting a day with
an uneven number, inviting an uneven number of
Brahmamas, &c.).

11. He should give food at least to nine (Bréh-
mawzas),

12. Or to an uneven number ;

13. To an even number on auspicious occasions
or on the performance of meritorious deeds (such as
the consecration of ponds, &c.);

14. To an uneven number on other (occasions).

15. The rite is performed from left to right.
Barley is to be used instead of sesamum.

KawpikA 6.

1. When going to mount a chariot he should
touch the wheels with his two hands separately with
(the words), ‘1 touch thy two fore-feet. Thy two
wheels are the Brzhat and the Rathantara (SAmans).’

g. Comp. the note on Sankhayana-Grshya III, 13, 1.

19. Comp. Sankhayana-Grshya IV, इ, 1.

13. Sankhayana-Grzhya IV, 4, 4.

15. Sdnkhdyana-Grzhya IV, 4, 6. 9.

6, 1. ‘He should touch at the same time the right wheel with his
right hand, the left wheel with his left hand.’ Narayana.

[29] ९

210 ASVALAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

2. ‘Thy axle is the Vamadevya’—with (these
words he touches) the two (naves) in which the axle
rests.

3. He should mount (the chariot) with the right
foot first, with (the words), ‘ With Vayu’s strength I
mount thee, with Indra’s power and sovereignty.’

4. He should touch the reins, or if the horses have
no reins, (he should touch) the horses with a staff,
with (the words), ‘ With Brahman’s splendour I seize
you. With truth I seize you.’

5. When (the horses) put themselves in motion,
he should murmur, ‘Go forward to thousandfold
successful vigour, divine chariot, carry us forward!’
—(and the verse), ‘ Free, strong be thy limbs!’ (Rig-
veda VI, 47, 26.)

6. With this (verse he should touch also) other
articles of wood.

7. ‘May the two oxen be strong, the axle firm’
(Rig-veda III, 53, 17)—with (this verse) he should
touch (each) part of the chariot (alluded to in that
verse).

8. With (the verse), ‘The earth, the good pro-
tectress, the unattained heaven’ (Rig-veda X, 63, 10)
(he should ascend) a ship.

9. With a new chariot he should drive round a
widely known tree or round a pool that does not dry
up, with his right side turned towards it, and then
should fetch branches which bear fruits,

2. On the Vedic form of the chariot and of the wheels, comp.
Zimmer, Altindisches Leben, p. 247.

6. According to N&arayava this Sitra would refer only to other
vehicles of wood, which he is directed to touch with that Az& when
going to mount them. Perhaps the commentator is right; the
wording of the ब्र is well in keeping with his explanation.

Il ADHYAYA, 7 KANDIKA, 8. 211

10. Or something else that belongs to the house-
hold.

11. (He then) should drive (in that chariot) to an
assembly.

12. Having murmured, while looking at the sun,
(the verse), ‘Make our renown highest’ (Rig-veda
{V, 31, 15), he should descend.

13. ‘To the bull among my equals’ (Rig-veda X,
166, 1)—(this verse he should murmur) while
approaching (that assembly ?).

14. ‘May we be called to-day Indra’s best friends’
(Rig-veda I, 167, 10)—when the sun is setting.

15. ‘Thus I address you, O daughters of heaven,
while you arise’ (Rig-veda IV, 51, 11)—when day
appears.

Kawpikd 7%.

1. Now the examination of the ground (where he
intends to build a house).

2. (It must be) non-salinous soil of undisputed
property,

3. With herbs and trees,

4. On which much Kusa and Virava grass grows.

5. Plants with thorns and with milky juice he
should dig out with their roots and remove them—

6. And in the same way the following (sorts of
plants), viz. Apamarga, potherbs, Tilvaka, Parivyddha.

7. A spot where the waters, flowing together from
all sides to the centre of it, flow round the resting-
place, having it on their right side, and then flow
off to the east without noise—that possesses all
auspicious qualities.

8. Where the waters flow off, he should have the
provision-ropm built.

P 2

212 AsVALAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA,

g. Thus it becomes rich in food.

10. On a spot which is inclined towards the south,
he should have the assembly-room constructed ; thus
there will be no gambling in it.

11. (But others say that) in such (an assembly-
room) the young people become gamblers, quarrel-
some, and die early.

12. Where the waters flow together from all
directions, that assembly-room (situated on such a
spot) brings luck and is free from gambling,

{<^ एणा 8,

1. Now he should examine the ground in the
following ways.

2. He should dig a pit knee-deep and fill it
again with the same earth (which he has taken
out of it).

3. If (the earth) reaches out (of the pit, the ground
is) excellent; if it is level, (it is) of middle quality;
if it does not fill (the pit, it is) to be rejected.

4. After sunset he should fill (the pit) with water
and leave it so through the night.

5. If (in the morning) there is water in it, (the
ground is) excellent; if it is moist, (it is) of middle
quality ; if it is dry, (it is) to be rejected.

6. White (ground), of sweet taste, with sand on
the surface, (should be elected) by a Brahmavza.

7. Red (ground) for a Kshatriya.

8. Yellow (ground) for a Vaisya.

9. He should draw a thousand furrows on it and
should have it measured off as quadrangular, with
equal sides to each (of the four) directions ;

10. Or as an oblong quadrangle.

7 aDHyAvA, 8 KAnpIKA, 16. 213

11. With a Sami branch or an Udumbara branch
he sprinkles it (with water), going thrice round it,
so that his right side is turned towards it, reciting
the Santatiya hymn.

12. And (so he does again three times) pouring
out water without interruption, with the three verses,
‘O waters, ye are wholesome’ (Rig-veda X, 9, 1 seqq.).

13. In the interstices between the bamboo staffs
he should have the (single) rooms constructed.

14. Into the pits in which the posts are to stand,
he should have an Avaka, 1. €. (the water-plant
called) SipAla put down; then fire will not befall
him: thus it is understood (in the Sruti).

15. Having put (that plant) into the pit in which
the middle-post is to stand, he should spread (on it)
eastward-pointed and northward-pointed Kusa grass
and should sprinkle (on that grass) water into which
rice and barley have been thrown, with (the words),
‘To the steady one, the earth-demon, svaha !’

16. He then should, when (the middle-post) is
being erected, recite over it (the two verses),

‘Stand here, fixed in the ground, prosperous, long-

8, 11. The hymn of which all verses (except a few) commence
with, and frequently contain, the word sam (Rig-veda VII, 35).

13. The bamboo staffs (vamsa) rest on the chief posts (ऽ) ;
see chap. 9, 1. 2.

15. Cemp. chap. 1, 4.

16. Comp. Sankhayana-Grzhya III, 3, 1 and the note there. How
stamiravatim should be corrected and translated is quite un-
certain. Instead of poshasva Prof. Stenzler proposes to read
poshasya, as Sankhayana has; I have adopted this correction.—
In the second verse € 8 # २६३7 saha seems to be corrupt; comp. my
note on Sdinkhdyana III, 2,9. Instead of parisritak we should
read, as Sankhdyana, Paéraskara, and the Atharva-veda (III, 12, 7)
have, parisrutah.

214 AsVALAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA,

lasting (?), standing amid prosperity. May the
malevolent ones not attain thee!

‘To thee (may) the young child (come), to thee
the calf. ..; to thee (may) the cup of Parisrut
(come) ; (to thee) may they come with pots of curds.’

- KawnikA 9.

1. (Over) the bamboo staff, when it is put on (the
middle-post, he recites the hemistich),

2. ‘Rightly ascend the post, O staff, bestowing on
us long life henceforward.’

3. On four stones, on which Darva grass has been
spread, he should establish the water-barrel with
(the words), ‘ Arise on the earth ’—

4. Or with (the verse), ‘The Arangara sounds,
three times bound with the strap. It praises the
welfare ; may it drive away ill.’

5. He then should pour water into it with (the
verse), ‘Hither may king Varuza come with the
plentiful (waters); at this place may he stay con-
tented; bringing welfare, dropping ghee may they
lie down together with Mitra.’

6. He then ‘appeases’ it (in the following way).

7. He puts gold into water into which rice and
barley have been thrown, and (with that water) he
sprinkles it three times, going round it with his right
side turned towards it, with the Santatiya hyshn.

8. And (so he does again three times) pouring out

9, 4. The meaning of Arangara is unknown to me; it seems to
be a musical instrument. Comp. Atharva-veda XX, 135, 13.

6. The ground on which the house is to be built.

4. On the Santatiya hymn, see above, chap. 8, 71.

8. This Satra is identical with chap. 8, 12.

Il ADHYAYA, IO KANDIKA, 6. 215

water without interruption, with the three verses, ‘O
waters, ye are wholesome’ (Rig-veda X, 9, 1 seqq.).

g. In the middle of the house he should cook a
mess of food, sacrifice (therefrom) with the four
verses, ‘ VAstoshpati, accept us’ (Rig-veda VII, 54,
I seqq.), verse by verse, should prepare food, should
give to the Brahmawas to eat, and should cause them
to say, ‘ Lucky is the ground! Lucky is the ‘ground!’

KanopikA 10.

1. It has been declared how he should enter the
house (when returning from a journey).

2. The house, when he enters it, should be pro-
vided with seed-corn.

3. He should have his field ploughed under the

“Nakshatras 1112184 Prosh¢fapadas, (Uttaraz) Phal-
gunyas, or Rohizi.

4. In order that the wind may blow to him from
the field, he should offer oblations with the hymn,
‘Through the lord of the field’ (Rig-veda IV, 57),
verse by verse, or he should murmur (that hymn).

5. He should speak over the cows when they go
away, the two verses, ‘May refreshing wind blow
over the cows’ (Rig-veda X, 169, 1 seq.).

6. When they come back, (he should recite the
following verses,)

‘May they whose udder with its four holes is full

9. Comp. above, chap. 3, 13.

10, ब. See Srauta-sitra II, 5, 17 seqq. It is there expressly
stated that these rules refer also to an Andhitagni.

3. Sankhayana IV, 13, 1.

5. Sankhayana-Grchya III, 9.

6. Sankhayana, loc. cit—Should the reading upa maitu be cor-
rected into upa maita?

216 AsVALAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

of honey and ghee, be milk-givers to us; (may they
be) many in our stable, rich in ghee.

‘Come hither to me, giving refreshment, bringing
vigourand strength. Giving inexhaustible milk, rest
in my stable that I may become the highest one’—

And, ‘ They who have raised their body up to the
gods’—the rest of the hymn (Rig-veda X, 169, 3. 4).

7. Some recite (instead of the texts stated in Satra
6) the AgAviya hymn.

8. He should approach their herds, if the cows do
not belong to his Guru, with (the words), ‘Prospering
are ye; excellent are ye, beautiful, dear. May I
become dear to you. May you see bliss in me.’

End of the Second Adhydya.

A

4. The hymn commencing 4 gavo agman (hither came the
cows) is Rig-veda VI, 28.

8. Perhaps the last words (which are repeated twice in order to
mark the end of the Adhyaya) should be written sam mayi
ganidhvam, ‘live with me in harmony together.’

III ADHYAYA, 2 KANDIKA, 2. 217

ApuyAva III, KaworxA 1.

1. Now (follow) the five sacrifices :

2. The sacrifice to the Gods, the sacrifice to the
Beings, the sacrifice to the Fathers, the sacrifice to
Brahman, the sacrifice to men.

3. Here now, if he makes oblations over the
(sacred) fire, this is the sacrifice to the Gods.

If he makes Bali offerings, this is the sacrifice to
the Beings.

If he gives (Pizda offerings) to the Fathers, this is
the sacrifice to the Fathers.

If he studies (Vedic) texts, this is the sacrifice to
Brahman.

If he gives to men, this is the sacrifice to men.

4. These (five kinds of) sacrifices he should per-
form every day.

Kanpika 2,

1. Now the rules how one should recite (the Vedic
texts) for one’s self.

2. He should go out of the village to the east or
to the north, bathe in water, sip water on a clean spot,
clad with the sacrificial cord; he should spread out,
his garment being not wet, a great quantity of Darbha
grass, the tufts of which are directed towards the east,
and should sit down thereon with his face turned to
the east, making a lap, putting together his hands in
which he holds purifiers (i.e. Kusa blades), so that
the right hand lies uppermost.

1, 7 seqq. Comp. Satapatha Brahmawa XI, 5, 6, 1 seqq.

218 ASVALAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

It is understood (in the Sruti), ‘This is what
Darbha grass is: it is the essence of waters and
herbs. He thus makes the Brahman provided with
essence.

Looking at the point where heaven and earth
touch each other, or shutting his eyes, or in whatever
way he may deem himself apt (for reciting the Veda),
thus adapting himself he should recite (the sacred
texts) for himself.

3. The Vyahvztis preceded by (the syllable) Om
(are pronounced first).

4. He (then) repeats the Savitri (Rig-veda ITJ, 62,
10), (firstly) Pada by 2842, (then) hemistich by
hemistich, thirdly the whole.

KawoikA 3.

1. He then should recite for himself (the following
texts, viz.) the Azkas, the Yagus, the 54718175, the
Atharvan and Angiras hymns, the Brahmawas, the
Kalpa (Sittras), the Gathas, the (texts in honour of
kings and heroes, called) Nardsamsis, the Itihdsas
and Purazas.

2. In that he recites the Azéas, he thereby satiates
the gods with oblations of milk—in that (he recites)
the Yagus, with oblations of ghee—the Samans, with
oblations of honey—the Atharvan and Angiras
hymns, with oblations of Soma—the Bradhmawas,
Kalpas, Gathas, Nardsamsis, Itihdsas and 87785,
with oblations of ambrosia.

3,1. On this and the following paragraphs comp. chiefly Satapatha
Braéhmana XI, 5, 6. Other enumerations, contained in the Veda
itself, of the texts that were considered as forming the Veda or as
attached to the body of the Veda, are found in the Satapatha
Brahmana XIV, 5, 4, 10 (Sacred Books, XV, 111), and in the
&handogya Upanishad VII, 1 (Sacred Books, I, 799).

III ADHYAYA, 4 KANWDIKA, 2, 219

3. In that he recites the Azfas, rivers of milk flow,
as a funeral oblation, to his Fathers. In that (he
recites) the Yagus, rivers of ghee—the Sdmans,
rivers of honey—the Atharvan and Angiras hymns,
rivers of Soma—the Brahmawzas, Kalpas, GAathas,
NArAsamesis, ItihAsas and Purdzas, rivers of ambrosia.

4. After he has recited (those texts) as far as he
thinks fit, he should finish with the following (verse),

‘Adoration to Brahman! Adoration be to Agni!
Adoration to the Earth! Adoration to the Herbs!
Adoration to the Voice! Adoration to the Lord of
the Voice! Adoration I bring to great Vishzu!’

Kawoikd 4.

1. He satiates the deities: ‘ Pragdpati, Brahman,
the Vedas, the gods, the 7115, all metres, the word
Om, the word ४251122, the Vyéhr“tis, the SAvitri, the
sacrifices, Heaven and Earth, the air, days and
nights, the numbers, the Siddhas, the oceans, the
rivers, the mountains, the fields, herbs, trees, Gan-
dharvas and Apsaras, the snakes, the birds, the cows,
the Sadhyas, the Vipras, the Yakshas, the Rakshas,
the beings that have these (Rakshas, &c.) at their
end.’

2. Then the Azshis: ‘ The (27zshis) of the hundred
(Azkas), the (९251115) of the middle (Mazdalas), Grzt-

4, 1. Comp. Sankhdyana-Grrhya IV, 9. Narayana: ‘Having
finished (the Svadhydya) he satiates with water oblations these
deities,

Pragapati and the following words stand in the nominative; the
verb to be supplied is trzpyatu (tr7pyantu), ‘may he (they)
satiate himself (themselves).’

2. Sankhayana-Grchya IV, 10, Sankhayana has pivaminad,
‘the (Aishis) of the Pavam4na hymns,’ but pragathaA as Asvala-
yana has, and not as we should expect, pragatha,

220 AsVALAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

samada, Visvamitra, VAmadeva, Atri, Bharadvaga,
Vasish¢ha, the Pragathas, the Pavamdna hymns, the
(51115) of the short hymns, and of the long hymns.’

3. (Then) with the sacrificial cord suspended over
the right shoulder :

4. ‘Sumantu, Gaimini, Vaisampayana, Paila, the
Sitras, the Bhashyas, the Bh4rata, the Mahabharata,
the teachers of law, Gananti, Bahavi, Gargya, Gau-
tama, Sakalya, Babhravya, Mazdavya, Mazaikeya,
Gargi Vaésaknavi, Vadava Prdtitheyi, Sulabha
Maitreyi, Kahola Kaushitaka, Mahakaushitaka,
Paingya, Mahdpaingya, Suyagzia Sankhdyana, Aita-
reya, Mahaitareya, the Sakala (text), the Bashkala
(text), Sugdtavaktra, Audavahi, Mahaudavahi, Sau-
gami, Saunaka, Asvalayana—and whatsoever other
teachers there are, may they all satiate themselves.’

5. After he has satiated the Fathers man by man,
and has returned to his house, what he gives (then),
that is the sacrificial fee.

6. And it is also understood (in the Sruti), ‘May
he be standing, walking, sitting, or lying, (the texts
belonging to) whatsoever sacrifice he repeats, that
sacrifice indeed he has offered.’

7. It is understood (in the Sruti), ‘ Regarding this
(Svadhydya) there are two cases in which the study
(of the sacred texts) is forbidden: when he is im-
pure himself, and when the place is.’

4. The names from Kahola Kaushitaki down to Asvaldyana stand
in the accusative ; tarpay4mi, ‘I satiate N. N.’ is to be supplied.

5. Narayana; ‘He satiates his father, grandfather, and great-
grandfather, and goes to his house. What he then gives, for
instance, food offered to guests, or given as alms (to religious
beggars), is considered as the sacrificial fee for the Brahma-
yagiia.’

6. Comp. Satapatha Brahmama XI, 5, 7, 3. 4-

Ill ADHYAYA, 5 KAwpIKA, 7. 221

Kawoiké 5.

1. Now (follows) the Adhyayopakarama (i. €. the
ceremony by which the annual course of study is
opened) ;

2. When the herbs appear, (when the moon stands
in conjunction) with Sravaza, in the Sravava month,

3. Or on the fifth (Tithi of that month), under
(the Nakshatra) Hasta.

4. Having sacrificed the two Agya portions, he
should offer Agya oblations (to the following deities,
viz.) Savitri, Brahman, Belief, Insight, Wisdom,
Memory, Sadasaspati, Anumati, the metres, and the
९231015.

5. He then sacrifices grains with curds (with the
following texts) :

6. ‘I praise Agni the Purohita’—this one verse
(Rig-veda I, 1, 1), 1

7. ‘The Kushumbhaka (mungoose ?) has said 1८/--
‘If thou criest, O bird, announce luck to us’—‘ Sung
by Gamadagni’—‘In thy abode the whole world rests’

5, 2,3. Perhaps the division of these Siitras should be altered, so
that srdvazasya would belong to Sfitra 2. In this case we should
have to translate, ‘2. ‘When the herbs appear, (on a day on which
the moon stands in conjunction) with Sravaza. 3. Or on the
fifth (Tithi) of the Sravaza month, under (the Nakshatra) Hasta.’
Comp. sravamasya pankamim, Par. II, 10, 2. If we count
the month beginning with the bright fortnight, and assume that the
full moon day of Sravava falls, as the name of the month implies,
on Sravava, the fifth Tithi of that month will fall indeed on Hasta.
‘Comp. on the dates of the Upakarana, Prof. Weber’s remarks, Die
vedischen Nachrichten von den Naxatra II, 322, and on the special
symbolical signification of the Nakshatra Sravava in this connection,
my note on Sankhayana IV, 5, 2.

4. On the two Agya portions, comp. above, I, 3, 5; 10, 13 seqq.

4. Comp. Sankha4yana IV, 5,8. The verses with which the obla-
tions are performed, are the first and last verses of each Mandala.

222 AsVALAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

—‘ Come to our sacrifice, O you that are worthy of
sacrifice, with care’—' Whosoever, be he ours, be he
alien ’—‘ Look on, look about’—‘ Come here, Agni,
the Maruts’ friend —‘ The oblation, O king, cooked
for thee '—each time two verses ;

8. ‘ United is your will’ (Rig-veda X, 191, 4)—
this one verse;

9. ‘ That blessing and bliss we choose’—this one
verse. ।

10. When he intends to study (the Veda together
with pupils), he should, while the pupils take hold of
him, sacrifice to those deities, and sacrifice to (Agni)
Svishéakr7t, and partake of the grains with curds;
then (follows) the ‘cleaning.’

11. Sitting down to the west of the fire on Darbha
grass, the tufts of which are directed towards the
east, he should put Darbha blades into a water-pot,
and making a Brahmavgali (i.e. joining his hands as
a sign of veneration for the Brahman), he should
murmur (the following texts):

12. The Vyahrvtis preceded by (the syllable) Om
(stand first); (these) and the Savitri he should repeat
three times and then recite the beginning of the
Veda.

9. This is the last verse of the Azk-Samhita in the Bashkala
Sakha. See my note on Sankhayana IV, 5, 9.

ro. The expression, ‘ Those deities’ would, according to Nara-
yaza, refer not only to the deities stated in Sfitra 4, but also to the
deities of the first and 125 verses of the Mandalas (50195 6 seqq.).
On the grains with curds, comp. Siitra 5. The technical sense of
the ‘cleaning’ is explained in the Srauta-sttra I, 8, 2; comp.
Hillebrandt, Das altindische Neu- und Vollmondsopfer, p. 130,
note 1. The sacrificer covers his joined hands with the Kusa
grass spread out round the fire, and has water sprinkled on them.

11, On the term brahmafigali, comp. Manu II, 71.

Ili ADHVAYA, 6 1471, 1. 223

-13. In the same way at the Utsarga (i.e. at the
ceremony performed at the end of the term of Vedic
study).

14. He should study six months.

15. One who has performed the SamAévartana
(should live during that time) according to the
regulations for Brahmaé£arins.

16. The others according to the rules.

17. Some say that he should have intercourse
with his wife.

18. That (is a practice) sacred to Pragdpati.

19. This (Up&karawa) they call varshika (i.e.
belonging to the rainy season).

20. On the middle Ash/aka they offer food to
those deities, and descend into water.

21. They satiate those same deities (with water
oblations),

22. (And besides) the AfAryas, the Rishis, and
the Fathers.

. 23. This is the Utsargana.

^ कणा 6.

1. Instead of the Kamya ceremonies (i.e. the
ceremonies, prescribed in the Srauta-sfitra, by which

15. Onthe SamAvartana, see below, chap. 8 seq. The restrictions
referred to consist in the interdiction of eating honey and meat, of
having sexual intercourse, of sleeping in a bedstead and in the
day-time, &c. Narayana,

16. Le. the Brahmaéarins.

17. Le. one who has performed the Samavartana,

20. After the six months (Satra 14) have elapsed, on the Ash/aka
of Magha.

23. Or Utsarga, see Sfitra 13.

6, 1. N4réyana divides this Stra into two: 1. atha kamydnam
sthane kamyas; 2. Aaravah.

224 ASVALAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA,

special wishes are attained, oblations of) boiled (rice)
grains, for the attainment of those wishes, (should be
made by the Grzhya sacrificer).

2. He attains (thereby) those same wishes.

3. For a person that is sick, or suffering, or
affected with consumption, a mess of boiled (rice)
grains in six oblations (should he offered)—

4. With this (hymn), ‘I loosen thee by sacrificial
food, that thou mayst live’ (Rig-veda X, 161).

5. If he has seen a bad dream, he should worship
the sun with the two verses, ‘ To-day, god Savitrz’
(Rig-veda V, 82, 4, 5), and with the five verses,
‘What bad dreams there are among the cows’ (Rig-
veda VIII, 47, 14 seqq.),

6. Or with (the verse), ‘Whosoever, O king, be
it a companion or a friend’ (Rig-veda IT, 28, 10).

7, When he has sneezed, yawned, seen a dis-
agreeable sight, smelt a bad smell, when his eye
palpitates, and when he hears noises in his ears, he
should murmur, ‘Well-eyed may I become with my
eyes, well-vigoured with my face, well-hearing with
my ears. May will and insight dwell in me!’

8. If he has gone to a wife to whom he ought
not to go, or if he has performed a sacrifice for a
person for whom he ought not to do so, or has eaten
forbidden food, or accepted what he ought not to
accept, or pushed against a piled-up (fire altar) or

8. Narayava is evidently wrong in explaining daityam 0049
ka by agnikayanastham yipam (which is not, as Prof. Stenzler
takes it, der Opferpfahl auf einem Bestattungsplatze).
Comp. Gobhila II, 3, 34; Grzhya-samgraha-parisish/a I, 4.

I have translated the second verse in Sfitra 8, as if the text had
kalpantém. The MSS. give kalpatam. Atharva-veda VII, 67 has
kalpayantam.

Ill ADHYAYA, 7 KANDIKA, 3. 225

against a sacrificial post, he should sacrifice two
Agya oblations with (the verses),

‘May my faculties return into me, may life return,
may prosperity return ; may my goods return to
me; may the divine power return into me. Svaha!

‘These fires that are stationed on the (altars
called) Dhishzy4s, may they be here in good order,
each on its right place. (Agni) Vaisvanara, grown
strong, the standard of immortality, may he govern
my mind in my heart. Sv&ha!’

g. Or (he may sacrifice) two pieces of wood,

10. Or murmur (the same two verses without any
oblation).

Kanoixd 7,

1. If the sun sets while he is sleeping without
being sick, he should spend the rest of the night
keeping silence, without sitting down, and should
worship the sun (when it rises) with the five
(verses), ‘The light, O sun, by which thou de-
stroyest darkness’ (Rig-veda X, 37, 4 seq.).

2. If (the sun) rises (while he is sleeping without
being sick), being fatigued without having done any
work, or having done work that is not becoming, he
should keep silence, &c., as before, and perform his
worship (to the sun) with the following four (verses,
Rig-veda X, 37, 9 seq.).

3. Invested with the sacrificial cord, constantly
fulfilling the prescribed duties regarding the use of

7, 2, Perhaps we should correct the text, akarmasréntam ana-
bhiripea karmana va vagyata iti, &c.

3 seq. See Sankh4yana-Grchya II, 9. There the same word
anvash/amadesa occurs,

[29] Q

226 AsVALAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

water, he should perform the Sandhya (or twilight
devotion), observing silence.

4. In the evening he should, turning his face to
the north-west, to the region between the chief
(west) point and the intermediate (north-western)
point (of the horizon), murmur the Savitri, (beginning)
when the sun is half set, until the stars appear.

5. In the same way in the morning—

6. Standing, with his face turned to the east,
until the disk (of the sun) appears.

7. If a dove flies against his house or towards
it, he should sacrifice with (the hymn), ‘O gods,
the dove’ (Rig-veda X, 165), verse by verse, or
should murmur (that hymn).

8. ‘We have thee, O Lord of the path’ (Rig-veda
VI, 53)—if he is going out for doing some business.

9. ‘Bring us together, Pashan, with a knowing
one’ (Rig-veda VI, 54)—if he wishes to find some-
thing lost, or if he has strayed.

10. ‘Journey over the ways, Pfishan’ (Rig-veda
I, 42)—if he is going out on a long or dangerous
way.

Kawoika 8.

1, Now when returning (home from his teacher)
he should get the following things, viz. a jewel (to
be tied round the neck), two ear-rings, a pair of
garments, a parasol, a pair of shoes, a staff, a wreath,
(pounded seed of the Karaziga fruit) for rubbing
with, ointment, eye salve, a turban; (all that) for
himself and for the teacher. :

9. 71048 may either mean, ‘having lost his way,’ or ‘ bewildered
in his mind,’ Ndrayava prefers the latter explanation (‘pragfid-
hina’).

ए apHYAyA, 8 KAWDIKA, 10. 227

2. If he cannot get it for both, only for the teacher.

3- He then should get a piece of wood of a
tree which is sacrificially pure, in a north-eastern
direction—

4. Sappy (wood) if he wishes for the enjoyment of
food, or for prosperity, or for splendour; dry (wood),
if for holy lustre,

5. (Wood) which is both (sappy and dry, in its
different parts), if (he wishes) for both.

6. Having put the piece of wood on high, and
having given a cow and food to the Brahmawas, he
should perform the ceremony of shaving the beard.

7. He should alter the texts so that they refer to
himself.

8. With Ekaklitaka (he should perform the rub-
bing). *

9. Having washed himself with lukewarm water,
and having put on two (new) garments which have
not yet been washed, with (the verse), ‘Garments
with fat splendour you’ put on, (Mitra and Varuza)’
(Rig-veda I, 152, 1), he should anoint his eyes with
{the words), ‘The sharpness of the stone art thou;
protect my eye.’

10. With (the words), ‘ The sharpness of the stone

8, 6. ‘On high’ means ‘not on the ground’ (Narayana). On
the gauddnikam karma (the shaving of the beard), comp. above,
Adhyaya I, Kandika 18. The word ‘ceremony’ would mean here,
according to Narayaza, that he should perform the rite alone,
without observing such prescriptions as stated above, I, 18, 7.

4. Thus, instead of ‘ Herb! protect him!’ (I, 17, 8) he is to say,
‘Herb! protect me!’ and so on.

8. Ekaklitaka is, according to Nardyava and the Prayogaratna,
the seed of such a Karaviga fruit (Pongamia Glabra, Vent.) which
contains only one grain of seed. Such grains are pounded before
he rubs himself therewith.

Q2

8

228 AsVALAYANA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

art thou; protect my ear’—he should tie on the two
ear-rings.

17. After having salved his two hands with
ointment, a Brahmavza should salve his head first,

12, A Raganya his two arms,

13. A Vaisya the belly,

14. A woman her secret parts,

15. Persons who gain their livelihood by running,
their thighs.

16. With (the formula), ‘Free from pain art thou,
free from pain may I become’—he should put on
the wreath.

17. Not (such a wreath) which is called mala.

18. If they call it mala, he should cause them to
call it srag.

1g. With (the formula), ‘The standing-places of
the gods are you; protect me from all sides’—he
steps into the shoes, and with (the formula), ‘The
heaven’s covering art thou’—he takes the parasol.

20. With (the formula), ‘Reed thou art; from
the tree thou descendest; protect me from all
sides '—(he takes) a staff of reed.

21. Having with the hymn ‘Giving life’ tied the
jewel to his neck and arranged the turban (on his
head), he should standing put the piece of wood (on
the fire).

2x. On the hymn beginning with the words ‘Giving life,’ see
Prof. Stenzler’s note on this Sitra. Its first verse is identical with
Vagasaneyi Samhiti XXXIV, 50 (comp. also Sankhayana-Grshya
III, 1, 7), and so are most of its verses found in that Samhita or in the
Atharva-veda; the whole of it occurs among the Rig-veda Khilas
(vol. vi, p. 25, 2-12).

III ADHYAYA, 9 KANDIKA, 3.

to
bo
Ke)

Kawoiké 9.

1. (He says), ‘Memory and reproach and know-
ledge, faith, and wisdom as the fifth, what is sacrificed,
and what is given, and what is studied, and what is
done, truth, learning, vow—

‘The vow which belongs to Agni together with
Indra, with Pragapati, with the Avzshis, with the
royal ones among the A7zshis, with the Fathers, with
the royal ones among the Fathers, with the human
beings, with the royal ones among the human beings,
with shine, over-shine, after-shine, counter-shine, with
gods and men, with Gandharvas and Apsaras, with
wild animals and domestic animals,—the vow, be-
longing to my own self, dwelling in my own self,
that is’ my universal vow. Hereby, O Agni, I be-
come addicted to the universal vow. Svaha!’

2. With (the hymn), ‘Mine, Agni, be vigour’
(Rig-veda X, 128, 1), verse by verse, he should put
pieces of wood (on the fire).

3. He should pass that night at a place where
they will do honour to him.

9, 1. ‘““My memory and my non-memory, that is my double
vow ”—in this way the twelve (parts of which the first section of
the Mantra consists) should be recited’ Né&rdyavza. I think the
commentator is wrong here, and that section should rather be
recited as it is given in the text without any alteration; it forms a
regular Sloka. Agneé instead of Agne is a conjecture of Prof.
Stenzler, which I have adopted.

2. According to Narayana the hymn should be recited including
the Khila, so that ten pieces of wood are offered. Now the hymn
consists of nine verses; there can be, consequently, only one
Khailika verse, which is, I suppose, the first verse of the Khila
quoted above, p. 228

3. By a Madhuparka (Narayava), Compare Sankhayana-Grzhya
III, 1, 14

230 AsVALAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

4. When, after having’ finished his (task of)
learning, he has offered something to the teacher, or
has received his permission, he should take a bath
(which signifies the end of his studentship).

5. He (i.e. the Snataka) has to keep the following
observances :

6. He shall not bathe in the night-time; he shall
not bathe naked; he shall not lie down naked; he
shall not look at a naked woman, except during
sexual intercourse; he shall not run during rain;
he shall not climb up a tree; he shall not descend
into a well; he shall not swim with his arms across
a river; he shall not expose himself to danger.
‘A great being indeed is a Sndtaka’—thus it is
understood (in the Sruti).

KawoikA 10.

1. If (a student) wishes to be dismissed (by his
teacher), he should pronounce before the teacher his
(1. €. the teacher's ?) name—

2. (And should say), ‘Here we will dwell, sir!’

4. Nardyava: He makes an offer to the teacher in the words,
‘What is it that I can do for you?’—and what the teacher tells
him, that he does.

10, 1. Narayana refers this rule to a student who has performed
the Samdvartana and wishes to go away. But a comparison of
Sankhdyana-Grthya II, 18 seems to make it probable that the
ceremony described here has nothing to do with the Samévartana.
I take this chapter rather for a description of the way in which a
student has to take leave of his teacher when setting out on a
journey. ‘His name’ is the teacher’s name, according to Nardyama.

2. Sankhayana II, 18,1. Sankh. has aham vatsy4mi; Asvala-
yana,idam vatsyamas. The commentator says that instead of idam
the Asrama is to be named which the student chooses to enter upon,
for instance, ‘Devadatta, we will dwellin the state ofa householder, sir!’

Ii ADHYAYA, 10 KAwpIRA, II. 231

3. With a loud voice (the words) following after
the name.

4. ‘Of inhalation and exhalation ’—(this he says)
with a low voice,

5. And (the verse), ‘Come hither, Indra, with thy
lovely-sounding, fallow-coloured (horses)’ (Rig-veda
ITI, 45, 1).

6. The aged one then murmurs, ‘To inhalation
and exhalation I, the wide-extended one, resort with
thee. To the god Savitrz I give thee in charge’—
and the verse.

7. When he has finished (that verse), and has
muttered, ‘Om! Forwards! Blessing!’ and recited
(over the student the hymn), ‘ The great bliss of the
three’ (Rig-veda X, 185)—(he should dismiss him).

8. On one who has been thus dismissed, danger
comes from no side—thus it is understood (in the
Sruti).

9. If he hears (on his way) disagreeable voices of
birds, he should murmur the two hymns, ‘ Shrieking,
manifesting his being’ (Rig-veda II, 42, 43), and (the
verse), ‘The divine voice have the gods created’
(Rig-veda VIII, 100, 11).

10. ‘ Praise the renowned youth who sits on the
war-chariot’ (Rig-veda II, 33, 11)—if (he hears dis-
agreeable voices) of deer.

11. From the direction, or from the (being) from
which he expects danger, towards that direction he
should throw a fire-brand, burning on both sides, or
having twirled about a churning-stick from the right
to the left, with (the words), ‘Safety be to me, Mitra

6. J have translated, as Prof. Stenzler has also done, according
to Sankhayana’s reading, praz4pana ... tvaya. The ‘aged
one’ is the teacher, the verse that which is quoted in Sftra 5.

232 AsVALAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

and Varuza; encounter the foes and burn them up
with your flame. May they find none who knows
them and no support; divided by discord may they
go to death ’—

12. He turns the churning-stick downwards with
(the verse), ‘The combined wealth of both, heaped
together’ (Rig-veda X, 84, 7).

Kawoixé 11.

1. If unknown danger from all sides (menaces him),
he should sacrifice eight Agya oblations with (the
formulas),

‘Prithivi (the earth) is covered ; she is covered by
Agni. By her, the covered one, the covering one,
I ward off the danger of which I am in fear. Sv4ha!

‘ Antariksha (the air) is covered; it is covered by
Vayu. By it, the covered, the covering, I ward off
the danger of which J am in fear. Svaha!

‘Dyaus (the heaven) is covered ; she is covered by
Aditya (the sun). By her, &c.

‘The quarters (of the horizon) are covered;
they are covered by AXandramas (the moon). By
them, &c.

‘The waters are covered; they are covered by
Varuza. By them, &c.

‘The creatures are covered; they are covered by
Prava (the breath). By them, &c.

‘ The Vedas are covered; they are covered by the
metres. By them, &c.

‘All is covered; it is covered by Brahman. By
it, &c. Svaha!’

11, 1. ‘Covered’ is vrzta; ‘I ward off’ is the causative of the
same verb, varaye.

III ADHYAYA, 12 KANDIKA, IO. 233

2. Then, stationing himself towards the north-
east, he murmurs the Svasti-Atreya and, ‘Of what
we are in fear, Indra’ (Rig-veda VIII, 61, 13 seqq.),
down to the end of the hymn.

Kawoiké 12.

1. When a battle is beginning, (the royal Purohita)
should cause the king to put on his armour (in the
following way)

2. (The Purohita) stations himself to the west of
(the king’s) chariot with (the hymn ?),‘I have brought
thee hither; be here’ (Rig-veda X, 173).

3. With (the verse), ‘Like a thunder-cloud is his
countenance’ (Rig-veda VI, 75, 1), he should tender
the coat of mail to him.

4. With the following (verse) the bow.

5. The following (verse) he should cause him to
repeat.

6. He should murmur himself the fourth.

7. With the fifth he should tender the quiver to
him.

8. When (the king) starts, the sixth.

9. The seventh (he recites) over the horses.

10. The eighth he should cause (the king) to
repeat while looking at the arrows ;

2. The Svasti-Atreya is the part of the hymn V, 51, which very
frequently contains the word svasti(vv. 11-15). There is a Khila
appended to that hymn (Rig-veda, vol. ili, p. 30), which, according
to Narayana, is also to be murmured on this occasion,

12, 2. According to Narayava the Pratika here signifies not the
verse, but the whole hymn, though a whole PAda is given (comp.
Srauta-sitra I, 1, 17).

234 ASVALAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

11. (The verse), ‘Like a serpent it encircles the
arm with its windings’ (Rig-veda VI, 75, 14), when
he ties to his arm the leather (by which the arm is
protected against the bow-string).

12. He then mounts up to (the king on his
chariot), while he is driving, and causes him to
repeat the Abhivarta hymn (Rig-veda X, 174) and
the two verses, ‘He who, Mitra and Varuza’ (Rig-
veda VIII, ror, 3 seq.).

13. He then should look at him with the Aprati-
ratha, Sasa, and Sauparva hymns.

14. The Sauparwa is (the hymn), ‘May the
streams of honey and ghee flow forwards.’

15. (The king) should drive (in his chariot suc-
cessively) to all quarters (of the horizon).

16. He should commence the battle in the line
of battle invented by Aditya or by Usanas.

17. He should touch the drum with the three
verses, ‘Fill earth and heaven with thy roar’ (Rig-
veda VI, 47, 29 seqq.).

18. With (the verse), ‘Shot off fall down’ (Rig-
veda VI, 75, 16), he should shoot off the arrows.

712. The Abhivarta hymn begins with the word abhivartena,
and is ascribed to Abhivarta Angirasa.

13. The Apratiraha hymn is Rig-veda X, 103 (ascribed to
Apratiratha Aindra); the Sasa, X, 152 (ascribed to Sasa Bharad-
vaga). On the Sauparza, see the next Sftra.

x4. This hymn is not found in any Vedic Samhita, as far
as I know, nor does it occur in the Suparv4dhydya. I have fol-
lowed Prof. Stenzler’s conjecture pra dh4&ra yantu instead of
pradharayantu, which is confirmed by Sayaza’s note on
Aitareya Braéhmaza VI, 25, 7; VIII, 10, 4 (pp. 365, 399, ed.
Aufrecht).

17, 18. According to Narayama the subject is the king.

पा ADHYAYA, 12 KANDIKA, 20. 235

19. ‘Where the arrows fly’ (1.1. v. 17)—this (verse)
he should murmur while they are fighting.

20. Or he should teach (the king the texts men-
tioned). Or he should teach (the king).

End of the Third Adhydya.

19. Here the subject is the Purohita.

ASVALAY ANA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

कये
८2
©

Apuydva IV, KawoixA 1.

1. If disease befalls one who has set up the (sacred
Srauta) fires, he should leave his home (and go away)
_to the eastern, or northern, or north-eastern direction.
2. ‘ The sacred fires are fond of the village’—thus

it is said.

3. Longing for it, desirous of returning to the
village they might restore him to health—thus it is
understood (in the Sruti).

4. Being restored to health, he should offer a
Soma sacrifice, or an animal sacrifice, or an ordinary
sacrifice, and take his dwelling (again in the village).

5. Or without such a sacrifice.

6. If he dies, one should have a piece of ground
dug up to the south-east or to the south-west—

7. Ata place which is inclined towards the south
or towards the south-east.

8. According to some (teachers), inclined towards
south-west

(The piece of ground dug up should be) of the
length of a man with upraised arms

10. Of the breadth of one Vy4ma (fathom),

1, 1. Comp. Srauta-sitra VI, 9, 1. The funeral rites according
to the Grzhya-sfitras have been treated of by Prof. Max Miiller,
Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlandischen Gesellschaft, vol. ix.

3. Le. longing for the village. I here differ from Prof.
Stenzler’s translation, ‘Indem sie, um nach dem Dorfe zu kommen,
ihm Gutes wiinschen.’ Prof. Stenzler here follows Narayasza, who
has the following note, gramam 4gantum iféfanto«gnaya enam
ahitagnim 52752116, ayam agado bhaved iti.

4. Comp. Srauta-sfitra VI, 9, 7.

5. Srauta-sitra VI, 10% 1

IV ADHYAYVA, 2 KAWDIKA, I. 237

11, Of the depth of one Vitasti (span).

12. The cemetery should be free from all sides.

13. It should be fertile in herbs.

14. But plants with thorns and with milky juice,
&c., as stated above.

15. From which the waters flow off to all sides:
this is a characteristic required for the cemetery
(smasana) where the body is to be burned.

16. ‘ They cut off (from the dead body) the hair,
the beard, the hairs of the body, and the nails’—
this has been stated above.

17. (They should provide) plenty of sacrificial
grass and of butter.

18. They here pour clarified butter into curds.

19. This is the ‘sprinkled butter’ used for the
Fathers (i.e. Manes).

KawpikA 2.

1. (The relations of the dead person) now carry
(his sacred) fires and (his) sacrificial vessels in that
direction.

12. Narayava: By the word smasina (cemetery) two different
smasdnas are designated here, because below (Sfitra 15) a dis-
tinction is added (to the word smasana), in the words, ‘This is
a characteristic required for the smasana where the body is to be
burned.’ Thus the place where the body is burned, and the place
where the gathered bones are deposited, both are called smasana.

14. See above, ITI, 7, 5.

15. See the note on ऽपि r2.

16. See the Srauta-sfitra VI, 10, 2.

17. Dvigulpham barhir 4gyat ka. Narayana explains dvigulpha
by prabhfita. Comp. bahulatrzva, Katyayana XXV, 7, 15.

18. ‘Here’ means, at a ceremony directed to the Manes,
Narayana.

2, 1. In the direction stated above, chap. 1, 6.

238 AsvALAYANA-GRIHYA-SOUTRA.

2. After them aged persons forming an odd
number, men and women not going together, (carry)
the dead body.

3. Some (say) that (the dead body should be
carried) in a cart with a seat, drawn by cows.

4. (Some prescribe) a she-animal for covering (the
dead body with its limbs) :

5. A cow,

6. Or a she-goat of one colour.

7. Some (take) a black one.

8. They tie (a rope) to its left fore-foot and lead
it behind (the dead body).

9. Then follow the relations (of the dead person),
wearing their sacrificial cords below (round their
body), with the hair-locks untied, the older ones
first, the younger ones last.

to, When they have thus arrived at the place,
the performer (of the rites) walks three times round
the spot with his left side turned towards it, and
with a Sami branch sprinkles water on it, with (the
verse), ‘Go away, withdraw, and depart from here’
(Rig-veda X, 14, 9).

11. To the south-east, on an elevated corner (of
that place), he places the Ahavantya fire,
` 12, To the north-west the Garhapatya fire,

13.. To the south-west the Dakshiza fire.

14. After that a person that knows (how to do it),
piles up between the fires a pile of fuel.

4. See chap. 3, 20-25.

ro. Kartodakena (i.e, kartd udakena) is evidently the right
reading, not gartodakena.

12, 13. The words, ‘on an elevated corner’ (Sitra 11) have to
be supplied.

14. As to the pronoun enam, which refers, with an irregular

IV ADHYAYA, 2 KANDIKA, 22. 239

15. After sacrificial grass and a black antelope’s
skin with the hair outside has been spread out there,
they place the dead body thereon, which they have
carried-so as to pass by the Garhapatya fire on its
north-side, turning its head towards the Ahavantya.

16. To the north (of the body they place) the wife
(of the deceased),

17. And a bow for a Kshatriya.

18. Her brother-in-law, being a representative of
her husband, or a pupil (of her husband), or an aged
servant, should cause her to rise (from that place)
with (the verse), ‘ Arise, O wife, to the world of life’
(Rig-veda X, 18, 8).

19. The performer (of the rites) should murmur
(that verse), if a Stidra (makes her rise from the pile).

20. With (the verse), ‘ Taking the bow out of the
hand of the deceased’ (Rig-veda X, 18, 9), (he takes
away) the bow.

21. It has been stated (what is to be done) in
case a Sidra (should perform this act).

22. Having bent the bow, he should, before the
piling up (of the things mentioned below, which are
put on the dead body) is done, break it to pieces,
and throw it (on the pile).

construction, to the dead person, comp. Satapatha Brahmawa XII,
5 2,7

16. The wife is made to lie down on the pile.

18. Possibly the words devara# and patisthantya& refer to
two different persons, so that we should have to translate, ‘Her
brother-in-law, (or some other) representative of her husband, &c.’

19. This refers to the case of the aged servant. The word for
*which we have put Sidra here and in Sfitra 21, is ४2510218.

22. See Sfitra 79.

240 AsvALAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

KawopikA 3.

1. He should then put the following (sacrificial)
implements (on the dead body).

2. Into the right hand the (spoon called) Guha.

3. Into the left the (other spoon called) Upabhv‘t.

4. On his right side the (wooden sacrificial sword
called) Sphya, on his left (side) the Agnihotrahavani
(1. €. the ladle with which the Agnihotra oblations
are sacrificed).

5. On his chest the (big. sacrificial ladle called)
Dhruva. On his head the dishes. On his teeth
the pressing-stones.

6. On the two sides of his nose the two (smaller
sacrificial ladles called) Sruvas.

7. Or, if there is only one (Sruva), breaking it (in
two pieces).

8. On his two ears the two Prdsitraharamas (i. €.
the vessels into which the portion of the sacrificial
food belonging to the Brahman is put).

g. Or, if there is only one (Prasitraharava), breaking
it (in two pieces).

10. On his belly the (vessel called) Patri,

11. And the cup into which the cut-off portions
(of the sacrificial food) are put.

12. On his secret parts the (staff called) Samyé.

13. On his thighs the two kindling woods,

3, 1. On the different implements mentioned in the following
Sftras, comp. Prof. Max Miiller’s paper in the Zeitschrift der
Deutschen Morgenlandischen Gesellschaft, vol. ix, pp. vii seqq.;
lxxviii seqq.

8. On the Prdsitra and the Prasitraharazas, comp. Hillebrandt,
Neu- und Vollmondsopfer, pp. 119 (with note 6), 120, 131.

IV ADHYAYA, 3 KANDIKA, 23. 241

14. On his legs the mortar and the pestle.

15. On his feet the two baskets.

16. Or, if there is only one (basket), tearing it (in
two pieces).

17. Those (of the implements) which have a
hollow (into which liquids can be poured), are filled
with sprinkled butter.

18. The son (of the deceased person) should take
the under and the upper mill-stone for himself.

1g. And the implements made of copper, iron,
and earthenware.

20, Taking out the omentum of the she-animal he
should cover therewith the head and the mouth (of
the dead person) with the verse, ‘ Put on the armour
(which will protect thee) against Agni, by (that which
comes from) the cows’ (Rig-veda X, 16, 7).

21. Taking out the kidneys (of the animal) he
should lay them into the hands (of the dead body)
with the verse, ‘ Escape the two hounds, the sons of
Saram4’ (Rig-veda X, 14, 10), the right (kidney)
into the right (hand), the left into the left.

22. The heart (of the animal he puts) on the heart
(of the deceased).

23. And two lumps (of flour or rice), according to
some (teachers).

17. Narayama explains ase#anavanti by bilavanti. On
prishadagya (‘sprinkled butter’) comp. the two last Sftras of the
first chapter.

19. The statement in Satapatha तपाद XII, 5, 2, 14 is
somewhat different.

20. Anustarazyd vapdm. See chap. 2, 4.

23. Narayana states that these lumps are not put, as one would
be inclined to believe, on the heart, but into the hands of the
deceased. Sfttra 24 shows that this interpretation is correct.

[29] R

242 AsVALAVANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

24. (Only) if there are no kidneys, according to
some (teachers).

25. Having distributed the whole (animal), limb
by limb (placing its different limbs on the corre-
sponding limbs of the deceaSed), and having covered
it with its hide, he recites, when the Pravita water is
carried forward, (the verse), ‘ Agni, do not overturn
this cup’ (Rig-veda X, 16, 8).

26. Bending his left knee he should sacrifice Agya
oblations into the Dakshiza fire with (the formulas),
‘To Agni svaha! To Kama svah4! To the world
svaha! To Anumati svaha!’

27. A fifth (oblation) on the chest of the deceased
with (the formula), ‘From this one verily thou hast
been born. May he now be born out of thee, N. N.!
To the heaven-world svaha!’

{९4 णार; 4.

1. He gives order, ‘ Light the fires together.’

2. If the Ahavaniya fire reaches (the body) first,
he should know, ‘It has reached him in the heaven-
world. He will live there in prosperity, and so will
this one, 1. €. his son, in this world.’

3. If the Garhapatya fire reaches (the body) first,
he should know, ‘It has reached him in the air-
world. He will live there in prosperity, and so will
this one, i. €. his son, in this world.’

24. I.e. if there is no Anustarazf animal, which is considered as
optional (see chap. 2, 4).

25. Comp. Katydyana XXV, 7, 35.

27. He who is born out of the deceased, is Agni. See Satapatha
Brahmawa I, 3, 3, 5; and also XII, 5, 2, 75.

4, 2. Satapatha Brahmawa XII, 5, 2, 10.

3. Satapatha Brahmawa 1. 1. § 9.

IV ADHYAYA, 4 KANDIKA, 10. 243

4. If the Dakshiwza fire reaches (the body) first,
he should know, ‘ It has reached him in the world of
men. He will live there in prosperity, and so will
this one, i. €. his son, in this world.’

5. If (the three fires) reach (the body) in the same
moment, they say that this signifies the highest
luck.

6. While (the body) is burning, he recites over it
the same texts, ‘Go on, go on, on the ancient paths’
(Rig-veda X, 14, 7). :

7. Being burnt by a person who knows this, he
goes to the heaven-world together with the smoke
(of the funeral pile)—thus it is understood (in the
Sruti).

8. To the north-east of the Ahavaniya fire he
should have a knee-deep pit dug and should have
an Avaka, i.e. (the water-plant called) Sipala put
down into it. From that (pit) he (1. €. the deceased)
goes out and together with the smoke he goes up
to the heaven-world—thus it is understood (in the
Sruti).

9. After he has recited (the verse), ‘ These living
ones have separated from the dead’ (Rig-veda X,
18, 3), they turn round from right to left and go
away without looking back.

to. When they have come toa place where standing
water is, having once (plunged into it and) emerged

4. Satapatha Bréhmama 1. 1. § अ.

5. Satapatha Brahmama 1. 1. § 12.

6. ‘The same texts’ means that the texts jndicated in the
Srauta-sitra VI, 10, 19 (twenty-four verses taken from the hymns
X, 14, 16, 17, 18, 154) have to be recited.

8, Comp. above, II, 8, 14.

ro. ‘All the Samanodaka relations (see Manu V, 60), men and
women, should pour out one handful of water each. Pronouncing

R2

244 AsvALAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

from it, they pour out one handful (of water), pro-
nounce the Gotra name and the proper name (of the
deceased), go out (of the water), put on other gar-
ments, wring out (the old garments) once, lay them
away with their skirts to the north, and sit down
until the stars appear.

11. Or they may enter (their houses), when still (a
part) of the sun-disk is seen,

12. The younger ones first, the older ones last.

13. When they have come to the houses, they
touch a stone, the fire, cow’s dung, fried barley,
sesamum seeds, and water.

14. Let them not cook food during that night.

15. Letthem subsist on bought or ready-made food.

16. Let them eat no saline food for three nights.

17. Let them optionally for twelve nights avoid
the distribution of gifts and the study (of Vedic texts),
if one of the chief Gurus (has died).

18. Ten days after (the death of) Sapizdas,

the Gotra name and the proper name of the deceased, saying, for
instance, ^ Devadatta, belonging to the Gotra of the Kasyapas, this
water is for thee!’’—they sprinkle it out, with southward-turned
faces.’ Nardyana.

12. Possibly praviseyu/ (they should enter) belongs to this
50. In Prof. Stenzler’s edition and in the commentary of
Narayaza it is taken as belonging to Stitra 11.

15. Vasish‘ha IV, 1g. Narayana here observes, ‘Some authori-
ties omit this Satra’

17. ‘Father and mother and the teacher who, after having per-
formed the Upanayana for him, has taught him the whole Veda,
are the chief Gurus. When these have died, they should avoid
giving gifts and studying the Veda either for twelve nights, or for
ten nights, this rule standing in correlation with the following one.’
Narayaza.

18. The Sapivda relationship is generally defined as the relation-
ship within six degrees, though the statements in the different

IV ADHYAYA, 5 KANDIKA, 4. 245

19. And of a Guru who is no Sapizda,

20. And of unmarried female relations.

21. Three nights after (the death of) other teachers,
22. And of a relation who is no Sapizda,

23. And of married female relations,

24. Of a child that has no teeth,

25. And of a dead-born child.

26. One day, after (the death of) a fellow-pupil,
27. And of a Srotriya of the same village.

Kawoixd 5.

1. The gathering (of the bones is performed) after
the tenth (Tithi from the death), (on a Tithi) with
an odd number, of the dark fortnight, under a single
Nakshatra.

2, A man into a male urn without special marks,
a,woman into a female one without special marks.

3. Aged persons of an odd number, not men and
women together (gather the bones).

4. The performer of the ceremony walks three
times round the spot with his left side turned towards

texts do not exactly agree. See Apastamba II, 15, 2; Manu प्र
60; Gautama XIV, 13 (with Prof. Biihler’s note, Sacred Books,
vol. ii, p. 247, &c.)

27. Comp. Sfitras 17, 19.

5, 1. Narayana (comp. the Asvalayana-Grthya-Parisish/a III, 7)
understands this Stra in a different way. ‘After the tenth Tithi
of the dark fortnight, on a Tithi with an odd number, i.e. on the
eleventh, thirteenth, or fifteenth.’ The single Nakshatras are those
the name of which does not denote two Nakshatras (as, for instance,
the two Ashadhas), Comp. Katy.-Sraut. XXV, 8,1; Manu V, 59.

2, Urns, with or without protuberances like female breasts, are
considered as female or male accordingly.

3. See chap. 2, 2.

4. Comp. chap. 2, ro.

246 AsVALAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

it,and sprinkles on it with a Sami branch milk mixed
with water, with the verse, ‘O cool one, O thou that
art full of coolness’ (Rig-veda X, 16, 14).

5. With the thumb and the fourth finger they
should put each single bone (into the urn) without
making a noise,

6. The feet first, the head last.

7. Having well gathered them and purified them
with a winnowing basket, they should put (the urn)
into a pit, at a place where the waters from the
different sides do not flow together, except rain
water, with (the verse), ‘Go to thy mother Earth
there’ (Rig-veda X, 18, 10).

8. With the following (verse) he should throw
earth (into the pit). ।

9. After he has done so, (he should repeat) the
following (verse).

10. Having covered (the urn) with a lid with
(the verse), ‘I fasten to thee’ (Rig-veda X, 18, 13),
they then should go away without looking back,
should bathe in water, and perform a Sraddha for
the deceased.

Kawoixd 6.

1. They who have lost a Guru by death, or are
afflicted by other misfortune, should perform on the
new-moon day an expiatory ceremony.

2. Before sunrise they should carry their fire

4. Narayana explains pavana by sfrpa. He says that the
‘ performer’ (kartrz) repeats this and the following texts.

10. ‘They should give a Sraddha to the deceased exclusively,
according to the Ekoddish/a rite.’ Narayana.

6, 2. According to Narayava the fire means here not the sacred
domestic fire, but a common kitchen fire. I doubt whether the

IV ADHYAYA, 6 KANDIKA, 5. 247

together with its ashes and with its receptacle to the
south with the half-verse, ‘I send far away the flesh-
devouring Agni’ (Rig-veda X, 16, 9).

3. Having thrown that (fire) down at a place
where four roads meet or somewhere else, they walk
round it three times, turning their left sides towards
it, beating their left thighs with their left hands.

4. They then should return home without looking
back, bathe in water, have their hair, their beards
the hair of their bodies, and their nails cut, and
furnish themselves with new jars, pots, vessels for
rinsing the mouth, wreathed with garlands of Sami
flowers, with fuel of Sami wood, with two pieces of
Sami wood for kindling fire, and with branches to be
laid round the fire, with bull’s dung and a bull's hide,
fresh butter, a stone, and as many bunches of Kusa
grass as there are young women (in the house).

5. At the time of the Agni(-hotra) he should
kindle fire with the hemistich, ‘Here may this other
GAtavedas’ (Rig-veda X, 16, 9).

commentator is right. The ceremonies described in the following
Sfitras seem to point rather to a renewal of the sacred Grshya
fire, the old one having proved unlucky to the sacrificer. In the
same way, in the Srauta ritual, a sacrificer who, after having per-
formed the Adhana, has bad luck, performs the Punarddheya,

3. Comp. Katyayana-Srauta-sitra V, 10, 15.

5. The text has agnivelayadm, which Nardyavza explains by
agnihotraviharamakale aparahne. He states that the fire
should be produced by attrition of two new kindling woods
(arazi), mentioned in Sfitra 4. The fire thus kindled is to be used,
he says, as a kitchen-fire. Herein he seems to me to have mis-
understood the meaning of the ceremony; see the note on Sitra 2.
The hemistich quoted in this 50072, (which is the second half of
the same verse of which the first half is prescribed in Sitra 2)
clearly points to the sacred quality of the fire in question ; it runs
thus, ‘Here may this other Gdtavedas carry the offerings to the
gods, the knowing one.’

248 AsVALAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

6. Keeping that (fire) burning, they sit till the
silence of the night, repeating the tales of the aged,
and getting stories of auspicious contents, Itihdsas
and Purdzas, told to them.

7. When all sounds have ceased, or when (the
others) have gone to the house or the resting-place,
(the performer of the ceremony) should pour out an
uninterrupted stream of water, beginning at the south
side of the door, with (the verse), ‘Spinning the
thread follow the light of the aerial space’ (Rig-veda
X, 53, 6), (going round the house), ending at the
north side of the door.

8. Having then given its place to the fire, and
having spread to the west of it a bull’s hide with the
neck to the east, with the hair outside, he should
cause the people belonging to the house to step on
that (hide) with (the verse), ‘Arise to long life,
choosing old age’ (Rig-veda X, 18, 6).

9. With (the verse), ‘This I lay round the living’
(Rig-veda X, 18, 4), he should lay branches round
(the fire).

10. After having with (the words), ‘A mountain
(i.e. a stone) they shall place between themselves
and death,’ placed a stone to the north of the fire,
and having sacrificed with the four (verses), ‘Go
hence, O death, on another way’ (Rig-veda X, 18,

7. The person who pours out the water is, as Narayana says,
the kartr¢, 1. €. the performer of the whole ceremony. The word
cannot be translated, as Prof. Stenzler does, der Bestatter, no
funeral ceremonies being here treated of.

8. See above, I, 8,9. Here Nfrayava sees that the fire is the
sacred one. He says, athasabdossmin kdle:gnyantaram aupa-
sanam upasamadadhyad iti g#dpanartham.

to. The words, ‘A mountain,’ &c., stand at the end of the verse
quoted in Siitra 9. 1

IV ADHYAYA, 6 KANDIKA, 18, 249

1-4), verse by verse, he should look at his people
with (the verse), ‘As the days follow each other’
(ibid. 5).

11. The young women (belonging to the house)
should, with each hand separately, with their thumbs
and fourth fingers, with young Darbha blades, salve
their eyes with fresh butter, and throw (the Darbha
blades) away, turning their faces away.

12. (The performer of the ceremony) should look
at them, while they are salving themselves, with (the
verse), ‘These women, being no widows, having
noble husbands’ (Rig-veda X, 18, 7).

13. With (the verse), ‘Carrying stones, (the river)
streams forward ; take hold of each other’ (Rig-veda
X, 53, 8)—the performer (of the ceremony) first
should touch the stone.

14. After that, stationing himself to the north-
east, while (the others) go round with the fire, with
bull’s dung, and with an uninterrupted stream of
water, repeating the three verses, ‘O waters, ye are
wholesome’ (Rig-veda X, 9, 1 seqq.), he should
murmur the verse, ‘These have led round the cow’
(Rig-veda X, 155, 5).

15. A tawny-coloured bull should he lead round—
thus they say.

16. They then sit down at a place where they
intend to tarry, having put on garments that have
not yet been washed

17. (There) they sit, avoiding to sleep, till sun-
rise.

18. After sunrise, having murmured the hymns
sacred to the sun and the auspicious hymns, having

18, See above, II, 3, 13.

250 AsvaLAVANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

prepared food, having made oblations with (the hymn),
‘May he drive evil away from us with his shine’
(Rig-veda I, 97), verse by verse, having given to the
Brahmazas to eat, he should cause (them) to pronounce
auspicious words,

19. A cow, a cup of metal, and a garment that has
not yet been washed, constitute the sacrificial fee.

KawoikA 7%.

1. Now at a Sraddha ceremony, at that which is
celebrated on the Parvan day, or for the attainment
of special wishes, or at the Abhyudayika Sraddha
(1. €. the Sraddha celebrated when some good luck
has happened), or at the Ekoddish¢fa Sraddha (the
Sraddha directed to a single dead person) —

2. He causes Brahmavas who are endowed with
learning, moral character, and correct conduct, or
with one of these (characteristics), who have been
invited in time, who have taken a bath, washed their
feet, and sipped water, to sit down, as representa-
tives of the Fathers, with their faces turned to the
north, one for each one of the Fathers, or two for
each, or three for each.

3. The larger their number is, the greater is the
reward (which the sacrificer is entitled to expect).

4. But in no case one (Braéhmawa) for all (the
fathers).

7, 1. Comp. on the Sraddha ceremonies in general the note on
Sankhayana-Grzhya IV, 1, 1, and the quotations giventhere. The
Parvana Sriddha, which is celebrated on the new-moon day, is
treated of by Sankhdyana IV, 1, the Abhyudayika Sr&ddha, IV,
4, the Ekoddishva Sraddha, IV, 2.-

IV ADHYAYVA, 7 KANDIKA, 11. 251

5. Optionally (he may invite only one Brahmaza)
except at the first (Sraddha):

6. By (the exposition of) the Pizda sacrifice (the
corresponding rules) have been declared (for the
Sraddha ceremonies also).

7. Having given water (to the Brahmamas),

8. Having given to them double-folded Darbha
blades, and a seat,

9. Having (again) given water (to them),

10. Having poured water into three vessels of
metal, of stone, and of earthen-ware, or (into three
vessels) made of the same substance, aver which he
has put Darbha grass,

11. And having recited over (that water the verse),
‘For luck and help the divine waters’ (Rig-veda X,
9, 4), he pours sesamum seeds into it with (the
formula), ‘Sesamum art thou; Soma is thy deity;
at the Gosava sacrifice thou hast been created by

5. Anddye. Of the different interpretations of this word which
Nardyava gives, it may suffice here to quote two. The first
Sraddha may either mean the 47४29. Sraddha, because this stands
first among the different kinds of Sraddha ceremonies enumerated
in 502 1; or it may mean the Sapivdikarava (see SAnkhayana IV,
3); for this is the first occasion on which a dead person receives
9140002. oblations together with two others of the Fathers,

6. The sacrifice to the Manes, as forming part of the Srauta
ritual, is explained in the Srauta-siitra II, 6 seq.

8. Yagfavalkya I, 229.

g. Yaghavalkya I, 230. The reading of several words of the
Mantra is doubtful, and the parallel texts, as Prof. Stenzler has not
failed to observe, differ; especially the words pratnavadbhik
0744184 seem to me to be corrupt. The word pratnavat is
only known to the Petersburg Dictionary as having the meaning,
‘containing the word pratna,’ which will not do here. Thus, I
think that the reading pratnam adbhif# przktahk should be
adopted ; the translation would be, ^ Anciently thou hast been
mixed with water.’

252 AsVALAYANA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

the gods. By the ancients thou hast been offered.
Through the funeral oblation render the Fathers and
these worlds propitious to us. Svadha! Adoration!’

12. (The different rites are performed) from the
right to the left.

13. With (the part) of the other (i.e. left) hand
between the thumb (and the fore-finger), because he
wears the sacrificial cord over his left shoulder, or
with the right hand which he seizes with the left (he
offers the Arghya water to the Fathers with the
words), ‘ Father, this is thy Arghya. Grandfather,
this is thy Arghya. Great-grandfather, this is thy
Arghya’—having first offered (ordinary) water (to
the Fathers).

14. When he is going to hand over that (Arghya
water to the Brahmawzas who represent the Fathers,
he says once each time), ‘Svadha! The Arghya
water

15. Over (the Arghya water) which has been

12. Comp. Sankhayana-Grrhya IV, 4, 6.

13. The part of the hand above the thumb is called the ‘ Tirtha
belonging to the Manes ;’ see, for instance, Baudhayana’s Dharma~
sfitra I, 8,16. The sacrificer is here understood to wear his sacrificial
cord suspended over the left shoulder (he is ‘yagopavitin’). But
as the oblation here treated of is directed to the Manes, it is
required that he should be prafindvitin. Now hé is considered
as prafinavitin, according to Narayava, not only if the cord is
suspended over his right shoulder (which is the ordinary meaning
of praéinavitin), but also if the hand with which he performs the
rites, and the shoulder over which he wears the sacred cord, are
either both right or both left. Thus here, acting with the left-hand
and wearing the cord over the left shoulder, he becomes 18614
vitin.

The last word (appiirvam) is separated by Narayawa from the
rest, so that it forms a separate Sfitra. -

16. The sacrificer gives the water to the Brahmawas, and these

IV ADHYAYA, 7 KANDIKA, 20. 253

poured out, he should recite the verse, ‘ The celestial
waters which have been produced on the earth, the
aerial waters and the waters which are terrestrial,
the gold-coloured ones, apt for sacrifice, may these
waters bring us luck and be kind to us.’ Pouring
together what has been left (in the three Arghya
vessels) he moistens his face with that water, if he
desires that a son should be born to him.

16. ‘He should not take up the first vessel, into
which the Arghya water for the Fathers has been
poured. Hidden the Fathers dwell therein: thus
Saunaka has said.’

17. In that moment the gifts of perfumes, gar-
lands, incense, lights, and clothes are offered (to the
Brahmavas).

18. Having taken some food (of the Sthalipaka
prepared for the Pizdapityzyagiia), and having be-
smeared it with ghee, he asks (the Brahmawzas) for
their permission by saying, ‘I shall offer it in the
fire, or, ‘1 will sacrifice my offering in the fire,’ or,
‘I will offer it in the fire.’

19. The permission (is given in the words), ‘ It
may be offered, or, ‘Sacrifice thy offering,’ or,
‘ Offer it’

20. He then sacrifices in the fire as stated above,

pour it out. Instead of pr7thivt sambabhivu/ (pr7thiv? being
intended as a locative; see Lanman, Noun-inflection in the Veda,
ए. 389) we should read, no doubt, as the parallel texts have, payasa
sambabhfivuz: ^ The celestial waters which have united themselves
with milk.’

16, This is a Sloka.

17. Manu III, 209; Yagfavalkya I, 231.

20. The oblations alluded to in this Sftra are prescribed in
the Srauta-sitra, II, 6,12. They are directed to Soma pitrzmat and
to Agni kavyavahana.

254 AsVALAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA,

21, Or, if they give their permission, in the
hands (of the Brahmawzas).

22. ‘The mouth of the gods verily is the fire, the
mouth of the Fathers is the hand ’—thus says the
Brahmava.

23. If in the hands, he assigns to them other food,
after they have sipped water.

24. The food (is put together) with the food.

25. It is said, ‘What is given away and offered,
that brings prosperity.’

26. When he sees that they are satiated, he should
recite (the verses) containing the word madhu, and
(the verse), ‘They have eaten, they have enjoyed
themselves’ (Rig-veda I, 82, 2).

27. Having asked them, ‘ Relished ?’ and having
taken the food, whatever food he has used, together
with the Sthalipaka, in order to make lumps thereof,
he should offer the rest (to the Brahmavzas).

28. After they have either accepted (that rest of
food), or left it (to him), and have finished eating,
he should, before they have sipped water, put down
the lumps for the Fathers.

21. According to Manu (III, 212) this is done only in case there
is no fire. Possibly abhyanugndydm belongs to Sftra 20, so
that we should have to translate, ‘He then sacrifices... if they
give their permission. Or in the hands.’

24. ‘The food which is left from the oblations he puts with the
food (Sftra 23) which is to be eaten by the Braéhmazas, and has
been put into the vessels.’ Narayana.

25. Is srzsh/am to be understood in the sense of visr7sh/am ?
Niarayaza explains it by prabhfiitam.

26. The verses containing the word madhu are Rig-veda I, go,
6-8.

27. On the question, ^ Relished?’ compare Sankhayana-Grzhya
IV, 2, 5. For several kinds of Sraddha ceremonies a Sthalipaka is
prescribed, for others it is not; for the Sraddhas of the last kind
the words ‘ Together with the Sthalipaka’ are not valid.

Iv ADHYAyA, 8 KANDIKA, 12. 255

29. After they have sipped water, according to
some (teachers).

30. Having strewn the food on the ground and
suspended the sacrificial cord over his left shoulder,
he should dismiss the Brahmazas, (saying to them),
‘Say Om! Svadha!’

31. Or, ‘So be it! Svadha!’

KaypikA 8.

1. Now the spit-ox (sacrificed to Rudra).

2. In autumn or in spring, under the (Nakshatra)
Ardra.

3. The best of his herd,

4. (An ox) which is neither leprous nor speckled;

5. One with black spots, according to some ;

6. If he likes, a black one, if its colour inclines to
copper-colour.

7. He sprinkles it with water, into which he has
thrown rice and barley,

8. From head to tail,

9. With (the formula), ‘Grow up, agreeable to
Rudra the great god.’

10. He should let it grow up. When it has cut
its teeth, or when it has become a bull—

11. To a quarter (of the horizon) which is sacri-
ficially pure,

12. At a place which cannot be seen from the
village, ।

39. They reply, ‘Om! Svadha!’

8, 1. According to Narayana, the ‘spit-ox’ sacrifice is so called
because 1६.15 offered to Rudra the spit-wearer.

5. Kalmasho nama kr7shwabindufitak, Ndarayava.

20. This Sfitra should rather be.divided into two.

11. Le. to the east or the north.

256 AsVALAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

13. After midnight,

14. According to some, after sunrise.

15. Having caused a Brahman who is versed in
learning and knows the practice (of this sacrifice), to
sit down, having driven a fresh branch with leaves
into the ground as a sacrificial post, (having taken)
two creeping plants or two Kusa ropes as two
girdles, and having wound the one round the sacri-
ficial post, and tied the other round the middle of the
animal's head, he binds it to the sacrificial post or to
the girdle (which he had tied to that post) with (the
formula), ‘ Agreeable to him to whom adoration (is
brought), I bind thee.’

16. The sprinkling with water and what follows is
the same as at the animal sacrifice.

17. We shall state what is different.

18. Let him sacrifice the omentum with the Patri
or with a leaf—thus it is understood (in the Sruti)—

19. With (the formulas), ‘To Hara, Mvzda, Sarva,
Siva, Bhava, Mahadeva, Ugra, Bhima, Pasupati,
Rudra, Sankara, fsdna svaha!’

20. Or with the last six (parts of that formula),

21. Or with (the formula), ‘To Rudra svaha!’

22, Let him make Bali offerings towards the four
quarters (of the horizon), to each on four rings of
Kusa net-work, with (the formulas), ‘The hosts,
Rudra, which thou hast towards the eastern direction,

15. Round the middle of the head means, between the two horns.
Nardyaza.

16. See above, I, 11.

22. This Bali offering is performed, according to N4rayana,
before the Svish/akrzt oblation of the chief sacrifice. On kusasfina
the commentator has the note, ‘Darbhastambais trzvais 4a kalpavad
(or rather, as Prof. Stenzler writes, ka/akavad) grathitva sarvesham
agram grrhitva, ekikr7tya grathita# kusasfina ufyante.’

IV ADHYAYA, 8 KANDIKA, 29. 257

to them this (offering is brought). Adoration to
thee! Do no harm to me!’ In this way the
assigning (of the offerings is performed) according
to the different quarters (of the horizon).

23. With the following four hymns he should
worship the four quarters, viz. ‘What shall we to
Rudra, ‘These prayers to Rudra, ‘To thee, O
father,’ ‘These songs to Rudra with the strong bow’
(Rig-veda I, 43, 114; I], 33; VII, 46).

24. (This) worship to the quarters (of the horizon)
(is performed) at all sacrifices to Rudra.

25. The husks and chaff (of the rice), the tail, the
skin, the head, the feet (of the sacrificial animal) he
should throw into the fire.

26. He should turn the skin to some use, according
to Samvatya.

27. To the north of the fire, on rows of Darbha
grass, or on rings of Kusa net-work, he should pour
out the blood (of the sacrificial animal) with (the
formula), ‘Hissing ones! Noisy ones! Searching
ones! Seizing ones! Serpents! What here belongs
to you, take that.’

28. Then, turning to the north, (he assigns it) to
the serpents (in the words), ‘ Hissing ones! Noisy
ones! Searching ones! Seizing ones! Serpents!
What here belongs to you, take that.’

Then the serpents take whatever has flowed down
there of blood or of the contents of stomach and
entrails.

29. All names, all hosts, all exaltations belong

26. Perhaps Samvatya is a mis-spelling of the name of the well-
known Grzhya teacher Sambavya.
27. Darbhavita is explained in the commentary by darbhardgi.

[29] = $

258 AsVALAYANA-GRIHYA-SOTRA. +

to him ;—to a sacrificer who knows that, he gives
joy.

30. Even to a man who only with words sets
forth (some part) of that (ceremony), he will do no
harm ; thus it is understood (in the Sruti).

31. He should not partake of that (sacrifice).

32. They should not take anything belonging to
it into the village. For this god wilh do harm to
(human) creatures.

33. He should keep away his people from the
vicinity (of. the place where he has sacrificed).

34. On an express injunction, however, he
should partake (of that sacrificial food), for it will
bring luck.

35. This spit-ox sacrifice procures wealth, (open)
space, purity, sons, cattle, long life, splendour.

36. After he has sacrificed, he should let loose
another (animal). .

37. He should not be without such an animal.

38. Then he will not be without cattle—thus it is
understood (in the Sruti).

39. Muttering the Santatiya hymn, he should go
to his house.

40. If disease befalls his cattle, he should
sacrifice to that same god in the midst of his cow-
stable—

41. A mess of cooked food, which he sacrifices in
its entirety.

32. Instead of abhimaruka we ought to read abhimanuka.
See Aitareya Bréhmaza III, 34, and the Petersburg Dictionary
§, ४. abhimanuka.

36. He should destine another young animal in the way stated
above (Sfitras 7 seqq.) to a new Sfilagava sacrifice.

39. Rig-veda VII, 35. Comp. above, II, 8, 11.

Iv ADHYAyA, 8 KANDIKA, 44. 259

42. Having fhrown the sacrificial grass and the
Agya into the fire, he should lead his cows through
the smoke. 4

43. Murmuring the SantAtiya hymn, he should go
in the midst of his cattle.

44. Adoration to Saunaka! Adoration to Saunaka!

End of the Fourth Adhydya.

4

End of the Asvalayana-Grihya-sitra.

PARASKARA-GRIHYA-
SUTRA.

INTRODUCTION

TO THE

PARASKARA-GR/HYA-SUTRA.

THE Grihya-sitra of Paraskara, which belongs to the
White Yagur-veda and forms an appendix to Katy4yana’s
Srauta-sitra, has been edited, with a German translation,
by the scholar who was the first to make a Grihya text
accessible to Orientalists and to begin to grapple with the
first and most serious difficulties that beset its interpre-
tation, and who has continued since to do more than any-
one else towards elucidating that important branch of Vedic
literature. It would be very unbecoming in any one engaged
in the study of Grihya texts, not to acknowledge most
warmly the debt of gratitude which he owes to Professor
Stenzler. Atthe same time the respect due to the veteran
editor and interpreter of Asvalayana and Paraskara not
only allows, but requires that one who proposes to himself
the same task at which Prof. Stenzler has worked with so
much learning, should state as clearly as possible what
that distinguished scholar has left for others to do, and
why one who prepares an English translation of Paraskara
has a very different task from merely translating into
English the German translation of Prof. Stenzler.

If I may venture to express in one word the difference
between Prof. Stenzler’s method, as I understand it, for
getting at the meaning of a doubtful or obscure passage,
and the method which I have endeavoured to follow, I
should say that with Prof. Stenzler the first step and,

264 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SOTRA,

I believe, in many cases also the last step is to ask how
Gayarama and Ramakr‘shva understand the passage in
question, while I hold that we ought rather to make our-
selves independent from those commentators in the sense
in which Prof. Max Miiller once expressed himself}, ‘not
that I ever despise the traditional interpretation which the
commentators have preserved to us, but because I think
that, after having examined it, we have a right to judge for
ourselves.’ There exists a commentary on the Paraskara-
Grihya which far surpasses in trustworthiness Gayarama’s
Sagganavallabha and Ramakrishva’s Samskaraganapati,
and which is not composed by an author who, as says

Goethe,
— im Auslegen ist munter ;

Legt er nicht aus, so legt er unter.

But the leaves of that commentary are scattered through
a good many volumes. Here we find a few lines of it in the
Satapatha Brahmava or in Katydyana’s Srauta-sitra ; there
Sankhayana or Asvalayana has preserved a word or a sen-
tence that belongs to it; or the law-books of Manu or
Yagiavalkya help us to understand a difficult or doubtful
aphorism of our text. In one word: the only true com-
mentary on a work like Paraskara’s Grzhya is that which
the ancient literature itself furnishes. No one will say that
in Prof. Stenzler’s translation and notes this commentary
has not been consulted. But it has been consulted perhaps
not quite as much as it ought to have been, and Rama-
krvishva and Gayarama have been consulted too much.
They have been consulted and followed in many in-
stances, where a continued consideration of what can be
the meaning of a word and what can not, and of what the
parallel texts say with regard to the subject in question,
would have shown that those commentators, instead of
interpreting P4raskara’s meaning, father on him vague
opinions of their own.

Perhaps it will not be out of place here to point our

+ Sacred Books of the East, vol. xv, p. 2, note 2.

INTRODUCTION, 265

criticism, lest it should be deemed unjust, by a few remarks
on a single passage of Paraskara in which the difference of
Prof. Stenzler’s way of translating and of our own becomes
manifest. Of the numerous passages which could be se
lected for this purpose, I choose Sitra I, 2, 5, belonging
to the description of the setting up of the sacred domestic
fire. The text of that Sdtra runs thus:

5. arazipradanam eke.

Prof. Stenzler translates as follows:

‘ Einige sagen, es miisse durch Reibhélzer erzeugtes Feuer
sein.’

The two Sitras which precede give a description of
that ceremony from which evidently the opinion of the
‘eke’ mentioned in this Sitra differs, or to which they
find it necessary to add something. Those 50128 run
thus:

3. After he has fetched fire from the house of a Vaisya
who is rich in cattle—

4. All ceremonies are performed as at the cooking of the
Ratushprasya ००१1.

It seems evident that the A#aryas to whom the opinion
spoken of in 502 5 belongs, add, or perhaps substitute, to
the fetching of the fire which is to be worshipped as the
sacrificer’s domestic fire, from a rich Vaisya’s house, another
rite in which an aravi, i.e. a stick for kindling the fire by
attrition, is made use of in some way or other.

Now if this may be accepted as a vague expression of
the general purport of the Sdtra, what is the literal mean-
ing of the words? ‘Some (teachers),’ it says, ‘ (prescribe)
the pradana of the kindling stick (or, of the kindling sticks).’

What does pradana mean? Gayardma says,

‘prasabda upasabdarthe, arazyupadanak&m eka Akarya
ikkfhanti. ।

1 The food which is eaten by the four chief officiating priests of the Srauta
ritual, For these priests a mess of food is prepared at the ceremony of the
Adhana of the Srauta fires, :

266 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

That is: ‘The word pra stands in the sense of the word
upa. Some teachers desire that it (i.e. the fire) should
have the kindling sticks as its physical basis1.’

Thus, if Gayaradma is right, Prof. Stenzler’s translation
would be justified. But can we acquiesce indeed in simply
accepting the commentator’s opinion? Praddana is pra-
dana and not upadana,as pradadAti is not upadatte.
Pradadati means ‘he hands over,’ and pradana ‘the
handing over.’ This is an established fact, and an inter-
preter of a Vedic text should not allow himself to be
induced by a statement like that of Gayarama about the
preposition pra standing in the sense of upa, to abate one
iota of it. Thus we are obliged, until passages have been
discovered which modify our knowledge of what pradana
means—but such passages most certainly will never be
discovered—to translate :

5. Some (teachers say that) the handing over of the
kindling sticks (takes place).

We should give that translation even if we were not able
to find an explanation for it. It appears that Prof. Stenzler,
as far as we can judge from his note, has not even thought
of the possibility of disregarding the authority of Gayarama
and Ramakvzshza, or of looking through the parallel texts
to see whether they do not throw light on what that
‘handing over of the kindling sticks’ signifies. The text
to be consulted first is of course Katyayana’s Srauta-sdtra.
As the Srauta ritual contains a description of an 4dhana
which is in some way the prototype of the corresponding
Grihya ceremony, we may possibly expect to discover, in
the course of that description, the statements regarding the
arawi-pradana for which we are searching. Now Katya-
yana’, having described the setting, up of the fire in the
garhapaty4gara, states that at sunset the sacrificer and his

1 Ramakrishva also, according to Prof. Stenzler’s note, explains pradana
by upadana, karava, utpattisthana.

? IV, 7,15 seqq. The corresponding passage of the Paddhati is found at
P. 353 of Prof. Weber's edition,

INTRODUCTION. 267

wife sit down to the west of the fire which has just been
established, and then the Adhvaryu hands over to them
the two kindling sticks. The Paddhati, in describing
that act, goes into further details. The Adhvaryu hands
over to the sacrificer the two Arazis, which, as required
by custom, are wrapped up in new clothes. The wife
takes the adhar4rawi from his hand and puts it on her lap;
the sacrificer puts the uttararawzi on his lap, and they do
homage to them with flowers, saffron, sandal wood, &c.;
then, after the performance of some other ceremonies, they
put the two Arawis away on a chair or bench. The two
Arazis have to be kept by the sacrificer; if they are lost or
burnt or destroyed in any other way, other Arazis must
be procured, and by their attrition a new fire must be
kindled?.

Apastamba likewise mentions, in his description of the
Agny4dhana’, the handing over of the two Aramis, and
indicates a Mantra which the Adhvaryu recites in giving
them to the sacrificer, and two other Mantras with the one
of which the sacrificer receives them, while he recites the
other over the Arazis, after having taken them into his
hands.

Finally we may quote here, as bearing witness to the
custom of the Arazipradana, a passage taken from Narda-
yaua’s commentary on the Sankh4yana-Grzhya. Though
the decisive words in that passage rest only on the autho-
rity of the commentator and not of the Sdtrakara himself,
they deserve to be taken notice of, as they are not subject
to the suspicion that they could be influenced by a mis-
understanding of that very ऽपि, of Pdraskara of which
we are treating. Ndaradyavza says, in his explanation of
Sankhéyana I, 1,104: ‘To the west of the fire the sacri-
ficer, and southwards (of him) the wife sits down. The

SIV, 7, 22: asvatthasamigarbharazt prayakeAati.

> See the commentary on IV, 7, 22, and the passages of the Karmapradipa
quoted there.

उ Srauta-sitra V, 8, 7; vol. i, p. 255, of Prof. Garbe’s edition.

4 Sayam4hutisamzskaro x dhvaryupratyaya ity aéarya/.

268 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

handing over of the kindling sticks does not take
place. For it is a fire fetched (from a Vaisya’s house, &c.)
which is inaugurated here!” Then the commentator goes
on to quote a Sloka:

‘The handing over of the Aravzis which the Adhvaryu
sometimes performs,

‘Ts not in accordance with the opinion of Suyagiia?; he
does not approve of kindling the fire by attrition,’

Thus, I think, no doubt can remain as to the real meaning
of Paraskara’s Sadtra: it means what its words signify and
what is in accordance with Katyayana and Apastamba,
and it does not mean what the commentators most gratui-
tously would make it mean.

Perhaps I have dwelt here too long on the interpretation
of a few words which are of no peculiar interest in them-
selves. But I venture to hope that the discussion on these
words will serve as a specimen, by which the fundamental
difference of two methods of handling our texts may be
discerned. Let us never forget how much we owe to the
scholars who have followed the first of these methods, but
for ourselves let us choose the second.

1 Agneh paskid yagamano dakshizatah patni fa upavisati. aravipradanam
na kartavyam. ahyztasyagner eva samskarak,
५ On this name of Sankhayana, see my Introduction to the translation of the
Sankhayana-Grhya, above, p. 3.
५ Atraravipradanam yad adhvaryu/ kurute kvaéit,
mata tan na Suyagf#asya mathitaw sostra 76464411.

PARASKARA-GR/HYA-SUTRA.

KAwpa I, KaworixA 1.

1. Now henceforth the performance of the do-
mestic sacrifices of cooked food (will be explained).

2. Having wiped (around the surface on which
he intends to perform a sacrifice), having be-
smeared it (with cowdung), having drawn the lines
thereon, having taken the earth out (of the lines),
having besprinkled (the place with water), having
established the (sacred) fire, having spread out the
seat for the Brahman to the south, having carried
forward (the Pravita water), having spread (Kusa
grass) round (the fire), having put down (the dif-
ferent things used at the sacrifice) according as they
are wanted, having prepared two (Kusa blades used
as) strainers, having consecrated the Prokshawt

1, 1. Comp. Sankhdyana-Grzhya I, 1; Asvalayana-Grihya I,1, &e.
It seems to me that Professor Stenzler is not quite right in giving
to the opening words of the text athdta4, which he translates ‘nun
also,’ the explanation: ‘das heisst, nach Beendigung des Srauta-sfitra
von Katyayana.’ I think rather it can be shown that 2184 does
not contain a reference to something preceding ; thus the Srauta-
5002, which forms the first part of the whole Sftra collection, is
opened inthe same way by the words athatosdhikara&.

2. The description of the standard form of domestic sacrifice
opens with an enumeration of the five so-called bhfitsamskara
(parisamuhya, &c.). On the samfihana (for parisamuhya is derived

270 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

water, having sprinkled (with that water the sacri-
ficial implements) according to what is needed,
having poured out (the Agya or sacrificial butter
into the pot), and having put the sacrificial butter on
the fire, he should (lustrate the butter by) moving a
fire-brand round it.

3. Having warmed the (sacrificial spoon called)
Sruva, having wiped it, having besprinkled it (with
water), and warmed it again, he should put it down.

4. Having taken the Agya from the fire, having
purified it, having looked at it, and (having purified)
the Prokshawi water as above, having taken up the
Kusa blades with which he is to take hold (of the
Agya pot) by its under surface, having put pieces of
wood on (the fire), and having sprinkled (water round
it), he should sacrifice.

5. This is the rite wherever a sacrifice is per-
formed.

Kawplka 2,

1. The setting up of the Avasathya (or sacred
domestic) fire (is performed) at the time of his
wedding.

from the root पि), not from vah ; comp. below, II, 4, 2: painagnim
parisam(hati), see Sankhayana I, 7,11; Grzhya-samgraha-parisish/a
I, 37, &c. On the lines drawn on the sacrificial surface, see San-
khayana I, 7, 6 seq.; Asvaldyana I, 3, 1; Grzhya-samgraha-parisish/a
I, 47 seq.

4. Pfirvavat (‘as above’) can possibly, as Professor Stenzler
understands it, have been said with regard to Katydyana’s rule, IJ,
3, 33: Tabhydm (scil, pavitrabhyam) utpunati Savitur va iti. But
it is also possible that the expression may refer to the second 5002.
of this chapter, where it is said, prokshawiZ samskrztya. On upa-
yaman4n kusan, comp. Katydyana I, ro, 6-8.

2, 1. Comp. Sankhayana-Grzhya I, 1, 3.

I KANDA, 2 KANDIKA, 8, 271

2. At the time of the division of the inheritance,
according to some (teachers)

3. After he has fetched fire from the house of a
Vaisya who is rich in cattle,—

4. All ceremonies are performed as at the cooking
of the AAtushprasya food.

5. Some (say that) the handing over of the kin-
dling sticks (should take place),

6. Because the Sruti says, ‘There are five great
sacrifices.’

7. Having cooked a mess of sacrificial food for the
deities of the AgnyAdheya, and having sacrificed the
wo Aya portions, he sacrifices (the following) Agya
oblations :

8. ‘Thou, Agni’ (Vag. Samhita X XI, 3); ‘ Thus

2. Sankhdyana J, २, 4. 3. Sankhayana I, 1, 8.

4. The 24tushprasya food is prepared, at the time of the setting up
of the Srauta fires, for the four chief officiating priests of the
Srauta sacrifices. Comp. Satapatha Brahmaya II, 1, 4. Kéatya-
yana's corresponding rules with regard to the Adhana of the Srauta
fires are found at IV, 7, 15. 16

5. Comp.the remarks on this Sfitra, in the Introduction, pp. 265 seq.

6. Satapatha Braéhmaza XI, 5, 6, 1: ‘There are five great
sacrifices which are great Sattras, viz. the sacrifice to living beings,
the sacrifice to men, the sacrifice to the Manes, the sacrifice to the
gods, the Brahmayagfia.’ As the Grzhya ceremonies are included
here under the category of mahdyagzas or great sacrifices, they
Tequire, according to the teachers whose opinion is stated in
Sfitra 5, a form of the Agnyddhana (setting up of the sacred fire)
analogous to the Agnyddhana of the Srauta ritual, and containing,
like that Adhana, the act of the Arazipradana or handing over of
the kindling woods (SAtra 5).

4. The deities of the Agnyadheya, or of the Srauta ceremony
corresponding to the Grihya rite here treated of, are Agni pava-
mana, Agni pivaka, Agni su4i, ^ का, On the Agyabhagas, see
Sankhdyana I, 9, 7, &c.

8. The verses Vag. Samh. XXI, 3, 4, the two verses quoted

272 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

thou, Agni’ (Vag. Samhité XXI, 4); ‘This, O
Varuza’.(X XI, 1); ‘For this I entreat thee’ (XXI,
2); ‘ Thy hundred’ (Katy.-Sraut. X XV, 1, 11); ‘And
quick, Agni’ (Katy. 1.1.) ; ‘The highest one’ (Vag.
Samwh. XII, 12); ‘ Be both to us’ (ibid. V, 3)—with
(these verses he sacrifices) .eight (oblations) before
(the oblations of cooked food).

9. Thus he sacrifices also afterwards, after he has
made oblatiéns of the mess of cooked food to the
deities of the Agnyddheya.

to. And to (Agni) Svish¢akvzt,

11, With (the formulas), ‘Into the quick one
(has been put) Agni’s- (sacrificial portion) over
which the word vasha/ has been spoken ;’ ‘ What I
have done too much ;’ ‘O gods who know the way.’

12. Having sacrificed the Barhis, he partakes (of
the sacrificial food).

13. Then food is given to the Brahmazas.

Katy. XXV, 1, 11, and fifthly the verse Vag. Samh. XII, 12, are
prescribed for the Sarvaprayaséitta (or general expiatory ceremony),
see Katydyana 1.1.

11. Professor Stenzler, following Gayaréma, takes the whole as
one Mantra, which he translates: ‘ Ungehemmet sei Agni’s Spende,
die durch die That ich tiberreich machte, bahnschaffende Gétter !’
But the words yat karmawatyartfrifam are the opening words
of a Mantra quoted Satapatha Bréhmaza XIV, 9, 4, 24, (comp.
also Asvalyana-Grthya I, 10, 23; the connection in which atyarf-
rikam there stands, shows that the word designates a mistake made in
the sacrificial work by doing too much.) The words १९४४. gatu-
vidas are the Prattka of Vag. Samhita VIII, 21. Thus I have no
doubt that also ayasy Agner vasha/fkrztam (or possibly aydsy
Agner (?) and vasha/krztam (?)) is a Pratika. Of course, the
translation of these words must remain uncertain until the Mantra
to which they belong has been discovered.

12. On the throwing into the fire of the Barhis, comp. Katydyana
IIL, 8. .

I KANDA, 3 KANDIKA, 9. 273

KanpikA 3.

1. To six persons the Arghya reception is due:
to a teacher, to an officiating priest, to the father-in-
law, to the king, to a friend, to a Snataka.

2. They should honour them (with the Arghya
reception) once a year.

3. But officiating priests (they should receive)
whenever they intend to perform a sacrifice.

4. Having ordered a seat to be got (for the guest),
he says, ‘Well, sir! sit down! We will do honour
to you, sir!’

5. They get for him a couch (of grass) to sit down
on, another for the feet, water for washing the feet,
the Argha water, water for sipping, and the honey-
mixture, i.e. curds, honey, and ghee, in a brass
vessel with a brass cover.

6. Another person three times announces (to the
guest) the couch and the other things (when they
are offered to him).

7. He accepts the couch.

8. He sits down thereon with (the verse), ‘I am
the highest one among my people, as the sun among
the thunder-bolts. Here I tread on whosoever
infests me.’

9. With the feet (he treads) on the other (bundle
of grass),

8,1. On vaivahya, which I have translated ‘father-in-law,’
comp. the note on Sankhayana IJ, rs, 1.

2,3. Comp. below, Sfitra 31, and Sankhayana-Grzhya II, 15, 19.

6. Asvalayana-Grzhya I, 24, 7.

8. I have translated according to the reading of Asvalayana
0.1. § 8), vidyutam instead of udyatam.

9, 19. There is no doubt that these Sftras should be divided

[29] T

274 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

10. When he is seated on the couch, he washes
(for his guest) the left foot and then the right foot.
11. If (the host) is a Brahmava, the right first.

12. (He does so) with (the formula), ‘The milk
of Virag art thou. The milk of Virag may I obtain.
(May) the milk of २०५४६ Virag (dwell) in me’

13. He accepts the Arghya water with (the
words), ‘ Waters are ye. May I obtain through you
all my wishes

14. Pouring it out he recites over (the waters the
formula), ‘To the ocean I send you; go back to
your source. Unhurt be our men. May my sap
not be shed.’

15. He sips water with (the formula),: ‘Thou
camest to me with glory. Unite me with lustre.
Make me beloved by all creatures, the lord of cattle,
unhurtful for the bodies.’

16. With (the formula), ‘With Mitra’s’ (Vag.
Samh., K&zvasdkha II, 3, 4) he looks at the Ma-
dhuparka.

17. With (the formula), ‘By the impulse of the
god Savitrz’ (Vag. Samzh. 1.1.) he accepts it

18. Taking it into his left hand he stirs it about

thus: padayor anyam. vish/ara dsinaya savyam padam prakshalya
dakshizam prakshalayati. Thus it is said in the Khadira~Grchya:
vish/aram 4stirya ...adhyasita. padayor dvitiyayd (scil. 774) dvau
ket. Gobhila has the Sfitra: padayor anyam.
The words brahmazas set refer to the host, as the com-

parison of Asvalayana I, 24, 11, shows.

12. Comp. Asvalayana ]. 1, § 22; Sdnkhayana III, 7,

13. The play on words (4pas=waters, avapnavani=may I
obtain) is untranslatable

16. Asvalayana-Grihya I, 24, 14

17. Asvalayana-Grzhya I, 24, 15

18. Asvalayana-Grhya].1, Annasane instead of annasane is
simply a mistake in spelling

I KANDA, 3 KANDIKA, 27. 275

three times with the fourth finger of his right hand
with (the formula), ‘Adoration to the brown-faced
One. What has been damaged in thee, when the
food was eaten, that I cut off from thee.’

19. And with the fourth finger and the thumb he
spirts away (some part of the Madhuparka) three
times

20. He partakes of it three times with (the
formula), ‘What is the honied, highest form of
honey, and the enjoyment of food, by that honied,
highest form of honey, and by that enjoyment of
food may I become highest, honied, and an enjoyer
of food.’

21. Or with (the verses) that contain the word
‘honey,’ verse by verse.

22. Let him give the remainder (of the Madhu-
parka) to a son ora pupil who is sitting to the north.

23. Or let him eat the whole of it (himself).

24. Or he should pour out (the remainder) to the
east, at an unfrequented spot.

25. Having sipped water, he touches his bodily
organs with (the formula), ‘May speech dwell in
my mouth, breath in my nose, sight in my eyes,
hearing in my ears, strength in my arms, vigour in
my thighs. May my limbs be unhurt, may my body
be united with my body!’

26. When (the guest) has sipped water, (the
host), holding a butcher’s knife, says to him three
times, ‘A cow!’

27. He replies, ‘ The mother of the Rudras, the
daughter of the Vasus, the sister of the Adityas, the

2१. These are the three verses, Vag. Samhita XIII, 27-29
22. Asvaldyana-Grchya I, 24, 25 23. Asvaldyana 1.1. § 27
24. Asvalayanal.J. § 26

T2

276 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

navel of immortality. To the people who understand
me, I say, “Do not kill the guiltless cow, which is
Aditi.” I kill my sin and N.N.’s sin,—thus, if he
chooses to have it killed.

28. But if he chooses to let it loose, he should
say, ‘My sin and N.N.’s sin has been killed. Om!
Let it loose! Let it eat grass!’ = `

29. But let the Argha not be without flesh.

30, On the occasion of a sacrifice and of a wed-
ding let (the guest) say, ‘ Make it (ready).’

31. Even if he performs more than one Soma
sacrifice during one year,-let only priests who have
received (from him) the Arghya reception, officiate
for him, not such who have not received it; for this
has been prescribed in the Sruti.

{^ र्णा 4,

1. There are four kinds of Pakayag/ias, viz. the
huta, the ahuta, the prahuta, and the pr4sita.

2. On the following five occasions, viz. the wed-
ding, the tonsure (of the child’s head), the initiation
(of the Brahmaéarin), the cutting of the beard, and
the parting of the hair, (on these occasions) in the
outer hall,

3. On a place that has been smeared (with cow-
dung), which is elevated, and which has been sprin-
kled (with water), he establishes the fire,

29, 30. These Satras are identical with two Sfitras in the Sankha-
yana-Grthya II, 15, 2.3. See the note there. It seems to me inad-
missible to translate § 29, as Professor Stenzler does: Der Argha
darf aber nicht immer ohne Fleisch sein.

31. Sankhayana-Grzhya II, 15, 10.

4, 1-5. See Sankhayana-Grshya I, 5, 1-5 and the notes.

I KANDA, 4 KANDIKA, 13. 277

4. Having kindled it by attrition, according to
some teachers, at his marriage.

5. During the northern course of the sun, in the
time of the increasing moon, on an auspicious day he
shall seize the hand of a girl,

6. Under one of the (three times) three Nakshatras
of which a constellation designated as Uttara is first,

7. Or under (the Nakshatras) Sv4ti, Mrzgasiras,
or Rohiwi.

8. Three (wives are allowed) to a Brahmazsa, in
accordance with the order of the castes,

9. Two toa Raganya,

10. One to a Vaisya,

11. One Sidra wife besides to all, according to
some (teachers), without using Mantras (at the
ceremonies of wedding, &c.).

12. He then makes her put on the (under) gar-
ment with (the verse), ‘Live to old age; put on the
garment! Be a protectress of the human tribes
against imprecation. Live a hundred years full of
vigour; clothe thyself in wealth and children.
Blessed with life put on this garment!’

13. Then the upper garment with (the verse),
‘The goddesses who spun, who wove, who spread

6. I. € under the constellations Uttaraphalguni or the two con-
stellations following it, Uttaréshad@Aa or the two constellations follow-
ing it, Uttarabhadrapada or the two constellations following it.

12. The words of the Mantra bhava krzsh/indm abhisasti-
8५१ no doubt are an imitation of Rig-veda I, 76, 3, bhava $ २६ -
nam abhisastip4va (where the words are applied to Agni). Thus
the use of the masculine abhisastip4va with reference to the bride
may be accounted for.

13. Comp. Atharva-veda XIV, 1, 45. This parallel passage
shows us the way to correct the text of this very much corrupted
Mantra.

278 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

out, and who drew out the threads on both sides,
may those goddesses clothe thee for the sake of
long life. Blessed with life put on this garment !’

14. (The bride’s father ?) anoints the two, (while
the bridegroom recites the verse,) ‘May the Visve
devas, may the waters unite our hearts. May
Matarisvan, may Dhatrvz, may Deshéri (the ‘show-
ing’ goddess) join us.’

15. (The bridegroom), having accepted her who is
given away by her father, takes her and goes away
(from that place) with (the verse), ‘When thou
wanderest far away with thy heart to the regions of
the world like the wind, may the gold-winged
Vaikarwa (i.e. the wind ?) grant that thy heart may
dwell with me! N.N.!’

16. He then makes them look at each other
(while the bridegroom repeats the verses), ‘With no
evil eye, not bringing death to thy husband, bring
luck to the cattle, be full of joy and vigour. Give
birth to heroes; be godly and friendly. Bring us
luck, to men and animals.

‘Soma has acquired (thee) first (as his wife) ; after
him the Gandharva has acquired (thee). Thy third
husband is Agni; the fourth is thy human husband.

14. The literal translation would be: ‘ He salves together (samat-
gayati) the two... May the waters salve together (samaagantu)
our hearts.’ It was a real anointing of the bridegroom and of the
bride, that took place, and we cannot accept Professor Stenzler’s
translation (based on Gayarama’s note: samafigayati parasparam
sammukhikaroti), by which the proper signification of samafigayati
is effaced: Dann heisst (der Vater der Braut) sie beide zusam-
mentreten, See the note on Sankhayana-Grzhya I, 12, 5. The
parallel passage of the Khidira-Grzhya runs thus: apares4gnim
auduko gatva pazigraham mfirdhany 8९517660, vadhOm da, samai-
gantv ity avasiktaz.

16. Comp. Rig-veda ॐ, 85, 44. 40. 41. 37.

I KANDA, 5 KANDIKA, 7. 279

‘Soma has given thee to the Gandharva; the
Gandharva has given thee to Agni. Wealth and
children Agni has given to me, and besides this wife.

‘Paishan! Lead her to us, the highly blessed one.
Sa na 070 usatt vihara, yasyam usanta# praharama
sepam yasyam प k4m4 bahavo nivish¢ya (nivish¢A ?)
iti.’

KawnikA 5.

1. Having led her around the fire, keeping it on
his right side, according to some (teachers)—

2. Having pushed with his right foot a bundle of
grass or a mat to the west of the fire, he sits down

3. While (the bride) touches him, (the following
oblations are made:) the two Aghara oblations, the
two Agya portions, the Mah4vy4hr“tis, the general
expiation, the Pragdpatya oblation, and the Svish-
takret.

4. These are regular (oblations) at every sacrifice.

5. The Svishfakyzt comes before the Mahavyé-
1122115, if the sacrificial food is different from Agya

6. The place for the insertion (of the peculiar
oblations belonging to the different sacrifices) is the
interval between the general expiation and the
oblation to Pragapati.

7. At the wedding (he may make oblations) with
the Rash¢rabhyzt formulas (i.e. the formulas pro-
curing royal power), if he likes, and with the Gaya
and Abhyat4na formulas (i.e. the formulas procuring

5, 3. See the note on Sankh4yana-Grchya I; 9, 12.

6. See the note 1. 1.—I have altered the division of Sfitras 6 and
7, 80 as to draw the word vivahe to the seventh Sfitra. The rule
in § 6 has an entirely general character; the formulas stated in § 7
are given for the particular occasion of the vivaha ceremony.

280 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

victory, and aiming [at the hostile powers]), if he
knows them—

8. Because it has been said, ‘ By what sacrifice he
wishes to attain success.’

9. (The Gaya formmlas run thus): ‘ Thought and
thinking. Intention and intending. The understood
and understanding. The mind and the Sakvari
(verses). The new moon and the full moon. Brzhat
and Rathantara.

‘ Pragdpati, the powerful one in victorious battles,
has given victories (or, the Gaya formulas) to manly
Indra. To him all subjects bowed down; he has
become powerful and worthy of sacrifice. Svaha!’

10. (The Abhy&téna formulas run thus): ‘ May
Agni, the lord of beings, protect me. May Indra,
(the lord) of the noblest, Yama, of the earth, Vayu,
of the air, the Sun, of heaven, the Moon, of the
Nakshatras, Byzhaspati, of the Brahman, Mitra, of
truth, Varuva, of the waters, the sea, of the rivers,
food, the lord of royalty, protect me. May Soma, (the
lord) of herbs, Savitrz, of impulses, Rudra, of cattle,
न ४351172, of forms, Vishzu, of mountains, the Maruts,
the lords of hosts, protect me. May the fathers,

8. Taittiriya Samhita ITI, 4, 6, 1: ‘By what sacrifice he wishes
to attain success, at that (sacrifice) he should make oblations with
them (i.e. with the Abhyatana Mantras): then he will attain success
by that sacrifice.’

9. Instead of sa i havyah we ought to read probably sa प
havya4, or, as the Taitt. Sah. III, 4, 4, 1 gives, sa hi havyaé.
The Maitr. Samh. has vihavyaA (II, 10, 2).

1०. The words, ‘in this power of holiness . . . svaha!’ are to be
added to each memiber of the whole formula (comp. Atharva-veda
V, 24). The expressions ‘fathers’ and ‘ grandfathers,’ which are
twice identically repeated in the translation, stand the first time for
0113728 pitimahad, and then for 12185 tatamahdaa of the San-
skrit text.

I KAwpDA, 6 KANDIKA, I, 281

the grandfathers, the former, the later, the fathers,
the grandfathers protect me here in this power of
holiness, in this worldly power, in this prayer, in this
Purohitaship, in this sacrifice, in this invocation of
the gods. Svah4!’—this is added each time.

ब. (He then makes other oblations with the fol-
lowing texts :)

‘May Agni come hither, the first of gods. May
he release the offspring of this wife from the fetter
of death, That may this king Varuza grant, that
this wife may not weep over distress (falling to her
lot) through her sons. Sv4ha!

‘May Agni Garhapatya protect this woman. May
he lead her offspring to old age. With fertile womb
may she be the mother of living children. May she
experience delight in her sons. Svaha!

‘Make, Agni, all ways of heaven and earth
blissful to us, O thou who art worthy of sacrifices,
What is great, born on this (earth), and praised, (born)
in heaven, that bestow on us, rich treasures. Svaha!

‘Come hither, showing us an easy path. Give us
bright, undecaying life. May death go away; may
immortality come to us. May Vivasvat’s son make
us safe from danger. Svaha!’

12. And the (verse), ‘Another way, O death’
(Vag. Samh. XXXV, 7), after the eating (of the
remnant of the sacrificial food), according to some
(teachers).

Kawoikd 6,

1. The girl’s brother pours out of his joined hands
into her joined hands fried grain mixed with Sami
leaves.

6, ४. Sankhayana I, 13, 15; Asvalayana I, 7, 8.

282 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

2. This she sacrifices, with firmly joined hands,
standing, (while the bridegroom recites the verses,)

‘To the god Aryaman the girls have made sacri-
fice, to Agni; may he, god Aryaman, loosen us from
here, and not from the husband. Sv4ha!

‘This woman, strewing grains, prays thus, “ May
my husband live long; may my relations be pros-
perous.” 54181

‘These grains I throw into the fire: may this
bring prosperity to thee, and may it unite me with
thee. May Agni grant us that. N.N.! Svaha!’

3. He then seizes her right hand together with
the thumb, with (the verses),

‘T seize thy hand for the sake of happiness, that
thou mayst live to old age with me, thy husband.
Bhaga, Aryaman, Savityz, Purandhi, the gods have
given thee to me that we may rule our house.

‘This am I, that art thou; that art thou, this am I.
The Saman am I, the A7é thou; the heaven I, the
earth thou.

‘Come! Let us marry. Let us unite our sperm.
Let us beget offspring. Let us acquire many sons,
and may they reach old age.

‘Loving, bright, with genial minds may we see a
hundred autumns, may we live a hundred autumns,
may we hear a hundred autumns!’

Kawpika 7,

1. He then makes her tread on a stone, to the
north of the fire, with her right foot, (repeating the

2. Sankhayana I, 18, 35 14, ग; Asvalayana I, प, 73.
3. Rig-veda X, 85, 36; Sankhayana I, 13, 4, &८
7, 1. Asvalayana-Grzhya I, 7, 73 Sankhayana-Grthya I, 13, 12

I KANDA, 8 KANDIKA, 1. 283

verse,) ‘Tread on this stone; like a stone be firm.
Tread the foes down ; turn away the enemies.’

2. He then sings a song: ‘Sarasvati! Promote
this (our undertaking), O gracious one, bountiful
one, thou whom we sing first of all that is, in whom
what is, has been born, in whom this whole world
dwelils—that song I will sing to-day which will be
the highest glory of women.’

3. They then go round (the fire) with (the verse,
which the bridegroom repeats,)

‘To thee they have in the beginning carried round
901४4 (the Sun-bride) with the bridal procession.
Mayst thou give back, Agni, to the husbands the
wife together with offspring.’

4. Thus (the same rites are repeated) twice again,
beginning from the fried grain.

5. The fourth time she pours the whole fried
grain by the neb of a basket (into the fire) with (the
words), ‘To Bhaga svaha!’

6. After he has led her round (the fire) three
times, and has sacrificed the oblation to Pragdpati—

{<^ 8.

1. Then he makes her.step forward in a northern
direction seven steps (with the words),

‘One for sap, two for juice, three for the pros-
pering of wealth, four for comfort, five for cattle, six
for the seasons. Friend! be with seven steps (united
to me). So be thou devoted to me.’

4. See chap. 6, 1.

5. Comp. Khadira-Grzhya I, 3: sfirpeza 51510 agnav opya pra-
gudiéim utkramayet. See also Gobhila II, 2 ; Asvalayana 1,7, 74.

8, 1. The parallel texts have sakha and saptapadf for sakhe
and saptapada of Paraskara.

284 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SUTRA,

2. (The words), ‘May Vishzu lead thee’ are added
to every part (of the formula).

3. From the moment of their going away a man
who holds a water-pot on his shoulder, stands silent
to the south of the fire;

4. To the north, (according to the opinion) of
some (teachers).

5. From that (pot) he sprinkles her (with water)
on her head (with the formula),

‘ The blessed, the most blessed waters, the peace-
ful ones, the most peaceful ones, may they give
medicine to thee ’—

6. And with the three (verses), ‘Ye waters are’
(Vag. Samh. XI, 50-52). .

7. He then makes her look at the sun with (the
verse), ‘That eye’ (Vag. Samh. XXXVI, 24).

8. He then touches her heart, (reaching) over her
right shoulder, with (the words), ‘Into my will I take
thy heart; thy mind shall follow my mind; in my
word thou shalt rejoice with all thy heart; may
Pragapati join thee to me.’

9. He then recites over her (the verse), ‘ Auspicious
ornaments does this woman wear. Come up to her
and behold her. Having brought luck to her, go
away back to your houses.’

10. A strong man snatches her up from the

3. See above, I, 4, 15. The water mentioned here is desig-
nated as sthey4 8824 ; see Sankhayana-Grehya I, 13, 5 seq.;
Grvhya-samgraha II, 26. 35.

8. See the note on Sankhdyana-Grshya II, 3, 3.

9. Rig-veda >, 85, 33.

10. The Atharva-veda (XX, 127, 12) has the reading pra
gayadhvam instead of ni shidantu (in the first Pada); the second
hemistich there runs thus: iho sahasradakshizo spi 08018 ni shidati.

I KANDA, 8 KANDIKA, 19. 285

ground, and sets her down in an eastern or northern
direction in an out-of-the-way house, on a red bull’s
hide, with (the words),

‘Here may the cows sit down, here the horses,
here the men. Here may sacrifice with a thousand
gifts, here may Pfishan sit down.’

11. And what (the people in) the village tell them,
that they should do.

12, For-it is said, ‘At weddings and funerals he
shall enter the village ;’

13. (And) because the Sruti says, ‘Therefore on
these two occasions authority rests with the village.’

14. To the teacher (who helps at the wedding
ceremonies) he gives an optional gift.

15. A cow is the optional gift to be given by a
Braéhmaza,

16. A village by a Raganya,

17. A horse by a Vaisya. ४

18. A hundred -(cows) with a chariot (he gives to
a father) who has only daughters.

19. After sunset he shows her the firm star (i.e.
the polar-star) with (the words),

‘Firm art thou; I see thee, the firm one. Firm
be thou with me, O thriving one!

*

12. I have ventured, differing from Professor Stenzler (‘ Bei der
Hochzeit und auf der Leichenstatte richte er sich nach dem
Dorfe’), to translate pravisatat according to its original meaning.
Could this possibly be a rule for Vanaprasthas who live in the
forest and enter the village only on exceptional occasions?

15-17. Sankhdyana I, 14, 13 seqq.

18, Sinkhayana I, 14, 16. Comp. the note there.

1g. In the text the word ‘ firm’ (dhruva) is neuter in the two
first instances, and refers to the ‘firm star;’ the third time it is
feminine, referring to the bride. Pdraskara has the vocative
poshye for the nominative poshya of Sankhayana I, 17, 3; comp.
above, § 7 sakhe for sakha.

286 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

‘To me Brzhaspati has given thee; obtaining
offspring through me, thy husband, live with me a

hundred autumns,’
20. If she does not see (the polar-star), let her say

notwithstanding, ‘I see,’ &c.

21. Through a period of three nights they shall
eat no saline food; they shall sleep on the ground ;
through one year they shall refrain from conjugal
intercourse, or through a period of twelve nights, or
of six nights, or at least of three nights.

KawpikA 9.

1. Beginning from the wedding the worshipping of
the Aupasana (i.e. sacred domestic) fire (is prescribed).
2. After sunset and before sunrise (the fire should

21. Sinkhayana I, 17, 5. 6; Asvaldyana I, 8, 10. 11.

9, 1. The expression which I have translated ‘beginning from
the wedding’ is upayamanaprabhrvti, The Indian commen-
tators and Professor Stenzler explain the term upayamana as
implying a reference to the Sfitra I, 1, 4, upayamanan kusdn
20479 (‘having taken up the Kusa blades with which he is to
take hold of the lower surface of the Agya pot’). ‘The worship-
ping of the domestic fire,’ says Stenzler, following the native
authorities, ‘consists in the rites which have been prescribed
above (I, 1, 4), beginning from the word upayamana, i.e. in
the taking up of the Kusa blades, the putting of wood on the
fire, the sprinkling and sacrificing. As the rites preceding that
word, such as the preparation of the sacrificial spoon (I, 1, 3), are
hereby excluded, the oblations are offered with the hand.’ It
would be easy to show that the upayamanah kusdh have
nothing at all to do with the regular morning and evening obla-
tions of which these Sftras treat. The comparison of Asvalayana-
Grihya I, 9, 1 (see also Manu III, 67, &c.) leaves no doubt that
upayamana is to be understood here as derived from upayakéhati
in its very frequent meaning of marrying. I have translated the
502 accordingly.

2. On the different statements of Vedic authors with regard to
the proper time of the morning oblations, see Weber’s Indische
Studien, X, 329.

I KANDA, IO KANDIKA, 2. 287

be worshipped) with (oblations of) curds, (rice) grains,
or fried grains.

3. (He sacrifices) in the evening with (the for-
mulas), ‘To Agni 5०818 To Pragdpati svaha!’

4. In the morning with (the formulas), ‘To Sarya
svaha! To Pragapati svaha!’

5. ‘Men are both Mitra and Varuza ; men are both
the Asvins; men are Indra and Sfrya. May a man
be born in me! Again svaha!’—with (this verse) a
wife who desires to conceive, (should offer) the first
(oblation).

KawpikA 10.

1. If (in the chariot) of a king the axle breaks, or
something that is bound loosens itself, or the chariot
is overturned, or if another accident happens, or (if
one of these same things occurs) when a bride is
carried home, he establishes the same fire, prepares
Agya,and sacrifices (two Agya oblations) separately
with the two Mantras, ‘Here is joy’ (Vag. Samh.
VIII, 51).

2. Having got ready another chariot, he (i.e. the
Purohita or the bridegroom) should make the king
or the woman sit down thereon with (the formula),
‘In royal power’ down to the word,‘ in sacrifice’

5. Comp. Sankhayana-Grshya I, 17, 9, where the reading and
the construction slightly differ. The words punad svaha at the
end of the Mantra seem to be corrupt; the frequent repetition of
pumamsam and pum4n through the whole verse suggests the
correction pumse svaha, or pumbhya& svaha, ‘to the man
svaha!’ or ‘to the men svaha!’

10, 1. ‘The same fire’ is the sendgni (the fire belonging to the
army) in the case of the king, the nuptial fire in the second case.
The two Mantras are the two parts of Vag. Samh. VII, 51 a.

288 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

(Vag. Samh. XX, 10), and with the (verse), ‘I have
seized thee’ (ibid. XTJ, 11).

3. The two beasts that draw the chariot, consti-.
tute the sacrificial fee.

4. (This is) the penance.

5. Then (follows) feeding of the Brahmawas.

KawoikA 11,

1. In the fourth night (after the wedding), towards
morning, (the husband) establishes the fire within
(the house), assigns his seat, to the south (of it),
to the Brahman, places a pot of water to the north,
cooks a mess of sacrificial food, sacrifices the two
Agya portions, and makes (other) Agya oblations
with (the following Mantras) :

2. ‘Agni! Expiation! Thou art the expiation of
the gods. I, the Bréhmaza, entreat thee, desirous
of protection. The substance which dwells in her
that brings death to her husband, that extirpate in
her. Svaha!

‘Vayu! Expiation! Thou art the expiation of
the gods. I, the Brahmavza, entreat thee, desirous
of protection. The substance which dwells in her
that brings death to her children, that extirpate in
her. Svaha!

‘Sarya! Expiation! Thou art the expiation of
the gods. I, the Brahmava, entreat thee, desirous
of protection. The substance which dwells in her
that brings death to cattle, that extirpate in her.
Svaha!

‘Kandra! Expiation! Thou art the expiation
of the gods. I, the Brahmavza, entreat thee, desirous

11, 2. Comp. Sankhayana-Grzhya I, 18, 3.

I KANDA, II KANDIKA, 8. 289

of protection. The substance which dwells in her
that brings destruction to the house, that extirpate
in her. Svaha!

‘Gandharva! Expiation! Thou art the expiation
of the gods. च, the Brahmavza, entreat thee, desirous
of protection. The substance which dwells in her
that brings destruction to fame, that extirpate in her.
59784 1* `

3. He sacrifices of the mess of cooked food with
(the words), ‘To Pragapati svaha '

4. Each time after he has sacrificed, he pours the
remainder of the oblations into the water-pot, and
out of that (pot) he besprinkles her on her head with
(the words), ‘ The evil substance which dwells in thee
that brings death to thy husband, death to thy chil-
dren, death to cattle, destruction to the house,
destruction to fame, that I change -into one that
brings death to thy paramour. Thus live with me
to old age, N.N.!’

5. He then makes her eat the mess of cooked
food with (the words), ‘I add breath to thy breath,
bones to thy bones, flesh to thy flesh, skin to thy skin.’

6. Therefore one should not wish for sport with
the wife of a Srotriya who knows this; for the other
one is a person who knows this (and is thereby
enabled to destroy a lover of his wife).

7. After he has led her to his house, he should
cohabit with her after each of her monthly periods,

8. Or as he likes, because it has been said, ‘May
we have intercourse as we like, until a child is born.’

4. The water-pot is that mentioned in Sftra 1.

6. Satapatha Braéhmaza I, 6,1, 18; XIV, 9, 4, 11 (=Brzhad
Aranyaka VI, 4, 12; Sacred Books of the East, vol. xv, p. 218).

8. Taittirlya Samhita I, 5, 1, 5.

[29] U

290 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

9. He then touches her heart, (reaching) over her
right shoulder, with (the verse), ‘O thou whose hair
is well parted! Thy heart that dwells in heaven, in
the moon, that I know; may it know me. May we
see a hundred autumns; may we live a hundred
autumns ; may we hear a hundred autumns,’

10. In the same way afterwards.

{< ^ 14 12.

1. At the beginning of each half-month he cooks
a mess of sacrificial food, sacrifices to the deities of
the festivals of the new and full moon (as stated in
the Srauta ritual), and then sacrifices to the following
deities: to Brahman, to Prag&pati, to the Visve
devas, and to Heaven and Earth.

2, To the Visve devas a Bali is offered, to the
domestic deities, and to Akasa (i.e. the Ether).

3. From the Vaisvadeva food he makes oblations
in the fire with (the formulas), ‘To Agni sv4ha!
To Pragapati svaha! To the Visve devas svaha!
To Agni Svishéakr7t svaha!’

4. Outside (the house) the wife offers the Bali
with (the formulas), ‘ Adoration to the wife! Adoration
to the man! To every time of life, adoration! To
the white one with the black teeth, the lord of the
bad women, adoration!

‘They who allure my offspring, dwelling in the
village or in the forest, to them be adoration; I offer

g. See above, chap. 8, 8.

12, 1. Comp. Sankhayana-Grzhya I, 3, 3. The deities of the
corresponding Srauta festivals are, at the full moon, Agni and
Agni-shomau ; at the new moon, Agni, Vishvu, and Indragni.

2. Comp. below, II, 9, 3.

3. Sankhayana-Grshya IT, 14, 3, 4.

1 KAWDA, 14 KANDIKA, 3. 291

a Bali to them. Be welfare to me! May they give
me offspring:

5. The remainder he washes out with water,
Then (follows) feeding of the Brahmazas.

Kawpiké 13.

1. If she does not conceive, he should, after having
fasted, under (the Nakshatra) Pushya, lay down (in
his house) the root of a white-blooming Siszhi plant,
and on the fourth day, after (his wife) has bathed, he
should in the night-time crush it in water and insert
it into her right nostril with (the verse), ‘This herb
is protecting, overcoming, and powerful. May I, the
son of this great (mother), obtain the name of a
father !’

KawpikA 14.

1. Now the Pumsavana (i.e. thé ceremony to
secure the birth of a male child),

2. Before (the child in his mother’s womb) moves,
in the second or third month (of pregnancy).

3. On a day on which the moon stands in con-
junction with a Nakshatra (that has a name) of mas-
culine gender, on that day, after having caused (his
wife) to fast, to bathe, and to put on two garments
which have not yet been washed, and after having
in the night-time crushed in water descending roots
and shoots of a Nyagrodha tree, he inserts (that into
her right nostril) as above, with the two (verses),

13, 1. I have translated according to the reading of a similar
Mantra found in the Atharva-veda (VIII, 2, 6), which no doubt is
correct, sahasvatf instead of sarasvatt.

14, 3. The words ‘as above’ refer to chap. 13, 7

U2

292 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

‘The gold-child’ (Vag. Samzh. XIII, 4) and ‘ Formed
of water’ (ibid. XX XI, 17);

4. A Kusa needle and a Soma stalk, according to
some (teachers).

5. And he puts gall of a tortoise on her lap.

If he desires, ‘May (the son) become valiant,’ he
recites over him (i.e. over the embryo), modifying the
rite (?), ‘The Suparza art thou’ (Vag. Samzh. XII, 4),
(the Yagus) before (the formulas called) ‘steps of
Vishzu.’

{< ^. 15.

1, Now the Simantonnayana (or parting of the
pregnant wife's hair).

2. (It is performed) like the Pusavana ;

3. In her first pregnancy, in the sixth or eighth
month.

4. After he has cooked a mess of sacrificial food,
containing sesamum and Mudga beans, and has sacri-
ficed to Pragdpati, he parts for the wife, who is seated
to the west of the fire on a soft chair, her hair
upwards (i.e. beginning from the front) with a bunch
containing an even number of unripe Udumbara

4. Comp. Sankhdyana-Grzhya I, 20, 3.

5. The commentators state that kirmapitta (gall of tortoise)
means ‘a dish with water.’ I place no confidence in this statement,
though I cannot show at present what its origin is. Iam not sure
about the translation of vikrztya (or vikrztya?). But it seems
impossible to me that it should be the name of the metre Vikrvti.
‘Steps of Vishvu’ isa name for the Yagus following in the Samhita
on the one prescribed in this 5008. It begins, ‘ Vishwu’s step art
thon, &c.’ (Vag. Samh. XII, 5).

15, 2. Ie. the Nakshatra under which the ceremony is per-
formed, should be of male gender; the wife is to fast, &c. (see

chap. 14, 3). .
4. Sankhayana-Grehya I, 22, 8; Asvaldyana I, 14, 4.

1 KANDA, 16 KAWDIKA, 3. 293

fruits, and with three bunches of Darbha grass, with
a porcupine’s quill that has three white spots, with
a stick of Viratara wood, and with a full spindle,
with the words, ‘ Bhar bhuvas/ svaz.’

5. Or (he parts the hair once) with each of the
(three) MahAvyahr‘tis.

6. He ties (the Udumbara fruits, &c.) to a string
of three twisted threads with (the words), ‘ Rich in sap
is this tree; like the tree, rich in sap, be thou fruitful.’

7. (The husband) then says to two lute-players,
‘Sing ye the king, or if anybody else is still more
valiant.’

8. Here some also prescribe a certain stanza (to be
sung by the lute-players) : ‘Soma alone is our king.
May these human tribes dwell on thy banks, O
(river) whose dominion is unbroken, N.N.!’—here he
names the name of the river near which they dwell.

9. Then (follows) feeding of the Brahmamzas.

KawpikA 16.

1. Soshyantim adbhir abhyukshaty egatu dasa-
masya iti (Vag. Samh. VIII, 28) prag yasyai ta iti
(ibid. 29).

2. Athavar4vapatanam, avaitu prvzsni sevalam sune
garayv attave, naiva mawsena pivari na kasmises
kandyatam ava garayu padyatdm iti.

3. When the boy is born, he performs for him,
before the navel-string is cut off, the medhaganana

6, Sankhdyana I, 22, ro.

7. Sahkhayana 1.1. §§ 11, 12; Asvalayana 1.1. § 6.

8. Asvaléyana 1.1. § 7. I take avimuktasakre to be the vocative
of the feminine.

16, 1. Satapatha Brahmana XIV, 9, 4, 22.

2. Atharva-veda I, 11, 4.

294 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

(production of intelligence) and the 4yushya (rite
for procuring long life).

4. (The medhaganana is performed in the follow-
ing way:) With his fourth finger and with (an in-
strument of) gold he gives (to the child) honey
and ghee, or ghee (alone), to eat with (the formulas),
‘Bhiz I put into thee; bhuva% I put into thee;
svah I put into thee. Bhar bhuva% svak everything
I put into thee.’

5. He then performs the 4yushya.

6. Near his navel or his right ear he murmurs:
‘Agni is long-lived; through the trees he is long-
lived. By that long life I make thee long-lived.

‘Soma is long-lived ; through the herbs he is, &c.

‘The Brahman is long-lived; through the Brah-
mazzas it is, &c.

‘The gods are long-lived; through ambrosia
(शा) they are, &c.

‘The Azshis are long-lived; through their ob-
servances they are, &c.

‘The Fathers are long-lived; through the Svadha
oblations (or oblations made to the Manes) they
are, &c.

‘Sacrifice is long-lived ; through sacrificial fee it
is, &c.

‘ The ocean is long-lived; through the rivers it is
long-lived. By that long life I make thee long-lived;’

7. And three times the verse, ‘ The threefold age’
(Vag. Sah. III, 62).

8. If he desires, ‘May he live his full term of

4. Comp. Satapatha Bréhmana XIV, 9, 4, 23 seqq. (Brzhad
Aranyaka VI, 4, 24 seqq.; S.B.E., XV, 222 seq.). The text has
anamikaya suvarvdntarhitay4, which literally is: with the nameless
(or fourth) finger, between which (and the food) gold has been put.

1 KANDA, 16 KANDIKA, 18. 295

life,” he should touch him with the Vatsapra hymn
(Vag. Samh. XII, 18-29).

9. From the Anuvdka beginning with ‘From
heaven’ (XII, 18 seqq.) he omits the last Azé
(XII, 29).

10. Having placed five Brahmazas towards the
(five) regions, he should say to them, ‘ Breathe ye
upon this (लप्‌).

11, The (Brahmava placed) to the east should say,
‘Up-breathing !’

12. The one to the south, ‘ Back-breathing ! '

13. The one to the west, ‘ Down-breathing!’

14. The one to the north, ‘ Out-breathing !’

15. The fifth one, looking upwards, should say,
‘On-breathing

16. Or (the father) may do that himself, going
round (his child), if he can find no (Brahmavzas).

17. He recites over the place at which (the child)
is born: ‘I know, O earth, thy heart that dwells in
heaven, in the moon. That I know; may it know
me. May we seea hundred autumns; may we livea
hundred autumns; may we hear a hundred autumns.’

18. He then touches him with (the verse), ‘ Be a
stone, be an axe, be imperishable gold. Thou indeed
art the Self called son; thus live a hundred autumns.’

11 seqq. In translating the technical terms for the different
kinds of breath, I adopt the expressions chosen by Professor Max
Miller, S.B.E., XV, 94. As to the whole rite, comp. Satap. Br. XI,
8, 3, 6.

17. Comp. above, I, rr, 9. The comparison of the parallel
Mantra leaves scarcely any doubt that veda (the first word of the
verse) is the first, not the third person, and bhfimi the vocative
case. Compare the vocative darvi of the Vag. Samhita, while
the Atharva-veda has darve. Lanman, Noun-Inflection, p. 390.

18. Satapatha Brdhmaza XIV, 9, 4, 26; Asvalayana J, 15, 3-

296 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

19. He then recites over his mother (the verse),
‘Thou art Ida, the daughter of Mitra and Varuza;
thou strong woman hast born a strong son. Be thou
blessed with strong children, thou who hast blessed
us with a strong son.’

20. He then washes her right breast, and gives it
10 ` प€ child with (the verse), ‘ This breast’ (V4g.
Samh. XVII, 87);

21. The left (breast) with (the verse), ‘ Thy breast
which ’ (ibid. XX XVIII, 5)—with these two (verses).

22. He puts down a pot of water near her head
with (the verse), ‘O waters, you watch with the gods.
As you watch with the gods, thus watch over this
mother who is confined, and her child,’

23. Having established near the door the fire
that has been kept from (the wife’s) confinement, he
throws into that fire at the time of the morning and
evening twilight, until (the mother) gets up (from
childbed), mustard seeds mixed with rice chaff (pro-
nouncing the following names of demons and goblins):
‘May Sazda and Marka, Upavira, Sauzdikeya,
Ulfkhala, Malimluéa, Drovdsa, Kyavana vanish
hence. Svaha!

‘May Alikhat, Animisha, Kisvadanta, Upasruti,
Haryaksha, Kumbhin, Satru, Patrapazi, Nzzmazi,
Hantrimukha, Sarshap4ruxa, Ayavana vanish hence.
Svaha '

24. If (the demon bringing disease) Kumara
attacks the boy, the father covers him with a net

19. Satapatha Brahmaza].].§ 27. Comp. Professor Max Miiller’s
note, §. ए. ए. XV, 223 seq.

21. Satapatha Brahmaza ]. 1. § 28.

23. On the sfitikagni, comp. Satap. Br. 1.1. § 23; Sankhayana-
Grihya I, 25, 4, &c.

24. Kfirkura seems to me, and this is also Professor Stenzler’s

I KAwpA, 17 KANDIKA, 4. 207

or with an upper garment, takes him on his lap,
and murmurs: ^ Kirkura, Sukfrkura, Kfarkura, who
holds fast children. Ket! et! doggy! let him
loose. Reverence be to thee, the Sisara, barker,
bender.

‘ That is true that the gods have given a boon to
thee. Hast thou then chosen even this boy ?

‘Ket! et! doggy! let him loose. Reverence be
to thee, the Sisara, barker, bender.

‘That is true that (the divine she-dog) Saramé is
thy mother, Sisara thy father, the black and the
speckled (two dogs of Yama) thy brothers.

‘Ket! ket! doggy! let him loose. Reverence be
to thee, the Sisara, barker, bender.

25. He then touches (the boy) with (the words)
‘He does not suffer, he does not cry, he is not stiff,
he is not sick, when we speak to him and when we
touch him.’

KawnpikA 17.

1. On the tenth day (after the birth of the child)
the father, having made (his wife) get up, and having
fed the Brahmazas, gives a name (to the child),

2. Of two syllables, or of four syllables, beginning
with a sonant, with a semivowel in it, with a long
vowel (or) the Visarga (at its end), with a Krzt
(suffix), not with a Taddhita ;

3. With an uneven number of syllables, ending in
8, with a Taddhita (suffix) to a girl.

4. (The name) of a Brahmama (should end in)

opinion, identical with kurkura, kukkura (‘dog’). The Peters-
burg Dictionary explains it, ‘Name eines die Kinder bedrohenden
Dimons (vielleicht eine Personification des Hustens)

17, 1. Comp. Gobhila II, 8, 14; Asvalayana I, 15,

298 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SOUTRA.

sarman (for inst. Vishzusarman), that of a Kshatriya
in varman (for inst. Lakshmivarman), that of a
Vaisya in gupta (for inst: Aandragupta).

5. In the fourth month (follows) the going out.

6. He makes (the child) look at the sun, pro-
nouncing (the verse), ‘That eye’ (४8९. Samhita

XXXVI, 24).
Kawoixd 18.

1. When he returns from a journey, he approaches
his house in the manner stated above.

2. When he sees his son, he murmurs, ‘ From
limb by limb thou art produced; out of the heart
thou art born. Thou indeed art the Self called son;
so live a hundred autumns!’

3. He then kisses his head with (the words),
‘With the hiskara (the mystical syllable hin) of
Pragapati, which gives thousandfold life, I kiss thee,
N.N.! Live a hundred autumns !’—

4. And three times with (the words), ‘With the
1171872. of the cows,’

5. In his right ear he murmurs, ‘ Bestow on us,
O bountiful, onward-pressing Indra, plentiful, rich
treasures. Give us a hundred autumns to live;
give us many heroes, strong-jawed Indra ;’

6. In the left ear, ‘Indra, bestow on us the best
treasures, insight of mind, happiness, increase of
wealth, health of our bodies, sweetness of speech,
and that our days may be good days.’

7. For a girl he only kisses the head silently.

18, 1. See Katydyana, Srauta-sitra IV, 12, 22 seq.: With the
words, ‘House, be not afraid, &c. (Vag. Samh. III, 41) he

approaches the house. With, ‘For peace you’ (III, 43) he
enters it.

5. Rig-veda ITI, 36, ro. 6. Rig-veda II, 21, 6.

I KANDA, 19 KAWDIKA, 8. 299

KawoikA 19.

1. In the sixth month the Annaprdsana (or first
feeding with solid food).

2. Having cooked a mess of sacrificial food, and
sacrificed the two Agyabhagas, he offers two Agya
oblations, (the first with the verse,) ‘The gods have
generated the goddess Speech; manifold animals
speak her forth. May she, the sweet-sounding, the
cow that (for milk) gives sap and juice to us, Speech,
the highly-praised one, come to us. Svaha!’

3. And the second (oblation) with (the verse),
‘May vigour us to-day’ (V4g. Samhita XVIII, 33).

4. He then sacrifices (four oblations) of cooked
food with (the formulas)

‘Through up-breathing may I enjoy food. Svaha!

‘Through down-breathing may I enjoy smells
9५218. !

‘Through my eye may I enjoy visible things.
Svaha !

‘Through my ear may I enjoy renown. Svaha!’

5. After he has eaten (himself), he should set
apart food of all kinds, and of all different sorts of
flavour,and should give it to him (i.e. to his son) to eat,

6. Silently or with (the'word), ‘Hanta’ (i.e. Well !).
For it is said in the Sruti, ‘Men (live on) the word
hanta,’

7. (He feeds the child) with flesh of (the bird
called) Bharadvagi, if he wishes (to the child)
fluency of speech,

8. With flesh of partridge, if abundance of nourish-
ment,

2. Rig-veda VIII, 100, rr. 6. Brthad Aranyaka V, 8.

300 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

g. With fish, if swiftness,

10. (With flesh) of (the bird) Kvzkashé, if long life,

11. (With flesh) of (the bird) Adi, if desirous of
holy lustre,

12. With all, if desirous of all.

13. Or each (sort of) food one by one. Then
(follows) feeding of the Brahmawas, or each (sort of)
food one by one. Then feeding of the Brahmawzas.

End of the First Kazda.

II KANDA, I KANDIKA, 9. 301

{८4524 II, KaworxA 1.

1. When (the son) is one year old, the KfdAkarana
(i.e. the tonsure of his head, should be performed),

2. Or before the lapse of the third (year).

3. When he is sixteen years old, the KesAnta (i.e.
the shaving of his beard, is to be done),

4. Or, according as it is considered auspicious by
all (the different families).

5. After food has been distributed to the Brah-
mamas, the mother takes the boy, bathes him, puts
on him an under and an upper garment which
have not yet been washed, and putting him on her
lap, she sits down to the west of the fire.

6. The father taking hold (of his wife) sacrifices
Agya oblations, and after he has partaken of the
(sacrificial) food, he pours warm water into cold
water with (the words), ‘With warm water come
hither, Vayu! Aditi, cut the hair.’

7. At the Kesanta ceremony (519. 3), ‘hair and
beard’ (instead of ‘ hair’).

8. He throws a piece of fresh butter, or of ghee,
or some curds into it (i.e. into the water, 503. 6).

9. Taking some (water) he moistens the hair
near the right ear with (the formula), ‘On the
impulse of Savity? may the divine waters moisten

1, 6. I see no reason why we should not take Aditi for the name
of the goddess. Comp. Atharva-veda VI, 68, 2: Aditi# smasru
vapatu. Asvalfyana-Grihya I, 17, 7. Stenzler translates: Unge-
bundener, die Haare schneide.

9. The text has, dakshivam godanam undati. The commentary
on Katyayana V, 2, 14 explains dakshiza godana: dakshizakar-
nasamtpavartinam sirahpradesam. Sdyana on Satapatha Brahmana
III, 1, 2, 4 (p. 323, ed. Weber): godinam nama karzasyopari
pradesaz. The Mantra reoccurs in K4tydyana, loc. cit—Savitra

302 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SOTRA,

thy body in order that long life and splendour may
be thine.’

10. Having unravelled (the hair) with a porcupine’s
quill that has three white spots, he puts three young
Kusa shoots into it with (the formula), ‘ Herb’ (Vag.
Samh. IV, 1).

11. Taking up a copper razor with (the formula),
‘Friendly by name’ (Vag. Samzh. III, 63 a), he cuts
(the hair) with (the formula), ‘I cut off’ (ibid. 63b),
(and with the formula,) ‘The razor with which
Savitr7, the knowing one, has shaven (the beard) of
king Soma and Varuza, with that, ye Brahmazas,
shave his (head), in order that he may be blessed
with long life and may reach old age.’

12. Cutting off (the Kusa shoots) together with
the hair, he throws them on a lump of bull’s dung
which they keep northwards of the fire.

13. In the same way two other times silently.

14. The moistening and the other rites are repeated
with the two other (tufts of hair).

15. Behind with (the verse), ‘The threefold age’
(Vag. Samzh. ITI, 62).

16. Then on the left side with (the verse), ‘ With
that prayer by which mayst thou, a mighty one, go
to heaven, and long mayst thou see the sun: with
that prayer I shave thee for the sake of life, of
existence, of glory, of welfare.’

7959184 should not be translated as Prof. Stenzler does: von
Sav. erzeugt, but: von Sav. angetrieben.

10. This Sfitra is identical with Katyayana-Sraut. ए, 2, 15.

17. Compare Katyayana 1. 1. § 17. The Mantra, Vag. Samh.
III, 63b, is that given by Katydyana, the following one is that
which the other Grzhya texts prescribe.

6. See the various readings of the Mantra given by Professor

Stenzler, p. 53 of his critical annotations, and compare Asvalayana-
Grihya I, 17, 13.

11 KANDA, 2 KANDIKA, 2. 303

17. Three times he shaves round the head, from
left to right ;

18. Including the face, at the KesAnta ceremony.

19. (He recites the verse,) ‘When the shaver
shaves his hair with the razor, the wounding, the
well-shaped, purify his head, but do not take away
his life.’ ।

20. He adds (the word), ‘his face’ at the Kesanta
ceremony.

21. With that water (Sdtras 6, 8) he moistens his
head, and gives the razor to the barber with (the
words), ‘ Without wounding him, shave him.’

22. The locks of hair which are left over, are to
be arranged as it is considered auspicious (in his
family).

23. Having put away that lump of dung with the
hair so that it is hidden in a cow-stable, or in a
small pond, or in the vicinity of water, he gives an
optional gift to the teacher ;

24. A cow at the Kesanta ceremony.

25. After the Kesanta has been performed, (the
youth) should observe chastity and should not be
shaven through one year, or twelve nights, or six
nights, or at least three nights.

Kawpikd 2.

1. He should initiate a Brahmaza, when he is
eight years old, or in the eighth year after the con-
ception,

2. A Raganya, when he is eleven years old,

19. Asvalayana 1.1. § 16; Atharva-veda VIII, 2, 17.

20. He repeats the Mantra, given in Stra rg, in this’ form:
‘ When the shaver shaves his hair and his face,’ &c.

23. See above, Sftra 12.

304 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

3. A Vaisya, when he is twelve years old.

4. Or according as it is considered auspicious by
all (the different families).

5. He should feed the Brahmazas. And they
lead him (i.e. the boy who is to be initiated) on, with
his head shaven all round,and decked with ornaments.

6. (The teacher) makes him place himself to the
west of the fire and say, ‘I have come hither for the
sake of studentship (brahmafarya).’ And, ‘I will be
a student (brahmaZérin).’

7. He then makes him put ona garment with (the
verse), ‘In the way in which Brzhaspati put the
garment of immortality on Indra, thus I put (this
garment) on thee, for the sake of long life, of old
age, of strength, of splendour.’

8. He ties round him the girdle with (the verse
which the youth recites), ‘Here has come to me,
keeping away evil words, purifying my kind as a
purifyer, clothing herself, by (the power of) inhalation
and exhalation, with strength, this sisterly goddess,
this blessed girdle.’

9. Or, ‘A youth, well attired, dressed, came
hither. He, being born, becomes glorious. Wise
sages extol him, devout ones, turning their minds
to the gods.’

10. Or silently.

11. He gives him the staff.

6 seqq. Comp. Satapatha Brahmama XI, 5, 4.

8. The commentators differ as to whether the Afdrya or the
youth should recite the verse. The comparison of Sankhayana IT,
2, 1 would rather tend to show that it is the teacher, but Gobhila IT,
Io says expressly : athainam tri# pradakshizam mufigamekhalam
pariharan vasayatiyam duruktat paribadham4nety rztasya goptriti va.

9. Rig-veda III, 8, 4. The verse is originally addressed to
Agni.

Il KANDA, 2 KANDIKA, 20. 305

12. (The student) accepts it with (the verse), ‘My
staff which fell down to the ground in the open air,
that I take up again for the sake of long life, of
holiness, of holy lustre.’

13. According to some (teachers he accepts the
staff) in the way prescribed for the inauguration,
because it is said, ‘He enters upon a long Sattra (or
sacrificial period),’

14. (The teacher) then with his joined hands fills
(the student’s) joined hands with water with the
three (verses), ‘Ye waters are’ (VAg. Samh. XI, 50
seqq.).

15. He then makes him look at the sun with (the
verse), ‘ That eye’ (V4g. Samh. XXXVI, 24).

16, He then touches his heart, (reaching) over his
right shoulder, with (the words), ‘Into my will I take
thy heart, &c.’

17. He then seizes (the student’s) right hand and
says, ‘What is thy name ?’

18. He replies, ‘I am N.N., sir!’

19. He then says to him, ‘Whose pupil (brahma-
arin) art thou?’

20. After (the student) has said, ^ Yours!’—(the

13. Satapatha Braéhmana XI, 3, 3, 2: ‘He enters upon a long
Sattra, who enters upon Brahmaéarya.’ The student, when being
initiated, ought to behave, consequently, in the same way as those
who receive the inauguration (diksha) for a long Sattra. This is
the meaning of this Stra. The rules regarding the staff handed
over by the Adhvaryu to the Yagamana at the diksha ceremony
are given by Katyayana, Srauta-sitra VII, 4, 1-4.

15. See above, I, 8, 7.

16. See above, I, 8, 8.

17 seqq. Comp. Satapatha Brahmava XI, 5, 4, 1 seqq.

20. The words ‘I am thy teacher’ are omitted in one of
Professor Stenzler’s MSS. and in his translation. But they are
given in the parallel passage of the Satapatha Brahmaza. The

[29] x

306 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

teacher replies,) ‘Indra’s pupil art thou; Agni is thy
teacher ; I am thy teacher, N. N.!’

21. He then gives him in charge to living beings
with (the formulas), ‘To Pragapati I give thee in
charge. To the god Savityz I give thee in charge.
To the waters, the herbs I give thee in charge. To
Heaven and Earth I give thee in charge. To the
Visve devas I give thee in charge. To all beings I
give thee in charge for the sake of freedom from
harm.’

KawpikA 3.

1. Having walked round the fire with his right
side turned towards it, he sits down.

2. Taking hold (of the student), he sacrifices the
Agya oblations, and after having partaken (of the
remains of the sacrificial food) he instructs him, ‘A
student art thou. Take water. Do the service. Do
not sleep in the day-time. Keep silence. Put fuel
on (the fire). Take water.’

3. He then recites the Savitri to him, who is
seated to the north of the fire, with his face to the
west, sitting near the teacher, and looks (at the
teacher), while (the teacher). looks at him ;

4. Some say, to (the student) who is standing or
seated to the south (of the fire);

5. Pada by Pada, (then) hemistich by hemistich,
and the third time the whole (verse), reciting it
together (with the student) ;

parallel passage in Sankh4yana (Grshya II, 3, 1) also runs thus:
Agnir a/aryas tava, asav, aham Aobhau.

3, 1 seqq. Comp. the corresponding section of the Satapatha
Brahmama XI, 5, 4, 6 seqq.

4. Satapatha Brahmama 1.1. § 14.

II KANDA, 4 KANDIKA, 3. 307

6. After one year, or after six months, or after
twenty-four days, or after twelve days, or after six
days, or after three days.

7. To a Brahmawza, however, he should recite a
(Savitri) verse in the Gayatri metre immediately.
For it is said in the Sruti, ‘To Agni indeed belongs
the Brahmaza.’

8. A Trishéubh verse to a Raganya,

9. A Gagati to a Vaisya,

10. Or a G&yatri to (persons of) all (castes).

Kawpiké 4.

1. Now the putting on of fuel.

2. He wipes with his hand (the ground) round the
fire with (the formula), ‘Agni, glorious one, make
me glorious. As thou, glorious Agni, art glorious,
thus, O glorious one, bring me to glory. As thou,
Agni, art the preserver of the treasure of sacrifice
for the gods, thus may I become the preserver of
the treasure of the Veda for men.’

3. Having sprinkled (water) round the fire from
left to right, he stands up and puts a piece of wood
on (the fire) with (the texts),

‘To Agni I have brought a piece of wood, to the
great Gatavedas. As thou, Agni, art inflamed by
wood, thus I am inflamed by life, insight, vigour,
offspring, cattle, holy lustre.

‘May my teacher be the father of living sons;
may I be full of insight, not forgetful (of what I have
learned) ; may I become full of glory, of splendour,
of holy lustre, an enjoyer of food. Svaha!

4. Satapatha Brahmawa 1. 1. § 72.

4, 2. Comp. Asvalayana-Grzhya I, 22, 21.

3. As to anirakarishzu, comp. anirakaraza below, III, 16.
X 2

308 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

4. In the same way (he puts on) a second (piece
of wood) ; and thus a third.

5. Or (each piece) with (the verse), ‘Thine is this’
(Vag. Samzh. II, 14).

6. Or (he uses) both (this verse and the formulas
given in 502 3).

7. The wiping and sprinkling (of water) round
{the fire are repeated) as above.

8. Having warmed his two hands, he wipes his.
mouth with (the formulas) :

‘Agni, thou art the protector of bodies. Protect my
body. Agni, thou art the giver of life. Give me life.
Agni, thou art the giver of vigour. Give me vigour.

‘Agni, what is deficient in my body, that restore to
fulness. :

‘May the god Savitz? bestow insight on me, may
the goddess Sarasvati, may the two divine Asvins,
wreathed with lotus, (bestow) insight (on me).’

^ कणा 5.

1. Here (follows the student's) going the rounds
for alms.

2. A Brahmavza should beg, addressing (the woman
from whom he begs alms) with the word ‘ Lady’ put
at the beginning (of his request),

3. A Raganya, with the word ‘Lady’ inserted in
the middle, षि

4. A Vaisya, with the word ‘ Lady’ put at the end.

5. (He should beg) from three women who will
not refuse ;

4. See above, Sftras 2, 3.

5, 2-4. Comp. Apastamba I, 3, 28 seqq. (S.B.E., II, p. 12);
Manu II, 49, &c. The Brahmama says, ‘Lady, give alms;’ the
Kshatriya, ‘Give, lady, alms ;’ the Vaisya, ‘Give alms, lady.’

5. १1111 I, 22, 7.

Il KANDA, 5 KANDIKA, 18. 309

6. From six, twelve, or an indefinite number.

7. From his own mother first, according to some
(teachers).

8. Having announced the alms received to his
teacher, he should stand, keeping silence, through
the rest of the day, according to some.

9. Having fetched fire-wood out of the forest with-
out damaging (trees), he should put them on that fire
as above, and should abandon his silence.

10. He should sleep on the ground and eat no
pungent or saline food.

11, Wearing the staff, worshipping the fire, being
obedient to his Guru, going the rounds for alms—
(these are the standing duties of students).

12. He should avoid honey or flesh, bathing
(for pleasure), sitting on high seats, going to
women, falsehood, and taking what is not given
to him.

13. Let him live forty-eight years as a student for
the (four) Vedas,

14. Or twelve years for each Veda,

15. Or until he has learnt it.

16. The garment (of a student) should be made of
hemp, flax, or wool (accordingly as he is a Brah-
10812, a Kshatriya, or a Vaisya).

17. The upper garment of a Brahmawza should be
an antelope-skin,

18. That of a Raganya the skin of a spotted deer,

8, Asvaldyana 1. 1. §§ ro, प्व,

g. The meaning is, he should not break off branches, but only
gather such as have fallen off. The words ‘as above’ refer to
chap. 4

12. Gautama IJ, 13; Apastamba I, 2, 23. 28-30. 21. 26

13-15. Comp. Apastamba I, 2, 12 seqq.; Asvaldyana I, 22, 3

310 PARASKARA-GRIHVA-SOTRA,

19. That of a Vaisya a goat’s or cow’s skin.

20. Or if (the prescribed sort of garment) is not to
be had, a cow’s hide (should be worn) by all, because
to that belongs the first place (among all kinds of
garments).

21. The girdle of a Brahmaza should be of
110९2 grass,

22. That of a Kshatriya should be a bowstring,

23. That of a Vaisya, made of Marva (i.e. Sanse-
veria Roxburghiana).

24. If there is no Mufga (or the other articles
prescribed in §§ 22, 23, the girdles should be made)
of Kusa grass, of the plant Asmantaka, or of Balbaga
grass (respectively),

25. The staff of a Brahmawa is of 2818528 wood,

26. That of a Raganya of Bilva wood,

27. That of a Vaisya of Udumbara wood.

28. Or all (sorts of staffs may be used) by all.

29. If the teacher calls him, he shall rise and then
answer,

30. If (the teacher calls him) while he is lying
down, (he should answer) sitting; if sitting, standing ;
if standing, walking up (to the teacher) ; if walking
up, running up. ५

31. If he behaves thus, his fame when he has be-
come a Snataka (i.e. when he has taken the bath at
the end of his studentship) will be (such that people
will say of him), ‘To-day he stays there; to-day he
stays there.’

32. There are three (kinds of) Snatakas: a Vidyé-
snataka (i.e. a Sndtaka by knowledge), a Vrata-

24. Manu II, 43.
32-35. Comp. Apastamba I, 30, 1-3; Manu IV, 31. The
term of the vows extends through forty-eight (or thirty-six, &c.)

II KANDA, 5 KANDIKA, 42. उ

snataka (i.e. a Sndtaka by the completion of his
vows), and a Vidy4-vrata-snataka (i.e. a 91141812. both
by knowledge and by the completion of his vows).

33. He who performs the SamAvartana ceremony,
after having finished the study of the Veda, but before
the time of his vows has expired, is a Vidy4-snataka.

34. He who performs the SamAvartana, after his
vows have expired, but before he has finished the
study of the Veda, is a Vrata-snataka.

35. He who performs the Samavartana, after
having finished both, is a Vidyd-vrata-snataka.

36. Until the sixteenth year the time (for being
initiated) has not passed for a Brahmaza,

37. Until the twenty-second for a Raganya,

38. Until the twenty-fourth for a Vaisya.

39. After that (time has passed), they become
patitasdvitrika (or persons who have lost the right of
learning the Savitri).

40. No one should initiate such men, nor teach
them, nor perform sacrifices for them, nor have inter-
course with them.

41. After the time has passed, (they should do) as
has been prescribed.

42. A person whose ancestors through three
generations have been patitas4vitrikas, is excluded

years ; see above, Sfitras 13 and 14, and below, chap. 6, 2. 3. The
SamAvartana is the returning home of the student at the end of his
studentship. ॥

36-40. Asvalayana-Grthya I, 19, 5 seqq. &c.

41. The general rule here alluded to is, according to the com-
mentators, that given by Katyayana, Srauta-sittra XXV, 1, 12. 13.
There it is stated which expiatory oblations have to precede, when
a rite that has not been performed, or that has been incorrectly
performed, is to be performed for good.

42. Those who have not been initiated in due time, may act as

312 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SOUTRA.

from the sacrament (of initiation) and from being
taught the Veda.

43. Of such persons those who desire to receive
the sacrament, may perform the sacrifice of Vratya-
stoma and then study the Veda, if they like. For
(of persons who have done that) it is said, ‘ Inter-
course with them is permitted.’

KannikA 6.

1. When he has finished the Veda, he should take
the bath (by which he becomes a Snataka) ;

2. Or when (he has gone through) a studentship
of forty-eight years ;

3. Or also after (a studentship) of twelve years,
according to some (teachers).

4. (Let him take the bath only) if his Guru has
given his permission.

5. Rules (regarding the performance of sacrifices),
(texts) to be used (at the sacrifices according to those
rules), and reasoning (on the meaning of the rites
and texts): that is the Veda.

6. Some say (that the Veda should be studied)
with its six Angas;

stated in Satra 41. But if the omission has been perpetuated
through three generations, the descendant of such persons is subject
to the rules stated in 50८25 42 and 43.

43. Katydyana, after having given the rules on the Vratyastoma
sacrifice (see Weber, Indische Literaturgeschichte, 2nd edition,
एए. 73 seq.), says: ‘Intercourse with them (who have performed
that sacrifice) is permitted’ (Sraut. XXII, 4, 28).

6, 2. See above, chap. 5, 13.

3. See chap. 5, 14.

5. The expressions of the text for the three categories are,
vidhi, vidheya, tarka.

6. Le. with the supplementary treatises on ritual, grammar,
astronomy, etymology, pronunciation of the Mantras, and metrics.

II KAWDA, 6 KANDIKA, 12. 313

7. Not so that he only knows the ceremonial.

8. But optionally by one who knows the sacrifices
(the bath may be taken).

9. (The student) after having embraced (the feet
of) his teacher, and put the pieces of wood on the fire,
places himself northwards of an enclosure, on east-
ward-pointed Kusa grass, to the east of eight vessels
with water.

10. ‘The fires that dwell in the waters; the fire
which must be hidden, the fire which must be
covered, the ray of light, the fire which kills the
mind, the unwavering one, the pain-causing one, the
destroyer of the body, the fire which kills the organs
—those I leave behind. The shining one, that I
seize here’—with (this formula) he draws water out
of one (of the eight vessels) ;

11, With that he besprinkles himself with (the
words), ‘ Therewith I besprinkle myself for the sake
of prosperity, of glory, of holiness, of holy lustre.’

12, (A second time he draws water out of a second
of the eight vessels with the formula given in Sitra
10, putting instead of the words, ‘The shining one,
&c.,’ the verse): ‘By which you have created pros-
perity, by which you have touched उपा, with which
you have anointed the eyes, which is your glory, O
Asvins.’

10. As to the names of the eight hostile powers of Agni, comp.
Sankhayana-Gréhya V, 2; Atharva-veda XIV, 1, 38; XVI, 13
Mantrabrahmaza I, 7, 1.

12. The reading of the Mantra seems to be corrupt. Compare
the form in which it is given by Bhavadeva, quoted in Professor
Stenzler’s note on this Sitra. Instead of sriyam we have probably
to read, as Bhavadeva has, striyam; instead of akshyau, akshan.
Professor Stenzler very pertinently compares Atharva-veda XIV, 1,
35. 36. Comp. also Mantrabrahmana I, 7, 5.

314 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

13. (And he draws water out of three other
vessels) with (the three verses), ‘Ye waters are’
(Vag. Samh. XI, 50-52), verse by verse.

14. With (water drawn out of) the three other
(vessels he besprinkles himself) silently.

15. Having loosened his girdle with (the verse),
‘The highest band’ (Vag. Sawh. XII, 12), having
put it down, having put on another garment, he
worships the sun—

16. With (the formulas), ‘ Rising, bearing a shining
spear, Indra stands with the Maruts; he stands with
the gods who walk in the morning. Thou art a ten-
fold winner; make me a tenfold winner. Make me
attain to renown.

‘Rising, bearing a shining spear, Indra stands with
the Maruts; he stands with the gods who walk in
day-time. Thou arta hundredfold winner; make me
a hundredfold winner. Make me attain to renown.

‘ Rising, bearing a shining spear, Indra stands with
the Maruts; he stands with the gods who walk in
the evening. Thou art a thousandfold winner;
make me a thousandfold winner. Make me attain
to renown.’

17. Having eaten curds or sesamum seeds, and
having had his matted hair, the hair of his body,
and his nails cut, he should cleanse his teeth with an
Udumbara branch with (the verse), ‘Array your-
selves for the enjoyment of food. Here has come
king Soma: he will purify my mouth with glory and
fortune.’

16. In the Mantra the Paraskara MSS. give bhragabhr7shaud
and bhragabhrishfA, and the Gobhila MSS. (Grzhya ITI, 4) bhraga-
bhrzshfibhi#. Possibly the instrumental case is right. Béhtlingk
and Roth propose to read bhragadr7sh/if.

II KAWDA, 6 KANDIKA, 23. 315

18. Having anointed himself and bathed again, he
takes up the salve for nose and mouth with (the
words), ‘Satiate my up-breathing and down-breath-
ing; satiate my eye; satiate my ear!’

19. Having poured out to the south the water
with which he has washed his hands, with (the
words), ‘Ye fathers, become pure,’ he should salve
himself and murmur, ‘May I become well-looking
with my eyes, well-shining with my face, well-hearing
with my ears.’ .

20. He then should put on a garment which has
not yet been washed, or not been soaked in lie, with
(the formula), ‘ For the sake of putting on, of bring-
ing fame, of long life I shall reach old age. I live a
hundred long autumns. For the sake of the increase
of wealth I will clothe myself.’

21. Then the upper garment with (the verse),
‘With glory (come) to me, Heaven and Earth.
With glory, Indra and Brzhaspati! May glory and
fortune come to me! may glory be my lot!’

22. If (he has only) one (garment), he should
cover himself (with a part of that garment as if it
were an upper garment) with the second part of the
former (Mantra; Sftra 20).

23. He takes flowers with (the formula), ‘(The

20. Comp. Katydyana, Srauta-sftra VII, 2, 18, to which Sfitra
Professor Stenzler refers.

22. I give this translation merely as tentative. Professor
Stenzler translates: Wenn er nur Ein Gewand hat, so bedecke er
sich (noch einmal) mit dem oberen Theile des zuerst angelegten.
Gayarama (MS. Chambers 373) says: ekam ket tatrapi paridhana-
mantram paéhitva vastrardham paridhdya dvir 4&amya uttarardhe
grzhitva uttariyam [sic] mantram pa/hitvottarlyam kritva punar dvir
akamed ity arthad.

23. Hirany.-Grthya I, 3, 11, 4.

316 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

flowers) which Gamadagni has brought for the sake
of faith (has brought to Sraddha?), of love, of the
senses, them I take with glory and with fortune.’

24. He then ties them (to his head) with (the
verse), ‘The high, wide glory, which Indra has
created for the Apsarases, the flowers bound up
with that, I tie on to me, to bring me glory!’

25. He binds a turban to his head with (the
verse), ‘A youth, well attired.’

26. (He puts on) the two ear-rings with (the
words), ‘An ornament art thou; may more orna-
ments be mine.’

27. He salves his two eyes with (the formula),
‘Vritra’s’ (Vag. 5289710. IV, 3b).

28. With (the words), ‘ Brilliant art thou,’ he looks
at his image in a mirror.

29. He takes a parasol with (the words), ‘Thou
art Brzhaspati’s covering. Shelter me from evil.
Do not shelter me from splendour and glory.’

30. With (the words), ‘ You are supports; protect
me from all sides,’ he puts on the two shoes.

31. With (the words), ‘From all powers of destruc-
tion protect me on all sides,’ he takes a bamboo staff.

32. (For) the tooth-cleaner, &c. (the Mantras
stated above are to be used) in every case; (for)
the garment, the parasol, and the shoes, the Mantra
(should only be recited) if they have not been used
before.

Kawopika 7.

1. We shall state the rules of conduct for a
Snataka,
2. Another (may observe those rules) optionally.

25. See above, chap. 2, 9.

Il KANDA, 7 KANDIKA, 12. 317

3. Dancing, singing, and playing musical instru-
ments, let him neither perform himself nor go (to
see or hear it).

4. Sing, however, he may at his pleasure, for
there is another saying, ‘He sings either or he
rejoices in (other people’s) singing.’

5. If everything goes well, he shall not go by
night to another village, and shall not run.

6. He shall avoid looking into a well, climbing up
a tree, gathering fruits, crawling through narrow
openings, bathing naked, jumping over uneven
ground, using harsh language, looking at the sun
while it is rising or setting, and begging. For there
is a Sruti: ‘After he has bathed, he should not
beg, For he who bathes, drives away from himself
begging.’

7. Ifit rains, he shall go without an upper garment,
and shall say, ‘May this, my thunderbolt, drive away
evil.’

8. He shall not look at himself in water.

9. Agatalomnive vipumsine shandham ka nopa-
haset.

10. Let him call a pregnant woman ‘viganya’
(one who will give birth to a child);

11. An ichneumon (nakula), sakula ;

12. A skull (kap4la), 0126812 ;

7, 3. Comp. the similar rule given in the Buddhist Vinaya, Maha-
४६९६० I, 56.

4. Satapatha Brahmaza VI, 1, 1, 15.

5. If no accident happens that makes his going to another
village necessary.

6. The passage of the Sruti quoted is found in the Satapatha
Brahmaza XI, 3, 3, 7. Comp. Vasishé#a XII, 2, 10, 25; Gautama
IX, 32, 61, &c.

12, Gautama IX, 21.

318 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SOUTRA.

13. A rainbow (Indra-dhanu, Indra’s bow), mazi-
dhanu (the jewelled bow).

14. A cow that suckles (her calf) he should not
point out to another (person).

15. Let him not void urine or excrements on a
ploughed field, on uncovered ground, or while rising
up or standing.

16. He shall wipe himself with wood that has
fallen off by itself.

17. He should not wear a dyed garment.

18. He should be fixed in his intentions, protect
everybody's life, and be everybody’s friend, as it
were.

KawoiKA 8.

1. Through a period of three nights (after the
Samavartana) he should keep (the following) ob-
servances.

2. He shall eat no flesh and not drink out of an
earthen vessel.

3. He shall avoid seeing women, Sidras, dead
bodies, black birds, and dogs, and shall not talk to
(such beings).

4. He shall not eat funeral food, or food of a

13. Gautama IX, 22; Vasish/ha XII, 32: 33; Apastamba I, 31, 18.

14. Gautama IX, 23; Apastamba I, 31, 10.

15. Gautama IX, 38; Vasish¢ha XII, 13; Apastamba I, 30, 15.
18, Before easing himself, he shall first cover the ground with
grass or the like.

17. Gautama IX, 4; Apastamba I, 30, 10.

8,1. The words of this Sfitra are repeated from Satapatha
Brahmanza XIV, 1, 1, 28 (only for Aarati it is said here Aaret).

2. Satapatha Brahmama I. 1. § 30.

3. Satapatha Brahmawa 1. 1. § 31. Black birds, according to the
commentators, mean crows.

4. Funeral food is such food as described below, III, 10, 26.

Il KANDA, 9 KAWDIKA, 3. 319

Sidra, or of a woman lying-in (during the period of
her impurity).

5. He shall not void urine or excrements, or spit
out in the sun-shine, and shall not cover himself
against the sun.

6. He shall take warm water for (the rites) in
which water is wanted.

7. Atnight he shall eat by the light (of a lamp or
a fire-brand).

8. Or only speaking the truth (suffices instead of
the other observances).

9. Also a person who has received the diksha (or
inauguration for a Soma sacrifice), should observe
these rules beginning from (that which regards) the
sun-shine (Sftra 5), if he performs the Pravargya
ceremony.

KanoikA 9.

1. Now (follow) the five great sacrifices.

2. Of the Vaisvadeva food he should, after
having sprinkled (water) round (the sacred fire),
make oblations, with the word Svah4 (each time
repeated), to Brahman, to FragApati, to the (deities)
of the house, to Kasyapa, and to Anumati.

3. To the domestic deities (he offers) three

g. The Pravargya ceremony, one of the preparatory ceremonies
of the Soma sacrifice (Indische Studien, X, 363), was not performed
at every Soma sacrifice, but there were certain restrictions regarding
its performance; see Indische Studien, IX, 219 seq.

9,1. The five Mahayagias are, the sacrifice to the gods, the
sacrifice to living Beings, the sacrifice to the Fathers, the sacrifice to
the Brahman, the sacrifice to men. As to the meaning of the five
categories, see Asvalayana-Grthya III, ग. x

2. Compare above, I, 12, 3.

3. Compare above, I, 12, 2.

320 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

(Balis) in the water-pot: to Parganya, to the waters,
to the Earth;

4. To [21714 and Vidhatrz at the two door-
posts ;

5. To the different quarters (of the horizon), to
Vayu and (to the presiding deities) of the quarters ;

6. In the middle three (Balis) to Brahman, to the
Air, to the Sun.

7. To the north of those (he offers Balis) to the
Visve devas and to all the beings ;

8. Further on to Ushas and to the Lord of
beings ;

g. To the south (to the Fathers) with (the words),
‘To the Fathers, Svadha! Adoration!’

10. Having rinsed out the vessel, he should pour
it out towards the north-west with (the words), ‘Con-
sumption! this to thee!’

11. Taking the Bréhmaza’s portion (of the food
which he is going to distribute), he should give it to
a Brahmavza, after he has made him wash himself,
with (the words), ‘Well! (this) to thee!’

12. To (religious) mendicants and to guests they
should apportion (food) as due to them.

13. The persons belonging to the house, the
young and the old, should eat what is due to them ;

14. Afterwards the householder and his wife.

15. Or the householder (should eat) first, because

11. What I have translated ‘the Bréhmava’s portion’ is agra.
See on this word the remark of Nflakaz/Aa quoted by Béhtlingk-
Roth s.v. agrahara : agram brahmanabhoganam, tadartham hriyante
ragadhanat prethakkriyante tes graharah kshetradayak. According
to different commentators and lexicographers one Agra is equal to
four or to sixteen mouthfuls of food.

15. I cannot indicate any more than Professor Stenzler could,
where the passage here quoted occurs in a Brahmaza.

II KAWDA, IO KaAwopIKA, 10. 321

the Sruti says, ‘Therefore the householder should
eat the sweetest food before his guests.’

16. Every day he should sacrifice with the word
svaha. If he has no food (to offer, he should make
his offering) with something else, be it even a piece
of wood (only), to the gods, or be it (only) a water-
pot, to the Fathers and to men.

Kawnotixd 10.

1. Now (follows) the Adhy&yopaékarman (or open-
ing ceremony at the beginning of the annual course
of study).

2. When the herbs appear, (when the moon stands
in conjunction) with Sravaza, on the full-moon day
of the Sravaza month, or on the fifth (Tithi) of
the Srdvaza month under (the Nakshatra) Hasta;

3. Having sacrificed the two Agya portions, he
offers two Agya oblations, (namely,)

4. To the Earth and to Agni, if (he studies) the
Rig-veda,

5. To the Air and to Vayu, if the Yagur-veda,

6. To the Heaven and to the Sun, if the Sama-
veda,

7. To the quarters (of the horizon) and to the
Moon, if the Atharva-veda;

8. (Besides) to the Brahman, to the metres in
every case,

9. And to Pragapati, to the gods, to the ७1115,
to Faith, to Insight, to Sadasaspati, to Anumati.

10. The same (oblations are made) when the

16. Comp. Sankha4yana-Grzhya II, 17, 2; Satapatha Brahmana
XI, 5, 6, 2.

10, 2. Comp. Asvalayana-Grzhya TIL, 5, 2. 3 and my note.

10. On the different vratas (observances) connected with the

{29} ५

322 PARASKARA-GRIHY A-SUTRA.

observances are imposed (on a student) or given up
(by him, after having been kept through the pre-
scribed period of time).

11. With (the verse), ‘Sadasaspati’ (Vag. Samzh.
XXXII, 13) (the teacher) three times (sacrifices)

‘fried grains,

12. All should repeat (that verse after him).

13. After each oblation they should each time put
on the fire three pieces of Udumbara wood, fresh
branches with leaves, anointed with ghee, reciting
the Savitri.

14. And the students (should put wood on the
fire) in the manner stated above.

15. With (the verse), ‘Luck may bring us’ (Vag.
Samh. IX, 16) they should eat the fried grains with-
out chewing them.

16. With the verse, ‘Of Dadhikravan’ (Vag.
Samh. XXIII, 32) they should eat curds.

17. As many pupils as he wishes to obtain, so
many sesamum grains should he sacrifice with a
dice-board, with the SAvitri or with the Anuvaka,
‘ Bright-resplending’ (Vag. Samzh. XVII, 80 seqq.).

18. After they have eaten (the remainder of the
sacrificial food, the teacher) should pronounce the
word Om and then repeat the Savitri three times,
and the beginnings of the Adhy4yas to (the students)
who are seated facing the west ;

study of the Veda, such as the Sukriya-vrata, the Sakvara-vrata, &c.,
comp. especially Sankhayana-Grzhya II, 11. 12 and the notes there.

14. See above, chap. 4.

ry. Akarshaphalakena. RAmakrzshva states that this is a
board of Udumbara wood, of the length of an arm, and of the
shape of a serpent. (See Professor Stenzler’s note.)

18. The following Sftras clearly show that this rule is intended
for students of the Yagur-veda only.

11 KANDA, 11 KANDIKA, 3. 323

19. The beginnings of the sections belonging to
the (different) Azshis, if they are Bahvrzéas (i.e. if
they study the Azg-veda),

20. The Parvans, if they are Khandogas (i.e. if
they study the Sama-veda),

The Siaktas, if they are Atharvans, 4

22. All murmur: ‘ May it be ours in common;
may it bless us in common; may this Brahman be
powerful with us together. Indra knows that through
which, and in which way, no hatred may spring up
amongst us,’

23. Through a period of three nights they should
not study (the Veda).

24. And they should not cut the hair of their .
bodies and their nails.

25. Some say (that this should not be done) till
the Utsarga (i.e. the concluding ceremony of the
annual course of study)

KawpikA 11.

1. If (a strong) wind is blowing, and on the new-
moon day there is an entire interruption of study.

2. If one has partaken of a Sraddha dinner, if a
meteor falls, or distant thundering is heard, or if the
earth quakes, or if fiery apparitions are seen, and
when a new season begins, (the study shall be
interrupted) until the same time next day.

3. If the Utsarga ceremony has been performed,

20. On the division of the SAma-veda into Parvans, comp. Weber,
Indische Literaturgeschichte, znd edition, p. 72.

11, 1. ‘Entire interruption’ means, according to the commen-
tators, that not only the study of the Veda itself, but also that of the
Vedangas, or even all sorts of worldly instruction are forbidden.

3. I have left the words sarvarfipe 4a untranslated. Evidently _

2

324 pARASKARA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

if clouds appear, ...., (it shall be interrupted)
through a period of three nights or till twilight has
thrice passed.

4. After he has eaten, until he has (washed and)
dried his hands; while being in water; at night-
time; at the time of the morning and evening
twilight ; while a dead body or a Kamdala is in the
village.

5. While running, while seeing a person of bad
fame or who has lost his caste, if a miraculous or
happy event happens, as long as (that which occa-
sions the interruption of study) endures.

6. If hoar-frost (lies on the ground), if a musical
instrument is heard, or the cry of a person in pain,
at the border of the village, in a burial ground, or if
a dog, an ass, an owl, a jackal, or a Saman song is
heard, or if a learned person approaches, as long as
(that occasion) endures.

7. If his Guru has died, let him go down into
water (for offering water-oblations) and interrupt
(the study) for ten nights.

8. If one who has performed with him the Tant-
naptra ceremony, or a fellow-pupil (has died), for
three nights.

g. If one who is not his fellow-pupil, (has died,)
for one night.

sarvartipa is identical with the doubtful word savarfipa which twice
occurs in the Sankhayana-Grzhya. See the discussion on that
word in the note on Sankhayana II, 12, ro.

4. On antardivakirtye, comp. Manu V, 85. Gautama XVI, 19.
* 8. The Tanfnaptra is an invocation directed to Taninaptr?
(i.e. the wind) by which the officiating priests and the Yagamana at
a Soma sacrifice pledge their faith to do no harm to each other.
See Indische Studien, X, 362.

II KANDA, 12 KANDIKA, 4. 325

10. After having studied five months and a half,
they should celebrate the Utsarga,

rr. Or six months and a half.

12, They then mutter this श्छ: ‘Ye two young
sages! The relation which has expired among us,
the friendship we dissolve, (turning away) from the
condition of friendship.’

13. After having remained together through a
period of three nights, they separate.

Kawika 12.

1. In (the month) Pausha, under (the Nakshatra)
Rohizi, or at the middle Ash¢aka let them celebrate
the conclusion of the study (of the Veda).

2. Let them go to the brink of water and make
water oblations to the gods, the metres, the Vedas,
the ९251013, the ancient teachers, the Gandharvas,
the other teachers, the year with its divisions, and
to their own ancestors and teachers.

3. After having four times quickly recited the
Savitri, they should say, ‘We have finished.’

4. Interruption (of the study) and (continuation of
the) teaching as stated above,

12. The reading of the Mantra is doubtful. I think it should
stand as Professor Stenzler has printed it, except that I should
propose to correct ए पए वै into ए प्रका (comp. Asvalayana-Srauta VI,
12, 12). It is probable that the gods addressed are the two
Asvins, who are called kavi and yuv4n4 in several passages of
the Vedas.

12, 1. See Asvalayana-Grihya TI, 5, 20; Sankhayana-Grzhya
IV, 6. On the three Ash/akds, see below, III, 3, 1.

4. Sankhayana-Grzhya IV, 5, 17, where the same expression
kshapama for interruptions of the study is used. The words ‘as
above’ refer to chap. 10, 23. 24.

326 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

KawoikA 13.

1. On an auspicious day the harnessing to the
plough. Or under (the Nakshatra) Gyesh¢/A,
(because that rite is) sacred to Indra.

2. To Indra, Parganya, the two Asvins, the
Maruts, Udalakasyapa, Svatik4ri, Sita, and Anumati,
he offers curds, rice grains, perfumes, and fried
grains, and then makes the bullocks eat honey and
ghee.

3. He should put them to the plough with (the
verse), ‘They harness to the ploughs’ (Vag. Sawzh.
XII, 67).

4. With (the verse), ‘ For luck may us the plough-
shares’ (४2९. Samzh. XII, 69) let him plough or
touch the plough-share.

5. Or (he may) not (do so), because (that verse)
has been prescribed for (the erection of) the Agni
(-altar), and the act of sowing stands in connection
(with it).

6. After the front-bullock has been sprinkled
(with water), they then should plough unploughed

ground.

13, 1. Indra is the presiding deity over the constellation Gyeshsha ;
see SAnkhdyana-Grzhya I, 26, 16, &c.

2. The names of the genius Udalakasyapa and of the female
genius Svatikari occur, as far as I know, only here. Bohtlingk-
Roth propose to read Sphatimkari (‘the goddess who gives
abundance’).

5. At the Agni-Zayana ceremony furrows are drawn with the
plough on the Agni-kshetra with the verses Vag. Samh. XII, 69-72.
Afterwards grains of different kinds are sown. See Kiatydyana
XVII, 2,12; 3, 8; Indische Studien, XIII, 244 seq. Thus in the
Srauta ritual the verse Vag. Samh. XII, 69 stands in a connection
which does not conform to the occasion for which it would be used
here.

Il KANDA, 14 KANDIKA, 7. 327

7. He should make oblations of cooked sacrificial
food to the same deities as above, when sowing both
rice and barley, and at the sacrifice to Sita.

8. Then (follows) feeding of the Brahmazas.

Kawolka 14.

1. Now (follows) the Sravaz4 ceremony,

2. On the full-moon day of the Sravaza month.

3. He cooks a mess of sacrificial food, fried grains,
and a cake in one dish, pounds the greater part of
the grains, sacrifices the two Agya portions, and two
(other) Agya oblations (with the following verses) :

4. ‘Beat away, O white one, with thy foot, with
the fore-foot and with the hind-foot, these seven
[children] of Varuza and all (daughters) of the king’s
tribe. Svaha!

5. ‘Within the dominion of the white one, the
Serpent has seen nobody. To the white one, the
son of Vidarva, adoration! 5५418. 1"

6. He makes oblations of the mess of cooked
sacrificial food to Vishzu, to Sravaza, to the full
moon of Srdvava, and to the rainy season,

7. (And oblations) of the grains with (the verse),
‘Accompanied with grains’ (Vag. 5291. XX, 29).

7. “As above’ refers to Stra 2. On the Sit4-yagfia, see below,
chap. 17.

14, 1 seqq. Comp. Sankhayana IV, 5; Asvalayana Il, गः
Gobhila ITI, 7.

4. Asvalayana II, 3, 3; SankhayanalV, 18,1. For Varuzaik
and ragabandhavaif I read Varunth, ragabandhaviZ, Praga
is an interpolation.

g. Asvalayana, loc. cit. One is rather tempted to correct ahir
dadamsa kafikana, but Ramafandra’s Paddhati on Sankhdyana
gives the reading dadarsa, as the Paraskara MSS. do.

328 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

8. He sacrifices flour, over which ghee has been
poured, to the serpents (with the following Mantras):

9. ‘To the lord of the serpents belonging to Agni,
of the yellowish, terrestrial ones, svaha !

‘To the lord of the white serpents belonging to
Vayu, of the aerial ones, svaha!

‘To the lord of the overpowering serpents belong-
ing to Sarya, of the celestial ones, svaha!

10. The (cake) in one dish he offers entirely
(without leaving a remainder for the sacrificer) with
(the formula), ‘To the firm one, the son of the
Earth, svaha !’

11. After he has eaten (of the sacrificial food), he
throws a portion of the flour into a basket, goes out,
besmears an elevated spot outside the hall (with
cowdung), ‘says, while a fire-brand is held (before
him), ‘Do not step between (myself and the fire),’
and without speaking (anything except the Mantras),
he causes the serpents to wash themselves, (pouring
out water for them, with the formulas :)

12. ‘Lord of the serpents belonging to Agni, of
the yellowish, terrestrial ones, wash thyself

‘Lord of the white serpents belonging to Vayu, of
the aerial ones, wash thyself!

‘Lord of the overpowering serpents belonging to
Strya, of the celestial ones, wash thyself!’

13. Each time after the washing has been done,
he offers to the serpents a Bali of flour, picking out

The ceremony with the fire-brand seems to stand in connec-
tion with the rule given by Asvalayana, II, 1, 13, that before the.
sacrificer has ‘given himself in charge’ to the serpents, nobody is
allowed to step between him and the Bali destined for the serpents.
Comp. also below, 5002. 23.

13. I have translated upaghdtam by ‘picking out.’ On the full

Il KANDA, 14 KANDIKA, 18. ` 329

(portions of it) with (the spoon called) Darvi (with
the formulas) :

14. ‘Lord of the serpents belonging to Agni, of
the yellowish, terrestrial ones, this is thy Bali!

‘Lord of the white serpents belonging to Vayu, of
the aerial ones, this is thy Bali!

‘Lord of the overpowering serpents belonging to
50192, of the celestial ones, this is thy Bali!’

15. After he has made them wash themselves
as above, he combs them with combs (with the
formulas) :

16. ‘Lord of the serpents belonging to Agni, of
the yellowish, terrestrial ones, comb thyself !

‘Lord of the white serpents belonging to Vayu, of
the aerial ones, comb thyself !

‘Lord of the overpowering serpents belonging to
Sarya, of the celestial ones, comb thyself!’

17. (He offers) collyrium, ointment, and garlands
with (the same formulas), putting at their end, re-
spectively, the words, ‘Salve thy eyes!’ ‘ Anoint
thyself!’ ‘Put on garlands!’

18. The remainder of the flour he pours out on
the elevated spot (mentioned in Sftra 11), pours
water on it out of a water-pot, and worships the

technical meaning of the term, which implies the omission of the
upastarama and abhigharaza, see Bloomfield’s note on Grzhya-sam-
graha I, 177 (Zeitschrift der deutschen Morgenlandischen Gesell-
schaft, XXXV, 568).

15. The words ‘as above’ refer to Sfttra rz. Pralikhati, which
I have translated ‘he combs them,’ is the same act for which
Sankhayana (IV, 15, 7) says, phavena fesh/ayati. I think Professor
Stenzler is wrong in translating : Er scharrt (das Meh!) mit Kammen
zusammen. Gayarama says: pralekhanam fa krameza pratiman-
tram balikazdfiyanam kankatai#. tani 4a vaikankatiydni pradesa-
matrazy ekatodantani kash/Aani bhavanti.

339 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

serpents with the three (verses), ‘Adoration be to
the serpents’ (Vag. Samh. XIII, 6 seqq.).

1g. At that distance in which he wishes the ser-
pents not to approach (the house), he should three
times walk round the house, sprinkling an uninter-
rupted stream of water round it, with the two (verses),
‘Beat away, O white one, with thy foot’ (पऽ 4
and 5).

20. He gives away the (spoon called) Darvi (Satra
13) and-the basket (Sdtra 11), having washed and
warmed them.

21. Near the door (of the house) they clean them-
selves with the three (verses), ‘O waters, ye are’
(Vag. Samh. XI, 50 seqq.).

22. Having put away that remainder of flour in a
hidden place, he should from that time daily till the
Agrahayani, after sunset, when he has performed
the service to the fire, offer to the serpents a Bali of
flour, picking out (portions of it) with the Darvi
(spoon).

23. When he is offering (the Bali), let no one step
between (the sacrificer and the Bali).

24. With the Darvi (spoon) he rinses his mouth.
Having washed it, he puts it away.

20. According to the commentators he gives these things to the
man who holds the fire-brand (Sftra rr).

22. The Agrahayani is the full-moon day of Margasirsha, on
which the Pratyavarohana ceremony is celebrated. See below, III, 2 ;
Weber, die vedischen Nachrichten von den Naxatra, II, 332. The
expression darvyopaghatam is the same that has occurred above
in Sitra 13.

23. Comp. Asvalayana-Grzhya II, 1, 13, and see above,
Stra 11.

24. Prakshalya seems to me to refer to the Darvt; see Sfttra 20.

Il KANDA, 15 KAWDIKA, 4. 331

25. They eat the (rice) grains which must not
form one coherent mass.
26. Then (follows) the feeding of the Braéhmamas.

Kawo1kA 15.

1. On the full-moon day of Praush‘Aapada the
sacrifice to Indra.

2. Having cooked milk-rice for Indra and cakes
and having put cakes round (the fire), he sacrifices
the two Agya portions and Agya oblations to Indra,
to Indrazi, to Aga Ekapad, to Ahi Budhnya, and to
the Prosh¢hapadas.

3. After he has eaten (his portion of the sacri-
ficial food), he offers a Bali to the Maruts. For the
Sruti says, ‘The Maruts eat what is not-sacrificed.’

4. (This Bali he offers) in Asvattha leaves, be-
cause it is said, ‘The Maruts stood in the Asvattha
tree.’

25. Asamsyfitah, Comp. Béhtlingk-Roth s.v. samesiv.

15, 2. After these Agya oblations follows the chief oblation of the
whole sacrifice, the oblation of milk-rice to Indra. In one of
Professor Stenzler’s MSS. there is a special Sitra inserted after
50072. 2, ‘Of the cooked food he makes an oblation with (the
formula), “To Indra svaha.”’ I do not, however, think it right to
receive this Satra into the text, as the other MSS. do not support
it, and the commentators did not find it in the text which they read.

3. Professor Stenzler’s translation, ‘ Die Maruts essen kein Opfer,’
seems to me not quite exact. I should prefer to say, ‘Die Maruts
essen Nicht-Opfer.’ This passage, taken from Satapatha Brahmana
IV, 5, 2, 16, is quoted as supporting the rule that a Bali offering
should be made to the Maruts; for in the technical language the
term ahuta is applied to Bali offerings (Saénkhdyana-Grzhya I,
10, 7, hutoxgnihotrahomena, ahuto balikarmava).

4. When Indra called them to his help against Vrztra. Satapatha
Brahmaza IV, 3, 3, 6

॥

PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

(+>
Ge

5. (He offers it} with (the texts), ‘Brilliantly re-
splendent’ (VAaz. Samzh. XVIT, 80-85), Mantra by
Mantra,

6. And with the (Mantra called) Vimukha.

7. (This Mantra he repeats only) in his mind.

8. For the Sruti says, ‘ These are their names,’

9. He murmurs, ‘To Indra the divine’ (Vag.
Samh. XVII, 86). : :

10. Then (follows) the feeding of the Brahmamas.

[९ 47271९4 16.

1. On the full-moon day of Asvayuga the (offer-
ings of) Przshatakas (are made).

2. Having cooked milk-rice for Indra he sacrifices
it, mixed with curds, honey, and ghee, to Indra, In-
drani, the two Asvins, the full moon of Asvayuga,
and to the autumn,

3. After he has eaten (his portion of the sacrificial
food), he sacrifices with his joined hands a Prisha-
taka prepared with curds, with the words, ‘May
what is deficient be made full to me; may what is
full not decay tome. Svaha!’

4. The inmates of the house look at the mix-
ture of curds, honey, and ghee, with the Anuvaka,

5. This Sutra is identical with the last words of Katy. XVIII, 4, 23.

6. This is the first part of Vag. Samh. XVII, 86. .

8. Satapatha Brahmava IX, 3, 1, 26. There it is said that
sukragyotis (‘brilliantly resplendent’) &c. (the words used in Vag.
Samh. XVII, 80) are names of the Maruts.

9. This Sitra is identical with Katy. XVIII, 4, 25.

16, 1. Prishdtaka means a mixture of curds and butter. Comp.
Sankhayana IV, 16, 3; Asvalayana Il, 2, 3; Grehya-samgraha-
parisishéa II, 59.

3. Asvalayana II, 2, 3.

Il KANDA, 17 KANDIKA, 6, 333

‘May Indra come hither’ (Vag. Samh. XX, 47
seqq.).

5. They let the calves join their mothers that
night and the Agrahayawi night.

6. Then (follows) the feeding of the Brahmazas.

Kawplka 17.

1. Now (follows) the sacrifice to Sita.

2. Wherever he sacrifices, be it (on a field) of rice
or of barley, of that grain he should prepare a mess
of cooked food.

3. One who has sacrificed may, if he likes, pre-
pare elsewhere also a mess of cooked food, either of
rice or of barley.

4. (There should be) no doubt (as to whether rice
or barley is to be taken), as a rule thereon has been
stated above.

5. If it is impossible (to take one of the two
species of corn), (that) is excluded.

6. To the east or to the north of the field, on a

5. Sdnkhayana IV, 16, 4.

17, 1. The goddess Sita is, as her name indicates, the rustic
deity of the furrow. ५

3. Perhaps the meaning is that a person who has already once
performed the Sita-yagiia on the field, is allowed, when repeating
the sacrifice another time, to celebrate it elsewhere, and to choose
at his will between rice and barley.

4. A rule has been given in the Srauta-siitra (Kity. I, 9, 1:
“Rice or barley, if a Havis [is prescribed] ') which shows that it is
indifferent whether rice or barley is taken. Thus the sacrificer is
free to elect the one or the other. At least this is the traditional
meaning of this Sitra. But possibly we had better understand it
otherwise. The sacrificer should offer, according to Sftra 3, rice
or barley. Whether he has to take the one or the other, there can
be no doubt, as the rule given above (ऽपय 2) shows that rice
should be cooked, if the ceremony is performed for a rice-field,
and barley, if for a barley-field,

334 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

clean spot that has been ploughed, so that the crop
be not damaged,

7. Or in the village, because (there) both (rice and
barley) are united, and because no obstacle is there.

8. Where he intends to cook (the sacrificial food),
he establishes the fire on a place that has been
smeared (with cowdung), which is elevated, and
which has been sprinkled (with water), strews (round
the fire) Darbha grass mixed with (stalks of) that
(sort of corn to which the sacrifice refers), sacrifices
the two Agya portions and Agya oblations (with the
following Mantras) :

9. ‘For whom earth and heaven, the intermediate
points and the chief points (of the horizon) are veiled
with light, that Indra I invoke here. May his
weapons be friendly towards us. Svaha!

‘ Whatsoever it be that I wish for at this sacrifice,
O killer of Vzztra, may all that be fulfilled to me,
and may I live a hundred autumns. Svaha!

‘May success, prosperity, earth, rain, eminence,
excellence, luck here protect the creatures. Svaha!

‘In whose substance dwells the prosperity of all
Vedic and worldly works, Indra’s wife Sita I invoke.
May she not abandon me in whatever work I do.
Svaha !

‘Her, who rich in horses, rich in cows, rich in
delight indefatigably supports living beings, Urvara
(i.e. the field) who is wreathed with threshing-floors,
I invoke at this sacrifice, the frm One. May she
not abandon me. Svaha!’

10. He makes oblations of the cooked sacrificial
food to Sita, Yaga (the goddess of sacrifice), Sama
(the goddess of zealous devotion), Bhiti (the goddess
of welfare).

Il KANDA, 17 KANDIKA, 16. 335

11. Some say that the giving (of the sacrificial
food to the deities) accompanies the Mantras.

12, But this is excluded, as the Sruti says, ‘The
giving (of the oblation to the deity) accompanies the
word Svaha.’

13. On the Kusa grass which is left over from the
strewing (of grass round the fire), he offers a Bali to
the protecting demons of the furrow with (the Man-
tra), ‘They who are sitting towards the east with
strong bows and quivers, may they protect thee
from the east, and be vigilant and not abandon thee.
To them I bring adoration, and I offer this Bali to
them.’

14. Then to the south with (the Mantra), ‘They
who are sitting towards the south, not winking the
eyes, wearing armour, may they protect thee from
the south, and be vigilant and not abandon thee.
To them I bring adoration, and I offer this Bali to
them.’

15. Then to the west with (the Mantra), ‘The
powerful ones, the excellent ones, prosperity, earth,
Parshwzi, Sunamkuri, may they protect thee from
the west, and be vigilant and not abandon thee.
To them I bring adoration, and I offer this Bali to
them.’

16. Then to the north with (the Mantra), ‘The
fearful ones, like to Vayu in speed, may they protect

12. The quotation has not been as yet identified in the अपति
itself, but the words quoted are found in Katy.-Sraut. I, 2, 7.

14. Some words in the beginning of the Mantra are lost. We
should probably write: atha dakshizatah. ye dakshizatosnimishaz...
varmiza 25216, &c. Of course it is impossible, to say which is the
word that is wanting before (or perhaps after) varminak.

15. Parshwz, which means ‘heel,’ stands here, of course, as the
name of a protecting demon.

336 PARASKARA-GRIHY A-SOTRA.

thee from the north, on the field, on the threshing-
floor, in the house, on the way, and be vigilant and
not abandon thee. To them I bring adoration, and I
offer this Bali to them.’

17. Of another (sort of food) as the chief (food
used at this sacrifice), and with the remainder of
Agya, he distributes Balis as above.

18, And the women should make accompanying
oblations, because such is the custom.

19. When the ceremony is finished, he should
feed the Brahmawas. He should feed the Brah-

mazas.

End of the Second {< 21:22.

17. See above, chap. 13, 2.

1 KANDA, I KANDIKA, 4. 337

KaAwoa III, (^ पणा 1.

1. (Now shall be explained) the partaking of the
first-fruits (of the harvest), of a person who has not
set up the (sacred Srauta) fires.

2. He cooks a mess of fresh sacrificial food, sacri-
fices the two Agya portions, and two Agya oblations,
(with the formulas),

“To the hundredfold armed, hundredfold valiant,
hundredfold blissful one, the vanquisher of enemies .
—he who may create a hundred autumns for us,
Indra,—may he lead us across (the gulf of) mis-
fortune. 5४872

‘The four paths that go between heaven and
earth, trodden by the gods—of these (paths) lead us
to that which may bring us freedom from decay and
decline, O all ye gods. Svaha!’

3. Having made oblations of the mess of cooked
food to the Agrayawa deities, he makes another
oblation to (Agni) Svishfakyzt with (the verse),
‘Agni, make this (sacrifice) full, that it may be well
offered. And may the god destroy all hostile
powers. Come hither, showing us a good path.
Bestow on us long life, full of splendour and free
from decay. Svaha!’

4. He then eats (of the fresh fruits with the

1, 1. The corresponding ceremony of the Srauta ritual is treated
of in Katy. IV, 6.

2. A fresh Sthalipaka means probably a Sthalipaka prepared from
the fresh grain of the new harvest.

3. The deities of the Agrayana ceremony, which occupies in the
Srauta ritual the place corresponding to the rite described here,
are Indra and Agni, the Visve devas, Heaven and Earth.

[29] ट

338 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

verses), ‘May Agni eat first, for he knows how the
Havis (is fit for sacrifice) ; may he, the friend of all
human tribes, make the herbs blessed to us.

‘ From the good you have led us to the better, ye
gods! Through thee, the nourishment, may we
obtain thee. Thus enter into us, O potion, bringing
refreshment, for the good of our children and of our-
selves, and pleasant.’

5. Or with the (verse) sacred to Annapati (the
Lord of food).

6. For barley, however, (he uses the Mantra),
‘This barley, mixed with honey, they have ploughed
through Sarasvati under Manu. Indra was lord of
the plough, the hundredfold wise one; ploughers
were the Maruts, the exuberant givers.’

7. Then (follows) the feeding of the Brahmazas.

{< 47211९4 2.

1. On the full-moon day of Margasirsha the
Agrahayami ceremony (is performed).

2. He cooks a mess of sacrificial food, sacrifices
two Agya oblations as at the Sravava sacrifice, and
other oblations with (the following verses) :

‘The night whom men welcome like a cow that
comes to them, (the night) which is the consort of

the year, may that (night) be auspicious to us.
Svaha !

5. The Annapatiya verse is Vag. Samh. XI, 83.

6. Comp. manav adhi, Rig-veda VIII, 72, 2.

2, 2. The two oblations belonging to the Sravaz4 ceremony are
those stated above, II, 14, 4. 5.

2. The first verses in which the Agrah4yant night is called the
consort of the year, or the image of the year, occur elsewhere with
reference to the Ekash/aka night. See Atharva-veda III, 10; Taitt.

Ill KANDA, 2 KANDIKA, 6. 339

‘The night which is the image of the year, that
weworship. May I reach old age, imparting strength
to my offspring. Svahé!

“To the Samvatsara, to the Parivatsara, to the
Idavatsara, to the Idvatsara, to the Vatsara bring
ye great adoration. May we, undecayed, unbeaten,
long enjoy the favour of these (years) which are
worthy of sacrifices. Svaha!

‘May summer, winter and spring, the rains be
friendly, and may autumn be free of danger to us.
In the safe protection of these seasons may we
dwell, (and) may (they) last (to us) through a hundred
years. Svaha!’

3. He makes oblations of the cooked food to Soma,
to (the Nakshatra) Mvzgasiras, to, the full moon of
Margasirsha, and to the winter.

4. After he has eaten (of the sacrificial food), he
throws the remainder of the flour into a basket, (and
then follow the same rites that have been stated
above) from (the sacrificer’s) going out down to their
cleaning themselves.

5. After the cleaning he says, ‘The Bali offering
is finished.’

6. After they have spread out to the west of
the fire a layer (of straw) and a garment that has

Samhita V, 7, 2, 1. See also below, Paraskara III, 3, 5. Samvat-
sara, Parivatsara, Idavatsara, &c. are terms designating the different
years of the quinquennial period of the Yuga. See Zimmer, Altin-
disches Leben, 369, 370.

4. See above, II, 14, 11-21 (not 19-21 as indicated by Professor
Stenzler).

6. ‘Redescending’ means that they do not sleep any longer on
high bedsteads, which they did from the Sravant day till the
Agrahdyani, on account of the danger from the snakes, but on the
ground. See the notes on Sankh.-Grzhya IV, 15, 22; 17, 1.

Z2

340 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

not yet been washed, they ‘redescend,’ having bathed,
wearing garments which have not yet been washed:
the master (of the house) southward, his wife to the
“north (of her husband, and then the other persons
belonging to the house) so that each younger one
lies more to the north.

7. Having caused the Brahman to sit down south-
ward, and having placed to the north a water-pot, a
Sami branch, an earth-clod taken out of a furrow,
and a stone, he murmurs, looking at the fire: ‘This
Agni is most valiant, he is most blessed, the best
giver of a thousand boons, highly powerful. May
he establish us both in the highest place.’

8. To the west of the fire he joins his hands (and
holds them) towards the east.

g. With the three (verses), ‘The divine ship’
(Vag. 92.41. X XI, 6-8) they ascend the layer (of
straw).

10. He addresses the Brahman: ‘ Brahman, we
will redescend.’

11. The Brahman having given his permission,
they redescend with (the words), ‘ Life, fame, glory,
strength, enjoyment of food, offspring !’

12, Those who have received the initiation mur-
mur, ‘May a good winter, a good spring, a good
summer be bestowed on us. Blessed may be to us
the rains; may the autumns be blessed to us.’

13. With (the verse), ‘Be soft to us, O earth’
(Vag. Samh. XXXV, 21), they lie down on their
right sides, their heads turned towards the east.

10, 11. See the note on § 6;
2. On upeta, which means a person for whom the Upanayana
has been performed, see my note, Sankhayana-Grvhya II, 1, 1.

II KANDA, 3 KANDIKA, 5. 341

14. They arise with (the verse), ‘Up! with life,
with blessed life. Up! with Parganya’s eye, with
the seven spaces of the earth.’

15. This (they repeat) two other times, with the
Brahman’s permission.

16. Let them sleep on the ground four months
(after the Pratyavarohaza), or as long as they like.

KanpikA 8.

1. After the Agrahdyazi (full moon follow) the
three ^ 51121585.

2. (The Ash¢aké is) sacred to Indra, to the Visve
devas, to Pragdpati, and to the Fathers.

3. (The oblations are made) with cakes, flesh,
and vegetables, according to the order (of the three
Ash/¢akas).

4. The first Ash¢ak (is celebrated) on the eighth
day of the fortnight

5. Having cooked a mess of sacrificial food and
having sacrificed the two Agya portions, he sacrifices

ya oblations with (the texts) :

(a) ‘Thirty sisters go to the appointed place,

14. The verse occurs, with a few differences, in the Kava Sakha
of the Vag. Samhita, II, 7,

3, 1. On the Ash/akas, celebrated on the eighth days of the three
dark fortnights following after the Agrahdyawt full moon, see
Sankhayana III, 12 seqq.; Asvalayana H, 4; Gobhila III, 10

2. As there are four deities named, I think it probable that they
are referred to all Ash/akas indiscriminately ; comp. Asvalayana II
4, 12, Thus in the Mantras prescribed for the first Ash/aka
(50४85 5 and 6), Indra, the Visve devas, and Pragdpati are named ;
to the Fathers belongs the Anvash/akya ceremony.

3. With regard to the order of these substances the Grzhya texts
differ.

5. Comp. Taitt. Samhita IV, 3, 11; Atharva-veda III, 10.

(a) The thirty sisters seem to be the days of the month. As to

342 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

putting on the same badge. They spread out the
seasons, the knowing sages; having the metres in
their midst they walk around, the brilliant ones.
Svaha :

(b) ‘ The shining one clothes herself with clouds,
with the ways of the sun, the divine night: mani-
fold animals which are born, look about in this
mother’s lap. Svaha!

(c) ‘The Ekash/aka, devoting herself to austerities,
has given birth toa child, to the majesty of Indra.
Through him the gods have conquered the hostile
tribes; he became the killer of the Asuras through
his (divine) powers. Svaha!

(d) ‘You have made me who am not the younger
(sister), the younger; speaking the truth I desire
this: may I be in his (i.e. the sacrificer’s ?) favour,
as you are; may none of you supplant the other in
her work.

(€) ‘In my favour dwelt the omniscient one; he
has found a firm standing; he has got a footing.
May I be in his (i.e. the sacrificer’s ?) favour, as you
are; may none of you supplant the other in her
work.

(f) ‘On the five dawns follows the fivefold
milking ; on the cow with the five names, the five
seasons. The five regions (of the sky) are estab-

madhyeféAandas, comp. Taitt. Samh. loc. cit. § 1: 2handasvatt
ushasa pepisine; ई 2: £atushfomo abhavad ya turfyd yagfasya
pakshav rshayo bhavanti, g4yatrimz trish/ubham gagatim anushfu-
bham brthad arkam yuvigana’ suvar 4sbharann idam.

(d) Probably one Ash/ak4 addresses the others, her sisters, as
Gayarama explains this verse.

(f) The explanation by which the ‘fivefold milking’ is referred
to what is called in Taitt. Brahmama II, 2, 9, ‘the milkings of
Pragapati,’ seems to me more than doubtful, for ‘the milkings

Ill KANDA, 3 KANDIKA, 6. 343

lished through the fifteenfold (Stoma); with one
common face (they look over) the one world.
Svaha!

(g) ‘She who shone forth as the first, is the child
of truth. One (of them) bears the majesty of the
waters ; one wanders in the courses of the sun; one
(in those) of the heat; Savityz shall govern one.
Svahé

(h) ‘She who shone forth as the first has become
a cow in Yama’s realm. Give us milk, thou who
art rich in milk, year by year. Svaha!

(i) ‘She, the owner of bright bulls, has come to
us with clouds and with light, she who has all shapes,
the motley one, whose banner is fire. Carrying on
the common work, leading us to old age, come to us
thou who art exempt from old age, Ushas! Svaha!

(k) ‘ The consort of the seasons, the first one has
come to us, the leader of days, the producer of off-
spring. Being one, thou shinest manifold, Ushas.
Being free from old age, thou leadest to old age
everything else. Svaha!’

6. He makes offerings of the mess of cooked food
with (the verses) :

‘May the earth be peaceful, the air friendly to us;

of Pragapati’ are only four: viz. the dark night, the moonlight,
the twilight, and the day.

(i) Sukra-rzshabha cannot be translated, as Professor Stenzler
does, ‘die schénste unter den Lichtern’ (Madhava: sukreshu nak-
shatradishu sresh/Aa), for this meaning of rzshabha occurs only in
later texts. The word is a Bahuvrihi compound, as the Petersburg
Dictionary explains it.

6. In the first verse I have omitted vyasnavai, which impedes
the construction and violates the metre. The word has found its
way into the text, no doubt, in consequence of the phrase dirgham
ayur vyasnavai occurring in chap. 2, 2. In the second verse

344 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

may the heavens give us bliss and safety. May the
points (of the horizon), the intermediate points,
the upper points give us bliss, and may day and
night create long life for us. Sv4ha!

‘May the waters, the rays protect us from all
sides; may the creator, may the ocean turn away
evil. The present and the future, may all be safe
for me. Protected by Brahman, may I be well
guarded. Svaha!

May all Adityas and the divine Vasus, may the
Rudras and Maruts be our protectors. May Praga-
pati, the highest lord, bestow on us vigour, offspring,
immortality, long life. Svaha!’

7. And with (the formula), ‘To the Ashéaka
Svaha !’

8. The middle Ashéaké (is celebrated) with (the
sacrifice of) a cow

9. He sacrifices the omentum of that (cow) with
(the verse), ‘Carry the omentum, O Gatavedas, to
the fathers’ (V4g. Samh. XX XV, 20).

10. On the day following each (Ash/aka), the
Anvash/éaka day, (he brings a sacrifice) with the left
ribs and the left thigh, in an enclosure, according to
(the ritual of) the Pixdapitrzyagia.

11. Also to the female (ancestors he makes Pizda
offerings) and pours (for them) strong liquor and water
oblations into pits, and (offers) collyrium, salves, and
garlands.

12. (He may also make oblations), if he likes, to
the teacher and to the pupils who have no children.

akrtad is corrupt. I have translated abhayam; comp. Asvala-
yana II, 4, 14. In the third verse I have left out mayi, as
Professor Stenzler has done in his translation.

ir KANDA, 4 KANDIKA, 4. 345

13. And in the middle of the rainy season (there
is) a fourth Ash¢aka on which vegetables are offered.

Kawoiké 4.

1. Now the building of the house.

2. Let him have his house built on an auspicious
day.

3. Into the pits (in which the posts shall be
erected) he pours an oblation with (the words), ‘To
the steady one, the earth-demon, svaha!’

4. He erects the post.

‘This navel of the world I set up, a stream of
wealth, promoting wealth. Here I erect a firm
house ; may it stand in peace, dropping ghee.

‘Rich in horses and cows, rich in delight be set
up, for the sake of great happiness. To thee may
the young calf cry, to thee the lowing cows, the milk-
cows.

‘To thee (may) the young child (go), to thee the
calf with its companions, to thee the cup of Parisrut,
to thee (may they go) with pots of curds.

13. Ihave stated in the note on Sankhayana III, 13, ए my reasons
for believing that the true reading of this Sitra is not madhya-
varshe (in the middle of the rainy season), but maghyavarshe
(the festival celebrated during the rainy season under the Nakshatra
Maghas). There are no express rules given with regard to the
third Ash/aké, but I think we should understand this Stra as
involving a statement on that Ash/aka: (The third Ash/aka) and
the fourth, on the MAghyavarsha day, are Sakash/akas (Ash/akas
on which vegetables are offered). Sankhd4yana (Grchya II, 13, ए)
declares that the ritual of the fourth Ash/aka is identical with that
of the second.

4, 3. Asvalayana-Grehya Il, 8, 15.

4. On gagadaif# saha (in the third verse) see my note on
Sankhayana-Grshya III, 2, 9.

346 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

‘The consort of Peace, the great one, beautifully
attired—bestow on us, O blessed one, wealth and
manly power, which may be rich in horses and cows,
full of sap like a tree’s leaf. May our wealth in-
crease here, clothing itself with prospering ’—with
(these four Mantras) he approaches the four (posts).

5. Having established the fire inside (the house),
having made the Brahman sit down towards the
south, having placed a water-pot to the north,
and cooked a mess of sacrificial food, he goes out
(of the house), and standing near the door, he
addresses the Brahman, ‘Brahman, I enter (the
house) !’

6. When the Brahman has given his consent, he
enters with (the formula), ‘To right I advance, to
luck I advance!’

7. Having prepared Agya and sacrificed two
Agya oblations with (the two parts of the Mantra),
‘Here is joy’ (Vag. Sawh. VIII, 51 a), he sacrifices
other oblations with (the verses) :

(a) ‘ Vastoshpati! Receive us (into thy protec-
tion); give us good entering and drive away from
us evil. For what we ask thee, with that favour us:
be a saviour to us, to men and animals. Svaha!

(b) ‘VAstoshpati! Be our furtherer; make our
wealth increase in cows and horses, O Indu (i.e.
Soma). Free from decay may we dwell in thy
friendship ; give us thy favour, as a father to his
sons. Svaha!

(c) ‘Vastoshpati! Let us be in a fellowship with
thee, which may be valiant, joyful, and well pro-
ceeding. Protect our wishes when we rest and

7. Rig-veda VIL, 54; 55: I.

lI KANDA, 4 KANDIKA, 9. 347

when we do our work. Protect us always, ye
(gods), and give us welfare. Svaha!

(d) ‘ Driving away calamity, VAstoshpati, assum-
ing all shapes, be a kind friend to us. Svaha!’

8. He makes offerings of the mess of cooked
food (with the following Mantras) :

(2) ‘Agni, Indra, Brvzhaspati, the Visve devas I
invoke, Sarasvati and ४8९1. Give me a dwelling-
place, ye vigorous ones. Svaha!

(b) ‘To all the divine hosts of serpents, to the
Himavat, the Sudarsana (mountain), and the Vasus,
Rudras, Adityas, {sana with his companions, to all
these I apply. Give me a dwelling-place, ye vigorous
ones. Svaha!

(c) ‘To forenoon and afternoon both together with
noon, to evening and midnight, to the goddess of
dawn with her wide path, to all these I apply.
Give me a dwelling-place, ye vigorous ones. 58118]

(d) ‘To the Creator and the Changer, to Visva-
karman, to the herbs and trees, to all these I apply.
Give me a dwelling-place, ye vigorous ones. Svaha!

€) ‘To Dhatrd and Vidhatz7, and to the Lord of
treasures together with them, to all these I apply.
Give me a dwelling-place, ye vigorous ones. Svaha!

(f) ‘As a lucky, a happy (place), give me this
dwelling-place, Brahman and Prag4pati, and all
deities. Svaha!’

9. After he has partaken (of the sacrificial food),
let him put into a brass vessel the different things
which he has brought together, Udumbara leaves
with strong liquor, green turf, cowdung, curds,

8a. Vagt is, as the name shows, the goddess of quick vigour.
Gayarama explains Vagi, a name of Sita, as a personification of food.
b. Comp. Asvalayana II, 1, 14. Op gagada, comp. above, § 4.

348 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

honey, ghee, Kusa grass, and barley, and let him
besprinkle the seats and shrines (for the images of
the gods).

10. He touches (the wall and the posts) at their
eastern juncture with (the words), ‘May luck and
glory protect thee at thy eastern juncture.’

11. He touches (them) at their southern juncture
with (the words), ‘May sacrifice and sacrificial fee
protect thee at thy southern juncture.’

12. He touches (them) at their western juncture
with (the words), ‘May food and the Brahmaza pro-
tect thee at thy western juncture.’

13. He touches (them) at their northern juncture
with (the words), ‘May vigour and delight protect
thee at thy northern juncture.’ र

14. He then goes out (of the house) and worships
the quarters (of the horizon, the east) with (the
formulas), ‘May Keta (i.e. will?) and Suketé (i.e.
good-will ?) protect me from the east.

‘Agni is Keta; the Sun is Suketa: to them I
apply; to them be adoration; may they protect me
from the east.’

15. Then to the south: ‘ May that which protects
and that which guards, protect me from the south.

‘The Day is that which protects; the Night is
that which guards; to them I apply; to them be
adoration; may they protect me from the south.’

16. Then to the west: ‘May the shining one
and the waking one protect me from the west.

‘Food is the shining one; Breath is the waking
one; to them I apply; to them be adoration; may
they protect me from the west.’

17. Then to the north: ‘May the sleepless one and
the not-slumbering one protect me from the north.

Ill KANDA, 5 KAWDIKA, 3. 349

‘The Moon is the sleepless one; the Wind is the
not-slumbering one; to them I apply; to them be
adoration; may they protect me from the north.’

18. When (the house) is finished, he enters it
with (the formulas),

‘Law, the chief post! Fortune, the pinnacle!
Day and night, the two door-boards!

‘Indra’s house is wealthy, protecting; that I enter
with my children, with my cattle, with everything
that is mine.

‘Hither is called the whole number (of relatives),
the friends whose coming is good. Thus (I enter)
thee, O house. May our dwellings be full of in-
violable heroes from all sides!’

19. Then (follows) feeding of the Brahmawzas.

KanpikA 5.

1. Now (follows) the putting up of the water-
barrel.

2. To the north-east he digs a pit like (the pit for)
a sacrificial post, strews into it Kusa grass, fried
grains, fruits of the soap-tree, and other auspicious
things, and therein he establishes the water-barrel
with (the words), ‘The sea art thou.’

3. He pours water into it with (the verse), ‘Ye

18. Comp. Sankhayana-Grshya III, 3, 7 seq.; chap. 4,10. The
comparison of Sankhayana shows that we have to divide saha
pragaya pasubhif, saha yan me [तद्वत asty, upahfitah, &c. SAdhu-
samvritah (if the reading is correct) seems to me to be the nom.
plur. of sddhusazvrzt. I understand this to be a Bahuvrihi com-
pound, in which samvrvit means ‘the approaching.’ In Atharva-
veda VII, 60, 4 we have sakhayak svadusammudaf. After sale
a verb meaning ‘I enter,’ or something like that, has been lost.

5, 3. Rig-veda X, 30, 12.

350 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

waters, rich in wealth, ye possess goods. Ye bring
us good insight and immortality. Ye are the rulers
over wealth and blessed offspring. May Sarasvatt
give strength to him who praises her !’—

4. And with the three (verses), ‘O waters, ye are’
(Vag. Samhita XI, 50 seqq.).

5. Then (follows) feeding of the Brahmamzas.

KawpikA 6.

1. Now the cure for headache.

2. Having moistened his hands, he passes them
over his eye-brows with (the verse), ‘From the eyes,
from the ears, from the whiskers, from the chin,
from the forehead, I drive away this disease of the
head.’ y

3. If (only) one side (of the head aches, he recites
the verse), ‘Cleaver! Thou with the disfigured
eyes! White-wing! Renowned one! And thou
with the various-coloured wing! Let his head not
ache.’

4. Then it will get better.

{९4217६4 7.

1. (Now will be declared) the making water round
about a servant who is disposed to run away.

2. While (the servant) is sleeping, he should dis-
charge his urine into the horn of a living animal, and
should three times walk round him, turning his left
side towards him, and sprinkle (the urine) round him,

7,1. UtGla-parimehad. Itis probable that utila, as meaning
a slave who habitually runs away, is connected with the use of that
word as the name of a tribe in the north-west of India,

tr KAwpA, 8 कणाद, 3. 351

with (the verse), ‘ From the mountain (on which thou
art born), from thy mother, from thy sister, from thy
parents and thy brothers, from thy friends I sever
thee.

‘Run-away servant, I have made water round thee.
Having been watered round, where wilt thou go?’

3. Should he run away (nevertheless, his master)
should establish a fire that has been taken from a
wood that is on fire, and should sacrifice (in that
fire) Kusa plates (used for protecting the hands
when holding a hot sacrificial pan) that have been
anointed with ghee, with (the formula), ‘May the
stumbler stumble round thee, .... may he tie thee
with Indra’s fetter, loosen thee for me, and may he
lead another one up (to me).’

4. Then he will quietly remain (in his master’s
house).

Kanpika 8.

1. The spit-ox (sacrificed to Rudra).

2. It procures (to the sacrificer) heavenly rewards,
cattle, sons, wealth, renown, long life.

3. Having taken the sacred domestic fire to the

3. Ukha ydbhydm grzhyate tav ixdvau. Comm. on Katydyana,
Sraut. XVI, 4, 2.

In the Mantra I propose to read, pari tva hvalano, &c. Nivrz-
ttendravirudhaZ seems to be corrupt; it seems to be a compound
of nivrrtta, a second member which is doubtful, and virudh (the
plant). The meaning may have been ‘ giving it up to consume the
plants.’

4. This Sfitra is word for word identical with chap. 6, 4.

8, 1. Asvalayana-Grzhya IV, 8.

2. Asvalayana, loc. cit. § 35.

3. The ‘outspreading’ is the establishing of the three sacred
Srauta fires, so that the Grzhya fire is considered as the Garhapatya,
and the Ahavaniya and Dakshiv4gni are taken from it.

352 PARASKARA-GRIHY A-SUTRA,

forest, and having performed the ‘ outspreading,’ he
should sacrifice the animal to Rudra. ,

4. One that is not gelded.

5. Or (it may be) a cow, on account of the
designation.

6. Having cooked the omentum, a mess of sacri-
ficial food, and the portions cut off (of the victim),
he sacrifices the omentum to Rudra, the fat to the
Air, and the cut-off portions together with the mess
of cooked food to Agni, Rudra, Sarva, Pasupati,
Ugra, Asani, Bhava, Mahadeva, 1581713.

7. (Then follows a sacrifice to) Vanaspati.

8. (To Agni) Svish¢akvct at the end.

9. Then (follows) the sprinkling round to the
different quarters (of the horizon).

10. After the sprinkling has been performed, they
sacrifice the Patni-saszyaga offerings to Indrazi,
Rudrazi, Sarvazi, Bhavani, and Agni Grvzhapati.

11. The blood he offers in leaves, on (grass-)
bunches, as a Bali to Rudra and to his hosts, with
(the Mantras),

‘The hosts, Rudra, which thou hast to the east,
to them this Bali (is given). To them and to thee
be adoration !

‘The hosts, Rudra, which thou hast to the south

. . to the west. . . to the north. . . upwards...

5. On account of the designation of the sacrifice as sfila-gava,

6. Asvalayana, loc. cit. § 19.

9. Gayardma: disam vyagharamam kartavyam iti sftraseshah.
tak ka vasaya bhavati yathagnishomiye.

70. On the Patni-samy4ga offerings, so called because they are
chiefly directed to the wives of the gods, see Hillebrandt, Neu- und
Vollmondsopfer, pp. 151 seqq.

11. Asvalayana, loc. cit. § 22.

1 KANDA, 9 KANDIRKA,. 4. 353

dowriwards, to them this Bali (is given). To them
and to thee be adoration!’ -

12. The contents of the stomach and of the en-
trails, besmeared with blood, he throws into the fire
or buries them in the earth.

13. Having placed the animal so that the wind
blows from himself to it, he approaches it with the
Rudra hymns, or with the first and last Anuvaka.

14. They do not take anything of that animal to
the village. `

15. Thereby (also) the cow-sacrifice has been
declared.

16. (It is combined) with (the offering of) milk-
rice; (the ‘rites) not corresponding (to that special
occasion) are omitted.

17. The sacrificial fee at that (sacrifice) is a cow

, of the same age (as the victim).

KawpikA 9.

1. Now the letting loose of the bull.

2. (The ceremony) has been declared in the cow-
sacrifice.

3. (It is performed) on the full-moon day of
K4rttika, or on the (day on which the moon stands
in conjunction with) Revati in the Asvayuga month.

4. Having set a fire in a blaze in the midst of the

12. As to dvadhya, comp. Asvalayana, § 28.

13. The Rudra hymns form the sixteenth Adhy4dya of the Vaga-
saneyi Samhita. Either that whole Adhydya or the first and last
Anuvaka of it is recited.

15. Gobhila III, 6.

9, ए seqq. Comp. Sankhayana III, गव.

2. See above, chap. 8, 15. 3. Sankhayana, loc. cit. ई 2.

4. Sankhayana, § 3. Ofcourse, in Professor Stenzler’s translation,
‘in der Mitte der Kiiche’ is a misprint for ‘in der Mitte der Kiihe.’

{29] Aa

354 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

cows, and having prepared Agya, he sacrifices six
(oblations) with (the Mantras), ‘Here is delight’
(Vag. Sanh. VITI, 51).

5. With (the verses), ‘May Pishan go after our
cows; may Pdshan watch over our horses; may
Pfishan give us strength ’—he sacrifices of (the sacri-
ficial food) destined for Pdshan.

6. After murmuring the Rudra hymns they adorn
a one-coloured or a two-coloured (bull) who protects
the herd or whom the herd protects. Or it should
be red, deficient in no limb, the calf of a cow that
has living calves and is a milk-giver ; and it should
be the finest (bull) in the herd. And besides they
should adorn the best four young cows of the herd
and let them loose with this (verse), ‘This young

_ (bull) I give you as your husband ; run about sport-
ing with him, your lover. Do not bring down a.
curse upon us, by nature blessed ones. May we
rejoice in increase of wealth and in comfort.’

7. When (the bull) stands in the midst of the
cows, he recites over it (the texts beginning with)
‘Bringing refreshment, down to the end of the
Anuvaka (Vag. Sah. XVIII, 45-50).

8. With the milk of all (the cows) he should cook
milk-rice and give it to the Brahmazas to eat.

5. Rig-veda VI, 54, 5; Sankhayana, § 5.

6. Sankhayana, ईई 6-14. On the Rudra hymns, see above,
chap. 8, § 13. Perhaps the words 718 724 sapta are corrupt;
the correct reading may possibly be, m4=vasthata.

4. Sankhayana, ई 15. There is no Mantra in the Vagasaneyi
Samhita beginning with the word mayobh@4, but this word occurs
in the middle of XVIII, 45; the texts which he recites begin at
that word and extend down to the end of the Anuvaka. It is clear
that mayobhfi/ was intended in the original text, from which both
SAnkhayana and Paraskara have taken this Sfitra, as the Avk-
Pratika, Rig-veda X, 169, 1.

प्रा KANDA, IO KANDIKA, 10. 355

g. Some also sacrifice an animal.
10, The ritual thereof has been declared by the
(ritual for the) spit-ox.

<^ 17८4 10.

1. Now the water libations (which are performed
for deceased persons).

2. When (a child) that has not reached the age of
two years dies, his father and mother become impure.

3. The other (relations) remain pure.

4. (The impurity lasts) through one night or three
nights.

5. They bury the body without burning it.

6. If (a child dies) during the impurity of his
mother (caused by the child’s birth), the impurity
lasts till the (mother’s) getting up (from child-bed)
in the same way as the impurity caused by a child’s
birth.

7. In this case (of the child being younger than
two years) no water libations (are performed).

8. If a child of more than two years dies, all his
relations should follow (the corpse) to the cemetery—

9. Singing the Yama song and murmuring the
Yama hymn, according to some (teachers).

10. If (the dead person) has received the initiation,

g. According to the commentators, a goat is sacrificed.

10. See chap. 8.

10, 2. Manu छ, 68; YAgziavalkya III, 1.

धर. Manu छ, 68; Y4géiavalkya III, 1

The Yama song is stated to be the second verse of Taittiriya

Arazyaka VI, 5, 3 (‘He who day by day leads away cows, horses,
men, and everything that moves, Vivasvat’s son Yama is insatiable
of the five human tribes’); the Yama hymn is Rig-veda X, 14.
Comp. Yagfavalkya III, 2.

10. The bhimigoshana (election of the site for the Smas4na) is

Aa 2

356 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

(the rites) from the election of the site (for the
Smasana) down to their descending into water (in
order to bathe themselves) are the same as those
prescribed for persons who have set up the (sacred.
Srauta) fires.

11. They burn him with his (sacred) domestic
fire, if he has kept that;

12. Silently, with a common fire, other persons.

13. They should ask one who is related (to the
deceased person) by blood or by marriage, for (his
permission to perform) the water-libation, in the
words, ‘ We shall perform the libation.’

14. (He replies), ‘Do so now and never again,’ if
the deceased person was not a hundred years old.

15. (He says) only, ‘ Do so,’ if he was.

16, All relations (of the deceased), to the seventh
or to the tenth degree, descend into water.

17. If dwelling in the same village, (all) as far as
they can trace their relationship.

18. They wear (only) one garment, and have the
sacred cord suspended over the right shoulder.

19. With the fourth finger of the left hand they
spirt away (the water) with (the words), ‘May he
drive evil away from us with his splendour’ (Vag.
Samh. XX XV, 6).

20. Facing the south, they plunge (into the water).

21. They pour out with joined hands one libation
of water to the deceased person with (the words),
‘N.N.! This water to thee!’

22. When they have come out (of the water) and

treated of in Satapatha Brahmawa XIII, 8, 1, 6 seqq.; Katydyana
Srauta-sfitra XXI, 3, 15 seqq. On the bath taken after the cere-
mony, see Satapatha Brahmana XIII, 8, 4,5 ; Katyayana XXI, 4, 24.
16, Yagfavalkya III, 3.
22. Yagnavalkya III, 7: apavadeyus tan 11185214 puratanaiz.

1 KANDA, IO KANDIKA, 31. 357

have sat down on a pure spot that is covered with
grass, (those who are versed in ancient tales) should
entertain them (by telling such tales).

23. They return to the village without looking
back, in one row, the youngest walking in front.

24. In the doors of their houses they chew leaves
of the PiZumanda (or Nimba) tree, sip water, touch
water, fire, cowdung, white mustard seeds, and oil,
tread upon a stone, and then they enter.

25. Through a period of three nights they should
remain chaste, sleep on the ground, do no work and
charge nobody (to do it for them).

26. Let them eat food which they have bought or
received (from others); (they should eat it) only in
the day-time, (and should eat) no meat.

27. Having offered to the deceased person the
Pizda, naming his name at the washing, at the offer-
ing (of the Pixda), and at the second washing—

28. They should that night put milk and water in
an earthen vessel into the open air with (the words),
‘ Deceased one, bathe here!’

29. The impurity caused by death lasts through
three nights ;

30. Through ten nights, according to some
(teachers).

31. (During that period they) should not perform
Svadhydya (or study the Vedic texts for themselves).

23. Yagiavalkya ITI, 12.

24. Yagnavalkya III, 12. 13.

25, 26. Yagnavalkya III, 16; Manu छ, 73; Vasish/Aa IV, 15.

24. See on the washing and on the offering of the’ Pinda,
Katydyana-Srauta-sitra IV, 1, 10.11. Comp. Weber, Indische
Studien, X, 82.

28. Yagnavalkya III, 17.

29, 30. Yagfavalkya JI, 18; Manu V, 59.

358 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

32. They should intermit the standing rites, except
those performed with the three (Srauta) fires,

33. And (with the exception of those performed)
with the (sacred) domestic fire, according to some
(teachers). #

34. Others should perform (those rites for them).

35. Those who have touched the dead body should
not enter the village until the stars appear.

36. If (they have touched it) in the night-time,
(they should not enter) till sunrise.

37. The entering and what follows after it is the
same (for these persons) as for the others.

38. (Their) impurity lasts through one or two
fortnights.

39. The same (rites should be performed) when
the teacher (has died), -

40. Or the maternal grandfather or grandmother,

41. Or unmarried females.

42. For those who were married, the others should
do it, #

43. And they for the (others).

44. If one dies while being absent on a journey,
(his relations) shall sit (on the ground, as prescribed
for impure persons) from the time when they have
heard (of his death), performing the water libation

37. The position of this Siitra after 35, 36 seems to me to
indicate that it refers to those who have touched the dead body ;
comp. Yagfavalkya III, 14: pravesanadikam karma pretasamspar-
sindm api. I believe that the same persons are concerned also in
600४ 38.

42. Le. the husband and his relatives. Comp. Vasish/ia IV, 19.

43. A married female should perform the rites for her husband
and his relatives. See Professor Biihler’s note on Vasish/Aa IV, 19;
S.B.E., XIV, 28.

44. Yagravalkya III, 21; Manu ए, 75,76. Comp. Gautama
XIV, 37; Vasishéha ly, 14.

III KANDA, 10 KANDIKA, 55. 359

(at that time), until the period (of their impurity) has
expired ;

45. If (that period has already) elapsed, through
one night or three nights. .

46. Optional is the water libation for an officiating
priest, a father-in-law, a friend, for (distant) relations,
for a maternal uncle, and for a sister's son;

47. And for married females.

48. On the eleventh day he should give to an
uneven number of Brahmazas a meal at which meat
is served.

49. Some also kill a cowin honour of the deceased
person.

50. When the Pizdas are prepared, the deceased
person, if he has sons, shall be considered as the first
of the (three) Fathers (to whom Pizdas are offered).

51. The fourth one should be left out.

52. Some (make Pizda offerings to a deceased
person) separately through one year (before admit-
ting him to a share in the common Pitrzyagiia).

53. But there is a rule, ‘ There can be no fourth
Pixda’—for this is stated in the Sruti.

54. Every day he shall give food to him (i.e. to
the deceased person), and if he was a Brahmavza, a
vessel with water.

55. Some offer also a Pinda.

47. See above, § 42.

51. See Sankhdyana-Grchya IV, 2, 8. :

52. Sankhdyana-Grchya VIII, 2. Comp. the description of the
Sapindikarana, ibid., chap. 3.

53. There would be four Pindas, if one were to be offered to the
recently deceased person, and three others to those Fathers who
had received Pivda offerings before his death. Therefore one of
these three Fathers is omitted; see ई 51.

54. Comp. Apastamba I, 13, 1; Baudhayana II, 11, 3.

360 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

KawoikA 11.

1. If an animal (is to be sacrificed), let him wash
it, if it is not a cow; let him walk round the fires
and drive in front (of them) a Palasa branch into the
ground.

2. The winding (of a Kusa rope) ‘round (that
branch), the touching (of the animal with the grass-
blade), the binding (of it to the branch), and the
sprinkling (of the animal with water) should be per-
formed in the way prescribed (in the Srauta-sitra),
and whatever else (is to be done).

3. After he has sacrificed the two oblations before
and after the killing of the animal, (he) silently (sacri-
fices) five other (oblations, directed to PragApati).

4. And the omentum is taken out (of the killed
animal). He should besprinkle it (with water) and
name the deity (to whom the sacrifice is directed).

5. (He should name that deity also) at the touch-
ing (of the animal with the grass-blade), at (its) being
bound (to the branch), at its being sprinkled (with
water), and at (the preparation and oblation) of the
mess of cooked food.

6. After he has sacrificed the omentum, he cuts
off the Avadana portions,

11, 1. The branch replaces the sacrificial post (yfpa) of the
Srauta ritual. As to agrevza, comp. Katy.-Sraut. VI, 2, 11 and
the commentary.

2. See Katy.-Sraut. VI, 3, 15 on the parivyayana, ibid. §§ 19, 26
on the upakarama, ई 27 on the niyogana, § 33 on the prokshaza.

3. Katydyana VI, 5, 22: He sacrifices (Agya) with the words,
*Svaha to the gods.’ § 24: He sacrifices (Agya) with the words,
‘To the gods svaha.’ In the commentary on ई 25 these two
oblations are called paripasavyahutt.

4. See Katyayana VI, 6, 13; Asvalayana-Grthya I, 11, 10.

5. See above, 5079 2.

रा KANDA, 12 KANDIKA, 4. 361

7. All of them, or three, or five.

8. He sacrifices the Avadana portions together
with the mess of cooked food.

9. A limb of the animal is the sacrificial fee.

10. At (a sacrifice) directed to a special deity he
should sacrifice (an animal) belonging to that deity,
should make a portion for that (god), and should
say to him (i.e. to the messenger who is to convey
that offering to a place sacred to that deity): ‘Take
care that this may reach that (god).’

1. If there is a river between (the sacrificer and
that sacred place), he may have a boat made, or he
may dispense with this.

KawpikA 12.

1. Now (follows) the penance for a student who
has broken the vow of chastity.

2. On a new-moon day he shall sacrifice an ass
on a cross-road (to the goddess Nirv7ti).

3. (And) he shall offer a mess of cooked food to
Nirrti.

4. The Avadana portions are sacrificed into water
(and‘not into fire).

भृ. The complete number of the Avadanas (i.e. the portions of
the killed animal which have to be cut off, such as the heart, the
tongue, &c.) is eleven; see Katy.-Sraut. VI, 7, 6; Asvalayana-
Grehya I, 11, 72.

8. Asvalayana-Grthya, loc. cit. § 13.

10,11. The way for interpreting these Siitras is shown by
Asvalayana-Grshya I, 12. 1 do not think that they have anything
to do, as Gayardma states, with reference to Sitra 11, with the
offering due to a relative who has died while being absent on a
journey (chap. 10, 44).

12, 1. See the parallel passages quoted by Professor Biihler in
his note on Apastamba I, 26, 8 (S.B.E., II, 85), and besides,
Katydyana I, 1, 13 seqq.; Gautama XXIII, 17 seqq., &c.

4. This Satra is identical with Katydyana I, 1, 16.

362 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

5. The Purod4sa (or sacrificial cake), which belongs
to the animal sacrifice, is cooked on the ground (and
not in the Kapalas).

6. (The guilty person) should put on the skin (of
the ass),

7. With the tail turned upwards, according to
some (teachers).

8. He should through one year go about for alms,
proclaiming his deed.

g. After that time he sacrifices two Agya oblations
with (the formulas), ‘O Lust, I have broken my vow `
of chastity. I have broken my vow of chastity, O
Lust. To Lust svaha!’—‘O Lust, I have done
evil. I have done evil, O Lust. To Lust svah4!’

10. He then approaches (the fire) with (the verse),
‘May the Maruts besprinkle me, may Indra, may
Brzhaspati, may this Agni besprinkle me with off-
spring and with wealth.’

11. This is the penance.

KawoikA 13.

1. Now the entering of a court of justice.

2. He approaches the court with (the words),
‘Court! Thou that belongest to the Angiras!
Trouble art thou by name; vehemence art thou by
name. Thus be adoration to thee!’

3. He then enters (the court) with (the words),
‘(May) the court and the assembly, the two unani-

5. This SGtra is identical with Katyayana I, 7, 15.

9. Baudhayana II, उ, 34. 10, Baudhayana IIT, 1, 35.

13, 2, The regular Sandhi would be sabha (for sabhe) 27617251,
instead of which the text has sabhangirasi.

3. In Sanskrit the words sabha (court) and samiti (assembly) are
of feminine gender. I have translated upa ma sa tish/Zet in the
sense indicated by Pamini I, 4, 87.

1 KANDA, 14 KANDIKA, 2. 363

mous daughters of Pragdpati (protect me). May one
who does not know me, be below me. May (all)
people be considerate in what they say.’

4. When he has arrived at the assembly, he
should murmur, ‘ Superior (to my adversaries) I have
come hither, brilliant, not to be contradicted. The lord
of this assembly is a man insuperable in his power.’

-5. Should he think, ‘This person is angry with
me,’ he addresses him with (the verses), ‘The destroy-
ing power of wrath and anger that dwells here on thy
forehead, that the chaste, wise gods may take away.

‘Heaven am IJ and I am Earth; we both take
away thy anger; the she-mule cannot bring forth
offspring; N.N.!’

6. But if he should think, ‘This person will do
evil to me,’ he addresses him with (the words), ‘I
take away the speech in thy mouth, I take away
(the speech) in thy heart. Wheresoever thy speech
dwells, thence I take it away. What I say, is true.
Fall down, inferior ‘to me.’

7. The same is the way to make (a person) subject
(to one’s self).

Kawoikéd 14,

1. Now the mounting of a chariot (is declared).

2. After he has given the order, ‘ Put the horses
to it, and it has been announced, ‘ They are, he
goes to (the chariot, saying), ‘This is the Virag, and
touches the two wheels,

5. Perhaps we should read garbhemdsvataryaA saha: we take
away thy anger together with the offspring of the she-mule (that
cannot foal). Comp. Kullavagga VII, 2,5; S.B.E., XX, 238.

6. It is impossible to give a sure restoration of this corrupt
Mantra. Perhaps we should read something like this: 4 te शतदा
Asya 4 te hrzdaya 20206. Comp. Hirany.-Grzhya I, 4, 15, 6.

364 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

3. The right (wheel) with (the words), ‘The
Rathantara art thou ’—

4. The left with (the words), ‘The Brzhat art
thou ’—

5. The pole with (the words), ‘The Vamadevya
art thou.’

6. He touches the interior of the chariot with his
hand (saying), ‘The two Ankas, the two Nyankas
which are on both sides of the chariot, which move
forward with the rushing wind, the far-darting one
with keen senses, the winged one, may these fires,
the promoters, promote us.’

7. With (the words), ‘Adoration to Mazizara,’ he
drives on the beast on the right side.

8. (If going in his chariot) toward (images of)
gods, let him descend (from the chariot) before he
has reached them; if toward Brahmawas, just before
(reaching them) ; if toward cows, when amid them;
if toward fathers, when he has reached them..,

9. A woman or a Vedic student shall not be
charioteers.

14, 6. The meaning of ankau and nyankau cannot be deter-
mined, as far as I can see. The commentators explain the words
as the two wheels and the two sides of the chariot, or as the two
right wheels and the two left wheels of a four-wheeled chariot.
Professor Zimmer (Altindisches Leben, pp. 251 seq.) compares anka
with dvrvé, and says, ‘Mit ankau (resp. ankfi) ware daher die obere
Einfassung des Wagenkastens (kosa, vandhura) bezeichnet, mit
nyankau (resp. nyankf) ein zu grésserer Befestigung etwas weiter
unten (ni) herumlaufender Stab.’ To me it seems that ankau and
nyahkau are to be understood both as designations of certain
parts of the chariot and as names of different forms of Agni dwell-
ing in the chariot—Comp. Taittirlya Samhita I, 7, 7, 2; Panka-
vimsa Brahmana I, 7, 5.

4. The name of the demon Mazizara occurs, as far as I know,
only here.

III KANDA, 15 KANDIKA, 4. 365

10. Having driven a moment beyond (the point
to which he intends to go) he should murmur, ‘ Here
is rest, rest here’ (V4g. Samh. VIII, 51).

11. Some add (the words), ‘ Here shall be no rest.’

12. If the chariot is weak, he should murmur, after
he has mounted it, ‘May this your chariot, O Asvins,
suffer no damage on bad ways or by being over-
thrown.’

13. If the horses run away with the chariot, he
should touch the post (?) or the earth and should
murmur, ‘May this your chariot, O Asvins, suffer
no damage on bad ways or by being overthrown.’

14. Thus he will suffer no harm and no damage.

15, When he has finished his way, and has un-
yoked the horses, let him have grass and water given
to them. ‘For thus satisfaction is given to the
beast that draws (the cart) ’—says the Sruti.

^ कणा 15.

1. Now how he should mount an elephant.

2. He goes to the elephant and touches it (saying),
‘The elephants’ glory art thou. The elephants’
honour art thou.’

3. He then mounts it with (the words), “With
Indra’s thunder-bolt I bestride thee. Make me
arrive safely.’

4. Thereby it has also been declared how he
should mount a horse.

11. If the reading of the text is correct, the meaning would seem
to be: We will rest here for a while, but then we will go further.

13. I cannot say what ‘the post’ (stambha) here means; it may
be apart of the chariot. Gayarama has dhvagastambha, ie. the
staff of a flag, which we are to suppose was carried on the chariot.
This may be the right explanation.

15. Satapatha Brahmaza I, 8, 2, 9.

366 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

5. When he is going to mount a camel, he ad-
dresses it: ‘ Thou art the son of Tvash¢7z; Tvashér7
is thy deity. Make me arrive safely.’

6. When he is going to mount a he-ass, he ad-
dresses it: ‘A Sidra art thou, a Siddra by birth. To
Agni thou belongest, with twofold sperm. Make
me arrive safely.’

7. A path he addresses: ‘Adoration to Rudra
who dwells on the paths. Make me arrive safely.’

8. A cross-road he addresses: ‘Adoration to
Rudra who dwells at the cross-roads. Make me
arrive safely.’

g. When he intends to swim across a river, he
addresses it: ‘Adoration to Rudra who dwells in
the waters. Make me arrive safely.’

10. When going on board a ship, he addresses
her: ‘ The good ship’ (Vag. 52971. X XI, 7).

11. When going to cross (the river), he addresses
(the ship): ‘The well-protecting’ (Vag. Sazzh.
X XI, 6).

12. A forest (through which he is wandering) he
addresses: ‘Adoration to Rudra who dwells in the
forests. Make me arrive safely.

13. A mountain (which he is going to cross) he
addresses: ‘Adoration to Rudra who dwells on the
mountains. Make me arrive safely.’

14. A burial-ground he addresses: ‘ Adoration to
Rudra who dwells among the Fathers. Make me
arrive safely.’

15. A cow-stable he addresses: ‘Adoration to
Rudra who dwells among the dung-heaps. Make
me arrive safely.’

6. The he-ass has twofold sperm, because he begets both asses
and mules. Taittiriya Samhita VII, 1, 1, 2.

Ill KANDA, 15 KANDIKA, 22. 367

16. And wheresoever else it be, let him always
say, ‘Adoration to Rudra.’ For the Sruti says,
‘Rudra is this universe,’

17. If the skirt (of his garment) is blown upon
him (by the wind), he addresses (that skirt): ‘A
skirt art thou. Thou art not a thunder-bolt. Adora-
tion be to thee. Do no harm to me!’

18. The thunder he addresses: ‘May the rains
be friendly to us; may (Indra’s) darts be friendly to
us—may they be friendly to us which thou throwest,
O killer of Vrztra,’

19. A howling jackal he addresses: ‘Friendly by
name’ (VAg. Samh. III, 63).

20. A shrieking bird he addresses: ‘Golden-
winged bird who goest where the gods send thee!
Messenger of Yama, adoration be to thee! What
has the Karkriza told thee ?’

21. A tree that serves as a mark (of a boundary,
&c.), he addresses: ‘May neither the flash of light-
ning (destroy thee), nor axe nor wind nor punish-
ment which the king sends. May thy shoots grow
up; may rain fall on thee, in safety from the wind.
May fire not destroy thy root. Blessing on thee, O lord
of the forest! Blessing on me, O lord of the forest!’

22. If he receives something (given to him), he
accepts it with (the formula), ‘May Heaven give
thee; may the Earth accept thee.’ Thus (the thing
given) does not decrease to him who gives it, and
what he receives increases.

79. The play on words is untranslatable; ‘jackal’ is siva,
‘friendly,’ sivad.

20. I do not know the meaning ofkarkarizak. Gayarama takes
it for a genitive standing instead of an accusative, and explains it
by asmadbadhakam.

368 PARASKARA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

23. If boiled rice is given to him, he accepts it
with (the formula), ‘May Heaven, &c.,’ and he par-
takes thereof twice with (the formulas), ‘May Brah-
man eat thee !’—‘ May Brahman partake of thee!’

24. If gruel is given to him, (as above)... . three
times with (the formulas), ‘May Brahman eat thee!’
—‘ May Brahman partake of thee!’—‘May Brahman
drink thee!’

Kawoixd 16.

1. Now each time after a lesson (of the Veda) is
finished, in order to prevent his forgetting (the texts he
has studied, the following prayer should be recited) :

‘May my mouth be skilful; my tongue be honey-
sweet speech. With my ears I have heard much}
do not take away that which I have heard, which
dwells in me.

‘The Brahman’s word art thou; the Brahman’s
stand art thou; the Brahman’s store-house art thou.
Fulfilment art thou; peace art thou; unforgetfulness
art thou; enter into my store-house of the Brahman.
With the voice I cover thee! With the voice I cover
thee! May I be able to form the vowels, to produce,
to hold fast and to utter the guttural, pectoral, dental,
and labial sounds. May my limbs grow strong, my
voice, breath, eye, ear, honour, and power. What I
have heard and studied, may that be fixed in my
mind; may that be fixed in my mind.’

End of the Third Kazda.

End of Paraskara’s Grzhya-sitra.

16,1. As to anirakaraza, comp. anirakarishzu above, II, 4, 3.
Possibly we should read, gihva me madhumad vakah.

KHADIRA-GRJHYA-SUTRA.

[29] Bb

INTRODUCTION

TO THE

KHADIRA-GR/JHYA-SUTRA.

AMONG the Grantha MSS. collected by the late Dr.
Burnell and now belonging to the India Office Library,
there are some MSS. (numbers CLXXII and following
of the Catalogue) of a Grvthya-sitra hitherto unpublished,
which is ascribed to Khadiraarya. It belongs to the,
Drahydyaza School of the SAma-veda, which prevails in
the south of the Indian peninsula?, and it is based on
the Gobhiliya-sitra, from which it has taken the greater
number of its aphorisms, just as the Drahyayavza-Srauta-
stitra, as far as we can judge at present, is nothing but a
slightly altered redaction of Latyayana*, Like the Gobhila-
Grihya it very seldom gives the Mantras in their full ex-
tent, but quotes them only with their Pratikas, and it is
easy to identify these quotations in the Mantrabrahmawa
(published at Calcutta, 1873), which contains the texts
prescribed by Gobhila for the Grvihya ceremonies.

The Khadira-Gvzhya has evidently been composed with
the intention of abridging Gobhila’s very detailed and
somewhat lengthy treatise on the domestic rites. Digres-
sions, such as, for instance, that introduced by the words
tatraihad 814, Gobhila I, 2, 10-27, or such as Gobhila’s
explication of the terms paurzam4si and 2718४458,
I, 5, 7 seqq., or most of the regulations concerning the
Sakvaryas, III, 3, or the Slokas, IV, 7, are invariably left

{+ ———“

1 See Dr. Burnell’s Catalogue, p. 56.

५ Weber, Vorlesungen iiber indische Literaturgeschichte (2nd edition), ए. 87:
‘ Almost the entire difference between this Stitra and that of Latyayana lies in
the arrangement of the matter treated of, which is in itself very nearly the same
in both texts, and is expressed in the same words. Comp. Anandaéandra
Vedantavagisa’s Introduction to his edition of Latyayana (in the Bibliotheca
Indica), pp. 2, 3, and his statements on Drahyayava in the notes of that edition.

Bb2

372 KHADIRA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

out, and in the descriptions of the single ceremonies
throughout the principal points only are given, with the
omission of all words and of all matter that it seemed
possible to dispense with. On the other hand, the arrange-
ment of the Sdtras has undergone frequent changes, in
which the compiler clearly shows his intention of grouping
together, more carefully than was done in the original text,
the Satras which naturally belong to each other. Of the
Sitras of the Khadira-Grvthya which cannot be identified in
Gobhila, several are to be traced back to La¢yayana, or we
should perhaps rather say, to Drahyayava. Thus Khad.
I, 1, 14 mantrantam avyaktam parasyadigraha-
nena vidy4t evidently corresponds to Latyayana I, 1, 3,
uttaradizZ pdrvantalakshazam, and Khad. I, 1, 24
avyavrittim yagiangair avyavayam kekhet is
identical with Lary. I, 2, 15, avyavayosvy4avrittis ka
yagiangaih.

Upon the whole, though certainly the Khadira-Grihya
does not contain much matter which is not known to us
from other sources, it notwithstanding possesses a certain
interest, since it shows by a very clear example how a
Sttrakara of the later time would remodel the work of a
more ancient author, trying to surpass him by a more
correct arrangement, and especially by what became more
and more appreciated as the chief accomplishment of Sitra
composition, the greatest possible succinctness and econo-
mising of words. To an interpreter of Gobhila the com-
parison of the Khadira-Grzhya no doubt will suggest in
many instances a more correct understanding of his text
than he would have been likely to arrive at without that
aid, and perhaps even readings of Gobhila which seemed
hitherto subject to no doubt, will have to give way to
readings supplied by the Grantha MSS. of the KhAdira-
Grihya. Thus, Gobhila ITI, 8,16, I do not hesitate to
correct asamsvadam, on the authority of Khad. ITI, 3,
13, into asamkhadam or asamkhadan?.

1 Comp. Paraskara II, 10, 15, and the quotations given by Bohtlingk-Roth

s.v. sam-khad. Forms derived from the two roots, khad and svad, are fre-
quently interchanged in the MSS.; see the two articles in the Dictionary.

INTRODUCTION. 373

As the text of the Khadira-Gvihya is very short and
has not yet been published, it has been printed at the foot
of the page, together with references to the parallel pas-
sages of Gobhila. For further explanations of the single
Sttras, I refer to my translation of Gobhila which will
form part of the second volume of the Grzhya-sitras, where
I shall also hope to give some extracts from Rudraskanda’s
commentary on the Khadira-Grzhya.

KHADIRA-GR/HYVA-SUTRA,

ParaLa I, Kuawoa 1.

1. Now henceforth the domestic sacrifices (will
be explained).

2. During the northern course of the sun, at the
time of the increasing moon, on auspicious days,
before noon: this is the time at which the con-
stellations are lucky, unless a special statement is
given. ।

3. At the end (of the ceremonies) he should give
to the Brahmavzas to eat according to his ability.

4. The sacrificial cord is made of a string or of
Kusa grass.

5. If he suspends it round his neck and raises
the right arm (so as to wear the cord on his left
shoulder), he becomes yag#zopavitin.

6. (If he raises) the left (arm and wears the cord
on his right shoulder, he becomes) pra4inavitin.

7. After having sipped water three times, let him
wipe off the water twice.

I, 1,1. athaito grzhyakarmazy, 2. udagayanapfirvapakshapu-
myaheshu prag dvartandad anubhaZ kalosnadese. 3. xpavarge ya-
thotsaham brahmaman asayed. 4. yagi#opavitam sautram kausam va.
5. grivdyam pratimudya dakshizam bahum uddhritya yagfopavitt
bhavati. 6. savyam pradinaviti, 7. trir Atamy4po वण parimrigita.

1,1, 1=GobhilaI, 1,1. 2=1,1,3, 3=1,1, 6. 4-6=1, 2,
7 seqq. 7-10=I, 2, 5 seqq.

I PATALA, I KHANDA, 17. 375

8. Having besprinkled his feet (with water), let
him besprinkle his head.

9. Let him touch the organs of his senses (i.e. his
eyes, his nose, and his ears) with water (i.e. with
a wet hand).

10. When he has finally touched (water) again,
he becomes pure.

11, (If) sitting, standing, or lying down (is pre-
scribed), he should understand (that it is to be done)
on northward-pointed Darbha grass, with the face
turned to the east, to the west of the fire with which
the sacrifice is performed.

12. If the word Sn4na (or bathing) is used, (this
refers to the whole body) with the head.

13. (The different ceremonies are) performed with
the right hand, if no special rule is given.

14. If it is not clear where a Mantra ends, one
should discern it by (adverting to) the beginning of
the next Mantra.

15. The Mantras have the word sv4h4 at their
end, when offerings are made.

16. The term Pakayagéza is used of every sacri-
fice that is performed with one fire.

17. There the Brahman is (present 4s) officiating
priest, with the exception of the morning and
evening oblations.

8. padiv abhyukshya sirosbhyukshed. 9. indriyazy adbhik
samsprised. 10. antatak pratyupasprésya sudir bhavaty. 11. dsa-
nasthanasamvesanany udagagreshu darbheshu pranmukhasya pra-
ttydt paséad agner yatra homa syat. 12. sahasirasam snAnasabde.
13. dakshizena pazina krztyam anddese. 14. mantrantam avyak-
tam parasyddigrahamena vidyat. 15.,svahdnt@ mantra homeshu.
16. pakayag#a ityakhya yak kas saikagnau. 17. tatra ritvig
brahma sayampratarhomavargam.

t1~14 desunt. 15=I, 9, 25. 16 deest. 17, 18=I. 9, 8. 9.

376 KHADIRA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

18. The Hotvz’s place is filled by (the sacrificer)
himself.

19. To the south of the fire the Brahman sits
facing the north, silently, until the oblation has been
performed, on eastward-pointed (Darbha grass).

20. But if he likes, he may speak of what refers
to the sacrifice. ।

21. Or if he has spoken (words) which are un-
worthy of the sacrifice, let him murmur the Maha-
vyahr‘tis,

22, Or (the verse), ‘Thus has Vishzu’ (Sv. I, 222).

23. If he does himself the work both of the
Brahman and of the Hotvz, let him sit down on
the Brahman’s seat, and (leave that seat) placing
a parasol on it, or an outer garment, or a water-pot,
and then let him perform his other duties.

24. Let him take care not to turn his back to,
or become separated (by any person or thing inter-
posed) from what belongs to the sacrifice.

KuHanpa 2,

1. In the eastern part of his dwelling he should
besmear (the place on which the sacrifice will be

18. svayamhautram. 19. dakshivato-gner udanmukhas tishzim
aste brahma homat pragagreshu. 20. kamam tv adhiyagziam vya-
hared. 21. ayagaiyam va vydhritya mahavyahritir gaped. 22.
idam vishzur ita va. 23. hautrabrahmatve svayam kurvan brahma-
sanam [sic] upavisya Afattram uttarasangaz kamandalum va tatra
kritvathanyat kuryad. 24. avydvrittim yagnhangair avyavayam
hekhet. :

2, 1. piirve bhage vesmano gomayenopalipya tasya madhyadese
lakshavam kuryad. ध

19 = 1, 6, 73 seqq. 20-22=1,6,17seqq. 23 =], 6, 27. 24 deest.
2, 1 seqq.=Gobhila I, 1, 9 seqq.

I PATALA, 2 KHANDA, 11. 377

performed) with cowdung, and should draw in the
middle of it the lines.

2. To the south he should draw a line from west
to east.

3. From the beginning of that line (he should
draw a line) from south to north; from the end (of
the last-mentioned line) one from west to east;
between (the first and the third line) three (lines)
from west to east.

4. He besprinkles that (place) with water,

5. Establishes the fire (thereon),

6. Wipes along around (the fire) with the three
verses, ‘ This praise’ (MB. II, 4, 2-4).

7. To the west of the fire he touches the earth
with his two hands turned downwards, with (the
verse), ‘We partake of the earth’s’ (MB. II, 4, 1).

8. In night-time (he pronounces that Mantra so
that it ends with the word) ‘ goods’ (vasu).

9. Having strewn Darbha grass to the west (of
the fire), let him draw (some grass) from the south-
end and from the north-end (of what he has strewn),
in an eastern direction.

10. Or let him omit this drawing (of Darbha
grass to the east),

171. And let him strew (the grass) beginning in
the east, so as to keep his right side turned to the

2. dakshizatak prafim rekham ullikhya. 3. taddrambhad परवद
tadavasanat pra&iz tisro madhye pratis. 4. tad abhyukshya. 95.
sgnim upasamadhaya. 6. imam stomam iti parisam@hya trzéena.
7. paskad agner bhimau nyafdau pant krztvedam bhimer iti. 8.
vasvantam ratrau. 9. paséad darbhan 4stirya dakshinatah एवैश्च
prakarshed uttaratas 44. 10. sprakrzshya va. गव, parvopakra-
mam pradakshizam agnim strzmuydn mfilany agrais &hddayan tri-
vritam paikavritam vo.

6-8=IV, 5,3 seqq. 9-11=I, 7, 9 seqq.

378 KHADIRA-GRIHYA-SOTP A,

fire, covering the roots (of the Darbha blades) with
the points, in three layers or in five layers.

12. Sitting down he cuts off two span-long Darbha
points, not with his nail, with (the words), ‘ Purifiers
are ye, sacred to Vishzu.’

13. He wipes them with water, with (the words),
‘By Vishzu's mind are ye purified.’

14. Holding them with his two thumbs and fourth
fingers so that their points are turned to the north,
he three times purifies the Agya (with them), with
(the words), ‘May the god Savitrz purify thee with
this uninjured purifier, with the rays of the good sun.’

15. Having sprinkled them (with water) he should
throw them into the fire.

16. Having put the Agya on the fire he should
take it (from the fire) towards the north.

17. Bending his right knee he should pour out to
the south of the fire his joined hands full of water
with (the words), ‘Aditi! Give thy consent!’

18. To the west with (the words), ‘Anumati! Give
thy consent!’

19. To the north with (the words), ‘Sarasvati!
Give thy consent!’

12. xpavisya darbhagre pradesamatre praf/inatti na nakhena
pavitre stho vaishwavyav ity. 13. adbhir unmrzgya Vishzor
manasa pute stha ity. 14. udagagre sngush/habhyam andmika-
bhy4m sa samgrrhya trir 4gyam utpundti devas tva Savitotpundtv
akhidrena pavitreva vasos sfryasya rasmibhir ity. 15. abhyu-
kshyagnav anuprahared. 16. agyam adhisrityottaratah kurydd.
17. dakshizaganvakto dakshizenagnim Aditesnumanyasvety uda-
kajigalim prasi##ed. 18. Anumatesnumanyasveti pasat. 19.
Sarasvate [sic, comp. Hirazyakesi-Grzhya I, 1, 2, 9] s»numanya-
svety पाश 3184.

12~16=I, 7, 21-27. 17-21=1, 3, 1 seqq.

I PATALA, 3 KHANDA, 3. 379

20. With (the words), ‘God Savityz! Give thy
impulse!’ (MB. I, 1, 1) he should sprinkle (water)
round the fire so as to keep his right side turned
towards it, encompassing what he is going to offer
(with the water).

21. (This he does) once or thrice.

22. He puts a piece of wood on (the fire).

23. He should murmur the Prapada formula
(MB. II, 4, 5), hold his breath, fix his thoughts on
something good, and should emit his breath when
beginning the Virpaksha formula (MB. IT, 4, 6).

24. At ceremonies for the attainment of special
wishes (he should do so) for each of the objects
(which he wishes to attain).

25. He should do so always at sacrifices.

Kuaypa 3.

A student after he has studied the Veda and
has offered a present to his teacher, should, with
permission (of his parents), take a wife

2. And (he should take) the bath (which signifies
the end of studentship) -

3. Of these two (acts the taking of) the bath
comes first.

20. deva Savitah prasuveti pradakshizam agnim paryukshed
abhipariharan havyam, 21. sakrdt trir va. 22. samidham Adhaya.
23. prapadam gapitvopatamya kalydzam dhydyan vairdp&ksham
arabhyoksAvaset. 24. pratikamam kimyeshu. 25. sarvatraitad
dhomeshu kuryat

3,1. brahmaarf vedam adhityopanydhritya guravesnugf#ato darian
kurvita. 2, splavana# fa. 3. tayor Aplavanam pirvam

22=I, 8, 26. 23=I1V, 5, 6 व्‌. 24, 25 desunt.
3, 1=Gobhila II, 4,1. 2=III, 4,7. 3, 4 desunt.

380 KHADIRA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

4. As, however, in the (collection of) Mantras
marriage is treated of (first), it is explained (here)
before (the bath).

5. A Braéhmavza with a water-pot, wrapped in his
robe, keeping silence, should step in front of the
fire and should station himself (to the south of it)
with his face to the north,

6. After (the bride) has taken a bath, (the bride-
groom) should dress her in a garment that has not
yet been washed, with (the verse), ‘ They who spun’
(MB. I, 1,5). While she is led up (to him), the
bridegroom should murmur (the verse), ‘Soma gave
her’ (1. 1. 7)

7. To the south of the bridegroom he (who has
led her to him) should make her sit down.

8. While she touches him, (the bridegroom) should
make oblations of Agya with the Sruva, picking
out (portions of it [comp. Paraskara II, 14, 13])
vith the Mahavyahs“tis
~ 9. A fourth (oblation) with (the three Maha-
vyahrrtis) together.

10. The same at the ceremonies of the tonsure
(of the child’s head), of the initiation (of the Brah-
marin), and of the cutting of the beard.

4. Mantrabhivadat tu pamigrahamasya (correct, pazigrahanam ?)
pirvam vyakhyatam. 5. brahmazas sahodakumbha/ pravrito
vagyatosgrenignim gatvodanmukhas tish/fet. 6. snatém ahatend-
khadya y4 akrentann ity aniyamanayim pazigraho gapet Somos dadad
iti, 7. pasigrahasya dakshivata upavesayed. 8. anvdrabdhayam
sruvexopaghatam mahavyahrvtibhir agyam guhuyat. 9. samasta-
bhis Aaturthim. 10. evam saulopanayanagodaneshv.

5== 11, 1,13. 6=I], 1,17-19. 7 seqq.-=II, 1, 23 seqq.; 79;
26 seqq.

I PATALA, 3 KHANDA, 20. 38 I

11. And at the marriage (he makes oblations)
with the six verses, ‘May Agni go as the first’ (MB.
I, 7, 9 seqq.).

12. At Agya oblations, unless a special rule is
given, the two Agya portions and the Svish¢akrit
oblation (are) not (offered).

13. After (the chief oblations he should) always
(make oblations) with the Mahavydhr‘tis,

14. And with the (verse) sacred to Pragdpati.

15. He should make an expiatory oblation.

16. After the sacrifice they both arise.

17. (The bridegroom) should pass behind (the
bride’s) back, station himself to the south, and seize
the bride’s hand.

18. Her mother who has, towards the east, put
fried grain mixed with Sami leaves into a basket,

19. Should make the bride tread with the tip of
her right foot on an upper mill-stone, to the west
of the fire, with (the verse which the bridegroom
repeats), ‘On this stone’ (MB, I, 2, 1).

20. Her brother, filling once his joined hands

11. Agnir etu prathama iti shadbhis 4a pamigrahane. 12. nagya-
bhagau na svish/akrid agydhutishv 2740९56. 13. sarvatroparish/in
mahavyahrtibhiz*. 14. prdgdpatyaya ka. 15. prayaskittam प
huyad. 16. dhutvopottish/Aato. 17. snupr7sh/ham gatva dakshi-
natoxvasthdya vadhvazigalim grihviyat. 18, एति एवै mata samipala-
samisran (var. lect. °misral) laga# दश्री € kritva. 19. paskdd agner
drzshatputram akramayed vadhim dakshizena prapadenemam as-
minam iti, 20. sakrzdgrzhitam aigalim ligdndm vadhvaiigalav
avaped bhrata.

14,15 desunt. 16-31=TII, 2, 1 seqq.
1 Possibly the Stitras 12 and 13 should be divided thus: 12. nagyabhagau na

svishfakrid Agyahutishy. 13. anddese sarvatr® &c. Comp. Gobhila I, 9, 26.
27; Sankhdyana I, 12, 13; 9, 10.

382 KHADIRA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

with fried grain, should pour it into the bride’s
joined hands.

21. Or some friend (instead of the brother).

22. That she should sacrifice over the fire without
opening her joined hands with (the verse which the
bridegroom repeats), ‘ This woman’ (MB. I, 2, 2).

3. (The verses), ‘Aryaman’ and ‘ Pashan’ (1.1.
3, 4) (are repeated) at the two following (oblations
of fried grain).

24. After that sacrifice he should go back in the
same way (see Sitra 17), and should lead her round
the fire, so that their right sides are turned towards
it with (the formula), ‘The maid from the fathers’
{l. 1. 5).

25. (These rites), beginning from his stationing
himself (to the south, Sfitra 17), (are performed)
thrice.

26. After (she) has poured the remnants (of the
fried grain) into the fire, he should make her step
forward in a north-eastern direction with (the for-
mula), ‘ For sap with one step’ (1. 1. 6, 7).

27. The looking at the lookers-on, the mounting
of the chariot, the reciting (of Mantras) at places
difficult to pass (on the way of the bridegroom and
the bride, is performed) with (verses) suited (to
those different occasions).

21. ऽपो v4 kashit. 22. tam sdgnau guhuydd avithidyizgalim
iyam narity. 23. Aryamazam Pfishamam ity uttarayor. 24. hute
tenaiva gatva pradakshizam agnim parivayet kanyala pitrzbhya ity.
25. avasthanaprabhrity evam tris. 26. sirpeva sish/an agndv opya
pragudi#im utkramayed ekam isha iti, 27. skshak4vekshavara-
tharohavadurganumantramany abhirGpabhir.

(21 and a part of 27 desunt.)

I PATALA, 4 KHANDA, 3. 383

28. Walking forward behind the fire, the water-
carrier (see Stra 5) should besprinkle the bride-
groom on his forehead.

29. So also the bride.

30. When he has thus been besprinkled, (he should
repeat the verse), ‘May (the Visve devas) anoint
(or, unite)’ (MB. I, 2, 9).

31. He should seize her right hand, together with
the thumb, with the six (verses), ‘I seize thy hand’
(MB. I, 2, 10 seqq.).

Kuawopa 4.

1. He should carry her away in a north-eastern
direction.

2. In a Brahmaza’s house he should establish the
(nuptial) fire, should spread out to the west of the
fire a red bull’s hide with the hair outside and with
the neck to the east, and should make her, who has
to keep silence, sit down (thereon).

3. When (somebody) has said that a star has
appeared, he should, while she touches him, make
oblations (of Agya) with the Sruva, picking out
(portions of it), with the six (verses) commencing
with (the verse), ‘In the lines’ (MB. I, 3, 1 seqq.).
The remnants he should pour out over the bride’s
head.

28. apareniignim auduko gatva paxigraham mdrdhany avasirhed.
29. vadhim fa. 30. samafigantv ity avasikto, 31. dakshixam
paxim sangushtham grihatyad gribhvdmi ta iti shadbhif.

4, 1. pragudiéim udvahed. 2. brdhmazakulesgnim upasam-
Adhdya paskad agner lohitam £armanadvham uttaraloma praggrivam
Astirya vagyatam upavesayet. 3. prokte nakshatresnvdrabdhaydm
sruvenopaghitam guhuyat shadbhir lekhdprabhritibhiz sampatan
avanayan mfirdhani vadhvad.

4, 1-11=Gobhila II, 3, 1 seqq.

384 KHADIRA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

4. Having circumambulated the fire so that their
right sides are turned towards it, he shows her the
polar star (literally, the firm one), with the verse,
‘Firm is the sky’ (1. 1. 7).

5. She should break her silence by respectfully
calling her Gurus by their Gotra names.

6. A cow constitutes the sacrificial fee.

7. Here the Arghya ceremony should be per-
formed.

8. (Or rather it should be performed) when they
have come (to their house), according to some
(teachers) : [comp. Sankh. I, r2, 10.]

9. Through a period of three nights they should
avoid eating saline food and drinking milk, and
should sleep together without having conjugal
intercourse.

10. Having murmured over food which is fit for
sacrifice, the (verses), ‘ With the tie of food’ (MB. I,
3, 8-10), he should pronounce the wife’s name,
‘NL N.Y

11. After he has sacrificed (or, eaten ?) he should
give the rest to the wife.

12. After the lapse of that period of three nights,
he should make oblations of Agya with the four

4. pradakshizam agnim parikramya dhruvam darsayati dhruva
dyaur ity. 5. abhivadya gurfin (guru, Gobhila) gotreva visriged
vakam. 6, gaur dakshiva. 7. strarghyam. 8. 4gateshv ity eke.
9, triratram ksharalavaze dugdham iti vargayantau (vargayanau the
MSS.) saha sayiydtam (sayyatam, saryyatém the MSS.) brahma-
Aarinau. 70. havishyam annam parigapyannapdasenety asav iti
vadhva nama brfiyad. वद. hutvokkhishfam (bhuktv°?) vadhvai
०१०0४६१. 12. drdhvam triratrak Aatasr¢bhir 4gyam guhuyad Agne
prayaskittir iti samasya pa#damim samp4tén avanayann udapatre.

12-13=II, 5, 1 seqq.

I PATALA, 5 KHAWDA, 5. 385

verses, ‘Agni, thou art expiation’ (MB. I, 4, 1 seqq,).
A fifth (oblation) combining (the names of the four
gods invoked in those verses). The remnants (of
Agya) he should pour into a water-pot.

13. With that (Agya) he should wash her, in-
‘cluding her hair and nails. ।

14. Thenceforward he should behave as required
by circumstances.

15. At the time of her courses he should touch
with his right hand her secret parts with (the verse),
‘May Vishzu make thy womb ready’ (MB. I, 4, 6).

16. When (that verse) is finished, he should
cohabit with her, with (the verse), ‘Give conception’

0.1. 7).
Kuanpa 5.

1. The fire used at his wedding (is kept as) his
(sacred) domestic fire.

2. Or that on which he (as a student) puts the
last piece of wood.

3. Or (a fire) kindled by attrition: that is pure,
but it does not bring prosperity.

4. Or he may get it from a frying-pan.

5. Or from the house of one who offers many
sacrifices, with the exception of a Sidra.

13. tenaindm sakesanakham 4plavayet. 414. tato yathartham
syad. 15. ritukale dakshizena pazinopastham dlabhed Vishzur
yonim kalpayatv iti. 16. samaptayam sambhaved garbhan
dhehiti.

5,1. yasminn agnau pasim grihniyat sa grihyo. 2. yasmin
vantyam samidham adadhyan. 3. nirmanthyo va pumyas sosnar-
dhuko. 4. mbarishdid vanayed. 5. bahuyagino vagaras £Aidra-
vargam.

14=II, 4, 1%. 15, 16=II, 5, 9, 10.
5, 1-g=Gobhila I, 1, 20-28.
{29] cc

386 KHADIRA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

6. The service (at that sacred domestic fire) begins
with an evening oblation.

7. After {the fire) has been set in a blaze before
sunset or Sunrise—

8. The sacrifice (is performed) after sunset,

9. (And) after sunrise or before sunrise.

10. He should with his hand make oblations of
food which is fit for sacrifice, having washed it, if
it is raw.

11. If it consists in curds or milk, with a brazen
bowl,

12. Or with the pot in which the oblations of
cooked rice are prepared.

13. (In the evening the first oblation with the
formula), ‘To Agni Sv4ha!’ in the middle (of the
sacred fire) ;

14. The second (oblation) silently in the north-
eastern part (of the fire).

15. In the morning the first (oblation with the
formula), ‘To Sfirya (Sv4ha)!’

16. The wiping round the fire and the similar
acts, with the exception of the sprinkling (of water)
round (the fire), are omitted here.

17. Some (teachers say) that his wife may offer
these oblations, for the wife is (as it were) the house,
and that fire is the domestic fire.

6. sdyamahutyupakramam parizaranam. 7. prdg astamayodaya-
bhyam pradushkrétya. 8. sstam itehoma. 9. पताल Aanudite va.
10. havishyasyannasyakrztam et prakshalya guhuyat pazind. 11.
dadhi set payo va kamsena. 12. Aarusthalya va. 13. «gnaye
svaheti madhye. 14. tishvim pragudisim uttaram. 15. Siryayeti
pratah pfirvam. 16. natra parisamfhanadini paryukshavavargam.
17. patnt guhuyad ity eke grzhaz patnt gréhyo-xgnir esha iti.

10-1y=], 3, 6-18 (16 deest).

I PATALA, 5 KHANDA, 30. 387

18, When (the meal) is ready, in the evening
and in the morning, (the wife) should say, ‘It is
ready!’ and (the husband) with loud voice, ‘Om!’

19, Then in a low voice: ‘May it not fail! Ado-
ration to thee!’

20. Of food which is fit for sacrifice he should
make oblations to Pragapati and to (Agni) Svish/a-
krit.

21. Then he should make the Bali offerings.

22. He should put down (a Bali) at four places,
inside or outside (the Agnyagara) ;

23. (Another Bali) near the water-barrel ;

24. (Another) at the middle door ;

25. (Another) in the bed,

26. Or in the privy;

27. Another on the heap of sweepings.

28. He should sprinkle each (Bali with water)
before and afterwards.

29. The remnants he should pour out together
with water towards the south.

30. Of chaff, of water, and of the scum of boiled
rice (he should offer a Bali) when a donation has
been made.

18. siddhe sAyampratar bhfitam ity ukta om ity पषा briyat.
19. ma ksha@ namas ta ity upimsu. 20. havishyasyannasya guhu-
yat pragdpatyam sauvish/akritam ka. 21. balim nayed. 22. bahir
antar va Aatur nidhdya. 23. mavikadese. 24. madhye dvari.
25. sayyam anu. 26, varkam [sic] va. 247. «tha sastGpam. 28.
ekaikam ubhayataA parishi#iek. 29. Akesham adbhis sardham
dakshivd ninayet. 30. phalikaraz4naém apaém Afimasveti (read,
asdmasyeti) visrazite.

20-37 = 1, 4, 1 seqq.
cc2

388 KHADIRA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

The gods to whom the Bali offerings belong,
are, the Earth, Vayu, Pragdpati, the Visve devas,
the Waters, the Herbs and Trees, the Ether, Kama
or Manyu, the hosts of Rakshas, the Fathers,
Rudra.

32. He should do so silently.

33. He should do so (i.e. offer Balis) of all food.

34. Iffor one meal the food gets ready at different
times, he should do so only once.

35. If (food is prepared) at different places, (he
should take) that which belongs to the householder.

36. Of all food he should offer (something) in the
fire, and give the due portion to a Brahmawa; he
should do so himself.

37. From the rice(-harvest) till the barley(-harvest),
or from the barley(-harvest) till the rice(-harvest) he
should offer (the Balis) himself. He should offer
(the Balis) himself.

End of the First 22.४22.

31. Prethivi Vayus Pragapatir Visve devia Apa Oshadhivanaspa-
taya ^ 18584 Kamo Manyur va Rakshoga#af Pitaro Rudra iti
balidaivatani. 32. tishvim tu kury4t. 33. sarvasya tv anna-
syaitat kuryad. 34. asakrz& fed ekasmin 1816 siddhe sakrid eva
kuryad. 35. bahudha fed yad grzhapateA. 36. sarvasya tv anna-
sydgnau kritvagram brahmazdya dadyat ; svayam kuryad. 37. vrthi-
prabhrity 4 yavebhyo yavebhyo vasvrihibhya svayam haret svayam
haret. prathamapasalas.

II PATALA, I KHANDA, 9. 389

Parara II, Kuawpa 1.

1. Of the sacrifices of the new and full moon, the
full-moon sacrifice should be performed first.

2. If (the term for the sacrifice) of the new moon
comes first, he should first celebrate the full-moon
sacrifice and then perform that.

3. Some say that he should not perform it, and
wait till the day of the full moon.

4. In the afternoon, husband and wife, after
having bathed, should eat fast-day food.

5. Manadantavya has said: ‘He who eats fast-
day food, obtains offspring better than himself; he
gains favour; hunger will not attack him.’

6. Therefore one should eat (fast-day food) which
he likes.

7. He should do nothing unholy (such as cohabit-
ing with his wife).

8. After he has sacrificed the morning oblation, .

9. He should pour out the sacrificial food with
(the formula), ‘Agreeable to such and such (a deity)
I pour thee out:’ (this formula) referring to the

II, 1, 1. paurvamasopakramau darsapaurvamasau. 2. darsam
Aet prvam upapadyeta paurzamasenesh/vatha tat kuryad. 3. akur-
van paurvamasim 4kankshed ity eke. 4. sparahwe sndtvaupava-
sathikam dampatt bhufgty4tam. 5. Manadantavya uvaa: sreyasin
pragdm vindate kamyo bhavaty akshodhuko ya aupavasathikawe
bhunkte. 6. tasmad yat kamayeta tad bhuagita. 4. navratyam
akaret. 8. pratarahutim hutva 9. _havir nirvaped amushmai tva
gushéam nirvapamiti devatasrayam sakr7d yagur va dvis tashxim.

II, 1, 1-3 desunt. 4==Gobhila I, 5, 26. 5-8=I, 6, 1-13.
9-16 (15 deest)=I, 7, 2-19.

390 KHADIRA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

deity, or a Yagus, (is repeated) once; twice (it is
done) silently.

10. He should wash (the food) thrice, (if it is
destined) for gods;

Twice, if for men;

12. Once, if for the Fathers.

13. Stirring it up with the pot-ladle from the left
to the right he should cook it.

14. When he has cooked it, he should sprinkle
(Agya) on it, should take it from the fire towards the
north, and should again sprinkle (Agya) on it

15. Thus all kinds of Havis (are prepared).

16. Having put (the Havis) on the sacrificial
grass,

17. He should sacrifice the two Agya portions
(in the following way): Having taken four portions
of Agya—five portions are taken by the Bhvzgus
(or at least?) by the Gamadagnyas [see Indische
Studien, 10, 95]—(he should make two oblations),
to the north with (the formula), ‘To Agni Svaha!’
to the south with (the formula), ‘To Soma Svaha!’

18. Others (do it) conversely

19. Having ‘spread under’ Agya, he should cut
off with the pot-ladle (portions) of the Havis from
the middle and from the eastern side ;

to. trir devebhya# prakshalayed. 11. dvir manushyebhyad.
12. sakrt pitrybhyo. 13. mekshazena pradakshizam udayuvaz
srapayek. 14. &hritam abhigharyodag udvasya pratyabhighdrayet.
15. sarvany evam havimshi. 16. barhishy 4sady4. 17. sgyabhagau
guhuyaé faturgrihitam agyam grchitva pawhkavattam Bhrighnam
Gamadagnyénam Agnaye svahety uttarataz SomAyeti dakshizato.
18. viparitam itara. 19. a4gyam upastirya havishoxvadyen me-
kshazena madhyat purastad iti.

17-27 (18, 23 desunt)=I, 8, 3-29.

II PATALA, I KHANDA, 26. ` 391

20. One who takes five cut-off portions (see Sitra
17), also from the western side.

21, After he has sprinkled (Agya) on (the cut-off
portions), he anoints the places from which he has
cut them off, (with Agya),

22, (This anointing) is omitted at the Svishéakrzt
oblation.

23. He should sacrifice with (the formula), «To
पि. वि. Sv4h4!’—according to the god to whom the
oblation belongs.

24. At the Svishéakvzt oblation he ‘ spreads under’
once—twice if he is a Bhy7gu—, (cuts off) once (a
portion) of the Havis, sprinkles (Agya) on it twice,
and sacrifices it in a north-eastern direction with (the
formula), ‘To Agni Svish¢akrzt Svaha!’

25. Having put a piece of wood (on the fire),

26. He should dip Darbha-blades (of the sacrificial
grass strewn round the fire) three times, the points,
the middle, and the roots, into the Agya or into the
Havis with (the words), ‘May the birds come, lick-
ing what has been anointed.’ Then, after having
sprinkled (those Darbha-blades with water), he should
throw them into the fire, with (the verse), ‘Thou
who art the lord of cattle, Rudra, who walkest with
the lines (of cattle), the manly one: do no harm to
our cattle; let this be offered to thee. Sv4ha!’

20. paskak ka pafhavatty. 21. abhighdrya pratyanakty ava-
danasthanani. 22. nasvish/akrzto. 23. smushmai svdheti guhuydd
yaddevatyam syat. 24. svish/akretah sakrid upastirya dvir
Bhrigtndm sakrid dhavisho [sic] dvir abhigharyagnaye svish/akrite
svaheti pragudi#yam guhuyat. 25. samidham 4dhdya. 26. dar-
bhan 4gye havishi va trir avadhdyagramadhyam@lany aktam rihand
viyantu vaya ity abhyukshya4gnav anuprahared yah pastindm adhi-
patt Rudras tantifaro vrzsha pasfin asmasam ma himstr etad astu
hutan tava svaheti.

392 KHADIRA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

27. This (ceremony is called) Yagiiavastu.

28. He should perform it at all (sacrifices).

29. The remnants of the Havis he should take
away in a northern direction, and should give them
to the Brahman.

30. A full vessel constitutes the fee for the sacri-
fice ;

31. Or as much as he can afford.

Kuanpa 2.

1. By one who has not set up the sacred fires,
a mess of cooked food, sacred to Agni, is offered at
the festivals of the full and new moon;

2. By one who has set them up, one sacred to
Agni and Soma at the full moon ;

3. One sacred to Indra, or to Mahendra, or to
Indra and Agni, at the new moon;

4. Or as (the sacrifice is performed) by one who
has not set up the sacred fires.

5. The time at which the morning oblation may
be offered, is the whole day ;

6. For the evening oblation the night;

7. For the sacrifice of the full moon the whole
second fortnight (of the month) ;

27. tad yag#avastu. 28. sarvatra kuryad. 29. dhavir uAk/ish-
vam udag udvasya brahmame dadyat. 30. pirvapdtram dakshima.
31. yathotsaham va.

2,1. Agneya sthalipakosnahitagner darsaptirzamasayor. 2. agni-
shomiyah paurnamasydm ahitagner. 3. aindro mahendro vaindragno
vamavasydyam. 4. yatha vanahitagnes. 5. sarvam ahad pratara-
hute sthanam. 6. ratris sdyamahutes. 7. sarvoxparapaksha/
paurzamasasya.

28 deest. 29-31=], 9, 1. 6. 11.
2, 1-4==Gobhila I, 8, 22-25. 5-14=], 9, 14 seqq.

II PATALA, 2 KHANDA, 19. 393

8. For the sacrifice of the new moon the first
fortnight.

g. Some say that he should keep his vow (until
the sacrifice is performed) by abstaining from food.

10. If (the proper) sacrificial food is wanting, let
him offer fruits of sacrificially pure (plants or trees);

11. Or leaves (of such plants or trees) ;

12. Or water.

13. For (even if he offers water) the sacrifice has
been performed.

14. A penance (is prescribed) for one who does
not perform the sacrifice.

15. If no Havis is indicated, one should offer
Agya.

16. The deity (only should be named), if no
Mantra is indicated.

17. In the third month of the first pregnancy (of
the sacrificer’s wife he should perform) the Pum-
savana (i.e. the ceremony to secure the birth of
a son).

18. After she has bathed, her husband should
put on her a (new) garment that has not yet been
washed, and after having sacrificed he should stand
behind her.

19. Grasping down over her right shoulder he

8. pfirvapaksho darsasya. 9. =bhoganena santanuyad ity eke.
10. svidyamane havye yag#iyanam phalani guhuyat. 11. palasdni
va. 12. spo va. 13. hutaw hi. 14. prayassittam ahutasya. 15.
sgya% guhuyad dhavishosnadese. 16. devata [corr. devatam?]
mantranddese. 17. prathamagarbhe tritiye masi pumsavanam.
18. snétam ahatendshddya hutva 211 przshéhatas 15160. 19.
dakshizam amsam anvabhimrsyanantarhitam (Chitam, “hitén, the
MSS.) nabhidesam abhimrzset pumamsav ity.

15,16 desunt. 17-23=II, 6.

394 KHADIRA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

should touch the uncovered place of her navel with
(the verse), ‘The two men’ (MB. I, 4, 8).

20. Then another (ceremony). Having bought
for three times seven barley corns or beans, a
Nyagrodha-shoot which has fruits on both sides,
which is not dry, and not touched by worms, he
should set that up with (the formula), ‘Ye herbs
everywhere, being well-minded, bestow strength on
this (sheot) ; for it will do its work,’

21. He then should take it and place it in the
open air.

22. A girl, or a (wife) addicted (to her husband),
or a student, or a Brahmazi should pound (that
Nyagrodha-shoot) without moving backward (the
stone with which she pounds it).

23. (The husband) should make (the wife) who
has bathed, lie down, and should insert (that pounded
substance) into her right nostril with (the verse),
‘A man is Agni’ (MB. I, 4, 9).

24. Then in the fourth or sixth month (of her
pregnancy) the Simantonnayana (or parting of the
hair is performed) for her.

25. After she has bathed, her husband should
put on her a garment that has not yet been washed,

20. athaparam nyagrodhasungam ubhayataAphalém asrama4m
akrimiparisr7ptam trissaptair yavai# parikriyotthdpayen mashair va
sarvatraushadhayas sumanaso bh&tva (hutva, hutv4m the MSS.)
ssyam viryam samddhatteyam karma karishyatity. 27, ahritya
vaihayasim kuryat. 22. kuméarf vratavati brahmadarf brahmani va
peshayed apratyaharanti. 23. snatam samvesya dakshize ndsika-
srotasy Asi#ket pumadn Agnir‘ity. 24. athasyas Aaturthe miasi
shash/he va simantonnayanam. 25. snatam ahatendéhddya hutva
patiéZ pr7shévatas tish/zann anupfirvayd phalavrzkshasékhaya sakret
simantam unnayet trisvetaya salalyayam Orgavato vrzksha iti.

24-27=II, 7, 1 seqq.

Il PATALA, 2 KHAWDA, 34. : 395

and after having sacrificed, he should stand behind
her and should part her hair once with a well-pro-
portioned (?) branch of a tree, on which there are
fruits, (and) with a porcupine’s quill that has three
white spots, with (the verse), ‘Rich in sap is this
tree’ (MB. I, 5, 1).

26. While she looks at a mess of boiled rice with
sesamum seeds, covered with ghee, he should ask
her, ‘What dost thou see ?’

27. He should make her reply, ‘Offspring !’

28. When the child is appearing, the sacrifice for
the woman in labour (is to be performed)—

29. With the two verses, ‘She who athwart’
(MB. I, 5, 6 seq.).

30. He should give a name to the child, ‘N.N.!’

31. That (is his) secret (name)

Before the navel-string is cut off and the
breast is given (to the child, the father) should have
rice and barley grains pounded in the way prescribed
for the Nyagrodha-shoot (see Sittra 22).

33. He should take thereof with his (right) thumb
and fourth finger and give it to the child to eat,
with (the formula), ‘This order’ (MB. I, 5, 8).

34. And butter with (the verse), ‘May intelligence
to thee’ (MB. I, 5, 9).

26. krisarasthalipikam uttaraghyztam aveksha[n]tim priidhet
kim pasyasiti. 27. pragdm iti vadayet. 28. pratish/Aite vastau
soshyantihomak. 29. ya tiraséitidvabhyam. go. asav iti nadma
dadhyat. 31. tad guhyam. 32. pran nabhikrentanat stanadanaé
ka vrihiyavau peshayee chungavrita. 33. sngush/renanamikaya
kadaya kumadram prasayed iyam agf#eti. 34. sarpis 4a medhan
ta iti,

28-34-17, 7, 13 seqq.

396 KHADIRA-GRIHYA-SOTRA,

Kuyaypa 3.

1. On the third (Tithi) of the third bright fort-
night after his birth, the father should have the child
bathed in the morning, and after sunset he should,
holding up his joined hands, towards the auspicious
directions (of the horizon), worship the moon.

2. The mother, having dressed (the son) in a
clean (garment), should hand him, with his face
turned to the north, to the father.

3. She then should pass behind (her husband’s)
back, and should station herself towards the north.

4. After he has performed worship (to the moon)
with the three (verses), ‘Thy heart, O thou with
the well-parted hair’ (MB. I, 5, 10 seqq.), and has
handed over the son, turning him towards the north,
to his mother, he should pour water out of his joined
hands with (the verse), ‘What in the moon’ (1. 1. 13).

5. (He should do the same) twice silently.

6. After a period of ten nights, or of a hundred
nights, or of one year after (the child’s birth) he
should give him a name.

7. He who is going to perform (that ceremony—
the father or a representative of the father), after he

3, 1. gananag gyautsne tritiye tritiyayam prata snipya kumaram
astam ite sdntésu dikshu pita Aandramasam upatish/fet prafgalif.
2. sukindkhadya mata prayakhed udaksirasam. 3. anuprish/ham
gatvottaratas tish‘fed. 4. yat te susima iti tisr*bhir upastha-
yodattkam matre pradaya yad ada ity apim a/galim 2४257664.
5. dvis पीक, 6. ganandd firdhvam dasaratrak Ahataratrat sam-
vatsarad va nama kuryat. 7. snapya kumaram karishyata upa-
vish/asya sudinakhadya mata prayakhed udaksirasam.

3, 1-5=Gobhila II, 8, 1-7. 6-12=II, 8, 8-17.

II PATALA, 3 KHANDA, 17. 397

has had the boy bathed, should sit down, and the
mother, having dressed him in a clean (garment),
` should hand him, with his face turned to the north,
to the performer (of the ceremony).

8. She then should walk around behind (his) back
and should sit down towards the north.

9. He should sacrifice and should touch the sense-
organs at (the boy’s) head with the (Mantra), ‘Who
art thou ?’ (MB. I, 5, 14, 15.)

10. ‘N. N.!’—(at the place thus indicated in the
Mantra) he should give him a name.

11. The same (he should pronounce) at the end
of the Mantra.

12. He should tell it to the mother first.

13. (The father) when returning from a journey,
should grasp (with his two hands) his son round the
head, with (the verses), ‘From limb by limb’ (MB.
I, 5, 16~18).

14. With (the formula), ‘With the cattle’s’ (1.1.
19), he should kiss him.

15. Silently (he should do the same) with a
daughter.

16. In the third year the tonsure (of the child’s
head is performed).

17. There the barber, warm water, a mirror, or a

8. anupr7shéham gatvottarata upavised. 9. dhutva kossfti tasya
mukhyan praz4n abhimrzsed. ro. 258४ itindma kuryat. 41. tad
eva mantrante. 12. matre prathamam 4khyaya. 13. vipro-
shyangad angad iti putrasya mardhanam parigrzhaiyat. 14. pas@-
nam tvety abhigighret. 15. tfishwim striyas. 16. trzttye varshe
faulan. 17. tatra napita ushzodakam AdarsaZ kshuro vaudum-
bara pifgfilya iti dakshizata.

13-15=I], 8, 21-25. 16-33=II, 9.

398 KHADIRA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

razor of Udumbara-wood, and (Darbha)-blades (are
placed) towards the south.

18, A bull’s dung and a mess of boiled rice with
sesamum seeds which may be more or less cooked,
to the north ;

19. And the mother with the son in her lap.

20. (The performer of the ceremony), after having
sacrificed, should look, with (the Mantra), ‘ Hither
has come’ (MB. I, 6, 1), at the barber, fixing his
thoughts on (the god) ऽव णा.

21. With (the Mantra), ‘With warm water’ (1.1. 2),
he should look at the warm water, fixing his thoughts
on Vayu.

22. With (the Mantra), ‘May the waters’ (1.1. 3),
he moistens (the boy’s hair).

23. With (the Mantra), ‘Vishzu’s’ (1.1. 4), he
should look at the mirror or at the razor of Udum-
bara-wood.

24. With (the Mantra), ‘Herb!’ (1.1. 5) he puts
seven Darbha-blades, with their points upwards
(1. €. towards the boy’s head ?), into (his hair).

25. With (the formula), ‘Axe!’ (1.1. 6) (he presses
them down) with the mirror or with the razor of
Udumbara-wood.

26. With (the Mantra), ‘With which Pishan’
(1.1. 7), he should move forward (the razor) three

18. 4naduho gomayah krisarasthalipako vrthapakva ity uttarato.
1g. mati 4a kuméram Adaya. 20, hutvayam ag4d iti napitam
prekshet Savitéram dhyayann. 21. ushvenety ushnodakam prekshed
Vayum dhyayann. 22. dpa ity untte (ante, umde, unmte, unte
the MSS.). 23. Vishwor ity 4darsam prekshetaudumbaram vau.
24. sshadha iti darbhapi#gfilis saptordhvagra abhinidhaéya. 25. sva-
dhita ity 4darsena kshurevaudumbarewa va. 26. yena Piisheti da-
kshiwatas triZ pra#kam prohet.

Il PATALA, 4 KHANDA, 3. 399

times towards the east on the right side (of the
boy’s hair), र

27. Cutting (the hair) once with a razor of metal
he should throw the hair on the bull’s dung.

28. The same rites, beginning from the moisten-
ing (of the hair, are repeated) on the left side and
on the back side (of the child’s head).

29. Grasping (with his two hands) the boy round
his head he should murmur (the verse), ‘The three-
fold age’ (1.1. 8).

30. Walking away (from the fire) in a northern
direction he should have the arrangement of (the
boy’s) hair made according to the custom of his
Gotra and of his family.

31. Let them bury the hair in the forest.

32. Some throw them on a bunch (of grass or
the like). *

33. A cow constitutes the sacrificial fee.

Kuawpa 4.

1. Let him initiate a Brahmawa in his eighth year.

2. For him the time (for being initiated) has
not passed until his sixteenth (year).

3. In the eleventh a Kshatriya.

24. sakrzd dyasena prakhidyanaduhe gomaye kesankuryad. 28,
undanaprabhrity evam paskad uttaratas fa, 29. tryayusham iti
putrasya mardhanam parigrzhya gaped. 30. udann utsr7pya kusa-
likérayed yathdgotrakulakalpam. 31. arazye kesfn nikhaneyud.
32. stambe nidadhaty eke. 33. gaur dakshiza.

4, 1. ashfame varshe brahmavam upanayet. 2. tasya shodasad
anatitah kala. 3. ekddase kshatriyam.

4, 1=Gobhila II, 19.

400 KHADIRA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

4. For him (the time has not passed) until the
twenty-second.

5. In the twelfth a Vaisya.

6. For him (the time has not passed) until the
twenty-fourth.

7. After (the student's) hair has been arranged,
and he has been adorned, and dressed in a gar-
ment which has not yet been washed, (the teacher)
should sacrifice with (the Mantras which the stu-
dent recites), ‘Agni! Lord of the vow!’ (MB.
I, 6, 9-13.)

8. He should cause (the student) to stand north-
wards of the fire, facing the west, and to join his
hands.

9. And he should himself join his hands above
(the student’s hands).

10. A Brahmaza versed in the Mantras who
stands towards the south, should fill the teacher's
joined hands with water.

11, While (the student ?) looks at him, (the teacher)
should murmur (the Mantra), ‘With him who comes
to us’ (MB. I, 6, 14).

12. (The student) to whom (the teacher) has said,
‘What is thy name?’ should pronounce a name
which he is to use at respectful salutations, derived
from (the name of) a deity or a Nakshatra, ‘I am
N.N.! (1 17.)

4. tasya dvavimsad. 5. dvadase vaisyam. 6. tasyA Aaturvimsat.
4. kusalikrztam alamkritam ahatenashadya hutvagne vratapata ity.
8. uttaratoxsgneZ pratyanmukham avasthapydagalim karayet. 9.
svayam kopari kuryad. 10. dakshivatas tish‘an mantravan brah-
mana akaryayodakdfgalim pfrayed. 41. Agantreti gapet preksha-
mane [sic]. 12. ko namAsity ukto devatdsrayam nakshatrasrayam
vabhivadantyam nama एा0#8 asav asmity.

Il PATALA, 4 KHANDA, 19 401

13. Having let the water run (out of his joined
hands over the student’s hands) the teacher should
seize with his two hands, holding the right upper-
most, (the student’s) joined hands, with (the formula),
‘ By the impulse of the god Savitrz’ (1.1. 18).

14. With (the formula), ‘Move in the sun’s course’
(1.1. 19) he should make him turn round from left to
right.

15. Grasping down over his right shoulder he
should touch his uncovered navel with (the formula),
‘(Thou art the knot) of all breath’ (1.1. 20).

16. He then should give him in charge (to the
gods) with the Antaka and the other formulas
(1.1. 20 seqq.).

17. (He touches) his right shoulder with (the for-
mula), ‘To Pragapati (I give) thee (in charge)’ (1.1. 23),

18. His left shoulder with his left (hand) with
(the formula), ‘To the god Savitrd (I give) thee (in
charge)’ (1.1. 24). °

19. Having directed him (to observe the duties .
of Brahmadarya, by the formula), ‘A student art
thou’ (1.1. 25, 26), (the teacher) sitting down should
from left to right tie round the student, who bends
his right knee and clasps his hands, the girdle made
of Muziga grass, and should cause him to repeat (the
verse), ‘ Protecting us from evil word’ (1.1. 27).

13. utsrzgyapo devasya ta iti dakshivottarabhyam hastabhyam
afigalim grihniyad 4karyas. 14. Sdryasyeti pradakshivam Avartayed.
15. dakshizam amsam anvavamr7syanantarhitam nabhim 4labhet
pravanam ity. 16, athainam paridadyad antakaprabhritibhir. 17.
dakshivam amsam PragApataye tveti. 18. savyena savyam devaya
tveti. 19. brahmatary astiti sampreshyopavisya (samprekshy’®,
samprokshy° the MSS.) dakshizaganvaktam afigalikritam prada-
kshizam mufigamekhalém 4badhnan vadayed iyam duruktad ity,

{29} pd

402 KHADIRA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

20. With (the words), ‘ Recite, sir!’ (the student)
should respectfully sit down near (the teacher).

21. He then recites the Savitri (1.1. 29) to him,
Pada by 2843, hemistich by hemistich, (and finally)
the whole—thus he should teach him the SAvitri,

22. And the Mahavydhr‘tis, one by one,

23. And the word Om.

24. He hands over to him the staff, which should
be made of (the wood of) a tree—

25. With (the formula which the student has to
recite), ‘O glorious one, make me glorious’ (1.1, 31).

26. Let him put a piece of wood (on the fire) with
(the verse), ‘To Agni a piece of wood’ (1.1. 32).

27. Let him go to beg food ;

28. First of his mother,

29. Then of other women friends.

30. He should announce the alms (received) to
his teacher.

31. He should stand silently till sunset.

32. Through a period of three nights he should
avoid eating saline food and drinking milk.

Kuanpa 5.

1. At the Godana (or cutting of the beard) the

20. adhihi bho ity upasidet. 21. tasm& anvaha अवज [8९606
stdharkasas sarvam iti sAvitrim vatayed. 22. mahavyahrztis hai-
kaikasa. 23. omkara# fa. 24. prayakhaty asmai varksham
dandam. 25. susravas sustavasam meti. 26. samidham ddadhyad
Agnaye samidham iti. 27. bhaiksham faren. 28. mataram agre.
2g. «thdnyds suhrzda. 30. aéarydya bhaikshan nivedayet. उव,
tishthed Astamayat tishvzim. 32. triratram kshadralavaze dugdham
iti vargayet.

5, 1. atha godane Aaulavat 1६217034.

5, 1-21 = Gobhila III, 1.

II PATALA, 5 KHANDA, 14. 403

rite is identical with the Kaula (cutting of the hair ;
see above, chap. 3, 16 seqq.).

2. He should have (his beard) and the hair of
his body shaven.

3. The sacrificial fee consists of an ox and a cow,
or of a pair of horses, or of sheep, for the (three)
castes respectively,

4. Or of a cow for all (castes).

5. A goat (is given) to the person who catches up
the hair.

6. The initiation (connected with the Godanakar-
man, &c.) has been declared.

7. (One should) not initiate one who does not
intend to keep the vow through one year.

8. (The use of) a garment, however, which has
not yet been washed (see chap. 4,7), is not prescribed
(here),

9. Nor the adornment (chap. 4, 7).

10. (The observances prescribed for the Godana-
vrata are the following :)

He should sleep on the ground.

711. He should avoid eating honey and flesh.

12. He should avoid sexual intercourse, shaving,
(luxurious) bathing, combing his head, and cleansing
his teeth and his feet (in a luxurious way).

13. ndsya kame reta skandet.

14. Let him not mount a chariot yoked with
cows,

2. salomam vapayed. 3. gossvavimithunani dakshinah prithag
varninam. 4. sarvesham va gaur. 5. agah kesapratigrahdyo.
6.sktam upanayanam. 7. nakarishyantam samvatsaram. 8. ani-
yuktan tv ahatam. 9. athdlamkaro, 10. sdhassamvesy. 11, ama-
dhumamsast syan. 12. maithunakshurakr:tyasnanavalekhanadanta-
dhavanapadadhavanani vargayen. 13. ndsya kame reta skanden.
14. na goyuktam arohen.

०१2

404 KHADIRA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

15. Nor (wear) shoes in the village.

16, Wearing the girdle, going the rounds for
alms, (carrying) a staff, putting fuel (on the fire),
touching water, reverentially saluting -(the teacher)
in the morning: (these are the) standing (duties).

17. The Goddna-vrata, the Vrdtika-vrata, the
Aditya-vrata, the Upanishad-vrata, and the Gyesh-
thasama-vrata (last) one year (each).

18. The Aditya-vrata some (do) not (ungergo).

19. They who undergo it, wear one garment.

20. They allow nothing to be between (themselves
and) the sun.

21. And they do not descend into water.

22. For the Sakvart verses, twelve, nine, six, or
three (years through which the Vrata is to be kept)
make up the various possibilities.

3. He (who keeps the Sakvara-vrata) wears
dark clothes.

24. He eats dark food.

25. He is entirely addicted to his teacher.

26. He should stand in day-time.

27. He should sit at night.

28. According to some (teachers, the Vrata may
last only) one year, if the ancestors (of the student)
have learnt (the Sakvari verses).

15. na grama upanahau, 16. mekhaladharanabhaikshakarana-
damdasamidadhanopasparsanapratarabhivada nityam. 17. godana-
vratikadityavratopanishaggyesh‘hasamikas samvatsara. 18. nadditya-
vratam ekeshaz. 19. ye Aaranty ekavasaso bhavanty. 20. Adit-
yav ka nantardadhate. 21. na 4aposbhyupayanti. 22. sakvarizdm
dvadasa nava sha/traya iti vikalpaz. 23. krishwavastrak. 24.
kvishnabhaksha. 25. akaryadhinas. 26. tishthed diva. 27. ssita
naktam. 28. samvatsaram ekeshdm pfGrvais srutas fed,

22-34 = 1, 2.

II PATALA, 5 KHANDA, 35. 405

29. (The teacher) should sing (those verses) to
(the student) who has fasted and veiled his eyes
(thinking), ‘May (the teacher) not burn me (with
the Sakvari verses),’

30. In the morning they make (the student) look
at such things as they expect will not burn him,
viz. water, fire, a calf, the sun.

31. At water (he should look) with (the words),
‘Water have I beheld!’ At fire with (the words),
‘Light have I beheld!’ At the calf with (the words),
‘Cattle have I beheld!’ At the sun with (the
words), ‘The sky have I beheld!’—thus he should
break his silence. °

32. A cow is the fee (for the teacher),

33. A brazen vessel, a garment, and a golden
ornament.

34. At the Anupravaéantya ceremonies (see Asva-
layana-Grihya I, 22, 12) he should sacrifice Agya
with (the two verses), ‘To the Azk, to the SAman
we sacrifice’ (SAma-veda IJ, 369), and, ‘The lord of
the seat’ (Sv. I, 171).

35. If he has touched a fire-altar or a sacrificial
post, if he has humming in his ears, or if his eye

29. uposhitaya parizaddhakshayanugapayed yatha ma na pra-
dhakshyatfti. 39. tam pratar abhivikshayanti yany apradhakshy-
anti manyante=posgnim vatsam Adityam. 31. aposbhivyakhyam
ity apo gyotir abhivyakhyam ity agnim pasfin abhivyakhyam iti
vatsam sur [sic] abhivyakhyam ity Adityam visriged vakam. 32.
gaur dakshiva. 33. kamso vaso rukmas 44. 34. snupravadani-
yeshv rzkam sfma Sadasaspatim iti Aagyam guhuyas. 35. 4itya-
yfpopasparsanakarwakrosdkshivepaneshu sfiry4bhyuditas sfiryabhi-
nimrukta indriyais 4a papasparsaiZ punar mam ity etaébhyam ahuttr
(correct, hut? ?) guhuyad.

35-37 = 117, 3, 34-36.

406 KHADIRA-GRIHYA-SOTRA,

palpitates, or if the sun rises or sets while he is
sleeping, or if his organs of sense have been defiled
by something bad, he should sacrifice two oblations
of Agya with the two (verses), ‘May (my strength)
return to me;’

36. Or two pieces of wood anointed with Agya.

37. Or he may murmur (those verses) at light
(offences). Or he may murmur (those verses) at
light (offences).

End of the Second 22212.

36. agyalipte vi samidhau. 34. gaped va laghushu, gaped va
laghushu. dvitiyapa/alah.

III PATALA, I KHANDA, 13. 407

Parata [II], Kuanpa 1.

1. When (the student) is going to take the bath
(at the end of his studentship), he seats himself in
an enclosure to the east of his teacher's house.

2. The teacher (sits) facing the north,

3. On eastward-pointed (Darbha-grass).

4. Thus one (should act) who is desirous of holy
ustre,

5. (The student should sit) in a cow-stable, if he
is desirous of cattle,

6. In an assembly-hall, if desirous of renown.

7. Let him boil water with all kinds of herbs,

8. And with scents.

g. With that water, which must be lukewarm, the
teacher should besprinkle (the student).

10, Or (the student should do so) himself, because
that is signified by the Mantra.

11. Some say that both (should do so).

12, The teacher should say (in the Mantra),
‘Therewith (I besprinkle) him,’ (instead of, ‘There-
with I besprinkle myself’).

13. With (the verses), ‘Which in the waters’
(MB. I, 7, t) (the student) should pour out his joined
hands full of water;

III, 1, 1. Aplavane purastéd afaryakulasya parivrita asta. 2.
udanmukha 44aryak. 3. pragagreshv. 4. evam brahmavarkasa-
kémo. 5. gosh/he pasukdmas. 6. sabhdyam yasaskdmah. = वृ.
sarvaushadhendpa phazayet. 8. surabhibhis 4a. 9. tabhis sitosh-
nabhir 4karyosbhishi#ket. 10. svayam va mantrabhivadad. 11.
ubhav ity eke. 412. tenemam ity 44aryo brfiyad. 13. ye apsv ity
apam afigalim 9४258६64.

II, 1, 1-32 =Gobhila III, 4, 7 seqq. (4-6, 11, 12, 1 5, 20 desunt).

408 KHADIRA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

14, And with (the formula), ‘What (is dreadful)
in the waters’ (1.1. 2);

15. And silently.

16, With (the formula), ‘The shining one’ (1.1. 3),
he should draw (some water) and should besprinkle
himself (therewith) ;

17. And with (the verse), ‘By which the wife’
(1.1. 5);

18, And silently.

19. With (the formulas), ‘ Rising’ (1.1. 6-8), he
should worship the sun.

20. He may repeat (the sections of that Mantra)
continuously.

21. If he repeats them separately, he should add
at the end (of each section), ‘The eye art thou’
(1. 1. 9).

22. With (the verse), ‘Loosen the highest’ (1.1. ro),
he should take off the girdle.

23. After he has eaten something, he should have
his hair, his beard, the hair of his body, and his nails
cut, so as to leave the lock of hair (as required by
the custom of his family).

24. Having adorned himself and put on clothes
which have not yet been washed, he should put
a garland (on his head) with (the formula), ‘Luck’
(1.1. rr).

25. The two shoes (he puts on) with (the formula),
‘Leaders are you’ (1.1. 12).

14. yad apam iti 4a. 15. tishvi# fa. 16. yo rofana iti
grihyatmanam abhishi#éed. 17. yena striyam iti 4a. 18. tish-
nit ko. 19. sdyann ity Adityam upatish/fet. 20. samasyed va.
21. viharann anusamhare’ fakshur asity. 22. ud uttamam iti me-
khalam avamuffet. 23. prasya vapayek khikavargam kesasma-
srulomanakhany. 24. alamkrzto=hatavdsasa srir iti sragam prati-
muvken. 25. netryau stha ity updnahau.

III PATALA, I KHANDA, 38. 409

26. With (the formula), ‘The Gandharva art thou’
(1.1. 13), he takes a bamboo staff.

27. He should approach the teacher and look at
the assembly (of pupils, &c.) with (the formula),
‘ Like an eye-ball’ (4.1. 14).

28. Sitting down, he should touch the sense-
organs at his head with (the Mantra), ‘Covered by
the lips’ (1.1. 15).

29. Let him touch a chariot yoked with oxen,
with (the verse), ‘O tree’ (1.1. 16).

30. With (the words), ‘He who stands on thee’
(1.1. 16), he should mount it.

31. Having driven (some distance) in an eastern
or northern direction, he should turn round from
left to right. ।

32. Some say that when he has come back, (his
teacher should offer to him) the Argha reception.

33. From that time he shall assume a dignified
demeanour.

34. nagdtalomnyopahasam iksfet.

35. Nor (should he wish for sport) with a girl
who is the only child of her mother,

36. Nor with a woman during her courses,

37. Nor with (a woman) who descends from the
same ९९251015.

38. Let him not eat food which has been brought

26, vainavam dandam ddadydd Gandharvossity. 27. upetyd-
karyam parishadam prekshed yaksham ivety. 28. upavisyaushcha-
pidhaneti mukhy4n praz4n abhimrised. 29. goyuktam ratham
alabhed vanaspata ity. 39. dsthata ta ity arohet. 31. pra4im
praydyodisim va gatva,pradakshivam 4vartayet. 32. pratydgata-
yarghyam ity eke. 33. vréddhasili syfd ata firdhvam. 34. naga-
talomnyopahasam [दकल 35. ndyugy (read, nayugva). 36. na
ragasvalaya. 37. na samanarshya. 38. sparaya वर्का prapannaf
{read, prapanna-) dvidpakvaparyushitani nasntyad.

33-44 177, 5 (4० deest).

410 KHADIRA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

by another door (than the usual), or which has been
cooked twice, or which has stood over-night—

39. Except such as is prepared of vegetables,
flesh, barley, or flour—

40. Or of milk.

41. He shall avoid gathering fruits, looking into
wells, running while it is raining, and taking his
shoes in his hands,

42. He should not wear a scentless wreath,

43. If it is not a wreath of gold.

44. He should not use the word ‘blessed’ without
a reason,

45. If he is desirous of thriving (in his cattle), he
should with (the Mantra), ‘May these’ (MB. I, 8, 1)
have his cows driven out.

46. When they have come back, (he should recite
the Mantra), ‘These which are rich in sweet’ (1.1. 2).

47. Ifhe is desirous of thriving (in his cattle), he
should lick the forehead of the first-born calf, before
it is licked by its mother, and should gulp with (the
formula), (‘ Thou art the phlegm) of the cows’ (1.1. 3).

48. When the cows have calved, he should at
night sacrifice in the cow-stable churned curds with
drops of ghee, with (the verse), ‘ Seizer’ (1.1. 4).

39. anyatra skamamsayavapish/avikarebhyak. त, fa.
41. phalaprasayanodapanavekshamavarshatidhavanopanatsvayamha-
ravdni na kuryan. 42. nadgandham sragam dharayen. 43. na
ked dhirazyasrag. 44. bhadram iti na vrztha vyaharet. 45. push-
tikémo gah prakdlayed ima maiti. 46. praty4gaté ima madhu-
matir iti, 47. pushfkama eva prathamagatasya vatsasya pran
matu/ pralehanal lald/am ullihya nigired ga%am iti. 48. sampra-
gatasu goshéhe nisay4m vilayana# guhuyat samgrahanety.

45-52=III, 6.

III PATALA, 2 KHANDA, 4. 411

49. Now another (ceremony). He should make
marks on the ears of a male and of a female calf
with (the formula), ‘The world art thou’ (1.1. 5, 6).

50. First on the male.

51. He should recite over them (the Mantra),
‘With metal’ (1. 1. 7).

52. When the rope (to which the calves are bound)
is spread out, (let him recite over it the Mantra),
‘This rope’ 0.1. 8).

Kuanpa 2,

1. On the full-moon day of (the month) Sravaza,
let him carry forward fire from his house, and let
him besmear (the place around it) to the extent of
more than one prakrama (i.e. step) towards’ the
different directions (of the horizon).

2. Having once taken a quantity of flour, and
having put it into (the spoon called) Darvi, he should
pour out water on the besmeared place to the east
(of the fire), and should offer a Bali with (the
formula), ((O king of serpents) dwelling towards
the east’ (MB. II, 1, 1).

3. He should pour out the rest of the water.

4. Having touched water, he should do the same

49. athdparam vatsamithunayo# kare lakshazam kuryad bhu-
vanam iti, 50. pumsosgre. 51. lohitenety anumantrayeta. 52.
tanti prasaritém iyan tantiti.

2, 7, stdvamyam paurvamasyam gréhad agnim atipraziya prati-
disam upalimped adhike prakrame. 2. sakrzdgrzhitan saktfin
darvyam kretva pfrvopalipte nintyapo yak prafydm iti balim nir-
vapen. 3. ninayed apam sesham. 4. apa upaspr7syaivam prati-
disam yathalingam.

2, 1-7. 14. 15=HII, 7.

412 KHADIRA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

towards the other directions (of the horizon) accord-
ing as they are mentioned in the Mantras.

5. Between (the besmeared surface) towards the
south and that towards the east and the fire (there
should be) a passage.

6. After he has thrown the remnants (of flour) out
of the basket into the fire, he should go from (the
fire) which has been carried forward, to that (fire)
which has not (been carried forward), and should
turn his hands downwards (so as to touch the earth
with them) and should murmur (the Mantra), ‘ Ado-
ration to the earth’s’ (1.1. 3).

7. Thence rising he should place (to the north of
the fire) a bunch of Darbha-grass with (the Mantra),
‘The king Soma’ (I. 1. 4), and should fix his thoughts
on the serpents that are in that bunch.

8. Taking a portion of fried grain, he should go
out of the village in a northern or eastern direction,
and should sacrifice it with his joined hands with
the four (verses), ‘Hearken, Raka!’ (MB. II, 6, 2
seqq.).

9. Walking eastwards he should murmur, ‘ Be a
giver of wealth’ (1.1. 6).

10. Thus three times to the different quarters and
intermediate quarters (of the horizon).

5. dakshivzapaskime antarenAgnif ka samkarah. 6. sfirpeza sish-
“an agnav opyatipramitad anatiprazftasyardham gatva nyazkau pant
kritva namah Prithivya iti gapet. 7. tata utthdya Somo rageti
darbhastambam upasthaya (correct, upasthapya) stambasthan sarpan
manasé dhyayann. 8. akshatan adaya prin vodan va graman nish-
kramya guhuydd afgalind haye Raka iti fatasrzbhiz. 9. pran
utkramya gaped vasuvana edhiti. 10. tris tri# pratidisam avan-
taradeseshu ko.

8-13=IV, 8, 1 seqq- (10 deest).

III PATALA, 2 KHANDA, 22. 413

11. Looking upwards (he should offer a Bali) to
the hosts of divine beings,

12, (Looking) towards the side, to the hosts of
other beings ;

13. Looking downwards, he should go back (to the
fire) without looking back, and should eat the fried
grain.

14. On the following day he should prepare flour
of fried grain, should put it into a new vessel, and
after sunset he should offer Balis.

15. (The same is repeated every day) till the
Agrahayant day.

16. On the full-moon day of Praush¢/apada (or)
under (the Nakshatra) Hasta they should begin the
Veda-study ;

17. On the full-moon day of Sravama, according
to some (teachers).

18. Having sacrificed as at the Upanayana—

19. He should cause (the students) to recite the
SAvitri,

20. (The verse), ‘Soma, the king’ (Sama-veda
I, 91), and the first verses of the Parvans.

21, Let them eat grain and curds with two
appropriate (verses).

22. On the following day in the morning let them
repeat (the Veda) to their pupils.

11. srdhvam prekshan devayaganebhyas (correct, devagane-
bhyas). 12. tiryann itaraganebhyo. 13. svan prekshan pratyetya-
navekshann akshatén prasntyas. 14. kAvobhiites kshatasaktn
kritva nave patre nidhaydstam ite balfn hared. 15. agrahdyawyas.
16. praush/hapadiw hastenadhyayan upakuryud. 17. sravanim
ity eke. 18. hutvopanayanavat. 19. savitrim anuvafayet. 20.
Somam raganam parvadims ka. 27. dhana dadhi 4a prasniyur
abhirfipabhy4m. 22. svobhfite pratar adhiyira# £rishyebhyo.

16~33=III, 3 (22, 25, 29, 33 desunt).

414 KHADIRA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

23. (After each section of the text) they should
repeat (as a sort of index ?) the beginnings of the
९2435 and the Prastavas (of the Samans).

24. Then the Rahasya texts are chanted,

25. Except when lightning is seen or thunder
heard.

26. When they have studied four months and a
half, they finish on the full-moon day of Pausha.

27. From that time studying is forbidden when
clouds appear,

28. And when lightning is seen, or thunder heard,
or when it is drizzling.

29. When these three things happen together,
(studying is forbidden) till the twilight has thrice
passed.

30. On an Ashéaka, on a new-moon day, on the
(three) festivals which come once in four months, and
at (the beginning of) the northern course of the sun,
(studying is forbidden) for one night with one day
before and one day after it.

31. And if a fellow-pupil has died.

32. On the falling of a meteor, or after an earth-
quake, or an eclipse of the sun or of the moon, on
these occasions one should know (that studying is
forbidden) until the same time next day.

33. The Kathas and Kauthumas, however, state

23. snuvakya’ kuryur r7gAdibhiA prastavais 44. 24. xnuganam
rahasydnadm. 25. vidyutstanayitnuvargam. 26. ardhapa#laman
masin adhitya paushim utsargas. 27. tata firdhvam mantrana-
dhydyo (correct, abhranddhyayo). 28. vidyutstanayitnuvr/shéiteshu
(correct, °prushiteshu or °pr7shiteshu; see Ludwig’s note on Rig-
veda VIII, 1, 12) ९8. 29. trisannipate trisandhyam. 30. ash/akam
amavasyam Aaturmasir udagayane fa pakshivim ratriv. 31. sa-
brahmafariai 4a preta. 32. ulkapate bhfimitale gyotishos kopa-
sarga eteshv 4kdlikam vidyat. 33. karshvan tu Ka¢hakauthuma2.

III PATALA, 3 KHANDA, 10, 415

that (when rain has fallen, studying is forbidden) as
long as the water stands in the ditches.

Kuawpa 8.

1, On the full-moon day of Asvayuga milk-rice
sacred to Rudra (is prepared).

2, He should offer it with (the Mantra), ‘ Not to
our children.’

3. Let him pour Agya into milk; this is called
2 Preshataka.

4. Therewith he should besprinkle the cows when
they have come home, with (the Mantra), ‘May
Mitra and Varuza’ (SAma-veda I, 220).

5. That night he should let the calves join their
mothers.

6. At the sacrifice of the first-fruits, milk-rice
sacred to Indra and Agni (is prepared).

7. Let him sacrifice Agya with the four (verses),
‘To the bearer of the hundred weapons’ (MB. II, 1,
9 seqq,),

8. And afterwards with (the verse), ‘May Agni
eat’ (1. 1. 15).

g. All of them who have received the initiation,
should eat the remainder of that (sacrificial food).

10. Having ‘spread under’ water, he should cut
off two portions of the new fruits.

3, 1. asvayugim Rudraya payaso. 2. ma nas toka iti guhuyat.
3. payasy avanayed 4gyam tat pr’shatakam. 4. tendbhydgata ga
ukshed 4 no Mitravarumeti. 5. vatsdms ka matrzbhis saha vasayet
tam ratrim. 6. navayagfie payasa aindragnaf. 7. satdyudha-
yeti katasrzbhir 4gyam guhuyad. 8. uparish/ad Agnik prasnatv
iti 4a. 9. tasya sesham prasniyur yavanta upeta. 10. upastiryapo
dvir navasyavadyet.

3, 1-15=Gobhila III, 8 (3 deest).

416 KHADIRA-GRIHY A-SOTRA.

. 11, Three (portions are cut off) by descendants of
शण.

12. Over (these portions) water (is poured).

13. He should swallow (some part of that food)
three times without chewing it, with (the Mantra),
‘From the good’ (1.1. 13);

14. Or at (the partaking of) barley with (the
Mantra), ‘ This barley’ (1.1. 16).

15. With (the Mantra), ‘This art thou’ (1. 1. 14),
let him touch the different sense-organs at his head.

16. The Agrahdyaza ceremony has been explained
by the Sravaza (ceremony).

17. Let him (not ?) murmur (the Mantra), ‘Adora-
tion to the Earth’ (see chap. 2, 6).

18. In the evening let him make an oblation of
milk-rice with (the verse), ‘As the first’ (MB. IT, 2, 1)

19. Turning downwards his two hands (so as to
touch the sacrificial grass) he should murmur (the
Mantra), ‘In worldly strength’ (1. 1. 2, 3).

20. Having spread out to the west of the fire a
layer of northward-pointed grass, so that it is inclined
towards the north, the householder sits down on that
layer,

21. (And) the other persons in due order.

Then, without an interval, their wives,

11. trir Bhrzgfivam. 12. apa# koparish4ad. 13. bhadran na
ity asamkhadya pragiret tris पा. 14. etam u tyam iti va yavanam.
15. amossiti mukhyan praz4n abhimrésed. 16. Agrahayanam
karma sravanmenaiva vyakhyatam. 17. namahk Prithivya iti gapet
(read, iti na gapet?). 18. pradoshe pdyasasya guhuy4t prathameti.
19. nya#ikau pani kritva prati kshatra iti gapet. 20. 25620 agne
svastaram udagagrais tr7zair udakpravazam Astirya tasminn 4sta~
Trane grihapatir 2516. 21. snupfirvam itare. 22. snantara bharya

16-31=III, 9 and 10, 1-17 (29 deest).

III PATALA, 4 KHANDA, I. 417

23. And their children.

24. The householder, turning his hands downwards
(so as to touch the layer of grass), should murmur
(the Mantra), ‘ Be soft’ (1.1. 4).

25. When he has finished that (verse), they should
lie down on their right sides. They should turn
round three times, turning themselves towards them-
selves (1. €. turning round forwards, not backwards,
and thus returning to their former position ?).

26. Let them repeat the auspicious hymns.

27. Then let them do what they like.

28. The eighth days of the three dark fortnights
after the Agrahdyawt are called the Ash/aks.

29. On (each of) these a mess of cooked food (is
sacrificed),

30. And eight cakes on the first.

31. These he should bake ina dish without turning
them round. :

2. On the last (Ash¢aka) vegetables (are offered).
(So also) at the Anvaharya (Sraddha).

33. Let him sacrifice with (the formula), ‘To the

^ 511८2158 Svaha!’

Kuaypa 4.
1. On the middle (Ashzaka) a cow (is sacrificed).

23. putras ha. 24. nyaf#kau pant kritva syoneti gréhapatir
gapet. 25. samaptayam dakshinaiZ parsvai# samviseyus tris trir
abhyaétmam 4vritya. 26. svastyayanani kuryus. 27. tato yathar-
tham 50. 28. firdhvam Agrahdyazyds tisras tdmisrash/amyo
ssh/aka ity 82130206. 29. tasu sthalipaka. 30. ash/au Aapiipah
pratham4yam. 3t. tan aparivartayan kapdle srapayed. 32. utta-
maydm sikam anvaharye. 33. xsh/akdyai svaheti guhuyat.

4, 1. madhyamayaz gaus.

32, 33=1V, 4,17. 21.
4, 1-13=Gobhila III, ro, 18 seqq.

[29] Ee

418 KHADIRA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

2. He should place that (cow) to the east of the
fire, facing the west, and should sacrifice (Agya) with
(the verse), ‘What, O beasts’ (MB. II, 2, 5).

3. After having made that oblation he should recite
over (the cow the verse), ‘May to thee’ (I. 1. 6).

4. Let him sprinkle it with water in which barley
is, with (the formula), ‘Agreeable to the Ash¢aka I
sprinkle thee!’

5. Having sprinkled it and carried a fire-brand
round it, he should give the Prokshazi water (to the
cow) to drink.

6. Going in a northern direction (from the fire)
he should kill (the cow), the head of which is turned
to the west, the feet to the north.

7. After it has been killed, he should sacrifice
(Agya) with (the verse), ‘If the beast’ (1.1. 8).

8. His wife should wash the apertures of its body.

9. After (the cow's body) has been opened, so
that two purifiers (i.e. grass-blades) have been put
under (the knife), he should have the omentum
drawn out. .

10. Seizing it with one branch and with another
forked branch of a sacrificially pure tree he should
roast it

17. When it has ceased to drop, he should hew
(the cow) to pieces

2. tam purastad agnef pratyahmukhim avasthapya guhuydd
yat pasava iti, 3. hutva Aanumantrayetanu एला. 4. yavama-
tibhir adbhiZ prokshed ash/akayai tva gush/am (correct, gush/m)
prokshamiti. 5. prokshyolmukena parihrztya prokshaziz payayed.
6. udanh utsr7pya pratyaksirasam (sim, “sim the MSS.) udakpadim
samgfapayet. 7. samgiaptayam guhuyad yat pasur iti. 8. tasyaz
patni srotamsi prakshalayet. 9. pavitre antardhayotkrztya vapaém
uddharayed. 10. yag#iyasya vrzkshasya visakhasakhabhyam pari-
grihyagnau srapayet. अव्र, prasritayAm visased.

Il] PATALA, 4 KHANDA, 23. 419

12. The ‘spreading under’ and sprinkling (of
Agya) on (the omentum) has been described. (It is
done) as at the Svishfakrzt oblation (see II, 1, 24).

13. He should sacrifice with (the formula), ‘To
the Ash¢aké Sva4ha!’ ~

14. The Avadanas (or portions which have to be
cut off) he should have taken from all its limbs.

15. Not from the left thigh and the lungs.

16. The left thigh he keeps (for the Anvash/akya).

17. He should cook the Avadanas and a mess of
sacrificial food, (stirring up the ones and the other)
with two different pot-ladles.

18. The juice he lets drop into a brazen vessel.

19. The Avadanas he puts on branches of the
Plaksha tree. :

20. From each (Avadana) he should cut off (the
prescribed portions, and should put them) into a
brazen vessel ;

21. And from the mess of cooked food.

22. Let him take four portions or eight portions of
Agya(?) and let him sacrifice it with (the verses),
‘Into Agni’ (MB. II, 2, 9 seqq.). =

23. Let him make oblations out of the brazen
vessel, each oblation with two of the following
(verses).

12. uktam upastarawibhigharazam yatha svish/akrzto. 13. ssh/a-
kayai sviheti guhuyat. 414. sarvangebhyosvadanany uddharayen,
15. na savyat sakthno na klomna#. = 16. savyam sakthi nidhaya.
17. prithan mekshava4bhy4m avadanani sthaltpaka# fa srapayitva.
18, kamse rasam prasravya. 19. plakshasikhdasv avadanani kritvai.
20. skaikasmat kamse<vadyet. 21. sthalipakaé fa. 22. Aaturgr?-
hitam ashéagrchitam vatra (vagyam? vatram, vatra the MSS.) guhu-
yad Agnav iti. 23. kamsdt parabhir dvabhydm dvabhydm ekaikam
ahutim. ।

14-24 = 1४, I, 3-17.
Ee2

420 KHADIRA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

24. The oblation to (Agni) Svishéakv7t with the
eighth (verse).

25. Ata sacrifice to the Fathers the omentum is
sacrificed with (the verse), ‘ Carry the omentum’ (MB.
II, 3, 16)

26, At one to the gods with (the verse), ‘ Gata-
vedas !’ (1. 1.17.)

27. If (the deity is) unknown, (in the formula for)
assigning (the oblation, instead of the name of a deity
the name of) that (ceremony is put)—

28. As (for instance), ‘To the Ash¢aka,’

29. An animal is the sacrificial fee at (the sacrifice
of) an animal ;

30. A full vessel at (that of) a mess of cooked food.

Kuawpa 5.

1. On the ninth or tenth (of the dark fortnight)
the Anvash¢akya (ceremony is performed).

To the south-east (of the house) they partition
off (a place with mats or the like), and to the northern
part of that (place) he should carry a fire which has
been kindled by attrition.

3. Let him take one portion of rice, let him remove
the husks once, and let. him cook it, stirring it up
from right to left.

24. sauvish/akrztam ash/amya. 25. vaha vapdm iti pitrye vapa-
homo. 26. Gataveda iti daivatye. 27. tadidesam anagfate. 28.
yathash/akaya iti, 29. pasur eva pasor dakshiza. 30. sthalipa-
kasya pfirzapatram.

5, 1. navamim dasamima vanvash/akyam. 2. dakshizapfirva-
bhage parivarya tatrottarardhe mathitvagnim pramayet. 3. sakrzd~
grihitan vwrihin sakrztphalikrztan prasavyam udayuva# srapayed.

25-28=IV, 4, 22~24 (29 deest). 30=I, 9, 6. 10.
1-12=Gobhila IV, 2.

IN PATALA, 5 KHANDA, 13 427

4. And some flesh of that thigh (see above, chap.
4, 16).

5. He should take it from the fire in a southern
direction, and should omit the second sprinkling (of
Agya) on it.

6. To the west of the fire he should dig, in the
southern part (of the place mentioned in Satra 2) three
pits, four inches in depth and breadth.

7. He should carry the fire to the east of them.

8. He should strew (Darbha-grass round the fire),

9. And (into) the pits.

10. Having spread out to the west of the fire a
layer of southward-pointed grass so that it is inclined
towards the south, he should put (a mat) on it.

11. On that (grass) he should place the sacrificial
implements, one by one.

12, Cutting off (the prescribed portions of the
sacrificial food, and putting those portions) into
the brazen vessel he should sacrifice, picking out
(portions of the Havis) with the pot-ladle, with (the
formulas), ‘Svah4 to Soma Pityzmat! Svaha to
Agni Kavyavahana!’ (MB. II, 3, 1, 2.)

13. With his left hand he should lay down a fire-
brand on the southern side of the pits (Satra 6), with

4. amushmaé 4a sakthno mamsam iti. 5. dakshizodvasya na
pratyabhigharayet. 6. paskdd agner dakshinds tisrak 1219404
khanyaé Aaturangulam adhas tiryak fa. 7. 14547 purastdd शहा
pramayet. 8. strzmuyat. 9. karshfis fa. 10. paskdad agne sva~
staram dakshinfgrais trizair dakshizdpravanam 4stirya br7sim upari
nidadhyat. 11. tasminn ekaikam dharet. 412. kamse samavadaya
mekshamenopaghatam guhuyat svaha Somaya pitr?mate svahagnaye
kavyavahandyeti. 13. savyenolmukam dakshivataz karshGr nida-
dhyad apahata iti.

13-34=1V, 3 (23 deest).

422 KHADIRA-GRIHYA-SUTRA,

(the formula), ‘ (The Asuras have been) driven away’
(MB. 17, 3, 3).

14. (He should perform the different rites) in the
eastern pit for his father,

15. In the middle for his grandfather,

16. In the last for his great-grandfather.

17. Let him pour out vessels of water, from right
to left, into the pits, pronouncing the name of each
one (of his ancestors), with (the formula), ` पि. N.!
Wash thyself, and they who follow thee here, and
they whom thou followest. To thee Svadha!’

18. In the same way he should put down the
Pizdas for them and should murmur, ‘Here, O
Fathers, enjoy yourselves; show your manly vigour
each for his part’ (MB. II, 3, 6).

19. After he has spoken thus, he should turn to
the north, doubling his left arm, turning round from
right to left.

20. Holding his breath and fixing his thoughts on
something good he should, while turning back (in the
same way), murmur: ‘The Fathers have enjoyed
themselves; they have shown their manly vigour
each for his part’ (MB. II, 3, 7).

21. He should sprinkle collyrium on three Darbha-

14. pirvasydm karshvamw pitur. 15. madhyamayam pitaéma-
hasyo. 16. sttamay4m prapitimahasyo. 17. sdapatrazy apasalavi
karshashu ninayed ekaikasya namoktv4sav avanenikshva ye Aatra
tvanu yams ka tvam anu tasmai te svaheti (correct, svadheti). 18.
tathaiva pizdan nidhaya gaped atra pitaro madayadhvam yatha-
bhagam avrishayadhvam ity. 19. uktvodann Avarteta savyam
bihum upasamhritya prasavyam dvrityo. 20. spatimya kalydzam
dhyayann abhiparyavartamaéno gaped amimadanta pitaro yatha-
bhagam 4Avrzshayishateti. 21. 11570 darbhapifgilir afganena
nighrishya karshdshu nidadhyad yathapindam.

रा PATALA, 5 KHANDA, 30. 423

blades, and should put them down into the pits in
the same way as the Pizdas,

22. And sesdmum oil and perfumes.

23. For the Pizdas and the following offerings he
should alter the formula (Satra 17) accordingly.

24. Now (follows) the deprecation.

25. On the eastern pit he lays his hands, turning
the inside of the right hand upwards, with (the for-
mula), ‘ Adoration to you, O Fathers, for the sake of
life! Adoration to you, O Fathers, for the sake of vital
breath !’ (MB. II, 3, 8.)

26. On the middle, turning the inside of the left
hand upwards, with (the formula), ‘Adoration to you,
O Fathers, for the sake of terror! Adoration to
you, O Fathers, for the sake of sap!’ (MB. 1. 1.)

27. On the western, turning the inside of the right
hand upwards, with (the formula), ‘ Adoration to you,
O Fathers, for the sake of comfort (svadha)! Ado-
ration to you, O Fathers, for the sake of wrath!’
(MB. 17, 3, 9.)

28. Joining his hands—

29. (He should murmur the formula), ‘ Adoration
to you’ (MB. II, 3, 9).

30. He should lay down threads into the pits in
the same way as the Pizdas, with (the formula),
‘This (garment) to you.’

22. tailam surabhi. 4a. 23. pizdaprabhr7ti yathartham fhed.
24. atha nihnavanam, 2g. pdrvasydm karshvam dakshizottanau
pat kr#tva namo va pitaro givaya namo ४2४ pitaras sfishdyeti.
26. savyottanau madhyamaydm namo ४३९ pitaro ghorfaya namo
४24 pitaro rasdyeti. 27. dakshizottinau pastimdydm namo vah
pitara svadhayai namo va4 pitaro manyava ity. 28. afgalim
kritva 29. namo vaiti. 30. sfitratantfin karshishu nidadhydd
yathapixdam etad va ity.

424 KHADIRA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

31. He should recite over the pits (the verse),
‘ Bringing strength’ (MB. IT, 3, 13).

32. The middle Pizda he should-give to his wife
to eat, if she is desirous of a son, with (the verse),
‘Give fruit.’

33. With (the verse), ‘(Gatavedas) has been our
messenger’ (MB. II, 3, 15), he should throw the fire-
brand into the fire.

34. They should take the sacrificial vessels back
two by two.

35. The same is the rite of the Pixdapitriyaga.

36. Let him cook the Havis in the (sacred)
domestic fire.

37. From that fire (let him take the fire which) he
carries forward (see above, 5073. 2}.

38. (Here is only) one pit.

39. No layer of grass (50६2. 10).

40. Of the mess of cooked food sacred to Indrazi
he should sacrifice with (the verse), ‘The Ek4sh/aka’
(MB. II, 3,19). He should sacrifice with (the verse),
‘The Ekash¢aka,’ +

End of the Third 22212.

31. पिक vahanttr iti karshGr anumantrayeta. 32. madhyamam
Pizdam putrakamam prasayed adhattety. 33. abhfin no diita ity
ulmukam agnau prakshiped. 34. dvandvam pdatramy atihareyur.
35. esha eva pindapitrzyagf#akalpo. 36. grihyesgnau havis sra-
payet. 37. tata evatipravayed. 38. eka karshfr. 39. na
svastara. 40. Indraaya sthalipakasyaikash/aketi guhuyad ekash/a-
keti guhuyat. _—trztiyapasalah.

35-39=1V, 4 1 seqqg. 4o=1V, 4, 32. 33.

IV PATALA, I KHANDA, 10, 425

ParaLta IV, Kuanpa 1.

1. When undertaking ceremonies for the obtain-
ment of special wishes, let him omit six meals or
three.

2. At such ceremonies as are repeated daily, (let
him do so only) in the beginning ;

3. After (the céremony), if it is performed on
account of a prodigy.

4. Thus also at the performances of the sacrificial
day (i. €. of the first day of the fortnight).

5. One who keeps the vow (of fasting) through
one fortnight, (may avail himself of the following
indulgence) :

6. If he is not able (to subsist entirely without
food, let him drink) rice-water once a day.

7. Let him murmur the Prapada formula (MB. IT,
4, 5), sitting in the forest on eastward-pointed grass-
blades.

8. Thus one who is desirous of holy lustre.

9. One who is desirous of cattle, as stated above
(III, 1, 5?).

10. One who desires that his stock of cattle

IV, 1, 1. kamyeshu shad bhaktani trizi va nasnfyan. 2._nitya-
prayuktandm adita. 3. uparish/4t sdnnipatika. 4. evam yagani-
yaprayogeshv. = 5. ardhamAsavraty. 6. asaktau peyam (read,
peyam) ekam kdlam. 7. aranye prapadam gaped 85184 prag-
agreshv. 8. evam brahmavarkasakimo. 9. yathoktam pasu-
kamak. 10. sahasrabahur iti pasusvastyayanakamo vrihiyavau
guhuyad. :

IV, 1, 1-18=Gobhila IV, 5, 1, 9, 10, 11, 13, 12, 27, 24, 25; 145
15,18, 19, 20, 27, 28, 22, 23, 30-34 (9 deest).

426 KHADIRA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

may increase, should sacrifice rice and barley, with
(the verse), ‘He who has a thousand arms’ (MB.
II, 4, 7). ;

11. To one with whom he wishes to become
associated, he should give fruits of a big tree,
over which he has murmured the Kautomata verse
(MB. 17, 4, 8).

12. Having kept the vow (of fasting) through one
fortnight, he should in the full-moon night plunge up
to his navel into a pool which does not dry up, and
should sacrifice with his mouth fried grain into the
water, with the five (verses), ‘Like a tree’ (MB. II,
4, 9-13).

13. This ceremony procures (property on) the
earth.

14. One who is desirous of the enjoyment (of
riches), should worship the sun with the first (of those
five verses), while one who is rich in wealth should
look at him.

15. One who desires that his stock of horses and
elephants may increase, (should sacrifice) fried grain
with the second (of those verses), while the sun has
a halo.

16, One who desires that his flocks may increase,
(should sacrifice) sesamum seeds with the third (verse),
while the moon has a halo.

11. yenedfet sahakaram kautomatendsya mahdvrzkshaphalani
parigapya dadyad. 12. ardhamasavrati paurmamdsyam ratrau
nabhimatram pragahyavidasini hradeskshatatandulan dsyena guhu-
yad udake vreksha iveti pavdabhi4Z. 13. parthivam karma. 14.
prathamayddityam upatish/red bhogakémo-rthapatau prekshamaze.
15. dvitiyayakshatatandulan dditye parivishyama@me brrhatpattra-
svastyayanakamas. 16. trittyaya 4andramasi tilataydulin kshudra-
pasusvastyayanakamas.

IV PATALA, I KHANDA, 26, 427

17. Having worshipped the sun with the fourth
(verse), let him try to gain great wealth.

18. Having worshipped the sun with the fifth, let
him return home.

19. In order to avert involuntary death let him
murmur every day (the formula), ‘Bhds!’ (MB. 11,
4, 14.)

20. On the sacrificial day (i.e. the first day of the
fortnight) let him make oblations with the six verses,
‘From the head’ (MB. 17, 5, 1 seqq.), with the Vama-
devya verses, with the Mahavydhr‘tis, and with the
verse sacred to Pragdpati (1.1. 8).

21. Thus he will drive away misfortune.

22, On an unsafe road let him murmur the verse,
‘Go away’ (Rig-veda X, 164, 1).

23. One who is desirous of glory should worship
the sun in the forenoon, at noon, and in the afternoon,
with (the formula), ‘I am glory’ (MB. II, 5, 9).

24. Let him change (the word), ‘Of the forenoon,’
according (to the different times of the day).

25. Worshipping (the sun) at twilight with the for-
mula, ‘O sun! the ship’ (MB. II, 5, 14), procures
happiness.

26. At the morning twilight (he says),‘ When thou
risest’ (1.1. 15).

17. katurthyadityam upasthdya gurum artham abhyuttish//et.
18. pa#kamyddityam upasthaya grzhan eyad. 19. anakamamaram
nityam gaped bhfir iti. 20. yaganiye guhuyan mOrdhno:dhi ma
iti shadbhir vimadevyargbhir mahavyahrctibhiz pragapatyaya 4a.
21. slakshminirzodo. 22. sksheme pathy apehiti gaped. 23. yaso
sham ity adityam upatish/hed yasaskima’ p(irvahzamadhyandina-
parahveshu. 24. pratarahwasyeti yathartham flhed. 25. Aditya
navam iti sandhyopasthanam svastyayanam. 26. udyantam tveti
एषि षव.

19~27=1V, 6, 1, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 3, ०12 (22 १८८७४).

428 KHADIRA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

27. At the evening twilight, ‘When thou goest to
rest’ (1.1. 16)

Kuawpa 2.

1. Having kept the vow (of fasting) through one
fortnight, he should, on the first day of the dark fort-
night, feed the Brahmazas with boiled milk-rice pre-
pared of one Kamsa of rice.

The small grains of that (rice) he should sacri-
fice (day by day) at the evening twilight to the west
of the village, on a place which he has besmeared
(with cowdung), with the formula, ‘To Phala’ (MB.
II, 5,17).

3. And with (the formula), ‘To Phalla!’ The
same on the first day of the next dark fortnight.

4. He shall observe chastity till the end (of the
rite).

5. A hundred cart-loads (of gold) will be his.

6. A Brahmaza should elect the site for building
his house on white ground, a Kshatriya on red, a
Vaisya on black, which should be even, covered with
grass, not salinous, not dry—

7. Where the water flows off to the north-west.

8. (Plants) with milky juice or with thorns or acrid
plants should not be there.

27. pratitish‘hantam tveti pastimam.

2,1. ardhamasavratt téamisradau brahmavan dsayed vrihikam-
saudanam. 2. tasya kavdn apardsu sandhydsu pratyag gramat
sthavdilam upalipya Phaldyeti guhuyat. 3. Phallayeti daivam
evaparasmims tamisrddau. 4. brahmakaryam 4 samapter. 5.
aditasatam ` bhavati. 6. gaure bhimibhage bréhmazo_lohite
kshatriyak krishve vaisyosvasdnam goshayet samam lomasam
anirizam asushkam. 7. yatrodakam pratyagudizim pravartate.
8. kshirizak kan/akina [sic] वरणो Aatraushadhayo na syur.

2, 1-5=Gobhila IV, 6, 13-16. 6-23=IV, 7.

IV PATALA, 2 KHANDA, 21. 429

9. (Soil) on which Darbha-grass grows, brings holy
lustre ;

10. Big sorts of grass, strength ;

11. Tender grass, cattle.

12, Or (the site of the house) should have the form
of bricks (?) or of ...... (?)

13. Or there should be natural holes (in the
ground) in all directions.

14, 15. {A house) with its door to the east brings
wealth and fame; with its door to the north, children
and cattle. By one with its door to the south all
wishes (are obtained), The back-door should not
face (?) the house-door.

16. Milk-rice should be offered,

17. And a black cow,

18. Or a white goat. Or only milk-rice.

19. In the middle of the house he should sacrifice
the fat (of the animal) and the milk-rice, mixed with
Agya, taking eight portions (of that mixture), with
(the verse), ‘ Vastoshpati!’ (MB. II, 6, 1.)

20. And with the seven last (texts) used at the driv-
ing away of misfortune (see above, chap. 1, 20,21).

21. After he has sacrificed, he should distribute
Balis in the different directions (of the horizon).

g. darbhasammitam brahmavarkasyam. 10. bréhattrinair ba-
lyam, 11. mrddutrimai# pasavyam. 12. sdtabhir (corr. sédabhir?)
mazdaladvipibhir va. 13. yatra va svayamkr7ztéA svabhrak sarvato-
sbhimukha syu#. 14. prdgdvdram dhanyam yasasyam kodag-
dvaraz putryam pasavyam ka dakshizadvare sarve kama. anudvaram
gehadvaram 15. asamloki (asamloki?) syat. 16. payaso havi.
17. krishna fa gaur. 18. ago va svetak pdyasa eva vd. 19.
madhye vesmano vasdm payasam Aagyena misram ashéagrihitam
guhuyad Vastoshpata iti. 20. yas a paras saptalakshminirzode
tabhis 4a. 21. hutva disdm balim nayed.

430 KHADIRA-GRIHYA-SUTRA.

22. And towards the intermediate points, and up-
wards and downwards.

23. This (he should repeat) every year, or at the
two sacrifices of the first-fruits (of rice and barley).

24. With the two (formulas), ‘Obeying the will’
(MB. II, 6, 7, 8), he should sacrifice two oblations.

25. He should pronounce the name of the person
whom he wishes to subdue to his will,‘ N. N.;’ then
that person will obey him.

e
Kuawpa 3.

1. Keeping the observance (of fasting) through one
fortnight, let him sacrifice in a full-moon night one
hundred pegs with the Ekakshary4 verse (MB. IT, 6,
9), if he is desirous of having (a large) family.

2. (Those pegs should be) of Khadira wood, if he
is desirous of long life.

3. Now another (ceremony performed with the
same verse). He should go out of the village in
an eastern or northern direction, should brush up an
elevated surface, or (should raise it) on a mountain
with the dung of beasts of the forest, should set it on

22. avantaradisim kordhvavastbhyam kai. 23, »vam samvatsare
samvatsare navayagfayor va, 24. Vasamgamav ity etabhyam dhutt
इण} दैव. 25. yam ikked vasam 4yantam tasya 77112. grchitvasdv
iti vast hdsya bhavati.

3, 1. ardhamasavratt paurvamasya ratrau sahkusatam guhuyad
ekaksharyaya sinvayakamak. 2. khadirin dyushkdmo. 3. =tha-
param. pran vodan va graman nishkramya sthandilam samthya
parvate vdranyair gomayai sthapayitva (read, gomayais tapayitva ?)
shgaran apohyasyena guhuy4d.

24 == 1४, 8, 7 (25 deest).
3, 1-5=Gobhila IV, 8, 10-16. 6=IV, 9, 15.

IV PATALA, 3 KHANDA, II, 431

fire, should sweep the coals away (from that surface),
and should make an oblation (of butter) with his mouth,

4. If (the butter) catches fire, twelve villages (will
be his).

5. If smoke rises, at least three.

6. Let him sacrifice in the evening and in the
morning the fallings-off of rice-grains. Thus his
means of livelihood will not be exhausted.

7. Of articles of trade let him make an oblation
with (the formula), ‘ Here (this Visvakarman),’ (MB.
II, 6, 10.)

8. On the sacrificial day (i.e. on the first day of
the fortnight) let him sacrifice a full oblation (with the
verse MB. II, 6, 11, ‘A full oblation I sacrifice,’ &c.).

9. One who is desirous of companions (should
sacrifice) with (the formula), ‘Indramavadat’ (?), (MB.
II, 6, 12.)

10. He should fast through a period of eight nights,
and then should kindle a fire to the east or to the
north of the village, at a place where four roads meet.
The fuel should be Udumbara wood, and the Sruva
and the cup (for water should be of the same wood).
Let him sacrifice (Agya) with (the formulas), ‘ Food
indeed,’ and ‘ Bliss indeed’ (MB. II, 6, 13, 14).

11. A third (oblation) in the village with (the for-
mula), ‘The food’s’ (1.1. 15).

4. dvadasa grama gvalite. 5. tryavara dhime. 6. kambfkan
sdyampratar guhuyan nasya vrittiz kshiyata. 7. idam aham imam
iti pavyahomam guhuyat. 8. pirzahomam yagantye guhuyad.
g. Indréamavadad iti sahdyakamo, 10. «sh/aratroposhitos param
pran vodan va gréma& fatushpathe samidhy4gnim audumbara
idhma sy&t sruvakamasau 4a guhuyad anna va iti srir va iti, 11.
grime trztiydm annasyety.

4-9=IV, 8, 19 seqq. 10-16=IV, 9, ` seqq.

432 KHADIRA-GRIHYA-SOTRA.

12. Then he will become a ruler.

13. When (his cows) are sick, let him sacrifice
milk-rice in the cow-stable.

14. Ona dangerous road let him make knots in
the skirts of the garments (of those who travel
together). This will bring a prosperous journey to
(himself) and his companions.

15. With the two (formulas), ‘To Hunger Svaha!’
(MB. II, 6, 16, 17), let him sacrifice a thousand obla-
tions, if he desires to obtain a thousand cart-loads
(of gold).

16. One who is desirous of cattle (should sacrifice
one thousand oblations) of the excrements of a male
and a female calf. Ofa male and a female sheep, if
he is desirous of flocks.

17. Let him make oblations of fresh cowdung in
the evening and in the morning; then his means of
livelihood will not be exhausted.

Kuawnpa 4.

1. One who has been bitten by a venomous
animal, he should besprinkle with water, murmuring
(the verse), ‘Do not fear’ (MB. II, 6, 18).

12. adhipatyam prapnoty. 13. upatapinishu gosh/he piyasam
guhuyad. 14. aksheme pathi vastradasandm granthin kuryat saha-
yindm (sahayanam?) fa svastyayanani. 15. kshudhe svahety eta-
bhyam 4hutisahasram guhuyad atitasahasrakamo. 16. vatsa-
mithunayo# purisheza pasukdmosvimithunayo kshudrapasukémo.
17. haritagomayena sdyampratar guhuyan nisya vritti2 kshfyate.

4, 1. vishavaté dash/am adbhir abhyukshan gapen ma bhaishir
10.

17=IV, 8, 18.
4, 1-4=Gobhila IV, 9, 16 seqq.

IV PATALA, 4 KHANDA, 9. 433

2. A 574131६8. should, when lying down to sleep,
put his bamboo staff near (his bed) with (the formula),
‘Strong one, protect’ (1.1. 19). This will bring him
luck. #

3. A place where he has a,worm he should be-
sprinkle with water, murmuring (the verses), ‘Thy
worm 15 killed’ (MB. II, 7, 1-4).

4. (If doing this) for his cattle, let him fetch in the
afternoon an earth-clod taken out of a furrow, and let
him in the morning strew the dust of it (on the place
attacked by worms), murmuring (the same texts).

5. (A guest) who is going to accept the Madhu-
parka should come forward murmuring, ‘Here I tread
on this’ (MB. II, 8, 2).

6.-They announce three times (to the guest) each
(of the following things which are brought to him):
a bed (of grass), water for washing the feet, the Argha
water, water for sipping, and the Madhuparka ;

7. And the cow.

8. Having spread out the bed (of grass, so that the
points of the grass are) turned to the north, he should
sit down thereon with (the verse), ‘The herbs which’
(MB. II, 8, 3).

9. With the feet (he treads on another bundle of

2. snatakas samvisan vaixavam dandam upanidadhyat tura gop4-
yeti svastyayanam. 3. hatas ta (hastata, hafsta, hasta, vitasta,
the MSS.) iti kyemimantam desam adbhir abhyuksha# gapet. 4.
pasinam sed aparahze sitaloshfam ahritya tasya pratak pamsubhid
pratishkira# gapen. 5. madhuparkam pratigrahishyann idam
aham imam iti pratitish/ha% gaped. 6. vish/arapadyarghyatama-
niyamadhuparkavdm ekaikam trir vedayante. 7. gam ho. 8.
sdafikam vish/aram Astirya ya oshadhir ity adhydsita. 9. padayor
dvittyaya dvau fed.

5-23=IV, 10.
[29] Ff

434 KHADIRA-GRIHYA-SOTRA..

grass), if there are two, with the second (verse)
(Ll. 4)

10. Let him look at the water with (the formula),
‘From which side I see the goddesses’ (1. 1. 5).

11. Let him wash his left foot with (the formula),
‘ The left’ (1. 1. 6), the right with, ‘ The right’ (1-1 7);
both with the rest (8)

12. Let him accept the Arghya water with (the
formula), ‘Thou art the queen of food’ (1/19).

13. The water which he is to sip, (he accepts) with
(the formula), ‘ Glory art thou’ (1. 1. 10). `

14. The Madhuparka with (the formula), ‘The
glory’s glory art thou’ (1. 1. 12)

15. Let him drink three times with (the formulas)
‘The glory’s, ‘The might’s,’ ‘The fortune’s’ (1. 1. 12).

16. Having drunk more of it a fourth time silently
he should give the remainder to a Brahmama.

17. Over the cow, when it has been announced to
him, he should recite (the formula), ‘Let loose the
cow.’

18. Instead of ‘and of पि. पि. (in that formula) he
should put the name of the person who offers the
Arghya reception

ig. Thus if it is no sacrifice (by which the Arghya
ceremony has been occasioned).

20. ‘Make it (ready),’ if it is a sacrifice.

10. apak pasyed yato devir iti, 411. savyam padam avasif#ked
savyam iti dakshizam dakshivam ity ubhau seshez@, 12. =nnasya
rashérir asity arghyam pratigrzhniyad. 13. yasoxsity akamaniyam.
14. yasaso yasossiti madhuparkam. 165. 1114 pibed yasaso mahasa
sriya iti. 16. शी aturtham bhfyosbhipaya braéhmana-
yokkhishtam dadyad. 17. gam veditim anumantrayeta mu#ha
gam ity. 18. amushya ety arhayitur ndma briyad. 79. evam
ayaghe. 20. kuruteti yagza.

IV PATALA, 4 KHANDA, 23. 435

21,. The six persons to whom the Arghya reception
. is due are, a teacher, an officiating priest, a Snataka,
` 2 king, the father-in-law, a friend
* 22, He should honour them (with the Arghya
reception) once a year
23. But repeatedly in the case of a sacrifice and of
a wedding. But repeatedly in the case of a sacrifice
and of a wedding.

End of the Fourth 2212.

End of the Grzhyakhazda.

ai. akarya ritvik snatako raga vivahya’ priya iti shad arghy42.
22, pratisamvatsaran arhayet. 23. punar yag#avivahayos 4a punar
yagfavivahayos ka. Aaturthapasalah.

grthyakhandam samaptam.

Ff2

५

<
ठ
&
2
्
3
&

437

as
ATION
<->

>

NSLITER

eee

eee

 (aya)a

(x) st
(Bu) €

(~ भाषण "~ 1
° "पण्यप 9
=°." शगु न
५१ * eyendse ^ PI
ttre eee ee ee smuar हा
(‘o2p ^8०्‌१ण४त)
OB}VOYIpom soyeanjjny

* * * * snqvony stay

* * sngvouy sodse

* ° sipvoney stuay

* * + sipeoney sodsu

“° °" "भुषण
+++ gadse sngindg /

cee eee * ° भुण्न्णु 9

श्णवृणृ-०मपकण्डछे ¢

seyondsy “ ए

^ ~° Se SPOS
° ° ejendse “ द
* * * * * ° * शृपप्यु,
"8१३१

439

` 2
5
=
I<
a 8": छ Ye
Ee

SACRED BOOKS OF THE EAST.
>=
नि]

"

10) 9 86 oe ए7व४1॥ 69
++ +++ sarpasnuy g¢
* # 810 ४६ 49
* * + godse snjindg 9६
vyeaidse se ५५
* * * sipooatmag FS
see * * * " शाण्ण्प्‌ eg
* * * * *एपा(इशाप्ण्‌, Zo
° ° euudse “ {9
== * ~ * * * शगु og
° ° uundse “ @
+++" ee smuay, gp
*SOLBIQB'T

eee study “« Lb
s+ godse sngundg oF

voyuoup ^ 9

* vyeony 4 bP
* * * * sifeooAtag EP

॥
॥॥

00042185

Digitized with financial assistance from the
Government of Maharashtra
on 05 October, 2018
