Henry Steel Olcott: Old Diary Leaves (1904)
===========================================
H. S. Olcott’s Old Diary Leaves, the first-hand history of the Theosophical Society’s founding years. Source: Internet Archive.


OLD DIARY LEAVES


niK ForxrM


OLD DIARY LEAVES


THE ONLY AUTHENTIC HISTORY OF

THE THEOSOPHICAL SOCIETY


THIRD SERIES, 1883-1887


BY

HENRY STEEL OLCOTT

HRESIOENT-FOUNDER OF THE SOCIETY '


“It takes two to speak truth — one to
speak and another to hear.” — Thoreau.


LONDON

THE THEOSOPHICAL PUBLISHING SOCIETY
MADRAS : THEOSOPHIST OFFICE
1904


Introduction


The first volume of these historical sketches covered the
period from the meeting of Madame Blavatsky and myself,
iri 1874, to our departure from New York for Bombay
in December 1878; the second tells of our adventures in
India and Ceylon, the formation of Branches, the giving
of lectures, healings of the sick by hundreds, occult
phenomena produced by H. P. B., etc., and brings us
down to the autumn of 1 883 : at this time we take up the
thread of narrative, and go forward to the month of May
1887. I think the reader will agree with me that the
subject-niatter of this Volume possesses absorbing interest,
quite equal* to that in its two preceding volumes, if ncrt
even greater. Accounts are given among other things of
my meetings with several of the “ Masters in the coufse
of my travels, and of the results of the same, of our
removal of the Society’s Headquarters from Bombay to
Madras, of H. P. B.’s last departure from her beloved
Indian home into the exile of an European residence. The
troublous times of the Coulomb conspiracy are dealt with
in this volume, and the true story of the S. P. R. Report
is placed on record, so that each member of our world-wide


VI


Introduction


organization may be in a position to refute the slanders
which, even at this date, echo in some quarters round
the name of Mme. Blavatsky. The building and formal
installation of the Adyar Library, with ceremonies of an
unprecedented character conducted by Indian pandits,
Buddhist monks, Parsi mobeds, and a Muslim maulvi, are
described, and numberless details of the growth of the
theosophical movement, and of our Society in particular,
are given. The story takes us to Europe as well as
through Eastern lands, the intelligent reader being afforded
the chance of watching the gradual outworking of the
plan of the unseen Founders, whom their visible agents
know to be at work through this channel in spreading
throughout the world a knowledge of the principles which
were taught by the Ancient Sages, and the general under-
standing and adoption of which would cure most of the
evils which now afflict mankind. For men suffer because
of ignorance of themselves and their environment, and
the false ideals of happiness which they struggle for are
begotten by their ignorance — by nothing else. The war
of individual men, of classes, and of nations can never —
will never — cease until the ideal of the Perfect Man, the
omnipotence of His perfected Will, and the irresistible
force of the law of Karma are grasped by the public
mind, and the present popular ignorance is dispelled.


CONTENTS


CHAPTER PAGE

Introduction

I. Official Recognition . . . . i

II. Adept seen at Pondich^ry . . -14

III. The Master K. H. at Lahore . . 26

IV. Reception by Maharajah of Kashmir . 39

V. Mysterious Disappearance of Damodar 51

VI. ‘‘Coming Events cast their Shadows

before ” 66

VII. Phenomena and Healing at Nice . . 79

VIII. A Struggle in the London Lodge T. S. 90

IX. H. P. B. and the S. P. R. Report . 99

X. Successful Issue of Buddhist Mission . 112


XI. Reality of Thought Transference

XII. The Painting of Adept Portraits

XIII. German Experiences

XIV. The Coulomb Missionary Conspiracy

XV. First Visit to Burma

XVI. H. P. B. leaves for Europe .

XVII. Concerning Sibyls ....
XVIII. Final Departure of Damodar

XIX. In Northern India again

XX. Progress of Theosophy in India .

XXI. Phenomenal Memories of Pandits.

XXII. H. P. B. IN Exile ....

vii


139

151

164

179

199

217

235

253

269

284

299

310


Vlll


Contents


PAGE


CHAPTBK

XXIII. Tender of Resignation . . .321

XXIV. Cremation Ceremony in Ceylon . 335

XXV. Establishing a Buddhist Flag . . 350

XXVI. Founding the Adyar Library . 372

XXVII. The Opening Ceremony . . . 382

XXVIII. More Touring in Ceylon and Western

India 399

XXIX. Thugs — The Prince of Wales in Danger 413
XXX. H. P. B. founds ‘‘Lucifer”. . . 426


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


The Founders of the T. S. . , . Frontispiece

#AGB

Group of Delegates to Convention of 1884 . 193

The First Convention held |in Headquarters,

Adyar, Madras, 1882 3S5



OLD DIARY LEAVES

Third Series.


CHAPTER I.

OFFICIAL RECOGNITION.

I F there was ever a man who could turn a menu into a sort
*of alimentary poem, it is Brigadier- General A. Kenny-
Herbert, ex- Military Secretary to the Government of
Madras, now retired and living in London. He possesses
so perfect a genius for cooking, that I believe he could
develop the latent potentialities of a potato or parsnip so
as to force one to realize what must have been the food of
the Olympian gods. In fact, I should not be surprised to
learn that he had been at least a sous chef in the Jovian
kitchen, and along with his colleagues Soyer and Brillat
Savarin, had reincarnated to teach our generation how to
prepare digestible dishes. It is a passion with him, as it was

with Alexandre Dumas, and I very much fear that — if ^tis

t


2


Old Diary Leaves

truly said that the ruling passion shows strong at death — he
would refuse to die until he had had time to give his final
orders for the preparation of the “funeral bakM meats/^

General — then only Lieut. -Colonel — Kenny- Herbert in-
vited H. P. B. and myself to his house one day to a tiflfin which,
in compliment to us, he made an entirely vegetarian repast.
After so many years I vainly try to recall the courses, but I
have the most vivid recollection of the fact that we and the
three other guests declared it to be superlatively appetizing.
The service matched the food, giving one the impression
that this was not a feast of Gargantua, but a Lucullan ban-
quet, over the preparation of which an exquisitely refined
taste had presided. Most of our Western vegetarian cookery,
on the other hand, has given me the impression that it was
but the serving up of chicken feed in a style the reverse of
attractive to a refined nature. If vegetarians could but get
this pseudonymic “ Wyvern ” to teach them how to do it,
their cause would win fifty converts where it now does one.
They have proved unmistakably that vegetable food is as
nutritious and healthier than meat diet, they need go no
farther ; but their cause can never be won until their cooks
learn how to make one's mouth water at sight of their dishes.

Whether it was the food, or the sweet hospitableness of our
hosts, or the semi-malicious banter of Mr. Forster Webster,
Mr. Reed, and Capt. Agnew, A. D.C., or the bright sunshine
and flowers in the garden, or what not, Madame Blavatsky
bubbled over with high spirits and kept the company in
continual merriment. Anon, a jest would be followed by an
occult teaching, and that by the making of “spirit raps'* on


Official Recognition 3

the table or silvery bell-tinkling in the air ; and this party,
like every other in which she had been present, broke up
with the impression left on the guests that she was one of
the most brilliant and entertaining, if eccentric, personages
they had ever encountered. At Ooty, as at Allahabad and
Simla, persons of the most influential position were disposed
to be friendly to her and to the Society, some of the most
impressible ready to submit themselves wholly to her charm.
Here, as elsewhere, she spoilt her chances of full success
by some sudden caprice of conduct, some passionate revolt
against conventional narrow-mindedness, the uttering of
strong language, or the indulgence of biting witticisms about
some high-placed person. While eminently fitted to shine
in the world, and having had many years of intimacy with
it through her high birth, she had passed out of the “ sphere
of its influence,” and brought away with her a feeling of
disgust for social shams and of contempt for moral cowards.
She railed at society, not like your parvenues, whose bitter-
ness springs from their being kept beyond the threshold of
the salons of the fashionable caste, but as one who, born
in the purple and accustomed to equal association with
peers and peeresses, had differentiated from her species and
stepped up to higher ground. *

The culminating point of my visit was the settlement
with the Madras Government of the civil status of the
Theosophical Society which, as was remarked in Chapter
XXX. of the preceding volume, was successfully accomplished
on the 1 2th September 1883 at Ootacamund. For con-
venient reference, I shall quote in this connection the text of



4


Old Diary Leaves


the letters which passed between myself and the Governor
in Council They were as follows :

From Colonel Henry S. Olcott,

President of tht Tkeosophical Society,

To The Honorable E. F. Webster,

Chief Secretary to the Government of Madras.

I ^>^ve the honor to address you on behalf of the
Theosophical Society, of which I am President, and the

objects of whose organization are as follow ;

I. ifl) To promote the feeling of mutual tolerance and
kindness between people of different races and religions j
(b) To encourage the study of the philosophies, religions,
and science of the ancients, particularly of the Aryans ;

(f) To aid scientific research into the higlier nature and
Dpwers of man.

r "

IL These are our only corporate aspirations, and, since
the year 1875 — when the Society was founded at New York
— they have been openly declared and publicly defended.
With them we have exclusively occupied ourselves, and
have most strenuously refused to meddle with politics or to
advocate any creed to the exclusion of others.

III. The principal seat of the Society’s operations was
transferred from New York to India in February 1879 for the
greater convenience of our purely Oriental researches, and
in December 1882 was moved from Bombay to Madras for
a like reason.

IV. The Society was, in the first instance, an open
body; but itjwat found in practice that the successful



Official Recognition 5

prosecution of physical experiments, in the progress of
which the most private thoughts and aspirations of our
common nature had to be expressed, demanded a more
confidential relation between members. The principle of
secrecy, identical with that of Free Masonry and Odd
Fellowship, and with the same laudable motive, was there-
fore adopted as early as the second year of the Society's
existence.

V. Our work being thus cut off from public view, many
ladies and gentlemen of good position, socially, joined us,
both in America and Europe — where branches after awhile
sprang up. But coincidently with our coming to India
this private relation between ourselves, and the great favor
which our endeavours to revive Aryan learning excited
among Hindus, caused a suspicion — to the last degree
unjust and unfounded — that we might have under the
mask of philosophical study some political design. Ac-
cordingly, the Government of India, at the instance of
Her Majesty’s Home Government, caused us to be watched
both at Bombay, our residence, and while travelling over
India. There being nothing whatever to discover of the
nature apprehended, the expense and trouble lavished upon
us only ended in proving our blamelessness of motive and
conduct. For sufficient proof of which I would respectfully
invite attention to the enclosed letter [No. 1025 E. G.,
dated Simla, the 2nd October 1880] from the Secretary to
Government in the Foreign Department to myself— which
I transmit in the original, with request for its return. It
is therein remarked that “the Government of India has



6 Old Diary Leaves

no desire to subject you (ourselves) to any inconvenience
during your (our) stay in the country,” and ‘‘so long
as the members of the Society confine themselves to the
prosecution of philosophical and scientific studies, wholly
unconnected with politics, . . , they need apprehend no
annoyance, etc., etc.”

VI. The above decision is in strict accordance with
the oft-declared policy of Her Most (kacious Majesty\s
Asiatic relations with subjugated peoples, to maintain
strict neutrality in all matters involving religious inquiry
or belief ; and, having ever faithfully observed the laws
and respected the established regulations of Government
in India — as everywhere else throughout the world where
our Society has branches — we are entitled to protection,
and demand it as our right.

VII, Entire freedom from annoyance and molestation
we have not enjoyed in the Madras Presidency, In various
quarters a certain pressure, none the less menacing because
unofficial, has been put upon Hindu subordinates to pre-
vent their taking active interest in our work. Though
the vindication of the wisdom, virtues, and spiritual achieve-
ments of their ancestors 'was involved, they have been
made to feel that they could not be Theosophists with-
out losing the goodwill of their superiors — possibly their
chances of promotion. Timid by nature, the subordinates
have, in many — though, to the honor of true manhood,
be it said, not all — instances, sacrificed their feelings to
this petty tyranny. But despite all opposition, whether
of sectarian bigotry or other kinds, the Society has sp



Official Recognition 7

rapidly increased, that it has already founded twenty
Branches within the Madras Presidency. An impartial
inquiry among our members will show that the influence
upon the natives is excellent : improving their moral
tone, making them more religious, more self-reliant, and
more tractable as subjects. Should the Government of
Madras care to test the truth of this assertion, I shall
most gladly furnish every needed facility.

VIII. In view of the above facts, what I respectfully
ask is, that the Government will make it understood that
so long as the Theosophical Society shall keep to its
declared field of activity, an absolute neutrality shall be
observed towards it by officials throughout the Presidency ;
and especially forbid that the fact of membership or
non-membership shall even be considered in determining
the claims of any employe^ English or Native, to official
favor.

I have the honor to be, sir.

Your most obedient servant,

H. S. Olcott,

President^ Theosophical Society.

Public Department.

Proceedings of the Madras Government,

Read the following [foregoing] letter from Colonel
H. S. Olcott, President, Theosophical Society, dated
7th September 1883 : (i) stating the objects of the
Society ; (2) transmitting a letter addressed to him by
the Government of India, Foreign Department, of 2nd


8 Old Diary Leaves

October 1880, promising the members of the Society
freedom from all annoyance so long as they confine them-
selves to the prosecution of philosophical and scientific
studies wholly unconnected with politics ; (3) complaining
that in various quarters of the Madras Presidency, some
native subordinates have been made to feel that they
cannot join the Society without losing the goodwill of
their official superiors.


Order.

13/// September 1883, No, 1798.

Colonel Olcott may be assured that this Government
will strictly follow the lines that have been laid down by
the Government of India in their letter to his address.
In regard to the complaint he has preferred, they observe
that it is of a general nature only, no specific instances
being mentioned ; and His Excellency the Governor in
Council need only say that he would highly disapprove
any interference with the religious or philosophical ideas
of any section of the population.

[True Extract.]

(Sd.) Forster Webster,

Ag, Chief Secretary,

To Colonel H. S. Olcott,

President^ Theosophical Society,

I have elsewhere mentioned H. P. B.^s inheritance
of the fiery temper of the Dolgoroukis, and the terrible



Official Recognition


9


Struggle it was to even measurably subdue her irritability.
I will now tell a story which I had from her ovm lips, and
the incidents of which had a most lasting effect upon her
through life. In childhood her temper was practically
unrestrained, her noble father petting and idolizing her after
the loss of his wife. When, in her eleventh year, the time
came for her to leave his regimen and pass under the
management of her maternal grandmother (the wife of
General Fadeyef, born Princess Dolgorouki), she was
warned that such unrestrained liberty would no longer be
allowed her, and she was more or less awed by the dignified
character of her relative. But on one occasion, in a fit of
temper at her nurse, a faithful old serf who had been
brought up in the family, she struck her a blow in the face.
This coming to her grandmother’s knowledge, the child
was summoned, questioned, and confessed her fault. The
grandmother at once had the castle bell rung to call in
all the servants of the household of whom there were
scores, and when they were assembled in the great hall,
she told her niece that she had acted as no lady should,
in unjustly striking a helpless serf who would not dare
defend herself ; and she ordered her to beg her pardon
and kiss her hand in token of sincerity. The child at first,
crimson with shame, was disposed to rebel, but the old
lady told her that if she did not instantly obey she would
send her from her house in disgrace. She added that no
real noble lady would refuse to make amends for a wrong
to a servant, especially one who by a lifetime of faithful
service had earned the confidence and love of her superiors.



10


Old Diary Leaves

Naturally generous and kind-hearted towards the people of
the lower classes, the impetuous child burst into tears,
kneeled before the old nurse, kissed her hand, and asked
to be forgiven. Needless to say she was thenceforth fairly
worshipped by the retainers of the family. She told me
that that lesson was worth everything to her, and it had
taught her the principle of doing justice to those whose
social rank made them incapable of compelling aggressors
to do rightly towards them.

All who have published reminiscences of her childhood—
Mme. Jelihovsky, her sister ; Mile. Fadeyef, her aunt; Mr.
Sinnett, and others — testify to the innate kindness and
chivalrousness of her disposition, notwithstanding her
inability to restrain her tongue or her temper, which too
often, as at Ooty, brought her into trouble. But whatever
her faults, there is one chargeable to a high-placed lady
at Ootacamund which does not redound to the latteFs
credit. My readers may remember my telling in the
previous volume of H. P. B.^s “doubling” a valuable topaz
or yellow diamond in a ring for Mrs. Sinnett while we were
together at Simla. She did a similar favor for the lady
friend at Ootacamund, a duplicate being made for her by
H. P. B. of a valuable sapphire. In the course of time
she and the lady fell out, or rather the lady fell away from
her, but kept the stone, which she had had appraised by
a jeweller and found its commercial value to be quite
two hundred rupees. If poor, impecunious H. P. B. had
played her-^as was pretended— the trick of passing off a
valuable sapphire (which she did not possess before it



Official Recognition 1 1

went from her hand to the lady’s) as a mysterious apport^
at least the recipient kept it and made the only profit
out of the transaction !

Twq days after receipt of the Order in Council, we two
left beautiful Ooty in tongas for Coimbatore, where we
tarried three days, receiving visitors, answering questions,
and taking candidates into membership. I lectured on
two successive days and did a good deal of psychopathic
work : on the 19th September, it appears, I mesmerized
thirty large jars of water and seventeen bottles of oil for
the use of the sick. H. P. B. was present when, in the
usual formal way, I organized a local Branch under the
name of the Coimbatore T. S. Our visit finished, we
left for Pondichery, followed by warm protestations of
affectionate goodwill. This was one of the two or three
occasions only in which my colleague even assisted in
the formation of Indian Branches, despite the foolish idea
entertained by many, ignorant of the facts, who constantly
talk of her personally founding our Branches and wearing
herself out with travel and its privations. Greater stuff
was never spoken : her sphere was the literary and spiritual
one, and her travelling in those days was mainly limited
to the distances between her writing-table, the dining-room,
and her bed. She was as unfit for platform and pioneer
organizing w^ork as she was for cooking ; and when w’e
remember that she thought to get boiled eggs by laying
them, raw, on the hot coals, her culinary aptitude is easily
gauged. Moreover, she had too much sense to try it, but
kept strictly to her own department, as I did to xpin^*



12


Old Diary Leaves

From the Nilgiris to the French territory of Pondichery
one has to cross country from West to East by rail, at
Villupuram Junction changing to a short branch line of
twenty-six miles that takes one to Pondichery. An
amusing episode occurred between the two stations. At
the Junction a certain elderly Hindu gentleman of our
acquaintance accosted us with the usual signs of exag-
gerated reverence, so easily seen through by foreigners,
and begged me to cure a paralytic — some rich or influential
person — who would apply to me before reaching Pondi-
chery. Now this was too much for good nature ; if I
was to be pestered from morning to night by patients
while stopping at stations, at least I ought to be allowed
to rest myself while travelling. Naturally, I refused the
man’s request ; but he stuck to me like a leech, got into
our compartment of the train, and urged, and fawned,
and begged until he wore out my patience. Just then we
came to a place where there was a halt of ten minutes,
and my pest abased himself to the dust to persuade me
to get out and cure his man, whom we saw sitting in an
arm-chair on the platform with a number of people about
him. In desperation, and to rid myself of the man’s
importunities, I got out, went over to the sick man,
handled his paralyzed limbs, made mesmeric passes over
them with a little massage, got his arm flexible, then his
leg, made him stand, Walk, put his bad foot on his chair,
lift the chair with the just-paralyzed hand, and then, as
the engine whistle blew, salaamed the company and ran
back to our carriage. All this while H. P. B. had sat



Official Recognition


13


at a window, smoking a cigarette and watching my per-
formance : she had never seen me at this work before
and was deeply interested. As the train started, we saw
my cured paralytic walk off, followed by his party and by
a servant carrying the chair; not one of them looking
behind him. The effect upon H. P. B. was most comical
to me and set me to laughing heartily. The language
she used was choice and so strong, that if her words had
been leaden shot and hurled at their mark by the full
force of her wrath, the backs of the retreating company
would have been well peppered. Such ingratitude, such
base and disgusting ingratitude, she had never seen in her
life. What do you mean ? I asked. “ Mean ? why,
there was that man almost licking your feet in the train
to get you to heal his friend ; you heal him in the most
marvellous way, on the platform, while the train stops
ten minutes or so ; and he, his friend, and his friend's
friends calmly walk away, without a word of thanks or
even a backward look of thankfulness. That beats every-
thing I ever saw ! ” I told her that if she had travelled
with me and seen my mesmeric healings, she would have
realized that the number of patients who had shown real
gratitude for benefits conferred were far less than one in
a hundred : that if the other ninty-nine were really grateful,
they concealed it from view, and left me to practice the
rule that Srt Krishna gave to Arjuna, to do the necessary
thing and care naught for the fruits of action. But she
never forgot the incident.



CHAPTER II.


AN ADEPT SEEN AT PONDICH^RY

C AN any of H. P. B.’s old friends figure to themselves
how she must have looked and felt on being received
at a railway station by a Governors band playing ‘‘God
Save the Queen,” and then taken in procession, to the
clang of music, to our lodging-house ? I'hat is just what
happened to us on reaching Pondich^ry, and I draw the
veil over the amusing picture, as I have not the talent of
Bret Harte to do it justice. At the house, in the presence
of a select number of dark-skinned French “ citizens,” an
address in a rickety sort of French was read to us and duly
responded to by me ; after which presentations, welcomes,
and compliments followed, and our rooms were thronged by
visitors day and evening. The next morning 1 had cere-
monial visits to make to His Excellency the Governor, His
something the Mayor, and various other local officials, by all
of whom I was courteously and kindly received. Then I
had a look through the town, upon which the French cachet
was placed wherever possible — the blue-and-white enamelled

14


An Adept Seen at Pondichdry 15

Street signs at the comers, the little side- walk tables and chairs
at restaurants, the Paris names and shops in petto, the French
look of the Place Dupleix, the unmistakable French look of
the functionaries and white traders, the very aping of French
manners by the Natives. This little seven-by-nine colony,
comparatively to British India as big as a postage stamp,
and hemmed in by it on the three land sides, was totally
unlike it, even in the attitude of the white and dark races
towards each other. That, indeed, was what stmck me
most forcibly, accustomed as I had become to the immense
gulf between the races in the (Ireat British Dependency.
My introducer to all these high officials was a dark, almost
black, Tamil gentleman, a Membre du Conseil ; and I was
no less pleased than surprised to see how they received him
as an equal, quite as though his dark skin did not prevent
his being a human being as good as themselves. While I
might have been amused to see my friend playing the
citizen, I was not amused, but very much gratified, to see
that his right to respect was freely conceded.

Before our arrival it had been arranged that I was to
lecture in English and the Mayor would translate me into
French. At the appointed hour I confronted a large
audience of both races ; the Mayor presided and I began
speaking, but after a sentence or two, paused for my
interpreter to take up the running. This went on for
perhaps ten minutes, when the Mayor confessed that his
stock of English was exhausted, and called the Interpreter
to Government, a French gentleman, to replace him.
Five or six sentences finished him up, and a third



1 6 Old Diary Leaves

translator, a Tamil, was brought forward, but he broke
down almost at once. It is a matter of common observa-
tion that foreigners of every nation understand English
when spoken by one of themselves much better than when
we speak it, the accent making it more comprehensible.
There I stood feeling like a fool, and ready to give it up
as a hopeless case ; but the Mayor, in his best French, told
the audience that he had had a long conversation with me
on Theosophy that morning, and that I knew quite enough
French to speak without interpretation, whereupon I was
called upon from all parts of the room to go ahead, and
that I had finally to do despite my excuses and protesta-
tions. In a fashion that I dare not look back upon, I went
on, and on, for more than an hour, expounding our ideas and
Eastern philosophy as best I could ; and the audience were
kind enough to signify by loud applause that in coming out
to India they had brought with them that lovely national
trait of courtesy and forbearance for strangers who try to
speak their tongue. You should, however, have seen the
face and gestures of H. P. B. when I returned home and
told her what I had done. She held up both hands in
amazement, and made comments strongly suggestive of her
horror at the possible and probable mistakes I had made
in the use of genders and verbs ! However, I did get
through after a fashion, and we did form a T. S. Branch in
the town, which was the chief thing after all.

I was so busy telling her the above and hearing her
comments, that beyond a sweeping bow to the dozen or so
of visitors sitting on the floor about her, whom she had



An Adept Seen at Pondichdry

been entertaining during my absence, I took no notice of
them* She, however, presently gave me a certain look, and
by slightly inclining her head, made me look towards her
right at one man who sat behind the others, and who met
my startled gaze with a kindly smile. It was none other
than one of the Masters known to me at New York during
the writing of Isis Unveiled : one who disliked English
so much that he always spoke and wrote French in his
communications with me : the very one who gave me that
cutting rebuke by duplicating several times the lead-pencil
I hesitated to lend H. P. B.” — his temporary shell. I
can’t say if the others saw him, but certainly they could not
have left him so unnoticed if they had, for he was to them,
in majesty, as a lion to a whippet. I longed to approach
and address him, but his eyes expressed the command that
I should not, so I took my seat on the floor to H. P. B.’s
left, where I had him in full view. The company did not
stay long after my arrival, and he, after saluting H. P. B.,
like the rest, with folded palms, in the Indian fashion,
spoke a word or tvfo to her apart and followed them out.

We left Pondichery for Madras, September 23rd, and got
home that afternoon, rejoiced to see the dear place again.
As usual after a tour, I had no end of arrears of corre-
spondence and literary work to make up, but by the next
midnight it had been disposed of. On the 25 th we
celebrated the first Anniversary of the Madras T. S. at
Pachiayappa’s Hall, a great crowd attending. Besides
myself, Dewan Bahadur, R. Raghoonath Row, and the
vegfettted T. Subba Row made speeches. My stay at

a


1 8 Old Diary Leaves

home was so very brief, that on the 27 th I started again
on a long journey to the northward, with our friend L. V.
V. Naidu as my Private Secretary. Bellary, Adoni, and
Hyderabad — the Nizam’s capital — came in sequence, and
the usual events of Branch-making, question-answering,
and patient-healing occurred. My receptions by friends
were always kind, and personal ties of brotherhood were
made which are still* unbroken.

At Mr. Narasimhalu Chetty’s house, at Hyderabad,
there was a most interesting case of the cure of blindness
in one eye within the half-hour's treatment. I remember it
so well. Facing the house, on the farther side of the road
that skirted the compound, stood a telegraph pole. The
patient, an adult Hindu, had been brought to me by his
physician. Dr. Rustomji, F.T.S., to the upper verandah,
where I sat talking with friends. He had done his best
for the patient, but had failed to even temporarily relieve
the total blindness of the eye. It looked as healthy as
the other one, but, on testing in the usual way, I found

t

that it was unmistakably sightless. I therefore breathed
upon the eyeball, “with mesmeric intent,” through the
small silver tube I carried in my pocket for that purpose,
made the proper passes over the forehead and nape of the
neck, and after the time mentioned had the pleasure to
receive the patient’s joyous assurance that his sight was
restored. To make sure, I laid my finger on the other
eyeball and told him to describe what he saw straight ahead
of him. He at once said : “ The compound, the fence,
the gate, the road, and a telegraph pole ; on the glass knob



An Adept Seen at Pondich^ry 19

to the right hangs a bit of colored rag.” All was correct.
The doctor was perfectly delighted, while as for the patient,
after a prostration before me he hurried away. When the
doctor and I came to talk over the case, I wanted to recall
the patient for us to make an optical examination with an
instrument, but Dr. Rustomji soon brought back word
that the felk)w had gathered his few effects together and
hastened away to his village to take his people the glad
tidings. Whether the rumour of this got spread through
the town or not I cannot say, but certainly my audience
the next day was so great, that the hall was — as a Hindu
correspondent wrote to his paper about another such
meeting — “crowded to the proverbial pin-drop,” and we
had to adjourn to the compound and let them spread over
the lawn. Secunderabad, Bolaram, Sholapore, and Poona
followed next : at the latter place — I see by my Diary — I
received the shortest address on record — a model of brevity.
The members met me at the station, drove me to the
bungalow prepared for my accommodation, got the company
placed, and then the spokesman, taking my hand, said :
“Mr. President and dear brother, I welcome you to our
station.” I replied: “Thank you heartily,” and that
finished it. Oh ! that those concocters of long, tiresome
addresses in Sanskrit, Pali, Sinhalese, Tamil, Telugu,
Bengalee, Urdu, Hindi, Hindustani, Guramukhi, Marathi,
Guzerati, and a dozen other, to me unknown, tongues
that I have had to listen to, often at midnight or even
at 4 o^clock in the morning, after a long, bone-banging
railway journey, could only have had the inspiration of



20


Old Diary Leaves

the Sholapore President, how happy it would have made
me. At this station a new recruit — Mr. W. T. Brown,
of Glasgow, ‘‘Poor Brown ” — joined me for the tour. He,
and a Mrs. Sarah Parker, of Dublin, had just arrived at
Madras under the impulse of service, and Brown had
volunteered to help me. I wrote him from Hyderabad
a kind but most explicit letter, warning him of the self-
sacrifice he must expect to make ; the public ingratitude,
individual treacheries, libellous attacks on character,
unjust suspicion of motives, bad fare and fatiguing
journeys by nights and days in all sorts of conveyances ;
warning him to return to Europe if he had expected any-
thing else, and leave H, P. B. and myself to continue
the work we had begun wdth our eyes open. His reply
was a telegraphic notice of his coming to me, and he
overtook me at Sholapore.

The coming into the electric intellectual atmosphere
of Poona was a delightful sensation. The cultured
Marathi mind is capable of grasping the highest problems
of philosophy with ease, and the tone of conversation
among the cultured class is as high as one could imagine
to exist anywhere, even in a German or English Uni-
versity town. In travelling through the East one feels
acutely these contrasts, and gauges towns by the mental
standard alone. If you ask me to describe their physical
features I could scarcely do it, for the recollection of
all these thousands of temples, dharmsalas, tanks, bazaars^
streets, and bungalows is almost a dim jumble in the
memory ; but I cap give a pretty fair description of thf



An Adept Seen at Pondich^ry 21

intellectual state of almost any of the towns and villages
which I have visited. Now that I recall it, this is just
what I was surprised to find in an old classical teacher
of mine whom I revisited many years after leaving his
school ; he recollected almost nothing of the personal
appearance of my old classmates, but when I mentioned
a name it associated itself with the boy^s mind, and
as such he remembered him. The subject given me to
lecture upon at Hirabag, in the Town Hall, was ‘‘The
Future Life,” and Sir Jamsetji Jijibhoy, the second
baronet, occupied the chair. From Poona we moved
on to Bombay.

For lack of house accommodation, the Branch put
us in large tents on the Esplanade, and we found it
very cool and comfortable until the next day, when an
untimely storm burst upon the city, and we were drenched
with torrents of rain during two days. Our tents became
soaked, our effects damp and mouldy, and the flat
ground about our camp, not being able to receive the
deluge as fast as it fell, was turned into a shallow pond.
This meaning fever to us and consequent interruption
of work, our colleagues put us into some large empty
rooms in the old building of the Botnday Gazette^ where
we were at least dry. A lecture was given on the 17 th
at Framji Cow'^asji Hall, and young Brown's remarks at
the close were received with great friendliness by the
crowded audience.

It may be a relief to some of the readers of these
sketches to learn that at Bombay I received orders



22


Old Diary Leaves

from my Guru to suspend all healings until farther
advices, and that the narratives, which must have sorely
tried their feelings, will henceforth practically cease.
The prohibition came none too soon, for I am persuaded
that I myself should have become paralyzed if the strain
had been kept up. One morning, at Madras, just before
starting on the present journey, I found my left forefinger
devoid of sensation — a clear warning to be careful ; and
between Madras and Bombay it had taken me much
longer and demanded far greater exertions to effect
cures than it had previously : there was also a much
larger percentage of failures. This is not to be wondered
at, for, after treating one way or another some 8000
patients within the twelvemonth, the sturdiest psycho-
path, let alone a man of fifty-odd, might be expected
to have come to the last “ volt in his vital battery ;
a state to which the tiring journeys, the nights of broken
sleep, the often meagre food, and the ceaseless intel-
lectual strain of a large correspondence, dally conver-
sazioni, and almost daily extemporaneous lectures on
profound themes must, naturally, have greatly helped
to bring about.

On the 20th October H. P. B. joined me at Bombay
to make a joint visit to the Maharaja Holkar, who had
invited us and sent us money for our railway expenses.
But a telegram to us at Bombay put an end to the
affair, as he was unable to receive us, so H. P. B.
returned to Madras and I kept on my pre-arranged
itinerary. While at Bombay we received an intimation



An Adept Seen at Pondichdry 23

from King Thebaw, of Burma, that he would be pleased
to have us visit him at Mandalay. Mr. Brown, Damodar
Mavalankar, and L. V. V. Naidu went North with me ;
and another F.T.S. — T. Narainswamy Naidu — got
permission to join us as a mere companion. To avoid
confusion on these long tours, a programme was always
settled upon in advance, and printed copies circulated
to the Branches and groups on the route ; giving the
hours and minutes of my arrivals at and departures
from stations, and information as to the kind of food,
the quantity of firewood, water, and accommodation
required, and all other details : the Branches were
left to select the subjects for my lectures, but sometimes
neglected it until I was actually ready to mount the
platform.

From some of our best-beloved colleagues, who were
then living at Jubbulpore, we received an affectionate
welcome and good service for seeing persons and places.
I visited the High School and the Rajkumar College,
one of those schools for young princes and nobles that
the Government has founded throughout India. It was
interesting to see together these lads who in time will
rule over millions, and I spoke kind words of counsel
to each class as I passed through the rooms. I was
told later that my words had stirred the hearts of the
princelings, so that they formed a friendly league
between themselves, to keep up their friendship and
encourage each other to lead the good life prescribed
for kings in the old Scriptures, They all came to my


24


Old Diary Leaves

lecture the same evening, which^ because of the crowd,
was given in the open air.

The next morning we rose at 3.30, and at 5 drove
away to the Marble Rocks, one of the tourist’s sights
of India. To one who had seen Niagara and many
great rivers of the world, it was a tame affair. The
sacred Nerbudda River is here hemmed in between
barriers of white limestone, which it has seamed and
cross-seamed with numberless cracks. The rocky scenery
is rather artistic in petto than grand and imposing ;
though by moonlight it must seem quite fairy-like.
Far more striking to me was an old Bawa (ascetic)

whom we found living in an adjacent cave. He had
great repute as a proficient in the physiological feats
of Hatha Yoga, and obligingly performed a number of
them — not a whit more difficult than those one sees in
our modern European variety halls and hippodromes —
at my request. He told us that he had spent the past
forty-seven years of his life in making Fradakshina (cir-
cumambulation) of the Nerbudda River as a work of
merit ; the distance to travel is 1800 miles, and the
time occupied in each circuit of his foot-pilgrimage

three years. He was a fine, hale man, with a bright
eye and the expression of a firm character on his face.
While I was studying these details, I was startled by
his asking me to be good enough to teach him how
to concentrate the mind ! If that was what his half

century of struggle had resulted in, certainly it offered

po inducement for anybody else to try his Hatha Yoga,



An Adept Seen at Pondich^ry 25

Here was a man who had got his body under such
control that he could almost turn himself inside out
and walk down his own throat, but had not yet learned
how to fix that wandering mind which gives us so much
trouble. Needless to say, I “ improved the occasion ”
to tell him a little homely truth about seeming and
being, on the lines of the Gita^ the Dhammapada^ and
St. Matthew xxiii. What a lesson it is in self-development !

My lecture that evening was upon the necessity for a
revival of Sanskrit literature, and at the close I started
a subscription for the opening of a Sanskrit School,
towards which the handsome sum of rs. 1500 was
pledged with a great show of enthusiasm. The same
idea was broached by me at my first lecture at Allahabad,
whither I went from Jubbulpore. The great audience
caught at the idea at once, and rs. 2007 was subscribed
that evening, and rs. 2500 more was reported at a
meeting of the local Branch on the 30th as having
been inscribed on the subscription paper.

On the 31st we moved on to Ghazipore, where we
were given hospitality by the Maharaja of Dumraon,
and where, on arrival, I had to reply to three addresses,
in English, Sanskrit, and Urdu — to the last-named two
through interpreters. The next halting-place was Cawn-
pore, of tragic memory, where the bungalow of the
Maharaja of Burdwan had been placed at my disposal.
When we drove through the compound we found the
house illuminated with 1000 chirags^ or Indian clay
lamps, and the rooms were a blaze of light.



CHAPTER III.


THE MASTER K. H. AT LAHORE.

T his Cawnpore visit was made memorable to me by
the proofs I got of Damodar’s rapid psychical
development. As stated elsewhere, he had been visited
when a lad, during a severe illness, by a glorious Personage,
whom he was enabled to identify many years later, after
connecting himself with our Society, as one of the Masters.
The intimate relationship of teacher and pupil had then
been established between them, and Damodar had thrown
himself heart and soul into psychic training ; regulating his
diet, devoting specified hours to meditation, cultivating a
spirit of perfect unselfishness, and working night and day, to
the uttermost limits of his strength, on the duties of the
official position I gave him in the Society. His coming
with me on the present tour was by command of his Guru,
and throughout the journey we had many proofs of the
progress he was making in spiritual unfolding. I remember
that he astonished me, that evening of our arrival at
Cawnpore, by giving me, verbally, a message from the Master

96


The Master K. H. at Lahore 27

in answer to my surmise as to what I ought to do in a
certain matter that had just turned up, and telling me
that I would find it written out in a note that was even
then in my locked writing-desk, the key of which was in
my pocket, as it had, of course, been all day. On going
to the desk and unlocking it, I did find the very letter he
had mentioned, and which, by-the-bye, was from Mahatma
K. H., in the hand- writing subsequently pronounced by
the sage S. P. R., on the authority of the infallible Mr.
Netherclift, to be of H. P. B.’s concoction and nothing
else ! As H. P. B. and I were then five days’ postal
distance apart, the forgery theory will hardly cover the
Cawnpore incident.

On the second day after reaching Cawnpore, I received
from Adyar a rather large mail that had been re-addressed
to me from there. Among the letters was one from the
late Mr. Sam. Ward, dated at Capri, and enclosing a note
to Mahatma K. H., which he begged me to have for-
warded if possible. As Damodar was then going nightly
in astral body to the ashram (residence) of that Master,
I handed him the letter, saying that he might ask him
whether he should bring on the letter, or not. This was
on the afternoon of November 4 (1883), and we were
at Cawnpore, N.W.P. The reader will kindly keep this
in mind in view of the sequel.

On the previous evening I had lectured in the station
theatre, a long narrow room with the stage at one end.
Agreeably to the repulsive custom that prevails throughout
British India, all Europeans, or rather whites, all half-breeds,


28


Old Diary Leaves

and even all Christian converts or pretended converts
wearing European dress, were given the front seats, and
all Hindus, however high-bom or respectable (not always
convertible terms), were placed behind them : an aisle
ran through the middle of the room. Now I am rather
sensitive to the auric “spheres^’ of persons, and quick at
feeling whether they are sympathetic or hostile to myself.
Every public lecturer, dramatic artist, and other public
character has this same finer sense more or less acutely
developed, but I fancy mine is rather quicker than the
average. On this occasion I felt as if there stretched
between me and the beloved Hindus a barrier, almost a
wall, of antagonistic thought, and a less skilled hand
might have been stricken dumb by it. But, finding the
hostile current flowing towards me from the right, I planted
myself opposite the aisle, put my will to work to break
through the cross-current, and at last made the connection
between myself and the sympathetic portion of my audience.
That this is no freak of the imagination, but a very real and
palpable fact in human intercourse, will be attested by
every person of average nervous sensitiveness whose business
it is to speak, sing, or play before the public. More than
once it has happened that the presence of a single white
man, not a Theosophist, in an audience of Hindus, has
acted as a damper upon them and reacted upon me, and
for the simple reason that, while between all Asiatics, of
whatsoever race and creed, and myself there is a complete
sympathy and mutual trust, between them and the average
white man there is the distinct mutual antipathy based, a^



The Master K, H. at Lahore ^

I believe, upon a conflict of auric or mesmeric polarities.
Closer personal intercourse and the development of mutual
sympathies would change the present feeling of noli me
tangere into the same pleasant relationship as that of all
Asiatics and all recognized Theosophists.

From Cawnpore we moved on to Lucknow on the
evening of the 4th November, reached that station at
9 P.M., and were welcomed at the house of Mr. Jwala
Prasad, one of our active members. Every minute of the
following day was occupied, the details including receptions
of visitors, with conversazioni, the trial and expulsion of
an unworthy half-caste member, a lecture on “'rheosophy
audits Claims,” and then, until i a.m., private teaching
of mesmerism, with illustrative demonstrations on one of
the Hindu gentlemen of my suite. Bara Banki followed
after Lucknow, and the usual routine was gone through.

I must in passing, however, pay a just tribute to the
intellectual brilliancy shown by Pandit Pran Nath, F.T.S.,
in summarizing my lectures at the above two places,
in Urdu, with an eloquence and unhesitating fluency that
were both admirable and remarkable. I have been often
placed similarly under obligations by educated friends, for
from first to last my lectures throughout Asia have been
interpreted in eighteen diflerent languages.

Bareilly next, where I lectured, and then on to Morada*
bad, where Damodar gave me another proof of his acquired
power of travelling in the astral “double/^ He went to
AdyaTi conversed with H. P. B., heard the voice of a
Ma^r apeak a message to me, and asked H. P« B. tp



30 Old Diary Leaves

telegraph me the substance of it so as to satisfy me of his
veracity in these matters. On reporting the facts to me,
he dictated the message as he heard it, and all present in
my room signed a certificate as to the facts. The next
morning the expected telegram from H. P. B. was delivered
to me by the postman, this being the rule in India as to
the class of ‘ * Deferred messages. The despatch corrob-
orated DamodaPs dictated and certificated message, and
again the witnesses who were present signed their names on
the back of the Government despatch. The S. P. R. has
been pleased to do its best to weaken Damodar’s reputa-
tion for credibility and mine for common-sense in this
affair, but the facts are above honestly reported, and their
opinion does not concern me in the least.

Aligarh came next on our tour-programme, and here, on
the 1 2th of the month, we came to the sequel of the
Ward-K. H. letter affair. At the post-office I received my
mail from Adyar, and in it a letter posted at Headquarters
on the Ith inst by H. P. B., enclosing Mr. Ward’s identical
letter to K. H., which, it will be remembered, I received
from Italy and handed to Damodar at Cawnpore on the
4th — that is to say, the evening before she posted it at
Adyar, Its cover bore the despatching stamp of Adyar,
November 5, and the receiving stamp of Aligarh of
November 10, the two places being distant apart five days’
rail journey. The letter had been awaiting me two days in
the Aligarh post-office. I submit this as about as clear a
provable case of instantaneous transportation of a material
object between two distant points as can be found on



The Master K. H. at Lahore 31

record. Collusion and trickery are barred by the evidence
of the postal markings described. I have the letter still in
my possession, and shall be happy to show it to anyone
save the managers of the S. P. R., whose savage injustice
to H. P. B., the most gifted and marvellous psychic
of the age, makes it unseemly for those who knew her
merits as well as demerits to take further notice of that
clique.

In connection with this astral journey, Damodar told me
an interesting fact. On putting his body to sleep as usual,
he made a dash for the home of the Master among the
Himalayas, but found, on arriving, that he too was away in
the astral body ; and, by the power of his attraction for his
pupil, the latter was swept away as powerfully and instan-
taneously as though he had ventured into a deep and
impetuous river current and been carried off his footing.
The next minute Damodar found himself at Adyar, in the
presence of both his Master and H. P. B. On going to
sleep he had held Mr. Ward^s letter in his hand, and it had,
it seems, gone along with him on the astral plane — itself, of
course, changed from ponderable into astral, or etheric,
matter. On telling the Master about the letter, he per-
ceived it in his hand, gave it over to him, and was bidden
to return to his place. By the radical power of the occult
chemistry or physics, the astralized letter was restored to its
solid state, taken by H.P.B., and the next day duly posted
to my Aligarh address ; the sequel is known. If I were
better versed in science, I should use this incident, together
with that of the other Master's turban given me at New


52 Old Diary Leaved

York by my trailed visitor, and various other instances
of apport^ as a text for a discourse upon the possible
changes in solid bodies, from the densely physical, objective,
and ponderable condition, into that of the invisible, in-
tangible one of bodies on the astral plane. That the
changes can be worked in both directions, viz., from the
objective to the hyperphysical, and back again into re-
integration, or manifestation, is within the personal know-
ledge of many experienced investigators of psychical
phenomena. These sixty -odd chapters of this series of
Old Diary Leaves contain enough examples to prove
the case, and the eye-witnesses to them are both numerous
and unimpeachable : so, too, the works of an army of other
writers and experimentalists in this field of natural science
support my own statements. What with our X-rays, our
Marconi rays, our researches in the Odic Force, in hypno-
tism, and, by no means the least important, in spiritualistic
mediumship {e,g.^ the cases of Mrs. Compton, Mrs. d’Esper-
ance, and Honto and other materializations at the EddysOi
we shall soon find ourselves forced to begin again with
the alphabet of physical science, and stretch out our hands
to the East for help to understand the Nature in which our
microcosmic selves have been so long vaunting our wisdom.
The phenomenon of my rose-born, half-ounce gold ring,
which all my constant readers must recollect, is the only
am that I can now call to mind which proves that a solid
object can exist within another solid object without possess-
ing tangible bulk and without abrading or disturbing its
paarticloi, yet at the same time have apF»’eoiable weight.



The Master K. H. at Lahore 33

Surely a long vista of physical discoveries is opening out
before us.

We went on to Delhi next, where I lectured twice at the
Town Hall, and whence I despatched young Brown and
L. V. V. Naidu, of my party, to form a Branch at Rawal
Pindi, my own duties precluding my going myself. From
Delhi the programme took me to Meerut, the home of that
gifted young Hindu lawyer, Rama Prasad, whose work on
Nature^s Finer Forces made him known, some years
later, to the whole Theosophical reading public, the world
over. From thence to Lahore, where things of great
moment happened. Between the two stations Damodar
made another astral flight which was capable of verification.
Three of us — he, I, and T. Narainswamy Naidu — were in
the same railway carriage, Damodar apparently moving
uneasily, as if in sleep, on one of the berths : I was reading
a book by the lamp-light. Damodar suddenly came over
to me and asked the time, which by my watch was some
minutes before 6 p.m. He told me that he had just come
from Adyar, where H. P. B. had met with an accident \
whether a serious one or not, he could not tell me, but he
thought she had tripped her foot in the carpet and fallen
heavily on her right knee. The reader will observe that the
young man was but a beginner in occult science, and incap-
able as yet of accurate recollection, in returning to outward
consciousness, of his experiences on the other planes of
being. I mention this in view of the studied unfairness
of the S. P. R. toward him. For my own satisfaction I
did two things on hearing his story. I wrote a certificate

3



34 Old Diary Leaves

"of the oeeurrence awi got Narainswamy to sign it with me,
noting the time ; and from the next station, Saharanpore,
teiegfaphed H. P. B. a question as to “what accident
happened at headquarters at about 6 o'clock ? " We reached
Lahore the next morning at 9, and were escorted to a camp
of six tents and four large shamiams (open canvas pavilions)
which had been pitched for me on the open grom^ {waiddn)
to the North of the city. We very soon began talking with
our friends about the previous evening’s incident in the
train, and my memorandum was passed around for informa-
tion : I got the friends present to sign it, and to say that
the expected telegram from H. P. B. had not yet arrived.
My party left me to take their morning bath and meal, and
while I was sitting under the shadow of my tent with Mr.
R. C. Bary, Editor of the Ary a magazine, a Government
telegraph peon was seen coming towards us with a brown-
covered telegram in his hand. 1 made Mr. Ruttan Chand
take it into his own hands and keep it unopened until the
return of our party, in whose presence it should be opened
and read. This was done at 1 2 noon by Mr. R. C. Bary,
wnd the nine present signed on the back to attest the cir-
cumstances. The contents were these : “ Nearly broke right
leg, tumbling from Bishop’s chair, dragging Coulomb,
frightening Morgans. Damodar startled us.” My Saharan-
pore despatch was received by H. P. B. late at night on
the 17th : her reply was dated at Adyar at 7.55 a.m. on
the 1 8th, and I got it at Lahore at noon. The discrepancy
in Damodar’s statement of details and H. P. B/s is not
even surprising in view of his then stage of spiritual evolu-



The Master K. H. at Lahore 35

tion, rhii« the corrohocation of the oiajoj: fejct of the heavy
fall md the injury to her right knee is full. Theie have
been critics of limited acumen but great conceit, who wish
us to believe that this might have been a vulgar conspiracy
between Damodar and H. P. B. to deceive me j but I am
not aware that it is likely that a fat woman of 1 6 -stones’
weight would give herself a serious injury to her knee for
the purpose of befooling me, when she might as easily have
agreed with Damodar that he should have seen her doing
something that would have been queer and yet haripless in
itself, such, for instance, as making antic gestures, tearing a
newspaper into bits, or declaiming a Russian or Fj:ench
poem ; the ex,planation has not the support of common-
jsense. And then character counts for something outside
the S. P. R., and gentlemen are entitled to some credence
when it is not a question of money interests ; sometimes
even then. H. P. B.’s telegram mentioned a fact until then
unknown to us, that Major-General and Mrs. Morgan, of
Ootacamund, were visiting at Adyar.

My camp was thronged with visitors during the three days
of our stay, and I gave two lectures under the -largest
shamiana to multitudes, with great pots of ike standing
along the sides to modify the biting November fqr

the {Punjab is the reverse of tropical as to teni^erature in
our winter months. My kind and most capable interpreter
was Pandit Gopinath, F.T.S., a well-educated and most
enterprising journalist, a Brahmin of Kashmir, well known
to TheosQjrfiisKts for his unshakable loyaky -tp the two
Founders.



36


Old Diary Leaves


I was sleeping in my tent, the night of the 19th, when I
rushed back towards external consciousness on feeling a
hand laid on ine. The camp being on an open plain, and
beyond the protection of the Lahore police, my first animal
instinct was to protect myself from a possible religious
fanatical assassin, so I clutched the stranger by the upper
arms, and asked him in Hindustani who he was and what
he wanted. It was all done in an instant, and I held the
man tight, as would one who might be attacked the next
moment and have to defend his life. But the next instant
a kind, sweet voice said : “ Do you not know me ? Do you
not remember me ? ’’ It was the voice of the Master K. H.
A swift revulsion of feeling came over me, I relaxed my
hold on his arms, joined my palms in reverential salutation,
and wanted to jump out of bed to show him respect. But
his hand and voice stayed me, and after a few sentences had
been exchanged, he took my left hand in his, gathered the
fingers of his right into the palm, and stood quiet beside
my cot, from which I could see his divinely benignant face
by the light of the lamp that burned ojjj^a packing-case at
his back. Presently I felt some soft substance forming in
my hand, and the next minute the Master laid his kind
hand on my forehead, uttered a blessing, and left my half
of the large tent to visit Mr. W. T. Brown, who slept in
the other half behind a canvas screen that divided the tent
into two rooms. When I had time to pay attention to
myself, I found myself holding in my left hand a folded
paper enwrapped in a silken cloth. To go to the lamp,
open and read it, was naturally my first impulse. I found it



The Master K. H. at Lahore 37

to be a letter of private counsel, containing prophecies of
the death of two undesignated, then active, opponents of the
Society, which were realized in the passing away of the
Swami Dydnand Saraswati and Babu Keshab Chandra Sen
shortly after. A point to notice is that the handwriting of
this letter, formed in my own palm by the Master K. H.
himself, is identical with that of all those others which the
sagacious Netherclift, after much dissection of them into
their original pothook-and-hanger elements, pronounced to
be of Blavatskyan origin ! What happened in young Brown's
end of the tent he related orally to a great many still living
witnesses, and published in his pamphlet. Some Experiences
in India, my copy of which I cannot lay my hand upon at
this moment. But in his other pamphlet, The Theosophical
Society ; an Explanatory Treatise, published at Madras, he
says (p. ii) : “It will be sufficient here to remark that
Mahatma K. H. is a living Adept, and that the writer had
the honor of seeing him personally at Lahore and of being
spoken to by him and even touched. Letters have been
received by the writer at Madras, Lahore, Jammu (Kashmir),
and again at Madras, all being in the same handwriting,
etc., etc.” The foundation having been thus laid, and
Mr. Brown's other pamphlet available after a little search,

I may say that on hearing an exclamation from his side of
the screen, I went in there and he showed me a silk -wrapped
letter of like appearance to mine though of different contents,
which he said had been given him much as mine had been
to me, and which we read together. That he has since
swung around a whole circle of changes, and is now a



Old Diary Leaves


38

professed Roman Catholic and a teacher in a school Of that
Church, does not alter in the least the facts of his reCeiting
this letter as described, and his identifying it as in the
K. H. script.

The Master’s letter to me connects itself with the visit
to me at New York of the other Master when, at my un-
spoken thought-wish, he “materialized” his ttirban and
gave it me as an objective proof that I had received his
visit. The letter says : “At New York you demanded
of .... an objective proof that his visit to you was not a
Mdya^ and he gave it ; [now] unasked, I give you the
present one : tho’ I pass out of your sight, this note will
be to you the reminder of our conferences. I now go to
young Mr. Brown to try his intuitiveness. To-morrow night,
when the camp is quiet and the worst of the emanations
from yotir audience have passed away, I shall visit you again
for a longer conversation, as you must be forewarned against
certain things in the future.” He concludes with a remark
that will not be very palatable reading to our ingenious
American rivals who are trying to play the drama of Hamlet
with the Dane omitted. He says : “Ever be vigilant, zeal-
ous, and judicious ; for, remember that the usefulness of the
Theosophical Society largely depends upon your exertions,
and that our blessings follow its suffering ‘ Founders ’ and
all who help on their work.”



CHAPTER IV.


RECEPTION BY THE MAHARAJAH OF KASHMIR.

T he experience described in the last chapter was cer-
tainly calculated to make a deep impression on the
dullest mind ; how much more so on one whose highest
aspiration was to be permitted to work in some capacity or
other with the “ Elder Brothers ” for the good of the race 1
If anybody had asked me what was the rarest pleasure that
I could imagine, I should have answered : “To see and con-
verse with a Master, for in his benign atmosphere the mind
and heart would expand like a flower to the sun and one’s
being be filled with joy.” And here I had had it without
the asking. Yet when I came to look back upon it, it was
but like a remembered glint of sunshine on a cloudy day,
seen for a moment, then gone. I'he whole time of the
interview could not have been longer than ten minutes.
The touch of his hand drew me out of the depths of the
oblivion of dreamless sleep. I had had a fatiguing day,
the tent was very cold, heated only by some embers in a
great earthen pot, and I had covered myself to the ears

39


40


Old Diary Leaves


in the bed-clothes. I am touched, I wake with a start,
I clutch the arms of my visitor, possibly my would-be
assassin ; the sweet, kind voice breaks the last stupor of
slumber ; he is there, standing beside my bed, his face
aglow with a smile ; I see it in the chiaroscuro of the
back-light. Then the magical creation of the silk-
enwrapped letter in my hand, a few words, a farewell
salute, he walks past the lamp on the box, his noble
form lingers an instant in the tent-door, he gives a last
friendly glance at me, and is gone. It is not much as
to time, but its memory will last my life through. Years
before — as my readers will perhaps remember — I was
bidden to go on with my work as if there were no
Masters to guide and help, but only Humanity, the
“ Great Orphan, to labour for : to expect nothing from
Them, yet to be ready for anything. So I have gone
on until to-day, never asking for help, never holding
back for lack of the promise of it, yet never being
without it when it was really needed.

This Lahore visit of the Master was but one of many
proofs vouchsafed me that we are watched and helped ;
never deserted, never forgotten, howsoever dark may seem
the outlook, howsoever menacing the aspect of things.
Twenty-odd years of this experience has begotten a
constant calm and an abiding trust in my heart, as it
did in that of H. P. B. Sometimes it may be a
glimpse of a personage, sometimes an audible voice,
sometimes a clear forecast of events, sometimes a message
through third parties ; like that which Mme. Mongruel,



Reception by the Kashmir Maharajah 41

the gifted Seeress, gave me in her somnambulic sleep
last year at Paris, and which foretold the immediate
future of the Society, the duration of my own life,
and the aspect of things towards the end of it.
Thus, in the letter made in my hand were predicted the
deaths of our two opponents, then most active, and
good counsel was given me. Though traitors should fill
twenty corner-stones with deliberately concocted lies
about the history of our movement, and forever suppress
my name and Mrs. Besant’s from their falsified records,
it will profit them not one iota ; the work will go on,
and the real workers be recognized, comforted, and
helped, so long as they are loyal to their duty.

The next evening, after the visits to Mr. Brown and
myself, we two and Damodar sat in my tent, at lo o’clock,
waiting for an expected visit from Master K. H. The
camp was quiet, the rest of our pau-ty dispersed through
the city of Lahore. We sat on chairs at the back of
the tent so as not to be observed from the camp : the
moon was in its last quarter and had not risen. After
some waiting we heard and saw a tall Hindu approaching
from the side of the open plain. He came to within a
few yards of us and beckoned Damodar to come to him,
which he did. He told him that the Master would
appear within a few minutes, and that he had some
business with Damodar. It was a pupil of Master
K. H. Presently we saw the latter coming from the
same direction, pass his pupil — who had withdrawn to a
little distance — and stop in front of our group, now


43 Old Diary Leaves

staftding and saluting in the Indian fashion, some yards
away. Brown and I kept our places, and Damodar
went and conversed for a few minutes with the Teacher,
after which he returned to us and the king-like visitor
walked away. I heard his footsteps on the ground, so it
was no wraith, but the man in his external body. Observe
that it could not have been Damodar masquerading, for
he himself formed one of our group of three. Then there
are the distinguished personal peculiarities of the two, as
unlike as possible, to account for, and the chela, whom I
had had to do with for years. Still further proof was
given me before retiring, when I was wTiting my Diary :
the pupil lifted the portiere^ beckoned to me, and pointed
to the figure of his Master, Avaiting for me out on the
plain in the star-light. I went to him, we walked off to
a safe place at some distance where intruders need not
be expected, and then for about a half-hour he told
me what I had to know, and what does not concern
third parties, since that chapter of T. S. history was
long since closed. Needless to say I slept very little on
either of those tw^o nights. The august visitor told me,
however, that he had not come to me of his own motion
entirely, although glad to come to me in person ; but had
been sent by the Authority higher than himself, who was
satisfied with my fidelity and wished me to never lose
confidence. There were no miracles done at the inter-
view, no magic circles traced on the ground, no gum-
burning lamps placed around it and burning with steely-
blue fiameS : just two men talking together, a meeting,



Reception by the Kashmir Maharajah 43

ai 9 d ft pftPting when the talk was oter. I dan that

ft was mot Damodar, but was the Om I was called to
meet ; so let it pass.

I broke up camp the next day— November i » — and left
Lahore for Jammu, the lower capital of H. H. the late
Maharajah of Kashmir, whose invitation to visit him 1 had
accepted. One of his durbar officers, a Muslim and,
strange to say, given to drinking, despite the p>rohibitions of
his creed, had been sent down to escort me from Lahore.
Simple affair as this was, there had been protests, explana-
tions, and compromises before it could be arranged. I had
heard that the Maharajah's custom was to make presents in
cash and costly clothing to his visitors, and I positively
declined to accept a single rupee, as incompatible with my
life-long habit. The emissary was at his wits' end between
two such stubborn men, and an active exchange of tele-
grams made things no better until, at last, the cloud rolled
by and all was settled in a way to satisfy us both. It was
agreed that the kfUlldt^ or present, should be given and by
me received and receipted for officially, as President of the
Theosophical Society, in which capacity I am ready to
accept any gifts, however large^ that involve no wrong to
anybody. So, all being right, our party took the 6 f.m,
train for IVazirabad, which was reached at 9.30. My
escort had evidently been saying good-bye to friends to
some purpose, as his breath smelt very bad in our closed
railway carriage, and he was quite half-seas-over. Hid
tongue got to wagging about politics, and I was assured,
with mysterious hints and nods, that a revival of Maslftm


44 Old Diary Leaves

power was certain, and that his fifty million Indian co-
religionists would rally under the standard of the Nizam of
Hyderabad. After awhile I got my fill of this nonsense
and the odors of his mouth, and retired to my corner and
read. He wanted to stop at Wazirabad, for that meant
the chance for sleep and other things, but I declared my
intention of pushing forward to Sialkot. We reached that
place by horse-dawk at 3 A.M., stopped at the rest-house
until noon, then moved on to Jammu. We left our
carriages on the hither side of the River Tavi, and were
brought on two of the royal elephants, a distance of two
miles, to the huge bungalow that the Maharajah keeps for
his more important guests. The road from the river leads
straight through the main street of the quaint old town,
whose breadth may be guessed when I tell my reader that
as our elephants moved their huge bulk forward, horsemen,
and even foot-passengers, had to whirl into alleys or
clamber into shops to avoid being crushed ! And we,
seated on their backs, cross-legged in true Oriental fashion,
were almost on a level with the living apartments and, if
we had been discourteous according to Indian notions of
politeness, might have seen the families in their private
rooms. At the rest-house we were received by an army of
servants with the obsequiousness that means naught else
than the hope of bakshish. My lordship was asked to
name what meats, game, fish, etc., I might prefer, whether
I would begin operations now with the customary whisky
“ peg,” and when I would have my meals. They appeared
really astonished when I named my simple, non-flesh diet



Reception by the Kashmir Maharajah 45

(for that time was included within my five years’ trial of
vegetarianism), and declined their liquors, wines, and
fermented drinks : such a mad white they had never seen
before. And then, too, who had ever seen a European
gentleman on terms of friendly equality with Indians?
Yes, here were two Sahibs, actually two, travelling with
dark-skinned people as if they were as good as themselves,
and apparently enjoying their company ! Bismillah /

As we learned that a certain famous European doctor
had been sent by the Maharajah’s request to prescribe for
him, and that he would arrive that evening and be lodged
in the same house with us, I at once asked our minister-
escort to change us into a smaller bungalow' that stood near
by, for I could not bear the sight of my dear dark-com-
plexioned colleagues being scornfully looked down upon, as
they would almost certainly be. My request being granted,
we found ourselves very comfortable and independent in a
house of four rooms divided by cross walls and with doors
of communication. In view of what was to happen, we
may as well have the ground plan. Thus :

C, — Pandit Gopinath,
L. V. V. Naidu,
and T. Narains-
wamy.

D. — ^W. T. Brown*

The next morning, at 10.30, the same Minister of the
Durbar brought me word that His Highness begged the
honor of my presence at the Palace. In our compound


Old Diaiy Leaves

i^^ood two elephants and four fine saddle-horses, richly
caparisoned, with housings and saddle-covers of Kashmir-
shawl work, and silver-mounted bridles and stirrups, await-
ing my pleasure, with a guard of honor of armed sepoys.
I chose the elephants, so we mounted the sagacious, kneel-
ing beasts and went on our way, the sepoys in front to
clear the road. I made the discovery that elephant-riding
is not so bad when one sits on the pad in eastern fashion,
the legs crossed. I had tried it elsewhere in a howdah, or
structure with raised seats, and in spite of its being covered
with plates of silver and otherwise gorgeously gotten up,
one rode most uncomfortably, being shaken about like a
bag of meal on an oscillating pivot. Again we threaded
the narrow streets of Jammu, driving all wayfarers to the
nearest shelters, and at last reached the Palace. There
were the usual enclosing walls with massive gates, the outer
compound with horses, elephants, camels, oxen, donkeys,
heavy wains, light vehicles {ekka^\ piles of straw, b^s of
grain^ building materials, etc., all in confusion, armed
sentries pacing their beats, and soldiers in untidy undress
lounging about. Then came an inner court and the Palace
gateway, through which we passed, mounted a wide stair-
case and found ourselves in the Presence Chamber. I
forget after these fourteen years how it looked, but a
vague memory of general untidiness remains in my mind.
The Maharajah came soon and received me with an air
of kindness and stately courtesy that showed beyond doubt
that 1 waa welcome. In compliment to him I woire the
woollen of Ijhe better clans in the P>wnjab-^jainae,



Reception by the Kashmir Maharajah 47

ft sleeveless waistcoat with deep flaps, an outside
or long robe, striped Kashmir socks, and purple idippers
embroidered with imitation gold braid— which, of eoufse,
I left at the door. His first expression to Pandit
Oopinath, my inta’preter, was one of pleasure to see me
in his national costume. A carpet and back-bolster had
been spread for him on a slightly raised platform, before
which we were to sit on the carpeted floor ; but he
dragged the bolster from there, placed it on the floor,
motioned me to sit beside him, called me his elder brother,
and proceeded with the conversation, which he opened with
the usual exchange of compliments and good wishes. He
was a man of noble presence, with an intellectual fece
and the splendid eyes of the Hindu, which by turns can
be full of pathos, blaze with anger, or penetrating with
intelligent interest. His personality fitted the kingly office
perfectly, which is more than can be said of some other
sovereigns whom I have seen, and who looked ra'tlier like
cooks or grooms than high-born rulers of men. I found
him to be a thoughtful Vedantin, well acquainted with
philosophical systems. He fully believed in the existence
of living Mahatmas, and trusted in them to do for India
all that her Karma made possible, but no more. He
gently broached the subject of his own ill-health, said ite
knew of -my cures and of the recent prohibition to -contimie
the practice, but asked if I would not at least relieve the
acute pain he was then suffering from. I consented, of
course, and on his removing his turban, did what 1 couW
for him with mesmeric healing passes. He submitted to



48 Old Diary Leaves

my manipulations with perfect docility, which, I must
confess, gave me a peculiar sensation, for Americans are
not in the habit of handling sovereigns like common men,
however they may theoretically regard them as their equals.
I had the pleasure of removing His Highness’s pain, and
when the audience closed he begged me to visit him twice
a day during my stay, that we might talk of the high
religious themes which equally interested us.

The same evening, when I was sitting in our bungalow,
I saw a queer procession of men enter from the verandah.
First came a Court official, attended by a servant carrying
a pair of scales and another with some heavy bag on his
shoulder, which was gravely laid at my feet. Then followed
a string of twenty-one other dark-faced, turbaned servants,
each bearing on his head a flat basket of fruit or sweets,
which were piled on each other on the table, counted by
the Court Officer, and the men dismissed. While I was
wondering what all this could mean, Gopinath was told that
His Highness received me as a guest of the first-class, and,
as such, twenty-one baskets were sent me ; there were
guests of three classes, of which the second received fourteen
baskets, the third seven baskets ; below that people did not
count ! He then opened the gunny-bag, poured the
contents — silver coins — into the scales, weighed them, and
took my receipt for rs. 500. This, he explained, was
“ table money,” though why he should give me that when
our every possible and impossible wish was gratified, I could
not imagine. However, it was the custom of the Court of
JKashmir, and His Highness’s honor was involved in doing



Reception by the Kashmir Maharajah 49

things as they had always been done from ancient times by
Indian kings.

I went twice to the Palace the next day, and resumed the
Vedantic discussions and even the mesmeric passes. His
Dewan (Prime Minister) was present with other officials,
including the Chief Justice, and after the free eastern
fashion, dipped into the conversation from time to time.
That is a thing that always astonishes Europeans : if there
be a wrangle in the street and a crowd gathers, they will
turn to listen to a side remark by a boy as readily as
though he were an adult. Can it be because, by the
accepted belief in Karma, only our encasing bodies are
young, the Dweller within the one being as old as that
within the other ? It is an idea to be considered like any
other, at all events.

In the afternoon the Maharajah presided at games and
a series of animal combats, and took me to his pavilion and
placed me at his side. It being an entirely novel experi-
ence, I stayed the thing out, but once was enough. There
were fights between rams, elephants, and horses — the first
laughable, the second tame, since the elephants were not
angry ; the third exciting, for the splendid stallions lashed
out at each other, screamed and tried to bite. A cock-
fight brought the affair to a close.

The Chief Justice spent the evening with me in pleasant
talk, in the course of which he dropped the remark that
the Maharajah was “so taken with me that he would
give me anything I might ask for.” I took this for what
it was wortl|> but after the Judge had gone, young Brown,

4



50


Old Diary Leaves


to my amazement, asked me to get him the appointment
of Judge. “What!” I said, “you, who came to India
to devote yourself to unselfish work ; whom I warned by
letter to expect naught but the chance of self-sacrifice ;
who have just been honored with a visit and letter from
a Master, a distinction that has been withheld from some
of the oldest of our members — you are ready to snap at
the first temptation, and take a post for which you are
not qualified?” I explained to him that if indeed the
Maharajah respected me, it was because he had become
convinced that I would not take for myself or any private
friend any present or favor whatever. He at last saw
the point and said no more ; but his character-gauge had
been exposed to me once for all, and his subsequent
career has corroborated my impressions.

I went as usual, the next day, to the Palace, and in the
afternoon saw a review by General Prince Ram Singh,
Commander-in-Chief of the Kashmir Government Service
troops, which have since then behaved so splendidly in
the various British Border Expeditions. This was all very
fine, but an event occurred that night which drove the
recollection of everything else out of my thought ;
Damodar disappeared from his room, and was not to be
found when I looked there for him in the early morning.



CHAPTER V.

MYSTERIOUS DISAPPEARANCE OF DAMODAR.

D AMODAR had disappeared, and left no trace behind
him as a clue to show me whither he had gone or
when he would return, if ever. I hastily went through
the four communicating rooms, but they were empty ;
my other companions having gone to the river for a
bath. From Damodar’s window I called to a servant,
and learned from him that Damodar had left the
bungalow, alone, at daybreak, but left no message.
Not knowing exactly what to make of it, I returned to
my room, and found lying on the table a note from a
Master, bidding me not to worry about the lad as he
was under his protection, but giving me no hint as to his
return. It had taken but a minute or so to make the
the circuit of the four intercommunicating open-doored
rooms, and I had heard no messenger's footstep in the
gravelly compound ; a person could hardly have .entered
my room between my leaving and re-entering it, yet here


52 Old Diary Leaves

was the mysterious letter, in the “K. H.” writing and
familiar Chinese envelope, lying on my table.

My first instinct was to take Damodar’s luggage — his
trunk and bedding — ^and pack it away under my own cot.
I then despatched a telegram to H. P. B., telling her of
his disappearance and of my having no idea as to his
return. When the bathers got back from the river, they
were naturally as excited as myself over the incident, and
we wasted much time in speculations and surmises as to
its possible sequel.

I went twice to the Palace that day and found myself
increasingly welcome to His Highness. He showed me
every courtesy, discussed the Vedanta philosophy with
evidently deep interest, and gave me a pressing invita-
tion to accompany him the next time he should go to
his Kashmirian capital, Srinagar. Just as evening was
closing in, and I was sitting alone, writing, in our
bungalow, the others having gone for a ride on horse-
back, I heard a step on the gravel outside, and, looking
around, saw a tall Kashmiri-costumed telegraph peon
(messenger) bringing me a message. On opening it, I
found it to be from H. P. B., in answer to mine. She
said that a Master had told her that Damodar would
return, and that I must not let his luggage^ especially his
beddings be touched by any third party. That was
strange, was it not, that she, at Madras — />., some 2000
miles away — should tell me to do the very thing it had
been my first impulse to do on finding out the lad’s
departure ? Was it long-distance telepathy, or what ?



Mysterious Disappearance ot Damodar 53

There was something stranger yet to come. To open
and read the despatch had not taken me a minute ; the
peon had not had more than time enough to get across
the verandah into the compound when, like a flash, it
came to me that the form of the peon was not real but
a mdya^ and that he belonged to the Brotherhood : I
knew it, I could swear to it, because of a certain psychic
disturbance caused in me by the approach of one of
those personages ; in fact, I could presently identify the
peculiar vibration set up by the mesiheric current of my
own Teacher, who was also H. P. B.’s Teacher. I ran
to the door and looked across the bare compound, in
which were no trees or bushes to serve as hiding-places,
but nothing was in sight : the peon had disappeared as
if into the ground.

I have been asked, when telling this story, how the
transfer of the despatch from the keeping of the real
peon to the simulated one, and the return of my signed
receipt to the telegraph office, could be accounted for
unless the messenger had been a consenting party. The
thing is very simple, provided the reality of hypnotic
power be conceded. The perfected hypnotism of the
Orient I mean ; not the rudimentary stage of it to which
the schools of Nancy and La Salpetriere have hitherto
attained : the secret of mdjyay in short. The adept meets
the peon ; by will-power prevents his seeing him ;
causes him to become unconscious ; leads him to any
convenient place of hiding ; leaves him there asleep ; puts
the illusive appearance of the man over his own features



54 Old Diary Leaves

and person ; brings me the telegram, takes my receipt,
salutes, and retires ; the next moment, the nervous thrill
caused in me by his sympathetic magnetism reacting
in himself, warns him that I am on the alert and will
naturally come to the door, so he inhibits my sight to
prevent my seeing him, returns to the sleeping peon,
puts the receipt in his hand, wills that he shall recollect,
as if it had happened to himself, the brief episode of our
meeting, awakens him, inhibits his sight, and sends him
back to the telegraph office. A very simple sequence
of events, easily comprehensible for every advanced
mesmerist.

It was on the 25th November, at daylight, that
Damodar left us : he returned in the evening of the
27 th — after an absence of some sixty hours, but how
changed I He left, a delicate-framed, pale student-like
young man, frail, timid, deferential ; he returned with
his olive face bronzed several shades darker, seemingly
robust, tough, and wiry, bold and energetic in manner :
we could scarcely realize that he was the same person.
He had been at the Master’s retreat {ashram\ under-
going certain training. He brought me a message from
another Master, well known to me, and, to prove its
genuineness, whispered in my ear a certain agreed pass-
word by which Lodge messages were authenticated to
me, and which is still valid : a fact which certain trans-
atlantic persons might profitably take note of.

At the Maharajah’s request I had been giving him some
mesmeric passes every day, which seemed to do him good,



Mysterious Disappearance of Damodar 55

or, at least, he said they did. He now began to deplore
my necessary departure, and begged me to select somebody
at his Court to whom I should be willing to give him over
for future treatment. Upon this, I looked about me more
closely than I had been doing, and found that there were
three distinct parties or cliques, each trying to gain a
paramount influence over the sovereign, and each as
selfish and, it almost seemed to me, unscrupulous as the
other. For the first time in my life, I got a clear view
of the rotten moral atmosphere of an Indian Prince’s
Court. So I told His Highness — for it was my blunt
candor that, I fancy, had given him the good opinion
of me that the Chief Justice had described in Brown’s
hearing — I told him frankly that the only person whom
I would recommend as his psychopath was his youngest
son, Prince Amar Singh, who was then a handsome,
honest-looking youth. His Highness approving my choice,
I showed the young Prince how to treat his father, and
gave him the famous silver tube with which I had worked
so many cures of eye and ear affections during the course
of that memorable year. But, as I afterwards learnt, no
good came of it, for the son stood in such awe of the
parent, that he was quite unable to feel, much less show,
that firm, commanding appearance of face, gesture, and
voice which is indispensable for the psychopath to have
when treating a patient. Yet I would not have risked my
royal patient’s coming under the influence of either one
of those scheming courtiers, who would certainly have used
the intimacy for their selfish purposes. The Maharajah



56 Old Diary Leaves

died a few years later, and was succeeded by his eldest
son, who was away at Srinagar at the time of my visit
to Jammu, and whom, therefore, I did not meet. The
latter was for some time suspended by the Government
of India, a Council of Regency was formed, and young
Prince Amar Singh was appointed its President. Major-
Gen. Ram Singh, the second son, has brought the Kashmir
army to such a state of proficiency, that it rendered the
most valuable services to the British Commander-in -Chief,
as before stated, in recent border campaigns.

The day fixed for my departure having come, the
Maharajah, finding me obdurate about prolonging my
visit, consented to receive me in audience of leave. So
I went to the Palace for the last time, I and my suite
riding on elephants, and causing every person, whether
mounted or afoot, whom we met in the cramped lanes of
Jammu, to scuttle out of our way into the nearest shops,
courts, or blind alleys. ^Ve found His Highness, with
his Prime Minister (Dewan), his Treasurer, and other
officials, seated cross-legged on the floor, with a number
of piles of woollen stuffs placed before him in a row :
one pile much bigger than the rest. Through the able
interpreter, Pandit Gopinath, he and I fell into conversation
about my departure and hoped-for return, after which,
on a signal from the Maharajah, a high official pushed the
big pile over towards me, with the request that I should
accept the articles as His Highness' khiMt (compli-
mentary present). At the same time the Treasurer laid
before me two heavy bags of coin. To each member of



Mysterious Disappearance of Damodar 57

my suite was given one of the smaller piles of woollens.
According to custom, I touched the presents, made a
respectful salutation, by joining my palms and holding
them edgewise to my forehead, which the Maharajah
returned ; we then rose and, saluting the officials in turn,
left the audience-chamber, having seen the noble face of
our host for the last time. No other reigning Indian
Prince whom I have met has left so pleasant impressions
on my memory. I speak only as to my personal inter-
course with him ; what sort of view the Government of
India may have taken of him as their political ally, I
cannot say ; but so far as his treatment of me is concerned,
no one could have shown himself a more perfect gentleman,
a more generous, self-respecting Prince, or a more thought-
ful host. I must not fail, moreover, to express the
obligations under which Pandit Gopinath, F.T.S., of
Lahore, laid the Society and myself, personally, by his
unpaid and invaluable services during this visit and my
whole tour in the Punjab of 1883.

When my khilldt was examined at the bungalow, it
was found to comprise a silk-lined, richly-embroidered
choga (outside coat) ; a splendid Kashmir shawl, “ worked
to the centre '' ; fine, soft woollen tissue for a turban ;
a green neck or waist scarf, with embroidered ends ; and
three pieces of pashmina^ or soft cloth made of goat^s
hair, for a suit of clothes in the Punjabi fashion. The
huge bags of coin contained, each, a thousand rupees ;
thus making the whole gift in money to me (or, rather, to
the Society, since I receipted for it officially) rs. 1500,



$8 Old Diary Leaves

The Treasurer's Report to that year's T. S. Convention
shows that, of this sum, I gave rs. 1500 towards the
purchase of the Adyar property, and the remaining
rs. 1000 to the Current Expense Account. The choga
and shawl I gave to H. P. B., the turban and three other
pieces of fine cloth to other friends, and the little green
scarf I kept for myself to protect my throat when on
tour. But the moths ate it up before long, and so I
kept nothing of the Jammu presents save the memory of
the kindness of their donor. The presents of cloths to
my suite were similar to my own, but fewer in number
and of rather inferior quality. At i p. m. we left on our
elephants for the other side of the river, and after a delay
of four hours at Sialkot, reached Wazirabad and passed
the night there. In the morning Damodar left us for
Madras, and we went on to Kapurthala vid, Lahore and
Kirtarpur.

Our reception at Kapurthala by the aged ex-Dewan
Ramjas ; the reigning one, his son Mathura Das ; Mr.
Harichand, Political Assistant ; and other important officials,
was most cordial and gratifying. The now so well-known
Maharajah was then a child, and the State was administered
for him by specially-chosen officials — whether British or
not, I do not remember. I found the mental atmosphere
much better than that at Jammu, where the sovereign
seemed to me the only one who really cared much for
philosophical discussions. Moreover, there was not the
same heavy atmosphere of selfish intrigue ; one could
breathe freer. I have noted the fact in my Diary, so it



Mysterious Disappearance of Damodar 59

must have been very palpable. While at this station
I was the guest of Dewan Mathura Das, and on the
third day lectured on “The Nature of Religion,” Pandit
Gopinath acting as interpreter in his usual fluent fashion.
The fourth and fifth days were devoted to the admission
of candidates for membership, among them all the chief
officials, and to the organization of the Kapurthala T. S.
My visit finished, I left for Jaipur, and reached that
unique city the next evening. We were accommodated
at the Traveller’s Bungalow — the best in India, so far as
my observations go.

Our local colleagues took me the next morning to call
on Atmaram Swami, a well-known and respected ascetic,
who had been telling them long before my arrival that he
was personally acquainted with our Masters, and that, eight
years before, in Tibet, one of them, known as Jivan Singh,
Chohan, had told him that he need not be discouraged
about the religious state of India, for they had arranged
that two Europeans, a man and a woman, should soon come
and revive the Eastern religions. This date corresponds
with that of the formation of our Society at New York,
and the intelligence was most important to me, I found
the Yogi a man of dignified presence, with a calm, thought-
ful countenance, quite a different sort of person from the
ordinary ascetic now so common in and profitless to India.
His greeting to me was charmingly affable, and he expressed
the greatest desire that our members should be encouraged
to practise Yoga. I told him that I dare not do that
wholesale, for, unless the candidates had the right tempera-


6o Old Diary Leaves

ment, and above all, the watchful surveillance of competent
teachers, they ran the risk of being seriously harmed by
psychical experiments. He agreed with me in this respect,
but said that everything had been foreseen and the right
thing would be brought about in good time. This has, in
fact, proved true, and the marvellous things that have
happened with Mrs. Besant, Mr. Leadbeater, and others who
were not then even members of the Society, fully corrob-
orate the prognostics made to me in 1883, at Jaipur, by
Atmaram Swami.

The same day I had to perform the unpleasant duty of
degrading from office and expelling from the Society the
Vice-President of our local Branch, for trying to use his
position to get personal favors from an influential Anglo-
Indian official and from Mr. Sinnett, both members. This
degradation of our Society is an offence so heinous, that I
should certainly expel anyone found guilty of it. So long
as I live, at least, the honor of the Society shall be pro-
tected against such ignoble self-seekers. This business
disposed of, I lectured al fresco in the great courtyard of
the Maharajah’s College to a large assemblage, and at
6 P.M. we left for Baroda, on our homeward journey.
After a dusty ride of thirty hours in the train, we reached
the Gaikwar’s capital, and were met at the station by Judge
Gadgil and other valued friends, who took us to our
destined quarters, and kept me chatting until 3 a.m. !
The next day, our former evil-wisher having been succeeded
by another British Resident, I paid him my respects, and in
the evening lectured on the “ Proofs of a Future Life ” ;



Mysterious Disappearance of Damodar 6i

a meeting of the local Branch, with fresh admission* of
candidates for membership, closed the proceedings of
the day.

By the Gaikwar’s special invitation I visited him at his
magnificent Palace the next day, and had a long talk about
several of our philanthropic schemes — among others, the
promotion of Sanskrit education and literature, in which
he took and still takes much interest. His Palace, as
hundreds of visitors can testify, is one of the finest in all
India, and will long be a grand monument of his largeness
of views as to the dignity of the sovereign of a great Indian
State.

From Baroda we went the long journey to Gooty, in the
Madras Presidency, halting a few hours between two trains
at Bombay. From Gooty we pushed on in bullock-carts
to Kumool, a distance of sixty miles. A warm welcome
made us forget the fatigues of the journey ; I received and
replied to Sanskrit and English addresses; organized a
local Branch ; the next morning at 8 o'clock lectured, and
at 4 p.M. started back to Gooty, which we reached after
riding all night. I completed the formation of our ever
active and honorably distinguished Gooty T. S., and at
5.30 p.M. took train again for Madras, where we arrived
on the morning of December 15 th, thus completing the
7000-mile tour on time and without accident. What
impression the return made on my mind may be guessed
from the following line in my Diary : “ Home never seemed
so delightful, nor my old Chum so dear.” These home-
comings are an ever recurrent delight, and no place in either



62 Old Diary Leaves

of the distant lands I visit seems half so sweet and restful
as Adyar.

The approaching Annual Convention now demanded all
my attention, and from that onward to the 27 th my every
hour was taken up with the reception and accommodation
of Delegates, the erection of temporary buildings, the pre-
paration of the annual financial and other reports, and the
arrangement of the agenda. Dr. Franz Hartmann, a recent
acquisition to our membership, turned up on the 17th
December as Special Delegate from the old New York
nucleus and the Rochester and St. Louis Branches. Since
he has conveniently forgotten the fact, on seceding with
the disloyal American party, I may say that neither Mr.
Judge, who wrote his credentials, nor he who presented
them and as Delegate addressed the Convention, nor
H. P. B. nor I, had any other idea than that the official, vital,
and only centre of the T. S. was at Adyar, and that what
was left at New York was a few crumbs of the loaf. How-
ever, this has been all explained and backed with historical
proofs,* so it is useless to dwell upon the subject any
longer.

There is an entry in my Diary that rather instructively
marks the different uses that a little money can be put
to for the making of Karma. On the i8th December
the Indian public of Madras gave a farewell banquet
and reception to a high European official on his retire-
ment on pension, on which they spent rs. 1 5,000 ; a

* See Annual Address of the President T. S. to the 2zst Annual
Convention, at Adyar, December 1897.



Mysterious Disappearance of Damodar 63

few days later we collected a lesser sum to pay for the
Adyar Headquarters property. The first event went off
with a splutter and glare like a firework ; the money
wasted, the subscribers forgotten by the beneficiary of
the show; the other gave a permanent home to our
Society, a noble housing, a refuge for its Founders in
old age, probably a nucleus for the world > benefiting
T. S. Oriental Institute that Mrs. Besant, the Countess
Wachtmeister, and I have planned out. In fact, when
one looks back through the whole career of the Society,
one may well be amazed that such a comparatively
trifling sum in the aggregate has been spent in pushing
its work to the five quarters of the world.

When the Convention opened, the house and out-
buildings were crammed with Delegates, and a real
enthusiasm marked the whole series of meetings ; our
position in India seemed impregnable, not a cloud
floated in our sky. Daily phenomena occurred in the
“ shrine ” ; six and even seven persons got notes, in
English and Indian vernaculars simultaneously, answering
questions put by them just before. On the morning
of the 28 th, out on the lawn, before the opening of
Convention, I told H. P, B. how sorry I was that the
other Madras members had allowed Judge P. Sreenevas
Row to spend so large a sum as rs. 500 out of his
own pocket towards the cost of the Convention, as I
was sure he could not afford to be so generous. She
reflected a moment, and then called Damodar to her
from a group with whom he was talking a little way



64 Old Diary Leaves

off. “Go,” she said, “to the shrine and bring me a
packet you will find there.” He went, and within less
than five minutes came hurrying back with a dosed
letter in his hand, addressed on the cover to “ P. Sreenevas
Row.” The Judge being called to us was given the

packet and bidden to open it. He did so, and the

expression of amazement on his face was indescribable
when he drew forth a very kind and affectionate letter to
himself from Master K. H., thanking him for his zealous
services, and giving him the notes enclosed as a help
towards the Convention’s expenses. The enclosure was
in Government Promissory Notes to the aggregate value
of rs. 500, and on the back of each were written the

initials “K. H.” in blue pencil. I have given the facts

exactly as they occurred, and one of the notes — for
rs. 10 — I have kept as a souvenir, by the Judge’s kind
permission. The points to bear in mind are : that I
myself had heard, but a moment before repeating it to
H. P. B., about the Judge’s unstinted generosity ; that
Damodar had gone to the shrine and returned with the
money within the next five minutes ; that each note bore
the familiar “K. H.” initials; that neither H. P. B. nor
Damodar had then between them one hundred, let alone
five hundred rupees, and that the gift was at once
reported to all the Delegates clustered over the lawn.
That it was not “fairy gold” is evident from the fact of
my having one of the very notes now at Adyar, after the
lapse of nearly fourteen years.

It was at that year’s Convention that the subscription



Mysterious Disappearance of Damodar 65

was collected to create the Subbarow Medal Fund, for
the fitting recognition by the Society of important
contributions to Theosophical literature. The recipients
thus far have been Judge Sreenevas Row, H. P. B.,
Mrs. Besant, G. R. S. Mead, and A. P. Sinnett. The
capital is so small that I cannot award the medal out
of the interest paid by Government on the deposit every
year. I should be glad to have another £ioo to add
to it. An interesting, though not very important, feature
of the meeting was my giving the Five Precepts of the
Buddhist religion to Dr. Franz Hartmann, in the presence
of H. P. B., four Buddhist Delegates from Ceylon,
Damodar, “Bawajee,’* Tookaram Tatya, and Balai Chand
Mullik, of Calcutta. By Dr. Hartmann’s request I
procured by telegraph the High Priest Sumangala’s
authority to act for him in the matter.

By the last day of December the greater part of the
Delegates had left for their homes, and only our house-
party remained. Thus closed one of the busiest, most
encouraging and successful years in our Society’s history.
To get through my share of the work, I had travelled
16,500 miles in India and Ceylon. The future sparkled
with bright promise; but the lower gods were envious,
and were already forging the thunderbolt that Mara
meant to hurl at us within the next few months ; to
how little profit, my narrative will show in the process
of its unfolding.


5



CHAPTER VI.


“COMING EVENTS CAST THEIR SHADOWS BEFORE.**

T he eventful year 1884 now opens out before us — the
tenth since H. P. B, and I first met at that Vermont
farm-house. What a, succession of stirring events and
picturesque experiences had followed each other throughout
those ten years ; how immeasurably had our field widened,
how great the effect upon ourselves and upon others ! The
epoch opened upon us amid the weird nightly seances of
farmer-mediums, with “ materialized, ” or rather objectified,
phantoms of the astral world stalking before us in the
gloom, sometimes nodding in dumb show, sometimes
whispering, and anon even shouting their commonplace
messages to the living ; its close finds us settled in a
noble Indian bungalow amid enthusiastic Asiatic friends,
every comer of India familiar to me, our Society's name
known throughout the world, and its chartered Branches
established in various countries : truly, a chapter of
romance.

The last of the visiting Delegates to the 8th T. S,

66


“Coming Events” 67

Anniversary had hardly left the house before I resumed
my official wanderings. On the 4th January I sailed for
Bimlipatam, on the Coromandel Coast, the nearest port
to Vizianagram, to visit the Maharajah of which ancient
Zemindary I had been invited.* Among my fellow-
passengers was a Scotch gentleman endowed with the
“ second sight, and, like the Swiss philosopher Zschokke,
compelled at times, against his own wish, to see the life-
histories of strangers pass before his inner vision in phantom
pictures. Everybody who has read Dale Owen or Ennemoser
knows the story of how Zschokke silenced a braggart infidel,
one of a party of student pedestrians whom he encountered
at an inn among the Alps. The feather-brained youths
drank deeply and grew very noisy and impertinent., A
quiet man at a small table in a corner attracted their
attention, and presently the loud-voiced braggart in
question, who had denied the existence of God and the
soul in the most vehement language, turned to the quiet
man and challenged him to defend the opposite view.
Zschokke — for it was he — saw, as in a moving picture,
the whole of the boaster’s life spread out before him,
and replied by asking him whether he would admit the
existence of a soul if he, the speaker, should tell him the
secrets of his past career. The young man laughed the
proposition to scorn, and dared Zschokke to expose all,
even the most important of his secrets. Thereupon the
latter proceeded to do so, and among other disgraceful
scenes described one where the young fellow was robbing
* The Prince has died since the above was written.



68 Old Diary Leaves

his master’s till. The bursting of such a bomb, it may
be supposed, put a stop to the idle debate, and the
philosopher left the room in quiet dignity unmolested.

On landing at Bimlipatam I found the Maharajah’s
carriage and pair awaiting me, and after a pleasant drive
of some hours, reached Vizianagram. I had “Bawaji”
with me as Private Secretary, and my Mussulman servant,
Abdullah, to look after my luggage and myself. After
making a toilet I drove to the Fort, and was met at the
door of his residence by the Prince, who welcomed me
with the extreme courtesy for which he is known to the
whole European community of Madras and Calcutta, and
which has earned from them the title of Prince Charming.
He is quite a book-collector, and has a very fine library,
most of the books in rich bindings. He talked earnestly
and fluently about religious and philosophical questions,
but not with the evidently deep interest and conviction
shown by the Maharajah of Kashmir. In fact, it struck
me that he had no very well formed belief at all in
religion, but was mostly concerned in the afiairs of the
world, its pleasures, and his personal position. I fancy
that he had had some anticipation that I would show
him phenomena, and that his lack of interest in our
Society during the subsequent years marks his disap-
pointment in that respect. However, nothing could have
been nicer than his behaviour as host, and his conversation,
on the four days of my stay, was very enjoyable. Before
we left, he refunded to Bawaji the expenses of our
journey, gave a considerable order for theosophical



“ Coming Events ” 69

literature, and made a gift of rs. 500 to the Society’s
treasury. Two lectures were given, and a Branch
organized at Vizianagram, and on the nth January we
sailed for Madras, which was reached on the third day.

I had hardly got back before a small disturbance was
created by the brother of one of our Hindu colleagues,
who demanded that the latter should at once quit our
house under penalty of being outcasted — an ordeal that
few Hindus care to face, however zealous they may be
as “reformers.” Under the ponderous mass of ancient
custom, backed by public opinion, the individual is crushed
unless he have money to bribe influential “ pfljaris ” (family
priests). This case being referred to me, I ordered both
parties to go outside the compound and settle their differ-
ences, as I should not permit any caste battles to be
fought out within our precincts.

It may be as well to say a few words about the attitude
of the Society towards caste and other social abuses that
swarm about us. I bracket caste with them, because
in the present state of India and the world I regard
it as an abuse and even an infringement of personal
liberty of action. What it was in the beginning, and
why instituted by the unseen Managers of the Aryan
race, has been explained to us by Mrs. Besant in sub-
lime language and with masterful ability : as a working
part in the plan of spiritual development its excellence
is apparent. But like the rusting machinery of an
abandoned mine, it is useful to nobody, a cumberer of
the high road. I speak my own opinion, of course



70


Old Diary Leaves


and that binds nobody save myself. Unquestionably we
find all groups of the race, called nations, differentiate
themselves into the four chief classes that correspond
with the four castes of the Aryans, viz., the hand-
toilers, the traders, the fighters, and rulers, and the
teachers of various kinds ; undeniably, therefore, the
institution of caste by Sri Krishna was a wise act and
bore splendid fruits. But the Western class is not a
fixed but a changeful thing ; the peasant of one day
may become the trader, general, or teacher of the next
decade : this is proved by a thousand examples. The
class, therefore,* is not so great an evil in our modern
social order as the fixed and immovable condition of
hereditary caste, which has fallen from the dignity of
a nursing school for reincarnating souls, to the low
state of trades guilds, social tyrannies, and unspiritual
panditism and miseries of religious hypocrisy. Admitting
all this, there is a necessary reformatory work to be
carried on by specially-fitted caste reformers, individuals,
and societies. It is as much outside the field of our
Society's corporate activity as diet, intemperance, widow
re-marriage, chattel slavery, the social evil, vivisection, and
fifty other outlets for philanthropic zeal. As a Society
we abstain from meddling with them, though as individuals
we are perfectly free to plunge into the thick of either
of the fights that they occasion. The Theosophical
Society ignores the differences of sex, for the Higher
Self has no sex ; also of color, for that is neither white,
black, red, or yellow like the human races ; of rank,



“Coming Events” 71

wealth, and political condition, worldly power or literary
rank, for It is above all these limitations of the physical
man — spotless, immortal, divine, unchangeable. That
is why, as President, I never commit the Society to
one side or the other of these questions. Mrs. Besant^s
.Central Hindu College at Benares, my three Buddhist
Colleges and two hundred schools in Ceylon, and my
Pariah free schools in Madras are all individual, not
Society, activities.

The Sinhalese Buddhists having secured my promise to
go to London and try to settle their religious disabilities, I
now began to make the necessary preparations, first for a
visit to Colombo for the final arrangement of matters with
them, and then for the European journey. In view of
possible contingencies of accident to me, I held a Council
Meeting on January 20th, at which I put the management
of the Society into their hands until my return, and the
next day left by train for Tuticorin, the southernmost
station in India, whence the British India Company’s boats
sail for Colombo. The Council deciding that H. P. B.
should accompany me to Europe, she also began her
preparations during my absence in Ceylon. On the boat
from Tuticorin I met two young Russian nobles and a
wealthy friend of theirs who had been enticed to India by
H. P. B.’s romantic stories in her ‘‘Caves and Jungles of
Hindustan,” as they appeared originally in the Roussky
Vyestnik, The young men told me that all Russia had
been charmed and bewildered by them.

Reaching Colombo the next morning at dawn, I called a



72


Old Diary Leaves

meeting of leading Buddhists, under Sumangala’s chairman-
ship, to consider the situation ; and on the following day, at
an adjourned meeting at Maligakanda, that useful body,
the Buddhist Defence Committee, was formed, with suitable
officers and a very simple and common-sense code of
Rules. It was then decided that I should go to London
as an Honorary Member and special delegate of the
Committee. Visits of conference to the Governor, Govern-
ment Agent, Inspector-General of Police, and other officials,
various meetings with the Buddhists, the drafting of several
petitions and addresses and other work followed. In view
to possibilities, the Chief Priests of the two ancient Royal
Viharas at Kandy, together with Sumangala, Subhuti,
Dhammalankara, and other priests of the Maritime
Provinces, united in giving me full powers to represent
them in the admission of candidates into the ranks of
Buddhism, on their “ taking Pansil ” — the Five Precepts.

The primary objects that my European visit was
intended to realize were ; i. To convince Government of
the actual disabilities under which the Sinhalese Buddhists
suffered in a case of criminal assault, like the recent bloody
attack by Roman Catholics on a Buddhist religious
procession, the culprits in which riot had escaped punish-
ment. 2. To induce Government to appoint a Buddhist
Registrar of Marriages, so that the Buddhists might not be
compelled to get married by an official of hostile religious
belief. 3. To get some action taken on the questions of
the management of the Temporalities of Buddhist Viharas,
whose rights had long been trampled on by their own lay



“Coming Events”


73


administratorB, to the shame of the Colonial officials, who
had neglected their duty. 4. To try and secure an order
declaring Wesak — the May Full-Moon day, Buddha’s
Birthday, and consequently the Buddhist Christinas — a,
public holiday. While each of the great sects in India
enjoyed their own special holidays, the patient, long-
suffering Sinhalese had no such act of justice done them.
Before sailing, on February loth, I took Sumangala to the
Gk>vernment House to see the Governor, and a discussion
which I had previously held with His Excellency about the
Wesak, was resumed between us three, and Sir Arthur
gave us encouragement to count upon his friendly action
when the question should be referred back to him in due
course from the Colonial Office, where I was to broach it.

On reaching Adyar I found there waiting for me Mr.
St. George Lane-Fox, the electrical engineer, a new
recruit to our ranks. H. P. B. had gone away to
Kathiawar with Dr. Hartmann, on a visit to the Thakur
Saheb of Wadhwan, one of our members. I hurried up
affairs, and on the i8th February the Wadhwan party met
me in Bombay. On the 20th we sailed for Marseilles,
on the ‘^Chandernagore,” Captain Dumont— an excellent
French steamer and a super-excellent French Commander,
whose friendship 1 have kept ever since. He is now
chief manager of the Suez Canal traffic. Our party
consisted of H. P. B., myself, Mohini M. Chatterji, and
B. J. Padshah, one of the cleverest Parsi graduates of
the Bombay University. Then there was Babula, our
trusty servant. Before sailing I enlarged the Managing



74


Old Diary Leaves


Committee left in charge of Headquarters, by adding to
the Council Members Dr. Hartmann, Mr. Lane-Fox, and —
Mr. Coulomb. Considering what happened later, this last
appointment may surprise some, but nothing whatever had
occurred up to that time to make me have a bad opinion
of him. As for his wife, I was as far as possible from
suspecting that she had been a party to tricks, either with
or without H. P. B.’s knowledge. Not a word of suspicion
had been dropped, nor a thing done by her, to my know-
ledge, of that sort. Of course, if I had had even an
inkling of her real character, instead of making her
husband (at her request — she saying that he was a proud
man and his feelings would be hurt if I left him out) a
Committee man, I should have had our servants chase both
of them out of our compound with bamboo switches.
She seemed to me a hard-working woman, who was doing
all she possibly could to keep the house tidy and take
care of H. P. B. 's physical comfort : she bought the food,
had meals very properly served, and looked after the
servants. Often I felt quite sorry for her when H. P. B.
scolded her for trifling faults and, I thought, showed
ingratitude for her services. Her character I did not
admire in the least ; she was a gossip and tale-bearer, and
gabbled too much about religious matters that she did not
in the least comprehend. But she seemed faithful as a
dog to H. P. B., and well earned the food and shelter she
and her husband got from us. He was handy with tools
and fond of using them, so he was given in charge the
work of masons and carpenters, that in a large place like



“Coming Events”


75


ours is constantly needed. He was a quiet, well-behaved
person, seemingly perfectly honest, and I liked him well
enough to put him on the Committee. A few words of
explanation as to the house will be useful.

The main building at Adyar is nearly loo feet square ;
there are six large rooms and the Convention Hall
( 1 00 X 28) on the ground floor, and when we moved there,
there were one large and one very small room upstairs : the
rest brick-and-cement terrace. The large room upstairs was
used by H. P. B. as her bed-room, a piece curtained off
from which made her sitting-room. I put up a temporary
kitchen for her at the N.W. comer of the roof, and the
little room over the stairs was given to Damodar. My
quarters were in a detached, one-storied brick bungalow in
the grounds, distant an hundred yards from the house. To
gain access to the upper floor of the main building, one had
to go outside on the back verandah and mount by an
inclosed brick staircase. When the door at its foot was
locked, no one could get to the upper rooms. This should
be kept in mind. Soon after coming we had built a room
for use as a “shrine,” and cut down a blocked-up window
in H. P. B.'s room into a door to give access to it. When
the room was finished, she moved her desk in and installed
herself in it. But her bed-room did not suit her, so she
set Mr. Coulomb to work to building another for her at the
N. E. angle of the terrace, and this was in progress when we
left for Europe. He having charge of the work, and his
wife that of H, P. B.'s effects, they kept the key of the
staircase, and nobody had the least concern in what the



76 Old Diary Leaves

workmen were doing upstairs, as even the materials were
carried in at the back verandah without troubling anybody.
Damodar was now sleeping and working in the office-room
downstairs. The Coulombs occupied another detached
bungalow in the grounds that matched my own. Dr.
Hartmann, Mr. Lane-Fox, and the rest of the house-party
had quarters either in the downstairs rooms or over in my
bungalow, according to their choice. The easy and natural
isolation of the upper floor apartments will now be clearly
understood, and should be kept in mind when reading the
S. P. R. report of the “Coulomb case.” We may now
return to the “ Chandernagore, ” where day after day we
shall find H. P. B. working in the Captain’s cabin on a
French translation of Isis Unveiled which she had under-
taken at the request of our French colleagues.

Barring a very little rough weather in the Mediterranean,
our voyage was exceptionally calm and delightful : in fact,
the Captain said he had never had such an one, taking it
throughout. I see that I have taken special notes of the
lovely picture that we sailed through when passing the
Straits of Messina : a cloudless azure sky, the town of
Messina, picturesque Reggio, on the Calabrian side, the
winding blue strait, the lighthouse standing out in high
light, a red-piped coasting steamer, and a sombre contrast of
black clouds massed above ^Etna’s smoking peak. Along
the Italian shore ran the trains with their puffing engines,
looking from the deck of our distant steamer like a toy rail-
road run for dolls. Reaching Marseilles on the lath
Marchi we were sent over to Trioul to be quarantined



“Coming Events”


77


twenty-four hours for the sanitary sins of Bombay — a
vexatious experience just at the end of a long voyage, when
we were impatient to set foot again on the solid ground.
Trioul is a basin-harbor amid barren rocks, with clusters
of silent grey pavilions and godowns in stone, and a Roman
Catholic chapel perched on a rock and capped with its
great cross. A tremendous gale had sprung up — the
mistral^ I presume — and our ship was so pushed by it that
we broke three cables at our moorings ; if the fourth had
parted we must have inevitably been wrecked within the
very basin. Happily it did not, and we left the Quarantine
early the next morning and got safely to Marseilles ; passing
on the way Chateau d’lf, about which rather commonplace,
if somewhat old fortress, Alexandre Dumas has woven the
golden spell of romance. No wonder tourists actually ask
to be shown the cells of Edmond Dantes and the good
Abbe Faria, and the rocky precipice from which the future
Comte de Monte Cristo was flung as a supposed corpse ;
and no wonder the guides actually do show them. When
Mark Twain can be forgiven for weeping at the bogus grave
of Adam in Palestine, and the whole of Christendom was
collectively bamboozled by toe nails of the Holy Ghost,
phials of Liebfraumilch, winking statues, etc., and French
Spiritistes have recorded improving messages from
“ Tartuffe,” who shall blame the breadwinners at the
Chateau dlf for truckling to the ignorant and harmless
curiosity of a public who have been so hypnotized by
Dumas^ genius as to believe that D'Artagnan and Athos,
Dantes and Danglars, were men of blood and bone like our-



78 Old Diary Leaves

selves? Surely their offence is not equal to that of a
travelled New York ignoramus, who told me that he had
seen the dungeon in the Castle of Chillon where “Lord
Byron had been imprisoned so many years that he had worn
a track in the stone floor of his cell ! * *

We were met, on landing, by our two staunch, highly-
cultured friends, Baron J. Spedalieri, the pupil of Levi, and
Captain D. A. Courmes, of the French Navy, who showed
us every possible attention and H. P. B. a sincere
reverence. Among the throng of her admirers not one wasf
so capable of gauging her literary and mystical abilities as
the good Kabbalist of Marseilles. It is my delight to
revisit his house every time I pass that way and be folded
to the breast of the affectionate patriarch, whose mind is
as vigorous now at 85 as it was when my chum and I first
sat at his table in 1884.* The fidelity and unflagging
sympathy of Captain Courmes in our work is matter of
common - knowledge among all readers of theosophical
literature.

* Our good friend has since died.


CHAPTER VII.


PHENOMENA AND HEALING AT NICE.

O N the second day after arrival, H. P. B. and I went to
Nice for a promised visit to Lady Caithness, Duchcsse
de Pomar ; and Mohini and Padshah preceded us to Paris.
Our hostess did everything within her power to make us
feel at home in her Palais Tiranty, and to draw around
H. P, B. the cream of the nobility that flock to the Riviera
in the colder months. Daily they visited us to talk of
Theosophy, and on most of the evenings there were meet-
ings at which discussions and expositions were followed by
light suppers, for the arrangement of which Lady Caithness
had a special talent. If I was delighted by this first
intimate view of Continental high life, H. P. B. was still
more so in meeting, after many years of voluntary expatria-
tion, her compatriots with whom she could talk Russian
by the hour, and get news at first hand of the fortunes and
misfortimes of families in whose intimacy her own had
always dwelt. Iconoclast she may have been as to some
things, but a more enthusiastic Russian than she was never

79


8o


Old Diary Leaves

bom, albeit she took out her naturalization papers at New
York and forswore allegiance to the Czar and all other
monarchs or princes. I fancy she did that, as she did her
two marriages, either as a caprice or for some occult reason
not apparent on the surface.

We made two friends extremely well worth having, in
Colonel and Mrs. Evans, of Cimiez, a couple who lived
in a splendid villa, which was made for us altogether
sunny by their cordial welcomes. We also met at Nice
Madame Agathe Haem merle, of Russia, a lady of high
culture, an astonishing linguist, and the regular ‘corre-
spondent of half the noted savants of Europe who give
themselves to research in the different fields of Psychology.
Then there was an evening with the astronomer Camille
Flammarion, of the Paris Observatory, at that time a
member of our Society. Two evenings were given in
part to mesmeric experiments by M. Robert, the Parisian
professional, which were very instructive ; and on another
occasion Mme. Hsemmerle and I attended a public
lecture, with experiments, on the same subject, by Prof.
Guidi, the Italian specialist. The disbelievers in thought-
transference should be called upon to explain one of
these experiments to which I was a party. The lecturer
had two lady assistants, of whom one played the piano
and the other was the mesmeric subject. He bade us
notice the effect of the music on the latter — ^whom he
had proved to us to be in a state of insensibility to
pinches, pullings, and loud noises. He willed her to
hear the music, and she responded in physical move-



Phenomena and Healing at Nice 8l

merits to every change in its character, expressing in
highly dramatic postures the feeling appealed to for the
moment. Pride, anger, mirthfulness, affection, disdain,
defiance, terror, were successively portrayed by this
cataleptical being, as though she had been some musical
instrument played upon by the pianist's fingers. Signor
Guidi then said that if any gentleman present wished to
satisfy himself of the power of the subject to receive
mental suggestions, he would be glad to give him the
chance. I rose at once and offered myself for the ex-
periment. The lecturer came over to me, told me that
I must concentrate my thought at the moment when I
wished to fix the subject in the pose in which she might
be at the time, and when he was satisfied that I under-
stood him, grasped my hand for a moment and then
stood aside. The pianist was then told to resume her
playing, and the hypnotized subject began once more her
statuesque poses. I took one good look at her, after
which I leaned my chin on my cane and turned my
eyes downward, so that I could see her movements
through my eyelashes, but she could not get any hint as
to my purpose. I let her go on until, in expressing the
feeling of sublimity, she was leaning backward, seem-
ingly past the centre of gravity, and was kept from falling
only by the contraction of the leg-muscles : it was a
posture so difficult, that in the natural state one could
scarcely have retained it a minute. Then, without making
the smallest gesture or muscular contraction to show my

object, I mentally ordered her to become rigid. She re-

6



82 Old Diary Leaves

sponded instantaneously ; the thought had barely been
formed in mind before she caught and obeyed it. With
her head thrown far back, her torso bent back from the
hips at an oblique angle, her arms held at their full
length pointing upward, her knees bent forward, she
seemed as immovable as if she were a statue of bronze.
It was to me a most instructive experiment ; the more
so in that the mere clasping of my hand for a moment
by the mesmerizer sufficed to put me in psychical rapport
with his subject, without the speaking of a word by him
or by me.

The mention above of M. Robertas experiments at the
Palais Tiranty recalls to my mind a story that he told us,
and which conveys a useful lesson to all mesmeric experi-
mentators. He had a certain very good clairvoyant
subject who, one time when he was asleep and lucid,
told his mesmerizer that a certain jeweller’s shop in Nice
would be entered by burglars on a certain night. There-
upon, Robert, seeing a fine chance to help the mesmerist
party, and, very likely, to advertize his own business of
Masseur^ went to the jeweller, handed him his business
card, and told him to take extra precautions against
burglary on the night in question. The jeweller thanked
him, but said that he did not believe much in clairvoyance,
and that, in any case, his premises were quite secure
against burglars. Yet it so happened that the predicted
burglary actually was made at the time mentioned*
Then there was a fine excitement, a running to the
Prefect of Police, and the usual wailing on housetops.,



Phenomena and Healing at Nice 83

Ah 1 that address card of the mesmerizer — happy thought !
He must have known something about it and tried to buy
him off by the offer of a bribe, failing the receipt of which
he had allowed his pals to do the burglary ! So the card
is taken to M, le Prefect, and the poor innocent M.
Robert summoned to come and stand* an investigation.
He went, was examined, and politely told that the Police
were as incredulous as the jeweller about clairvoyance, and
he must explain on some more reasonable and common-
sense ground his fore-knowledge of the intended burglary.
The wretched Robert managed to get off by citing a
number of the most eminent personages in Nice to
testify to his good character, but he had to pack off
secretly his equally innocent clairvoyant, to put him
beyond the clutch of the Nice detectives. Perhaps these
facts will give a valid reason for the extreme reluctance
of every respectable mesmerizer to allow his clairvoyant
to aid in the tracking of criminals and the unravelling of
crimes. The narrow escape of H. P. B. from arrest in
Russia for suspected complicity in a murder, the per-
petrator of which she discovered clairvoyantly at her
Fathers request and the special solicitation of the
District Inspector- General of Police, is familiar to many
of her friends, and bears me out in the precautionary
word I offer to all mesmerizers who are so fortunate as
to have under their control a good clairvoyant, whose aid
the police would obtain : — don^t.

It so happ^ed that the annual “BataiUe des Fleurs”
(Flower Carnival) came off while we were in Nice, and ^



84 Old Diary Leaves

was very glad to see one of the most charming ways in
which the fashionable world contrives to kill time. The
Duchess could not go out herself, but sent me, in charge
of one of her lady friends, in her carriage to fall in with
the procession. Almost every carriage but ours was be-
decked with flowers and garlands, and bunches of them
adorned the horses. From every house fronting the street,
flowers were showered down upon us ; the sun shone resplen-
dently, the bosom of the Mediterranean lay like a pavement
of sapphires, the cool grey-greens of the olive orchards on
the hilly slopes refreshed the eye, and all was joyous
laughter, gay trifling, and prankish little tricks of flower-
pelting along the route. A pretty Russian Countess up
in a balcony asked, by dumb show, of her friend the
lady by my side, who I was, and was answered with a
mysterious nodding and winking to indicate that she
should hear the facts later. She did, and no mistake ;
the mutual friend told her that I was the Governor of
Madras and her affianced husband ! The flower- battle was
very pretty foolery, to be sure, yet a saddening spectacle ;
for one can realize, in seeing the round of childish amuse-
ments followed year after year in changeless monotony,
how indisposed the higher circles are to think of serious
things, how completely submerged in sensuous pleasures.
Yet their religious feelings can be excited to even the
point of frenzy by a great preacher or a great idea set
in circulation at the right time. At this moment there
are many women of the highest social rank, some
even among the royalties, who read theosophical literature



Phenomena and Healing at Nice 85

and think the theosophical things : this is a fact well
known to me. A bit of leaven is working in the mass,
and the influence will grow. But for the several scandals
that have been attached to our movement since 1884, an
open connection with Theosophy would not be so shunned
as it has been, and, to some extent, still is, by the European
aristocracy and upper middle class. The greatest obstacle
in our way, however, is the iron hold that social routine
has upon those classes, and the almost hopeless submer-
gence of the individual in the fashionable, time-killing,
oblivion-seeking round of daily life. Apart from the
crowd, these reading and thinking entities would be free
to develop all the good in themselves : as it is, they
are wasting this present incarnation.

Although I thought, before leaving Adyar, that I had
done with my healings, I let myself be tempted to take,
at H. P. B.^s request, the cases of three Russian ladies
whom we met at Lady Caithness^ house on the evening
of the 25th March — a Princess, a Countess, and a Baron-
ess : the second, a cousin of H. P. B. *s ; the last-named,
one of her playmates in childhood. The Princess had a
stubborn remnant of a stroke of hemiplegia, which, since
twelve years, had prevented her raising her left hand to
her head and using her left foot properly. Within a half-
hour 1 freed both limbs from their bonds. The Countess
was extremely deaf ; after a treatment of fifteen minutes
she could hear ordinary conversation, and was enchanted
to be able to enjoy the music of a concert that evening,

{^8 8b$ bfid not for jfcarsr Tbo third hdy I relieved



86 Old Diary Leaves

of a minor spinal trouble. H. P. B. and I left Nice
for Paris, March 27, many of our new friends seeing us
off at the station.

We reached Marseilles at 9.30 p.m., and Paris the next
evening at ii p.m. Mohini, Dr. Thurman, F.T.S., and
Q- Judge — who had left New York for India — met
us at the station and conducted us to our apartments at
46, Rue Notre Dame des Champs, which T^dy Caithness
had hired for us, and H. P. B. occupied, three months.
Visitors thronged, and a multitude of questions were asked
about our Society and its aims. It had then about 100
Branches or a sixth of its present strength. The Parisian
press, always in search for sensations, gave us many
columns of notices ; Victor Hugo’s organ, Le Rappel^ lead-
ing off with an article of three columns on “ The Buddhist
Mission to Europe.”

Our old Albany friends, Dr. and Mrs. Ditson, we found
living in Paris, and the Doctor and I went together to
see the famous healer. Zouave Jacob, a few days after our
arrival. The exceptional healing power of this man was
first exhibited during the Second Empire, and the press
of Europe and America teemed for years with stories of
his wonders. We were courteously welcomed, M. Jacob
saying that he knew me by reputation as a founder of the
T. S., and a healer. He was a spare man of medium
size, lithe, active, and full of nervous force, with his hair
cut short, black firm eyes, and a black moustache \ he
was dressed in black, his frock-coat buttoned, his linen
scrupulously clean. He led us to his cHnique-room —



Phenomena and Healing at Nice 87

long narrow basement chamber, with a bench against the
walls all around. On the average he was treating fifty
patients a day, and having been at the work twenty years,
there must have passed through his rooms some 300,000
patients. I was much struck with his method. At the
appointed hour the entrance door would be closed, the
patients seated on the benches, and in silence, and with an air
of solemnity, the Zouave would enter and take his stand, with
arms folded, at the centre of the lower end near the door.
After a moment of meditation, he would raise his head
and slowly glance at every patient, letting his eyes rest on
every face deliberately and scrutinizingly. Then, beginning
with the nearest on his left hand, he would stop in front
of him and gaze as if trying to look his body through ;
then he would perhaps touch him in some part, or not, as
the case might be, and ask, Est-ce UiV^ (Is it there?),
and upon receiving the affirmative reply, would give some
order, or make a pass or two, or let the hand rest on the
affected part, and cither let the patient stop, or send him
away and pass on to the next. Sometimes, after gazing
at a patient, he would shake his head and say, Eten f
AUez^^ intimating that he could do nothing and the patient
should go away. So he wwild move around the whole
room, always silent, grave, impressive ; effecting many
cures, rejecting some cases, directing others to return the
next day for further treatment, taking no fees, but trusting
for his support to sales of his photograph and literature.
A striking personality, a rather vain man, bitterly resenting
the petty persecutions of the doctors of medicine and the



88


Old Diary Leaves


priests, which had followed him throughout his career. I
had — it will be remembered — but just completed my
fifteen months of healings, and his method greatly impressed
me with its efficacy and simplicity. It was pure hypnotic
suggestion, and called for no outpouring of the healer’s
own vitality as mine had done. His impassive calm and
mysterious insight into symptoms, the silence maintained,
the gliding noiselessly from patient to patient, the joyful
words and expressions of such as were relieved of pains in
the sight of all, combined to create a vivid expectancy,
which his repute as a great healer intensified, and effected
spontaneous cures at the moment when his pointing finger
touched the spot of suffering. The one indispensable
factor was that he should show in his every motion and
whole demeanor a sense of absolute self-confidence as the
Master of Pain. It was collective auto-suggestion, the
mighty power that helps General Booth and all great reviva-
lists to “convert” their thousands and tens of thousands.
In fact, the method of the Salvation Army is one of the
most effective hypnotizing agencies ever adopted. Last
summer I saw it used to perfection by Booth himself in
Exeter Hall, and seventy-five subjects drawn by Braid’s
and Charcot’s system to the “anxious bench.” The
rhythmic pounding of the big drums and swells and falls
of the music were identical in potency with that of the
tap of the huge tambourines of the Aissouas in their
blood-curdling hypnotic phenomena.

The nejct day Dr» Ditson and I called on another

ft spiritiMlist medium named Su^ene Hippol^’ter



Phenomena and Healing at Nice 89


/f/j, who was said to have made many cures under
‘‘control” He was a large, sallow-complexioned man,
and on testing him, with his consent, I found him quite
sensitive to my mesmeric control — a patient whom I
could have relieved of almost any functional disorder in
two or three treatments. We then paid our respects to
still another, M. Adolphe Didier, brother of the very
celebrated “Alexis,” whose marvellous clairvoyant faculty
is historical. M. Adolphe had only recently resumed
residence in Paris after many years spent in London in
practice as a medical clairvoyant. He gave me his
brother’s address and we called on him, but had no
opportunity of witnessing a display of his powers.

Meetings for conversation and discussion were being
held by H. P. B. and myself at the houses of Lady
Caithness and other friends, some of the results of which
her ladyship has embodied in her work, The Mystery
of the Ages,


CHAPTER VTII.


A STRUGGLE IN THE LONDON LODGE T. S.

O N the 5th of April I left H. P. B. and took the train
for London with Mohini M. Chatterji. As a serious
dispute had grown up in the London Lodge between Mrs.
Anna Kingsford, Mr. Edward Maitland, and their party,
on the one hand, and Mr. Sinnett and the rest of the
members, on the other, about the comparatively superior
value of the Indian teachings as compared with the
Christo-Egyptian teachings which she was giving out,
and as it lay with me to settle it or see the members
divided into two camps, as it were, I had issued from
Nice a circular to each registered member of the London
Lodge, asking them to send me, separately, to Paris,
in confidence, their views respectively on the situation.
These letters I had brought with me to read in the
train. I had just come to a passage in the letter of
Bertram Keightley, where he affirmed his entire confidence
that the Masters would order all things well, when, from

the roof of the railway carriage, above Mohini^s head, a

90


A Struggle in the London Lodge T. S. 91

letter came fluttering down. It proved to be addressed
to me and to be in the K. H. handwriting, giving me
necessary advice for the treatment of the difficulty. It
was as if intended as a marked response to the lo)ral
thought of the writer of the letter I was reading at the
moment. I wish that everybody in the Society could
realize how certain it is that those Great Brothers who
are behind our work keep a vigilant eye upon all of us
who with a pure heart and unselfish mind throw our
energies into it. What more comforting than to know
that our labors are not in vain nor our aspirations
unheeded ?

The trouble in our London Lodge, like all such misunder-
standings, tended to increase and ultimately to disrupt
the once harmonious group. It was imperative that I
should put a stop to it, if possible, and this was my
principal business in going over to London. If I had
had the least doubt of it before, it would have been
dispelled by a letter which I received phenomenally in
my cabin on board the “Shannon,” the day before we
reached Brindisi, and in which it was said :

“ Put all needed restraint upon your feelings, so that
you may do the right thing in this Western imbroglio.
Watch your first impressions. The mistakes you make
are from failure to do this. Let neither your personal
predilections, affections, suspicions, nor antipathies affect
your action. Misunderstandings have grown up between
Fellows, both in London and Paris, which imperil the
interests of the movement . , . . try to remove such



92 Old Diary Leaves

misconceptions as you will find, by kind persuasion and
an appeal to the feeling of loyalty to the cause of truth,
if not to us. Make all these men feel that we have no
favorites, nor affections for persons, but only for their
good acts and for humanity as a whole.”

A great truth was stated in this same letter, viz. :
** one of the most valuable effects of Upasika's (H. P. B's)
mission is that it drives men to self-study,^ and
destroys in them blind servility to persons.” What a
pity that some of her most ardent disciples could not
have realized this, for they would have been spared the
bitter pain that has been caused them and all of us by
the many successful exposures of her defects of character,
by opponents who accepted their foolish challenge and
proved her to be the reverse of infallible. She was
great enough and had quite sufficient claims upon our
gratitude, without our trying to make of her a goddess,
immaculate and unerring.

In the London struggle in our Branch I had to deal
with a learned, clever, self-confident woman, ambitious
and eccentric: a unique personality, who believed herself
the angel of a new religious epoch, the reincarnation of
Hermes, Joan of Arc, and other historic characters. By
canvassing the opinions of all the registered members of
the London Lodge T. S., I had ascertained that as between
her teachings and those of the Indian sages, the verdict
was almost unanimous against her. It was not that they
did not appreciate her great qualities as they deserved,
but that they valued those of the Musters more. Perhaps^



A Struggle in the London Lodge T. S. 93

also, they found her inclined to be too masterful for British
notions. The first step was naturally to call on her, which
I did. I cannot say I altogether liked her, although it
did not take many minutes for me to gauge her intellectual
power and the breadth of her culture. There was some-
thing uncanny to me in her views about human affection.
She said she had never felt love for a human being;
that people had told her, before her child was bom, to
wait its appearance and she would feel the great gush
of mother-love and the fountains of her affection would
be unsealed: she had waited, the child had been shown
her, but her only feeling was the wish that they should
take it away out of her sight ! Yet she lavished excessive
love on a guinea-pig, and, in his Life of Anna Kingsford^
Mr. Maitland’s splendid pen has made us all see, as in a
mental Kinematograph, his great colleague carrying the
little beast around with her in her travels, lavishing on
it her caresses, and keeping the anniversary of its death
as one does that of a near relative.

The annual election of officers by the London Lodge
was to come off on the following day, so I had no time
to lose. I made Mrs. Kingsford the offer to give her a
charter for a separate Branch of her own, to be called
The Hermetic T. S., first having discussed it with Mr.
C. C. Massey, her sincere friend and mine. The offer
was accepted, and the election passed off harmoniously;
Mr. G. B. Finch being chosen President, Mr. Sinnett
Vice-President and Secretary, and Miss Arundale Treasurer.
Things were proceeding smoothly, in the usual manner,



94 Old Diary Leaves

when they were interrupted by the sensational appearance
of H. P. B., whom I had left in Paris, but who took a
flying trip so as to be present at this meeting. The
Kingsford-Maitland party, who had notified me in advance
that they would not be candidates for re-election to office in
the London Lodge T. S., presented me, before leaving, a
formal application for a charter for the new Branch, which
I promised to grant. On the 9th (April) the meeting
for organization was held at the chambers of Mr. Massey,
and the “Hermetic Lodge T. S.'' became an established
fact. Besides Mr. Kingsford, Mr. Maitland, Mr. Kirby,
and Mr. Massey, there were present Lady Wilde, her
sons Oscar and William, and the wife and daughters of
the late Dr. Keneally, the erudite and eccentric counsel
of the noted Claimant. These three ladies applied for,
and were admitted into, membership. Mohini M. Chatterji
accompanied me, and made one of the excellent addresses
on the occasion.

On the Easter Sunday I went with Miss Arundale and
Mohini to Westminster Abbey to hear a preacher of high
repute, and then to the Central Hall and Barracks of
the Salvation Army. We all gave the palm to Mrs.
Booth and the other speakers who followed her, over
the stately and soulless inanity of the fashionable Abbey
priest, whose discourse had not warmth enough in it to
vitalize an amoeba, whereas those of the others boiled
over with fervor. The kingdom of Heaven will never
be carried in white bands and cassocks, unless the
man they hide be a bit more like “flames of fire'*



A Struggle in the London Lodge T. S. 95

than like a boxful of dictionary words and rhetorical
phrases.

The change from the tropical heat of India to the bitter
winds and damp days and nights of London, and the lack
of warm clothing, laid me up Wilh a pleuritic cold for two or
three days, and might have been more serious but for the
unselfish care of Mrs. and Miss Arundale, my hostesses,
who were kindness personified. Out again on the i6th, I
was given a dinner at the Junior Athenaeum Club by
Mr. W. H. Coffin, of the Society for Psychical Research.
He had bidden to meet me Messrs. W. Crookes, F.R.S. ;
Prof. W. F. Barrett, F.R.S.E. ; Col. Hartley, LL.D. ;
H. J. Hood ; A. P. Sinnett ; F. Podmore, M. A. ; Edward
Pease ; Rev. Dr. Taefel ; F. W. H. Myers ; and Edmund
Gurney. Truly a brilliant company of scholars and literati I
This was in the early pre-Coulombian days, when the
Theosophical Society had not been declared taboo^ and
H. P. B. had not been branded by the S. P. R. as the
most accomplished and dangerous charlatan of the present
world-period !

On the 17th Mohini and I visited the laboratory of
Mr, Crookes, and were shown a variety of most interesting
experiments. The next day we two and Mr. Sinnett dined
at a private house, where Mohini saw for the first time a
lady partisan of the Esthetic Reform movement, dressed in
the utterly absurd style of costume affected by that body of
cranks, and having her hair tousled, like a rafs nest, all
over her head, and far too much of her bust exposed to
suit our Hindu's notions of decency. As luck would have



96 Old Diary Leaves

it, she was given to Mohini to take in to dinner. He
glanced at me hopelessly, not knowing what was expected
of him, with a strange expression of eye that I could not
make out and had no time to inquire into at the moment.
When we were driving home, later, in the cab, the mystery
was explained in a way that was nearly the death of me.
“ That lady that I took in to dinner, said he, “ does she
sometimes get dangerous ? ” “ Dangerous ? What do you
mean?” I replied. ‘‘Why, she is insane, isn’t she? She
must be. She asked me at the table if we ever laughed in
India! It was when you were telling that comical story,
at which they all roared. The fact is, I kept my eyes all
the while fixed on my plate, lest by catching hers I might
send her off into a paroxysm and she might use one of the
knives beside her plate: how could I laugh? Don’t you
think it was inhospitable in them to put such a lady in my
charge without telling me what to do in case a fit should
come on ? ” He said this in perfect sincerity, and stared in
astonishment when I burst into fits of laughter; which
made it worse than ever for me. He was much relieved
when I at last was able to explain matters, and assured me
that he thought the lady was a mad relative of the family,
who was, perhaps, harmless, ordinarily, but subject to
recurrent crises of the nerves, and was “ allowed to dress
like that to keep her quiet.”

My Diary shows that the making of the “Hermetic”
group did not quite settle the disturbance in the old lodge.
The members generally wanted to profit by both courses of
instruction and to belong to both lodges. The effect was



A Struggle in the London Lodge T. S. 97

to keep up the excitement, so I was obliged to issue a new
rule, to the effect that multiple membership would not be
allowed ; no person to be an active member in more than
one Branch simultaneously ; and where double membership
existed, choice should be made in which group the
individual preferred to remain. The effect was to threaten
the disruption of the “Hermetic** lodge. So, after con-
sultations with Mr. Massey, I suggested that Mrs.
Kingsford should return her charter and form her friends
into an independent society, and thus make it feasible for
them to belong to both. For, the Hermetic being an
outside body, its relation to us would be the same as that
of the Asiatic, Geographical, Astronomical, or any other
foreign society, Mrs. Kingsford returning a favorable
answer through Mr. Massey, this plan was carried into
effect, the Hermetic Lodge of the T. S. ceased to exist, and
the “ Hermetic Society ** was born, with Mrs. Kingsford as
President and Mr. Maitland as Vice-President. Calm
followed the storm and all went well. The first meeting
was held on May 9th, and, by request, I made a friendly
address of good wishes and sympathy for the new society.

The interest in theosophical ideas was now spreading
throughout all London social circles. Virtually begun by
the publication of Mr. Sinnett*s Occult World — of which
the late Mr. Sam. Ward gave away 250 copies among
his friends — it had been fostered by a number of agencies,
literary and social, and one could pretty well foresee the
extension that has since occurred. A number of persons of
high standing in the world of letters, as well as in the

7



98 Old Diary Leaves

nobility, joined us. I had my full share of dinners to eat
in company with social lions, some of whom impressed me
most amiably — others didn’t. At Mrs. Tennant’s house I
met Sir Edwin Arnold, was invited to lunch with him, and
he gave me the valuable present of some pages of the
original manuscript of the Light of Asia^ which is now
one of the curios of the Adyar Library. At Mrs.
Bloomfield Moore’s Mr. Sinnett and I met Robert
Browning, and talked some Theosophy with that master
of verse. Earl Russell had me up to Oxford for a night,
and Lord Borthwick, F.T.S., to his place in Scotland for
a fortnight. At one table I met an officer of the Queen’s
Household and a famous General ; at another, one of the
greatest of modern painters. Everywhere the theme of talk
was Theosophy; the tide was rising. The ebb was to
follow, but as yet no one foresaw it in Europe, for it was
to begin at Madras ; the Scottish Missionaries its engineers,
the high-minded Coulombs their tools. We shall come to
that chapter of history very soon now, as we are recalling
the incidents of the month of April 1884, and the grand
explosion occurred only a few weeks later.


CHAPTER IX.

H. P. B. AND THE S. P. R. Report.

T WO distinct and very dilFerent streams of the Society's
karma were now converging, though we then realized
very little their prospective importance. One was the out-
come of my special mission for the Ceylon Buddhists,
which had brought me to Europe this year; the other,
our first contact with the Society for Psychical Research.
The former, beneficent in itself, brought honor to us and
joy to a whole nation ; the latter cast a disrepute upon the
S. P. R., caused us undeserved grief and sorrow, tarnished
our reputation, and pierced the heart of that unrewarded
servant of the race, H. P. B. In the sequence of events
it comes first, and shall have first attention.

There had been the making of acquaintances between
us and the S. P. R, ; entire cordiality and unsuspicious
friendliness on our part ; an equally apparent sympathy
on theirs; agreeable social meetings at the houses of
their leaders ; and, finally, a consent on my part to be
examined by a Committee of the S. P. R. The sky was

99


lOO


Old Diary Leaves

purely blue, without the tiniest cloud to indicate the
hurricane in preparation for us. So those were joyous
days in London and Paris, and H. P. B. and I were in
exuberant spirits. On the nth May (1884) I had my
first sitting and examination with Messrs. F. W. H. Myers
and J. Herbert Stack. A stenographer reported the
Questions and Answers. The printed Report is in a
pamphlet of 130 pp. 8vo. (Private and confidential to
members of the S. P. R.), which was issued in Decem-
ber 1884, and which also contains reports of similar
examinations by the Committee of Mohini M. Chatterji,
and forty-two documentary appendices. The ground
covered by the inquiry was as to the appearance of
phantasms of the living ; the projection and material
constitution of the human Double ; appearances and
communication with the same at distances from the
physical body ; visits to the witnesses from living Adepts
or Mahatmas ; apports of ponderable objects ; astral
bell'sounds ; the phenomenal receipt of written docu-
ments ; the precipitation of Mahatmic writing within
closed letters from ordinary correspondents while in
transit through the mails ; the giving of flowers by an
Adept^s double to a group of observers, etc. I think
that any candid reader of the Report will notice the
perfect candor, openness, and evident good faith of the
witnesses, and the amplitude of corroboration contained
in the documents which were laid by us before the Com-
mittee. But to understand our feelings when, later qiv
the S. P. R. made its merciless attack upon H. P.



H. P. B. and the S. P. R. Report loi

our Masters, and Ourselves, one should try to put one-
self in our places. Here were we laying bare a series
of personal experiences which had for us a most private
and sacred character, for no possible benefit that could
accrue to ourselves, but solely that our testimony might
help the cause of spiritual science and give comfort to
other students not yet so favored as ourselves ; going
before the Committee with no prepared case, but answer*
ing the questions sprung upon us, and hence putting
ourselves at the mercy of those who had none of out
enthusiasm, whose policy was to criticize, analyjDe, and
pick flaws in our statements, and who in rendering their
final judgment were unsparing of our feelings, sceptical
as to our motives, and merciless to a degree. Worst of
ail, they were then incompetent through inexperience of
psychical laws, misled by the conclusions of an agent-**
Dr. Hodgson — whom they sent out to India to verify
our statements and collect evidence, and by an utterly
incompetent handwriting expert’s report, and so put them-
selves on permanent record as the self-righteous calum-
niators of a woman — IT. P. B. — who had neither done
an injury to a living person, nor asked or received any
benefit or reward for her services to the world, yet whom
they dared to brand as “one of the most accomplished,
ingenious, and interesting impostors in history " (see
Report of the Committee appointed to investigate phenomentx
connected with the TfuoSophical Society, Members : Messrs.
E. Gurney, F. W. H. Myers, F. Podmore, H. Sidgwiek,
and J. H. Stack. Published in 1885).


102


Old Diary Leaves

This Second Report was received by poor H. P. B. at
Adyar when she lay apparently on her death-bed, and it
nearly killed her. With an agony of pathos she has
written in blue pencil, in the copy that now lies before
me, the following: —

“ Madame Blavatsky, who will soon be dead and gone,
for she is doomed, says this to her friends of the P. R. S.
(S. P. R.) : After my death these phenomena, which are
the direct cause of my premature death, will take place
better than ever. But whether dead or alive, I will be
ever imploring my friends and Brothers never to make
them public ; never to sacrifice their rest^, their honor,
to satisfy public curiosity or the empty pretext of science.
Read the book. Never, throughout my long and sad
life, never was there so much of uncalled for, contemp-
tuous suspicion and contempt lavished upon an innocent
woman as I find here in these few pages published by
so-called friends.

“H. P. Blavatsky.”

“ Adyar, Feb , 5, 1885,

“ on my death-bed.”

She adds the remark that she shall never forgive me for
“ thrusting our phenomena upon the attention of the gentle-
men scientists of the P. R. S. (S. P. R.)>” which was rather
hard on me, considering the innocent part I played in the
whole affair. I knew of nothing to be concealed, had no
suspicion whatever of bad faith anywhere, and was perfectly
willing to put every facility in the way of those who wished



H. P. B. and the S. P. R. Report 103

to investigate the facts. This is conclusively shown in Dr.
Hodgson^s Report on his investigations in India, as the
special agent of the S. P. R. On page 311, he says of me ;
“ His candor was shown by his readiness in providing me
with extracts from his own diary, and the freedom with
which he allowed me to inspect important documents in his
possession; and he rendered me every assistance in his
power in the way of my acquiring the evidence of the native
witnesses. Not only so, but observing, as I thought, that
Mr. Damodar was unduly endeavouring to take part in my
examination of a witness, shortly after I arrived in India, he
desired me not to hesitate in taking the witnesses apart for
my private examination, and he made special arrangements
for my convenience.”

Now there are several points not to be overlooked in
finally revising the wholesale condemnation of Madame
Blavatsky and the discrediting of her phenomena by Dr.
Hodgson and his colleagues of the S. P. R. : —

I. No prepared case was submitted to the Committee in
London, Mr. Sinnett, Mr. Mohini, and I having come
forward and answered questions impromptu^ according to
our best recollections about events stretching back over
several years. When the incidents occurred there had been
no measuring by feet and inches, consulting of watches,
tying up of H. P. B. in a bag or fastening her to chairs by
sealed threads, as in the case of mediums ; nor did either of
us think for one moment of daring to banter with the
august Personages in momentary view, or to tell them to
mov^ here, or stand there, or let themselves be weighed or



104


Old Diary Leaves

handled or pinched, to satisfy us that they were real. I
have never heard of anybody’s so treating any saintly per-
sonage. So we simply made ourselves the easy game of a
Committee who cared not a whit about our feelings, motives,
or opinions as to the Living Teachers, but concerned them-
selves chiefly in trying to break down the standing of the
great rival Society, and sweeping our rubbish off the ground
which they aimed at occupying alone. This is the tone
that seems to run through the whole Report.

2. That when, later on, in India, they cross-examined the
Hindu and other Indian witnesses who had signed the
certificates published in the Theosophist, in Mr. A. O.
Hume’s Hints on Esoteric Theosophy and other pamphlets,
every stress was laid upon their contradictions, while no
allowance whatever was made for {a) the utter inexperience
of Asiatics in psychical research methods, and ip) their
mental incompetency to restate accurately what had been
their observations and impressions at the time of witnessing
the phenomena, when no tests had been applied, measure-
ments taken, or other details looked to : since nobody had
had an idea that they would have to recall the incidents
four or five or even more years later. A judicially-minded
investigator would have seen at a glance that self-contra-
dictions would, under those circumstances, have been the
most natural, and mnemonic accuracy the least so, to
expect. Every cool observer at mediumistic circles would
know that. I have attended the late Dale Owen, Epes
Sargent, and other equally honest and cultured men, to
circles where they proved to me their perfect inaccuracy of



H. P. B. and the S. P. R. Report 105

observation. How much less, then, ought to have been
eJtpected from Hindus who had never had the l^t personal
experience in such matters ?

3. The chief accuser of Madame Blavatsky was Mme.
Emma Coulomb, whose moral worth is shown in her con-
fession to the Missionaries that she had been cognizant of
the fraudulent character of H. P. B.’s phenomena all along,
and had served as her lying and dishonest accomplice!
Inquiries at Cairo, of the ladies of the Royal harem, would
yield highly interesting facts about her.

4. That the pretended letters of H. P. B. to her were
never shmm me by anybody y although I was within easy reach,
a fact which does not go towards proving their genuineness.

5. That the unqualified opinion of the caligraphic expert
who declared the K. H. and other alleged Mahatmic letters
to have been written by H. P. B. (from certain resemblances
between them and her admitted handwriting), upon which
the S. P. R. Committee largely based their denunciation of
her, is that of a man notorious for having declared, on like
professional analyses, the “ Pigot Forgeries ” to have been
genuine letters of Mr. Parnell, while the forger himself later
killed himself in prison after confessing to his forgeries.
Moreover, his professional opinion is opposed to the cate-
gorically opposite one of the chief caligraphist of the High
Court of Berlin. Letters of H. P. B. and of the Mahatma
K. H. were submitted for his decision by Herr G. Gebhafd,
Persian Consul, and he declared in writing that ‘*it was
impossible that the two letters could have been written by
the same hand” {Theosvpkisiy June iS86, Supplement),



io6 Old Diary Leaves

6. That even if the resemblances in the handwritings to
Madame Blavatsky’s had been much more striking than
they were, this would have been no proof of her mala fides^
since every tyro in spiritualistic research knows that, whether
a psychic message is written on a closed slate, or precipi-
tated on a paper or card laid on the floor, or on the ceiling,
or anywhere else at a distance from the medium, the writing
will usually resemble that of the medium. The same rule
applies to all intermediary agents through whom messages
in psychic writing are transmitted. Neither Dr. Hodgson,
nor either of his colleagues, nor their infallible “expert”
seems to have known this elementary fact ; yet this did not
deter them from rendering an unjust and cruel judgment on
a woman whom they almost seem to have fallen upon to
claw to pieces, like so many wolves on a victim^s carcase.
I wish to keep my feelings within bounds, but it becomes
very hard when I think of the injustice done to my old
colleague. The attitude of the Committee of the S. P. R.
seems to me that of a body of gifted, scholarly men, blinded
by self-righteousness so as to make them incapable of seeing
facts as they were, and daring to lay violent hands upon the
reputation of a person entitled, under every principle of
human justice, to the benefit of the doubt.* Was any

* The character of Mr. Podmore has been just recently drawn by
the veteran Editor of Li^ (see issue of November 27th, 1897) in a
way that will show how little chance of fair treatment H. P. B. had at
the hands of his S. P. R. Committee. “Patient, unspeakably pains-
taking, with a wonderful eye for a crevice, and an equally wonderful
wrist for jerking an incident off the rails, and putting an up-train on
the down-line .... Mr. Podmore is an enthusiastic unbeliever. He
starts with 4 ychepent assua>ption against all things spiritual, aa4



H. P. B. and the S. P. R. Report 107

mercy shown her? One searches in vain throughout the
published Report for the smallest sign of it

“ Oh ! for the rarity
Of Christian charity,’*

7. That Dr. Hodgson, the agent-detective sent by the
S. P. R. to India to ferret out the facts, has since then
become an avowed spiritualist, to the extent of pronouncing
the medium, Mrs. Piper’s phenomena, spiritualistic after six
years’ scrutiny of them ! In his earlier days he devoted
fourteen hours to the writing up of a single slate-writing
seance — at the time when he was as sceptical and
incompetent to pronounce upon ‘ psychic powers ’ as is Mr.
Podmore to this day. It is sad to think what a different
report on H. P. B.’s phenomena he would have made to the
S. P. R. but for his incompetence as an observer of psychic
facts ; sad, because he might then have done her justice
instead of injustice, and spared her years of agony undeserved.
The congeniality of Dr. Hodgson’s mind at that time with
Mr, Podmore’s is apparent throughout his report of observa-
tions: a single example will suffice — ex uno disce omnes,
Mr. S. Ramaswamier, District Registrar of Tinnevelly,
Madras Presidency, encountered in Sikkim my Guru,


strictly attends to business as one whose business is to detect crevices,
and stuff them up with anything that comes to hand ; and if there is
nothing substantial to stuff them up with, he jams in an unfailing
supply of innuendos, assertions, and assumptions. But a passage,
towards the end of the book [under review] gives us the key to it
all . . . * We are bound to assume abnormality somewhere, and, of

the two, it may be easier to suppose the medium abnormally dishonest
than to credit him with abnormal psychic powerg.’**


io8 Old Diary Leaves

Mahatma M., on horseback, and had a long conversation
with him, which he describes at length (Theosophist^ Dec.
1882). Dr. Hodgson says: “I see no improbability in
supposing that the Mahatma was personated by one of
Madame Blavatsky's confederates.’' As though this penni-
less woman had a paid army of cheats scattered over India,
even to Sikkim !

8. That weird phenomena occurred in H. P. B.’s presence
from her very childhood, as is proved by the testimony
of her family, and that similar ones were witnessed by
myself and many other persons in America and India, long
before the Coulombs came out of their obscurity, and under
circumstances precluding tlie theory of confederacy or bad
faith,* This fact should, it would seem, have great weight
in the making up of the public verdict in the case at issue.
The misfortune was that the S. P. R. Committee, owing to
ignorance and lack of experience, doubted the possibility of
such phenomena, and hence — as Mr. Podmore puts it in
the passage above quoted — as they had “ to assume abnor-
mality somewhere,” it was “easier to suppose the medium
.abnormally dishonest than to credit him with abnormal
psychic powers.”

If the reader will but think a moment, he will see how
impossible it was that the members of the Committee could
have been qualified to pronounce upon phenomena of the
class of H. P. B.’s. There had been plenty of mediums in
Europe and America, but no alleged adept proficients in

• See Old Diary Leavtz, “The True History of the Theosophical
Society,” London, New York, and Madras, 189$,



H. P. B. and the S. P. R. Report 109

psychical science since CagUostro and Count St Germaixt
Where is the record of verified phenomena with which
H. P. B/s could be compared and tested ? In the whole
range of scientific research no branch demands of the
experimenter such intuitive insight, such capacity for delicate
weighing of facts, such a profound knowledge of man in his
physical, mental, and spiritual aspects, such an intimate
acquaintance with the ancient schools of philosophy and of
occultism, such a memory of the recorded powers of adepts,
such a power to experimentally verify at first hand the
number and play of the finer forces of nature, as this field
of transcendental physics. What were the special qualifica-
tions, then, of Messrs. Myers, Gurney, Podmore, Stack,
Sidgwick, and Hodgson for this inquest ? What weight
ought to be given to their hasty verdict? We scorn the raw
opinions of the uneducated tradesman upon astronomy,
mathematics, symbology, spirit survival, or any other of the
great questions of human knowledge with which he has had
no familiarity whatever. Yet is his case worse than that of
these gentlemen amateurs in Practical Psycliology, who
possessed no more qualification to render a just judgment
on H, P. B,’s psychical powers than our supposed greeiv-
grocer, tailor, ox blacking-maker ? If the S. P. R. had had
to convert the public to a belief that ran counter to
preconceptions, or to some new aspect of a fixed error, such
SiS the geocentric theory, for example, does any sane man
believe that they would have brought forward so weak a
case as this, and so hastily risked the indignant censate of
a more enlightened posterity? But the chance of die**



no


Old Diary Leaves

crediting a dangerous personality, by merely calling her ^
clever impostor and thus appealing to popular ignorance and
popular prejudice, was too tempting to be resisted ; so they
slandered and passed on, leaving their poisoned shaft to
rankle in the breast of this poor, race-loving, imprudent,
impulsive thaumaturgist and teacher. They have had their
day of triumph, but divine justice has still its inexorable
policy to vindicate.

Whatever her other friends may have done, I, at least,
have always tried to deal with H. P. B. as a natural, not a
supernatural, personage. In relating my observations of her
phenomena I have done my best to speak the plain truth
and present my facts without bias. I'his policy has been
adhered to in the face of the resistance of many of my
colleagues who would have liked to cover up her weaknesses.
What they might think of me was of no consequence
whatsoever; I had my duty to do to my benefactress, friend,
and co-founder of the Society. I have done it all the better,
I believe, by telling the truth, adding nothing pleasant,
concealing nothing unpleasant. I have taken H. P. B. as
a being of different sides of character, some almost angelic,
others the reverse. Often, when on lecturing tours in far-
away lands, I have been asked what I had to say in
defence of her against the charges of the Coulombs and
Hodgson. My answer has always been that the case against
her had never been judicially presented, but very crudely and
in an unconvincing way ; that I myself had seen so many of
her phenomena produced under circumstances of an un-
impeachable character, as to make me know that she was a



H. P. P. and the S. P. R. Report 1 1 1

great adept in handling nature^s occult forces; but that,
even if one had to accept as proven every charge brought
against her phenomena, she was still a benefactress of
mankind in the teachings she had left behind, and had won
the fervent gratitude of thousands of men and women to
whom her writings had first shown the path up the hill of
spiritual truth. And I have challenged my questioners to
tell the audience whether they or any other of Mme.
Blavatsky’s flippant accusers dare claim the right to a tithe
of the love and gratitude given her by the public, for what
they had done for humanity. I never yet failed to win the
applause of my hearers. For there is beneath all social
movements, down in the heart of human nature, a pas-
sionate love of fair-play, and this will vindicate the now
besmirched reputation of Helena Petrovna. In short, all of
us instinctively believe in Karma. As for the victim of the
S. P. R., she is beyond their reach, and can smile at their
most malicious attempts to do her harm. Her Karma
thrust her under this crushing burden of sorrow, but the
ordeal is past, and she can now

“ Know how sublime a thing it is
To suffer and be strong.*’


CHAPTER X.


SUCCESSFUL ISSUE OF BUDDHIST MISSION.

T urning our hacks upon the tragical episode of the
attack of the S. P. R. upon Madame Blavatsky and
her associates, we will now take up the pleasanter task of
recalling, for permanent record, in greater detail than was
given in Chapter VL, the incidents of the Buddhistic
commission with which the Sinhalese nation had honored
me, and which had brought me to London in the spring
of 1884. The events preceding this action are historically
so important, and their consequences have been so serious,
that I feel it a duty to expand the brief narrative above
mentioned, and to quote, from the original documents in
my possession, facts that must otherwise go unrecorded.
My duty was, as above stated, to lay before the Colonial
Office certain grievances for which no redress had been
obtained in Ceylon. They struck at the very root of the
principle of religious neutrality, so clearly and so wisely
announced by Her Majesty, the Queen, as the future

policy of her Government throughout her dominions.

112 '


Successful Issue of Buddhist Mission 1 13


Of course, the British Empire would not hold together
under any other system than the absolute guarantee to
all the followers of the various religions under its sway,
of the right of private judgment as to their creeds and
of personal freedom as to their forms of worship. When
the Portuguese conquered the Maritime Provinces of
Ceylon, they adopted the opposite policy and employed
the brutal agencies of the sword, fire, confiscation, and
rapine to compel the mild and inoffensive people of the
Island to adopt the Christian religion, but without avail.
The poor creatures saw their houses burnt, their females
dishonored, and their friends put to the sword, but they
only fled to the jungles and clung to Buddhism. Under
the rule of the Dutch, who supplanted the Portuguese,
the same stress was put upon them, but by chiefly legal
enactments and appeal to selfish motives, rather than by
military cruelty. Cruel enough, though, were some of
their laws as, for instance, the denial of legitimacy to
children born in lawful Buddhistic wedlock and of their
right of inheritance, unless the parents were married in a
Christian church : an infamous bit of cunning. A Jubilee
Report of the C. M. Society, noticing the past and then
present state of the Christian churches in Ceylon, says
that these harsh measures of the Dutch bred “Christians” —
/>., hypocrites — prolifically, and when the British drove
out the Dutch and conquered the Maritime Provinces,
the church registers bore the names of thousands of this
sort of Christians, but within a brief time after the procla-
mation of religious freedom was made, “the flourishing

8



114 Diary Leaves

ttee Wto wilted as though stricken by a black frost." 1
quote the substance of this avowal from memory, but I
think I am fairly accurate.

However warlike the Sinhalese of the seaboard may
have been in the far past, the fight has all been drawn
out of them by three centuries of foreign rule^; yet its
potentiality is always there, according to the law of
sociological evolution, and it only needs the right con-
catenation of circumstances to set their passions ablaze
again. On Easter Day, 1883, ^ crisis occurred which,
under less wise self-restraint in the leaders of the Buddhist
community, might have caused serious riots and blood-shed.
If the leaders had not been under what we may call the
conservative training of membership in the Theosophical
Society, which had taught them the benefit of union and
patient persistence in the conduct of public movements,
the masses might have broken loose and taken that
Lynch law redress for their wrongs which they could not
get from a vacillating Governor and unsympathetic officials.
Briefly, the facts were that on the Easter Day a procession
of peaceful, unarmed Buddhist worshippers was passing
through the streets of Colombo to Kotahena, a suburb
where on6 of their most revered temples is situate, to
make the customary offerings of flowers, fruits, and other
things at the shrine, when they were assaulted violently
by a laige mob. To quote from the Petition laid before

* held the «e<iboard lor 153 years > the Dutch, from

A>D* 1658 to 1795, ^hen the British expelled them and made them-
selves a present of the sovereignty. ** In the interests of Christianity
and dvilization,* of couirse ]



Successful Issue of Buddhist Mission 115

the Governor ! **They were murderously assaulted by a
mob of Roman Catholics and other evilly-disposed rioters,
who bore painted upon their persons the sign of a cross,
who had inflamed their passions by intoxicant drinks, and
who were armed with bludgeons, sharp weapons, and other
deadly instruments; that in the affray which followed,
the lives of women and children were imperilled, great
bodily harm was done to a number of Buddhists, five
head of cattle drawing their carts were slaughtered in the
Queen’s highway, and the carts themselves, with their
valuable contents, were consumed by fire.” It goes on
to state that a Buddhist named Juan Naide was murdered,
the Police looking on without interfering; that the mob
was collected by the ringing of tocsins on the bells of
the Catholic churches, and that certain noted persons
were seen by the Police painting white crosses on the
dark-skinned bodies of the rioters, organizing the attack,
and giving them liquors. Although these outrages were
witnessed by thousands, and the leaders were all well
known, no action was taken by the authorities, and it was
but too evident that the whole thing was to be ignored*
After waiting some days, the leaders of the Buddhist
community, taking counsel together, brought a criminal
action against certain suspected parties, with such proofs
as, without Police help, could be discovered. The Justice
of the Peace recommended that twelve of the accused
should be committed for trial, but the Acting Queen’s
Advocate, acting in violation of the “Ordnance (Ord.
XI., of 1868) and of the settled policy of British justice,



ii6 Old Diary Leaves

the sitting Justice of the Peace was obliged, under in-
structions of the Acting Queen’s Advocate, to assume
the functions of the Supreme Court, and, without trial by
jury, to decide the validity of the complaint and the value
of the testimony offered by the accused. . . . Thus, then,
as events proved, the ordinary course of justice was inter-
rupted and the accused were released. . . .” “ The result

being,” says the Petition, “that, notwithstanding we have
spent rs. 5000 in legal and other expenses to secure justice,
the murderers of an unoffending Buddhist are unpunished,
no recompense has been given for property destroyed, to
the value of some rs. 4000, and the whole body of
Sinhalese Buddhists .... are left to face the possibility
of similar bloody attacks in future by the various
enemies of their religion. ... So serious has the agita-
tion upon this subject already become, that, but for the
remonstrances of counsel, ten thousand Buddhists would
have presented this petition in person to your Excellency ;
and a committee of our influential men have, in despair,
taken the preliminary steps to ask of the Home Govern-
ment and the Commons of England such help as may be
practicable to redress their wrongs and give full effect in
future to the assurances of religious neutrality in Her
Majesty’s Asiatic dominions which have, from time to
time, in the Royal name been solemnly pledged.”

Things went from bad to worse. The Buddhists,
smartmg under a sense of their wrongs, and goaded by the
jeers and taunts of the unpunished rioters, were getting
ripe for bloody reprisals* Government had not turned



Successful Issue of Buddhist Mission 1 17

over a finger to right them in more than a year. In
short, there was a crisis that menaced the destruction of
law and order.

The first thing that occurred to the Buddhist leaders in
their time of worst trouble was, as stated in Chapter VI.,
to telegraph me an urgent request to come over and help
them. Accepting, as in duty bound, I crossed vi^ Tuticorin
and reached Colombo on Sunday, the 27th January 1884.
I went straight to Sumangala’s College and organized a
meeting of leading Buddhists. The next day I got them
to form a Buddhist Defence Committee, with old Mr.
Goonewardene, Mohandiram, as Chairman, Don Carolis,
as Vice, H. A. Fernando as Treasurer, and C. P.
Goonewardene as Secretary ; that is to say, all most
respected persons in the community. They elected me an
Honorary Member, as the following extract shows: —

“At the suggestion of the High Priest, and upon the
motion of Mr. Don Carolis, seconded by Mr. H. A.
Fernando, and supported by Mr. J. P. Jayatilleke, it was
unanimously

“Resolved, that Colonel H. S. Olcott, of Madras, be
respectfully requested to generally assist the Committee
to carry out the objects of its organization.

“ And that provided he consent, he be made an Honorary
Member, and asked to proceed to London as the Chief
Agent of the Committee, with full power to represent it
under any circumstances that may arise, and in its name
and that of the Sinhalese Buddhists in general, to ask for



ii8 Old Diary Leaves

such redress and enter into such engagements as may
appear to him judicious.”

The next day I went to Kandy to personally confer with
the new Governor^ Sir Arthur Gordon, who had just
succeeded Sir James R. Longden, the Feeble. I found
him quite another sort of person, and from his intelligent
grasp of the situation felt much encouragement for our
case. He promised to forward immediately to London
any papers we might wish to lay before the Colonial
CflSce, and altogether expressed his sympathy with our
party under the afflicting circumstances. Messrs. Wm.
de Abrew and Goonesekara accompanied me to the
interview. These preliminaries being satisfactorily settled,
we returned to Colombo on the next day.

At the College I held, on the following day, a private
conference with the High Priests, Sumangala, Dhamma-
lankara, Subhuti, and Weligama, who, among other things,
joined in giving me a written commission to accept, in
their names, any persons, in Europe or elsewhere, who
might wish to formally declare themselves Buddhists.
The ranking High Priests of Mai watte and Asgiri,
the Royal Temples at Kandy, had given me similar
powers already. Having done all that was possible in
Ceylon, I returned that evening to India, to arrange
affairs at Adyar and make as early a start as possible for
London.

The idea of H. P. B^s accompanying me to Europe was
an afterthought, it having been decided in a Council



Successful Issue of Buddhist Mission 1 19

meeting after I had foreseen that I would have to go to
London for the settlement of the Ceylon business.

H. P. B., taking time by the forelock, preceded me to
Bombay so as to make a promised visit to our colleague,
the late Thakur of Wadhwan,

On the isth of February I left for Bombay with Mr.
St. George Lane-Fox, F.T.S., and on the i8th was rejoined
by H. P. B., Dr. Hartmann, and Mohini, who had
extended their Kathiawar trip as far as Sihor, to visit
our always beloved and loyal colleague, Prince Harisinhji
Rupsinhji. On the 20th, at noon, we sailed for Marseilles
on the s.s. “ Chandernagore,'’ of one of the French lines,
r^eiving demonstrations of affection from a large number
of friends who came, with the usual bouquets and flower-
wreaths, to see us off.

The particulars of our delightful voyage, our arrival at
Marseilles and Nice, the incidents which occurred while
we were the guests of Lady Caithness, our arrival at Paris,
my leaving H. P. B. there and proceeding on to London
with Mohini, the settlement of the teapot tempest in the
London Lodge, and the melancholy results of our inter-
course with the S. P, R., have been recorded above. We
will now resume the thread of our narrative of the results
of my Buddhist mission.

A long familiarity with the methods of public business as
followed in governmental departments restrained me from
hurrying to the Colonial Secretary’s antechamber with my
papers in my hand. Instead of committing that indis-
cretion, which has caused so many aspirants for offlcial



120


Old Diary Leaves

favor to spend weeks and months outside the door behind
which the great man sits, I made it my first business to find
out how the business of the Colonial Office was transacted,
which bureau had special charge of Ceylon affairs, and
what was the character of the gentleman in charge of it.
These inquiries — which, of course, I might have completed
in an hour had I been so fortunate as to meet with the right
man — took up a fortnight. Seeing at last my way clear, I
called at the Colonial Office and sent in my card to the
Hon. R. H. Meade. Mr. Meade received me with the
utmost politeness, and showed himself entirely familiar with
the details of our case. He was good enough to enlighten
me about the forms of correspondence used in the British
public offices, and I addressed to Lord Derby the following
letter: —

77 Elgin Crescent W.,
London, the lyfk May 1884.

To The Right Honorable The Earl of Derby,

Secretary of State for the Colonies,

My Lord : —

1. The despatch of the i8th of Feb. of H. E. Sir Arthur
Gordon to your Lordship will have informed you of my
having come to London as the representative of the
Sinhalese Buddhists, to obtain redress for the gross wrongs
done them in connection with the riots of Easter Sunday
last year.

2. I have personally conferred with the Hon. R. H.
Meade of the Colonial Office with respect to the matter,



Successful Issue of Buddhist Mission 121


and now have the honor to ask your Lordship^s considera-
tion of the enclosures herewith forwarded, copies of which
are not on file in the office. They are : —

3. A copy of an official report of a meeting of Sinhalese
Buddhists held at Colombo on the 28th day of January
1882, to consider the present state of Buddhism in the
Island of Ceylon, and adopt such measures as may be
necessary for obtaining redress for certain grievances.

4. Copy of a letter and appeal to H. E. Sir Arthur
Gordon, Governor of Ceylon, asking him to take certain
specified lawful steps to secure redress for the Buddhists : the
writer being Edward F. Perera, Esq., leading Proctor for
the Buddhists in the late riot proceedings. To which letter,
although written and delivered to its addressee on the 5th
of February, no response had, I believe, been received up
to the most recent dates from the Island.

5. Extracts from a private letter to myself from Mr. J. R.
De Silva, one of the best and most intelligent Buddhists of
Ceylon, and the gentleman who was Secretary to the meet-
ing for forming the Defence Committee named in the
Document ; the information showing the despairing state of
feeling with regard to the prospect of getting justice from
Government unless my present mission should succeed.

6. I have also shown to Mr. Meade a copy of a Colombo
paper, which sets forth the unlimited power habitually
enjoyed by the second law officer of the crown — the local
official primarily responsible, as alleged, for the apparent
miscarriage of justice complained of.

7. That your Lordship may know what the Sinhalese



122


Old Diary Leaves

people hope for as measures of justice, I would state that I
am asked to beg your consideration of the following points : —

(a) That the Attorney-General of Ceylon * be instructed,
if not illegal, to order the parties accused of the guilt of the
Easter Riot and of its consequences to be committed for
trial.

(/j) That, ciiher by extending the terms of the Imperial
Indian Proclamation of religious neutrality by the British
Government, or otherwise, some absolute guarantee of their
religious rights and privileges shall be at once given the
Sinhalese Buddhists, so that the prevailing inquietude may
be done away with, and all officials be made to feel that
Her Majesty’s Government will hold them to stern account
should they henceforth fail in the impartial performance of
duty.

(c) That the Birthday of Buddha, viz., the Full Moon day
of May, be proclaimed a full holiday for Buddhist em-
ployees of Government, as the sacred days of Mussulmans,
Hindus, and Parsis are officially recognized holidays in India
for employees of those several faiths. The Buddhists, who
are always most loyal subjects, are compelled to either work
on this, their most holy day of the year, or lose the day’s
pay.

(<^) That all restrictions upon the use of their national and
religious music shall be removed, and the Buddhists per-
mitted to hold their religious processions as always hitherto
since the remotest epochs. Though your Lordship’s de-
spatch to Sir Arthur Gordon of December last, as transmitted
* The title of the Queen’s Advocate under the New Code.



Successful Issue of Buddhist Mission 123

to Mr. Perera through the Ceylon Colonial Govenunent*
declared that instructions had been given which your
Lordship trusted “will enable all Her Majesty’s subjects in
Ceylon to practise the rites of their respective religions with-
out interference ” j yet the most revered and respected monk
in the Island — Sumangala Thero, High Priest of Adames
Peak and Principal of Widyodaya College, Colombo — was,
only the other day, denied the privilege of a procession with
tom-toms, and thus forced to bring his religious fair, or
finkamma^ to a premature close. Harsh and unpleasant as
the sound of the tom-tom may be to European ears, yet it
is music to the Asiatic, and a festival without it is lifeless
and uninteresting to them.

(e) That Buddhist Registrars of Marriages, etc., shall be
appointed in Buddhist villages and wards of cities, and the
Buddhists not forced as hitherto to depend for these
services upon their bitter enemies of other faiths.

(/) That immediate steps shall be taken to decide the
question of the Buddhist Temporalities, and, by taking
financial matters out of the hands of the priests who, by
their ordination laws, are prohibited from meddling in
worldly affairs, but nevertheless have been greatly corrupted
by the hasty action of the British authorities in turning over
to their custody (see Ordnance No. 10, of 1856) the vast
estates of the Church, to aid in restoring the pristine virtue
of the priesthood. An examination of Ceylon official
records shows that the British authorites have, unwittingly,
helped to a great extent to injure the tone of Buddhist
morality, by first extinguishing the ancient sovereign power


124 Old Diary Leaves

of ecclesiastical discipline vested in the King, and then failing
to either exercise it themselves or to vest it in a Chamber,
or Board, or Council of Priests. The High Priest of the
Dalada Maligawa, at Kandy, himself bitterly complained to
me about this when I was at his temple in January last.

I am sorry to inform your Lordship that discontent
and despair are rapidly spreading among the Sinhalese
Buddhists ; a fact to be the more deplored, since there is
not in all the Imperial realm a more simple, peaceable
community. Before the manufacture and sale of arrack was
promoted for revenue purposes, they were — unless history
belies them — a most kindly, quiet, and virtuous nation.
Their devotion to Buddhism appears in the fact that,
despite the bloody policy of the Portuguese, and the
despicable and crafty one of the Dutch, they ever remained
secretly true to their forefathers’ faith, and as soon as it
became safe under British rule, openly professed it. They
feel just now, however, as though the ruling powers were
secretly willing to deliver them over to the Romish mob,
and determined to deny them common protection. No
seer is required to foretell what the legitimate outcome of
such a feeling must be, and on behalf of the better part
of the nation, I do most earnestly implore your Lordship
to take such steps as shall, without dangerous delay, prove
to them the sincerity of the professions of Government as
made from time to time.

I have the honor to be.

Your Lordship’s obedient, humble servant,

(Sd.) Henry S. Olcott.



Successful Issue of Buddhist Mission 125

A few days later, having received further communications
from Colombo, I supplemented it with a second letter, to
the following effect : —

77, Elgin Crescent, Notting Hill,

London, 27M May 1884.

To The Right Honorable The Earl of Derby,

Secretary of State for the Colonies.

My Lord, — I have the honor to enclose, for your Lord-
ship’s information, the following additional papers on the
matter of the late religious riots at Colombo, Ceylon : —

Copies of eight letters and endorsements, included in a
correspondence, in February last, between H. Sumangala,
Thero, High Priest, and certain Government officials, with
respect to a Police permit for a religious procession.

The venerable High Priest, as your Lordship will per-
ceive, asked for permission to perform the well-known,
popular rite of conveying about the city, with appropriate
music, a sacred relic. The object was to help ally the pre-
valent apprehension “ with respect to sicknesses now prevail-
ing at Colombo,” the relic being supposed to possess a
certain power in itself. If this be regarded as a mere super-
stition, it is to be observed that it is identical in character
with the popular feeling in Catholic and Greek Protestant
countries, which demands the similar bearing of relics about
the streets in times of pestilence. Moreover, among the
Sinhalese Buddhists the ceremonial is hallowed by the
custom of many ages»



126


Old Diary Leaves

The documents show that their innocent request was
virtually denied, notwithstanding the benevolent assurances
of your Lordship, as communicated through the Colonial
authorities in January last

My latest advices from Ceylon — May sib, instant — in-
dicate a continuance of the unsettled feeling among the
Buddhists ; and I venture to hope that, in view of the fact
that they have now been patiently waiting for about thirteen
months for justice, your Lordship may be able to give early
and favorable consideration to the appeal which, on their
behalf, I have had the honor to make. With assurances of
profound respect,

1 have the honor to be,

Your Lordship’s obedient servant,

(Sd.) H. S. Olcott.

About this time some of the London editors, coming to
know of the nature of my business in London, expressed
their sympathy ; and one Conservative organ, at least, inti-
mated that there had been a miscarriage of justice, and that
it was the duty of Government to make proper amends.

I will now complete the record, by giving the text of the
reply of the Earl of Derby to my communications, and of
the letters which subsequently passed between us : —

Downing Strset,
17M June 1884.

Sir, — I am directed by the Earl of Derby to acknow-
ledge the receipt of your letters of the 17th and 27th ultimo,



Successful Issue of Buddhist Mission 127

relating to certain grievances which the Buddhists of Ceylon
are alleged to be suffering.

fi. Lord Derby has already expressed his great regret that
it has not been found possible to prosecute the ringleaders
of the riots of Easter Sunday last year, and is ready to
acknowledge that the sufferers on that occasion have real
grounds for complaint in this respect ; but in the absence of
ftesh evidence, it would be impossible to reopen the matter.

3. Her Majesty’s Government are resolved that in Ceylon,
as in other parts of the Empire, the principles of religious
liberty shall be strictly adhered to, and will do their utmost
to remove any grievance under which any religious com-
munity can be shown to labor, and to put an end to any
appearance of disregarding the proclamations of religious
neutrality which were made at the time when the English
took possession of the Island. It is impossible to make any
more explicit statement of the firm intention of the Govern-
ment to abide by the spirit of those ancient proclamations
than has already been made by the Governor, under the
instructions of the Secretary of State, as given in Lord
Derby’s despatch, to which reference is made in your letter
of 17th May.

Lord Derby has confidence in the loyalty and good sense
of the Buddhist community in Ceylon, and feels sure that
they will loyally accept his assurances in this matter.

4. The question of dealing with the Buddhist Tempo-
ralities is a difficult one, and has already engaged the atten-
tion of Her Majesty^s Government, and (rf Sir Arthur Gordon^s
predecessors* No doubt Sir Arthur Gordon, to whom your



128 Old Diary Leaves

letter will be referred, will carefully consider the whole mat-
ter, and Lord Derby will be glad to give his attention to
any practicable scheme suggested to Sir A. Gordon and
recommended by him, which would enable the Buddhist
community to control the management of the Properties
vested in their church, though clearly the exercise of any
such control should be by the Buddhists themselves rather
than through the instrumentality of any Government
officials.

5. As regards the suggestion that the Birthday of Buddha
should be observed as a full holiday for all Buddhist
servants of the Government, and the questions of allowing
tom-toms in the religious processions, and of the appoint-
ment of Buddhist registrars of marriage, Lord Derby
can express no opinion without first referring to the
Governor, but he is confident that it will be the wish
of Sir Arthur Gordon, as it is that of Her Majesty's
Government, that every consideration possible should be
shown in these matters.

Your letters will accordingly be referred to the Governor
by the outgoing mail.

I am, sir.

Your obedient servant,

(Sd.) R. H. Meade.

77, Elgin Crescent, Notting Hill, W.,
\()th June 1884.

To The Right Honorable The Earl of Derby,

Secretary of State for the Colonies,

My Lord, — 1 have the honor to acknowledge the



Successful Issue of Buddhist Mission 129

receipt of your Lordship’s letter of the 17th inst.,
replying to mine of the - 17th and 27th ultimo.

II. On behalf of the Buddhists of Ceylon, I have
to thank you for the frank and unequivocal declaration
of the intent of Her Majesty’s Government to rigidly
enforce the neutrality of the Crown in the matter of
religious liberty as regards the Buddhist community of
Ceylon, equally with other religious communities in all
parts of the Empire. Or, as you state it, “to put an
end to any appearance of disregarding the Proclamations
of Religious neutrality which were made at the time
when the English took possession of the Island.” This
assurance, if published in the Gazette of the Local Govern-
ment, and made obligatory upon all local officials, will
go far towards re-establishing the confidence of the
Sinhalese nation, now so deeply shaken by recent events.
What the nation wants is the full conviction that they
are not to be made the victims of a mob of religious
fanatics who, by threatening the peace of Ceylon, can
intimidate officials and escape punishment of their
crimes.

III. I beg your Lordship’s attention to the 2nd clause
of the letter under reply, as it really touches the most
vital point of the present question. It is there remarked
that “ in the absence of fresh evidence^ it would be impossible
to re-open the matter ” of the trial of the alleged ringleaders
of the riots of Easter Sunday last year. By implication
this, of course, affirms that if such “ fresh evidence ” had
been by me brought forward, Her Majesty’s Government

9



130 Old Diary Leaves

would have felt it their duty to instruct the Colonial
law officers of the Crown to proceed to prosecution, as
by statute provided. If I am not mistaken in this
deduction, I would most earnestly beg of your Lordship
to put that affirmation into so many words. For that
alone would, in the opinion of the Sinhalese, restore them
•to their vested rights as subjects, by showing them that
the Courts are as open to them as to their foes, and
they need not sue for justice in vain. Until this moment,
in the absence of some such assurance since the riots,
they have felt the contrary, and it was their despair
which drove them to organize the “Buddhist Defence
Committee” on the 28th of January last, and send me
to England upon my present mission.

IV. A reference to the archives of the Colonial Office
will convince your Lordship of the fact that the question
of the Buddhist Temporalities is in the state of a case
awaiting decision, after a full report by a Special Com-
mission appointed to look into the entire subject. Their
report is dated 17th October 1876, and the delay of
Government in acting upon its recommendations has
been pioductive of much injury to the morals of the
Kandyan priesthood.

V, I thank your Lordship for the promise to refer to
H.E. Sir Arthur Gordon, Governor of Ceylon, with the
expression of the wish of Her Majesty’s Ck)vernment
“that every consideration possible should be shown in
these matters” — the questions of making Lord Buddha’s
Birthday a Government holiday for Buddhist public



Successful Issue of Buddhist Mission 131

servants, of allowing tom-toms in religious processionsi
and of the appointment of Buddhist Registrars, I have
the full conviction that Sir Arthur Gordon will do all
he can to give effect to the expressed sympathies of
Government, and in all official matters to treat the Sinhalese
with justice, when his attention is called to grievances.

VI. To complete the files of the Colonial Office to
date, I hand your Lordship herewith copies of documents
received by me by last mail from the Buddhist Defence
Committee. They show that permission was denied for
a Buddhist religious procession upon the Birthday of Lord
Buddha (May 9th), and for another on the Sinhalese
New Year’s Day (April nth), although permits were issued
for processions, with tom-toms, during the months of
February and March, to Mohammedan and Hindu
applicants. Can it be that to the representatives of the
most ancient religion in Ceylon these simple privileges
are to be denied, while granted to communities of all
the other and later faiths? That permission to march
in religious procession was actually given the Buddhists
in one or two instances within the past year, but was of no
practical benefit to them, since they were prohibited the
use of their tom-toms ; and therefore the permit or permits
were not availed of. P'or, as the correspondent shows, a
procession without those musical instruments is a tame
and lifeless affair. It is the commonest of things in Great
Britain for the ordinary street traffic to be suspended in
streets along which authorized processions are passing.
It would be no great concession, therefore, for the same


132 Old Diary Leaves

thing to be done in the small town 6 t Colombo—where
the street traffic is usually very small-^^upon the rate
Occaalond of Buddhist processions, seeing that the Sinhalese
people have ever been loyal and peaceable subjects of Her
Majesty, and the privilege for which they are contending
has been enjoyed from the remotest antiquity.

I am, my Lord,

Your Lordship’s obedient servant,

(Sd.) H. S. Olcott.

Downing Street,
Junt 1884.

SiRj^I am directed by the Earl of Derby to acknowledge
the receipt of your further letter of the 19th instant, on
the subject of the late unfortunate riots which took place in
Ceylon on Easter Sunday last year.

A copy of your letter will be sent to Sir Arthur Gordon,
with the previous correspondence, for his consideration.
As Governor of the Island he is responsible for the peace
and order of the community, and no final decision can
be taken without first referring the matter to him.

Lord Derby, however, desires me to acquaint you, with
reference to paragraph 3 of your letter, that your inference
is correct that if any fresh evidence had been forthcomings
such as would justify legal proceedings^ a prosecution would
have been instituted and pressed to its conclusion.

I am to add, what must be well known in Ceylon,* that
when the new Queers Advocate arrived in the Island,

^ As above ShoWfl, this hCt was not known to the Buddhists.



Successful Issue of Buddhist Mission 133

be was instructed to review the whole proceedings, with
the view to ascertaining whether then, late as it was, those
who took part in the disgraceful riots of Easter Sunday
might not be brought to justice, and Lord Derby much
regrets that this has not been found possible.

I am, sir,

Your obedient servant,

(Sd.) R. H. Meade.

Colonel Olcott.


The London business being thus satisfactorily disposed
of, I waited, by appointment, upon Lord Derby, to take
leave and to thank him for the prompt attention paid
by the Colonial Office to the representations made through
me by the Sinhalese Buddhists. His Lordship’s reception
of me was most cordial. He said that the members of
Government had been much pained on hearing of the
lawless events at Colombo, and he was very sorry not to
be able to do more than he had; but he said that if, at
any future time, the Sinhalese Buddhists should have
occasion to seek the protection of the Colonial Office, he
hoped that I would have no hesitancy in writing or speak-
ing to him about it : I should always be most welcome.

The sequel to this interesting case is soon told. The
demands of the Buddhists, so far as they could be in
law, were complied with. Their right of religious pro-
cessions was recognized. The birthday of Lord Buddha
was proclaimed a full holiday for the Buddhists of Ceylon.


134 Old Diary Leaves

The displeasure of Government for the failure of jus-
tice, in the matter of prosecuting the rioters, was made
known in the Island. Buddhist Registrars of Marriages
were appointed ; and finally, the Buddhist Temporalities
problem has been recently put in the way of settlement,
by the proclamation, in the Government Gazette^ of the
Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance No. 17, of 1895, which
placed the vast land endowments of the Viharas under
the control of committees of laymen, whose duties and
responsibilities were defined in the Ordinance itself. In
the Gazette of November 12th, 1897, Sir E. Noel Walker,
Colonial Secretary of Ceylon, proclaimed, by the Gover-
nor's command, the rules of the Colombo Provincial Com-
mittee, of which not the least important are those relating
to the trial and punishment of Buddhist priests for offences
against the rules of their ordination, and to the qualifica-
tions necessary for candidates for incumbencies of temples.
This being the first step in what, I sincerely hope, may be
the beginning of the entire reformation of the Ceylon priest-
hood, I shall quote the Rules in question in this connection,

I. A representation of an offence committed by an
incumbent of a temple or any other priest or priests in
violation of the ‘ Vinaya,’ made in writing by five or more
laymen, or by two Buddhist priests, or a Committee member,
or by the President of District Committee of the district
wherein the offender lives, shall be considered a sufficient
cause for the Provincial Committee to institute an inquiry.

“ 2. The Provincial Committee and a chapter of five, ten,



Successful Issue of Buddhist Mission 135

or twenty Buddhist priests selected by the Committee
shall constitute a competent body to inquire into oflfences
committed by priests in violation of the ‘Vinaya.’

“ 3. The chapter of Buddhist priests shall belong to the
same sect as that of the offender against whom a com-
plaint is preferred, and its opinion is to be taken by the
Committee only on ‘Vinaya' matters.

“4. The Provincial Committee alone shall have the power
of finally deciding on the removal or otherwise of the
accused from the incumbency, and in the event of the
nature of the offence established at the inquiry requiring
that the offender or offenders should be disrobed, it shall
be competent for the said Committee, provided the action
be acquiesced in by the said advisory council or a majority
of its members, to entrust a Committee of priests especially
appointed with the execution of this part of the finding.

“5. All charges preferred against priests shall be fully
inquired into, and the proceeding duly recorded. Every
such inquiry shall be in the presence of the accused, who
shall have full liberty to make their defence, unless in
case of their absence it is proved to the satisfaction of
the Provincial Committee that they have had ample and
distinct notice of the inquiry, and the Committee is
satisfied that they have no valid excuse for being absent
therefrom, and satisfied that they purposely evade the
inquiry.

“6. If any priest who is not duly ordained a priest, or
who has been disrobed under the above rules, is found
wearing the robes of a Buddhist priest, the Provincial


136 Old Diary Leaves

Cocomitt^ shall have the power to prosecute him at the
nearest Police Court.

“7. The characteristic qualifications required in a priest
of the Buddhist faith (adherence to an observation of
the rules laid down in the ‘Vinaya' for their guidance,
knowledge of the Buddhist doctrines, and education)
shall be considered essential qualifications in candidates
for incumbencies, and the Provincial Committee shall
give due weight and consideration to such qualifications.

“8, In selecting a candidate to fill up an incumbency
Nati-sisya and Sisyanu sisya Parampara successions shall
be observed, provided the Provincial Committee is satis-
fied that the election is not liable to operate against the
interest of the temple, and the candidate possesses the
qualifications prescribed in rule No. 7.'^

The following excerpt from my address before the con-
vention of Buddhist Priests, which met at my invitation
at Galle, on July 4th, 1880, will also be of interest as
showing that my original plans for the elevation and
purification of the Buddhist Sangha have now, after the
lapse of seventeen years, been realized in the official pro-
clamation of the foregoing Rules. Events have clearly
proved the truth of my forecast, that what a nation really
needs and persistently demands, any wise Government
will concede. I said, in the address in question : —

“I have noticed a very sad apathy among the priests
about the question of disrobing such as have been proved
immoral and to be disgracing their religion and their



Successful Issue of Buddhist Mission 137

Order. At a recent convention of Chief Priests and
Kandyan Chiefs I spoke of this as doing enormous injury
to both priests and laity. The explanation given was that
the Church has no power to unfrock a bad priest, and he
can continue to wear the robes in defiance of their
authority. In the time of the Kandyan Kings, I was told,
the King had the power and used it, but under the present
Government there was no remedy. Well, my answer to
this is, to point to the Vth clause of the Kandy convention
rules, and to have the two million Buddhists of this Island
petition and demand that its spirit as well as letter shall
be strictly obeyed. The Government has there solemnly
bound itself to protect and maintain Buddhism, and, if you
demand it, believe me, the clever lawyers of the Crown will
find a way to disrobe your bad priests and not violate
Buddhist Law. Nothing would be easier than for a High
Ecclesiastical Tribunal with adequate powers to be
constituted by law. If the Government does nothing, no
one is to blame except the Buddhists themselves. How
can you expect a Christian Government to help to maintain,
‘ inviolable,' the religion of Buddha, when Buddhists will
not even open their mouths to ask it to do sot . . . .

‘‘It is my deliberate conviction, based upon these two
months’ observations, that the entire structure of Sinhalese
Buddhism is in danger, and that if this apathy of yours
continues, and no determined effort is made to reform the
abuses and dissensions that now prevail among both priests
and laity, in one more century all Ceylon will have become
infidel or Christian — probably the former.



138 Old Diary Leaves

** One more important idea has come to me. The children
of Buddhists should be taught their religion, regularly, on
specified days, at a specified hour, at every tempk in the
Island, How can we expect them to grow up strong
Buddhists if they are not taught the elements of their
parents’ religion in their childhood? The Christians do
not n^lect their children ; why should Buddhists neglect
theirs?”

It was the large endowments of the Vikaras by former
Buddhist sovereigns that demoralized the Order of the
Yellow Robe, so far as it was enriched. Private purity,
piety, and spiritual aspiration have never survived the
acquisition of wealth ; the spirit becomes less willing as the
flesh grows more and more pampered. However, we are
now at the parting of the ways, and the future of Ceylon
Buddhism looks brighter. To the spread of our educa-
tional movement we have every right to look, in Ceylon,
for that gradual raising of the popular intelligence and
purging of the national ideals which, infallibly and
invariably, react upon all priestly fraternities that develop
out of the body of the people.


CHAPTER XI.

REALITY OF THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

O F the various methods of propaganda, I am not sure
but that I should give first place to the conversazioni
at private houses. True that from the lecture platform one
addresses his hundreds or thousands, yet I doubt if con-
viction is so driven home to individual minds, if so many
real inquirers are made, and so many members won for
the Society, as when one is brought into close relation with
the smaller company of a drawing-room. This idea first
occurred to me on seeing Mohini leaning against the
mantel-shelf at Mr. SinnetPs house in London, and, after a
brief exposition of some given theme, answering, seriatim^
the questions put by the interested company. Since then I
have held many such soiries in various countries, and been
present at many at which the incomparable Mrs. Besant
was the expositor of our teachings, and my conviction
has been strengthened by experience. I can now recom-
mend the practice to all our Branches and groups with
perfect confidence. At the house of Mrs. Campbell-Praed,


140 old Diary Leaves

in Talbot Square, there was such a gathering on the
evening of May 24th, 1884, and by the request of our
gifted hostess I explained the principles and scheme of
our Society to as brilliant a party of literary notables as
even London could bring together. Questions followed
each other rapidly and were answered, and thus in the
simplest of ways everybody present came to know some-
thing of our great work. Conversazioni like this have
been constantly held over the United Kingdom ever since,
and, in fact, throughout the whole world wherever there
is an English Colony; for the literature of Theosophy
has penetrated everywhere, and in most countries its name
is familiar as household words.

On the evening of the 28th May, at the private house
where Mohioi and I w^ere guests, I tried the now famous
experiment with our colleague, Mr. E. D. Ewen, of Scot-
land, which suggested the means of proving the nature of
thought and the process of its evolution, that has been
several times described by me, but which has its place
also in this detailed historical sketch. As it interested
both Mr. (now Sir William) Crookes and Prof. Balfour
Stewart, besides other men of science, at the time, it is
not right that I should omit it from my present narrative.

The reader of Stewart and Tait's Unseen Universe
will remember its being said in that suggestive work that,
as the evolution of a thought is accompanied by a sort of
galvanic discharge from the grey matter of the brain, and
a3 this vibration passes beyond the periphery of the brain
into the ether, and no one can say bow far it n>ay ext^,



Reality of Thought-Transference 141

It is conceivable that the evolution of thought in a human
brain may affect a distant planet. (I am now quoting from
memory while writing on the ocean, and from a book read
many years ago, yet the above is substantially the idea as
expressed by the learned authors of the work in question.)
Now, this was but a scientific hypothesis, and at the time,
I believe, had not been experimentally supported. It was
my object to see if any facts could be obtained that might
throw light upon this great problem. Circumstances came
to my aid at this juncture. Mr. Ewen inherits from his
Scotch forebears the gift of second sight ; not one that he
can exercise at pleasure, but which comes sporadically; he
finds he has it on awaking some morning; the next, it is
gone and he cannot recall it at will, but must wait until it
chooses to reappear. It is usually active throughout the
day.

At that time I was, at the urgent request of the lad/s
husband, giving psychopathic treatment to a well-known
literary lady, and, with her permission, one day brought
Ewen with me. The lady was confined to her bed, and
I treated her as she lay. Mr. Ewen was present. I made
the “long passes” over her, downward from her chest
towards her feet : not always, however, with “ mesmeric
intention” — />., with concentration of the will — but
mechanically, yet without making the passes differently in
the one case than in the other. To my surprise, Mr.
Ewen suddenly said that he could see that my mind was
not always equally bent upon the work in hand; that
sometimes I made the vital fluid to flow from me, some-



142


Old Diary Leaves


times not : the difference was most palpable to his
clairvoyant sight. Thereupon, I put his powers to the
test, but found that he could unerringly distinguish my real
from my simulated curative passes. He described it to me
in this way : The patient’s body was enveloped in a pale
bluish aura, seemingly elastic and compressible, like a
loosely-inflated toy balloon. Over the pelvic region — the
seat of her disease — the aura was of a yellowish color.
When I made by will a curative pass with my hands,
there flowed from my finger-tips strong, clear streams of
vital force, in color a bright and clear sapphire. This
strong current, impinging upon the patient’s pale blue
aura, was met with a feeble resistance from the latter,
but, overcoming this by its own strong rush, it mingled
with the weaker aura, tinged it with its own hue, and set
it into quick vibration ; the result being a reinvigoration
of the invalid’s system, and the creating of a tendency
towards convalescence. I am convinced of the accuracy
of this description, and, in fact, in the case under mention,
the lady, instead of lying in bed for months, as her doctor
had predicted she must, was up and about within the next
ten days. The improvement was so striking, after even the
first treatment, that her medical attendant was astounded
at his next visit, and said she must have something uncanny
about her constitution, some extra spring in her machinery
that was out of the common run. This she conveyed to
me in a gleeful note the next day, and said that she and
her nurse were laughing together over the doctor’s illusion
as to the success of his remedies, and his ignorance of the



Reality of Thought-Transference 143

fact of my having treated her and thus put in the suspected
“ spring " that had worked such a wonder.

The evening after our visit to Mrs. M. C., I was called
upon by Mr. Herbert Stack to arrange for a meeting between
myself and the S. P. R. Committee, and, as he was a man
of high culture and of scientific tastes, I told him of Ewen^s
powers, and suggested that this would be a good chance for
us to see whether Stewart and Tait^s theory of thought-
evolution was a sound one. As our Scottish friend was
still possessed of the vision, and willing to assist in the
experiment, it was thus arranged : We were to sit in the
unlighted back drawing-room, he with his back to the solid
partition to the right of the sliding doors, we two facing
him, over against the opposite wall ; one of us was to con-
centrate his thought upon any subject he might choose ; if
Ewen should be able to fix the moment of concentration,
he was simply to say the word “Now ! ’’ and we all should
then be able to see whether his power extended so far or
not. The object in giving him but the one word to utter
was to preclude the necessity for his making any sustained
mental effort at the time when his consciousness would be
functioning on the other and higher plane. Two experi-
ments made by Mr. Stack were successful ; the moment of
mental concentration being detected by the clairvoyant
watcher. Mr, Stack then asked me to try, as, he said, I
was much more in the habit of doing these mental feats
than himself. Just as I was about to do so and Ewen was
all ready, it occurred to me that if I should hold Mr. Stack^s
hand and press it at the moment of concentrating my



144


Old Diary Leaves


thoughts, both he and I could know whether or not Ewen^s
power was real, and the evidence would be doubly strong.
So we agreed ; I took Mr. Stack’s hand, and, after a moment’s
calming of the mind, concentrated. Instantly, before I
could transmit the order to my finger muscles, Ewen cried
out “ Now ! ” and our plan was frustrated. I was vexed at
this, for some instinct made me anxious that the committee-
man of the S. P. R. should get such a bit of valuable proof
at first hand. His ingenuity, however, was equal to the
occasion, for he proposed that he should hold my hand
and give me the signal for concentration. This proved all
sufficient ; he pressed my hand, I fixed my thought, and
Ewen, as before, detected the moment of the act. So far
so good; we had now four tests between us two, but I
suggested, as an extension of the experiment, that we should
see if Ewen could trace the direction of thought if it were
fixed upon a certain point within the two rooms. Of the
two tests made, both were successes. The first time he
said : “ I think your thought is directed to the ceiling over
my head”; the second time he said : I see the thought-
current passing by me, to the left, as if directed to some
point in the front drawing-room.” In both cases he was
right: the thinker, at the second attempt, directed his
attention to a lady, Mme. De Steiger, who sat at the farther
end of the lighted front drawing-room,

Mr. Ewen’s description of the luminous appearance of
a thought-current was very interesting. When one concen-
trates his mind upon some subject, not of an exciting nature,
a shimmer of light goes forth from his brain, like the pulses



Reality of Thought-Transference 145

of light in an electrically charged cloud on a warm summer
night When, on the other hand, the mind sends its out-
flowing aura to a fixed spot or object, a ray darts from the
brain towards its target, like the flash of lightning in a
thunder-storm. These revelations, it will be remembered,
were made in May 1 884 ; they received no corroboration
for twelve years, but then the accuracy of Mr. Ewen’s obser-
vations was, I think, fully proven by those of other and
more highly trained students of occult science, as will
presently appear.

An acute scientific mind like Mr. Crookes’ could not fail
to be interested with facts like these, which pointed the
way towards a splendid field of psychological research. I
took Mr. Ewen to him the next morning and described
what Mr. Stack and 1 had seen. He frankly said that this
was an important matter, and he would like to follow it up
if Mr. Ewen would be so obliging as to lend his services to
the inquiry : he further wished to test the physical nature
of the thought-current, and see whether it would pass with-
out deflection through sheets of glass and other materials ;
whether the luminous wave could be focussed by lenses,
reflected by mirrors, etc.; in short, whether it had any
properties which would make it function on the physical
plane, in any degree to be tested by laboratory appliances.*
Unfortunately, Mr, Ewen’s clairvoyance had not shown

* Writing from memory, without notes, and so many thousand
miles away from London, I beg the indulgence of Sir William Crookes
for any minor inaccuracies that may have crept into my narrative of the
incidents of fourteen years ago.


10


1^6 Old Dkry Leaves

itself that <layi and he had to leave for Scotland in the
afternoon^ so that he could not aid in the suggested experi-
ments — much to his own regret, for he is deeply interested
in this branch of scientific investigation, and needed no
urging. At a large public meeting of the S. P. R., on the
evening of May 28th, Mr. Stack and I made our reports on
the preliminary experiments, and thus made it a matter of
historical record.

The bearing which this discovery has upon certain
familiar phenomena will be evident to the intelligent reader ;
for instance, the jettaiura and mal occhdo^ or killing glance
and “ evil eye,^’ with which certain persons are congenitally
cursed — the late Pope Pius IXth among them. Ignorant
persons like to call this a superstitious folly, but it must be
confessed that no popular belief has been more Strongly
supported by evidence. And it is one that is not confined
to one nation or country, but is spread all over the world
and recorded in all history. The glance of a human eye
may either soothe or slay, according to the mental impulse
behind it, provided that the person thought of is sensitive
to its vibration. Find the key-note of a glass vessel or
globe, and, by playing it with the right intensity on a violin,
the glass will be shattered, while no other note will affect it.
So man, the most sensitive of organizations, has each his
key-note which, if found and played by a thought-current,
will carry him out of his equilibrium, perhaps upset his
moral nature, or even destroy his life. The world-history
of magic and sorcery proves this amply. Thus, it is a
truism of ancient date that the hateful will^rr^t of a



Reality of Thought-Transference 147

btedc ouigician^ if hurled at a pure and saintly persoii, fails
to ham him and is dirown back against the sender, to his
possible destruction. No woman was ever seduced, no
youfiig man ever made a criminal, unless in their moral
systems there was some sympathetic tendency which had
been set to <^ivering and vibrating by the impact of the
influences <rf their environment. It was Horace who said j
Hie murus eeneus tsto^ nil conscire sihi^ nulla palhscere cu^a^
And the e^jpwence of mankind teaches that this innocence
of evil, this absence of consciousness of sin, is indeed a
wall of everlasting bronze about us. Mr. Ewen^s second-
sight makes it possible for us to realize the truth of this old
mystery. *801, also, does it make clear the rationale of the
x^arming power of animals and men. It has been denied
by some scientists that the bird-charming of serpents is a
fad^ yet here we have the key to it. We once had at Adyar
a yellow cat, which I have seen sitting under the branches
-of a tall tree and gazing up at a squirrel. The pretty little
rodent would move uneasily, squeal, and then drop to the
ground before the cat, which would quietly catch k and
carry it oif to her young. In Isis Unveiled (i. 380) is told
the story of Jacques Palissier, a French peasant of Le Van
“ who made a living by killing birds by simple wiU pawerl
His case is reported by a savant, Dr. D’Alger, who saw him
at work, and declares that the man, by mere^ fixing his
gazecKU a apar^w, robin, goldfinch, or meadow-lark, from a
•distaflace of twenty, twenty-five^ or even thirty pace§, would
mase st to drop paralysed on dae ground, when he would
wdk up to and do what he iiked witih it. If asked, he



148 Old Diary Leaves

would not completely paralyze his victims, but only partially,
and then restore them to animation. Or, if asked, he
would kill them absolutely, before laying his hand upon
them. Mme. Blavatsky says that this destructive current
is a “ bolt of the astral fluid,” or ether, and warns against
the misuse or cultivation of a power which enables one to
commit murder at a distance, without detection, leaving no
visible mark upon the victim’s person. In such cases, she
says, “the Coroner’s inquest will never disclose anything
but sudden death, apparently resulting from heart disease,
an apoplectic fit, or some other natural but still not veritable
cause.”

The great mesmerizer, Regazzoni, is reported to have
stricken down and instantly paralyzed a blindfolded girl-
subject, by his unspoken will, when the scientific observers
present requested him to give them this proof of his power.

The facts above cited deal mainly with the effect of a
thought-current which operates upon objects visible to the
eye. Many others offer themselves for use in the argument,
but I shall take only one or two. In India, if a cultivator
has a good crop of paddy or other grain that is likely to
excite the envy or cupidity of passers-by, he drives a stake
in the ground near the middle of the field, and hangs
on it an inverted clay pot {ghurra) with a grotesque face
smeared on it with lime, so that the evil glance may see
it first and be “ drawn ” before it can injure the crop ; for
it is the first glance that does the mischief. So, too, the
Hindu mother of a handsome child will smear its face
with some charcoal or mud to protect its young life from



Reality of Thought-Transference 149

the envious glance of some childless woman. This bolt
of hate or envy, if hurled, cannot quickly be followed
by a second, and hence these devices to draw it away
from its target.

If the reader will now turn to the number of Lucifer
for September 1896, and read Mrs. Besant's striking article
on ^‘Thought-forms,” he will see how completely her
observations and those of her advanced fellow-students
support the descriptions of Mr. Ewen, given me twelve
years earlier, and also the folk-lore teachings about the
evil eye, and the observed facts of healing of the sick by
gaze alone. Here she describes, from actual vision, the
luminous flashes of color that come when the thought
is of a general character, and the sharp, dagger-like, darting
flash when an evil thought is shot against an individual.
The colored illustrations given with the text make the
law of thought-evolution very clear to us. Her figure 4
shows a zigzag flash of dull red aura breaking out of a
mental storm-cloud, for all the world like the lightning-bolt
that rives an oak in a thunderstorm. This is the thought
of brutal violence, sent by a man who has just stricken
down a woman in an East London slum. The thought-
form in figure 5 is that of a murderer, and exactly like
the blade of a poniard. Such must have been the “air-
drawn dagger” that the guilty Macbeth saw, yet could
not clutch: a “one-pointed” thought, indeed; a wicked,
life-taking thought. Human speech is full of expressions
which indicate that their first users had an instinctive,
if not a clairvoyant sense of their fitness. For example,



150 Old Diary Leaves

the cemHion* e»e, “He looks dagger? at mej^ eacactfy
represents the shape and motion of a thought of hatred
when directed towards some one: a ^‘bright mind/^ a
“ sunny mood,” a “ clouded intellect,” the often reiterated
confession of the murderer that ‘^aH looked red about me,”
“green-eyed jealousy,” “his glance seemed to pierce me
through and through,” etc., similarly support these obserra-
trons of our clairvoyants.

The same rule holds as to the loving, helping, unselfish
thought that would help instead of harming, do good
instead of evil. No ocean is too wide, no continent too
vast, to obstruct the running of such a good thought to
rts goal. The ancient shastras teach that it will even
bridge the chasm of death, and follow its object into tire
trans-sepulchral states of existence. The moral to be drawn
from these observations, none the less powerful from its
being so evident, is that we have it in our power to ban
or bless our fellow-men by the one-pointed thought-currents
we send forth from our minds. But this has been indicated
by so many speakers and writers of our literature in that
of the ages which preceded our own, that I need not
dwdl upon it, but for the one moment needed to drive
k in upon the mind of everyone who aims at spiritual
advancement and the doing of good to the race.


CHAPTER XII.


THE PAINTING OF ADEPT PORTRAITS.

T WO days after the thought-testing experiments with
Mr. Ewen, I went to Paris and remained there a
fortnight with H. P. B. Meetings for the instruction of
inquirers were held at our own rooms in the Rue Notre
Dame des Champs and at those of several friends. Among
them was one at the palace of Lady Caithness, at which we
met M. Yves Guyot, the famous publicist, and some of
his friends as sceptical as himself about things spiritual.
H. P. B. and I were made by our hostess, to our great
discontent, to sit in two huge throne-like gilt arm-chairs,
as though we were royal personages holding a levee.
M. Guyot and the others drew from us a full explanation of
the principles of our Society and of the views of the Eastern
school of mystics as to the constitution of nature and the
alleged powers in man. All went well until they said they
would now feel obliged if we would show them the
phenomenal proof of the correctness of our teachings. I,
for my part, had not expected this, as Lady Caithness had


152


Old Diary Leaves


not prepared us for any such demand, H. P. B. refused
point blank to do the smallest marvel, and could not be
moved even by the urgent request of Lady Caithness. I
told M. Guyot that we had done what lay within our power
to explain the Eastern views as to states of matter beyond
those hitherto discovered by Western science, and must
leave him to accept, reject, or test them as might seem best
to him ; I assured him, however, from my own experience,
that if any man really wished to get the proofs at first hand,
he could do so if he would but take as much trouble as he
would cheerfully undergo to gain knowledge in any other
department of scientific research : but I regretted as much
as himself that Mme. Blavatsky was not willing to do as
much for him as I had often seen her do for other in-
quirers. But so it was, and we must leave the matter as it
stood for the present. Of course, M. Guyot and his friends
were much dissatisfied, but I never expected that a man of
his standing would descend to such insulting and disparag-
ing remarks about H. P. B. and myself as he did some
time later. As things turned out, I now believe that
H. P. B.^s stubborn refusal was a wise one, and that she
or those behind her foresaw that compliance would have
been worse than useless, for spiritual phenomena can only be
comprehended by the spiritually- minded, and to that class
M. Guyot most certainly did not belong. If H. P. B. had
shown him anything, the most that would have happened
would, probably, have been that, on leaving the house, he
would have said to his companions, “ I wonder how that
fraudulent old witch did that triclf/’ What be did sa^



The Painting of Adept Portraits 153

about us subsequently fully warrants the suspicion. I
fancy that he and Mr. Podmore and the late Prof.
Carpenter and some hundreds more of the sort, will have
to be reincarnated many times before they will be able to
understand the laws of spirit-action on this physical plane.

I first made the acquaintance of that illustrious man,
the late Prof. Charcot, at the Hospice de la Salpetriere,
Paris, on the 7th June 1884. I called there with Dr.
Combret, F.T.S., a former pupil of his, and the Professor
kindly showed me various experiments in hypnotism. This
subject has now become so widely known, that it is useless
for me to dwell at any length upon the things that were
shown me fourteen years ago. It must be familiar to most
of my readers, at least to those outside India, that there are
two very antagonistic schools among hypnotists, viz., the one
of Charcot at La Salpetriere, Paris, and the other of
Nancy, Lorraine, founded by Dr. Liebault and his great
disciple Dr. Bernheim. From a remote period there have
existed the two parties which these schools now represent,
and especially among alienists or physicians who treat
patients mentally deranged. The one party, that of
Charcot, attribute the abnormal mental and other
phenomena of hypnotic subjects to physiological causes ;
w'hile the other party, that of Nancy, trace them to
psychological, />., operative mental causes. My readers
will find the questions treated at length in back numbers
of the Theosophist* together with an account of my

* Vol. xiii. pp. 61 and 391 ; art. My Hypnotic Research in
FrvJce,”



154 Old Diary Leaves

experiments at the Salp^triere and Hopital Civil (Nancy)
m the year iSgi, The observations of 1884 were valuable,
as giving me my first chance to see for myself how far the so-
caficd new science of hypnotism agreed with the century -oM
science of mesmerism, which I had been studying for the
previous forty years. Dr. Charcot provoked in his patients
the three stages of hypnosis which he claims the credit of
classifying, viz. (1) the cataleptic; (2) the lethargic; (3) the
somnambulic. In the first, the position of the patients limbs
is easily changed by the operator, and every position given
them is unresistingly retained for some time ; in the second,
the subject is unconscious, and if a limb be raised and then
let go, it will fall like a dead weight, the eyes are relaxed
and the muscles abnormally excitable; in the third, the
eyes are closed, or half closed, the muscles may be made to
rigidly contract by gentle stimulation of the skin over them,
and many other phenomena are producable by suggestion.
The Nancy school admit the fact of all these phenomena,
but ascribe them solely to the influence of suggestion upon
the mind of the patient: “ suggestion covering not only
ideas conveyed to him verbally by the hypnotizer, but
also silently by gesture, or voluntary or involuntary move-
ments of his body, or even the expression of his face. No
one who has not made a deep study of the subject has an
idea of the tremendous potentialities included in this matter
of hypnotic suggestion : there is scarcely any limit to what
may be done by it as regards the control of one mind
ov^ another. Charcot produced for me an artificial
paralysis of a patient’s limb by applying to k a strong



The Painting of Adept Portraits 155

magnet: I can the same mthaut a magnet, without
even touching the patient with my hand, sim|^ by
suggestion; he transferred the paralysis from one arm to
the other by the same agency, viz., the magnet; I can
do it without one : so can a man of the Nancy school,
so can any experienced mesmerizer. Then why must we
believe the effect physiological when the provoking cause
is mentai and lies outside the physical system of the
subject ?

On the 13th June I returned to London in company
with Mr. Judge, who had come over from New York to
see us on his way out to India, his intended future field of
work. A little while before this I had instituted a friendly
competition between certain of our London associates who
were either professional or amateur artists, to try an impor-
tant psychical experiment. My earlier readers will recall
my description (see London edition Old Diary Leaves^
ch. xxiii. pp. 370-373) of the way in which my adept
Guru redeemed his promise that he would give me his
portrait at a convenient time. This was a profile likeness,
drawn by an amateur who was not an occultist, either
trained or untrained, and so, while the resemblance was
unquestionable — as I verified later in personal intercourse
— it did not show the soul-splendor that lights up an
adept’s countenance. Naturally, I wanted to get a better
portrait if possible, and bethought me to try whether my
sympathetic artistic colleagues in London could get clearer,
more life-like, spiritual glimpses of his divine face.
Upoft broaching the subject, the five — three professionals


156 Old Diary Leaves

and two amateurs — whom I addressed, very kindly and
willingly consented, and I lent each in turn the photo-
graphic copy of the original crayon sketch that I had
with me. The results were very instructive. One had
got the right idea of his complexion, another of his profile,
and a third, my respected friend Mme. De Steiger, of the
luminous aura that shimmers about his head. But neither
of the five was, on the whole, a better likeness than the
New York sketch by Monsieur Harrisse. Before this
competition was finished, Herr Hermann Schmiechen, a
very well-known German portrait-painter, domiciled in
London, joined the Society and, to my great delight, at
once agreed to have the inspirational test tried with him.
The photograph was handed him with no suggestion as
to how the subject should be treated. He began work
on the 19th June and finished it on the 9th July Mean-
while I visited his studio four times alone and once with
H. P. B., and was enchanted with the gradual development
of the mental image which had been vividly impressed
upon his brain, and which resulted in as perfect a portrait
of my Guru as he could have painted from life. Unlike
the others, who all copied the profile idea of Harrisse,
Schmiechen gave the face in full front view, and poured
into the eyes such a flood of life and sense of the indwelling
soul as to fairly startle the spectator. It was as clear a
work of genius and proof of the fact of thought-transference
as I can imagine. In the picture he has got all — the face,
complexion, size, shape and expression of eyes, natural
pose of head, shining aura, and majestic character* It



The Painting of Adept Portraits 157

hangs in the Picture Annexe of the Adyar Library that
I had built for it and the companion portrait which
Schmiechen painted of our other chief Guru, and on
entering the room the visitor feels as if those grand eyes
were searching his very heart. I have noticed the signs
of this first impression in nearly every case, and the feeling
of awe is enhanced by the way in which the two pairs of
eyes follow one about the room, still seemingly reading
one, no matter where he may take his stand. Then, again,
by some trick of the artist’s brush, the shining aura about
the two heads seems to be actually in a shimmery motion,
just as it is in nature. No wonder the religiously-minded
visitor finds himself, as it were, impressed with a sense
of the holiness of the room where the two portraits hang,
and meditative introspection is easier there than elsewhere.
Grand as they are by day, the pictures are even more
striking by night, when properly lighted, and the figures
seem as if ready to step out of their frames and approach
one. The artist has made two or more copies of the
portraits, but they lack the life-like character of the original ;
he evidently lacking the stress of inspiration under which
the latter were produced. As for the photographs which
were — against my passionate protest — permitted to be
made from the copies, they are as inferior to the originals
at Adyar, as a tallow candle to the electric light. And
It has made me inexpressibly sad that these glorious
faces, in cheap photographs, have been sold over the
counter by Judgeites, and published in a magazine and
a book by Dr. Hartmann.



fS8 Old Diary Leaves

Does it not seem as if this ^feregok^ expedient tibrew
a gmit light on the mystery of axt-inspiration, md helped
tts to see what makes the dilference between a greatt painter
or sculptor and the general rabble of the professioQS.
The great artist must be a man whose lower mind n
sensitive to the impressions that can be impressed on it
hy his higher, or spiritual, consciousness, and his -best
works would be produced in those so-called moments of
“inspirfftioii,** when this transfer of consciousness is going
on. Is it not illustrated in the case in point, when the
artist, guided and iired by an influx from without, paiivts
S»ch pictures as he cannot duplicate in his normal state
of independent mortality ? And is not the Titian, Rubens,
Claude, Cellini, Leonardo, Praxiteles, or Pheidias, one
who is open to the guidance of the Higher Self, capable
of receiving in “flashes” those race-lifting glimpses of die
divine reality behind these walls of flesh ? A point of
interest in this instance is that the Schmiechen por^aak
of my Guru was the seventh attempt to get a worthy
reflection of his image, for the helping of those who cannot
as yet go in sukshma sharira to the Ashram and converse
with him face to face.

At about this same time, in July 1884, occurred at the
house of our dear hostess, Mrs. Arundale, the afternoon
tcoeption by H. P. B. which Mrs. Oampbell-Praed has
«0 iwvaciously sketched in one of her novels, Affimties,
it brings the scene vividly to mind, and I can ’see *thc
lion-faced H. P. £. sitting d;iere, sinokixig her cig»rert<^
and resisting all the attempts of Pxo&ssois Barrett, Oliver



The Painting of Adept Portraits 159

Lcxjge, Coues, Mme, Novikoif, and several others to get
her 4o make some phenomena for them; the while, tio
insinuatingly kittenish and supple-framed American lady
sitting on the arm of her chair, and now and then snuggUng
her face under the old lady’s double-chin, to her evident
disapproval. 1 stood as spectator in the doorway, greatly
amused at the comedy that was going on. Mrs. Campbell-
Praed has it all in her story, down to the details of
Babula’s coming into the room, and Mohini’s participation
in the conversation and discussions.

The making of the acquaintance of Sir Edwin Arnold,
briefly alluded to in Chapter VIIL, was one of the notable
incidents of that London summer. I met him at the dinner
table of a well-known society lady, and shall not forget my
astonishment when he was pointed out to me by the lady
whom I took in to dinner. The reading of a poem or great
novel gives one a sort of ideal of the probable appearance of
its author. I had expected to find in the writer of the Ligki
of Asia a person of a romantic type of countenance, pale,
with delicate features, a dreamy eye, and a frame of rather
the feminine type ; instead of which, there sat at the
opposite side of the table a portly man, with a large nose
and mouth, thick lips, more of a worldly than cloistral look,
and wearing a black silk skull-cap. “You must be mis-
takejn,” I said to the lady, “ that cannot be Arnold I ” But
it was, as 1 found on going around and talking with him
aftw the ladies left the room. He kindly asked me to
iunch at his house, and was good enough to present me, as
above noted, with some pages of the original manuscript of



i6o Old Diary Leaves

the Light of Asia^ which are now treasured in the Adyar
Library. It was from that original that I read when we
celebrated, at Adyar, the first anniversary of the death of
our dear H. P. B., in compliance with the terms of her
Will.

In the same month I went to the seat of Lord Borthwick,
Ravenstone, in Wigtonshire, Scotland, on a visit, and thence
on to Edinburgh, where I founded the Scottish Theo-
sophical Society, with the late Robert M. Cameron as
President, and E. D. Ewen as Secretary. Despite the
liberalization of modern thought, the old Presbyterian
influence is still so strong in the Northern Capital, as to
prevent the very learned and influential men composing
this excellent Branch from openly avowing their interest
in our movement. Their names are concealed from the
public, and admission to their meetings barred against
all outsiders. It seems ridiculous that this should be so,
and I, for my part, if I lived in Edinburgh, would defy
the bigoted public to do their worst, even, if they dared,
to bum me for a heretic, rather than submit to such moral
slavery. However, men are not all of one opinion as to
these questions of expediency, and the spread of our ideas
goes on all the same, whether on or below the surface of
contemporary society. The only other country in the
world where we have encountered the same state of things
is Russia, where persecution is the order of the day for such
as dare swerve from the straight lines of the State religion.

On the day after the Branch was formed, I lectured
on ‘‘Theosophy” in the Oddfellows Hall, to a crowded



The Painting of Adept Portraits i6i

^ludience. The incident is worth recording for what
happened at the close. Among those who came up to shake
me by the hand, was a gentleman who said that the views
expressed in the lecture were identical with those which
he preached from his own pulpit. I found, upon inquiry,
that he was the most popular Presbyterian minister in
Edinburgh, and I must say 1 was astonished that he had
recognized in Theosophy the spirit of his particular form
of creed, for, having been brought up in it myself, I had
always associated it with all that was narrow, bigoted, and
hateful : the embodiment of religious tyranny. The con-
viction now sank into my mind that the followers of even
the most intolerant sects will soften and spiritualize their
creeds if themselves superior to them, and that even a
Scottish Presbyterian may, in exceptional cases, be as kind
to his fellow-men outside his sectarian fence, as though he
had not been brought up on the iron-and-thunder theology
of Knox and Calvin. Do we not see it exemplified in the
history of Islam ? At one time, the courts of its Khalifs
were homes of tolerance and religious amity ; at another,
hell-centres of bigotry and massacre. “In the tenth century,
says Draper, “the Khalif Hakem II. had made beautiful
Andalusia the paradise of the world. Christians, Mussul-
mans, Jews, mixed together without restraint. . . . All
learned men, no matter from what country they came, or
what their religious views, were welcomed. . . . His library
contained four hundred thousand volumes, superbly
bound and illuminated. . . . Almansor, who usurped
the Khalifate .... put himself ^t the head of the

ll



i62 Old Diary Leaves

orthodox party. He therefore had the library of Hakem
searched, and all works of a scientific or philosophical
nature carried into the public places and burnt or thrown
into the cisterns of the palace.” Averroes, the ornament of
Islam, a star of the first magnitude in the sky of learning,
“ was expelled from Spain .... denounced as a traitor to
religion. There was hardly a philosopher who was not
punished. Some were put to death, and the consequence
was that Islam was full of hypocrites.” *

This is the holding of the mirror up to human nature,
for what happened under the Khalifs has always happened,
is happening now, and ever will do the same. For the
moment, the learned men who belong to our Scottish
Branches may be forced to hide their connection with us,
and go to meetings under cover, but as surely as the sun will
rise to-morrow, the day is not far distant when Theosophy will
be preached, not in one but the majority of Scottish pulpits,
and it will be deemed an honor to hold our diplomas of
membership. For Scottish nature is but human nature,
and the national intellect is powerful beyond the average of
the intellects of human races, and cannot be prevented from
following wherever the thinkers of the past have been able
to soar. When the day of liberty dawns, then — as I
told the Edinburgh colleagues when forming the branch — I
shall expect Scottish Theosophists to outstrip all others in
spreading the Ancient Wisdom throughout the world.

On the 8th July there was an open meeting of the
London Lodge T. S. at the Prince's Hall, Piccadilly,

* Cmjlict between Religion and licieme^ p, 142.



The Painting of Adept Portraits 163

intended as a public and farewell demonstration to H. P. B.
and myself. Many distinguished people in science,
literature, diplomacy, and society were present, and
addresses were given by Mr. G. B. Finch, then President
of the London Lodge, Mr. Sinnett, Mohini, and myself.
My topic was “ Theosophy”; Mohini^s, “The Wisdom of the
Aryans ” ; and Mr. Finch’s, a welcome and farewell to us.

My next move was towards Germany, where what
happened was so interesting from the theosophical as well
as the personal point of view, that I shall reserve the
narrative for the next chapter.



CHAPTER XIII.


GERMAN EXPERIENCES.

I CROSSED from Queensborough to Flushing, on the
night of the 23rd July, in one of the splendid boats
that ply on that line, and reached Elberfeld (Germany)
at 3 P.M. the following day. A most sisterly welcome
was given me by Frau Gustav Gebhard, since, alas !
deceased. A sweeter or more loyal character I never met.
She was one of those women who shed about them an
atmosphere of love and virtue, fill their homes with sun-
shine, make themselves indispensable to their husbands
and adored by their children. Frau Gebhard possessed
for her colleagues in the T. S. the special attraction of
being a born mystic, and for many years a student of the
occult, so far as her family duties allowed. For seven
years she had been one of the two pupils of Eliphas Levi,*
and after the siege of Paris was raised, that half-starved
and ill-starred Occultist found generous hospitality in her
house for a long period. Her impressions of him were

* Baron Spedalieri was the other.

164


German Experiences 165

contorbtifed by hear to the Theosophist for January i88^.
She speaks very kindly and appreciatively of him aa a
learlied Kabbalist, a teacher, and a friend, but 'says that
his Epicurean nicety in the matter of eating was his weak
point and was often to her “a matter of wonder/^ AS
both of them are dead, there is no harm in my saying
that Mrs. Gebhard told me that Eliphas was an enormous
eater, craved rich food, both animal and vegetable, and
drank much wine at his dinner. Mrs Gebhards inter-
course with him was chiefly in writing, he taking her
through a long course of occult instruction by this medium.
A large portion of these teachings were, with the kind
permission of Frau Gebhard, translated for the TJieosophist,
and will be found in the volumes for 1884 (Supplement),
1885, and 1886. The Gebhard mansion was furnished
in the best taste, and, in the temporary absence in America
of Herr G. Gebhard, the host, his whole family vied with
each other in making the home delightful to their guests.
On the upper floor Frau Gebhard had an occult room for
herself^ where she had a choice library of rare books on
her favorite subjects, and on the wall a portrait from Hfe,
in oils, of her master, Eliphas Levi. It represented him
just as he is described by her in the article above men-
tioned — “ of a short and corpulent figure ; his face was
kind and benevolent, beaming with good nature, and he
Wore a long grey beard which covered nearly the whole
breast.” It was an intellectual face, but that of a man
whose attractions were for physical rather than for spbitual
things ; a face totally unlike that of the type of our Indiafi



1 66 Old Diary Leaves

Adepts, upon which the majesty of a divine aspiration is
enthroned. Two days after my arrival, the first of a group
of expected Theosophists came in the persons of Mme.
Haemmerle, of Odessa; Dr. Hiibbe Schleiden, of Ham-
burg ; and Dr. E. Coues, of Washington ; and on the follow-
ing day, at a meeting held in the “occult room,” our
first German Branch, the “ Theosophische Gesellschaft
Germania,” was formed. The officers elected were : Presi-
dent^ Dr. Hiibbe Schleiden ; Vice-President, Frau M.
Gebhard ; Treasurer, Consul G. Gebhard ; and Secretary,
Herr Franz Gebhard, the worthy son of excellent parents.
This was the beginning of the movement in the most in-
tellectual country of Europe, a field which in the course
of time must yield a splendid harvest, though, like Scot-
land, local causes will long keep back its full development.
While in Scotland our obstacle is the unexhausted power
of Calvinism, in Germany there are several, viz., the
tumultuous mental activity within the circle of pecuniary
interests, the enormous development of physical science
with its accompanying spiritual prostration, and the surviving
distrust of mysticism, mystical teachers, and systems, which
was caused by the overdose given to Germany by the
Rosicrucians, the Egyptian Masonry of Cagliostro, and
the misunderstood claims and labors of the mediaeval
alchemists. A century ago and more, Germany was the
centre and hottest nucleus of all this occult research, and
if we now see a reactive tendency, it is but the natural
working of unchangeable law. The capacity for this high
spiiritugl aspiration is innate in th^ German character, and



German Experiences 167

it is quite possible that in future some change of circum-
stances will bring it once more into activity. If it were
wise to do so, I might mention names of high Germans
secretly inclined towards our Theosophical ideas, that would
make my remark seem quite warranted ; but all will be
made clear in time. Meanwhile, my duty is to go on as
I have throughout so many years, keeping many secrets
about persons and things locked up in my breast, and
suffering myself and others to be maligned and misunder-
stood for the sake of the cause to which we have devoted
“ our lives, our fortunes, and our sacred honor.”

We have at Adyar a souvenir of the above incident, in
an excellent photograph of the group of friends who
assisted in forming the new German Branch, and Frau
Franz Gebhard has one of myself in an oil portrait for
which I gave her sittings. In the interest of the move-
ment in Germany, I left Elberfeld on ist August with
Dr. Hiibbe Schleiden for Dresden. It was on that day
that the good Doctor received in the train a letter from
one of the Masters which answered a question that he
had just then put to me. As his account of the incident
has been published by the S. P. R. (with their usual
sniffings and suspicions), there is no impropriety in my
saying that he had begun a conversation about certain
painful experiences of his early years, which he was then
relating for the first time, and about which he had not
spoken to Mme. Blavatsky. While we were thus occu-
pied, the railway guard came to the right-hand window
of the carriage for our tickets. I sat to the Doctor's Jeft.



i68 Old Diary Leaves

Ha took both his and my ticket and leaned to the right
to hand them to the guard, across the knees of the person
who sat to his right As he was resuming his seat, he saw
between his body and the next passenger a letter : it was
addressed to himself in the K. H. handwriting, was in a
Tibetan, or, rather, Chinese envelope, and its contents not
Only explained the cause of the misfortunes he had just
been complaining of, but also answered certain questions
he had addressed to H. P. B. (then in London) in a
posted letter, to which, in due course of mail, there had
not been time to receive her reply.* The case seems free
of taint of fraud, but the kind, generous S. P. R. critic
who reviews it hints at the possibility of an agent of (the
penniless) H. P. B. having been in the train with us !
Really, with such people is it worth while to waste time
in taking them seriously ? At all events, poor Dr. Hiibbe
was much cheered up and encouraged by the contents of
the letter, which, after all, was the principal thing. And
I too rejoiced in his joy — as my Diary records it.

At Weisser Hirsch, a summer resort near Dresden, we
visited that noble soul Herr Oskar von Hoffmann, a
gentleman in every instinct as well as action. He was
then engaged on a translation of Esoteric Buddhism^
which he subsequently published at his own cost. It was
at his house in Leipzig that Zdllner and the other
Professors of the Leipzig University held their memorable
seances with Slade, the medium, which confirmed Zdllner

* Second Report on H. P. B.’s Phenomena to the S. P. R.,
PP* 3«3-4^



German Experiences 169

in his theory of a Fourth Dimension. The Germans are
a handsome race, with a suggestion of the lion, very often,
in their faces, and Herr von Hoffmann was a marked
example of the type. Both he and his brother who resides
in England have been my dear friends for many years,
and the latter, especially, has helped the Society when it
most needed help.

The same evening Dr. Hiibbe and I called on Herr
Schroeder, the famous magnetizer, who does — or was then
doing — wonders in psychopathic healing. His method was
simplicity itself ; he sets up an auric communication with
his patient, and then just lets his superfluous vitality flow
into the other’s system until he is cured or helped, as the
case may be. Puts himself on tap, as one might say!
Well, that is what the Jewish doctors made the Shunamite
woman, Abishag, do for old King David, and it is scientific
therapeutics. After two more days at Dresden we went
to Bayreuth, where we were in time to attend a repre-
sentation of Parsifal in Wagner’s own theatre. The
performance lasted from 4 to 9 p.m., and was deeply
impressive. The effect was, in fact, indescribably grand.
The Doctor and I called on Baron Hans von Wolzogen,
Vice-President and Manager of the Wagner Verein. He
received us in his library, where he was standing at a high
desk correcting proofs of an article on “Theosophy and
Wagner.” The coincidence struck us all as strange, and
this impression was enhanced when, on hearing my natne,
he turned to a book-shelf and, with the remark that a
•friend at Helsingfors had sent it him the day before,



1 70 Old Diary Leaves

handed me a copy of my Buddhist Catechism^ gilt-edged
and bound in white velvet ! Wagner, he told us, was
deeply interested in Buddhism, and Parsifal was originally
written to represent the Buddha’s struggles after wisdom
and his attainment of the Buddhahood. But at the instance
of the kings of Saxony and Prussia and other august
patrons, he had recomposed it into its present form, a
search after the Holy Graal.

Dr. Coues and Herr Rudolph Gebhard, F.T.S., joined
us at Bayreuth in time to attend the opera, and Coues
went on with Dr. Hiibbe and myself to Munich, which we
reached at 8 p.m. on the 5th August and went to a hotel.
We called on Dr. Pranz Hartmann’s most estimable sister,
the Countess von Spreti, wife of a retired German army
officer, and visited the great galleries of paintings and
sculptures. The same evening those excellent people,
with a Captain Urban and Herr Diesel, another popular
mesmerizer, came and spent a pleasant time with us at
our hotel. It was here also that I first met Baron Ernst
von Weber, the veteran anti-vivisectionist, whom my Indian
colleagues will recollect as a Delegate from Germany at
one of our Adyar Conventions, and a F.T.S. who was
proud of the title. The next morning he accompanied Dr.
Hiibbe and myself to Ambach, the summer villa, on the
lovely Starnberger See, of Prof. Gabriel Max, the great
German painter. We returned to town in the evening, but
went back again the next day to Ammerland, another lake-
side bit of Paradise, where Baron Carl du Prel, the Philoso-
pher^ in the habit of spending his hot-weather seasoj^s,



German Experiences 17 1

He was a short, stoutish, hardy, sun-browned man, with an
honest face and a noble head, inside which worked one of
the grandest brains of our times. Du Prel was the most
esoteric and theosophical writer of his time in Germany.
We dined at Prof. Max’s. He is a short man also, with a
thick and long body, a great intellectual head, and is very
shy with strangers. We stopped at Ambach that night and
the next day and night, returning to Munich on the loth.
A most charming and memorable experience it was
throughout. Add to the grand company of high-thinkers,
a perfect, sunny day, a clear sky, a lakeshore spread with
velvety turf, picturesque villas, a smell of pines in the air,
and before us, open, like a heavenly mirror of cloud and
shore, the unruffled expanse of Starnberger See. Amid
such surroundings I admitted into the Society’s membership,
on the 9th, the Baron and Baroness Du Prel, Prof, and
Frau Max, the latter’s sister, Fraulein Kitzing, Count and
Countess von Spreti, Baron E. von Weber, and Captain
Urban. Mme. Haemmerle, of Odessa, had joined us on
the 8th, and was present in the capacity of an old member.
That there was some high talking may be inferred from
the quality of the company present. We returned to
Ambach by moonlight in rowboats. A few notes on
some of the new members will be interesting outside
Germany, where their personal history is less known than
it is at home.

Gabriel Max was born 23rd August 1840 at Prag;
studied there at the Academy from 1855-58, and in
Vienna until ? 80 ij returned to bis native town; in



17^ Old Diary Leaves

lIurj^Bed the world by a series of thirteen pictures
very effectually, yet fantastically, illustrated pieces of
music; from 1863-69 ccmtinued his artistic studies at
Munich, and has since become, by his various pictures,
one of the greatest artists of Germany. His subjects
are usually of a weird and mystical character. He is also
a great anthropologist, and owns a splendid ethnographical
collection.

Hiibbe Schleiden, Juris Utriusque Doctor, was born 20th
October 1846 at Hamburg; studied jurisprudence and
political economy; was, during the War of 1870-71, an
attacks of the German Consulate General in London;
travelled over almost all Europe, and lived in West Africa
from 1875-77. He is the author of several very important
works, and the author of the German colonial policy, his
statesmanlike scheme having been adopted by Prince
Bismarck, and since carried out by the Kaiser.

Baron Carl du Prel was born 3rd April 1839 in
Landshut (Bavaria) ; studied at the University in Munich ;
in 1859 entered the Bavarian military service, which he left
in 1872 as Captain. In 1868 he was graduated Doctor
Philosophise by the University of Tubingen for his magis-
terial work on dreams, and his fame was constantly en-
hanced by other books until his lamented death in 1898;
one of them. The Philosophy of Mysticism^ which appeared
in 1885, has been splendidly translated by my dear friend
C. C. Massey.

Such were the men who clustered about me on that
green slope by the shore of the sweet lake, which that



*73


German Experiences

unfortunate mad king Louis, of Bavaria, loved so romaa^
tically and covered with so sad a pall by his suicide in
its blue waters. My friendship with them remains un-
broken, although two of them have since retired from their
member^ip.

From Munich we passed on to Stuttgardt, Kreu2aiach, and
Heidelberg, where we, of course, visited the Schloss, the
giant wine-tun, and the other sights. We slept at Mainz,
and went thence to Kreuznach to pay a visit to Mme.
Haemmerle. This is a summer resort for invalids, aiKi is
very interesting to strangers. They have there an Ozone
Kurhaus (Cure house) which is very curious. The walls
are of birch twigs piled up on each other between the
timbers of a skeleton frame. A fine spray of water is
caused to trickle through the twigs from top to bottom,
and in evaporating is said to liberate ozone, which serves
as a very healing atmosphere for patients with weak lungs.
There are baths, fine gardens lit up at night, a splendid
band of musicians — one never hears a bad one in Germany
— and in the Bazar numbers of little shops where one can
buy at almost nominal prices jewelry and other objects in
agate, onyx, carnelian, and the other stones that are found
in the neighbouring mountains. Countess von Spreti and
Frau Max and her sister suddenly turned up, having deter-
mined to give us an agreeable surprise. Mr. Rudolph
Gebhard and I got them to consent to come on with us to
Elberfeld, our faces being now turned in that direetioo*
W« all aarlcd down the Rhine from Mainz to Cologne, and
iifr the ^y was bright, the steamboat good, and our oompany*



174 Old Diary Leaves

congenial) we had a very happy time of it. The cloud of
the Missionary plot was not yet visible, but it was
approaching.

The Gebhard mansion could contain us all, and the
next five days passed away like a bright dream. Dr.
Coues, whom we had left behind at Kreuznach, rejoined
us on the 15th (August) ; and on the 17th, H. P. B., Mrs.
Holloway, Mohini, Bertram Keightley, and Mrs. and Miss
Arundale came in a body from London. I gave up my
room to Countess von Spreti, and went over to Mr. Franz
Gebhard*s villa. Herr Consul G. Gebhard had returned
from America, and was the very type of an ideal host.
In fact, I never met a more courteous gentleman nor more
sympathetic friend. We celebrated his birthday on the
1 8th with enthusiasm. Mme. Hsemmerle arrived that day
from Kreuznach. On the 19th the Munich ladies left
and Dr. Hiibbe arrived. Dr. Coues departed on the 20th,
and Mme. Haemmerle on the 21st. The reader may
imagine the tone of conversation that went on during this
memorable week, with H. P. B. sparkling like champagne
with her witty talk, and everybody contributing his or
her best to the enjoyment of the others. Dr. Hiibbe,
debilitated by severe mental work, left us to go to the
Black Forest to recuperate his nervous system in the
balsamic air of that vast piney wood. This reminds me
that I have omitted mentioning an important incident of
my visit to Prof. Gabriel Max.

In the compound of the villa stood some majestic old pine
trees, under whose shade it was pleasant to lie and look out



175


German Experiences

Upon the lake. It suddenly came to my mind that I had
been told that a certain Adept in Tibet is in the habit of
lying at the foot of a pine tree, resting his back against the
trunk, and so absorbing into his system the pure healing
aura of the tree. Now, as I have already said, my nervous
system had been pretty effectually drained of vitality by the
thousands of sick folk whom I had treated psychopathically,
and I did not recuperate; my general health was perfect,
but the ganglia along the spinal tract felt empty; after
five months of rest it was no better. So I tried the
tree experiment. It worked like magic, the aura poured
through my system, and within two days I was as well as
possible.

“ H. P. B. savage,^' is one of my Diary entries of 24th
August ; which means that she was in a mood the opposite
of mild, and that we all caught our share, of the thunder-
bolts ! She had an attack of rheumatism, poor thing !
besides her regular ailments. On the evening of the 25th
there was a letter phenomenon, strange and convincing
enough to satisfy even Mr. Rudolph Gebhard, one of the
cleverest conjurers in Europe. He described it in his
address before the Annual Convention at Adyar in
December 1884, which he attended as a Delegate (vide
Official Report of that year’s Anniversary, p. ni). He
said that “ from the age of seven he had studied conjuring.
At the age of nineteen he went to London, and took
lessons from Professor Field, the best sleight-of-hand man
there. He had met the leading conjurers of the day
and had exchanged tricks with them. He had made a



176 Old Diary Leaves

special study of sleight-of-hand. He then gave an inter-
esting account of the dropping of a letter fronj a pictoe
ki the drawing-room of his father^s house while Mme.
Blavatsky was in the room. The letter was (by request)
addressed to the speaker's father, and treated of the
exact subject he was thinking about at the time. He
offered a reward of rs. looo to anyone who would repeat
the same thing under the same conditions. He was
himself an amateur conjurer and had his eyes open.”
(Cheers.)

In passing judgment on this incident, one important
fact is to be considered, viz., that the company present,
some twelve or fifteen in number, themselves voted that
the letter, if any should come, was to be addressed to
Herr G. Gebhard and to be a test to him. They might
equally as well have had it addressed to any other person
in the room, and as the choice was made only a minute
or so before the letter dropped on the piano, it is bard to
imagine a more self-evident proof of H. P. B.’s real power
to effect these phenomena.

Happily, wc have now passed beyond the cycle of psycho-
phyacal phenomena of this sort since poor H. P. B.^s
death, yet, all the same, they were of the greatest import-
ance at that time, and did more than anything else could
have done to focus public attention on the Society and
open the way for the diffusion of the ideas of which
it was the channel. Prof. Max Muller has done me*
persoi^ly, a wrong in declaring and repeating kx

print that in a private conversation between us, at hie



German Experiences


177


house in Oxford, I had spoken of false miracles as the
natural manure of new religious movements, with the
implication that if H. P. B.’s phenomena were of that
category it was all right. I cannot lay my hand upon
the place where the statement occurs, but I believe he
first printed it in the Nineteenth Century^ and repeated it
in a Gifford Lecture, though of this I am not sure.
The important fact is that — probably without malevolent
intention, and only because he misunderstood my remark—
he made me appear to uphold trickery and falsehood as
a necessary means for pushing a religious movement. As
we were alone in his library when the conversation occurred,
it becomes a question of his memory against mine, and all
I can do is to solemnly deny having ever said anything
that would bear such a construction, and offset it with the
record of my whole life, which in nothing shows me to
have been governed by such low principles. My word
will go as far as Prof. Muller's with those who know
me intimately. What I did say was that “ miracles ’’ had
attended the birth of all religions, and that when real
phenomena had not been forthcoming, the priests usually
employed bogus ones as manure for their crops. But
that had no reference to the Theosophical movement, and
it was only Prof. Muller’s hatred of it which caused him
to misunderstand me. “You have done nobly,” he said,
“in helping so much to revive the love for Sanskrit, and
the Orientalists have watched the development of your
Society with the greatest interest from the commencement.
But why will you spoil all this good reputation by pandering



178 Old Diary Leaves

to the superstitiqus Ikncies of the Hindus, by telling them
that there is kr esoteric meaning in their Shastras ? I know
the language perfectly, and I assure you there is no such
thing as a Secret Doctrine in it.” In reply, I simply told
the Professor that every unspoilt {ue., un westernized) Pandit
throughout all India believed, as we did, in the existence
of this hidden meaning; and that, as for the Sidihis, I
personally knew men who possessed them and whom I
had seen exhibit their powers. “Well, then,” said my
erudite host, “let us change the subject.” And we did,
and since then, and until his death, he attacked us and
our movement whenever the spirit moved him.

Several other letter phenomena occurred during our stay
at Herr Gebhard’s house, but I need not relate them, as
the one above described will do for all. Among the visitors
of H. P. B. was that talented Russian Solovioff, whose
book, which appeared long after dear H. P. B.’s death
made it safe for him to tell his falsehoods about her,
shows him to be as heartless and contemptible, though
fifty times more talented, than the Coulombs. On the ist
September he related to all of us the wonderful waking
visit he had had from an Adept and the striking phenomena
attending it, not as a questionable delusion of the senses,
but as an actual experience so perfect and redistic as to
banish all theory of doubt. But, as Prof. Max Muller
said, “let us change the subject.”



CHAPTER XIV.


THE COULOMB MISSIONARY CONSPIRACY.

O UR last chapter brought us up to the ist September.

There were more days of sunny friendships and bright
surroundings at Elberfeld, but on the loth day the first
growl of the coming tempest was heard, for we received from
Adyar a lugubrious letter from Damodar, intimating that
the Missionaries were hatching a plot, evidently with the
help of Mme. Coulomb. He said that this woman was
going about here and there, breathing vengeance against
H. P. B. and the Society. The members of the Board of
Control, to which I had confided the management of our
affairs at Headquarters, became so tired of her and her
wretched gossip, that they tried to get her and her husband
to go to Colorado, where Dr. Hartmann offered to present
them with a gold-mine claim of his. They were both willing
and anxious to go, and a day for their sailing, vid Hong
Kong and San Francisco, had been agreed upon, when they
spoilt everything by saying that they held compromising

letters of H. P. B.’s, and that if they did not receive a bonus

179


i8o Old Diary Leaves

of rs. 3000, they should give the letters for publication.
Of course, that stopped all negotiation ; the Board held a
meeting to which the accused were summoned, affidavits of
their slanders were read in their presence, and they were
expelled from membership in the Society. Then came a
wrangle and contention about their quitting our premises,
they contending that Mme. Blavatsky had left her rooms in
their custody, and that they should not leave Adyar until
an order was received from her to that effect. Under
advice of counsel, the Board wrote and cabled H. P. B. to
send the required order ; she cabled it back, and at length,
after weeks of most disagreeable disturbance, the worthy
couple were turned out of the compound, and went
and settled themselves at St. Thom6 in a house pro-
vided for them by the gentle, Christlike Missionaries!
Their bombshell mortar battery was fired off in the
September number of their Madras organ, the Christian
College Magazine^ and then they stood by to see the super-
structure of the Theosophical Society crumble and bury its
founders beneath the ruins. No reasonable person was
deceived by the pretence that the employment of the self-
discredited Coulombs as tools to attempt our ruin was
“ in the interest of public morals ” ; the partisan spirit
underneath the attack shone clearly through. If it had
been a question of attacking the leaders of one of the sects
of their own religion, it is very doubtful if the interests of
public morals would not have been left to take care of
themselves ; but when the chance of discrediting the Society
which of all others had the strongest hold upon the Gon«



The Coulomb Missionary Conspiracy i8i

fidence of the Indian peoples offered itself, the temptation
was irresistible, and even such unsavory accomplices as
these were paid their price — partly in cash, partly in
promises — and the Rev. Mr. Alexander is said to have
served as their literary chef de cuisine. Very ably, too.

Naturally enough, so sensational an article achieved instant
notoriety ; the Calcutta correspondent of the Times cabled
its substance to that paper on September 20th, and it very
soon became known throughout the whole civilized world.
Only by the reaction was it now seen how widespread the
interest in our views had become, and it is doubtful if any
Society had ever before had to sustain so terrible an attack.
It almost seemed as if the very reactive bitterness of public
denunciations of Mme. Blavatsky was the strongest proof
of the deep impression which her revelations of the existence
of the Eastern School of Adepts, their individual characters
and spiritual attainments, and the part they play in the
progress of our race, had made on the public mind.

Though I have traced the development of this conspiracy
to its culmination within a single paragraph, weeks passed
between our first warning from Damodar and the appear-
ance of the Calcutta despatches in the Times, These were
weeks of painful anxiety to us and others, but to H. P. B.
herself of strong mental agony. Her supersensitive tem-
perament made her suffer mental tortures proportionate to
the length of her enforced inaction. A perfect parallel can
be found in the case of my distinguished compatriot
J. Fenimore Cooper, the author, of whom his biographer,
Prof, Lounsbury, says;*—


I $2 Old Diary Leaves

‘‘The extent to which Cooper was affected by hostile
criticism is something remarkable^ even in the irritable race
of authors. He manifested under it the irascibility of a
man not simply thin-skinned, but of one whose skin was
raw. Meekness was never a distinguishing characteristic
of his nature ; and attack invariably stung him into
defiance or counter-attack.”*

What H. P, B. could do under the circumstances, she
did. She wrote to the Times of October 9th, d©nouiM>ing
the alleged private letters of herself to Mme. Coulomb
as forgeries, and in published interviews in the Pall
Mall and other journals declared her intention of return-
ing to India and prosecuting the Coulombs and the
Missionaries for libel. Following her letter to the Editor
of the Times, appeared one from Mr. St. George Lane-Fox^
who had just returned from Madras, and who said that^ in
GOmnfK)!) with all who were acquainted with the circum-
stances of the case, he had “ no doubt whatever that,
whoever wrote the letters, they were not written by Mme.
Blavatsky”; moreover, that he did “not believe that the
true theosophic cause suffers in the slightest degree.” The
accuracy of this judgment has been abundantly proven
by subsequent events, for, as statistics show, the growth and
strength of the theosophic movement have, year by yeari
been double what they had been up to the moment of the
attack.

1 have no intention at this late day to flog this dead

* James Penimore Cooper^ by ITiomas R. Loiltisbury, London, !S 84 r
Kegan Paul, Trench & Co.



The Coulomb Missionary Conspiracy 183

horse ; the public have taken their sides, H. P. B. has cast off
the burden of her earthly sorrows, and time is daily vindicat-
ing her greatness of character and dignity of life-aims. Her
personal faults and weaknesses are well-nigh forgotten, and
her reputation now rests upon the books she gave us, whose
paramount value is being brought to view after the dust and
smoke of the conflict have passed away. In company with
Mr. Rudolph Gebhard, I returned to India in the first half
of November, and Mme. Blavatsky followed in December,
bringing with her Mr. Leadbeater and Mr. and Mrs. Cooper-
Oakley, of London, and three Delegates from Ceylon, to
attend the Annual Convention. Dr. Hartmann and I had
joined the party at Colombo, whither I had gone to report to
the Sinhalese the grand results of my mission to London
in their interest.

Before her departure from Europe, H. P. B. received the
most gratifying proofs of the unshaken' confidence of our
European colleagues in her integrity; the London Lodge
and the German and French Branches unanimously adopted
resolutions of a complimentary character, and the first two
cabled their decisions out to Adyar. Meanwhile letters and
telegrams poured into Headquarters from the Indian
Branches, and the reports from our colleagues of the Board
of Control — all of which are now lying on my table as
I write— became bright and reassuring; we felt that the
storm had passed without doing us such grievous damage
after all.

Landing at Bombay on November lo, I lectured on the
rath, on ** Theosophy Abroad,” in Frantji Cowaifjti Hall, to



184


Old Diary Leaves

a packed audience, and one of the most enthusiastic I ever
addressed. Madras was reached on the isth, and what
sort of reception I had the local papers of the day show.
More than 300 students of the very Christian College whose
professors had attacked H. P. B., and a large number of
our Society members, met me at the station, with cheers, a
band of musicians, addresses, garlands, and perfume-
sprinklings. Their joy and enthusiasm seemed boundless.
The address read to me by the school-boys is very flowery,
but quivers with true affection. In certain of its sentences
they touch the very heart of the mystery of the failure of the
Missionaries to weaken our hold on the Indian public — for
a mystery, indeed, it must have seemed to them. These
Indian lads identify the Theosophical Society with the
revival of Sanskrit Literature, the reconciliation of Religion
with Science, the throwing of light upon man^s future state,
the welding of the “ incohesive ” Indian castes and creeds
into one brotherhood feeling of mutual sympathy, and the
defence of Aryan wisdom and Hindu honor against all
critics and all comers. With such convictions as these
possessing their minds, and with such thrills of gratitude
pulsing through their hearts, the poor conspiracy against
H. P. B. and the Blessed Ones was foredoomed to failure —
nay, was predestined to do us infinite good instead of infinite
harm in the long run. One sees this in the tone of the
influential Indian journals of the day. Noticing the return
of Mme. Blavatsky and her party, the Indian Mirror of
December 20 said : —

**The Hindu community, in general, is the more attracted



The Coulomb Missionary Conspiracy 185

to Mme. Blavatsky, because they believe that the Mission-
aries have, in reality, attacked the ancient Hindu religion
and philosophy under the guise and pretence of exposing
the lady’s ‘trickery.’ On that account the feeling of
the Native community against the Missionaries and for
Mme, Blavatsky is very strong.”

The Indian Chronicle said : “ We are not Theosophists
ourselves .... but we have a great respect for the founders
of the Theosophical Society. It is the only foreign move-
ment which appeals to the national feeling of India ....
and instead of being made the butt of ridicule, and its leaders
the subject of persecution, it ought to be patiently nourished.
The Christian scoffers .... are perhaps not aware that
the existence of Mahatmas .... is universally believed
throughout India, and it is preposterous to suppose that
the Padris of Madras will do any serious harm to that
belief. . . . Theosophy, though it may have to bear much
temporary annoyance .... will come out of the fiery
ordeal purer for having gone through it.” The Sahas of
3rd November expressed the same opinions, saying that
the Hindus believed in occult science before we two
persons were born, and that this belief — in the case of
hundreds, knowledge — cannot be affected by anything that
may happen to us. The Amrita Bazar Fatrika said that
the Christian accusers were incapable of grasping the possi-
bility of facts such as Theosophy dealt with, but the Hindus,
knowing Yoga, believe in the Mahatmas implicitly. In trying
to discredit the existence of such men, the Missionaries, as
the tone of the whole Indian press showed, were slapping



1 86 Old Diary Leaves

the faces of, and oifering deadly insult to, the whole Indian
people.

Her reception at Madras on her return was even more
tumultuously joyous than mine had been. She was met at
the pier by a large Committee, garlanded, along with her
party of fellow-travellers, and escorted in procession to
Pacheappa’s Hall, where an assemblage that crowded the
place to suffocation was waiting. They rose to their feet
and gave vent to their feelings in a roar of cheers and vivas,
as she slowly walked through the press to the platform, her
hand nervously gripping my arm, her mouth set like iron, her
eyes full of glad light and almost swimming in tears of joy.
The new-comers from London received each a separate
ovation also. Mr. C. Ramiah, the Tahsildar of Madras,
bade her welcome on behalf of the local Branch ; Judge P,
Sreenevasrow requested permission for the address of the
Christian College and other College students, bearing some
500 signatures, to be read ; and she assenting, it was read by
A. G. Krishnasawmy Iyer, a student of the Christian College,
amid great excitement. When the outburst of cheering at
the end had somewhat subsided, H. P. B. made her first
and, so far as I know, only speech from a public platform.
She said that ‘‘ of all the letters published, not a single one,
as it stood, had been written by her. She would deny them
all in toto .... she would be the greatest fool in the world
to commit herself so that she might be fairly accused of
such vile, disgusting things. ... As for her accusers, she
and the Colonel had treated them with all possible kindness,
and what should she say of their going over to the enemy’s



The Coulomb Missionary Conspiracy 187

campf when her back was turned, and selling her like Judas
Iscariot? She had not done anything against India of
which she should be ashamed, and she was determined to
work for India while there was health in her/* (Report in
the Madras MatL)

Other speeches were made by Mrs. Cooper-Oakley,
Mr. Leadbeater, and myself, which were vehemently
applauded, and the presentation of garlands and bouquets
to H. P. B. and the rest of us terminated the proceedings*

H. P. B. came back fully determined to prosecute the
Coulombs and the Missionaries; she had so declared in
London and so wrote me from Cairo, where she had
stopped some time to collect testimony about the ante-
cedents of the Coulombs. From thence Mr. Leadbeater,
then an Anglican curate, or clerk in Holy Orders, wrote
to the Indian Mirror (issue of Dec. 16) about what he
and the others had discovered — facts certainly not much
to the credit of these champions of “ public morals.** He
says that the information, derived from the members of
Mr. Coulomb*s own family, showed that his (M. C/s)
wife, formerly a Miss Emma Cutting, had been employed
for a short time as governess in the family of S . , . ♦
Pasha, “but was expelled from his household upon the
discovery that she was endeavouring to instil vicious ideas
into the minds of her charge ** ; that she pretended to be
able to see clairvoyantly buried treasures; that several
were induced to dig where she told them, but discovered
nothing save once, when they found some dcmbloofis-^
which a little girl had seen her place in the hole the



1 88 Old Diary Leaves

night before.” Mr. Leadbeater further says that he was
assured by Mr. Gregoire d’Elias, Vice-Chancellor of the
Russian Legation at Cairo, that he knows Mme. Blavatsky
intimately, and saw her daily during her (former) stay there,
and ‘‘esteems her most highly, and has never till now heard
the slightest reflection on her moral character.” I think
we may fairly ofl*set this testimony of a high Russian official
against the calumnious falsehoods of an accuser like Mme.
Coulomb. And a fair-minded person would be disposed
to look with great suspicion upon her statement that
Mme. Blavatsky, one of the most brilliant women of her
time, had put her reputation so completely in her power as
the wretched letters in question would show. Of course,
never having seen the letters themselves, nor being as
infallible in determining the genuinesses of handwriting as
professionals like Netherclift and Berthelot — the Govern-
ment expert in the recent Zola trial, who made as ridiculous
a failure about Dreyfus’s writing as the other did about
Parnell’s — I cannot express any opinion as to their
genuineness; moreover, since poor H. P. B. is dead, the
truth will never be known * ; but I can and do say, for the
hundredth time, that I have had numberless proofs of
H. P. B.’s occult powers, of the clear altruism of her
motives, and the moral purity of her life; and I thrust

* In his Leaves from a Life^ p. 263, Mr. Montague Williams, Q.C.,
says that in a case in which he appeared, Netherclift and Chabot swore
positively to a writing as that of a certain man, and it was proved to be
by quite another one ; that their evidence from handwriting is quite
worthless. **In fact,” he says, “in my opinion they are utterly
unreliaUe.” ** #



The Coulomb Missionary Conspiracy 189

those old scrap-books and bundles of letters and papers
back into their boxes, with the sense of relief that one
feels on putting out of sight a loathsome thing. Yet not
until I have shown why H. P. B. never redeemed her
promise to prosecute the Coulombs ; for that fact has been
used ever since to her discredit, and most unjustly.
Fortunately, it is all a matter of record. For it, we must
now turn to the Annual Report of the T. S. for the year
1884.*

She sent me from Cairo the following cable: “ Success com-
plete. Outlaws. Legal proofs. Sail Colombo, Navarino*'
The meaning of this is that she had what she regarded as
legal proofs of the fact that the Coulombs were outlaws
who had fled the country to escape arrest for fraudulent
bankruptcy. This I learnt on reading the written state-
ments of reputable witnesses which she brought with
her; statements which, however suggestive as to the line
of inquiry that should be followed up in case the matter
should come to trial, I saw at once were not in form for
production in Court. Acting without legal advice, she had
made a mess of the affair. From the day she landed, she
kept urging me to take her to a judge, or solicitor, or
barrister, no matter which, for her to file her affidavit and
begin our action, but I positively refused. I told her that
within the next few days the Convention would meet, and
that our paramount duty was to lay her case before the
Delegates, have a special Committee formed, of our ablest

* Cf. also my article on the ^eath of H. P. B. in Theosophiit for
August 189x4



J90 Old Diary Leaves

kwf€rs, and let them decide what steps she should take 5
that she and I had so merged our personalities into the
Society, that we ought not to move until we should know
the wish of our colleagues. She fretted and stormed and
insisted, but I would not stir from my position, and, when
she threatened to go by herself and “ wipe this stain off her
character,” I said that I should, in that case, resign my
crffice and let the Convention decide between us : I knew
too much about legal practice to do any such foolish thing.
She then yielded.

The Convention met in due course on the 27th, and
in my Presidential Address I laid the matter before it.
The following paragraphs will be pertinent to our present
narrative : —

^ With regard to the proper course for Madame Blavatsky
to adopt in the matter of a lawsuit, there is a difference of
opinion among her friends. She herself naturally feels
anxious to go to Court with her proofs, and have her
accusers punished. That was her first thought when we
received the news in London, and I am not aware of her
having changed her opinion. Some of her friends and all
her enemies also urge it. Her assailants especially display
a very eager and unanimous, not to say suspicious, anxiety
for her to do so. But the vast majority of our members
throughout the world have expressed a decided objection to
this course. Their opinion is that, do what our counsel
may, it will be impossible to avoid having the trial of
Madame Blavatsky*s reputation turned into a trial of the
truth of the Esoteric Philosophy and of the existence of the



The Coulomb Missionary Conspiracy 19 1

Mahatmas, and, as these are subjects the most sacred, not
only to Hindus but to occultists of all religions .... the
prospect is shocking to their feelings. They represent that,
in view of the angry prejudice against us among the Anglo-
Indians as a class, the utmost latitude is likely to be given
to opposing counsel to ask the most insulting questions,
and goad to desperation our witnesses, especially Madame
Blavatsky, whose extreme nervousness and excitability all
know. This strictly within the limits of legal practice, and
without our having any redress. I have the written opinion^
of eminent London counsel upon this point, which will be
submitted for your consideration. In face of this diver-
gence of opinion, and in deference to the views of so many
of the leading men in our Society, I have represented to
Madame Blavatsky that it is her duty to be governed l^ the
sense of the General Council and not undertake to decide
for herself. ... If for (the Society's) sake we should he
required to sacrifice even our lives, we ought to be ready to
do it without a moment's hesitation. And, finally, I have
insisted that the present imbroglio shall be unreservedly
laid before a special Committee of the best lawyers and
judicial officers, selected from among the Delegates, who
^all be required to examine persons apd papers, ^nd sub-
mit their recommendations for the decision of the Convention
b^for^ its final adjournment ; she to hold herself re^dy to
sue or not to sue her traducers, as the Convention may order.
To this she has with some reluctance finally consented.”

A Committee was chosen, and, before the adjourpnipn}^
duly reported as follows ; — *



193 . W Ciarr Les9^

■* " . ] ■ ■ ■ I f jr - fi.-‘

^ ^*Jte$ohitd.^That th^ letters published to Ubi

Magazine under the heading Collapse^ Stool
Hooisu,** are only a pretext to injure the cause of Theosophy ;
aud as these letters necessarily appear absurd to those who
are acquainted with our philosophy and facts, and as those
who are not acquainted with those facts could not have their
opinion changed even by a judicial verdict given in favor
of Madame Blavatsky, therefore it is the unanimous opinion
of this Committee that Madame Blavatsky should not
prosecute her defamers in a Court of Law. Signed by
Norendro Nath Sen,^ Chairman \ A. J. Cooper-Oakley,*
Secy. ; Franz Hartmann, M. D. ; S. Ramasamier ® ; Naoroji
Dorabji Khandalvala ^ ; H. R* Morgan, Major-General ;
Gyanendranath Chakravarti, M.A. Nobin K. Banneiji ® ;
T. Subbarow ^ j P. Sreenevasrow ® ; P. lyaloo Naidu • \
Rudolph Gebhard ; R. Raghoonath Row ; S. Subramania
lyer.^^ The high character and competency of this Com-
mittee cannot be questioned, and if a client is ever justified
in acting in legal matters under the advice of counsel,
assuredly H. P. B. was in this case.

In the course of the debate upon the above Report of the
Committee, Babu Norendranath Sen cited the case of an

^ Editor Indian Mitrcr, Honorary Magistrate, Calcutta ; now a
Member of the Legislative CounciL * M.A (Cantab.) ; now Registrar,
Madras University. * District ftq^rar, Madura. * Judge. * Rst-
merly Professor of Mathematics, Allahabad ; now Inspector of Schools.

* Deputy Collector and Magistrate. ^ B.A, B.L., Pleader*

Court, Madras. ® Judge. • Deputy Collector (Ret). “ Deputy
Collector, Madras, formerly Prime truster, Indore. ^ Since knighted
by H.M. Government, and now a Tustice of the Comi.

Madras.


The Coulomb Missionary Conspiracy 193

metton for libel brought by his cousin, the late Keshab
Chunder Sen, and said that “ the position of plaintiff in an
Indian libel case is much worse than that of defendant.^*
This was his professional experience as a Solicitor of many
years’ standing. Judge Khandalvala said that, after giving
the Coulomb letters a careful study, he was convinced that
the one in which his own name occurred was “a perfect
forgery.” General Morgan said that, for reasons stated, he
believed that the whole series of letters were forgeries.
Judge Sreenevasrow narrated the circumstances which
attended his own receipt of Mahatmic letters, and which
made a deep impression on his audience ; finally, he felt
convinced that there was no legal proof of the genuineness
of the letters in Mme. Coulomb’s possession: “at the best
it is but a matter of oj union.” Mr. (now High Court Judge)
S. Subramania Iyer’s remaiks were full of the luminous im-
partiality and common-sense which have elevated him to
his present position on the Bench.

“ From my experience,” he said, among other things, “ I
know the difficulty of proving the genuineness of letters in a
Court of Law, a difficulty which has existed in cases in
which I have been engaged myself. It is merely a question
of opinion, and I would ask if it is not better to form such
an opinion from the evidence embodied in a pamphlet than
by the surrender of one’s judgment to the verdict of a Court
of Justice. The question is whether this Society, putting
itself forward as a Society for the promotion of peace and
Ollier, is justified in making an appeal to a Court of Justice
ill this matter. I think that every reasonable man is at

13


194


Old Diary Leaves

liberty to form an opinion on the evidence placed before
him .... without going into a Court of Justice in which re-
sults are very often contrary to the truth. If Theosophy has
only strength in itself, I consider it will survive such difficul-
ties. . . . We cannot bind Madame Blavatsky, but as a
member of our Society I do not think it is the proper
course for us to give the world the spectacle of a spite-
ful cross-examination. Many are insisting that it will
be necessary, simply because it would make an interesting
trials but as sober men engaged in spreading the truth, we
ought to take a different view.**

Other speakers took part in the discussion, and, the
question being put to vote, ‘‘ the Report of the Committee
was then unanimously adopted by acclamation. Three cheers
were then given for Madame Blavatsky, who was deeply
(and very naturally) affected by this fresh proof of affection-
ate confidence.** On her appearance the next evening
before the audience of 1500 persons who attended the
celebration of the Society*s ninth anniversary, she was
cheered to the echo, and every allusion to her in the
speeches of the several speakers aroused great enthusiasm.

One fact, reported confidentially by a very respected
colleague of ours, made a deep impression on the minds of
the Committee. He had overheard a conversation between
two influential Madras civilians about Madame Blavatsky
and the charges against her. In reply to a question by one
of them as to what would be likely to happen, the other
said, ‘‘ I hope she will bring an action, for ... . who must
try it, is determined to give the greatest latitude for cross*



The Coulomb Missionary Conspiracy 195

examination so that this d— d fraud may be shown up,
and it is not at all impossible that she may be sent to the
Andaman Islands.” Of course, this was equivalent to saying
that the case was already prejudged, and that H. P. B.
would not have a chance of getting justice. What it was
that was calculated upon seemed pretty clear from the fact
that when the Missionaries saw that H. P. B. had been
kept from walking into the trap, they caused Mme. Coulomb
to bring an action for libel against General Morgan, in-
tending to subpoena H. P. B. as a witness and cross-examine
her, but immediately vrithdrew it when she was sent away to
Europe by her attending physician, as will hereafter appear.
Their anticipated victory proved a defeat; H. P. B.'s
persecution doubled the love felt for her by the Hindus
and her foreign colleagues; and they were left with their
disreputable informer on their hands. The Rev. Mr.
Patterson, “Editor Christiafi College Magazine^^^ in the
Madras Mail of 6th May 1885, appealed to the public
for money to send them to Europe, “as the genuineness of
the Blavatsky letters may now be considered (by them?)
settled, and there is therefore no longer any necessity for
M. and Mme. Coulomb to remain in India. . . . They
are penniless, and it is impossible for them to earn a liveli-
hood in this country. . . . They are not without some
claim upon the consideration of the public. , . . There
are many who, feeling that a good work has been done^ will
be willing to contribute, etc.” He acknowledges receipt
of the following sums : The Rt Rev. the Bishop of Madras,
rs. 50 ; the Hon* H. S. Thomas, rs. 100 ; the Rev. Dr. Milleri



Old Diary Leaves

rs. loo; the Rev. J. Cooling, B.A., rs, lo. Poor Mis^n-
aries I poor Coulombs 1 This was their last resource, after the
ghastly failure of a lecture scheme, in which the Coulombs
— personally conducted — were to have made the grand tour,
showing up the fraudulent tricks of P. B., with accessories
of bladders, muslin, wigs, and pulling-strings. The one
trial given them at the (Missionary) Memorial Hall, Madras,
was such a j^asco that it was never repeated, and the poor
traitors sank gradually out of sight into their congenial mud.
Up to that time the Society had chartered 95 Branches in
all the world, up to last December (1897) it had chartered
492.* Evidently the crumbling which was expected to
follow the Coulomb episode did not happen : the engineer
was ‘ hoist with his own petar.’

While the party were in Colombo, en route for Madras, an
interesting episode occurred. The Rev. Mr. Leadbeater,
with H. P. B. and myself acting as sponsors, “took
PansiP from the High Priest Sumangala and Rev. Amara-
moli, in the presence of a crowded audience. This was the
first instance of a Christian clergyman having publicly
declared himself a follower of the Lord Buddha, and the
sensation caused by it may be easily imagined.

As we are not likely to have to recur to the Coulomb
scandal in any detail, it is proper that I should say what its
actual effects were upon us. We have seen that the growth
of the Society, as a whole, was quickened to an unexpected
degree, and I must also add that very few individual resig-
lutions of members were sent in. Yet, so far as the great
^ Up to the close of 1902 we had issued 714 charters.



The Coulomb Missionary Conspiracy 197

public is concerned, undoubtedly both H. P. B. and the
movement were for a long time under a cloud. It is so
much easier to think ill of others than to judicially
decide upon their merits and shortcomings, and “where
much mud is thrown against a public person, some of it
always sticks”: a venerable truism. Until the attacks of
the Coulombs and the S. P. R. were made, H. P. B. was
simply an exceptional, eccentric, and brilliant woman sans
pareil\ after that, she was as one who had been arraigned
before a Scottish jury and dismissed with the verdict “ Not
proven,” which was very different from “Not guilty.”
Among our members were quite a number, and some in-
fluential ones, who had acquired doubts of her perfect
innocence, yet excused her in their minds for the sake of
the public benefits and private consolations she had given.*
We were still under the spell of phenomena-hunting, and
to have doubt cast on H.P.B.’s phenomena was to shake the
whole superstructure — that now solid edifice of Theosophy
which settled on its base later on. My correspondence
shows the existence of this feeling of gloom and unrest, and
in my succeeding chapters it will be shown how I handled
the situation. As these nineteen years have gone by since
that tragical 1884, the relation of H. P. B. to the movement

* This same charity has been extended to W. Q. Judge, whose guilt
was much more capable of proof. One might almost fancy the author
of these lines had poor H. P. B. in mind when waiting them : —

“ A thousand blacker names, worse calumnies,

All wit can think and pregnant spite devise.

Strike home, gash deep, no lies nor slander spare ;

A wound, though cured, yet leaves behind a scar,”



198 Old Diary Leaves

has greatly changed, and for the better. She is now
remembered and appreciated, not so much as the thauma-
turge, but as the devoted s^ent of the Elder Brothers for
the spreading of long-hidden truth to modern times. As time
goes on this will be more and more so, and in the growing
effulgence of this new day the shadows cast about her
martyr personality will melt away and the calumnies of her
foolish foes be forgotten, as are those libels against Washing-
ton which were so rife in his lifetime. For she was the
herald of truth and, as Bacon said, “the sun, though it
passes through dirty places, yet remains as pure as before.”
He might have added, “ it illumines the faces of those who
stand in its glory.”



CHAPTER XV.


FIRST VISIT TO BURMA.

T he attendance of Delegates at the Convention of 1884
was double that of the preceding year, and the feel-
ing exceptionally enthusiastic. The first gold medal of the
Subbarow Fund was awarded to Judge P Sreenevasa Row,
of Madras, for a very able paper on the identity of two great
personages as traced in the Puranas. The Convention
adjourned sine die on the 31st December, and the Delegates
gradually departed for their homes, some of them 1500
miles distant. The last left on the 8th January (1885), and
the house settled down to its normal quiet. During the
night before I was visited by Dj. K. — then an advanced
pupil, now a Master — who talked with me about sundry
persons and things. Mr. Leadbeater, who had at that time
all his great spiritual enlightenment before him, sleeping on
another charpai in the same room, heard the two voices and
saw a column of light by my bedside, but could not dis-
tinguish the form of my visitor. On the following night

— as my Diary entry states — “H. P. B. got from her

199


200


Old Diary Leaves

Teacher the plan for her Secret Doctrine^ and it is excellent.
Oakley and I tried our hands at it yesterday, but this is
much better.” Meanwhile, the accumulation of materials
for the book had long been going on. It will be news to
some that this was not originally intended to be a new
book, but only a recasting and amplification of Isis
Unveiledy with the late T. Subba Row, B.A., B.L., as co-
editor with H. P. B. As first advertised in the Theosophisty
it was to have been issued in monthly parts of 77 pp. each,
and to have run to about twenty parts. This new scheme,
given her by her Teacher, changed this programme, and
the gradual building up of the present grand w'ork was
the result.

One night, about this time, H. P. B., unsolicited, pro-
duced for Dr. Hartmann a caricature sketch of a woman
whose double, leaving the body, is waited for by a devil;
while the divine ray of the Atma escapes. “ Dr. H. says ”
— notes my Diary — “that the picture answers a question
that has been mooted in his mind for several days past,
and has a significance of which H. P. B. is not aware.”
Just so : perhaps.

The late King of Burma, Theebaw III., having heard of
my work for Buddhism from an Italian official at Mandalay,
a member of our Society, had invited me to his Court for
conversation about the Ceylon Buddhist movement, and
in the month of January, just after the Convention above
described, I sailed for Rangoon with Mr. Leadbeater to
help me in my general work. We had an easy time of it
until we got abreast of Monkey Point just at the lower end



First Visit to Burma 201

of the city) where the current of the Irrawady fan like a
mill-race, and our poor, broken-down old steamefi the
“ Asia,” had to come to an anchor and wait for high-water.
At last, however, we reached the jetty, and I was received
by a Burmese gentleman on behalf of a well-known English
official, one of our members. He found us hospitable
quarters at the private house of the late Moung Htoon
Oung, an advocate and an enlightened man. The same
evening our reception-rooms were crowed with the “Elders”
(I forget the Burmese name) of the Buddhist community,
who plied us with questions and evinced an appreciative
and friendly spirit. The next morning Oo Nyoung) Muni-
cipal Commissioner, came and escorted us to the golden-
domed Shway Dagon, the finest and most revered pagoda
in the Indo-Chinese countries. It is built on a spur of
the Pegu hills, and the platform is in part artificially con-
structed of numberless baskets of earth, brought as an act
of piety by Buddhist pilgrims from all parts of the country.
The bell-shaped dagoba, gilded from base to apex with
gold-leaf at a cost of over a lac of rupees, given by the
people, is a resplendent object to one who approaches
the city by steamer. When the sun shines on it the effect
is very grand indeed : one might fancy it the pharos of
the mythic Jerusalem the Golden. It stands upon the
upper of two terraces, which rises i66 feet from the level
of the ground, and has diameters of 900 by about 700 feet.
At the two sides of the foot of the grand staircase stand

* For a full description of Shway Dagohn (Dag6n) Payah, sefe
Shway Yeo’s Tht p. 1 93, and many other books on Burma.



202


Old Diary Leaves

monster leogryphs, built of brick covered with plaster and
gaudily painted. The ascent is very tedious, but, reaching
the top, one finds himself on a great flagged open space
which runs all around the pagoda, and on special days is
thronged by a multitude of worshippers, picturesque in
costume and colors beyond any other crowd I ever saw.
The dagoba stands on an octagonal plinth pierced at four
sides with worshipping chambers or temples, each of which
enshrines one large and many small statues of the sitting
Buddha lit up by thousands of candles, and resounds with
the hum of voices of devotees reciting the Five Precepts.
Smaller and larger dagobas, chapels, image-houses, bells,
and carved figures of lions and other animals are seen
around the edges of the platform. One of the bells is so
large that six men can stand inside, it being 7 feet 7J inches
across the mouth and weighs 94,628 lbs. {op, cit, 197). It
is the third largest bell in the world, and has a history
that is worth reading.

From its eight-sided plinth springs the gold-covered
pagoda, whose perimeter is 1355 feet and height 370.
Think what a grand object must be this ovoid structure
or hillock of masonry enveloped with gold on a bright,
sunny day! But I shall not give time to mere architec-
tural details when they can be so easily gotten from Shway
Yeo’s charming volumes on Burma. The peculiar sanctity
of the Shway Dagon is due to the fact “it is the only
payah known to Buddhists which contains actual relics,
not only of Shin Gautama, but of the three Budhs who
preceded him in this world/* In the relic chamber, in



First Visit to Burma 203

the heart of the dagoba, are said to be eight hairs from
the head of Gautama Sakhya Muni, and the drinking-
bowl of one, the robe of another, and the staff of a
third preceding Buddha. Whatever be the fact, the
assertion is- believed throughout Burma, Siam, Cambodia,
and Corea, from all which countries pilgrims swarm to
pay their homage. Its actual historical date is not easily
fixed, for, though Buddhist authorities assert it to have
been built in 588 b.c., yet, as Shway Yeo says, it may
have been sacred for cycles upon cycles, if it contains
relics of the Buddha’s predecessors. The pagoda is
crowned with a htee^ or umbrella, one of the emblems
of sovereignty. It is an iron, cage-like structure, gilded
and hung all over with gold and silver jewelled bells
“ which tinkle melodiously with every breath of air.”
Mr. Oo Nyoung introduced me to various important
personages connected with the pagoda, and arrangements
were made for me to lecture there on Buddhism.

The news of my arrival having been spread, I very
soon was visited by large numbers of both Burmese and
resident Hindus, coming to discuss their respective religions.
January 24 was a very busy day. I had a three hours’
interview with the Tha-tha-na-bang, or Buddhist Archbishop,
so to say, from Mandalay, and, later, the house full of
Burmese and Hindus, each in a separate room, and Lead-
beater and I going from one group to the other, discussing
now Buddhism with one, and then Hinduism with the other
party. On Sunday, the 25th, I lectured in KLrishnam
Koil on “Hindu Religion, its Enemies and Friends.”



204 Diary Leaves

A band of Native Christian rowdies attended, and by
their bad behaviour created great excitement. There was
every prospect of a hand-to-hand fight, with bloodshed,
but I managed to stop it. My throat was, however, the
worse for the excessive use of my voice at the lecture
and in the interminable discussions with our visitors.

I had the opportunity for seeing a number of instructive
mesmeric experiments here, by a private gentleman named
Moody, upon Indian subjects. I have notes of a series
involving the question of thought-transference which were
tried at my suggestion. They were made with a pOckct-
handkerchief. The operator having brought his subject into
the state of suggestibility, stood before him holding a
white handkerchief in his hands. Recognizing its nature
and normal color at first, he subsequently saw it, without
any spoken orders, as red, blue, green, yellow, purple,
black, brown, or whatsoever other color I whispered in
the operator’s ear. The color sensation underwent an
instantaneous change when the mesmerizer visualized in
his own mind the color designated by me. We also
proved the community of taste and feeling between
mesmerizer and subject, by the usual experiments of
making the former, with his back turned towards the
subject, taste successively sugar, quinine, ginger, salt,
vinegaf> etc*, etc., and by pricking or pinching him, every
taste and every physical sensation being immediately
reproduced in the subject* To a reflective mind this
field of mesmeric research produces most serious thoughts ;
there is something so awesome in the idea that two



First Visit to Burma


2Q5


human beings can be thus identified as to mental and
physical action. Such an experiment is, in fact, a key
that unlocks awful mysteries.

My first lecture at Shway Dagon was given on the
27th January in a crimson-and-gold rest-house, beautifully
carved outside and intoxicating with color inside. Pansil,
or the Five Precepts, was first given by a Burmese priest,
some introductory remarks were made, and I was then
given speech. I spoke for an hour, but, as three inter-
preters had to translate me by turns, I very much doubt
if my huge audience got a very clear idea of what I said.
The scene, however, vividly appealed to my artistic sense,
and I took in the whole picture piece-meal, while keeping
an attentive ear upon my interpreters to see if they
seemed to be rendering, if not my words, at least my
ideas, correctly. For one of average intuitiveness of
temperament can do so much by thought-reading, even
though ignorant of the vernacular employed. My reasoned
discourse finished, I was put through a public examination
in Buddhistic theology and metaphysics by several priests,
and pronounced satisfactory. I don’t wonder at their taking
precautions before giving me their confidence considering
what a marvel, almost an impossibility, it must have
seemed to them that a pticca white man (that is, a pure-
blooded not a mixed-blooded one) should come and,
at that sacred shrine, in open day and in the presence
of thousands of Burmans, avow himself a Buddhist from
conviction, without ulterior motive. In fact, this suspicion
followed us for years in Asia, and we had to live it



2o6 Old Diary Leaves

down before we won the sure place in the confidence of
the Asiatic peoples which we now hold.

At 1.27 A.M. in the following night I was awakened by
a telegraph peon who brought me this despatch from
Damodar: “Return at once, Upasika (H. P. B.) danger-
ously ill.” It was a thunderclap out of a clear sky. “ Poor
old chum ! ” my Diary says. “No more sleep for me that
night.” I spent the time in perfecting plans for carrying
on the Burmah mission. At an early hour I went with
Leadbeater to carry the bad news to our dear Mrs. Gordon,
of Calcutta, then in Rangoon on a visit to her adopted
daughter. After that to a Buddhist meeting where I
was engaged to speak ; then to bid farewell to the
Mandalay Archbishop ; and then, at 1 1 a.m., to the steamer
“Oriental” in which I sailed for Madras. Leadbeater
was left behind to go on with the work.

My older colleagues will have no trouble in figuring to
themselves my state of mind while on that sea voyage.
Here were we two with our vast work not yet even shaped
out, the Society still staggering under the blow struck by
the Missionaries ; for, while we were floating along on the
full tide of our co-workers' sympathy, yet outside our ship,
to borrow the metaplior, the billows of angry outside hatred
and suspicion were swelling, and foaming, and dashing
against it all around. With us together and united, each
supplying what the other lacked, and linked together in
one intense thought of service to man, there was nothing
to fear for the future, our cause had in it the spirit of
victory. But with her stricken down, perhaps lying on



First Visit to Burma


207


her bed of death, perhaps doomed to die before I could
get back to receive her last word and close her eyes, how
heavy my heart must have been needs no seventh son
of a seventh son to comprehend. No wonder I wrote in
my Diary, when the ship was running through a silvery
sea : “ My poor Chum, and is thy life of adventure, of
anguish, of violent contrasts and of unswerving devotion
to Humanity, ended? Alas, my loss will be greater than
if thou hadst been wife, or sweetheart, or sister ; for now
must I carry alone the immense burden of this respon-
sibility with which the Holy Ones have charged us.”

The transit across the Bay of Bengal was as calm as
a summer yachting voyage, and passed without incident,
beyond my being spied out by Hindu friends at Bimli-
patam, and taken ashore and made to lecture that evening.
We reached Madras at 4 p.m. on the 5th P'ebruary; I
hurried home and found H. P. B. in a state between life
and death, with congestion of the kidneys, rheumatic gout,
and an alarming loss of vitality. Added to this, an
enfeebled action of the heart had brought her to a crisis
where her life trembled in the balance. She was so
delighted to see me that she put her arms around my
neck, as I came to her bedside, and wept on my breast.
I was unspeakably glad to be there to, at least, bid her
farewell and assure her of my steadfastness. Her attending
physicians, Dr. Mary Scharlieb and Dr. Franz Hartmann,
M.D., said it was simply a miracle that she was alive.
Our Teacher had worked the wonder by coming one night
when they were waiting for her last gasp, laying his hand



2o8


Old Diary Leaves

on her, and snatching her back from death. Wonderftil
woman! This same thing happened with her at Phila-
delphia, when Dr. Pancoast told her that her leg must
be cut off to save her life ; but she was out of the
house the very next day, with her mortifying limb cured.
Readers of the first volume of these O. D. L. reminiscences
will recall the facts. She hung in this state the next four
days, we at first not knowing whether she would live a
year or years, or suddenly die from syncope. As her
strength served we talked over the situation, and she
rejoiced in my promise of undying loyalty to the cause
we represented. But I was not left to commune with her
in peace. Mr. Lane-Fox had returned from London, and
he and Hartmann and the other new-comers had put
their heads together, and hatched a scheme for what was
simply my putting aside, and the transfer of the governing
power to a Committee, composed mainly of themselves.
It was an ungracious and ungrateful project, and I revolted
at once. They had even got poor H. P. B. to sign the
papers, which they formally handed me (and which, you
may be sure, I have in the box of archives for that year).
When I went to her with the paper, and asked her if it
coincided with her sense of justice that I, who had watched
over and built up the Society from its first germ until now,
should be turned out on the road to go hang, without a
word of thanks or even so much as the “ chit,” or character
certificate, one gives to the rest-fiouse keeper after a day^s
stay, or to the dhobie (washerman) or one’s water-boy;
she moaned out that she had signed something they had



First Visit to Burma


209


brought to her dying-bed, and which they said was very
important for the Society, but she never understood it
to mean what I described, and that she repudiated any
such ingratitude. She told me to tear the papers, but I
said no, I should keep them as the story of an episode
that might be useful to the future historian. So it passed.
While we two were talking, H. P. B. got a note from our
Guru in a phenomenal way, saying that she might assure
Subbarow and Damodar that, upon her dying, the link
between the T. S. and the Masters should remain unbroken.
A promise which has been amply fulfilled.

By the loth H. P. B. was about again, and so much
better that, when a telegram came from Leadbeater urging
my return to Rangoon as there was a very promising
opening for the T. S., she consented to my going. So
I sailed on the “Oriental’^ on the nth; My “Chum”
wept when we parted, and I should too if I had thought
it was for the last time, but my mind was now completely
reassured on that point. The recollection that she would
not be permitted to die before her work was accomplished
and somebody was ready to fill the gap she would leave,
came back to me. I had forgotten that in my momentary
grief at the thought of parting from her.

Mr. Leadbeater, with deputations of Burmese Elders
and Hindus, received me at the jetty at Rangoon on my
arrival on the 19th February. On the following day I
paid my respects to the late beloved and respected Bishop
Bigandet, author of The Legend of Gaudama^ one of the
most authoritative books on Southern Buddhism. Hi$



210


Old Diary Leaves

sweet manners and noble character had earned for him
the confidence and homage of all educated Burmese as
well as of all Christians. We had a most agreeable talk
together about Buddhism and its literature. He was past
seventy and quite feeble. He expressed his regret that
he should never be able to bring out another book, and,
although I offered to supply him with a secretary to whom
he might dictate according to his strength, he sadly shook
his head and said that his work was all but finished, and
the affairs of the world were receding from his sight.
With that perfect courtesy of an old French courtier of
the time of the Louis, he said it was now my turn to
supply this want, and when I protested my incapacity,
shook his finger at me and smilingly said he could not
accept that excuse, since he had read my Buddhist Catechism
and there was no more useful book on the religion of
Sakhya Muni. Of course I put that down to his amiable
politeness, but his manner was so charming that I could
only answer by my blushes. He was a tall, spare man
of graceful carriage, with white, small hands and small
feet, and wore the episcopal purple cassock with red
buttons, a long gold chain and cross, and the ring of his
episcopal rank. When I took my leave he insisted on
accompanying me downstairs to the gate, and after a final
exchange of kind expressions we parted— for ever, for
I never saw him again.

The next day we breakfasted in the Burmese fashion, on
the floor, at a Burmese rest-house, and later received the
calls of several European gentlemen interested in Mesmer4s«s«



First Visit to Burma


211


to wjipm I sbowe^J a variety of experiments in thought-
control. A large Committee of English and Pali Native
scholars sat the next day to complete a revision of the
Burmese translation of the Buddhist Catechism^ and accom-
plished it after some hours of work. Some 20,000 copies
were subscribed for on the spot for gratuitous distribution,
and tlie Elders showed quite an enthusiasm about the aifair.
After the adjournment Leadbeater and I called on Messrs.
Duncan and Badelier, two new acquaintances, and I re-
ceived the former into membership along with eight others.
On the Monday following I lectured in the Town Hail on
“Theosophy no Sect” to a large audience including
Missionaries, and later organized the “ Rangoon T. S.,” a
Hindu Branch with all Tamil members. On the Wednes-
day we dined at Mr. Duncan’s, where we witnessed and
assisted in some very instructive mesmeric experiments. I
recollect one which recalls some narratives in Baron Du
Potet’s classical work La Magic DevoilSe, In the centre
of the drawing-room stood a large round table, and the
company sat against the walls all around the room. Tl>e
subject, a Hindu servant, being in another room where he
could hear nothing of our conversation, I asked Mr. Duncan
to draw on the floor with his finger an imaginary line from
the table outward, and will that the subject should not be
able to cross it. The company present chose the place
where the line should be drawn, and then Mr. Duncan^
approaching his finger tips to the carpet, but without toucb^
ip$ willed that his subject should not be able to pas» the
invi^l ^ barrier, Tb^ sub^ then sent for. On cateft'



212


Old Diary Leaves

ing, he was told to walk around the table twice, after which
he would be told what next to do. He began the circum-
ambulation, and went on well enough until he came to the
enchanted spot, when he suddenly stopped, tried to lift one
foot to step forward, failed, shrank back, and said he
couldn’t go farther. Why ? ‘‘ Why, don’t you see that line

of fire; how could I get past it?” he answered. I told
him there was nothing there; to try again. It was quite
useless, he could not advance an inch until Mr. Duncan,
who had all this while been standing silent, made a dis-
persive sweep with his hand and said “ All right ! ” when
“ Tommy ” completed the circuit of the table. He de-
scribed it to me as a low wall of flames about six inches
high.

Our preliminary discussions with the Burmese finally
resulted in the formation of the ** Shway Dagon T. S.,’’ a
Buddhist Branch. They were very urgent that I should
stop in Burma at least a couple of months to organize the
movement, and it was really desirable, but the claims on
my time elsewhere forbade it and I had to decline. I told
them they must get on as best they could, on the lines I
laid out for them.

Saturday, the 28th February, was a great holiday with the
Burmese, as the anniversary of the Buddha’s alleged descent
from the Tusita heaven into his mother’s womb under the
form of a white elephant ! We went again to Shway Dagon
and saw a great crowd of pilgrims. Meetings, talks, and
Branch reunions engaged us during the next few days.
Meanwhile, I was collecting the opinions of the most



First Visit to Burma


213


spectable Elders about King Theebaw, with the result that
I decided that I should not accept his invitation to Manda-
lay, as he was a monster of vice and cruelty, and his motive
in asking me was not to satisfy his thirst for religious know-
ledge, but only to gratify an idle curiosity to see the white
Buddhist. I had too much respect for the dignity of the
Society and its President to put myself on show before a
debauched tyrant, and sacrifice my American self-respect by
kow-towing to him, merely on the chance of getting a costly
ruby ring, or a sum of money, some expensive silken cloths,
or such-like toys. So I sent word to that effect to our
Italian colleague through whom the King’s message had
been transmitted, and when, a few days later, I was urged
to reconsider by King Theebaw’s local agent and another
Burmese noble, I held my ground and gave my reasons
with perfect frankness. I am not sure, but I think that at
heart even the Burmans respected me for my independence.
The incoming Madras Mail brought us disagreeable
news. Hartmann reported that the Central Committee at
Adyar had resigned, and some Branches would dissolve if
H. P. B.’s case were not made good against the Padris.
H. P. B., with her usual inconsistency, reproached me for
having prevented her — as she said, although it was not I
but the Convention who had done it — from bringing suit
against them ; and copies were sent me of the latest
Missionary pamphlet against us. As I wrote in my Diary,
there was “something hostile in the air,” How true is that
expression — so-and-so is “in the air”; for assuredly we arq
constantly acted upon by currents, mental, moral, spiritual.



214 Old Diary Leaves

ind physical, that are set flowing by cmr feHow-tnto. So,
likewise, are others acted upon by our own thought-Ctirrents
— as we now all have been taught by our advanced Students
in occultism. The next day came a cable from Adyar that
H.P.B. had had a relapse and I must cut short my projected
tour in Burma and Bengal, and come back at once. Whh
that exhilarating intelligence on my mind, I had to lecture
in the evening to an audience of looo in the Town Hall.
The dear Missionaries had a fellow posted at the door to
sell the above-mentioned pamphlet, and I saw many in the
hands of my auditors ; but nothing is so bracing as a savage
opposition, and nothing so stirs up all the resisting power
one has in him. I took the adversary by the throat, so to
say, and shook him, and made my sympathetic Burmese
and Hindu hearers join together in peals of applause. I
don’t believe our esteemed enemies made much profit out
of their speculation of importing this poisoned weapon to
use against us.

We had already a Buddhist and a Hindu Branch in
Rangoon ; I had now to form one of European and
Eurasians interested in Mesmerism and practical Psy-
chology in general. I gave it the name of the “ Irrawady
T. S.”

A second urgent telegram came the next day, but I
could not get a steamer until the following day, the nth,
when I sailed in the “ Himalaya ” for Madras. The Cap-
tain, Mr. Allen, was an old acquaintance, having com-
manded the ** Chanda” in 1880, when H. P. B. and I
returned from Colombo to Bombay. Having a day at



First Visit to Burma


215


command before sailing, I profited by a visit from Mr.
Duncan to our house, to make further and better mes-
meric experiments on his boy “Tommy/* The boy was
made to sit with his back against the wall of the
room, just beside a large French window opening on a
sunny verandah ; his mesmerizer, Mr. Duncan, stood facing
him, with a white handkerchief in his hands ; I stood in
the verandah, out of Tommy’s range of vision, with a
book of samples of bright-colored papers, used by book-
binders and others. Mr. Duncan would say to Tommy,
showing the handkerchief, “ What is this ? ’* “a handker-
chief.” “ Color ? ” “ white.” I would then show Duncan,
say, a red paper, and he, still holding the handkerchief
out to Tommy, would repeat ; “ Color ? ” “ Red,” the boy

would answer. So color after color would be silently
shown to the mesmerizer, and the next moment he men-
tally imparted it to the linen handkerchief, and it was seen
by the hypnotized subject. This was, I fancy, about as
fine a proof of the possibility of thought-transference as
can be found on record.

While in Paris in the October preceding, Mr. Rudolph
Gebhard and I had been present on the i8th at some
mesmeric experiments of M. Robert, the well-known
masseur-magnitiseur, on one of his clairvoyant subjects.
Among other things, the latter told us that he saw us
sailing in a steamer on a far-off sea ; a man falling over-
board ; the steamer stopped ; a boat put out, and the
steamer sailing in a circle. That sounded queer, as neither
of us recollected the evident fact that a vessel, especially



2i6 Old Diary Leaves

a steamer, usually does sail in a circle to pick up a person
who has gone overboard ; however, I made a note of it at
the time, and it now came vividly back to me, for, while
crossing the Bay of Bengal on March 14, a Hindu deck
passenger fell overboard, and the “ Himalaya ” sailed in a
circle to pick him up. The coming event of March had,
therefore, cast its astral shadow before it on the clairvoy-
ant brain, five months in advance of its happ)ening, I
reported the fact to M. Robert by letter at the time, and
he can confirm it to anybody who may have the curiosity
to ask him to let them see my letter.

We touched at the usual coast ports, among them
Coconada, Subbarow’s native place, where I went ashore
and organized the local Branch T. S. which still survives.
Our steamer landed us at Madras on the 19th March, and
on reaching Headquarters I “found Atra Cura enthroned
and everything looking bad.^’ But we need not sail into
that cloud-bank just as we have reached port. Leave it
for the next chapter.


CHAPTER XVI.


H. P. B. LEAVES FOR EUROPE.

Y es, indeed, Black Care was enthroned at Adyar when
I got back from Rangoon ; the very moral atmos-
phere was dark and heavy; H. P. B. was stniggling for
life and as vehement as an enmeshed lioness ; while certain
of the European new-comers were displaying a special
talent for meddling with the Headquarters* business, plotting
to have me reduced to subjection to a faddish Central
Committee, in which I should not have the least influence
and keeping my quasi-dying “ Chum ** in a perpetual state
of nervous explosion. Brief mention was made of this
matter in Chapter XV., but it is important enough for
extension. The wonder is she did not die before I could
get there and fight for the staiu quo ante. One ostensible
revolt was against my autocracy, demand being made —
to quote from one of the documents before me — that:

“The President-Founder should be asked to select out
of the General Committee an Executive Committee con-
lisping of five p^rsoni, including Mr. T, Subb^^ Row an4

ai7


2i8 Old Diary Leaves

four European gentlemen residing at Headquarters, and to
transfer upon them all the supervisory, financial, and
executive affairs of the Society, to distribute and direct the
work of the Society, to appoint all officers — the President-
Founder excepted — and to ratify all documents concerning
the Society.”

If this was not modesty, what would be ? I was to step
aside, after conveying all my powers to a group of five
persons, self-picked for me out of the whole Council — four
of them Europeans, recently arrived from Europe and
America, having but the briefest experience in the executive
Management of the movement, next to no personal intimacy
with the majority of our members, no association whatever
with the Ceylon Buddhists, whose educational programme
Was then gettmg into full swing, no recognized hold on the
affections and confidence of the Hindus and Parsis, nor,
with one exception, any private means to contribute to-
wards the up-keep of the Headquarters and of the move-
ment generally. This last difficulty, however, they would
over by forcing H. P. B. and myself to convey our
Theosophist and its book business to the Society, without
compensation, and without reserving out of the property
we had ourselves created, without a rupee’s help from the
Society, even the pittances needed for our modest support :
they thought it highly detrimental to the Society’s interests
that the magazine should be private property ! A fine
scheme, worthy of the Red Republicans of Ninety-Three.
Damodar, Bawaji, and Alnanda, our three devoted Hindu
feUow-ofiicets, denied the validity of each of the complaints,



H. P. B. leaves for Europe 219

and protested vehemently against the plan in all its details ;
while Mr. Leadbeater coincided with them in a very
temperate yet firm paper, which is before me. But on the
Jth February 1885, when poor H. P. B. was thought to be
dying, they got her to scrawl the following : —

“Believing that this new arrangement is necessary for
the welfare of the Society, I approve of it, so far as I am
concerned. H. P. Blavatsky/*

Mr. Leadbeater says, in his paper : “ Mme. Blavatsky

withdraws her endorsement of the writing, as having been
given without a clear perception of the construction it bears
upon its face.’^ The imminence of death being past, her
mind worked again, and she repudiated her endorsement
and — as remarked in the last Chapter — begged me tear
the paper, which I refused. This is but one of a number
of proofs of ingratitude that I have had since the Society
was founded. If I mention it at all it is not by way of
protest, but as a striking corroboration of the old truth,
that he who sets himself to work for his fellow-men should
expect no thanks, but much unkindness. H. P. B. and I
had given rs. 9000 out of the Theosophist fund towatds
the Society's necessities within the preceding twelve months,
and, of the nett profits of the magazine to that date, viz.,
rs. 15,600, had paid the Society rs. 14,994-4-6, as I find
noted in my Diary. If the charge of “autocracy” lay
against me, it was because, until then, I had had to shoulder
all the responsibility alone and push on all the movement.
Our present helpers had not yet stepped into the ranks,



220


Old Diary Leaves

and it was not until two years later that Mr. Judge began
to work in America.

The Europeans being leagued against us, I naturally
turned for counsel and sympathy to my most trusted Hindu
advisers, and long consultations ensued between them and
myself, at the residence of Dewan Bahadur R. Raghoonath
Row. The result was the adoption of a policy which
shortly after I carried out ; Mr. Hodgson, of the S. P. R.,
was still at Madras, and hearing that at an Anglo-Indian
dinner-table he had expressed his belief that H. P. B. was
a Russian spy, I called on him with Mr. Cooper-Oakley to
discuss the matter. Both of us gave our views so clearly
that we came away with the impression that Mr. Hodgson
thought the charge as puerile and unfounded as we did.
Yet he stuck to it, and put the cruel slander into his report
to his employers of the S. P. R. Since then I have had
no respect for him, for it was a stab in the back to a
helpless old woman, who had never done him the least
harm. He made me suffer intensely in mind for a couple
of days by declaring that Hurrychand Chintamon, of
Bombay, had shown him a letter of H. P. B/s to him,
from New York, in which she said I was so under her
hypnotic spell that she could make me believe what she
liked by just looking me in the face. I saw that such an
assertion, however transparently childish and absurd,
would be taken up by our opponents to do us harm.
While I did not mind what they might do, if even ten
times worse than this, it went to my heart that H. P. B.,
whose loyal friend I had been through everything, should



H. P. B. leaves for Europe 221

have done this act of treachery to me; and merely to
gratify her vanity, as it would seem. But that is the
inconsistent creature she was, in her physical self^ and it
was these traits which made it then so very hard for
anybody to live and work with her for any length of time.
I have always said that the trouble of getting on with her,
as Helena Petrovna^ was infinitely more difficult than to
overcome all the outside obstacles, impediments, and
opposition that stood in the way of the Society's progress.
In my whole experience in the movement, nothing ever
affected me so much as this. It made me desperate, and
for twenty-four hours almost ready to go down to the beach
and drown myself in the sea. But when I put the question
to myself what I was working for, whether for the praise
of men or the gratitude of H. P. B., or that of any other
living person, all this despondency drifted away and my
mind has never gone back to it. The sense of the
paramount obligation of doing my duty, of serving the
Masters in the carrying on of their lofty plans — unthanked,
unappreciated, misunderstood, calumniated — it mattered
not what — came in to me like the flash of a great light,
and there was peace.

March 25 th, I wrote to Mr. Sinnett and suggested the
formation of a Central Committee or T. S. Board of
Control, with Headquarters at London, to have charge of
our interests in Europe; thus anticipating the idea of a
Section, which was adopted later. He, however, did not
like it, for, in fact, this would commit him to the policy
of a popular propaganda, which H. P. B. and I, under



222


Old Diary Leaves

S^pmor encQurstgement, had always followed out, but
which to him was always repugnant; as it had been to
Mr, Massey and Dr. Wyld before him.

March aSth was a tempestuous day at Adyar, it seems,
for I have written : “ A day of disagreeable experiences :
H. P. B. wild and violent ; news of a further step in the
plot of the Missionaries against us ; threatened suit against
General Morgan by the Coulombs. A bazaar rumor, and
in^)robable.’' But it was true, as the sequel proved.
All this excitement told almost fatally upon my dear
Chumps health. It was awful to see her, with her f^e
empurpled by the blood that rushed to her head, her
eyes almost standing out from their orbits and dead-looking,
as she tramped up and down the floor, denouncing every-
body and saying wild things. Her physicians said this
could not last, she must have rest and quiet or she would
drop down dead some day without giving us a moment's
warning. So she listened to them, and, on the 2J9th March
resigned her office and gave Babula orders to pack her
trunks. Dr. Hartmann and 1 went the next day to town
and took passage tickets for her. Miss Flynn, of Bombay,
the Doctor, who consented at my request to go and look
after H. P. B., and “Bawaji," then a devoted follower of
hers. The party sailed for Naples on the Tuesday in the
Mess^geries Co.'s steamer “Tibre." She was so helpless
that Dr. Mary Scharlieb's husband, one of the Presidency
Magistrates, procured the use of a hospital chair, and she^
sitdr^ in it, was lifted from the hoat on board by a
boigting tackle. That n^ht, by her jrequest, I moved



H. P. B. leaves for Europe 223

over into her room and alept in it for the first time. She
particularly asked me not to give it to any other occupant

The following passages are copied from the official report
that appeared in the Theosophist (Supplement) for May
188s

“At about this time Madame Blavatsky was having
severe attacks of palpitation of the heart, and all at
Headquarters were kept in a state of alarm, as the physicians
had expressed the opinion that under any sudden excite-
ment death might be instantaneous.

“Following is the certificate of her medical attendant ; —

“‘I hereby certify that Madame Blavatsky is quite
unfit for the constant excitement and worry to which she
is exposed in Madras. The condition of her heart renders
perfect quiet and a suitable climate essential. I therefore
recommend that she should at once proceed to Europe,
and remain in a temperate climate — in some quiet spot.

(Sd.) ‘ Mary Scharlieb,

‘ M.B. and S.L, London^ ”

“The local members of the General Council, meeting
at Headquarters as an Executive Committee on the 12 th
instant, adopted unanimously the following : —

Resolution,

“ ‘ Resolved that Madame Blavatsky^s resignation be
accepted, and that the President be requested in the name of
the Council to inform her of the great regret with which
they have learnt that she is compelled, on account of her


224 Diary Leaves

extreme ill-health, to relinquish her duties as Correspond-
ing Secretary of the Theosophical Society. The Council
further record their high sense of the valuable services
she has rendered to the cause of science and philosophy.

(Sd.) ‘R. Raghoonath Row,

‘ Chairman" ”

“To mark our respect for Madame Blavatsky’s
exceptional abilities, the vacancy caused by her retirement
will not be filled, and the office of Corresponding
Secretary is hereby abolished. Official correspondence
upon philosophical and scientific subjects will, however,
be conducted as heretofore by other members of the
Executive Staff, and inquiries may be addressed to the
Recording Secretary at Adyar.^’

Her resignation, as acted on by the Executive Committee,
read as follows ; —


“Adyar, March 21st, 1885.

“To the General Council

of the Theosophical Society.

“Gentlemen, — The resignation of office, which I
handed in on September the 27th, 1884, and which I
withdrew at the urgent request and solicitation of Society
friends, I must now unconditionally renew. My present
illness is pronounced by my medical attendants mortal;
I am not promised even one certain year of life. Under
these circumstances it would be an irony to profess to



H. P. B. leaves for Europe 225

perform the duty of Corresponding Secretary ; and I must
insist upon your allowing nve to retire. I wish to devote
my remaining few days to other thoughts, and to be free to
seek changes of climate, should such be thought likely to do
me good.

“ I leave with you, one and all, and to every one of my
friends and sympathizers, my loving farewell. Should this be
my last word, I would implore you all, as you have regard for
the welfare of mankind and your own karma, to be true to the
Society and not to permit it to be overthrown by the enemy.

** Fraternally and ever yours— in life or death,

(Sd.) “ H. P. Blavatsky.”

I believe that by taking this wise step she saved her
life, for it was to the last degree unlikely that she could have
borne the strain much longer ; and her colleagues are, in a
way, indebted to Dr. Mary Scharlieb for the subsequent
appearance of the Secret Doctrine^ tlie Key to Theosophy,
tlie Voice of the Silence, and all the other valuable writ-
ing she was spared to do after getting out of the
psychic maelstrom that had been created about her at
Adyar. Apart from the motive of her ill-health and
incapacity for work, she was influenced by the wish to
relieve the Society from the responsibility which her
continuance in office would lay upon it. Later, at one
of the Annual Conventions, she was unanimously and
enthusiastically invited to retvirn if her physician should
consent, and although she could never do that, she resumed
her old official status.



426


Old Diary Leaves


“The Headquarters,” I wrote on Apill ist, in my Diary,
“ is desolate, yet peaceful as it has not been before. We can
tiow face the situation calmly. General Morgan writes that
he has received a letter from Mme. Coulomb’s counsel,
demanding an apology for calling her a ‘forger’ and a
‘purloiner of letters.’” On this, a Council meeting was
called, and we telegraphed the loyal old veteran to ask
a week’s delay to give him time to i)repare his answer.
At an adjourned meeting, the next day, ‘‘ the whole Morgan
case was discussed, and the unanimous opinion was that the
General had better defend the case, as he would most
probably win it and expose the worthless characters of the
Coulombs.” He did so, but — ^as noted in a previous
Chapter — the Missionaries withdrew the suit, as they
could get no benefit from it now that H. P. B. was
out of their reach !

At a Council meeting on the Sunday following (5th
April), I brought forward as a tentative measure a plan for
the creation of a real Executive Committee, which should
share with me the management of the Society, and it was
adopted. My circular was worded as follows ; —

“ Adyar, April *]th, 1885.

“With a view to improving the administration of the
Theosophical Society and relieving the President of a
portion of the responsibility which now devolves upon him,
I have determined to form, as an experimental measure and
subject to ratification by the next Convention, an Executive
Committee, of which I invite you to become a member.



H. P. B. leaves for Europe 227

“My wish is that this Committee should assume, in
connection with myself, the entire management of the
Society’s affairs during the recess — each member and myself
to have an equal vote, the President to have a casting vote
in case of a tie ; all questions to be decided by the majority
present ; the Secretary to the Society to act as Secretary to
the Committee ; the entire proceedings to be kept strictly con-
fidential, save with the consent of the majority present ; and
the Committee to meet at least once a week for business.

“The design being merely to form a convenient working
Committee of Councillors most accessible from the Head-
quarters, I propose that a circular be sent to each and every
one of the members of the General Council, notifying him of
the appointment of this Executive Committee, and inviting
him to attend the sessions when in Madras, and at all times
to communicate through any one of his colleagues among
your number any matter he may think it advisable to have
acted upon. Thus practically the entire General Council
would have a share in the management of the Society
throughout the year.

“It is to be understood, of course, that the present
measure is adopted tentatively, and that the right is reserved
of rescinding this special Rule in case difficulties should arise
(as in the late Board of Control) of so serious a nature as to
prove its inexpediency.”

In pursuance of the invitation appended to the above
circular, the Executive Committee met, and in obedience to
a Resolution unanimously adopted, the following gentlemen



228


Old Diary Leaves


signed an acceptance of seats “under the conditions
mentioned in the President-Pounder's circular letter”;
R. Raghoonath Row ; P. Sreenevas Row ; S. Subxamanier ;
C. Ramiah; P. Parthasarathy Chetty; T. Subba Row;
A. J. Cooper-Oakley ; and C W. Leadbeater.

The Committee as thus organized went on harmoniously
for some months, but was ultimately abandoned, for the
practical reason that nobody save myself had all the details
in his head, nor the personal acquaintance with individual
colleagues and their local environments, which were needed
for acting with judgment in specific cases. The meetings
resolved, finally, into mere sittings to agree to all my
recommendations, one member after another absented
himself, and it was the general wish that I should go on as
previously, doing what seemed best without further obstruc-
tion. The marplots, Messrs. Lane-Fox and Hartmann, had
left the country, and no one else was disposed to make
trouble. Yet autocracy was my abhorrence, and I asked
nothing better than that somebody should come forward
and take a share of the great responsibility for the adminis-
tration of our difficult business. I looked on the Society as
a free and open republic of altruism, in which there should
be no sect, or caste, or privileged class, nor any strife or
emulation save as to who should best work for the good
of the world. I put my views into a leader in the
Theosophist for June 1885, entitled, “Infallibility.” It was
d propos of a recent move of Keshub Chunder Sen towards
the assumption of quasi divine honors from his following, !
•said



H. P. B. leaves for Europe 229

** A Brahmo organ charges us with the purpose of build-
ing up • a new order of priesthood/ Perhaps the theory is
based upon the fact that certain phenomena have been
shown in connection with our movement, and that the
authors of two or three Theosophical books, possibly to
give them more weight, have affirmed their personal
relationship with Mahatmas. But whatever the phenomena,
their exhibition has always had for its object to prove the
existence in all mankind of certain psychic potentialities,
which, under favoring conditions, develop. Was it ever
pretended that only certain chosen ‘vessels of election*
could have these powers, or that their exercise proved
their possessors to be infallible teachers ? Is it not, on the
contrary, absolutely true that, from the first page of Isis
Unveiled to the last line printed about Theosophy, the
uniform burden of Theosophical teaching has been that
man, as man, possesses to-day exactly the same psychic and
other capabilities as his remotest ancestor possessed; that
in successive cycles these have been alternatively developed
and latent; and that religious knowledge results from
psychic development? Where is the room for a priest-
hood among us in the exoteric sense of the word ? or the
necessity, in a Society like ours, for leaders ? The writer,
for his part, is convinced that, whatever mental sufferings,
and whatever injury to personal reputations may result
from recent events, the price is not too high to pay if the
last chance be destroyed of ever building up a sect and
‘priesthood' in the Theosophical Society. Rather than
see that calamity befall the movement, he would prefer



230


Old Diary Leaves

that the respect now felt by any friend for anyone
concerned in its inception or direction should be lost ; for
then the field would be cleared of obstructive personalities
for the consideration of first principles. In neither his
official nor private capacity has he evinced any sympathy
with the yearning after inspired teachers or infallible
teachings. Quite the reverse : for he has never let slip an
opportunity to affirm the dignity of private judgment ; the
necessity of individual research and interior development
for the comprehension of truth ; the absolute independence
of Theosophy of all special teachers or groups of teachers —
all sects, dogmas, confessions of faith, forms, ceremonies, and
national or geographical limitations. If this is not broad
enough ; if, in any other language besides English, there be
any stronger words to express an absolute repugnance to the
idea of any thinking person blindly giving up his sovereign
right of inquiry to any other person, high or low, adept or
non-adept, and of giving any value to a teaching beyond its
own intrinsic weight by appealing to an authoritative
authorship — then those are the words the writer would
wish to employ. There never was an Adept or Mahatma
in the world who could have developed himself up to that
degree if he had recognized any other principle. Gautama
Buddha is held to have been one of the greatest in this
august fraternity, and in his Kaldma Sutta he enforced at
great length this rule, that one should accept nothing,
whether written, spoken, or taught by sage, revelator, priest,
or book, unless it reconciled itself with one’s reason and
common-sense,



H. P. B. leaves for Europe 231

This is the ground upon which we stand ; and it is our
earnest hope that, when the founders of the Theosophical
Society are dead and gone, it may be remembered as their
‘profession of faith/ With stout old John Hales, the
preacher of the i6(:h century, we maintain that ‘to mistrust
and relinquish our own faculties, and commend ourselves
to others, this is nothing but poverty of spirit and
indiscretion/ ”

P'or my part, as one of the co-founders of the Society,
I had persistently adhered to that policy of personal
freedom and personal responsibility of the member from
the beginning, and have stood for it and fought for it
down to the present day. When I can no longer have
such freedom within it, I shall leave the Society, and grieve
over it as a lost cause. If I needed a Pope I should go
to Rome, where a so-called Vicegerent of God is enthroned,
and a brazen toe of a statue is always waiting to be kissed.
Docile obedience to a Teacher, who has mastered the
secrets of life and death, of man and nature, is natural and
proper; but se*rvilc obedience to a bald creed, or to a
person no better nor spiritually wiser than oneself, is the
worst of serfdoms — undignified, unmanly, a spiritual
suicide. This, I repeat, is my own feeling about the
matter, and nobody save myself is responsible for it. It
does not bind another member of the Society, and, free-
thinker as I am, I am ever ready to stand by my neighbour
and defend his right of private judgment, howsoever
orthodox he may be to whatsoever form of religious faith.
Jf he is unable to reciprocate, I should ask or compel hiin



232 Old Diary Leaves

to iresign his membership, for he has no naturd place
trithitt our ranks, and empty house is better than
bad company.**

Two consoling things happened at this time, two rifts of
clear sky amid the gloom : the Berhampur (Bengal) T. S.
sent us a letter of sweet sympathy, and the Ceylon
Buddhists reported that the Buddhist National Holiday
which I had asked Lord Derby to grant them had, with
their Governor, Sir Arthur Gordon’s consent, been
gazetted.

Under the circumstances of the situation we had the
choice of two policies, the passive and the active : we
might keep quiet, carry on our current business without
attracting public attention, or we might adopt the bolder
course of challenging public opinion, by giving lectures in
the principal centres of Indian influence and thought. I
declared for the latter, and, my colleagues of the Executive
Committee concurring, a lecture at Pacheappa^s Hall,
Madras, was arranged for the 27th April — the 117th day of
the year ; hence, to our notions, one of good omen. The
result exceeded our highest expectations; the Hall was
packed in spite of the fact that, to prevent a rush, the
Managing Committee made a small charge for admission.
The sum of rs. 150 was taken at the doors, and given
away in charity. Five professors of the Christian College
attended, but their presence did not dampen the ardor of
their students, who almost cheered themselves hoarse.

1 see that the lecture was very fairly reported the next
day in the local papers — an encouraging circumstance in



H. P. B. leaves for Europe 233

itsdf. T. Subba Row brought back, on the same day, our
copy of Mohini's and ^Mrs. Holloway's a Fragment

of Forgotten History^ and made a very severe criticism on it.

Condemned it utterly” — I write — saying that its
mistakes are calculated to throw discredit upon the
Mahatmas, while its dogmatic tone is insufferable." When
the book was announced in London, with the intimation
that it embodied authoritative teaching from the Masters
Of Wisdom, I at once wrote to the Pall Mall Gazette to
deny the claim in toto^ and warned the public that the
authors of the book were alone responsible for its contents.
Moreover, I had pasted inside the cover of every copy sold
by the Theosophist Manager the same notification.

The European Mail of that week brought dispiriting
accounts of the feeling among our people : the result, no
doubt, of H.P.B.’s not having been allowed to prosecute
her slanderers in court. Still, it could hot be helped;
to have done otherwise than we did would have been
most unwise.

If the Missionaries did not let Mme. Coulomb loose
against General Morgan, it certainly was not for lack of
provocation, for the Madras Mail of April 29 contained
his reply to her plaint, in which he renewed his former
insults and defied her to do her worst ; the Editor, at the
same time, giving notice that the discussion should not be
carried further in his columns.

As a mental recreation, on the principle of offsetting one
disagreeable thing by another even more lugubrious, I read
a good deal just then about the Witchcraft and Witch



234


Old Diary Leaves


Trials of the 17th Century. It strikes a Theosophist, in
particular, most forcibly what revolting proofs those
tragedies afford of human bigotry, stupid prejudice, and
densest ignorance of the laws of life, mind and soul. It is
enough to make one weep to recall the pictures of ignorant
and innocent hysteriacs and mediums persecuted, im-
prisoned, even judicially murdered, because phenomena,
which they could not help, occurred in their presence,
spreading panic and horror among the eye-witnesses, who
were equally ignorant and powerless as the neurotic
patients themselves. D^Assier has made good use of some
of the thousands of recorded facts, and Prof. Charcot and
his colleagues have drawn upon the judicial archives for a
basis of argument ; but we have only to turn over the
pages of Des Mousseaux and the host of writers upon these
psychical and mediumistic mysteries, to see that there exists
an inexhaustible fund of proof of the occasional interplay
of occult forces and the mutual interference of the planes
of the living and the dead.


CHAPTER XVII.


CONCERNING SIBYLS.

A fter a residence of only five months, Mrs. Cooper-
Oakley found her health suffering so much in India
that about this time she had to leave us for home under
medical orders. Our loss has been the very great gain of
the London Headquarters, where, under a more bracing
climate, she has done a prodigious amount of work.

Our London news of that week was more calming, as it
appeared that, besides Mr. F. W. H. Myers of the S. P. R.,
nobody had resigned his membership. Whether or not a
popular disbelief in the infallibility of professional hand-
writing experts influenced public opinion, or whether it was
just the instinctive feeling that an accused person ought to
have the benefit of the doubt, the fact above stated was
gratifying to the colleagues of H. P. B. There was in
the Theosophist (June 1898) a reference to the late Mr.
Montagu Williams Q.C.’s opinion of the value of this expert
testimony. Since then a copy of Mr. Williams* Leaves from
a Life (Macmillan & Co., 1890) has beep sent ipe by a

«35


Old Diary Leaves


236

friend in New 2 Leakind, and I am able to show, by the testi-
mony of that eminent leading counsel, how unnecessary was
our grief and distress on hearing that Mr. Netherclift had
declared the K. H. letters forgeries by H. P. B. Mr.
Williams tells {op. cit., p. 263) the story of a case of alleged
libel by publication on a postal card, brought against Sir
Francis Wyatt Truscott by one John Kearn. Messrs.
Poland and Grain conducted the prosecution, while Sir
John Holker, Mr. Williams, and Horace iVvory represented
the accused. The prosecutor and a lady swore to the
identity of the handwriting, and the evidence of Charles
Chabot and Frederick ^George Netherclift, professional
experts, was then taken. Both swore positively to the
writing on the postcard as being that of the defendant,
Chabot pointing out in detail to the jury the turns of letters
and flourishes, the dots, cross lines, and up and down strokes
which bore him out in his decision ; and Netherclift, pet of
the S. P. R. and slayer of the Blavatsky Medusa, said “ he
had tnade handwriting a study during more than thirty
years .... and that, after minutely comparing the letters
(of the defendant) with the postcard, he had independently
come to the conclusion that the writer in both cases was
the same. He produced a most elaborately written report^
calling attention to the various similarities existing between
the handwriting on the different documents, and, on being
cross-examined, he adhered absolutely to the position he
had taken up.** Alas ! for the poor man. The defence put
upon the stand One Mr. Thomas Flight Smith, an acquain-
tance of both the parties, the accused and accuser, Who



Concerning Sibyls


337


swore that he had himself written the postcard as a friendly
warning to Sir Francis, yet without malice to Mr. Kearn !
His father, Mr. T. J. Smith, bore him out in the assertion,
and produced three other postcards written by his son.
Mr, Alderman Swan Nottage, who stated that he was a
friend of the accused and the witness, Mr. T. F. Smith, and
had received many letters from both, and was acquainted
with tlieir respective handwriting, swore that the postcard
was undoubtedly written, not by Sir Francis, but by Mr.
Smith.” Mr. Williams adds : “ The jury stated that they
did not wish to hear any further evidence, and proceeded at
once to pronounce a verdict of ‘ Not Guilty.* So much for
the evidence of experts in handwriting ! ”

So much, indeed j and notwithstanding the Arab proverb
about the malodorousness of proffered advice, I will venture
to recommend that copies of Mr. Montagu Williams* book
and of the Report of the Parnell case be placed in the
library of the S. P. R., for the benefit of those who care
to know what the professional opinions of handwriting
experts are sometimes worth. Poor H. P. B., how those
S(leuthounds) of P(sychical) R(esearch) made thee suffer
under the knouts of these experts!

On the Good Friday of that year I had had an interview
witli a Telugu Brahmin astrologer, the possessor of a palm-
leaf copy of that wonderful old book of prophecies, the
Bhinia Grantham^ who had greatly astonished me by
his readings in that volume. In the TkeosopJust for May
i88§ (vol. vi. number 8) will be found my account of it,
under the title “Indian Sibylline Books.** As prophecies



238 Old Diary Leaves

acquire no value until their fulfilment, but after that become
most important as proofs of the predictive faculty in man,
my habit is to put on record all I hear of this sort, so that
they may be cited at the proper time. That is why I
published the revelations of the Telugu Brahmin at the
time, and as thirteen years have now passed since then, it
will be interesting to turn back to that number of the
Theosophist and see what he foretold and how he did it.
Several friends of ours told us that they had had read out
of one of these ancient ollas accurate details of their own
lives, and prophecies about their affairs which had been
literally fulfilled. They had also been allowed to verify the
astrologer^s readings by consulting the book themselves.
These friends told me, moreover, that in the course of their
consultations it had transpired that their connection with
our Society had been mentioned, and that the book con-
tained much about the Society itself. On this account they
had arranged the interview between the astrologer and
myself, but only with much difficulty and after overcoming
his objections to have a sitting with an European. Even
then he would not do it until he had consulted the book itself^
and learned from it the day, hour, and minute for the inter-
view, the number of witnesses permissible, and the positions
(relative to the cardinal points) to be assumed by the
Brahmin and myself. At the appointed time we took our
seats on the floor, on mats, in the Indian fashion. The
book, on being unwrapped, proved to be an ordinary palm-
leaf volume, the characters etched on the leaves with a
stylus. I judged it to be very old. The edges were much



239


Concerning Sibyls

discolored and worn, and the characters black with age.
The book was laid before me, the edges of the leaves
upward, and I was told to take in my two hands the
unwound binding-cord which passes through holes punched
in every leaf, insert it between any two leaves I chose^ and
open it at that place. I did so, and the astrologer then
read the contents of that and following pages. Notes were
taken by one of the witnesses. The book said : “ The
inquirer is not a Hindu, but of foreign birth. He was
born with the Moon in the constellation Pleiades, having
the sign Leo in the ascendant.” Here follow some par-
ticulars of the personal sacrifices which I was said to have
made for the public welfare. It then continued : “ With a
colleague, he organized a society for the propagation of
Esoteric Philosophy {Brahmagnyanum), This colleague is
a woman, of great power {sakti)y high family, and, like him-
self, a foreigner. Though born so well, she too gave up
everything, and for thirty years has been working in this
same direction. Yet her karma is such as to compel her to
endure great trouble and anxiety ; and she is hated by her
own kind (the white race), for whom she has w^orked so
hard.” It then spoke of two white persons who had been
most friendly, but had turned about, published bad stories
about her, and tried to make the public doubt the genuine-
ness of our movement. “Many phenomena have been
shown in connection with the Society,” it went on to say,
“ and letters received by the Founders from their Teachers
have been injudiciously made public: this has been the
cause of all the present troubled* The prophecy then



240 Old Diary Leaves

followed that our Society would survive me by many
years, and, to my surprise, for the two friends present were
not aware of it any more than the astrologer, the book told
about a private meeting of myself and others (that at Dewan
Bahadur Raghoonath Row’s private house which I have
mentioned in the last chapter) held the day before, with
the subject of our discussion, and prophesied the issue
correctly. “ The Society,” said the book, “is now passing
through a dark cycle, which began seven months and
fourteen days ago, and will last nine months and sixteen
days more ; making for the whole period seventeen months
exactly.”

Counting backward from the date of the interview, we
come to the time, in 1884, of the attack of the Missionaries
upon H. P. B., which goes to the book’s credit ; and, tracing
forward in the light of events, the prophecy as to the passing
away of the Society’s dark cycle and the beginning of a
brighter one we find corroborated. Meanwhile, what had
happened was my Indian tour of 1885, which proved a
very great success, adding seventeen new Branches to our
roll, and which certainly was not to be anticipated by either
the astrologer or my two Hindu friends who brought him
to me. That “dark cycle” of 1885 was a more serious crisis
than any we have traversed since, even that of the Judge
secession, for the Society was not then as impregnable in
its organization, the numerical strength of its membership,
or Its geographical distribution, as it was when the great
blow was struck at its life by its quondam Vice-President
across the Atlantic.



Concerning Sibyls


241


The question, so often put me as to my belief in astrology,
will naturally recur in this connection. I must answer it as
I always have, that I have not yet had evidence enough to
warrant my saying I either believe or disbelieve. Many
facts in the experience of others, some in my own, go
towards proving the truth of this alleged science, yet not
enough for a cautious man to base thereon a positive belief.
I am waiting, most ready to be convinced, yet determined
not to say I am unless I have a good case to go with to the
jury of sensible men. It seems as if we can never say what
there is in astrology until we have learned all there is in
thought-transference. Who is to say that when I sat with
that Telugu astrologer he may not have clairvoyantly read
my history and traced out its sequel in my own mind or my
aura ? And although I was permitted to examine his time-
worm book of palm-leaves, and his readings were verified
by the two Telugu friends who took notes of his readings,
that leaves open two questions, viz. (i) Did he throw a
glamor (hypnotic) over our eyes to make us see what was
not on the pages? (2) Was he a cheat who had by hook or
by crook found out about the T. S. and its founders, pre-
pared fresh pages of ollas, made them look old by discoloring
them, and inserted them among the rest? There is not
much weight in either of these hypotheses, still one must
think of all alternatives and suspend judgment until all the
needed proofs are in. The astrologer, or let us say his
book, ventured one prophecy which ought to be recalled
from time to time as a test of the science. He said that at
the time of my death “the Society would have 156 principal

t6



242 Old Diary Leaves

Branches, not counting minor ones, and in them will be
enrolled 5000 members. Many Branches will rise and
expire, many members come and go before then.’’ I,
myself, was to live from this hour (viz., 3rd April 1885,
afternoon) “ 28 years, 5 months, 6 days, 14 hours,” which
would bring us to early morning of September 9, a.d. 1913.
Here we have accuracy, beyond dispute, and it only remains
for somebody who survives me to enter this prognostic in
his common-place book and write to the then Editor of
Theosophist about a thing which, probably, everybody else
will have forgotten ! I am quite ready to believe that the
prophecy will be correct to within a year or two. As to the
strength of the Society at that time, it seems as if there is a
mistake, for already we have about 400 living charters and
more members. However, we shall see.

The interested reader will find much about the books
of the Cumaean and other Roman Sibyls, and those of
Egyptj Id the article above mentioned (May 1885, Theo-
sophist). It is a historical fact that the Sibylline Books
were so accurate in all their fateful prophecies about the
Roman state, that for over two centuries they were kept
under the strict custody of duumvirs^ until Sulla increased
the number to fifteen. They were consulted only at
times of great national crisis. St. Augustine {De civitaie
Deiy lib. xviii. c. 23) defends their veracious character, and
the Early Fathers generally held them in reverence, as it
is alleged they prophesied the advent, life, and sufferings
of Jesus Christ.

Whatever the actual value of the astrologer’s revelations



243


Concerning Sibyls

to me on that Good Friday, it is the fact that they cheered
us up at a time of gloom, and no doubt helped to give
me the courage to go forth on my public tours of that
year. Mr. T. Subba Row went with Judge P. Sreenevas
Row to consult another astrologer in Madras, who also
possessed a nadigrantham^ but with most unsatisfactory
results, as he tells the public in an article on “ Nadigran-
thams and their Interpreters,'^ which he contributed to the
Theosophist for July 1885. He was an extremely en-
lightened and advanced esotericist, and his views are
entitled to the most serious consideration. The astrologer
visited failed in every instance to give a correct answer,
and what he read or pretended to read from his book
proved to be rubbish. The one case therefore olfsets the
other, and leaves us as far as ever from having a satisfactory
answer to the question whether the Nadigranthams deserve
to be held in the high repute they enjoy throughout India.
But then, again, we have the verified prognostics of my
astrologer, and still further, the open question of telepathy
and clairvoyance. The late Mr. Judge took a hand in
the discussion of the question, giving his views in an
article (“The Nadigranthams") in the Theosophist for
October 1885. He contends that my case and that of
Mr. Subba Row are not identical, as I seem to have got
hold of a genuine nadi^ and the other gentleman of a false
one and a tricky astrologer. “It is," he writes, “by no
means proved that no nadi is trustworthy, and that at no
time could they be relied on ... . can, then, books or
leaves be made or procured which may be used in the



244


Old Diary Leaves


way pretended? I say that they can, and that there are
two or more modes of doing it.*’ He first postulates the
astrologer’s having the faculty of prevision or clairvoyance
with which “he could have given all the details related
quite easily with the aid of a few figures, letters, or verses.
His second is that “it is possible to cast up certain
astrological figures to be used on certain days and hours,
and for certain classes of questions, from which a large
number of replies and predictions can be given that would
startle the average hearer, and be true not only to the
past but also to the future. ... A large number of leaves
could be prepared which would enable one to make replies
to any kind of question at once” — /. <?., at that same sitting.
This again I give for what it may be worth, having no
great belief in Mr. Judge’s having possessed any very
notable predictive power of an occult kind. The one fact
that there is throughout the world at this present moment
an intense and growing interest in astrology and all the
“ occult ” sciences is sufficient excuse for my having diverged
so widely from the episode of the astrologer’s visit to Head-
quarters, at the lime with which our historical narrative
is now concerned.

As I had no mind to accept blindly the revelations of the
Bhima Grantham — the palm-leaf book in question — and
as I had not had time to handle and examine it during
the seance with the Telugu Brahmin, I went to Mylapore
with A’nanda to hunt him up. I was allowed to examine
it as closely as I chose. Any doubt I may have had about
the Pandit’s having befooled me with bogus leaves inter*



Concerning Sibyls


245


calated among the others was set at rest, for every lea
was unquestionably ancient and equally time-worn with
the rest. My notes say: “I saw the book, handled and
examined it. It contains 300 answers to questions written
with an iron stylus on palm ollas, is perhaps 500 years old,
and written in Telugu. There seems no doubt as to its
genuineness.’^ And yet the wonder but deepens that out
of those mere 300 answers, the Pandit should have found
a number relating to the history and destiny of our Society.
Had these verses been waiting five centuries to be read
to the right questioner when he should appear in the year
1885? It seems absurd on the face of it, yet the in-
cidents of the interview have been truthfully reported, and
my account will be corroborated, I am sure, by Mr. G.
Soobbiah Chetty, now the incumbent of an influential office
in the Madras Sea-customs Bureau. How, then, explain
the riddle ? First, fraudulent conspiracy between the Pandit
and the brothers Chetty who brought him to me. But
they were ignorant of facts read, or seemingly read, from
the Bhima Grantham \ for example, the private meeting
at Dewan Bahadoor R. Raghoonath Row’s house, the
nature of our discussion, and the policy determined upon ;
then as to the outcome of the events at that crisis, with
the fixing of the exact times of their fruition. Secondly
(if the Pandit had the faculty of psychic vision), the reading
by him of the pictures stored up in the “Astral Light.”
Thirdly, his power to compel subservient elementals to
cast a glamor over the eyes of the two Telugu witnesses,
to compel them to be blind to the actual writing on the



246 Old Diary Leaves

leaves turned over, and to read there the totally different
sentences about the Society and its Founders which he
read out to us. Fourthly (and lastly, for I can form
no other hypothesis), instead of his compelling enslaved
elementals to cast the glamor over our eyes, it is con-
ceivable that he might have been an ordinary medium,
like the famed Govind Chetty, of Kumbakonum, and
under the control of elementals or other entities who
made him, their passive agent, see what they wished him
to see, and not what was on the page before his eyes.
In either case it is a very interesting problem.

The Council decided, April i 8 th, to finish the rebuilding
of the former ‘‘Shrine Room” upstairs, which, in disgust
at its defilement by the Coulomb conspirators, I had had
demolished on my return from Europe, and to use it as a
library, collecting together our several small stores of books.
Our modest plan was very soon altered by the rapid
accumulation of Sanskrit MSS. and other literature which
about this time began. The Adyar Library building was
soon projected and built, as we shall see later on.

Meanwhile our dear H. P. B. and party were on their
way to Europe. I heard from them from each port of call,
and, May 20th, their arrival at Naples and landing. They
found cheap lodgings at Torre del Greco, near Vesuvius,
and settled down to bear their exile as best they might.

To be able to answer one of Mme. Coulomb^s shocking
slanders about H. P. B. having been the mother of illicit
offspring at Cairo, I sent for a respectable Tamil woman
who had helped nurse H. P. B. throughout her dangerous



Concerning Sibyls 247

illnesses of February, and, of course, had had to discover
her exact physical state. As might have been expected by
all who knew H. P. B.^s character intimately, the ayah
affirmed and declared her willingness to go into court and
testify that her late mistress had never been a mother.
She even went so far as to say that whatever marriage she
had contracted must have been a merely nominal one.
Adult readers will understand my meaning.

At about this time news was received from Paris that
our sole surviving French Honorary Fellow, Alphonse
Cahagnet, was dead. He and the late Baron Du Potet
were our only two, and both were distinguished authorities
in psychical science. The first book of Cahagnet’s that I
read was his Celestial Telegraphy which appeared in its
English translation at New York in about the year 1851
It was almost the first of my reading about the clairvoyant
faculty and modern ecstatical visions of the world of spirits.
Unfortunately I never had the chance of conversing with
its honest and enthusiastic author, but he sent me his
photograph and that of his wife, the ecstatic “ Adele, ”
which I keep hanging in my private rooms. Not a visitor
has ever guessed that the heavy-bodied peasant woman of
the picture was even a clairvoyant at all, let alone that
soaring visionary whose soul-flights through space took her
to supernal planes, where she was swallowed up in a great
blinding light, that drove back the less ethereal clairvoyants
whom Cahagnet sometimes set to watching her in her
upward progress. Elsewhere, when writing on the subject
of clairvoyance, I have quoted from Cahagnet’s book his



248


Old Diary Leaves

description of the agony felt by him on finding himself
powerless to draw Ad^le*s soul back into her body when
she felt so merged in the spirit sphere as to declare she
should never re-enter the “corpse” that seemed so re-
pugnant to her. He tells us that the body began to even
change color like a real corpse, and show the preliminary
signs of decomposition; while he, in the greatest distress
and fear, vainly brought his strongest will to bear upon her
soul to come back, and not leave him to be perhaps tried
for murdering the adored wife of his bosom. Poor man 1
his plight is one that many have, and anyone may, experi-
ence. The last resource that he employed was prayer to
God, which succeeded. Of course it would in the case of
a man of his temperament, for by praying he raised his
consciousness and yearning to the celestial levels on which
Adele was functioning, and so got into touch with her as
he could not by the mere use of his brain-power. If one
sets out to chase a bird, one must get bird’s wings and fly
after it ; to walk on the ground will be useless.

In pursuance of the policy of propaganda adopted by the
Council, I left Madras, May 9, for Vellore, in company
with Messrs. R. Raghoonath Row, P. Sreenevas Row, C.
Ramiah, and L. V. V. Naidu. Addresses were delivered
by the Dewan Bahadur in Tamil, and myself in English.
The Councillors returned to Madras, but Doraswamy kept
on with me. Our next station was Arcot, where we re-
organized the local Branch, then in that sort of compulsory
pralaya because of the transfer to other stations of active
members in Government service, which is so often happen-



Concerning Sibyls 249

ing throughout India, We went to Arnee next, where a new
Branch was organized ; thence to Chittoor, where there was
prepared for our delectation much music, many fragrant
garlands, and a procession of the 90 boys in the Sanskrit
school that our Branch had formed. At 8 p.m. on the 17th
we started for Madras and got home the following morning.
The results of this short tour were: — i Branch revived,
I new one formed, 10 new members admitted, and the T. S.
movement put on a healthy footing throughout that district.

Another short tour began on the 21st when I started for
Madura, where a lecture was given and two candidates
admitted to membership. ‘‘ But for the Coulomb blight,*’
says my Diary, ‘‘the number would have been from 20
to 30.” Yet the visit stopped the retrograde tendency, and
the two men gained being of influential standing, I felt that
we had done well. At Trichinopoly my audiences were
large, especially that in an inner court of the ancient
Sreerangam Temple, where the people massed in thousands.
As on the occasion of my visit in 1882, the scene was most
picturesque and striking, the dark-skinned multitude and
the massive stone walls, huge gateway and carved mono-
lithic columns being lit up by hundreds of torches, and the
Brahmin priests with their snowy cloths thrown up into
dazzling whiteness in the glare. With this picture vivid in
my mind I left at 1,30 that same night for Tanjore. My
first public discourse there was given at the Reading
Room; my second, in the vast open enclosure of the
Temple, standing on the plinth of the colossal Bull, a
monster measuring about twelve feet from the ground to



2$o Old Diary Leaves

its shoulder in the sitting posture. One feels dwarfed in
such an environment, and as I stood with the Bull beside
me and the lofty pyramid, or Goparanty in front, towering
up towards the sky, its numberless life-sized figures of
Indian gods, goddesses, and mythological heroes brought
out in high lights and deep shadows by the moonlight, the
thought of the strangeness of it all rushed in upon me and
gave a peculiar tone to my impromptu discourse. The
sense of my American modernity, in contrast with the
hoary antiquity of the temple and the race which worship
in it, was overpoweringly real. A visit was paid, as usual,
to the Tanjore Royal Library, once the richest literary
collection in India, and even now extremely important ; but
it was a not too cheerful experience, for the library is but
little used by scholars, since scholarship is so poorly
recompensed in these utilitarian days. These repositories
of the high thoughts of ancient sages are like so many
granaries where the seed-corn of future harvests is kept
against the time of sowing.

A little tired and used up by the heat and travel, I laid
my straw mat and cotton rugs on the stone platform of the
station that night and slept a deep sleep, despite hurrying
trains, until 3 a.m,, when I left for Kumbakonam, a two-
hours* journey. I was kindly welcomed at the station, and
lectured that evening at the Porter Town Hall, a fine and
large room, to a very large, attentive, and appreciative
audience. Kumbakonam, known as “the Cambridge of
Southern India,*’ is a centre of culture and, of course, of
religious scepticism — the two going too much together.



251


Concerning Sibyls

Naturally I attacked materialistic agnosticism, vindicated
our Society’s policy and record of usefulness, and defended
H. P. B. as a true and brave friend of India, whose un-
selfish exertions on its behalf put to shame the majority of
modern educated Hindus, who acted as if it were a shame,
instead of an honor, to have been born in the land of the
Rishis. Whether I did any permanent good is impossible
to say, but most assuredly the sleepers were aroused to
enthusiasm for the passing moment, and who knows what
are the consequences of even a moment’s awakening to the
sense of duties neglected and opportunities slipping aw^y ?
The next day’s audience, in the same hall, were extremely
demonstrative as I went on to treat Idols and Idol Worship
from the side of psychological science. There were many
college men present who had no clear conception of the
actual process by which a mere block of stone, metal, or
wood, carved into a certain conventional shape, is changed
into a sort of psychic dynamo, soaked with human aura and
efficacious for the production of psychological and physio-
logical effects upon sensitive worshippers. The process is
called in Sanskrit Prana pratishtha — the focalizing of auric
power (prana ) — and is intensely interesting to the amateur
of mesmerism. Without going into details, it will suffice to
say that the image goes through a process which extends
over forty days and includes the withdrawing from the
image of all innate impurities, and the subsequent imbuing
or saturating of it with a purified human xnagnetism^/.^.,
aura. Then to fix this supply, as it were, it is customary
for the officiating adept, or Chief Brahmin, to prepare, or



Old Diary Leaves

have engraved on a sheet of copper, a geometrical symbol,
called chakram^ into which a magic power is imparted by
the concentration of the trained Will* This copper-plate
is placed under the image when fixed in its place, and there
left so long as the temple stands. Now, the wiser and
purer the adept-consecrator, the more real, effective, and per-
manent the infusion of prana into the image ,* and the more
carefully the chakram is prepared and placed, the more
lasting its efficacy as a storage-battery of divine power. One
sees, from all this, that the good Bishop Heber was more
or less silly in saying : —

** The Heathen in his blindness
Bows down to wood and stone,

In point of fact, neither is the Heathen blind, nor does
he bow down to wood and stone : quite the contrary, and
the average Missionary is the real blind one, since he knows
nothing at all about the Powers, symbols, customs, or cere-
monies which he reviles.

On to Cuddalore, my last station of this tour, where I
lectured on Idols in the Temple, where I was surrounded
by them; and on the ist June I got back to Adyar, with a
thankful heart for having escaped sunstroke or heat-apoplexy,
and, despite the high temperature, having done so much
to restore the old kindly feeling between the South Indian
people and ourselves.

* Vide the standard Western books on Magic for an explanation of
the occult connection between geometrical signs and the Powers of the
Elementary kingdoms.


CHAPTER XVIII.

FINAL DEPARTURE OF DAMODAR.

A N official tour in Northern India having been planned
2 ~\ as part of the year’s programme, I sailed for Calcutta
in the French steamer ‘‘Tibre” on the 3 rd June. It was a
relief most blessed to get to sea and enjoy its pure, cool
breezes and its ozone after my recent tour in the South,
with its concomitant heat and dust, its crowds, mental
anxiety, and physical strain ; never did I so gladly go out
from land upon the deep blue Bay of Bengal, badly as it
had treated me at times. I was in the thick of the fight for
the salvation of the Society, my courage and faith rising in
proportion to the obstacles ; and everyone will understand
what must have been the physical and mental effect of this
temporary escape from the strain of public work. Life
seemed pouring into my body from the physical mother of
all terrestrial life, the germ-hatching sea. I could well have
cried out with Uhland ; —

** Take, O boatman, thrice thy fee ;

Take, — I give it willingly ;

For, invisible to thee,

Spirits twain have cross'd with me.*

*53


254 Old Diary Leaves

The weather fine and the sea smooth, I was well rested
and refreshed by the time we reached Calcutta, on the 6th,
at 5 P.M. About twenty friends met me on landing and
gave me cordial welcome. A crowded meeting of the
Branch was held on the next evening, and a stream of
visitors kept me busy throughout each day. Instead of
losing members I began to admit fresh candidates almost
at once; but my first public lecturing work was fixed for
Darjiling, so I took train for that mountain-cradled station
on the second day. The journey occupies but twenty-five
hours, and one has scarcely time to prepare his body for
the change from ioo° to 6o° Fahrenheit before one is there.
It is a most delightful little trip, provided one has good
weather and is not too much delayed by landslips in the
mountains.

The whole Darjiling Branch met me at the station, and
with them was that excellent, philanthropical young million-
aire, the late Tej Narain, of Bhagulpur, founder of the
prosperous Anglo-Sanskrit College that bears his name and
perpetuates his memory. He and I were old acquaintances,
and the founding of this College, for the accomplishment
of which act credit is largely due to Babu Ladli Mohun
Ghose, L.M.S., one of our Bhagulpur members, is directly
traceable to our Society’s influential appeals to the Hindu
heart and conscience. Tej Narain brought Sarat Chandra
Dis (the now famous Founder and Honorary Secretary of
the Buddhist Text Society, a C I.E. and Rai Bahadur for
his services to Government and achievements in Philology)
to see me, and many others called daily. Sarat Babu is a



Final Departure of Damodar 255

most interesting man to talk with, if one cares about Tibet
and Northern Buddhism, for he knows more about them
than any man in India — or outside it, for that matter. He
was a teacher in Government service, in charge of a Bhutia
and Sikkimese school at Darjiling, and had learned a good
deal of the Tibetan language, when the idea came to him
to try the feat, which has baffled so many European ex-
plorers, of reaching Lhassa, the mysterious Tibetan capital.
In the character of a Pandit and Indian doctor he went
and actually succeeded ; not only that, but he brought back
with him many Tibetan versions of early Buddhistic books
and a very complete knowledge of the Tibetans, their
Lamas, religious ceremonies, and holy days, not to speak of
the geography of Tibet between the Indian frontier and
Lhassa, his notes on which had to be collected with the
greatest care and preserved with the greatest cunning. For
example, as he could not use a surveyor’s chain, he counted
distances by telling the beads of his rosary. His two
reports to the Indian Government are highly interesting and
instructive, the narrative comparing favorably with the best
works of the kind by the world’s most famed explorers;
and, what is strange for an Oriental, they are free from
bombastic exaggeration and extravagant hyperbole — the
“Mahavansa.” In conversation, as confidence was estab-
lished between us, he told me most interesting things about
the white and black magic of the “ yellow and red ” Lamas
— things which amply support the evidence of the Abb^s Hue
and Gabet, and of Mme. Blavatsky as well But, being a
Government servant, he seems to think that if he should


256 Old Diary Leaves

tell the public what he told me several times and once Mrs.
Besant in my company, his reputation as a scientific ob-
server would be jeopardized and his interests have to suffer :
in short, he takes the selfish view of it, and has for many
years now been hiding truth because he can’t afford to give
it out. He actually lived thirteen months at Teshu Lumpo,
in the household of the Tashi Lama, the second in rank in
the Lamaic hierarchy ; made the journey thence to Lhassa
under favorable auspices; saw and talked with the Dalai
Lama, or Supreme Pontiff, and brought back manuscripts,
printed books, and other souvenirs of his memorable journey.
He was good enough to give me one of the soft silken
scarfs that the Tashi Lama, at a reception, laid across his
hands, after the national custom, when they were held out
with joined palms in reverential salutation. I have it at
Adyar among our curiosities. Woven into the tissue is a
picture of the Lord Buddha, seated, with his two disciples,
Sariputra and Moggallana, at his right and left.

Among my frequent visitors was Babu Parbati Charan Roy,
one of the best educated of Calcutta University graduates,
and then holding a position of influence under Government.
Like too many of his class, his feeble spiritual belief had
been submerged by Western educational influences, and he
was a thorough disbeliever in the future state, though always
ready to discuss those questions. I am glad to say that his
contact with H. P. B. and our literature eventually worked
a complete change in his ideas ; he became a member of
our Society, and some years later published a book giving
the history of his repudiation of his ancestral religion, his


Final Departure of Damodar 257

return to it, and the peace of mind and joy Which this
brought him.

The then young Prince of Nuddea came to see me
spent many hours in my company, seeming happy to be
under the influence of one who loved his country and
people. His tutor, a brilliant graduate^ was another free^
thinker and sceptic, so that, for all the religious good he got
by it, the Prince might as well have been brought Up by one
of those disbelieving European tutors who have checked the
pious inclinations of their young royal pupils. I could
name cases if I chose or it would do the least good, but as
it is, the friends of India can only grieve over the too
common spectacle of heirs to ancient thrones being led
out of the path trodden by their ancestors, and turned into
irreligious billiard-players, pleasure-seekers, and toadies to
the whites, instead of being encouraged to patronize religious
men, learned scholars, and the classical literature of India
which, in the good old days, shed lustre on the courts where
its custodians were supported and honored. It is not the
fault of the poor boys, but of the Europeanizing system
under whose masterful influence they come— a system
perhaps good enough for Western princes, who are not
expected to shine as religious exemplars, but bad for Indian
chiefs, who are called to rule over millions of unspoilt
Asiatic subjects. I once visited a Rajkumar College in
Northern India — />., a school for the sons of ruling chiefs
and nobles — and was taken through the rooms by the
Principal, the most liberal-minded European teacher I have
met. Being requested to address the lads, I tried to impress

17



258 Old Diary Leaves

on their minds the responsibilities imposed upon them by
the fact of their princely birth, and begged them to try to
emulate the examples of Ikshavaku, Harischandra, and
Dharmaputra, rather than that of some of our contemporary
princes, whose hoarded wealth is wasted on flitting pleasures,
and whose minds are never given to holy thoughts. I have
heard since from one of those boys that my offhand remarks
made such an impression on them that they formed a
society among themelves, to encourage each other to be
good Indian rulers and leave honored names behind them.
Admitting, what is more than likely, that, for want of follow-
ing up, the influence was but transitory, yet I think it was a
gain to have even planted the seeds of higher ideals in those
receptive boyish minds, and that the forming of their society
is an indication that the adoption of such a system would be
a great blessing to India. We need give no weight to the
objection that it would be an evil thing to encourage these
future petty sovereigns to fall into gross superstition and
idolatry, for that comes from the class of persons who do
not know, or, if they know, dare not reveal, that when
Hinduism is read with the key of Theosophy it represents
no superstition, nor does its idol-worship tend to degrade
the lofty conceptions of the Supreme Being which are
presented in the Git4 and the Upanishads. What is
desirable is that, not only the Indian princes, but all intel-
ligent Indians, should realize the dignity of the religion
imparted to the Aryan race in the present Manvantara, and
the real meaning of their religious stories, folk-lore fables,
and carven symbols, which teach, by carefully-chosen object-



Final Departure of Damodar 259

lessons, the limitless power, wisdom, and justice of the One
Divine Reality.

Damodar K. Mavalankar is one of the best-known
characters in the early Indian history of the Theosophical
Society, and has been frequently mentioned in the course of
these memoirs. He left Adyar, while I was away in Burma,
for the last time on the 23rd February 1885, for Calcutta, in
the s.s. ** Clan Graham,” with the intention of going to
Tibet via Darjiling. This was thirty-six days before
H. P. B.’s own final departure for Europe. Four persons
on this side of the Himalayas had voices in this matter, of
whom three were H. P. B., T. Subba Row, and Maji, of
Benares : the chief agent, of course, was H. P. B.,
Mr Subba Row having merely some questions to be
answered, and Maji some clairvoyant information to give.
The name of the fourth party I shall not mention, but merely
say that he is equally well known on both sides of the
mountains, and makes frequent religious journeys between
India and Tibet. Damodar hoped to be allowed to go with
him on his return to Lhassa, though his constitution,
naturally delicate, had run down from overwork, consump-
tive tendencies had .“^hown themselves, and he had had some
hsemorrhage. The most disquieting rumors were circulated,
soon after he left Darjiling, about our dear boy’s having
perished in the attempt to cross the mountains. In the
first week of July it was reported to me from Chumboi,
Sikkim, that his corpse, frozen stark and stiff, had been
found in the snows, and his clothing at a little distance.
Despite the transparent improbability of his having thrown



26 o Old Diary Leaves

off his clothing in that climate merely to die, the tale was
believed by many, chiefly by those who denied the
existence of the White Lodge, and who wished to cast some
opprobrium on us for allowing a young fanatic to sacrifice
his life in so evidently vain a quest. Well, we bore it, as
we did, and ever since have, similar malicious stories, with
as much equanimity as we could summon. But at Darjiling,
through the courtesy of Babu Saratchandra Das, who
interpreted for me, I had a long talk with the chief of the
coolies who went with Damodar from Darjiling through
Sikkim, and who brought back his superfluous luggage and
his pocket Diary. From this latter important document I
am now tracing Damodar from Madras to the time when he
sent back the coolies and passed under other protection
than ours. The value of his past work and the possibly
important part he may be destined to play in the future of
this movement of ours, makes me think that it is as well
that I should include the chief parts of the Diary in this
history.


Damodar’s Diary.

zyd, 1885.— In the evening embarked on the
“ Clan Grant ” to go to Calcutta. Feb. 2 Steamer sailed
before 6 in the morning. Did not suffer from sea-sickness.
as^A— Made friends with the Doctor of the ship, who seems
to be a very nice man, but to know or care little for phil-
osophy, though he has the capacity if he would only develop
it. ayrt.— Reached Calcutta at about 4 p.m. ; was met at
the jetty by Norendro Babu and others, whom I told about



Final Departure of Damodar 261

my illness and of the necessity for a change.^’ [Of course,
concealing the ultimate purpose of the journey. 0.]

Here follow entries about his talks with friends, his visit
to the local Branch, and his opinion about its activity, which
was not too favorable. Then come his notes on his leav-
ing by rail for Berhampur, where we then had about the
best Branch in India, under the leadership of Babu Nobin
K. Banerji, President ; Babu Dinanath Ganguli, Vice-Presi-
dent ; and Babu Satkauri Mukerji, Secretary — three as good
colleagues as any man could ask for in any great public
movement. After spending three days with them he moved
on to Jamalpur, where we had (and still have) another
Branch. I note that once in Calcutta and once at
Berhampur he was recognized by persons who had seen
him in their dreams, an experience that I have often had
myself in different lands. The Jamalpur brothers, he
says, put to him much more interesting and intelligent
questions than those propounded in Calcutta, showing
that they had thought deeply about the great problems
of life.

March — Reached Benares and went to Majids

ashram. Had long talks with her both morning and after-
noon. She spoke about Subba Row, and told me things
which he had only lately spoken to me in private. Also
spoke about Bawaji and said things known only to Mme. B.
and myself. Said various other startling things,

“ March ^th . — Conversations with Maji continued. She



262 Old Diary Leaves

spoke about the portraits of the Masters at the Headquarters
and told me many surprising things. Four Benares Theoso-
phists called in the evening. Majids talk was very interesting
and instructive. In the afternoon she told me about Subba
Row’s Guru and about himself.

March loth . — Commenced to take internally some
medicine she prepared for me. Had private talks with her
during the day. Mnie. B., she says, will not die for a year
or more yet. When she does, she will probably reincarnate
in Subba Row’s family, and reappear in public life after ten
years.*

March nth , — Talks continued. In the afternoon at-
tended a meeting of the Benares Branch. The Munsiff of
Benares is President. The members are all new, but earnest
and intellectual. Later, Maji showed me a portrait of her
father which was precipitated after his death.

March 12th , — A morning talk with her, and one at
noon, entirely private, in her gupha^\ when she discussed the
plans in view and the persons concerned. She tells me
startling facts and something about the future. She says
that for about a fortnight I am not to go to ... . [the
personage with whom he wished to go to Tibet], but
then it will be determined whether I shall proceed
further.

* As neither of these prophecies has been fulhlled, we must discount
all of Maji*s revelations to Damodar. At one visit I myself paid her,
she predicted that H. P. B. would die within two years of that time
and at sea. Neither of these proved true.

t A cave such as Yogis excavate for themselves to live in. The one
at Maji’s was used by her father, a Yogi,



Final Departure of Damodar 263

March i^th , — Left Benares at ii a.m. Travelled all
day and night. Reached Calcutta the next morning.”

He spent the next fortnight in Calcutta, and his Diary
records the visits exchanged and conversations held on
different occasions.

March ^oiL — Received a telegram, through .... from
. . . . that I might now come to Darjiling and matters
would be arranged.”

He left town on the 31st and got to Darjiling on the ist
April, where he was cordially welcomed by our members
and became the guest of Babu Chhatra Dhar Ghose,
F.T.S., one of our excellent colleagues. Three days later
a representative of the personage who was leaving for
Lhassa came to see him, and told him to keep himself in
readiness, although the day of departure was not yet fixed.
Damodar saw the agent several times, and all details were
agreed upon. At last, on the 8th, the party arrived, and
Damodar received his orders to start, which he did, as the
following entry shows.

April 13/A — Left Darjiling at 10.15 a.m., and
reached Runjeet (about 1 1 miles) in the evening. Halted
there.

April 14/A — Left Runjeet about 7 a.m. Took rice (/>.,
broke his fast) at Tasding, about one and a half miles
from Tasding Bridge. Reached Vecha, about four miles



?64 Old Diary Leaves

Kalingpong, in the evening at about t o^clock.
Halted in a cow-shed for the night.

April i^th , — Left Vecha after morning coffee. Took
iMt (rice) at Podaon,* where I met Babu Opendranath
Mukhopadhyaya, Reached Renanga in the evening, where
I sent *s coolie back with the pony.

April i6tk — Took bhdt instead of coffee the next
morning, and went on without stopping to Sanangthay,
about a mile beyond Dichbring. Reached there before
5 p.M. Stopped in a Bhutia house.

April — Left Sanangthay in the morning after
taking bMt, and got to Bhashithang in the evening at
about s. It is about two miles from Ranevon, which is
on top of a hill at whose foot is this village.

April i8M. — Left Bhashithang in the morning, after
bMl. Reached, about 4 p.m., the river Dichoo, at the
place called Doomrah, about three miles from Longboo.
After crossing the river there is an ascent for about five
miles before reaching the capital of the Sikkim Raja.
Stopped for the night by the river.

April i8/i4. — Left the river in the early morning, after
bhat^ and reached Sikkim at noon. Stopped with the . . ,
(the personage with whom his journey was to be made).
Saw him for an hour in the afternoon. Nothing in par-
ticular said. Am to have a talk to-morrow. Had another
interview with him at night. He will tell me positively

* Some of the names of places are almost illegible, Damodar having
written his Diary in soft pencil, which in the course of time has got
rubbed.



Final Departure of Damodar 265

to-naorrow about effecting my purpose. He leaves Sikkim
the day after to-morrow.

Afril 20th , — Another talk with him.

April 2ist — Saw him again to-day. I wanted to go on
to Longboo, but he wants me to remain till to-morrow,
when he will be a little more at leisure.

April 2 2nd , — Left Sikkim in the morning at about
10 o’clock. Reached Kabi (about half a mile from
Longboo) at 3 p.m. Halted there for the day. The ....
said he had not yet fully known me, but that I am destined
for some important work within the next month or two ;
that I must probably be a big Tibetan lama reincarnated in
Tibet. The karma is great.

April 2^rd . — Took bhdt in the morning, and proceeded
on from Kabi alone, sending back my things with the
coolies to Darjiling.”

Here tlie Diary ends, and this is the last written trace of
this devoted, high-minded, enthusiastic young Brahmin,
whose record since joining H. P. B. and myself at Bombay
is one of unbroken energy and unfaltering zeal in the cause
of humanity. A nobler heart never beat in a human
breast, and his departure was one of the hardest blows we
ever received. As above remarked, he had almost broken
down his constitution by incessant official work, and when
leaving Adyar had begun to spit blood and show signs of a
rapid decline. Yet, with undaunted courage, he undertook
the hard journey across the Himalayas, indifferent to the
biting cold, the drifted snow, the lack of shelter and food*



266


Old Diary Leaves

intent upon reaching the Guru whom he had first seen in
his youth when lying on a sick-bed, of whom he had lost
sight for many years, but whom he had recovered soon after
joining the Theosophical Society, as his spiritual faculties
developed and he was able to seek him in the sukshma
^arira. What made him so devotedly attached and un-
swervingly loyal to H. P. B. was the discovery that this
Guru was one of the Adepts behind our movement, the
intimate associate of “ Upasika,” as he always subsequently
called H. P. B. From the chief coolie of his escort I got
particulars about him of great interest. After the pony was
sent back to Darjiling, Damodar tried to proceed on foot
up the steep acclivities of the mountain track, but his
strength soon gave out, and after that the coolies carried
him by turns on their backs. To conceal his connection
with the Tibetan functionary who had promised his pro-
tection and aid, Damodar was ordered to go on ahead two-
days* marches and then wait for the other to come up.
That the junction should be unwitnessed, the coolies were
ordered back to Darjiling. Damodar would not keep any
more clothes than the ascetic costume he was wearing, nor
any of the rice, meal, pulse, or other dry provisions with
which his friends had supplied him. The most he would
do was to let the chief coolie bake him a dozen chapaties^
or unleavened pancakes. The last that was seen of him by
the coolies was when, with face turned towards the Tibetan
frontier, he trudged painfully on and disappeared behind a
turning of the road. On their way back the coolies passed
the personage who was following after our dear lad ; and



Final Departure of Damodar 267

the jemadar heard subsequently that the junction had been
effected, and the caravan proceeded on towards the pass
through the mountains.

It is quite possible that Damodar’s rejected clothing may
have been found in the snows, for it was agreed that he
should receive Tibetan dress, and be supplied with food,
shelter, transportation, and all necessaries. The finding of
his frozen corpse is quite another matter. That is certainly a
lie. A miya of his body may have been left there to make it
appear as if the pilgrim had succumbed ; but that he reached
his destination safely, and has ever since been under the
protection of his Guru, I have reason to believe. So far,
however, as intercourse with him in the ordinary way is con-
cerned, he might as well be dead, for he is inaccessible by
post, telegraph, or messenger. Though he has written thrice
to two persons in India, he has passed out of our reach as
effectually as though his body had been dropped into the
sea in a shotted hammock, and I have refused the most
urgent requests to disclose his place of abode or the possible
time of his return. This latter for the good reason that I
do not know when, if ever, he will come back to us. That
he will, I believe ; and I should not be surprised if he came
when H. P. B., reincarnated and, like himself, changed
beyond all recognition, shall resume the world-work she had
to drop on “White Lotus Day*^ in 1891. It would be
too unreasonable to imagine that the Lords of Karma would
keep any one of the best workers of the Theosophical
movement idling about on the other planes of existence,
when the cry of the suffering world foi light and guidance



268 Old Diary Leaves

ia rising to their celestial abodes. Their chief desire and
paramount duty is to help our human race to climb the
path to the higher levels, where delusions, born of spiritual
ignorance, wither away in the blaze of Wisdom like flowers
bitten by a frost.


CHAPTER XIX.

IN NORTHERN INDIA AGAIN.

I WAS loath to exchange the cool, bracing climate of
Darjiling for the hot, vaporous temperature of the
Plains, but I had still many hundred miles of journeying
before me before my tour should be finished and I could
take rest at green Adyar, with its refreshing ocean breezes
and its river running just beneath my chamber window.
So, after more talks with the Tibetan traveller and my other
friends, more conversazioni, and a public lecture at the
Town Hall, I descended the mountain to Siliguri, the
Junction-place of the Himalayan Railway and the Northern
Bengal, and sweltered in a temperature of loo* to a most
uncomfortable extent. It suggested to me the change from
the outer air on a crisp morning to that of a greenhouse.
However, work had to go on all the same, and I organized
the Siliguri T. S. that same evening, sat up late talking and
answering the metaphysical conundrums they are so fond

of putting in this country, and slept on the stone platform

269


270 Old Diary Leaves

of the station as the coolest — ^say, rather, the least hot —
place to be found.

Saidpur, the next place on the programme, was reached
at noon on the 19th (June 1885), and at 6 p.m. I lectured
to a very large gathering on ‘‘Theosophy and the Aryan
Revival.” There was another lecture on the next day and
the admission of several new members, as the happy proof
that the malign influence of our persecutors had not spread
that far. I went next to Rajshahye via Nattore, and I
mention the detail merely because the distance from Nattore
to my destination had to be made in a palanquin — the most
ignoble of all modes of conveyance, I think, to a healthy
man. Fancy yourself lying at ease on your back, smoking,
reading, or dozing, in a cofiin-like box carried by poles on
the shoulders of six or eight undersized coolies, in a pouring
rain, over a sticky clay road, twenty-eight miles in nine and
a half hours ; the wretched pole-bearers gasping a droning
refrain the whole way, except when they would groan to
excite your pity and get bakshish — and say whether I am
not right. True, they are trained to it from boyhood, and
at the end of such a heavy journey as this would come in to
your place on the trot, but still I felt thoroughly ashamed of
myself, innocent though I was of any part in the business.
“Talk, talk, talk” — says my Diary — “with all the clever
men in Rajshahye, including a German Professor of Physics
in the local College”; and there were the usual public
lecture and admissions into membership. The return transit
to Nattore was even worse than the other, for, leaving at
a p.M., we did not get there until after % a«m. 1 By that



In Northern India Again 271

day noon we were back in Calcutta, and I went from the
Sealdah station straight on to Bhowanipore to see Maji, who
had come from Benares on a visit to Nobin K. Bannerji at
his family house. I had a three-hours* talk with her through
Nobin, and she told me that Damodar was then at a place
four-days* journey from Darjiling. This we now see, on
referring to his Diary, was not the fact ; so it goes to make
another point against the accuracy of MajPs revelations — for
which I am sorry. I saw her daily during the fortnight
that I spent in Calcutta, and was always much interested by
her discourse. She was always surrounded by a small crowd
of inquirers, and her answers displayed erudition and insight.
Her attractive manner and sympathetic voice added to her
popularity. Finally, there was that glamor of supposed
mystical powers which attaches in India to every respectable
yogi and yogini, and which is a survival of the traditions of
the olden times. These powers she must have had to some
extent, for we have seen that on our first meeting, in 1879,
before anything was known in India about H. P. B*s connec-
tion with two certain Adepts, she told me things about them
that she could not have learnt from third parties, and in
DamodaPs Diary we read how she astonished him with her
revelations about Subba Row and others. It was my early
enthusiasm about her that mainly caused Nobin, Dinanath,
Bihari, and Shama Charan Babus to come to her as disciples,
and to do so much to make her known and popular in
Bengal and Behar ; so that, naturally enough, I was most
anxious for her reputation as a mystic to be fully sustained.
If it has not, it is not my fault.



272 Old Diary Leaves

The local Committee had me lecturing in all the quartets
of Calcutta during my fortnight’s stay. Among other
topics given me was a defence of Hinduism against the
missionary charge of gross superstition and immorality.
It will scarcely be credited by those who have even a super-
ficial knowledge of the ethical teachings of the Aryan sages,
that the chief of the Scottish Mission in Calcutta had the
effrontery to put in print the assertion that Hinduism tends
to make its men liars and its women unchaste ; yet he did
this, and it fell to me to refute this outrageous calumny.
To hear me, the elite of Hindu society were invited, on the
3rd July, to the house of the venerable scholar and noble-
man, Raja Radhakanta Deb, Bahadur, author of the great
lexicon, Sabdakalpadruma, I believe every local Indian
scholar of note was present, and that I had no great difficulty
in proving my case.

So far from encouraging untruthfulness, dissoluteness of
behaviour, or any other vice, the Shastras teem with
exhortations to noble conduct and the striving after the
very highest ideals. Manu (VI. 92) enumerates the
following “ten-fold system of virtuous duties'’: Content-
ment ; abstention from injury to others, active benevolence,
and returning good for evil ; resistance to sensual appetites ;
abstinence from theft or illicit gain ; purity, chastity, and
cleanliness \ correction of the passions ; acquisition of
knowledge ; acquisition of Divine Wisdom ; veracity,
honesty, and fidelity ; freedom from wrath and hatred. A
little farther on he says : “ Persevere in good actions,
subdue thy passions, bestow gifts in a suitable manner, be



In Northern India Again 273

gentle, bear hardship patiently, associate not with the
malignant, and give pain to no sentient being.” Again,
he says (II. 239, IV. 178): “Walk in the path of good
people, the path in which thy forefathers walked. Take
examples of good conduct from all, as nectar is taken from
poison, gentleness of speech from a child, prudent conduct
from an enemy, and gold from dross.” Again : “ Though
reduced to penury in consequence of thy righteous dealings,
give not thy mind over to unrighteousness.” Then, we
find in the Taiteriya, the Mundaka, and the Sandilya
Upanishads this injunction: “Speak the truth (Satyam),
Truth alone conquers, not falsehood. No religion or
morality is higher than truth. Nothing is higher than
truth,” It was hence that the Benares royal family took
their motto, which, with the late Maharajah^s permission,
I adopted as the legend of the Theosophical Society.
“ Mercy is the might of the righteous,” says the Vishnu
Purana (I. 21), an axiom that matches the noble defini-
tion of Mercy that Shakespeare put into the mouth of
Portia. And how poetical and touching is this sentiment
from Hitopadesa: “A good man thinks only of benefiting
all and cherishes no feelings of hostility towards anyone,
even at the moment of his being destroyed by him; just
as the sandal tree sheds perfume on the edge of the axe
when it is being felled.” Manu (VI. 47) goes so far as to
say : “ Being treated cruelly, do not return the cruelty.
Give blessing for curses.” Is there anything more noble
in any other Scripture? So we might go on multiplying
similar quotations from the teachings of the Aryan sages,

18



274


Old Diary Leaves

to pi^ov^ the cruel injustice of those who concur with the
O^utta missionary that Hindu religion is the nurse of
vicious tendencies. How can such people ever hope to
convert intelligent Hindus to their religion ? How far the
sympathies of the Indian public went with us may be
judged from the fact that, whereas my public audiences
ran from 1500 to 200Q, only a score or so of persons,
and they Christians, went to listen to an address, given
after my departure by one of the ablest preachers of the
missionary party, denunciatory of our views !

On the 7th July I left Calcutta for Bhagulpur, but was
intercepted at Nalhati Junction by our dear brothers of
Berhampore, and, so to say, compelled to diverge in their
direction. Between Azimgunj and Berhampur is the
Palace of the Nawab of Murshedabad, an old friend of
mine ; and he had arranged for me to break journey, spend
part of the day with him, and dine at the Palace. I did
so, and he and I had a long talk about religious and
scientific matters, and parted with expressions of mutual
goodwill. My reception by the friends at Berhampur was,
as usual, most cordial, and my four days there were full
of pleasant experiences. With one exception, however;
for on the 9th we heard by telegraph from Calcutta of the
sudden death of Nobin K. Bannerji, President of this
Branch, of whom I have spoken above. He was to have
rnet me at Berhampur on the 9th, but died of an attack
of cholera. Among our Indian colleagues not one was
pxore prized and beloved than he, and it is a consolation
for me to know that he is likely to soon reapp^r in the



In Northern India Again 275

ranks of our workers in a better body than he had in the
last incarnation.

I reached Bhagulpur, my next station, on the 12th, and
became the guest of Tej Narain, whom I have mentioned
in my notes on the Darjiling visit. Here I met Babu
Baidyanath Bannerji, my blind patient of Calcutta, whose
sight I restored, as the reader will probably remember.
Well, I found him again blind. His restored sight lasted
only six months and then faded out, and the pall of
black night again descended upon him. As before, a
boy now led him into my presence, and he looked up into
my face with that inexpressibly touching expression that
one finds in the eyes of the sightless ones. I felt very
sorry, and not altogether hopeful of being able to do any
good. However, I drew him into the room, kept him
standing, and began the same course of manipulation that
I had employed so successfully two years before. I
touched my finger-points to his closed eyes, sometimes
those of one hand, sometimes of both; when it was the
former it was the right hand that I held to the eyes, and
the left was laid on the nape of the neck. Then I made
passes before the eyes and the brow, and, finally, breathed
gently on the eyeballs through a glass tube. All the
while, of course, I was willing with my whole strength
that the sight should be restored. Thus keeping on for
a hajf-hour, I was at last rejoiced to hear him ask : ** Is
that a, table behind you ? '' It was, and thenceforward and
by, degrees the blessed light came back into his darkened
orbs, until he could at last distinguish every abject in the



276 Old Diary I.eaveS

room. Ah, if you could have seen the heavenly smile that
spread over his features then ! You would have stood
there, as I did, amazed at the discovery that you had this
sort of divine gift of healing, and that it needed but a
few passes of your fingers and a few breathings over a
blind man’s eyes to draw him out of midnight gloom into
the sunlight of sight, with the whole panorama of surround-
ing objects opened before him.

This case of Baidyanath teaches a great scientific fact,
viz., that blindness, when due to suspended nerve action,
may be removed by mesmeric treatment, provided that
the right conditions as to mesmerizer and patient are
given ; that the sight, thus restored, may fade out after a
time, when, presumably, the nerve-stimulus has subsided
for lack of renewal ; that, even after an interval of two
years, the sight may be again restored and after even a
very brief treatment. The reader will recollect that when
Badrinath (or Baidyanath) Babu was first treated by me
at Calcutta and elsewhere, after ten treatments he was
able to read fine print with one eye and see a bed of
flowers at some distance with the other. On this second
occasion, two years later, I made it possible for him, after
a bare half-hour’s treatment, to read the smallest type in
a newspaper and, of course, to distinguish every object
within the range of ordinary vision. It is true — as I
learned subsequently — that his sight failed him a second
time, but only after twice the number of months that
it had before. This made me believe that if I could
have had the patient under constant treatment for, say sht



In Northern India Again 277

months, the optic nerves would have been restored to
normal function and the cure completed. The lesson to
professional healers is that they should never despair if
there should be a relapse after a first success. Moreover,
they should note that, whereas the confidence of the
patient may have been shaken by the loss of sight after
the first operation, it can be restored in spite of that, with
one-tenth the trouble as before. The sme qua non is that
there shall be no lesion in the nerves, for that makes a
break that can never be mended.

At Jamalpur, when lying in bed one morning, I had my
first experience of an earthquake, and it was curious. It
seemed to me as if the house were solid but built on a
stratum of bog, or jelly, which was all of a quiver, like the
generous paunch of St. Nicholas when he was laughing — if
we may believe the famous Christmas poem ! While it
lasted, my memory recalled sundry stories of historical
earthquakes, and I was not sure whether the house would
not tumble about my ears; still I thought I might as well
take the chances where I was, as to rush outdoors and
perhaps drop down some crack.

Among the topics of discourse given me here by the
local Committee was: “Theosophy not antagonistic to
Hinduism.” On thinking it over, I invented a new plan.
Among the members of the Bhagalpur T. S. was the late
Pandit Nitydnand Misra, a most excellent man and capable
Sanskrit scholar, who had come to Jamalpur with me. So
I arranged with him that he should sit beside me at the
lecture, I sbpuld go on and make points ope by one,



278 Old Diary Leaves

should pause after each, and he should then rise, repeat
some sloka of GM without a word of comment, and then
sit down, and I would go on to my next stage. Both he
atid 1 spoke contemporaneously — without notes or any
defined plan previously agreed upon — and this made all the
more interesting and striking his flexibility of mind and
thorough familiarity with his national literature. The effect
on the audience may be guessed.

At Bankipur I was kept up to a very late hour, the day of
arrival, by visitors, and on retiring I sank into one of those
deep sleeps which I can always get when there is nothing
else to do, and which brace me up for the wearisome round
of a travelling tour. At the College, the next day, I had a
very crowded audience, including several hundred students,
the ones I most love to address. One of the Professors, an
English gentleman, was good enough to preside, and his
boys were particularly enthusiastic. The Principal, how-
ever, moved by an unreasoning prejudice, refused the hall
for the second lecture, and the Committee had to make other
arrangements. If these narrow-minded men could only
realize how they weaken their personal influence with their
pupils by these futile attempts to do us harm ; how, in fact,
they largely increase their sympathy and their enjoyment of
our discourses on the national literature and religion, surely
they would not be so tactless as they usually are. Not one
of them ever heard a theosophical lecturer say one word
that was opposed to good morals, or that had the slightest
tendency to make his or her hearers worse than they are ;
quite the contrary : yet they go on nourishing hatred against



In Northern India Again 279

US, and vainly trying to belittle our strong influence in every
way by word and action. Poor creatures, they might as
wen try to pull the stars out of the sky ! While they are
dreaming their impotent dreatns of malice, the influence
of Theosophy is travelling the whole earth, like a thrill of
electric force that might run around the planet. One has
to come to India to realize how a whole community of
European people can become steeped in besotted prejudice
against us. Their own relatives at home throng Mrs.
Besant^s lectures, buy our books, take in our magazines,
and join our Branch Societies ; but these hold themselves
aloof, and use the name of our dear H. P. B. as a word to
curse by. Morels the pity, for 1 am perfectly sure that it
would only need the aid of some ardent society man, like
the late Samuel Ward, or society woman, like some I
know of in our European and American Branches, to bring
around nine-tenths of the community. But then we public
speakers should have to lecture to them and such few of
the higher-class Hindus as they might choose to invite,
or to confine our talks to their drawing-rooms where no
ordinary Hindu is welcomed. In a word, the color line is
drawn across the gateway of almost every Anglo-Indian
bungalow, and our obliviousness to this fact is one of the
strongest causes of our unpopularity. One could see, when
Mr. and Mrs. Sinnett and Mr. Hume w^e introducing us
into Anglo-Indian society at Simla, that there were no in-
superable obstacles between them and ourselves, and that
if we could run in their grooves we might in time become
quite friendly. But this we could never do, for that would



28 o


Old Diary Leaves

mean almost cutting ourselves adrift from Hindu society;
and so we must go on as hitherto, close to the hearts of the
Indians and far away from the other community, our blood
relations and nearest of kin in the flesh — of this incarnation.
It seems a pity, but we can’t help it ; for one reason, that
we can neither afford the money that we should have to
spend in society, nor the time that would have to be con-
sumed in visiting and going to “ functions of sorts ” to keep
up acquaintances.

At Benares, Pandit Bhavini Shankar Ganesh — then
doing duty as one of our Branch Visitors — joined me for
the rest of the tour throughout the N. W. P. We took
boat on the Ganges to pay a visit to Majids ashram^ to
which she had returned from her Calcutta visit. We were
caught in a heavy downpour of rain and well wetted.* In

* By an interesting coincidence, just after the above had been sent
to the printer, I read in the Indian Mtrror of a very recent date the
following obituary notice of this remarkable woman : —

“We are much concerned to hear of the passing away from this
worldly plane of the venerable lady, known to the numerous visitors to
the holy banks of the Baruna at Benares, and to the wide circle of her
admirers, as Majee^ the Mother, In every respect the deceased lady
was a remarkable personality. She was a Sanskrit scholar, and some-
thing of an adept in occult studies. She was easily accessible, and all
those who had the privilege of close acquaintance with her, literally
worshipped her as a divinity. Majee was one of the few who
thoroughly believed in, and testified to, the mission of the late Madame
Blavatsky, and bore testimony to the existence of the Great Teachers
who have done so much for the propagation of Theosophical truths
in the world.”

Maji was a Guzerati Brahmini by caste, but spoke other Indian
languages, including Sanskrit, fluently. She was a ll|orough Vedantin^
liptl pf a VP7 tejppcramwif



In Northern India Again 281

the afternoon H.H. the old Maharajah of Benares presided
at my lecture at the Town Hall, and the notorious Raja
Siva Prasad interpreted ; which did not give satisfaction to
the better part of the audience, as he indulged in remarks
of his own, adverse to my views. At the close, that ripe
scholar and ex-professor at the Anglo-Sanskrit College,
Babu Pramada Dasa Mitra, made a very dignified and
acceptable speech in moving the vote of thanks. He was
my Chairman the next day at a lecture to Indian Youth, in
the course of which I gave a summary digest of the Six
Schools of Indian Philosophy, and which caused an
orthodox Hindu gentleman to call on me next day and say
that I had now brought the orthodox community to realize
that our Society was not a mere Buddhist propaganda. He
said I was to be elected a member of the Sanskrit Club,
which held daily sessions to recite and discuss Shastras.

We next moved on to Mirzapur, at the request of the
Maharajah of Durbhunga, then stopping there at one of
his many palaces. He sent Col. Jung Bahadur, of Nepal,
and Babu Juggul Kissore, his own Political Agent, to meet
us at the station and see us housed, and later in the day
came and took me for a drive and a three-hours’ talk. We
spent two days with him, and before leaving he expressed
his great appreciation of our Theosophical movement,
which, he said, he felt sure was destined to do immense
good to his country. He then handed me a Government
Promissory Note for rs. looo, w'hich sum, he said, I might
count on his giving us annually, This was done without
the slightest prelimipa^ expectatipn pu my part, and I fel^



282


Old Diary Leaves

very grateful indeed. How he kept his promise will be
shown in due time.

On to Fyzabad next, where there are almost as many
wild monkeys swarming over the house and shop roofs as
there are people in the place. And pestiferous creatures
they are : they will dart into your very room and snatch
and run off with any fruit, article of dress or toilet, or any
other loose and portable object that may be lying about.
One tall chap sneaked at night into my servant Babula^s
window, carried off his trousers, leaped across the narrow
street to the roofs, called his friends together, and went to
biting and tearing the garment, out of sheer mischief.

At my lecture here the very large audience was swelled
by the presence of some two or three dozen Europeans —
an unusual circumstance. H.H. the Rajah of Ayodhya,
the ancient kingdom of Sri Rdma, came to call on me, as
did also a number of Pandits and a Committee with the
usual address and garlands.

On the 29th July I rose at 3 a.m., crossed the swollen
Ghogra River in an open boat in a heavy rain-storm, took
traitij^ and reached Gorakpur at 7 in the evening. Here, as
at all the Northern stations, there were long discussions
on the Coulomb-Missionary case, the putting of questions,
the showing of letters and papers by me, an invitation of
full inquiry, and the re-establishment of confidence and
good feeling between us. A tour of this kind seems to
acquire a sort of spiritual force as it goes on, which follows
and surrounds the lecturer, making him increasingly con-
fident and influential, and more and more able to drive



In Northern India Again 283

back hoc^ ^currenls that may be flowing into his vortex.
I fancy this has not occurred to all the travelling repre-
sentatives of our Society; they may have felt the power
without having stopped to analyze its cause. To get at
that, one must look on the next higher plane of conscious
ness above this one of our everyday world.



CHAPTER XX.


PROGRESS OF THEOSOPHY IN INDIA.

O N my fifty-third birthday (August 2nd, 1885) I reached
Bara Banki, the home of that most esteemed, able, and
honorable colleague, Babu Parameshri Das, where I lectured,
admitted new members, and encouraged despondent old
ones. Thence on to Lucknow, former capital of the Kings
of Oudh, one of the immoral sinks of India where, on the
whole, spirituality seems drowned in animalism, though
there are many bright exceptions. We were received at
the station by committees of the Kashmiri National Club,
Bengali Club, Rafiam Association (a Mahomedan body),
and our local Branch. They put me up in the Kaiserbagh,
or King’s Pleasure Garden, a great park full of palaces and
kiosks, and surrounded by a quadrangle of houses which
were formerly occupied by the princesses and other women
of the royal harem. From all accounts this must have
been the scene of debauched pleasures hard to parallel.
The late King used to have all sorts of sports for his amuse-
ment:, some of ^ most immoral character m which hi§

984


Progress of Theosophy in India 285

Women folk played their parts. His life flowed on in a
current of ignoble recreations, until he and his kingdom and
all the paraphernalia of licentiousness were swept away by
the thunder-burst of the Mutiny tragedy and the success of
the British arms. It needs no great gift of clairvoyance to
picture to oneself those ribald scenes as one sits at an open
window, looking out on the square, with its artistic build-
ings, its close-shaven lawns, and meandering walks bathed
in the tropical moonlight. Fancy brings them all back, and
one cannot refrain from being thankful that this cesspool of
animalism has been purged by the inrush of a purer and
nobler civilization.

Almost as soon as I arrived I received a shock in the
calmly announced fact that the local Committee of our
Branch had engaged that I should give a public lecture the
next day on the subject of “ Islam.” I was in a pretty fix
when I found out that there was no escape, as the posters
and handbills were already issued, and the whole Mussul-
man public were to be present. The novelty of a white
man being about to lecture in a friendly spirit about their
religion was, doubtless, an irresistible attraction. I could
have given the Committee a good thrashing, for I had then
no more than the slight knowledge of the subject which one
gets in the course of his general reading, and I felt very
reluctant to speak before so critical an audience as awaited
me. Escape being out of the question, however, I borrowed
a copy of Sale’s Koran and another Mahomedan book,
and sat up all night to read them. Here I found the
immense advantage of Theosophy, for, as I read, the key to



'286 Old Diary Leaves

the exoteric teachings helped me to grasp all that lay
between the lines, and light was shed upon the whole
system. I think I never before realized so fully its incom-
parable value as an interpreter of religious systems. On
entering the huge Baradari, or Royal Pleasure Hall, I found
it packed with an audience which included most of the
notable Mahomedans of the place, together with some
hundreds of educated Hindus. I treated the subject not as
a professor of the religion but as an impartial Theosophist,
to whom the study of all religions is equally interesting, and
whose chief desire is to get at the truth beneath them and
boldly announce it without fear or favor. Some good
genius must have inspired me, for, as I proceeded, I
seemed to be able to put myself in Mahomed's place, to
translate his thoughts and depict his ideal, as though I
were ‘‘a native here, and to the manner born." I could see
this inspired camel-rider incarnating where he did, to work
out a tremendous Karma as the Founder of one of the
mightiest religious movements in history. The audience
were certainly aroused to a pitch of enthusiasm, for they
gave it tumultuous expression, and the next day a Committee
waited on me with an address of thanks, in which every
blessing of Allah was invoked for me, and the wish was
expressed that their children knew “one-tenth as inuch
about their religion" as I did. Ye gods! how cheaply a
reputation is sometimes made. From this experience I
ventute to say that an intelligent Theosophist is better
qua|i^ than any other man to take up the study of any
given and will be more likely to get at its inner



Progress of Theosophy in India 287


meaning than the most learned philologist who has sought
the key only in the crypt of his rationalistic mind. This
recalls a most amusing experience at my first public lecture
in London about a dozen years ago. I had gone on, in
what I thought a very unpretentious way, to explain
Theosophy as I understood it, and incidentally cited ideas
from some of the ancient religious works. The house was
packed, galleries and all, and great good feeling prevailed
until the close. Then began the usual “ heckling with
questions that every lecturer in Great Britain has to face,
and which kept me busy for a full three-quarters of an hour.
On the whole this cross-questioning is good, for it tends to
draw out points which may have been overlooked by the
speaker. Just when it seemed as if the ordeal was finished
and the audience might be allowed to disperse, a man in
the right-hand gallery cried in a loud voice; ‘‘Mr, Chair-
man, I should like to know how it comes that Colonel
Olcott has such a general knowledge of all the Eastern
religions, when I have studied one of them more than
twenty years without getting to the bottom of it.** Of
course it was a foolish question, an exhibition of mere
pique, since I had made no pretence whatever to knowing
all or even one of the ancient cults, but many years* resi-
dence in the East and personal intercourse with learn^
Asiatics had certainly given me some chance to learn about
the spirit and meaning of the various Scriptures. I was
just about to say that much, but was saved the trouble, for
instantly another voice from the opposite gallery shouted
out the word “ Brains ! *^ and the whole house burst into



288


Old Diary Leaves

a roar of laughtef. The chair dismissed the audience, and
amid the confusion we could see the indiscreet questioner
waving his hands and saying things that were lost in the
hubbub. I felt greatly grieved on learning later that the
gentleman was one of the best-known Orientalists of Europe,
and that he was so annoyed by his discomfiture as to con-
ceive a violent hatred for myself and the Society — both
absolutely innocent of offence !

On the three remaining days of my stay in Lucknow I
gave public lectures and private addresses to our Branch
and other bodies. By the former I was put through a
searching inquiry into the pros and cons of the Coulomb
case, but was able to remove all doubts, and left our people
in good spirits on our departure from the station.

On the 8th August we reached Bareilly in a drenching
downpour of rain, our colleagues, Messrs. Cheda Lai, Piari
Lai, and Gyanendra Nath Chakra varti receiving us at the
station, with the water dripping from them as though they
had been out in a surf-boat. A malicious busybody had
done his best to foment suspicion against us at this station,
and I underwent a very stiff examination, happily with
entirely satisfactory issue. Mr. Chakravarti was one of
several of our leading Indian members to write H. P. B.
that I had saved the Society inTndia by making this tour, as
I had cleared away doubts, enlisted public sympathy, and
restored strength to the movement. And why should not I,
considering the Powers that were gathered behind us and
going forth with us to touch the popular heart ? It would
have been a black time for me if I had forgotten that for one



Progress of Theosophy in India 289

moment. But I never did ; not for an instant did my faith
and confidence in the Masters waver, never once did the idea
of possible defeat enter my mind. That was my shield and
buckler ; that my tower of strength. Those who were for us
were an hundred times stronger than those who were against
us. On the heels of the Coulomb disaster we chartered
seventeen new Branches within that year: let the reader
take note of the mystical number. Neither at Bareilly, nor
Moradabad, nor Meerut, nor at any other station included
in my long programme, did the heavy rains of the wet
season prevent my having full, even crowded audiences;
though it must be admitted that the watery elementals
seemed somehow to be leagued together to help me. It
happened so often as to be remarked by many that, by
some mysterious chance, the pouring showers would hold
up just when it was time to go to my lectures, recommence
while the audience was safely housed, and cease again when
they had to leave for home. We all know about Queen’s
weather, so why should there not be some similar provision
by benevolent storm-spirits to help their friend and ex-
positor of the Theosophical Society? I leave the conun-
drum to answer itself, meanwhile just noting a fact that
came under the personal observation of many intelligent
witnesses.

At each of the stations mentioned in the foregoing para-
graph, there were the like questionings and clearings up
of doubts, the same lecturings, admissions of candidates,
strengthening of Branches. We got to Cawnpore on the
1 6th, and were most kindly received and entertained by our

^9



igo Old Diary Leaves

staunch and tried friend Capt. A. Banon, F.T.S., then
with his regiment there. This is the gentleman who — it
Will be remembered — so valiantly backed us up against the
tta veiling calumniator, the Rev. Joseph Cook, and caused
him to run away as fast as he could to the other side of
India, to escape meeting me in public and making good
the malicious slanders he had uttered. In all these years
this gifted yet eccentric man has remained our loyal sup-
porter, a friend such as an Irish gentleman of good family
always proves himself to be. His holding an army com-
mission and being in a military mess unsympathetic to
Theosophy, did not weigh a feather’s weight with him, as
it does with so many; he drove me about, took me to
the mess, and was conspicuous at my lecture. In short, he
displayed the same quality of moral courage that Sir William
Crookes has just shown so nobly as President of the British
Association.

My lecture at Cawnpore was delivered in the theatre, a
long, narrow room which seems to me full of the most dis-
agreeable influences : if it had been the scene of a massacre
it could not have been worse. To make it still more un-
pleasant, the Committee followed the detestable custom of
giving all the front seats to the most unsympathetic class,
the Anglo-Indians, Eurasians, and Native Christians — the
latter, low-caste people, of course, in nine cases out of ten.
This made a wall of aura right across the room, through
which I had to force my own auric current to reach my
friends and sympathizers. One can’t help getting sensitive
to these influences after awhile; a sort of finer sense of



Progress of Theosophy in India 291

their quality, or perhaps we should say polarity, becomes
developed, and in such instances as this one has to con-
centrate all one^s will to break down and burst through this
cross current, so to speak. The phenomenon is confined
to India, and is due to the silent, yet irresistible auric anti-
pathy of races : take either alone and one does not feel it,
but bring them together, and at once there comes this note
of discord. I got over it in this way: I placed myself
opposite the aisle, the weakest point in the barrier, and
pulling myself together, projected my current towards the
Hindu majority until they and I were blended together in
magnetic unity. The reality of this law of mutual attraction
and repulsion has been too often felt and mentioned by
public speakers and actors to be open to question, and any-
one who has not discovered it experimentally can hardly
be called spiritually sensitive. Cases have been recorded
where one single person in an audience has drawn to him-
self or herself by an irresistible power the attention of the
speaker, and actually compelled him, as it were, to address
his speech or play his part to him or her. On the next
evening I obliged the Committee to reserve the front seats
of the left side of the aisle for Hindus and get them filled
very early ; and when I began speaking, I stood at that side
of the stage, thus presenting my strongest, />., most
positively magnetic, side to the least sympathetic part
of the audience. Thus all went well.

Among our friends at Allahabad as much unrest had been
created by the Coulomb-Missionary conspiracy against our
Society as at any station in India. Certain agents had been


292 Old Diary Leaves

very active in sowing distrust, and I had my work cut out for
me ; but I had a good case, and all came out right in the
end. With Mr. Janaki Ghosal I went to pay my respects to
Swami Madhavdas, an English-speaking ascetic who is much
respected. Curiously enough, he is the author of a com-
pact compilation of Sayings of the Grecian Sages, in
whose wisdom he found the echo of the teachings of the wise
men of his native country. He was good enough to lend
me the MS. to read, and allow us to publish it for him, or
for his disciples rather, for a man of his sort abstains from
meddling in worldly concerns. Among my interrogators
about the H. P. B. case was a clergyman named Hackett,
who came with an armful of books and pamphlets, with his
points all marked. I was very pleased with his courtesy and
evident fair-mindedness, and gave him as much time as he
required to go to the bottom of the business ; he stopped
three hours and we parted the best of friends. When I left
for Jubbulpore the next day he was at the station to see me
off. I wish all Missionaries were like him : but then all
Missionaries are not gentlemen.

At Jubbulpore I presided at the anniversary celebration
of the Sanskrit school founded by our local Branch, and
which is — thanks to the unflagging devotion of Kalicharan
Bose — still flourishing. This is but one of at least a score
of Sanskrit schools that our people have started, but in too
many cases the others have been abandoned because of the
lack of that peculiarly necessary quality of stubborn per-
severance in their promoters. Not one would have failed if
it had been under good European management. I am soriy



Progress of Theosophy in India 293

to say it, yet the Hindu is enthusiastic, loving, and faithful,
but in public affairs he is at his best only when under the
lead of colleagues of the more practical race. A contrast to
Mr. Hackett was the character of a clique, comprising a
Padri of the C. M. S., a pretended Christian doctor, and
some other alleged Christians (I can^t recognize them as
followers of Christ because of their narrow prejudices and
intolerance) who attended my second lecture and tried to
create disturbance at the close. Seeing their tactics, I re-
fused to let them address my large audience, advising them
to hire a hall for themselves and say what they liked. The
next day they sent me a challenge to do a miracle ** under
conditions of their own prescribing! Poor creatures, let
them read their Bible^s description of their prototype:
“ Wiser in his own conceit than seven men who can render
a reason.” The wheel of Karma ipust turn many times
before they can be fit to even clean a lamp in the hut of a
pupil of a Master of Wisdom.

My route turned towards the West through the Central
Provinces, Hoshangabad and Nagpur being my objective
points. I don’t know why, but from Jubbulpore onward I
seemed to be passing through a better atmosphere ; the dark
distrust, wavering courage, and captiousness which had
beset me in the N. W. P., and which I had had to dispel,
were absent from this part of my circular journey. Friendly
hands were offered, kind words spoken, ears opened to hear
my message, and many loyal friends and well-wishers made.
The Government rest-house at Hoshangabad is most beauti-
fully situate on the banks of the Nerbudda River, ai)d the



294 Old Diary Leaves

scene, when I stood in the bright moonlight on the top plat-
form of the bathing ghit, addressing a multitude, was most
poetic and picturesque. Among my visitors were a number
of Europeans in Government employ, and they attended
both of my lectures. An even more warm welcome was
given me at Nagpur, where the moving spirit was Mr. C.
Narainswamy Naidu, the principal pleader of the place,
since unfortunately deceased, but from that time onward to the
last, one of the most useful, wise, and loyal members of our
Society. At his house I formed the Nagpur T. S., with him-
self as President, and as Chairman of the monster audience
which packed the theatre to hear me discourse on ‘‘The
Aryan Rishis and Hindu Philosophy.’^ He laid over my
shoulders, after the old Hindu fashion, a crimson em-
broidered chadduy or shawl. An interesting incident which
happened on that evening will be remembered by the
spectators. In the midst of my discourse there suddenly
broke into the dead silence one of those raucous, uncanny
cries that epileptics utter at the beginning of their seizures.
The whole audience rose to their feet and anxiously looked
towards the right, where a man stood beating the air, his
face convulsed with an expression of agony, and the next
moment fell to the floor. He had hardly touched the
ground before I sprang from the stage, pushed my way to
him, took his forehead and the nape of his neck between
my hands, breathed on his face, and concentrated my will
upon his disease. In less than a couple of minutes his
meanings ceased, the fit passed off, somebody gave him a
sup of water, he rose and passed out pf the house. Then I



Progress of Theosophy in India 295

climbed back to the stage and took up the thread of
my argument. This simple experiment showed, for the
thousandth time, that epilepsy, one of the most formidable
of afflictions under orthodox treatment, is quite amenable
to the well-directed power of the mesmeric aura. I hope it
may be remembered by all who have the power and the
wish to help suffering humanity.

We reached Bombay on the morning of September 3 and
were affectionately welcomed. Among other visits I paid
one to Tookaram Tatya at his Bandora country-house,
where we dined together in Hindu fashion. Tookaram was
a man of the Sudra caste, and, like all intelligent persons of
his rank, felt the pressure of the higher castes galling to him.
To get rid of this in a measure, at least in his own mind, he
had got me to obtain the permission of the High Priest
Sumangala to give him the Pancha Sila and admit him as 'a
Buddhist. At the same time, in view of the certain ostracism
of his family by Hindu society if he openly seceded, he
kept his status among them, and in later years, when
Mrs. Besant’s open profession of Hinduism and defence of
the Aryan caste system turned the tide backward, I believe
he reverted to his hereditary faith with much zeal. At any
rate, of late years I heard no more about his Buddhism.
After giving one lecture at Framji Cowasji Hall to a large
audience, I passed on to Poona with our colleague the late
Mr. Ezekiel, a member of the great Jewish family of the
Sassoons and an ardent Kabbalist. At his house I met a
Rabbi Silbermann, of Jerusalem, and his wife. They were
put up in one half of a detached small bungalow in Ezekiel's



296 Old Diary Leaves

compound ; he, an old and feeble man, with a middle-aged,
bright wife and a Hebrew maid-servant. He wore the
Oriental costume, as also did Mr. Ezekiel Senior, who lived
in the other half of the little house. I was wearing the cool
cotton Hindu dress which I find so much more comfortable
than our tight European costume in the Tropics, and which
I should always wear if the Salvationists had not vulgarized
it so effectually. The old gentleman and I were sitting
alone together one day, he watching me so closely that I
thought something must be wrong about my dress, but he
soon undeceived me. Beckoning me mysteriously into his
bedroom, he took from a press a complete Jewish costume —
turban, gabardine, and all such as he himself wore — and
asked me to put them on. When I had done so, he led me
by the hand along the verandah to the adjoining rooms,
intimating that he was going to pass me off as a Jew.
Entering into the spirit of the joke, I gravely saluted the
Jerusalem family after the Eastern fashion, and was led by
my guide across the room to a chair. The aged Rabbi was
sitting on a mat to the left of the door, and on my un-
expected entrance saluted me with great respect, pronounc-
ing the special form of words used when greeting a
Jerusalem rabbi. He then began putting me a lot of
questions in Hebrew, and refused to believe that I was a
mere Gentile, when young Ezekiel, laughing heartily at his
bewilderment, told them who I was. No, he insisted that
my nationality was too evident, and would go on with his
Hebrew cross-questioning until the facts had been reiterated
to him over and over again. His wife, sitting in a rocking-



Progress of Theosophy in India 297

chair over against the side wall of the room, with her maid
on the floor at her feet, looked me over most scrutinizingly,
and confirmed her husband in his belief as to my Hebraic
origin. ‘*Why,’’ said she to the maid, “who can deny it?
See, has he not the shekinah ? ” meaning the shining aura,
the tejas as the Hindus call it. Both the Ezekiels were
immensely amused at the success of the old gentleman's
trick, and it was gravely proposed that Mr. Ezekiel Senior
and I should be photographed together in the costume, as a
souvenir. But my stay at Poona was too brief to allow of
its being done. I lectured once in town on “Aryan
Morals," with the eminent Mr. Ranade in the chair ; and
once at Ferguson College to looo Hindu boys, on
“ Education." The leading Native gentlemen were present.
To illustrate my idea of what bad education is, I turned to
the nearest student and took from him his Geography and
glanced at the portion allotted to India. I found that to
the whole of Asia — India, Burma, Siam, Ceylon, China,
and Japan — were given only seventeen pages of descrip-
tion, while to the United Kingdom something over forty
pages ! Of course, I said, it is most evident that the
compilers of this book thought it quite useless for Indian
youth to know anything about their own native land, its
history, products, capabilities, etc., but indispensable that
they should know about every English county, its re-
sources, population, industries, towns, and villages, so that
they might be prepared to make a pedestrian tour over
there. What nonsense to call that an enlightened system
pf education !



2g8 Old Diary Leaves

The last public event during my stay was a lecture at
Hirabig, the picturesquely placed Town Hall, on ** Karma
and Kismet,” after which I left the station for Hyderabad,
the Nizam's capital.



CHAPTER XXI.


niENOMENAL MEMORIES OF PANDITS.

T he Nizam’s Hyderabad, as it is called, to distinguish it
from Hyderabad, Sind, is one of the most distinctively
Asiatic cities in India. It has a picturesqueness and artistic
interest in strong contrast with other large towns, especially
the Presidency capitals. The streets are alive with fighting
men armed and equipped like the figures' in an illustrated
edition of the Arabian Nights^ elephants and camels are
seen in processions, the stamp of Orientalism is upon every
shop in every bazaar, and life goes on in the ancient fashion
with little coloring by Western influence. At the same
time, Hyderabad is one of the worst centres of dishonesty
and immorality, as bad as Lucknow ; bribery and corruption
are said to be rife, and public mal-administration to be the
normal condition of things. Yet, despite all this, there has
been a centre of Theosophical work there for many years,
and a few earnest souls have kept the torch burning amid
the spiritual gloom. All honor to them !

I reached this place on the nth September (1885) at

299


300 Old Diary Leaves

4.30 and received the usual welcome, with an address
and garlands, and had to make the expected reply. An
American colleague was quite right in saying in a recent
letter that, with my keen sense of humor, it must often
sorely tax my powers of self-restraint to listen to some of the
fantastically extravagant panegyrics that are read to me on
arrival at Indian stations. It would be simply impossible
if it were not for my knowledge of the heartfelt sincerity
that is usually covered over by these perfumed garlands
of compliment There is a voice of the soul which makes
one pay no heed to mere speech, and which stirs up the
responsive emotion in one of my nature.

On the day following my arrival I had the good fortune
to witness a display of that superlative mnemonic training
of which India affords so many examples. The reader will
find in the Theosophist for January 1886 an article by
myself on “Some Aspects of Memory,” which, besides a
general inquiry into the subject, covers also a report on the
Hyderabad experiments under notice. Thirteen years
having elapsed, it may be as well to recall the marvellous
details in the present connection. I shall therefore reprint
the certificate which the spectators handed to the Brahmin
Pandit ; it reads as follows

“ Hyderabad (Deccan), the i^tk September 1885.

“The undersigned have much pleasures in certifying to the
following intellectual achievement by Vedanta Dasigacharya
of Theruvellur, Madras Presidency, of which they were eye-
witnesses.



Phenomenal Memories of Pandits 301

“The Acharya, having arranged ten of ns in two lines^
simultaneously kept in mind and did the following eleven
things : —

“ I. Played a game of chess, without seeing the board.

“ II. Carried on a conversation upon various subjects.

“ III. Completed a Sanskrit sloka from the first line given.

“ IV. Multiplied five figures by a multiplier of four figures.

“V. Added a sum of three columns each, of eight rows
of figures.

“ VI. Committed to memory a Sanskrit sloka of sixteen
words — the words being given him out of their order, and
at the option of the tester.

“VII. Completed a “magic square,” in which the
separate sums in the several squares added up to a total
named, whether tried horizontally or vertically.

“VIII. Without seeing the chess-board, directed the move-
ments of a knight so that it should make the circuit of the
board within the outline of a horse traced on it, and enter
no other squares than those.

“ IX. Completed a second magic square with a different
number from that in the above-named.

“X. Kept count of the strokes of a bell rung by a
gentleman present.

“XI. Committed to memory two sentences in Spanish,
given on the same system as No. VI., and correctly repeated
the same at the end.

“As a study in mnemonics this was a most instructive
experiment. The Acharya has, it seems, acquired die power
<of creating in his mind, for each of the several things he does,



302 Old Diary Leaves

a separate mnemonic point, or thought-centre, and around
this forces the ideas relating to it to cluster and group
themselves.”

Signed by H. S. Olcott, Bezonji Aderji, G. Raghoonath,
M. Raghunayekaloo, A. T. Muthukistna, Darabji Dossabhoy,
Hanumant Row, Bhimaj Raojee, and lyaloo Naidu — all
members of our Society.

The plan is for the Pandit to go around the group of
testers one by one, as many times as may be necessary to
complete the mental tests, doing with each, each time, one part
of the whole mental task set him by that person. Thus, with
the first, he will think out and order one move in the game of
chess ; with the second, follow his lead in the conversation
which is meant to disturb his mnemonic labors ; to the third,
dictate one line of the desired Sankrit poetry ; to the fourth,
name the first part of the quotient, etc., etc. He would
thus have to fix in his mind every fact related to the result
expected by each of his testers, and at the close reel off the
final results without error. From me he took from dictation
the two lines of Spanish in this fashion : the words were
privately written by me on a slip of paper, and under each
its proper number in the sequence was placed ; thus : —

Ay de mi 1 mt ano felice
12345 6

Parece como uno soplo iegero,

7 8 9 10 II.

Here we have eleven words running in a certain sequence,
but I was allowed to give the Pandit any one of the eleven



Phenomenal Memories of Pandits 303

out of its order each time that he stopped in front of me
in his circuits. Only two things are required, viz., that the
word shall be distinctly pronounced until he can catch the
sound, and that as we give each we shall tell him its number
in the sentence. It is his business then to keep all in
memory until the eleven rounds of the circle are made,
when he will ponder a moment and then recite the couplet
correctly, giving each word its place in the sequence. He
must do the same in the case of each of the other testers.
Thus he carries forward his sum in addition, multiplication,
subtraction, division, etc., one stage at each round, and
when he comes again to the same person must pick up the
thread of the suspended mnemonic feat and proceed on
another stage. So all around the circle. Figure for your-
selves the number of separate mental activities he is obliged
to keep going throughout, and if this does not amaze you,
you must have been reborn from some anterior wonder-
breeding planet. This evident overstraining of the brain
brings on at last primarily a lassitude and then an
exhaustion of the mentality, I have this at first hands ; in
fact, the Principal of one of our Sanskrit schools who had
been a proficient A.thdvadhdni, had had to give it up
completely to save his “wits from falling into ruin.”
Whoever wishes to go farther into this impoitant subject
will find the best authorities cited in the number of the
Theosophist above mentioned.

My audiences at the Nizam's capital and at the adjacent
British military station of Secunderabad were very large
and attentive. The topics given me by the Committee



304 Old Diary Leaves

were “The Unity of Religions,” “Mesmerism and
relation to Occult Science” (doubtless suggested by tbe
recollection of my healings during my previous visit^ “ Who
am I? whence came I? and whither am I going?”
There were the usual conversation (or puzzle-putting)
meetings, Branch gatherings, and admissions of applicants
into membership.

Adoni, the cotton carpet-weaving centre, was my next
stopping-place, and here I was asked to lecture on “The
Aryans and their Religion.” On to Bellary next, where one

our staunchest colleagues, Mr. A. Sabhapathy Moodeliar,
lives. After spending three days with our friends there, I
went to Gooty, which for many years has been made a
stronghold of Theosophy by our local members, especially
P. Casava Pillay, J. Sreenevas Row, and T. Ramachendra
Row, than whom no society has three more active and
useful workers. Before leaving Bellary I had the chance
of testing the alleged efficacy of my snake-stone which,
my earlier readers may recollect, I got from a snake-
charmer at Bombay soon after our arrival in India. At
that time the mere approach of the stone (which was no
stone, but a bit of bone) to an angry bra would make it
sw^ay on its coils, lean over backward, and finally subside
to the ground; but it did not work so at Bellary. The
cobra on which I tried it was apparently trained to ob^
the signs of his Master’s hand, and paid no attention to me
or the stone. So I put the failure as a counterbalance to
the Bombay success.

Our Gooty friends had bought at Government auction-



Phenomenal Memories of Pandits 305

a fine stone building for a nominal price, and had not only
installed in it a Sanskrit school which they had established,
but made it the Branch Headquarters and the chief place
for lectures and other public meetings. Just at the back of
the town rises a rocky hill of looo feet in height, crowned
with a strong fort which had been captured and recaptured
at different times in battle before the British occupation.
Within its walled enclosure is the alleged tomb of Gautam
Rishi (not the Buddha), which is a place of pilgrimage.
The fort is now dismantled, and might be bought of
Government for a nominal sum. As there are many good
rooms that could be made habitable at trifling cost, I
thought it would be an admirable place of retreat for some
European friends of mine who had a mind to realize in
practice Mr. Sinnett’s ideal of a castleful of mystics, as
described in his novel, Karma, So, after getting all
needed information, I proposed it to them, but nothing
came of it.

To reach the last station on my tour programme,
Anantapur, I had to travel all night in a bullock carriage,
which shook me about to such a degree that sleep was
almost impossible, and I was not sorry when, a mile from
the place of destination, I found ready for me a tent
pitched, with bath and breakfast ready. Anantapur was
all dressed out with flags, a band of musicians obstrep-
erously greeted me, there was a public address to reply to
in presence of a great crowd, and in the evening an over-
flowing audience listened to me on the subject of “ Modem

Scepticism and Brahma Vidya.” The next evening I

80



306 Old Diary Leaves

organized the Anantapur T. S., and, later, took die
bandy” again for Gooty, which was reached at 8 a.m.,
after another sleepless night. Thus closed tny long tour
of 1 13 days, of 1885, in the course of which I had visited
31 Branches and given 56 public lectures besides un-
counted private discussions and answerings of questions.
Beyond doubt the tour did good in restoring the courage
of friends, enlightening the outside public as to our views
arid aims, removing unjustifiable suspicions as to H. P. B.
and the Masters, strengthening old centres with new
members, and creating fresh ones where previously we had
not been represented. In a word, the bolder policy had
been vindicated, and it was very easy to see, on giving a
retrospective glance over the year, that it would have been
a great misfortune if I had listened to timid counsellors and
stayed quietly at Adyar, waiting for the clouds to roll by.

Again I must emphasize the fact, which I tried to make
clear in the last Chapter, that I did not count upon my own
powers or abilities only to do this work, but also, and
especially, upon the help I derived (and still get) from Those
who stand behind this movement. Without them, I should
have been powerless to breast and push back the adverse
current of hatred which was sweeping in against us. With
their aid I untwisted every coil of the Missionary serpent
which was trying to crush us into a mass of broken ribs and
bruised flesh. Not one of my readers can realize what we
had to go through, and I especially, in those dark days.
On the one hand, the active opposition of the sneering
public and the faint-heartedness of many of our colleagues



Phenomenal Memories of Pandits 307


whom I had the right to count upon as standing beside me,
staunch and true ; the outright desertion of others ; a poorly
filled treasury with increasing expenses to meet ; a pressure
on me to consent to certain radical changes in the Society's
policy and platform ; and, finally, my compulsory separation
from H. P. B., who for eleven years had been working with
me in close accord of general aims and ideals. On the
other hand, the tragical situation of H. P. B. herself,
virtually an exile packed away in a cheap little Italian inn
on the slope of Mount Vesuvius, racked with rheumatic
gout, ordered imperatively by Dr. Mary Scharlieb to keep
herself perfectly quiet on peril of life, suffering privations
that I had not the money to alleviate, chafing like a wounded
lioness over her inability to fight her slanderers, and writing
me the sharp and angry letters that might naturally be
expected from her under the circumstances.

My earnest desire was to carry out the Doctor’s wishes,
which I knew to be based on simple common-sense; the
one absolutely necessary thing for H. P. B. to do, if she
would save her life, was to keep perfectly quiet in some re-
tired spot out of reach of her friends or enemies, and espe-
cially to abstain from correspondence or newspaper reading.
She was like a powder-magazine, and just an incautious bit of
gossip in a letter was enough to make her explode. The
Doctor so warned her before leaving, and I so wrote her in
the letter, to which she replied in March. ^‘Calm your
fears, she said, ^^for, with the exception of Solovioff and
Miss .... I know of no European theosophists with whom
I would correspond, or to whom I would divulge my



3o 8 Old Diary Leaves

address/* To SoloviofT — fancy that ! To that contemptible
person, who took advantage of her guileless confidence and
her fervent love for her countrymen, to watch and spy upon
her daily actions, inveigle her into confidential correspon-
dence, and betray her in a book gotten up for pecuniary
profit and written in her very mother language and published
in the motherland she so adored to the day of her death.
The staunch souls who were only anxious to prove how
loyal they could be, she saw not before her mind^s eye ; but
to this poor creature of a professional litterateur^ because he
was a Russian and played the devoted friend, she gave her
confidence and revealed the necessary secret of her retreat.
And to crush me with the sense of her displeasure for daring
to doubt her discretion, she addresses me, after ten years of
chumship, as “ My dear Colonel Olcott ! **

“ Writing as I do,** she says in a letter of no date, but
from Torre del Greco, ‘‘ in a damp room at the North side
of Vesuvius, my feet on uncarpeted stone flags, and in Italy,
where people suffer indoors of cold more than in Russia,
for stoves are unknown and the cold air circulates from
under doors and through windows ad libitum^ I feel pretty
sure to have, notwithstanding my every precaution, a relapse
of rheumatic gout, unless you do what I must ask you to do.
If you have not sent me away to die, and since there is no
money for a better appartement or to buy carpets and rugs,
please send me .... the old carpet bought at Bombay,
with a few other things we want, ... I can cut the carpet
in two and thus avoid agony and suffering. It is raining and
told and damp even now, while in September it becomes so



Phenomenal Memories of Pandits 309

cold that even the old landlord told me no one, least of all
an invalid, could stop here after August. Wherever I go,
I shall need carpets, and they are a luxury unknown in Italy
and France, etc., etc. ” ; the letter being full to the end with a
statement of her miseries. How would any of our readers
have felt under such a state of things ? And to think that
she, whose teachings have been the consolation and guiding
lamp of thousands, and of many who are surrounded with
luxuries, that this poor, stricken woman, this lighter up of
dark paths and dispenser of spiritual brightness, should have
been crying out across the seas to her old chum, as poor as
herself, in accents of distress; thus doubling and quad-
rupling the load of care he had to carry behind his smiles
and jests, for the sake of the growing multitude who had
embarked in our movement and would have felt themselves
dropping into a gulf of despair if it had failed. Is it too
much, then, to say that naught but the knowledge of the
Unseen Master Helpers would have carried me through
that time and landed me at last on the farther shore of
success? “For lo, the winter is past, the rain is over and
gone : the flowers appear on the earth ; the time of the sing-
ing of birds is come, and the voice of the turtle is heard in our
land.” Later on, she settled among friends in London, who
saw that she lacked no comfort and did their best to lighten
her every burden ; but think of her in the cold spring of
1885 on the northern slope of Vesuvius, living from hand to
mouth, and writing at “a rickety old table” that with great
difficulty she had procured, and with her poor gouty feet on
the cold stones of the uncarpeted floor I


CHAPTER XXII.


H. P. B. IN EXILE.

“ i^HAFING like a caged lioness*^ is just the expression
to use to convey an idea of H. P. B/s state of mind
throughout that period of three months which she spent at
Torre del Greco in 1885. What wonder, when one recalls
to mind the circumstances of her compulsory exile from the
Adyar home that we had built up together and that she
loved. This is one of the things most distasteful about
which she complained in her letters to me. Then it was
most galling to keep quiet, to so brave a hereditary fighter,
child of an ancient family whose swords had always flashed
in the forefront of battle from generation to generation,,
when called for by their sovereign. To her, as to them, the
ultimate chances of conflict were of no account ; the over-
powering instinct was to give battle without counting the
odds. But we, her colleagues, mindful of the quips and
and quillets of the Law, and of what her discomfiture in
Court would mean to the Society, overbore her wish and

wrung from her an acquiescence in the policy of silence and

310


H, P. B. in Exile 31 1

forbearance towards our enemies. While at Adyar with us,
she saw that we were right, but in her lonesome exile in
Italy the aspect of things changed, and she upbraided me
in letter after letter for what she called our “cowardice/’
and our haste to sacrifice her as our scapegoat. She was
utterly wrong, of course ; but argumentation was useless^
and remonstrance a waste of time and ink. She was of
a most trustful disposition in one side of her character,
and hence we see her constantly deceived and victimized
by people whose effusive protestations masked sometimes
the basest plans of treachery.

From this present point of view, after the lapse of
thirteen years (viz., 1899), when people have been sifted
through the sieve of time, it is mournful to read her letters
and see how her most lauded courtiers have rewarded her
trust with blackest treason. To emphasize her charges
against us of Adyar, she quotes their names and sayings
over and over again ; she even sends me notes of theirs to
her, condemnatory of myself and fulsomely laudatory of
herself. Solovioff had passed five weeks with her at
Wurzburg, her second place of refuge, so-and-so a fortnight,
so-and-so was coming — all of whom turned enemies later
on.

The form of the Thco sop hist was changed — it will be
remembered — at the beginning of Vol. VII., from quarto
to octavo, as the larger size was found to be inconvenient
for binding and also for carriage through the mails. She
was in sole charge of it then, but had appointed as her
assistant Mr, Cooper-Oakley, M.A., a fine scholar, and put



312 Old Diary Leaves

him in full charge when leaving home for Naples. Certain
malicious persons, whose identity is now known by me
since looking over her papers and our correspondence, had
put it into her head that I meant to remove her name from
the title-page, because we dare not carry the obloquy of
the connection any longer, and that this was but part of a
scheme to pitch her out altogether. Certainly there was
not a shadow of truth in all this, but she was so ill, her
mind was in so distressing a state of nervous commotion,
that she at once plunged at me. I was called all the harsh
names conceivable, my supposed delinquency was stigma-
tized as sheer poltroonery, and she gave me solemn notice
that if any other name than hers, save T. Subba Row^s or
mine, were put on the magazine, she should not write
another word for it ! But in due course the new issue of
the Theosophist reached her, and she then wrote : —

“ Well, I knew that the accusation of your taking off
my name from the Theosophist was all bosh. But they all
understood it and ‘ felt sure ’ it was so — even to H. S. It
was in consequence of Nivaran Babuls innocent remark ;
‘The magazine is coming out in its new garb, and Mr.
Cooper-Oakley is to be its Editor.* They said that since
C.-O. had been its Editor for nearly a year already, why
should Nivaran write this as news unless his name were
to appear on the cover of the magazine, etc. ? Well, I
caught fire too. But now that’s at an end. . . . Any-
how, the Theosophist looks very neat now — of course,
a great deal better than before. I send for it a long



H. P. B. in Exile 313

article, ‘Have Animals Souls?* I shall write, this week,
one or two more.**

Then she does the very unusual thing, for her, of asking
my pardon, but on the basis of mutuality. “ Let us,** she
says, “forgive each other, be indulgent for each other*s
failings, and cease fighting and back-biting like Christian
sectarians!** That shows the wonderfully elastic quality
of her mind. In an instant she withdraws from an impasse^
and carries off the other fellow in her retreat 1 Fancying
this sort of thing as recurring weekly or fortnightly, along
with the normal strain of executive duties at that crisis, the
reader may gauge the inner life I had to lead until our ship
came into smoother waters. For all the grief caused me by
her cruel letters I do not, now, hold her responsible ; for
her wounded spirit was played upon by unprincipled third
parties, whose hope was to separate her from the Society
and use her power and talents for their own selfish ends ;
she was not in a state to be reasonable, and ten years of
trial had proved to her that I should be ready to let myself
be chopped into mincemeat rather than desert my duty or
be unfaithful to my holy Teacher; so let her say or do
what she liked, it would make no difference.

When she really set herself to looking into people*s
motives, however, she could do it. Thus, she unmasks to
me the secret plans and speculations of one man closely
connected with her Society work at that time, and whose
unfavorable remarks about myself she often quotes. No
doubt all this heckling was just the discipline I needed.



314 Old Diary Leaves

and undoubtedly still need as much as ever, to bring me
down to my bearings, but I can’t say it was nice. I am
not like the negro boy who, on being found pounding his
finger on an anvil, explained that it was done because “ it
felt so good when getting well.” I could have spared three-
foiirths of the discipline to any other needy neophyte without
regret, although, doubtless, it was best for me to have it.

H. P. B. had one trait of character that has made her
memory so precious to most of her former colleagues —
winsomeness. She might drive you almost mad with her
sayings and doings, might make you feel ready to run as
far away from her as possible, yet when she changed from
one extreme to the other in her treatment of you, as she
would in a flash, and looked and spoke to you with a sort
of childlike blandness, your anger would vanish and you
would love her in spite of herself.

There were, besides, special elements about H. P. B.
which gave her power over others, viz. ; —

(a) Her amazing occult knowledge and phenomena-
working powers, together with her relation to the hidden
Masters.

(^) Her sparkling talents, especially as a conversationist,
with her social accomplishments, wide travels, and extra-
ordinary adventures.

(r) Her insight into problems of philology, racial
origins, fundamental bases of religions, and keys to old
mysteries and symbols; certainly not the result of study^
fet a more restless and eccentric student there never was*
was not all smoothness or courtesy — far from it : when



H, P. B in Exile 31S

the mood was on her she was all that, but at other times
she spared nobody, no matter how rich, powerful^ or highly
placed they might be. As to trained literary faculty^ she
had none ; she wrote under inspiration, thoughts flashed
through her brain like meteors, scenes painted themselves
before her mental vision and died out often when but
half caught, parenthesis bristled through her paragraphs
so as to sometimes interminably stretch out her sentences,
and she would — as it now appears —catch up and use
other men^s writings as though they were her own — ^intent
only on fitting their formulated thoughts into the working
out of her theme. In short, she was a genius in the
same sense as Shakespeare and others, who took materials
as they were found, and worked them into the amalgam
upon which they put the stamp of their own individuality.
Take her two great books, for instance* She has sinned
an hundred times against the canons of literary usage as
regards acknowledgment of authors drawn upon, but
upon both is spread the golden web of her own high
powers, and the Secret Doctrine is found, year by year,
more and more like an inexhaustible mine of occult
knowledge. That is what makes widening circles of students
reverence her memory, and turn their backs in scorn upon
those pigmies, like Solovioff, who work like ants to distil
acids to squirt on her clothing.

Her occult powers made her run after by Spiritualists^
impelled by avid curiosity ; discredited by men of sciencei
who mistrusted all such pretensions ; hated by the modem
priests and pastors, who ought to have been able to cap



3i 6 Old Diary Leaves

her phenomena by like ones of their own, but could not;
and feared by the orthodox multitude, who saw in her a
black sorceress and dared not come near her. This
uncanny evil reputation even extended to myself by
reason of our association. “Dear me! Colonel Olcott,”
said Lady X to me one day at her luncheon-table, “how
very different you are from what I had expected.” “ And
what — may I venture to ask ” — I said, “ had your ladyship
expected?” “Oh, you know,” she replied, “we all thought
that if we should meet you, you would throw on us
some magic spell ; but, really, you are just like ourselves ! ”
This feeling among her acquaintances accounts for much of
the latitude accorded her as to conduct and conversation.
The same instinct makes the courtier think the King can
do no wrong, and society pass over as “ eccentricity ” the
millionaire’s solecisms in manners, which they would
revolt against in a poor man. One never knew at what
moment she might do some wonderful feat of magic, or
perchance whisper in their ears some message from the
unseen Powers. Then, again, it was a frequent experience
that the scoldings she gave her intimate friends proved
subsequently to have been most timely checks in a wrong
path, turnings into the right one and blessed kindnesses.
Association with her was a continual excitement, and the
most sluggish temperament was roused into some show of
activity. She was truly a great woman — to confound, if
we may, the carcase with its indwelling entity, which
seemed to me as far removed as possible from the ideal
of the gentler sex.



H. P. B. in Exile 317

After stopping three months at Torre del Greco, she
went to Wurzburg which, as she writes me, bids fair to
become a sort of theosophical Medina, since she was
exiled from the Mecca of her heart, Adyar. “I have
not much time now,” she writes (Oct. 28, 1885), “with
the Secret Doctrine, I am only at the middle of Part
I., but shall in a month or two send you the first six
sections. I take from his only facts, leaving out every-
thing in the shape of dissertations, attacks on Christianity
and Science — in short, all the useless stuff, and all that
has lost its interest. Only myths, symbols, and dogmas
explained from an esoteric point of view. It is actually
and de facto a new work entirely. Cycles are explained,
along with everything else, from their occult bearings. I
wish you had sent me the Preface, or Introduction.”

In this same most interesting letter she sketched out a
form of communication she wanted me to put into the
Theosophist in her name. I find in it the outline of the
whole teaching now being given out by our chief theosophical
writers, as to the persistence of the Individuality; “the
same Divine monad, plus all its essence of compound
spiritualities from its endless rebirths, must come down
again and be reborn in a higher, hundredfold more
perfected and pure earth or planet — in short, commence
again its grand cycle of reincarnations.”

Among the devoted friends who thronged to her at
Wurzburg were the Countess Wachtmeister (ever the same
faithful, loyal woman of generous heart and invincible
devotion), and Frau Gustav Gebhard, of Elberfeld, whom



31 8 Old Diary Leaves

I loved so dearly and regret so sincerely since she kft us.
These dear ladies nursed H. P. B. in her sore illness, being
like younger sisters in their assiduous ministrations. Dr.
Habbe Schleiden and Madame Gebhard's son Franz were
there also, and from this group I received a most important
document. It is a complete vindication of my beloved
^chum^ H. P. B. from the foul charge of the woman
Coulomb and those who echoed her falsehood, that while
at Cairo she became the mother of illicit offspring. The
author of the document was (perhaps still is) the Royal
Medical Director of that District, and the certificate was
given by request of Madame Blavatsky^s friends, who foresaw
the immense future importance it might have. Following,
is a translation of its text : —



H. P. B. in Exile


319


“Medical Certificate.

“The undersigned testifies, as requested, that Madanue
Blavatsky, of Bombay — New York Corresponding Secretary
of the Theosophical Society—is at present under the medical
treatment of the undersigned. She suffers from Anteflexio
Uteri^ most probably from the day of her birth; because,
as proven by a minute examination, she has never borne
a child, nor has she had any gynaecological illness.

(Sd.) “Dr. Leon Oppenheim.

“WOrzburg, yd November 1885,

“The signature of Doctor
Leon Oppenheim is hereby
officially attested. Wurzburg
yd Nov. 1885.

“ The Royal Medical Officer
of the District.

(Sd.) “Dr. Med. Roeder.

“ We, the undersigned,
hereby certify that the above
is a correct translation of the
Xjerman original before us.
WOrzburg, Nov. 1885,

(Sd.) SCHLEIDEN.

( ,» ) “ Fhan^ Gebhahp.*'



320


Old Diary Leaves


The document, worded as delicately as possible, was
intended to cover the whole question of H. P. B's moral
history from her youth upward. She herself, as well as
the friends in question, wrote me about the circumstances,
and expressed the hope that I would keep the paper with
care against the future time when I could make the best
use of it. I think that time is the present, for now that
the bitterness of that olden epoch has given place to a
more charitable feeling towards her, and her underlying
greatness has gradually become more and more recognized,
I believe that the publication of this document, of un-
questionable authority, in its proper place in this chrono-
logical narrative, will give pleasure and consolation to her
friends and pupils, and afford them some sort of a shield
with which to ward off the arrows of slander, shot at the
heart of our benefactress. As the years roll by and this
movement of ours consolidates itself upon its permanent
foundation, this rugged personality behind which a giant
Individuality worked for humanity will be more and more
uplifted, grow brighter and brighter. For sayeth not the
Buddhist aphorism : Good men shine from afar, like the
snowy peaks of Himavat ; while bad men are unseen, like
arrows shot in the dark ? “ Peace to thee, H. P. B. ! ” is
now the loving cry of thousands.


CHAPTER XXIII.


TENDER OF RESIGNATION.

L iving in a country where omens and portents are
traced in the chirp of a lizard, the cry and flight of a
bird, and in innumerable other natural phenomena, what
wonder if one should in time be more or less affected by
such ideas, and that on the occurrence of any unusual thing
the idea of its possibly occult significance should present
itself to one's mind ? On awaking, on the morning of the
7th October (1885), I received an unpleasant shock. The
splendid portrait of one of the Masters lay inverted on the
floor, the top downward, having been detached from the nail
where it had hung in my room,* at some time during the night
The cord had been cut as if with a knife, and the picture
had turned a summersault over a tall bookcase, and leaned
itself against the glass doors without injuring them or itself,
Save at one corner where its heavy gilt frame had been a
little brushed. I was amazed at the accident and distressed

* Previously to the building of the present picture-annex of the
Adyar Libraiy.


321


21


$22 Old Diary Leaves

lest it might indicate the displeasure of the Master for some
serious fault that I had committed. I stood there and
looked and pondered a long time, trying to recall any sin
of omission or commission which had brought upon me so
phenomenal a rebuke, but I could find nothing. Yet the
clean cut through the cord belied any accidental rupture of
the fibres, and the fact that the canvas had not been torn
when the picture was falling and striking the tiled floor
made the affair mysterious. No one whom I consulted
gave me any reasonable explanation, and I was worried all
that day. At last the puzzle solved itself; the accident had
been caused by the squirrels, which then infested the house
and made their nests in the drawers of our furniture and
behind the books on our shelves, doing much damage in
various ways. They had gnawed the cord to get fibrous
nesting material, and the picture had probably been let
down easily by the friction of the dragging of the cord over
the nail. But this did not weaken my resentment against
the little rodents, for I got very angry when I bethought me
of the irreparable loss that would have been caused by the
destruction of the canvas on which was painted that divine
face. So I straightway had wire-gauze frames fitted in all
the doorways and window-openings of rooms where pro-
tection was needed against the ravages of these pretty
little pests.

I do not recollect whether or not I have mentioned a
scheme propounded by an eccentric member of the Society
to buy up the Theosophist with the idea of suppressing it
andun its place starting a new magazine, under the title of



Tender of Resignation 323

Karma, At any rate, such a proposal was made to me,
which only as a matter of news I reported to H. P* B.,
never imagining that she would think that I should seriously
entertain it ; but one day I received from her a cablegram
declining to sell (which cost her, as she wrote me, forty
marks, or ;£ 2 !). In due course of mail a letter came, in
which she said she would “as soon think of cutting off
her hand ” as do it ! She added some uncomplimentary
remarlvs about the person making the offer.

A few days later I lectured at Pacheappa’s Hall on “The
Peril of Indian Youth.” A Committee of Hindu school-
boys took notes and wrote out the lecture for publication at
their own cost. Thousands of copies have since been sold.
Their peril, I showed, lay in the fact of their irreligious
education by Government and their anti-nationalistic educa-
tion by the Missionaries, whose policy was to destroy their
reverence for their national religion, which to a Hindu is
the spur of all action, his guide and pole-star ; to rob him
of this is to leave him like a rudderless ship on the sea of
life. This, in fact, has been the keynote of all our teaching
in Asia from the very commencement ; and the creation of
the Central Hindu College at Benares by Mrs. Besant has
been made possible thereby ; it is the harvest after twenty
years* sowing of thought-seed.

In November I went to Karur and formed a local Branch.
One of the 18 Siddhas or high Adepts, recognized in
Southern India, by name Karura, is buried in the temple at
this place, and, according to popular tradition, is still alive
in his tomb, sitting in samddhL



5^4 Diary Leaves

On my return home, “ A nanda ** and I spent a good deal
of time in planning, measuring, and calculating the cost of
the alterations of the house-front and porte-cochere^ which
resulted in making the present Convention Hall. Accord-
ing to our closest ciphering, we thought it could be done
for rs. 2500, whereas the plan approved at the previous
Convention for a separate building called for an outlay of
about rs. 15,000. The approval of our resident councillors,
Messrs. R. Raghoonath Row, P. Sreenevas Row, and T.
Subba Row, having been obtained, workmen were set to
breaking ground the very next day, and from that time
onward they were driven at a rate of speed more often seen
in America than in slow-moving India. The foundations
and retaining walls were built, the earth-filling done, the
marble steps transferred to the outside of the extension, a
temporary roof of posts and palm-leaves lined with white
cotton cloth constructed, decorations made, crystal lustres
hung, and the Hall made ready for occupancy within twenty-
seven days — deducting four days when it rained heavily. The
Convention met at the usual time (December 27) in its own
premises, and all the delegates expressed their complete
satisfaction. A photograph of the empty Hall that Was
taken at the time, now possesses historical interest. The
improvement saved us over rs. 400 that year, which we
should have had to pay for the hire of a temporary pandal
or wigwam. The improvements cost only rs. 2600, one
hundred more than the estimate.

The news from France at that time was encouraging, no
less than four or five leading magazines having admitted



Tender of Resignation 325

serious articles on Theosophy by first-class writers. But the
public mind of France has for many years been uncongenial
to the discussion of metaphysics. The friends of that
“ distressful country and of her cheerful, enthusiastic people
— none are more so than Americans — have long been
saddened in looking critically upon her spiritual condition.
As a reaction from her crass materialism there has been a
recrudescence of superstitious belief, as evidenced by the
pilgrimages to Lourdes and other presumably favored
shrines, and by the excitement over the jeremiads of Mile.
Couedon : a great attention has also been given to the
subject of Hypnotism. But her public men seem to be
madly clutching for money and the pleasures of sense, and
the current of egoism sweeps everything before it. The
books of Zola are, I fear, not so much exaggerations as
social photographs. Moral corruption, formerly confined
to the effete aristocracy, has rotted the middle and is rotting
the peasant class. This is not only an impression from
personal observation during my frequent visits to the
country, but I have it from long talks with persons of the
highest social rank and most conservative views, who have
bemoaned the facts while admitting them. When a country
descends so low as to crown vice with laurels and make
virtue a butt for jest ; when it fills its shop windows with
pornographic books and pictures, and crowds a theatre to
see a shameless hussy undress herself on the stage, and she
sits to the photographer for a series of views of herself in
her lascivious scenes, which are sold by thousands; when
a Dreyfus case — the death of personal liberty and civil



326 Old Diary Leaves

law — has become possible ; when all these things are, what
is the use of talking Theosophy to the general public and
inviting the nation to rise to the higher ideal of human
perfectibility ? Yet things were never, can never be, so bad
but that a large minority of true, noble souls can be found,
and so let every one of us send to Capt. Courmes, Dr. Th,
Pascal, M. Gillard, and their little contingent of valiant
workers, the fervent prayers of our hearts for the success of
their efforts to spread theosophical teachings in their sunny,
smiling land — the cradle of many a hero, many a genius,
many a great teacher, many a divinely-inspired poet, many a
master of science and arts.* For my part, I shall never
altogether despair of France until she commits national
suicide. Adsif omen /

In the same month of December Mr. W. T. Brown, the
“Poor Brown’* of Dr. Hartmann and Mr. R. Harte,
published his autobiographical pamphlet entitled My Life^
to the regret of his well-wishers at Adyar. It shows him to
have been at the time an earnest young man but an
emotional sentimentalist, quite unfit for practical life in the
world. He had chopped and changed before coming to us,
and has been doing it pretty much ever since j the latest
news being that he has turned Catholic, taken the soutane,
kept it on only a few days, became again a laic, and is now
teaching in a Roman Catholic college in Madras Presidency,
and married to an Eurasian widow lady of ripe age. May

* Since the above was published (1899) a great change for the
better has occurred. Our movement has quadrupled its strength in
France.



Tender of Resignation 327

he prosper in his undertakings, and find that peace of mind
for which he has so long been hoping.

The Delegates to the Tenth Annual Convention began
arriving on the 23rd December, and thenceforward poured
in by every train and steamer until the 27th, when the
sessions began. Among the most welcome was Baron
Ernst von Weber, President of the (German) International
Antivivisection Society, who represented our German
Branch. In my Annual Address I gave a retrospect of the
history of our first decade as well as my usual glance over
the movement in all parts of the world. I strongly pleaded
for the creation of an Oriental Library at the Headquarters,
showing how we had helped in the revival of Sanskrit
learning in India and the opening of Sanskrit schools, citing
the unanimous testimony of the Indian press as to the
national services we had rendered. “ What an- anomaly it
is,” said I, “ that we have not at Headquarters a Sanskrit
library! We ought to be able to attract to Adyar the
cleverest Brahman Pandits and the most learned Western
Orientalists by the size and value of our library. If we and
our successors do our whole duty, this can be made a
second Alexandria, and on these lovely grounds a new
Serapion may arise. . , • It may sound strangely for us
to be mentioning these august names in connection with our
infant theosophical movement, but, gentlemen, wait twenty
years and you shall see what it will grow into. We are but
agitators and poor scholars now, hardly able to push on
through the obstacles, but let us keep a dauntless soul and
an unwavering faith in ourselves and our cause, and there



320 Old Diary Leaves

will arise, perhaps in far-away lands and least-expected ways,
friends who will snatch the laurel of imperishable fame by
giving their names to our desired Adyar Library and
Museum.” I suggested that we should begin the work as
a monument of the completion of our first decade. Was
this not prophetic ? See how friends, not then members of
the Society — Carl H. Hartmann, of Brisbane ; Charles A.
White, of Seattle; Annie Besant, of London ; Salvador de la
Fuente, and others — have arisen to help us with their money
and influence to build up the Society and make the Adyar
Library what I had hoped for it before the twenty years
have come and gone. We had no ancient MSS. then, and
only a couple of hundred or so of books ; whereas now we
have sixteen thousand volumes in the two beautiful libraries
that we have opened, and the prospect of the command of
ample means in due course. With all the earnestness I can
express, I again appeal to our members and sympathizers to
hasten, by their individual exertions, the day when scholars
will make pilgrimages to Adyar to study what they may
make the finest Oriental literary collection in the world.

In the same official Address I tendered my resignation
of the Presidency. ‘‘If you will allow me,” I remarked,
“ I shall gladly retire to that life of study and self-improve-
ment which has such attractions for me — and which
neglected early opportunities make so necessary. The time
is a suitable one, for I have served my decade, and some
other person ought to be given his chance to display his
abilities. I pray you to consider this seriously. . . . I hope,
therefore, with all seriousness and earnestness, that you



Tender of Resignation 329

will suffer no personal liking for myself, no thought of the
brotherly affection that binds us together, to prevent your
choosing as my successor some one of our colleagues who
would be better able to carry the movement on to the end
of the next decade.”

An intelligent person knows better than anybody else his
or her own limitations, and I have ever from the first been
convinced that an abler and better man than myself ought
to fill the post of chief executive in so vast an organization
as ours. I had had every advantage of early education
that the best American schools and universities could
supply, but, like hundreds of other sons of good families,
had idled away the time which ought to have been given
to study, never having dreamt that I should ever be called
to take up such serious public duties as these. As for the
bare honors of office, I cared absolutely nothing, and I was
perfectly sincere in asking that the Convention should let
me retire and choose my successor. But my too lenient
colleagues would not listen to it : in the second day’s
session, when I was temporarily absent and Maj.-Gen.
H. R. Morgan was in the chair, Resolutions were adopted
requesting Madame Blavatsky to return to Adyar as soon
as her health should be restored, declaring that ‘‘the
charges brought against her by her enemies had not been
proven, and that our affection and respect for her continue
unabated,” and that “the President-Founder has, by his
unremitting zeal, self-sacrifice, courage, industry, virtuous
life, and intelligence, won the confidence of members of
the Society and endeared himself to them throughout the



330


Old Diary Leaves

world; and (2) that as this Convention cannot for one
moment entertain the thought of his retiring from the
Society which he has done so much to build up, and has
conducted safely through various perils by his prudence
and practical wisdom, they request him to continue his
invaluable services to the Society to the last.”

I hope I may be pardoned the possible bad taste of
publishing these too complimentary Resolutions, in view
of their historical importance. They show that the policy
which the Founders had pursued from the beginning and
throughout the first decade of the Society’s career was
approved ; that H. P. B. had the unbroken confidence and
love of her colleagues, despite the worst attacks of the
Missionaries and their allies ; that the length of her exile
was to be governed entirely by the state of her bodily
health, and that she would be gladly welcomed on her
return ; finally, that it was the general wish that I should
continue to hold office throughout my life. What public
servant would not be glad and proud to have on record so
gratifying a testimonial of the approval of his colleagues of
the way in which he had done his duty ? And how sad it
is to see the dishonest policy of falsehood that is being
followed out by the leaders of the party who seceded from
the Society under the leadership of the late Mr. Judge.
Poor babies in practical experience !

On the third day of the Convention a Resolution was
adopted approving of the plan suggested by the President-
Founder for the completion of the Convention Hall and
the erection of a building for the Sanskrit Library and



Tender of Resignation 331

Picture Gallery, and he was “requested to carry it out as
soon as practicable.”

The Recording Secretary’s Report showed that 117
Branches had been chartered within the decade; that the
two Founders had given about rs. 35,000 to the Society,
and that it went over to the next year with an almost empty
cash-box but unlimited confidence and enthusiasm. On
the whole, the Convention proved a very great success,
and it broke up in the best of feeling all around. One of
the pleasantest features of the meeting was the glowing
and eloquent speech made at the Anniversary celebration
in Pacheappa’s Hall, by Prof. G. N. Chakravarti, Delegate
from the N. W. P.

A fearful tragedy occurred, however, in the People’s
Park, Madras, during the days of the Convention; some
three or four hundred persons were burnt alive in a panic
that seized them when some palm-leaf shops and fences
accidentally caught fire at a People’s Fair that was in
progress. The reason for my mentioning it is that the
wave of agony that it created in the Astral Light reached
H. P. B. in her lodgings in Belgium, and threw her into
the greatest excitement about our safety. She tells the
story thus : —


“Ostende, January 1886.

“My dear Olcott, — This is the first time that I
have smoked and passed a whole New Year’s Day quite
alone, as if I were in my tomb. Not a soul the whole day,
as the Countess is gone to L>ondon, and I have no



332 Old Diary Leaves

one but Louise (her maid) with me in the big hou^e.
A queer thing happened. I had been writing all day,
when, needing a book, I got up and approached my
table de nuit^ over which hangs the photograph of
Adyar and the river. I had looked long and earnestly
at it on the 27th Dec. and tried to imagine what you
were all doing. But on that day (New Year’s), occupied
in finishing the Archaic Period^ I had not given it a
thought. Suddenly I saw the whole picture blazing
as with fire. I got scared, thinking it meant blood to
the head ; looked again ; the river, the trees, and the
house were all glowing as from a reflection of fire. Twice
a wave of flame, like a long serpentine tongue, crossed the
river and licked the trees and our house, and then receded
and everything disappeared. I was struck with surprise
and horror, and my first thought was that Adyar must be
on fire. For two days all Ostende was drunk (from the
festival excesses) and I had no papers. I was in agony.
Then on the morning of the 2nd January I wrote to ... .
(in England), begging him to loot over the papers and see if
there was no fire at Adyar or in Madras on that day. On
the 3rd he telegraphed me : ‘ Great fire at People's Park^
Madras \ 300 Natives burnt, DorCt bother I To-day I
saw the notice in the Independance Beige myself. What is
it? and why should I connect Adyar with that Fair and
the poor 300 Hindus burnt ? Are there any victims among
the Theosophists ? I am positively in great fear. I hop^
you were not there. You could not leave Adyar on that
day, could yop? It is terrible, that. And that young fool



Tender of Resignation 3^33

to telegraph : * Don’t bother ; only 300 Natives burnt 1 ’
Well, I wrote him to say that I would have Felt less ‘ bother ’
if it had been 600 Europeans — confound his impudence ! ”

This is a most instructive psychological phenomenon.
The “wave of agony” of which I spoke touched Adyaf,
of course, first of all, being so near, and from me passed
on to H. P. B., with whom I was spiritually so intimately
connected. In the fact of her seeing the sheet of fire
reaching us from the direction of the People’s Park — the
North — across the Adyar River, on whose Southern bank
our house stands — we see that my explanation is valid ;
while, as for the tragedy being communicated to her from
me, that was as natural as that, when she died in London
in 189T, I was made aware of it in Sydney, N.S.W. We
used to call ourselves “twins,” and twins we were so far
as community of sympathies within the lines of our work
was concerned. No great wonder, considering how we
had worked together. Moreover, one of our Madras
members was burnt. I had visited the Fair with Mr.
Cooper-Oakley and Dr. J, N. Cook, and left it just before
the fire broke out ; so that our narrow escape intensified
the horror which the awful tragedy caused us to feel.
But my thoughts did not go out to H. P. B. in connection
with it, else in all probability she would have received
telepathically from me a more accurate picture of the
occurrence.

Near the Sea Customs building, opposite the Harbor
at Madras, stands a solid, two-storey brick building,



334


Old Diary Leaves

ornamented outside with inlaid encaustic tiles, and which
is occupied as a Police Station. I have been told that
it was built out of the money realized by the sale of the
melted gold and silver ornaments that were found in the
pile of cremated corpses at the Fair grounds. The bodies
were consumed beyond possibility of recognition, and the
jewels reduced to formless metallic masses. I had had
it in my mind to take two of the lady Delegates in our
Convention to see the Fair, but something (what some-
thing ?) put it out of my mind. I shudder to think what
might have happened if they had gone with me; been
enticed by the novelty of the spectacle to get me to
stop until the fire had broken out ; had been themselves
seized with panic, and broken away from me and rushed
with the mad multitude into the raging flames.


CHAPTER XXIV.

CREMATION CEREMONY IN CEYLON.

H OW much was done by us, in the first decade of the
Society’s existence, towards realizing the objects of
its formation, will be seen in a few statistics. The T/teoso-
phistvfdi^ founded in October 1879, and there appeared in
its first ten volumes 429 pages (royal 8vo.) of translations
from the Sanskrit, and 935 pages of original articles on
Eastern religious, philosophical, and scientific subjects,
mainly by writers of Oriental birth ; several hundred
lectures were given by myself, besides hundreds more by
our colleagues in India, America, and Ceylon ; the Buddhistic
educational movement was started and vigorously pushed in
Ceylon ; a number of Sanskrit and Anglo-Sanskrit schools
were begun in India ; H. P. B. visited Europe once, and I
several times; Branches and Centres were established in
Europe and America; a considerable number of books
were published in different languages ; I travelled thousands
of miles in India and went to most of the villages in the
Maritime Provinces of Ceylon ; a heavy correspondence

33S


33^ Old Diary Leaves

was kept up with all parts of the world, and as we crossed
the threshold of the eleventh year, the erection of the
building for the Adyar Oriental Library was begun at the
lovely Headquarters which had been bought for the Society
and paid for. In my Diary of 1886 the entry for January
ist says : —

In the name of the Masters and for the sake of their
cause, I, Henry S. Olcott, President of the Theosophical
Society, this day turned the first sod for the Sanskrit Library
and Museum at Adyar. The only witnesses present were
T. Vijiaraghava Charlu and two of the gardeners. The
impulse to do it came so strongly — after staking out the
ground for the building — that I did not call any of the
other people in the house.”

A very simple affair, one will see : no speeches, no music,
no processions, no humbug of any sort, just a real beginning
of what is meant to be a great work, accompanied by in
declaration of the motive at bottom : one which, though
not heard by more than two or three spectators, yet
certainly must have been heard and noted in the quarter
where the Wise Ones sit and watch the actions of men.

Work was not begun on the building for some little time,
however, as plans had to be perfected, money provided for,
and materials bought. On the 8th I consulted Mr. C.
Sambiah, F.T.S., a retired Sub-Engineer and most excellent
colleague of ours, about the building, and he agreed to take
it in charge in conjunction with “ A'nanda ” and myself* I
made myself personally responsible for the money, and we



Cremation Ceremony in Ceylon 337


wefe soon teady. But there were first the religious preju-
dices of the bricklayers to be considered ; they would not
begin a new work save at the auspicious hour, whatever
temptations might be offered. Saturday morning, the i6th,
proved to be the critical moment, so a Brahman was called,
and at the north-east corner of the ground, where I had
started the trench, he recited slokas, laid out a broken
cocoanut, red powder, betel nuts, saffron and mango-leaves,
on a tray ; then he burnt camphor and threw into the thick,
smoky flame seeds of various varieties of gram (pulse),
sprinkled the place with drops of water from mango-leaves,
and recited many Sanskrit mantrams of supposed fiend-
smiting potency. Bits of ripe plantain, roasted gram,
chopped rice, and brown sugar were laid about the fire for
the benefit of any hungry bhutas and pisachas who might
be idling about, and, finally, flowers were showered into the
trench and the ceremony came to an end. After that, the
masons were ready for work, and so we set them at it. Mr.
Sambiah took professional charge and opened a book of
accounts in which every load of bricks, sand, lime, and
other materials, every foot of teak timber, and every day’s
‘‘coolie” (work) was entered with scrupulous care and
integrity. He and we two others (T. V. Charlu and myself)
have always been in close accord upon every work of con-
struction or repairs that the exigencies of our corporate
property have demanded, and have used the utmost
economy possible. It is necessary that this should be
stated, because it has sometimes been uncharitably said — of
course by those who never had practical experience in the



33^ Old Diary Leaves

owning and care of real-estate like that of our Society — ^that
I have wasted money in bricks and moitar: such people
h^ve no idea of the cost of keeping up such large buildings,
bought when they were some forty years old, nor realize
that as a society grows it must have increased accommoda-
tions, the same as a family. However, this need not be
dwelt upon further.

In my entry of January 3rd I find it recorded that our
friend Judge P. Srecnevas Row, F.T.S., “ generously pays
not only the cost of feeding the delegates, but also for the
Pandals^ decorations and lights used at the Convention.”
He had drafted for me the Divaita Catechism for my
proposed series of elementary handbooks of the ancient
religions, and at this time I received from him the MS. and
edited it for publication.

Baron Ernst von Weber had gone on a short tour at the
close of the Convention, but returned on the nth January
and sailed for Calcutta on the 17th. He was a good-natured
man, and heartily entered into a joke of mine for the amuse-
ment and instruction of the resident Indian members of the
Headquarters staff. On the evening of the 15th he donned
his gold-embroidered court dress, with his orders, cocked
hat, silk stockings, pumps, sword, and all, and pretended to
have been sent to me as special Ambassador from his
Sovereign, to convey to the President of the Theosophical
Society His Majesty's compliments and congratulations on
the completion of our first decade. I made the Hindus
take up positions to the right and left in the vestibule,
advanced as Marshal of Ceremonies to the column^ front



Cremation Ceremony in Ceylon 339

%

entrance to receive and conduct the Ambassador, led him

up the vestibule, and announced his name, dignities, and
functions ; then wheeled around to face him as P. T. S,, heard
his (coached) address, responded to it with solemn gravity, and
hung on the Baron’s button a small tin shield emblazoned
with H. P. B.’s escutcheon, to which 1 gave the dignity of
an order with a fanciful name, and begged him to wear it
as a proof to his august Master of the value I placed upon
his brotherly message. The mock levee being then broken
up, the Baron and I had to laugh heartily on seeing the un-
sophisticated wonder displayed by the auditory at his whole
“outfit,” every article of which they successively inspected
and asked about His white kid gloves surprised them
quite as much as anything else : they did not know what to
make of them, but said they were very strange things to
wear, “ very soft and smooth.” Of course, I know that this
innocent bit of tomfoolery will be deprecated by those of
our members who take life lugubriously and fancy that the
P. T. S. must be a yogi-ascetic, but it would have been just
the thing to suit H. P. B.’s temperament, and she would
have entered into it with zest In how much of such harm-
less nonsense did she not indulge in those old days, when
we laughed and joked while carrying our heavy burden up hill.
In truth, but for our light-heartedness it would perhaps have
crushed us: a good laugh is more restful than laudanum,
and mirth than morphia. I know Mahatmas, my lugubrious
fnend, who actually laugh !

On the day of Baron von Weber’s departure, a British
captain called and asked permission to look at the



34<^ Old Diafy Leaves

River Bungalow, in which he had been bom. This will
give an idea of the necessary age of the Adyar buildings.

On the 19th occurred the annual “floating festival^' at
the Mylapore temple tank, and we went to see it. It is a
very striking picture of Indian national life. Symbolically,
it typifies the floating of Vishu on the face of the waters at
the beginning of a Manvantara or new cosmic period. The
ascending steps on the four sides of the tank, which mount
from the water’s brim, are lit up with chirdgs, or clay lamps ;
and the small temple at the tank’s centre blazes with light,
while its white stucco of chunam is turned into the sem-
blance of old ivory by the soft light of the silvery moon.
On a raft of catamaran fishing-boats, that has been prepared
by the coast fishermen as an act of time-honored feudal
service, the temple idol has been placed in a small pagoda
covered with glittering tinsel. Its hereditary attendant
Brahmans, naked to the waist, but with two white cloths, one
wrapped about them from the waist downward, the other
folded into a strip and laid across the shoulders, chant
slokas. Standard-bearers wave their quaint banners. Deva-
dasis, or temple nautch-girls, sway before the idol in graceful
motions. Colored fires of all bright hues blaze at the
corners of the raft. Musicians waken the echoes with their
strident sounds, and the floating raft is poled seven times
around the tank, in the presence of a vast multitude of
dark-skinned people who watch it from the bank, the
disturbed water reflecting back the while the shining
splendor of the earthly lamps and fires, and the silver
radiance of the moon and stars far up in the blue vault.



Cremation Ceremony in Ceylon 341

Anything more picturesque in the way of a human festival
would be hard to find.

On the 23rd of the month I gave my first and only
lecture in India on practical agriculture, at the Saidapet
Agricultural College — a Government institution. It was a
pleasant break into the monotony of perpetual lectures on
religious and metaphysical subjects, and aroused my old
interest in the great problem of helping the earth to fully
nourish mankind. The President of the College presided,
and the whole thing went off very nicely. But as this sub-
ject properly belongs to the pre-theosophical portion of my
life, it need not be mixed up with the present one, the
history of whose chief events we are now tracing.

On the 27th Mr. Leadbeater and I sailed for Colombo
to take up a lecturing tour on behalf of the Buddhist
National Education Fund that I had promised to make.
The sea was smooth, the weather pleasant, the ship^s officers
old acquaintances of other voyages, and the stretch of 640
miles from port to port was made in due course. On arrival
we were met on board ship, at the jetty steps, and at the
new quarters of the Colombo Buddhist Theosophical
Society, where a hymn of welcome was sung by some of our
school children. I found Mr. (now Sir) Edwin Arnold, his
wife and daughter, in town, and at once set to work to
organize a fitting public reception to one who had laid the
whole Buddhist world under deep obligations by the writing
of his Lig?it of Asia. But a very few Sinhalese knew
this, however, although Sir Edwin was happily ignorant of
the fact, and I had to get my intelligent Colombo Buddhist



342 Old Diary Leaves

Colleagues to go with me to the priests and secure their co-
operation. Fortunately the Ceylon Observer^ a most abusive
and dogmatic paper, made a virulent attack upon him for his
sympathy with Buddhism, which made our task a light one.
With the High Priest Sumangala we arranged that the re-
ception should be given at his College on the second day
thereafter, and fixed just where the priests and visitors
should sit on the platform and what the High Priest should
Say. A copy of the proposed address was given Sir Edwin
at his request, and the function duly came off with complete
success. My next neighbor on the platform was George
Augustus Sala, who chanced to be passing homeward from
Australia. When the guests had departed, Mr. Leadbeater
and I were asked by the High Priest to address the people,
and did so.

The next day we took train for Kalutara with some
of our Colombo members, to attend the cremation of
Ambagahawatte Indasabha, Nayaka Terunnanse, the learned
founder of the Ramanya Nikaya (sect) of Ceylon Buddhism.
The occasion was so striking that I think I may as well
quote some of its details from an account which I wrote
for the Theosophist while the circumstances were fresh
in my mind.*

As it has been more than once explained, the Buddhist
sects of Ceylon are not at variance as to dogma, they
have the same books and the same beliefs ; their distinction
from each other is in the several sources of their priestly
ordination {upasampada\ one brotherhood getting it from
^ See the issue for May 1886, p. 49 j.



Cremation Ceremony in Ceylon 343

Siam, the other from Amarapoora, in Burma. Buddhism
originally went to those countries from Ceylon, but a series
of wars of invasion and conquest, waged by kings of India
against the rulers of Ceylon, caused the almost complete
extinction of the religion of Buddha in that country. To
so low an ebb had it come, that when, finally, a Sinhalese
warrior-king drove out the Tamil invaders and recovered
his ancestral throne, he could find no worthy monks to
conduct public worsliip and preacli the Dhamma. He
accordingly sent to the King of Siam for learned bhikku^
to come and re-establish the religion, and the best of the
Sinhalese candidates were duly ordained. This formed
what is known as the Siam Nikaya. The priests, being
mainly of high social rank, would not confer ordination
upon candidates of lower caste, so the more energetic
and learned of these went to the King of Burma and
got what they sought from the chief priests. This formed
the Amarapoora Nikaya. But in the course of time that
happened which always happens in the religious affairs
of men : piety relaxed, learning became confined to the
minority, idleness and sanctimoniousness prevailed, and
now and again a monk who grieved over the decay of
true religion would break out in protest, and either start
a new sub-sect or withdraw into the jungle for a life of
seclusion and meditation, Ambagahawatte was one of
these protesting rebels ; he gave up his connection with
the Amarapoora Nikaya, went abroad and took a fresh
ordination, and founded the Ramanya Nikaya, just before
H. p. B. and I came to the Island, if I remember aright



344 Diary Leaves

On the 23rd June 1880 he joined the priests’ division
of what I called the Buddhist section of the T. S., the
other division being that of the laymen who formed our
Ceylon branches. Four days earlier the great leaders of
all the other sects and sub-sects — Sumangala, Subhuti,
Weligama, Bulatgama, Piyaratana, Potuwila, and Megittu-
watte, the silver-tongued orator, par excellence^ of Ceylon,
had preceded him in entering our Society ; and thus were
united on our common platform those leaders who had
been hitherto divided more or less seriously. Ambagaha-
watte was learned, ascetic, a great stickler for the minute
observance of every detail of rule of conduct prescribed
for the Sangha in Vinaya Pitaka. His head was of a
highly intellectual type, his eye full of thought and power,
his manner gentle and repressed, and his private conduct
blameless. We were great friends, for I fully sympathized
with his yearning for reformation of the bhikkus and
extension of Buddhism throughout the world. Naturally,
therefore, I was invited by his followers to attend the
cremation of his body at Kalutara, and gladly went to
pay the last act of respect to his memory. He had died
on January 30th, and his cremation occurred on February
3rd. Meanwhile the body had lain in state at his own
monastery, five miles from the town of Kalutara, whence
it was borne in procession on a catafalque erected on a
decorated car, to the place of cremation. Mr. Lreadbeater
and I with our Colombo friends saw everything. Before
the coffin was removed from the Dharmasala (preaching
fiall) where it was lying, the assembled priests^ to th^



Cremation Ceremony in Ceylon 345

number of some two hundred, filed thrice in silence
around it, faced inward with joined palms raised to the
forehead, knelt, and laid their faces to the ground, as if
paying their final homage to their dead chief. The coffin
was then raised by the senior disciples, borne outside the
house, and laid upon the car. Native musicians then, with
booming drum and wailing pipe, thrice circumambulated
the bier, the people cast flowers, roasted grains, and sweet
waters upon the coffin; the village headmen closed in
about the car, gorgeous in gold lace and buttons and
towering combs of shell; the yellow-robed friars extended
in single file before and behind the car, each with his
fan, his cadjan sunshade, and his begging-bowl slung at
his back. The line of march was then taken up in a
glare of hot sunshine that made vivid the colors of vest-
ments and gold lace, of amber-yellow robes, and of the
gaudily bedecked catafalque on wheels. Behind the rear
end of the line of bhikkus walked hundreds of men and
women bearing the spices, the citronella and sandalwood
oils, and other portable materials which they were con-
tributing towards the pyre.

In a grassy basin, bordered at two sides by steep
hillocks clothed to the top with forest trees, stood a pyre of
logs of mango; cachu, cinnamon, and cocoa-palm, built nine
feet square, so as to front the four points of the compass.
At each side three heavy posts of about fifteen feet in height
were provided to serve as a sort of frame to support the
additional fuel that might be brought by friends. Outside
4II W4S a quadrangular structure of young areca-palm trees,



34^ Old Diary Leaves

framed in squares after the native fashion for triumphal
arches, and prettily decorated with the split and festooned
tender leaves of the cocoanut tree in the charmingly artistic
fashion which comes naturally to the Sinhalese. On the
side facing the road was a canvas screen inscribed with the
name, titles, and chronological history of Ambagahawatte ;
on the east side a larger one painted with emblems; over
the pyre stretched a cloth canopy with a painted sun at the
centre and stars at the corners ; and around the cornice
of the areca framework fluttered crimson pennons and
bannerets. At the distance of fifty yards towards the east,
a long arbor of cloths upon bamboo supports awaited the
occupancy of the monks coming in the procession.
Leadbeater and I, who had pushed on ahead by a cross
path, sat in a cool shade looking on. Presently we heard
the sad, sobbing wail of the pipes and the roll of the
bass and kettle drums and the tom-toms, and the procession
came into sight and all took their assigned places. The car
was drawn to the pyre, the chief disciples mounted the
latter, white cloths were drawn about it as a temporary
screen, the coffin was lifted and placed, and then an
eloquent, clear-voiced monk recited the Pancha Sila.
Response was made by the 5000 people present in a great
volume of sound that produced a most striking effect. The
same priest then pronounced an eloquent discourse upon
the dead master, and enlarged upon the mysteries of life
and death, the working of the law of Karma, and Nirvana
as the summum bonum. Turning towards me, he then
asked me to make some remarks as a friend of Ambaga*



Cremation Ceremony in Ceylon 347

hawatte and President of our Society, which I did. The
contributions towards the funeral pile were then brought
forward, and the pyre was built up to a height of nearly
fifteen feet, and gallons upon gallons of fragrant oils and
gums were scattered over the logs. All being now ready,
the disciples removed the cloth screen, descended to the
ground, thrice circumambulated the pyre, reciting pre-
scribed Pali verses, called Piritta, thrice knelt and made
obeisance, then slowly, with downcast eyes and grief-
stricken countenances, stood back. The firing of the pyre
in such cases is the privilege of the chief disciple and the
brother of the deceased, but these two paid me the unusual
compliment of asking me to apply the torch. I, however,
declined the honor, as I thought it an intrusion, so the
usual course was taken. Presently the great structure was
sheeted in curtains of flame, that licked, up the wood, the
spices, and the oils, and waved long yellow-red streamers
towards the clear sky. It was a grand sight ; how infinitely
nobler than the ceremony of burial, one could see who had
the least poetical instinct in him. After awhile the huge
pyre was a mass of glowing coals, the corpse was reduced
to ashes, and the gifted and courageous founder of the
Ramanya Nik ay a had passed out of the sight of men whose
view is limited to the physical plane, and moved on another
stage in his evolutionary orbit.

Cremation was the universal custom of sepulture in Ceylon
before the Portuguese conquest, save for the most ignoble
class. In the case of a laic the pomp of it was proportioned
to the wealth and the consequence of the deceased. This



348 Old Diary Leaves

Tve learn from the ancient Pali and Sanskrit writings. But
with the new masters came innovations — the result, in part,
of bloody persecutions and the necessity for hiding in the
jungle from their savage conquerors. Burial replaced cre-
mation for the laity, until now it is only given to priests
and the nobles of the Kandyan districts. Some of the
friends of the Sinhalese, myself among them, have urged
them to revert to the older and better fashion, and I hope
that in time this may be done. No obstacle whatever in
the form of ancient custom, social prejudice, or religious
prescription stands in the way; the Sinhalese are just
stupidly continuing a bad method of sepulture that their
forefathers would have regarded as a terrible disgrace, one
which was forced upon them by foreign conquerors who
were as bigoted as fanaticism could make them, and as
cruel as tigers in dealing with the captives to their sword.
It is a curious instance of national auto-hypnotism. Some
fine day a few leading men among them will realize that
they are doing to the bodies of their deceased relatives
just what, in the olden time, the Government would have
done to an outcast or criminal — one, in short, who was
outside the pale of respectable society and not entitled to
better treatment for their carcases than a dog ; and then
the spell will be broken, ostentatious burials will be given
up, and the bodies of the dead will be put into the bosom
of the all-purifying fire, to be reduced to their component
elements. The embalming of corpses with spices and natron,
and the laying of them away underground to turn into
poisonous carrion, are customs begotten of false theological



Cremation Ceremony in Ceylon 349

beliefs as to the 1>ost mortem importance of our mortal shell :
cremation, the noblest, most honorable of all forms of
sepulture, was the natural outcome of those higher, grander,
and more reasonable concepts about the perishable and
imperishable parts of the human Ego, which are taught in
Brahmanism and Buddhism.


CHAPTER XXV.

ESTABLISHING A BUDDHIST FLAG.

T he American Consul sent me, on the 5 th February, a
gentleman^s visiting-card, which rolled back the pano-
rama of my life, twenty-odd years, to the period of the
American War of the Rebellion. It was that of a Mr. Miller,
of Sacramento, who had been one of the clerks under me
when I was attached to the War Department. A greater
contrast between myself as I was then and now could not
be imagined ; and it was with a feeling of real pleasure that
I called on my friend and his wife at their hotel, and, in
the exchange of reminiscences about persons and things, the
magic of memory brought up in my mind the long-hidden
pictures of those awful days when our nation was fighting
for its existence, and my hair was turning grey with the load
of responsibility which was cast upon me by my official
position. The chance of his voyage around the world
having brought him to Colombo was grasped by our leading
Buddhist to get from Mr. Miller, at first-hand, some details
about my public record and private character at home, to
serve as weapons of defence against the hostile parties in*

350


Establishing a Buddhist Flag 351

the Eastern pulpit and press, who trod as near to the line of
actionable slander as they dared, in their attacks upon our
Society and its Founders. A great calamity impended, how-
ever, over the head of my friend, for within the next week
his wife died at the hotel, and the Consul and I followed
her remains to the grave.

It was at this time that our Colombo colleagues had
the happy thought of devising a flag which could be
adopted by all Buddhist nations as the universal symbol
of their faith, thus serving the same purpose as that of
the cross does for all Christians. It was a splendid idea,
and I saw in a moment its far-reaching potentialities as
an agent in that scheme of Buddhistic unity which I
have clung to from the beginning of my connection with
Buddhism. With the many points of dissemblance be-
tween Northern and Southern Buddhism, the work of
unification was a formidable one; yet still, in view of the
other fundamental features of agreement, the task was
not hopeless. My Buddhist Catechism was already circu-
lated in Japan in two translations, and now this flag came
as a powerful reinforcement. Our Colombo brothers had
hit upon the quite original and unique idea of blending
in the flag the six colors alleged to have been exhibited
in the aura of the Buddha, viz., sapphire-blue, golden-
yellow, crimson, white, scarlet, and a hue composed of
the others blended.* The adoption of this model avoided
all possible causes of dispute among Buddhists, as all,

* In Pali the names of the colors are Nila^ Pita^ Lohita^ Avadata^
and Prabhasvara,



352


Old Diary Leaves

without distinction, accept the same tradition as to the
Buddha^s personal appearance and that of his aura : more-
over, the flag would have no political meaning whatever,
but be strictly religious. As the Colombo Committee had
sketched the flag, it was of the inconvenient shape of a
ship's long, streaming pennant, which would be quite un-
suitable for carrying in processions or fixing in rooms. My
suggestion that it should be made of the usual shape and
size of national flags was adopted, and when we had had a
sample made, it was unanimously approved of. Accepted
by the chief priests as orthodox, it at once found favor,
and, on the Buddha Birthday of that year, was hoisted
on almost every temple and decent dwelling-house in the
Island. From Ceylon it has since found its way throughout
the Buddhist world. I was much interested to learn, some
years later, from the Tibetan Ambassador to the Viceroy,
whom I met at Darjiling, that the colors were the same as
those in the flag of the Talai Lama.

The importance of the service thus rendered to the
Buddhist nations may perhaps be measured with that of
giving, say, to the Christians the Cross symbol, or to the
Moslems the Crescent. The Buddhist flag, moreover, is
one of the prettiest in the world, the stripes being placed
vertically in the order above written, and the sequence of
the hues making true chromatic harmonies.

In pursuance of the policy of unity, I held a Con-
vention in Colombo on the 14th February (1885) to agree
upon a line of action as regards the tour I had come to
make in the interest of education and religion. Suman-



Establishing a Buddhist Flag 353

^^egittuwatte, personal representatives of Wime-
lasara and Ambagahawatte were present, and we were able
to cpme to a perfectly unanimous conclusion. Waskaduwe
Subhuti, who was unavoidably absent, called on me the
next day, and was, as usual, extravagantly liberal in promises
and compliments.

On the 20th, in company with Messrs. Leadbeater,
W. d’Abrew, Dharmapala, and my veteran Buddhist servant
“Bob,” I started in my travelling-cart for Negombo. But
man proposes and God disposes, it is said, and I had my
first and only serious attack of malarial fever since coming
to the East. I could only lecture once, when we retraced
our steps, and during the next fortnight Leadbeater had to
do my work, while I lay abed and drank nasty herbal
decoctions given me by a Native doctor, that were enough
to make a horse sick. I was out again on the 5th March
and took the platform at a place called Ratmalana. The
tour in the Negombo district was resumed, and we
visited the stations on our list, whose names may be
judged from these few specimens ; Pamankada, Hunupitiya,
Naranpitiya, Wilawalla, Mokallangamuwa-— which I com-
mend to the managers of American “spelling bees” as
good practice.

Returning from one of these outstations to Colombo,
we held a bumper meeting at the Colombo Society’s IJead-
quarters, and broached the scheme of placing small earthen
collecting-pots at private bouses, into which the family and
Iriends should drop as many coppers as they felt
could afibrd in aid of Ihe Buddhist National Fundi



354 Old Diary Leaves

The packed audience responded fervently to Leadbeater^s
and my appeals, and fifty names were given in by persons
who were willing to take pots. Our zealous brothers of the
Colombo Society, accordingly, had a number of these
money-pots made at a pottery, and, putting them into a
cart, went through the streets of Colombo and distributed
them. They would stop from time to time, call the
neighbors around, make them a stirring address, and give
pots to all who asked for them. Within the next twelve-
month a sum of about rs. looo was thus collected, if my
memory serves me

The cocoanut palm has been the theme of hundreds of
poets, for it is one of the most beautiful objects of the vegetable
kingdom. But to see it as we saw it on the night of 23rd
March, at Ooloombalana, on the estate of Messrs. Pedalis
de Silva and R. A. Mirando, was to take into the memory a
picture that could never fade. The stars shone silvery in
the azure sky, and in the extensive cocoanut grove many
bonfires had been built to protect the fruit from the depre-
dations of thieves. The effect of these lights upon the
enamelled surfaces of the huge fronds was marvellously
artistic. Their lower surfaces were brought out into high
relief, and, standing at the foot of a tree and looking upward,
one could see the great circle of star-studded sky that was
opened out by the outspringing foot-stalks, while, as the
wind shook the fronds, their spiky points would wave up and
down and bend sidewise and back again, so that the hard,
smooth, emerald-hued upper surfaces would glint and sparkle
in the yellow glare of the fires. It was one of the most



Establishing a Buddhist Flag 355

entrancing pictures I ever saw in my life. Our pitched cart
with its white tent-top, the white oxen, our camp-fire, and
our group of persons, were vividly lighted up, and I could
not but fancy what an exquisite painting Salvator Rosa
would have made of the quiet scene.

We entered the village of Madampe with a great pro-
cession that had come to meet us, and made noise enough
with their barbaric tom-toms and horns to frighten away
all the pisdchas within the circuit of five miles. Of course,
our public lecture was attended by a huge crowd, who dis-
played much enthusiasm. Leadbeater, who is now working
in America, will doubtless be entertained by these notes of
our associated tourings. I doubt, however, his recalling
with pleasure the trip from Madampe to Mahavena, in a
country cart without springs, over a fearfully rough road, on
which we got, as Horace Greeley did over a Kansas rail-
road, more exercise to the mile than was good for the soul.
Every bone in our bodies was shaken up so as to make us
painfully conscious of its anatomical position, while, as for
poor Leadbeater, he suffered agony with his weak back.
However, we came out of the experience alive, and that
was something.

At one village, which I shall not name, we found the
Buddhists killers of animals for food and drinkers and
vendors of arrack — a pretty mess indeed — quite after the
Indian Christian model. Well, it may be safely said that I
walked into them in my discourse, citing the Silas to show
what a real Buddhist should be, and pointing to what they
were. The very headman whose hospitality was offered us



3S6 Old Digtry L^v<;3

was an arrack-renter, and fish-catching and selling was
^ 4 er of the day. Ii) defining Nirvana and the Path towajsds
it;, I gave them one and all to understand, on the authority
of Jx)rd Buddha himself, that if they imagined that they
could get to Nirvana with a jug of arrack in one hand and
a string of fish in the other, they were mightily mistaken:
they had better go over to the Christians at once if they
believed that, for fishing and arrack-drinking put a man
(juite outside the pale of Buddhism !

On the 7 th April we closed the tour and started back for
Colombo, but in the night our driver, having fallen asleep^
dropped from his seat, and the bulls drew the heavy cart
over his foot, so my servant “Bob,” who was up to any
emergency, took his place and brought us at 3 a.m, to the
house of our good friend Hendrik Araccbi, where we stopped
until 9 o’clock the next morning and then proceeded on
towards home. We got to the Headquarters at 3 p.m., and
I went at once to my desk to deal with arrears of work.

Sunday, the nth April, being the Sinhalese New Year’s
Day, Leadbeater and I and others went to Kelanie temple,
a very sacred shrine, a few miles from Colombo, to ofier
flowers and address the multitude. It was an animated
scene indeed, what with the crowds of worshippers, the
flower offeritigs before the images of Lord Buddfra, the
babel of chattering voices, the drawling intonations of the
Five Precepts by the priests, and the full roar of repetfripi^iSi
by dre people, the thousands of little lamps a}igbt afound
tbe trees, dagpto, and buildings* mi the genecal
and busd^ Suddbif^ worship” is iHKilf. ThM



Establishiftg a Buddhist Flag 3$^

c^ryiftg Bowers of the lotus, lily,
other sWeet-sisfeOffing plant^i and trees, doffs hfef sandali^ ft! th^
threshold of the house of statues, holds hrs joined palftls td
his forehead, lays the flowers on a marble slab before the
image, bends his body reverentially, pronounces a phrase Or
two of the sacred teachings, and then quietly retires fa give
place to the next comer. That is all, and what could be
simpler Or more unobjectionable? The image is not
Worshipped; the devotee offers his fragrant blooms to
the ideal of the world- savior, Gautama Buddha, Whom
he professes to follow in the Eight-fold Path {Arydstauga
Marga) which He traced out for all men, and whom he
holds enshrined in his heart of hearts. The Buddhist monk
IS no mediator, his prayers can do nobody good save him*-
self, and then only as practically worked into his daily life,
thought, and conversation. The Tathagata Was a man Who,
through countless rebirths, had at last reached the goal of
Wisdom and Divine Powers, and who had preached the
doctrine that Nirvana was attainable by all men who would
profit by His discoveries and walk in the path of good and
Wise men. No infallibility had He claimed, no dogma
enforced on assumed authority of divine inspiration. Hc
had taught in the Kalmna Sufta^ on the contrary, as I haVe
above noted, that one should believe nothing taught by a
a sage, written in a book, handed down by tradition, or
supposedly proved by analogy, unless the thing taught Was
supported by human experience. Full of compassion fOr
an beings, moved to heartbreaking by the volunie of human
Woe, He had voluntarily taken rebirth after rebirth to learn



358 Old Diary Leaves

more and more, develop more and more His insight, and
gradually fit Himself to be the Leader of ignorant mankind
out of the quagmire of Ignorance on to the firm ground of
Truth. One has only to mix with such a crowd as we saw
at Kelanie to realize how deep is the devotion and love for
the Buddha in the hearts of His followers of to-day ; ignorant,
and petty, and backward in civilization as they may be.

The next important public work that I had to take up
was the reorganization, on a stronger basis, of the Buddhist
Defence Committee, a body which — as may be remembered
— we formed in 1884, when I was leaving for London, to
represent certain grievances of the Ceylon Buddhists to
Lord Derby, the Colonial Secretary. The results of the
Colombo Riots of that year, when a peaceable Buddhist
procession was murderously attacked by Roman Catholics,
showed the necessity for some permanent committee which
should be the channel through which the community might
transmit their petitions to Government and secure redress
for grievances. Until then, the Sinhalese had had no
organization of a national character, and, consequently, no
semblance of public opinion that carried any weight. To
the Theosophical Society is due the state of affairs now
prevalent, viz., a Committee of Defence and a popular
newspaper, circulating throughout the Island and even
reaching those who live in the most distant countries as
merchants, servants, or in other bread-winning capacities.
The remodelled Committee, formed on the i8th April 1885,
had the High Priest Sumangala as Honorary President and
the most influential laics as active members, I was elected



Establishing a Buddhist Flag 359

an Honorary Member, and have had frequent occasion to
assist with counsel and otherwise my co-religionists. The
remaining few days of my stay in the Island were taken up
with business in Colombo, and on the 26th I sailed for
Madras on the “ Cliindwara,” on board which comfortable
ship I found in the Captain and other officers old “ship-
mates” of former voyages in Indian waters. During the
tour I lectured thirty-two, and Leadbeater twenty* nine,
times ; tours were made among the villages of the Western
and North-Western Provinces ; several hundred rupees were
collected for the National Fund ; a new Sinhalese edition
of 5000 copies of the Buddhist Catechism and 2000 of
Mr. Leadbeater’s Sisya Bodhya^ or elementary Catechism,
were published; the accounts of the Colombo Buddhist
Theosophical Society, and of our Vernacular paper, the
Sandaresa, were overhauled and audited ; subscriptions
amounting to rs. 3000 were collected towards the cost of
Headquarters' buildings ; the Defence Committee was per-
manently organized ; and, last but not least, the Buddhist
Flag was devised, improved, and adopted. A fair show of
work, one would say, I returned alone, as it was arranged
that Mr. Leadbeater should stay as my local representative
and take the general supervision of Buddhist (secular)
affairs.

I found all well on reaching home on the 5th May, and
dropped at once into work. T. Subba Row came to see
me on the next day, and we had a long talk about H. P. B.
and the project of her return to India. For some reason
l]is feelings towards her had entirelj^ changed ; he was nqw


360 Old Diary Leaves

positively inimical, and protested that she should ftO! be
recalled for another year or two, so as to give time for
public animosity to subside, and avoid the scandal that
would be caused by the Missionaries setting on again the
Coulombs to sue her for libel. His views were shared by
only a few of our members, however, the great majority
inclining towards her return as soon as her health should be
sufficiently restored to permit it. Subba Row came again
a few days later, bringing with him a letter from one of
our Indian members, in which was found, on opening it, a
postscript in blue pencil, in the K. H. handwriting.

After showing me it, he re-mailed it to his correspondent,
asking him if the blue writing was in the letter before it left
him. His reply came in due course and — to me at least —
was unsatisfactory. At about this time some man in
Northern India was advertizing widely in the papers that
he had been allowed to photograph Mahatma K. H. in the
Tibetan Borderland, and that he would sell copies at two
rupees each. Of course, we knew that it must be an
impudent swindle and did not send for a copy, but one was
sent me by a friend, and it was far worse than even we had
expected. Instead of the Master's Christlike face, this was
the picture of a brutalized Dugpa lama, with his parapher-
nalia of human leg-bone pipe, drinking-cup made of a skull,
coarse red dress, peaked red cap, and heavy rosaries. It
was like a personal insult to me, who had Seen the real
Personage face to face, talked with him, and seen the
spiritual radiance which lights up the countenances of the
Wise Ones. No doubt the scoundrelly speculator made a



Establishiftg a Btlddhist Flag ^df

gdod thing of his ^otOgfAph, and rtitich good fnay
fnoAey have done him.

On the 44th several of us attended the wedding of one
of Our younger Madfassi members, Mr. RamanjiilU Naidu,
and were much amused by the performances of a buflbdn,
who, with a simple bit of betel-leaf held by his tWO hands
to his lips, imitated the singing and whistling of various
birds, and, by breathing through his nose, the sounds
of brass and stringed instruments. He also caricatured
cleverly a missionary trying to preach in Tamil, a European
scolding his servant, and some types of Hindu character
that one meets from time to time in social intercourse*

A most sad case of the suicide of a young lad, th^ Son
of beloved European friends of ours, was reported to m§
in this month. He was only about twelve or fourt^n
years of age, had a happy and luxurious home, and parents
Who loved him dearly; his father was in a position to
ensure him just such a career in life as he might have
preferred* But sudde nly, without provocation, he shot
himself dead in his own room. This was not all; his
brother had done the same, at about the same age, ht
the same house, a year or two before. The two events
seem to have been related, and it is an interesting problem
what peculiar karma could have made it necessary that
these two bright, affectionate lads should have taken their
own lives at the same age, and thus have wrenched whh
a double agony the hearts of their noble parents. Can
anyone imagine my happiness in hearing from the dear
mother that^ but for the support and consolation of



362 Old Diary Leaves

Theosophy, she should in all probability have gone mad ?
The complete realization of the truth of the theory of
Karma dried her unavailing tears and calmed her affrighted
soul. How admirably has Mr. Fullerton stated the case
for the beneficent and consolatory working out of karmic
results, in his pamphlet, Theosophy in Practice^ and Consola-
tions of Theosophy, If these parents suffered, it was no
accident, no “mysterious Providence” that caused it, but
they themselves : of what they had sown long before, they
now reaped the harvest.

“The father, in some past time, when himself a father,
had made life bitter to his children, or had been unsym-
pathetic to those dependent on him, and had then formed
a record which had to be expiated later on. Then the
conditions were reversed, and the iron which he had
driven into the souls of the helpless is now driven into
his own. The pain is hard to bear, yet he knows that
thus only can atonement be made, the debt to Justice
be wiped out, the future freed from anxiety and sorrow.
And so he becomes reconciled to an expiation which is
reassuring, and is consoled at the thought that he has
but brought upon himself what he deserved, etc.”

This would explain why these two entities, self-doomed
by self-generated karmas to suicide in boyhood, had drifted
into this particular family circle to take birth. The
antecedent karmic tie between them brought it about
that one should first rush into Kamaloca, and then
hypnotically draw his companion culprit along the same
dark path. As for the present mother of them, if there



Establishing a Buddhist Flag 363

was ever a woman and mother more lovable, I have never
seen her. But that she had done something in a past life
to draw upon herself the suffering resulting from such a
tragedy is plain enough, if we live in a world of balanced
cause and effect, and are not the sport of devils and astral
tramps.

In an earlier chapter I have noted a peculiar case of
family karma that came under my notice in Northern
India. Two sons of a respectable and healthy family had
each been stricken with paralysis on attaining his twelfth
year. When I saw them, one was fourteen, the other twelve
years old; and although I had cured some two hundred
paralytics by my curative passes, I could do nothing for
these poor lads: evidently it was their karma to suffer in
this way, and their cases were incurable.

The book of Adolphe d’Assier on the state of man
after death* pleased me so much that I asked and, in
due course, obtained his permission to bring out an
English edition with annotations of my own, I began
the task on the 27th May (1886), and, with intervals of
other duties attended to, finished it on June 24th. It
was published in a neat form by Mr. Red way, and had
a gratifying success. To my mind, it is one of the most
useful books of reference in our occult literature, especially
so because of the author's having been a Comtist, and
having led us, as it were, past the tomb, into the shadow-
land. That he deserts us midway through the gloom,
matters not; he has at least disposed of the objectors



^64 Old Diary Leaves

III Ms old party who refused to stir one step beyotifl HS®
Sill Of the door of the sepulchre.

dh the 6th June the Council met and approved of
my plan for the organization of an American Board of
Control to have charge of our movement in the Uftited
States of America. Shortly after, however, a quarrel sprang
up between Mr. Judge and Dr. Coues, the latter wanting
to be appointed President for life of the American Section
— an anomaly, since a society can have but one head if
It be really an entity, or corporate body. He Wrote
H. P. B. and myself the most fantastical, self-adulatory
letters, in which gross flattery was mingled with boasting
and peppered with covert threats. He explained to us
how he played upon the American public, now exciting
its curiosity and wonder, anon destroying its hopes of
ever solving the mystery which he was hiding fronfi the
profane. In short, he gave me the impression that he
Was a most dangerous and undesirable man to have dealings
with ; and when he had brought things to a certain point,

I got the Council to agree to dissolve the American
Board of Control and replace it by a sectional form Of
organi:iatidn, based on purely republican lines, and having
in Itself the elements of stability. How well the scheme
worked, under Mr. Judge’s direction, is now a matter of
histoiy. Dr. Coues was ultimately expelled from our
rnembefship.

A letter came to me from Bombay, from TOokafatil
Tatya, which gave us all a great surprise. On the flrst
page he writes feelingly about the disappearance of



Establishing a Buddhist Flag 3^3

and of our not knowing whether he was 4^94
or aUv^. On the second page, left blank, J found a Ipng
ma^page from Mahatma K. H., or at any rat^ in his
script, giving me full information in aniswer to
Topkaram’s plaint. Damodar, it said, was alive and safe ;
h^e bad tried to pass through a terrible prdeal of initiation,
but had failed through physical weakness ; he would, how-
ever, ultimately succeed. The time had come for us all
to realize that there was an inexorable law of Karma and
aet accordingly. The tone of the message was admirable,
^d I felt rejoiced to see its stern reminder of our personal
accountability: it seemed the harbinger of better days,
the knell of sham holiness, of which there had been too
much. 1 re-posted the letter to Tookaram, and asked what
he knew about it, as Subba Row had in the previous
instance. He answered in a letter, received on the J7tb
of that month, expressing his great joy over the oecurrence,
and telling me how other leading men of ours shared
his feelings. As H. P. B. was in Europe and Damodar
in Tibet, this phenomenon could not be attributed to
them by even their most dishonest critics.

Tbe news from Europe was now cheering. At the
head of our movement in France we bad a gifted and
extremely able man, M. Louis Dramard, who, most un-
fortunately for us, went into a rapid consumption a little
later, and died just when a held for unlimited usefulness
ms (gening before him. Had he lived, we should have
hfd, within the next five years, a very large following among
the hi^<sr class of French Socialists^ of whom



$66 Old Diary Leaves

Malon and Dramard, pure altruists, were types. Even as
it is, we have members in the National Assembly — or had,
at all events, three years ago, when I was last in Paris.
The fact is, this pollen of Theosophy has been wafted all
over the world, and fructified thought-seeds in thousands
of brains that the world does not suspect of such affinities.
When Tennyson died, a copy of The Voice of the Silence
lay by his bedside on the night-table, and more than one
royal personage has our books on the shelves of his
private library. And why not? Thoughts are things,
and great thoughts more potent than the most absolute
monarch on earth: before their majesty even he has to
bow in reverence. Cry out, then, O warders on the walls
of our citadel ! for the wind will waft your call to the
ears of those whose clairaudient sense is waiting to hear
it, and whose hour of karma has struck.

A letter from H. P. B., about the writing of The Secret
Doctrine^ that I have just come across, is so suggestive
that I shall use it in this place. She says : —

“Sinnett has left, after stopping with me three weeks,

and Mrs remains for ten days more. She is very

kind, and copies for me the Secret Doctrine, The enormous
(volume) of Introductory Stanzas, the first chapter on the
Archaic Period and Cosmogony, with numberless appen-
dices, is ready ; but how to send it to Adyar ? Suppose it
is lost! I do not remember one word of it, and so we
would be cooked 1 Well, old boy, Z. has read it through
twice and begun again for the third time. He has not



Establishing a Buddhist Flag 367

found one part to be corrected in the English, and he is
amazed, he says, at the ‘gigantic erudition and the
soundness of reasoning in its showing of the esotericism
of the Bible and its incessant parallels with the Vedas,
Brahmanas, etc.* This is a little more wonderful yet than
Isis, Then you corrected, and Wilder suggested. Now^ I
am absolutely alone^ with my arm-chair and inkstand before
me, and no books to speak of. I wrote a whole section
and the interpretation of a whole stanza (about 40 pages),
without any books around me, and without stopping, for
about four hours, simply listening. This is no humbug,
old boy, anyhow.”

Now for a coincidence. As I write, among the exchanges
laid on my table is the copy of the Banner of Light for
February 25th (1899), in which appears an article entitled,
“Was Talmage Inspired?” and apparently from the pen
of the editor. It says : —

“ Many of our readers will remember a poem published
some months ago in The Banner^ entitled, ‘The Stage of
Life,* by Madge York. This poem was received, laboriously
spelled out word by word, on the Ouija board, by a
gentleman, who, though not widely known in spiritualistic
circles, has been singularly blessed in his own medial
powers. A year ago last summer the editor was informed
by this gentleman that he had received another most
remarkable communication on the Ouija board, of many
pages in length, concerning occupations in spirit-life,
fie and a friend sat several evenings to receive it, one



3^ Oid Diary Leaves

transferring the words to paper, and the other furnishing
the power with which the intelligence guided the pointer
to the letters. Oftentimes a word was spelled over and
over s^gain in order that there might be no mistake. Being
pncertain regarding many historical characters referred to,
the gentleman sat up nearly the whole of one night
verifying by the encyclopaedia names and statements given*
In every instance he found them absolutely correct.

“While the communication was received in response
to queries and a personal desire for knowledge, he yet
felt that the information was given for the benefit of others
as well as himself, and fully intended sometime to share
it with the world. He hesitated to do so because of the
assurance that the message was not quite completed. In
the meantime he read it to many friends. About a year
and a half ago he took it to a typewriter in New York
and had it copied. Lawyers, merchants, and prominent
business men read the document, or heard it read, and
speculated as to its source.

“We now come to the strange part of our narrative.
On January 32, 1899, Rev. T. De Witt Talmage delivered
from his pulpit in Washington, D. C., a sermpn entided,
' What Are Qur Departed Friends Doing Now ? * taking
his teri from Ezekiel i. ; ‘Now it came to pass in the
thirtieth year> in the fourth month, as I was among the
captives by the river of Chebar, that the heavens were

“This was r«port«J by the Washington iW/,

by the Pfv^ssive Thii^r last wsefe, and wiU



Establishing a Buddhist Flag 369

appear in the next issue of the Banner oj Light Excepting
the introduction, certain other embellishments, and an
orthodox coloring given by the brain through which it
passed, the sermon is identical with the communication
received on the Ouija board two years previously by our
friend. Whole paragraphs are the same, without the
variation of a word.

“From whence came the inspiration? The gentleman
tells us he did not request the name of the intelligence who
gave him such rich spiritual food. He does not care to
have his name published at present, but he will communi-
cate by letter with any who wish to verify the above, and
will furnish them with the names and addresses of the type-
writer and others who will cheerfully testify.

Every experienced occultist who reads this must see the
bearing the case has upon the whole question of H. P. B.’s
alleged plagiarisms. In the most merciless and savage
manner her books have been dissected by her evil-wishers,
and on the strength of their containing a large number
of citations from other authors without giving credit, she
has been charged with wilful and dishonorable plagiarism.
Some of these traducers have, themselves, been Spiritualists
of many years’ experience with mediums and their
phenomena, who ought, therefore, to have known that we
have not yet learnt the secret of thought-currents on the
several planes of mentality. Not one of them is able to explain
the simultaneous or almost simultaneous discovery of scientific

truths by students far removed from each other and not in

*4



370


Old Diary Leaves

mutual communication, of the putting of the same ideas into
books issued at about the same time in different parts of the
world."* Presumably, not one of H. P. B.*s cruel critics
would venture to say that Mr. Talmage had plagiarized his
sermon from an unpublished mediumistic message two
years after it was received by the medium, read by his
friends, and, so far as appears, never brought to Mr,
Talmage's notice. If, therefore, he is to be given the benefit
of the doubt, why should less kindness be used in the case
of H. P. B. ? One can see, from the instance under notice,
that H. P. B. may not have been guilty of a single conscious
plagiarism in the writing of either of her greater books, but
that she may have spiritually drawn them direct, or received
them at second hand spiritually, from that great storehouse
of human thought and mental products, the Astral Light,
where, as drops are merged in the ocean, personal begetters

* Just while I am writing, the current issue of the Bombay Gazette
publishes the following paragraph : —

“ It is a singular fact (says a correspondent) that at the time of the
publication of Kipling’s first ‘Jungle Book,’ Mr. Fred. Whishaw actually
had a Jungle Book of his own ready for publication The coincidence
was complete, for Mr. Whishaw had used the names of animals and
animal expressions in much the same manner as Kipling had done.
Suddenly the latter’s ‘Jungle Book’ was announced, and albeit this
incident happened several years ago, Mr. Whishaw cannot be persuaded
to place his own work upon the market. It is among the most singular
of literary coincidences. He has the manuscript still.”

Which plagiarized from the other? Again: In 1S42 Dr* J. R.
Buchanan, then of Louisville, Ky., and Mr. J. B. W. Gardner, of
Roche Court, Hants, England, acting independently of one another,
announced their discovery of the power to suspend or excite cerebral
organs by mesmeric action. Which plagiarized ?



Establishing a Buddhist Flag 371

of thought are lost in the totality of the Infinite Mind« save
to those most advanced Intelligences who can count the
sand-grains and the ocean-drops and pick out the atoms in
their respective vortices. In her letter to me H. P. B. cites
the fact of Mr. Z. having sat with her for hours while she
was transcribing what was spoken to her clairaudient sense
by a Master, invisible to him but seen by herself. The
reader will find in the second volume of this series
(p. 467) my description of her method of writing from the
dictation of an invisible Teacher as I myself saw it at
Ootacamund. This very same thing I saw unnumbered
times while she was writing Isis Unveiled : I have
described it exactly as it occurred,* and quoted her own
description of the process in a letter to her sister ; it agrees
perfectly with what she writes me as having occurred at
Ostende. Shall we call this phenomenon plagiarism, then,
or shall we not modestly confess our ignorance of that most
awe-inspiring fact of the transmission of thought-vibrations
from man to man physical, man to man spiritual, and man
spiritual to man physcial; its laws, its limitations, and its
potentialities ?

* Cf. Old Diary Leaves^ vol. i. p. 242.



CHAPTER XXVL


FOUNDING THE ADYAR LIBRARY.

I T had been originally intended to erect a separate kiosk
to contain the pictures of the two Mahatma patrons
painted by Schmiechen, but as the building of the Library
and Convention Hall proceeded, it became evident that it
would be better in every way to house them in a special
annex to the Library, which was done. The superbly carved
screen which H. P. B. had had made to go in her own
big room, was of just the right size to serve as a partition
in the arch between the Library and Picture Room, and
was finished in due course and set up in its place. The
black and white marble flooring-tiles which were in the
verandahs when we bought the property, were now taken up
and utilized for paving the Library and its approach, while
new tiles were presented by Mr. C. Ramiah, of Madras, for
the floor of the Picture Annex. Building operations were
being pushed as energetically as possible, under the pro-
fessional superintendence of the good Mr. C. Sambiah ; our
aim being to have everything finished in time for the next

37a


Founding the Adyar Library 373

Convention. The want of money hampered us greatly, but
somehow it all came out right in the long run, as it always
does.

On the 17 th May I left for the lovely hill station of
Bangalore, at the invitation of a number of influential men,
to come and lecture and form a Branch of the Society. A
century ago the Battle of Seringapatam crushed the power
of Tippoo Sultan, the warlike ruler of Mysore, and under
the protection of the British brought the old Hindu dynasty
to the throne. Since then the affairs of this State have been
so well administered that it has been made one of the most
prosperous and progressive in the Empire. Its advance-
ment, within the past fifteen years especially, under the
management of Sir K. Seshadri Iyer, the Dewan (Prime
Minister), has been astounding; its wealth increasing by
leaps and bounds, its taxation lightened, its mineral
resources opened up, and its education policy for both sexes
made a model to copy after. When it is stated that the
Dewan has been an avowed member of our Society since the
time of the visit I am now mentioning, it will be seen that
we have reason for a just pride in seeing how the welfare of
a people is promoted under the rule of a statesman who
practises theosophical principles.*

I was received on arrival at Bangalore by a large number
of people, who escorted me to a fine house in the Canton-
ment, where the customary address was read and then
handed to me in a carved sandalwood box, having inside
the cover a silver plate appropriately inscribed.

* This eminent man has died subsequently.



374 Old Diary Leaves

Drives through the wide tree-bordered avenues to points
of interest, visits to important personages, receipts of their
return visits, private and public discussions on philosophy,
metaphysics, and science, filled in the time between my
hours of reception and made the visit a charming one
throughout. On the day after my arrival I had a two-hours’
talk with the Dewan upon Yoga, Advaita, and Theosophy,
and found him one of the most enlightened and attractive
men I had ever met. He consented to take the chair at
my first lecture on the 20th. It was given at the Central
College, in a great pillared hall with galleries, which was
packed to overflowing. A crowd equally as large stood out-
side the building. The subject given me was “Theosophy
and the T. S.,” and certainly I never faced a more enthusi-
astic assemblage. The Dewan’s remarks went right to the
point, and were both lucid and benevolent. One result of
the meeting was to send me a stream of visitors the next
day and to cause thirteen persons to enter the Society.
Nine more offered themselves the next day, and on the third
day there were twenty-eight names on the roll. My second
lecture was on “Brahma Vidya,” and the audience was a
large one, although, to prevent such an uncomfortable
crowding as before, the Committee sold tickets of
admission. The next evening there was a lecture on
“Mesmerism,” with experimental demonstrations for the
instruction of the new members only ; and earlier in the
day one to schoolboys, of whom hundreds were present.

Bangalore City spreads over a large area, and is divided
into two parts — ^the Cantonment, where Europeans and the



Founding the Adyar Library 375

highest officials live ; and the City proper, the more ancient
quarter. My third lecture was given there, upon the dis-
tinctly Hindu subject of “Vayuloka and its Inhabitants,”
the term being almost the equivalent of the Purgatory of
the Roman Catholics. The popular beliefs in India about
this post-sepulchral state of existence are very interesting
and, on the whole, identical. The student of this branch of
folklore and occultism will profit much by reading D’Assier’s
excellent work on the state of man after death.* At the
time of my Bangalore visit I was engaged in compiling
information about Vayuloka, and some of the matter in my
lecture had been obtained from two Mysorean gentlemen of
the place. The natural term of the soul’s sojourn in this
purgatorial region, this half-way house between earth and
Swarga, people greatly differ about : in Mysore they fix it
at from ten to sixteen days, and the ceremony of Shraddha
takes place only after that. Soldiers killed in battle pass on
at once to Swarga — a belief singularly like that of the Scan-
dinavians and other ancient nations of Europe ; but their
rulers have to pay a heavy karmic penalty if their cause was
not just. Suicides and the victims of accident have to linger
in Vayuloka as many years as they would have lingered on
earth had they lived out their natural life-terms. The
Mysoreans say that after the Vayuloka, the transitive state,
come Naraka and Swarga — hell and heaven — and the soul
cut adrift from its earth-anchorage, so to express it, is
drawn to the one or the other state according to the pre-

* Ptfsthumous Humanity^ EngHsb Trans., London, 1887, George
Red way.


376 Old Diary Leaves

ponderating attractions which it has created in itself. After
it has exhausted all the effects of the karma of its last
preceding incarnation it comes again into earth-life, obedient
to its unexhausted trishna ; and so the wheel of birth and
death keeps on revolving, ever revolving, until the extinction
of desire gives release. I am giving here an outline of the
popular belief in this hilly state and, to a great extent,
among primitive people, as it was told me during the
delightful visit I am now describing.

At the house of Sir K. Seshadri Iyer, the Dewan, I was
having a most interesting talk about Vedanta with him and
his Guru, a venerable and learned Brahman pandit, when
the harmonious spiritual atmosphere that we were engender
ing about us was suddenly thrown into turbulence and
confusion by an inrush of the aura of political cunning and
selfishness in the person of the late Sir T. Madhava Row,
K.C.S.I., ex-Dewan of Baroda. The whole life of this
gifted statesman had been devoted to worldly affairs, and
what he liked best was to realize the schemes for increase of
wealth, industrial progress, and mental shrewdness, which
his fertile brain planned, and which he did his best to put
into operation within the several States of which he had
been Prime Minister, viz., Travancore, Indore, Baroda.
His model was the British administrative policy, and his
success had always been remarkable : at London, as at Simla,
Bombay, and Madras, he was i>ersona grata. A man like
this would not be expected to care for the philosophical and
metaphysical excursions along the higher levels of Indian
thought, and so, when he joined our little party in the



Founding the Adyar Library 377

Dewan's drawing-room, Advaita flew out of the window when
Mr. World-Wisdom came in by the door. To say that we
were satisfied would not be true, we were quite the contrary,
but there was nothing for us but to let him lead the con-
versation along his own “practical*^ level. Now, whether
because of my boldness in uttering heterodox and unworldly
opinions, or because my experience in the management of
public affairs at home had taught me how to meet such
minds as his, I can’t say, but the fact is that I had no
better friend in India in a certain way than Sir T. Madhava
Row, wide apart as we were on religious points. Shortly
before his death he organized a public subscription to get
my bust modelled by Mr. Havell, Director of the Madras
School of Arts — a pretty good sign of his friendly regard.
But on the occasion under notice he — as my Diary records
— disputed with me in favor of giving Hindus what he
called “ a belly education,” and drawing them away from
their ancestral philosophies which, he contended, had only
reduced them to political national subjection. Poor man !
he died rich but scarcely happy, I fear, for he once offered
Mme. Blavatsky to give the Society rs. 100,000 and devote
the rest of his life to its work if she would ** show him some
miracles going to prove the existence and survival of the
soul.” How many, alas ! are ready to barter wealth for
spiritual knowledge, if it can be conveyed to them without
interfering with their business engagements.

Lectures, nightly, to an ever-increasing group of new
members, at my lodgings and publicly on general subjects,
together with visits and drives, took up aid my time. I was



37^ Old Diary Leaves

interested much in a lecture, given by special request, of the
“ Queen’s Own Sappers and Miners,” in the schoolroom of
their battalion, this being piy first experience of an address
to an exclusively military audience. I was most kindly
received and treated by the Committee throughout, and,
of course, garlanded on leaving.

The Dewan of Mysore joined our Society on the ist
August, as many of his principal colleagues had previously
done, and I was able to form two large Branches in the
city and the cantonment before returning to Madras, after
farewell addresses from Committees of both, on my departure
— at 7 P.M. on the ist August. This visit was one of the
pleasantest I ever made, and after the lapse of thirteen
years I am happy to say the friendships then formed are
still alive.

I got to Adyar on my birthday (August 2), and spent its
hours, as usual, at my desk until far into the night.

When H. P. B. left us for Europe, she particularly re-
quested me to shift over my own quarters in the Riverside
bungalow to her new room which Coulomb had built for
her in 1884, while we were abroad and he and his cara sposa
were still in charge of the housekeeping. I did so, but when
the rainy season came there was not a spot in the chamber
where I could keep my bed dry, the terraced roof leaking
like a sieve. So I had to tear down and rebuild, and while
I was about it, I extended the Northern end and opened
windows at the East and West sides, so as to give H. P, B.
a chance for currents of air and pretty views of the river
when she should come back to her beloved Indian home.



Founding the Adyar Library 379

Poor thing ! she never had the chance to enjoy it ag^n, and
so I am sleeping in the room where she lay twice dying in
;385, with some of her own furniture, pictures, and knick-
knacks about me as perpetual reminders of her dear old self.
As usual, she mixed up the Society’s practical business
when she put her finger into the pie. The Overland mail
of August 12 th brought me the consoling news that (of
course without the shadow of constitutional authority) she
had cabled our people in New York to dissolve the
American Board of Control — to pacify Coues, I presume —
and she also offered to turn over her share of the Theoso-
fhist to Judge and make him her successor (one of two
or three dozens). What a pity that one cannot collect
into one letter-file the many similar offers she made to men
and women from first to last ! To offer anyone the suc-
cessorship was as liberal and practical as to offer him a
farm in the Moon, for she never could have a real successor,
for the excellent reason that nobody was ever likely to be
born just like her and so fill her place. At the same time
the case of Mrs. Besant has proved that it is possible for
another to create as commanding a place as hers was, and
to do as much as she to spread Theosophy throughout the
world. Still, “there is one glory of the Sun and another
glory of the Moon, and another glory of the stars,” and so,
while there can be no more than one H. P. B. Sun nor one
Annie Besant Moon, there are places in our sky for hosts of
stars, which certainly differ from each other in glory. If
Judge had only realized that!

Worh tumbled in upon me on my return, as O^ley



380 Old Diary Leaves

went away for a change and recuperation, and I had to
take over the whole editorial work.

Among the clever Hindus whose languid patriotism
had been stirred up by contact with us was the late R.
Sivasankara Pandiyaji, an assistant teacher in Pacheappa’s
College. He was an eloquent and intense man, with a
clarion voice and the capacity for great enthusiasm, so
that, when he turned his nervous force into the channel
of work, he moved with power. He founded the Hindu
Theological High School at Madras, and gathered into it
hundreds of boys. His leisure was employed in compiling
readers, tracts, and leaflets, full of high moral teachings
culled from the Hindu scriptures, and he trained a number
of children of both sexes to recite Sanskrit slokas in a
charming manner. His lectures and their recitations at
several of our annual gatherings are remembered with
pleasure. His first exhibition of the children to me was
made at the time above specified.

The growth of the library making it expedient that the
Oriental and Western books should be kept separate, I
fitted up H. P. B.’s first bedroom at Adyar — the large
one upstairs where many recorded phenomena occurred —
as the Western Section, and w'e moved the books into it
in September, put in a huge table, and utilized the place
for Council meetings as well. As fate would have it, the
room could only be got ready by the 7th of the month,
despite my desperate attempts to hurry on the carpenters ;
so, when I was struck by the coincidence, I myself carried
in Isis Unveiled as the first book and put it on its shelf.



Founding the Adyar Library 381

H. P. B., as the readers of Mr. Sinnett^s Incidents may
recollect, being bom in the seventh month of the year,
went by the name of Sedmitchka^ she who is connected
with the number Seven. Moreover, she was married on
the 7th July (1848), reached America on the 7th July
(1873), seventh month of the seventeenth

year of our theosophical collaboration; and when it is
seen that the number seven has played and is playing a
similar important part in the history of my own life, we
find ourselves in a pretty tangle of fateful numerical
relationships.

We saw a good deal of T. Subba Row at Headquarters
at this period, and enjoyed many opportunities to profit
by his instructive occult teachings. I have a diary note
to the effect that he told us that fully “one-third of his
life is passed in a world of which his own mother has no
idea.** How few parents do know what are the nightly
occupations of the entities to whom they have furnished
the present facility for reincarnation ! And how few of
of the entities themselves bring back recollections of those
transcorporeal activities !


CHAPTER XXVII.

THE OPENING CEREMONY.

T here was much building to do in i8S6, and the sound
of the hammer and trowel was heard almost through-
out the year. Besides the rebuilding of H. P. B.^s bedroom
upstairs, which M. Coulomb had made as rain-proof as a
sieve, and the conversion of her first large bedroom into a
library for Western literature, we had the work of building
the Oriental library to push on with great despatch, so as
to have it ready for opening during the Convention. To
avoid the encroachment of pillars on our limited floor-space,
we had ordered steel girders out from England, and when
they were fixed in place, suffered a spasm of anxiety on
finding that the weight of the brick terrace caused a
deflection of f in. The span of 2 7 ft. was a long one, and,
in our inexperience, we feared that the terrace might come
down by the run some day and perhaps kill somebody, or,
what was almost worse, crush the priceless portraits of the
Masters into ruin. I think either of us would have con-
sented to death rather than that. But the girders sank to

their bearings at last, and the work was hurried on as fast

382


The Opening Ceremony 383

as we could push it. By the end of September, seeing that
the library would certainly be ready in time, a circular was
sent around inviting learned men to contribute poems in
Sanskrit, Pali, and Zend for the occasion, and asking our
colleagues throughout India and Ceylon to arrange for the
priests of their several ancient religions to come and take
part in the opening ceremonies, which I meant to be of a
character to show the eclectic attitude of the Society towards
the various religions of the world. In the literary depart-
ment there was plenty to do, the editing of the Theosophist
being supplemented with the preparation of a handy mono-
graph on Psychometry and Thought-Transference^ cataloguing
the Western library books, preparing a new edition of the
Buddhist Catechism^ and other things. Besides which there
were lectures to give.

We were all rejoiced by the arrival, on the 3rd October, on
a visit, of Prince Harisinhji and his family, for, as my readers
know, he has always been beloved at Headquarters for his
sweet character and loyal friendliness. He has worn as well
as any man who has joined us from the beginning. Among
Indian princes he is the best as man and friend whom I have
met, and if all were like him, religion would be on a far better
footing in India than it is in these degenerate days. He
stopped with us four weeks, occupying the Riverside bungalow
and having his meals prepared by his own servants.

Just before the Prince left Adyar, his sweet wife, the
worthy type of the noble Rajpoot race, gave us a consider-
able sum of money in her son's name, for the erection of
a stone gateway of ancient design. Circumstances of one


A «. ^

i^iwil maiitm billed om iitKiBj|p(|i to fh»

IdoK nets qidte reocn^, wben ve brooght Inm * nSmA
^ea|^ Is Southern India tiie ponderous sculptured {idbm
Ahd cross^-beam which are bang erected on the e»Ci$i^
avenue in our grounds The Princess, her son and elder
daughter having died meanwhile, their three names waie
cut in the cross-beam; and the structure, already 2000
years old, as surmised, will for ages stand as a tribute of
affection to their memory.*

The Overland mail brought me, about this time, a
most cordial letter from a Christian bishop, blessing our
Society for what it was doing to stem the tide of scepticism
and strengthen the religious spirit; he wished to become
a member, and asked permission and directions for forming
a T. S. Branch! Fancy that; a Bishop, and his letter
stamped with the Episcopal seal. That was something
brand new in our experience, for the clergy had for the
most part been denouncing us in the pulpit and classifying
us as sons of Belial. True, he was black, a full-blooded
negro, as his photograph too plainly showed, yet a Bishop,
all the same ; orthodox, consecrated in the Episcopal or
American section of the Anglican Church. His dioi^se,
Haiti What good results might have followed for our
cause it is hard to say, if the Island had not been upset
shortly afterward by one of those political revolutions which
are so common in Haiti and the South American states.

^ While this book has been going through the press, the Prhuai
Haridnhji, who was present at the Convention in B^iares, lost hjN ffis
€iom an acckiwt on the niottling


Th# 0 |«ning Ceremony 385 .

'

^ November 1 had bjrdie same mail letters from Dn
Elliott Cones and Mr. Richard Harte, of New York,
announcing the collapse of the Society in the United
States ; the former attributing it to my refusing to play the
autocrat, or let him do so, and the latter to Coues having
tried tf> “ boss ” everybody ! My Diary note on them is that

Perhaps both are wrong and the T. S. is not collapsed over
there/’ the reasonableness of which events have proved.

A flying visit was made between the 19th and 22nd
November to Cuddapah, where I lectured and formed the
Cuddapah T. S.

By the first week of December Sanskrit poems for the
Library opening had been received from Benares, Bengal,
Bombay, and Madras Pandits ; and Sanskrit and Pali verses
from the most learned Buddhist priests of Ceylon. About
the same time I received from H. P. B., for reading and
revision by T. Subba Row and myself, the MS. of Vol. I,
of the Secret Doctrine \ but in his then captious mood the
former refused to do more than read it, saying that it was
so full of mistakes that if he touched it he should have
to rewrite it altogether! This was mere pique, but did
good, for when I reported his remark to H. P. B. she was
greatly distressed, and set to work and went over the MS.
most carefully, correcting many errors due to slipshod
literary methods, and with the help of European friends
making the book what it is now. It must be said of her
that she was always most eager to have mistakes pointed
out, and most ready to correct them. Especially was
that die case with such of her writings as were not dictated



386 Old Diary leaves

to her, psychically, by the unseen Helpers who presided
over the production of her two great books, Isis and the
Secret Doctrine, which will be the Jachin and Boaz of her
perpetual monument, a wonder to coming generations.*

The last touches to the Library were being giv^ up to
the 22nd December, the lovely carved screen which has
been the admiration of all visitors was set in place on the
19th, the Picture Room marble door laid on the same and
following day, that of the Library on the 22nd, and then the
work was done. The first Delegates arrived on the 21st,
and on the same evening I wrote my address for the open-
ing Library ceremony. By every train more Delegates came
from Bengal, the North-Western and Central Provinces,
Bombay, Madras, and Ceylon, until the buildings were full
to overflowing. As usual, I wrote my Annual Report on

* I think she would have felt deeply mortified if she had lived to
read the scathing and complete exposure of Keely’s fraudulent demonstea-
tions of his “ Inter-Etheric Force,” in her own magazine, the Theosophical
Revmv, for May (1899), after what she had written about it in the
Secret Doctrine (i. 55 ^ 5 ^» ed.). She knew nothing personally

about Keely, taking her impressions and fiicts at second hand from
a friend at Philadelphia — a shareholder in Keely’s original company,
and from Mrs. Bloomfield Moore, his enthusiastic disciple and backer ;
but she did know a gieat deal about the etheric and other forces and
their potentialities, and had often proved, experimentally, her ability
to handle them ; so, without stopping to test Keely’s theories or verify
Mrs. Moore*s alleged facts, she flew off at a tangent into a most
instructive essay on cosmic forces, and by her ung^uarded iialf'*
endorsement of the now-proven charlatan, exposed one more large
joint in her armor to the shafts of her sneering enemies. But what
does it matter, after ail? She was jiist H. P, B., and strode along
with us, a s^tess in wbus aipecto, tho\^ perhaps a gobesneucJu
when accepting unchallenged the statements of those who had too
easily won her confidence.



The Opening Ceremony 387

tbe evening of the 26i\ii and on the 27th at the fixed time
the Convention organized and disposed of its work. This
yearns session was made memorable by a course of four
lectures on the Bhagavad GM, by T. Subba Row, whkb
charmed his hearers and, in book form, are now among
the most precious treasures of our theosophical literature^
They were a foretaste of the intellectual character which
has been stamped upon our Adyar annual meetings by the
discourses of Mrs. Besant. On the afternoon of the 27th
the Buddhist priest, Medankara, of Ceylon, lectured in Pali,
and — a fact which proves the close connexion between Pali
and Sanskrit — his remarks were interpreted to us in English
by the late Adyar Library Pandit Bhashyacbarya, who did
not know Pali, but understood the speaker perfectly from his
own deep knowledge of Sanskrit. A word must be said
about this Medankara. He was of th6 Ramanya Nikdya^
a young man, truly holy in his life and aims to a degree that
I have never seen equalled among the bhikkus of Ceylon.
A part of each year it was his custom to retire into the
forest and spend the time in meditation, subsisting on berries
and such other food as came in his way. Almost alone
among the monks, he believed in the existence of our
Masters, and his strongest yearning was to go to Tibet in
search of them. He would have started in that very year
had 1 not dissuaded him and used all my personal influence
with hitm He reluctantly went back to Ceylon, but so far
from abandoning his project, sent me several urgent requests
tiiat I would let him go to die Himilayas and help him om
But aias t it was not his karma like Damodar’s to seek and



388 Old Diary Leaves

find the Teacher, for death soon caught him away from
our sight, perhaps that he might soon reincarnate in a
body better adapted to the accomplishment of his heart's
wish.

The Library opening on the 28th was a complete success.
Brahmin, Buddhist, and Parsi priests and a Muslim Maulvi
participated. The scene was most impressive to a thought-
ful mind.

However tinged with sectarian inclinations some of my
colleagues may have been and are, even my ill-wishers must
do me the justice to say that I have stubbornly opposed all
attempts to put forth ex cathedra teachings. In fact, it has
been my passion to uphold the platform of tolerance on
which H. P. B. and I laid the foundations of the Society in
the beginning, and I grasped the chance, which the opening
of the Adyar Library offered, to put that idea before the
world in a way that could not be misunderstood. Such a
thing had never been seen in India as the religious teachers
of the antipathetic sects of the East uniting in a ceremony
like this ; but, for that matter, India had never, before the
uprising of the Theosophical Society, seen men of all the
castes and Indian sects meeting together to celebrate the
anniversaries of a religio-scientific body of foreign inception.
We have been “making history” in a very real sense ever
since we had that momentous drawing-room meeting in New
York, when the idea of our Society was first broached by
myself and supported by H. P. B., Judge, and others. And
now these chapters are collected in book form to serve as
a contribution to the history of our movement, it is well for



The Opening Ceremony 389

US to recall the incidents of the official opening of the Adyar
Library on the 28th December 1886.

As stated, priests of Advaita and Visishthadvaita Hinduism,
of Southern Buddhism, of Zoroastrianism, and of Islam
were in attendance, and, as they were called, mounted the
speaker’s platform, and with ceremonies appropriate to their
several religions, invoked blessings and prosperity on the
enterprise. The crowded audience of Asiatics and Europeans
showed the deepest interest in the proceedings. Each group
of priests, after finishing its part of the programme, left the
platform and gave place to the next, we laymen sitting
there and watching the events whose like had never been
seen or even dreamt of in India before. It was one of the
happiest days of my life. A Pandit from Mysore invoked
the favor of Ganapati, the god of occult research, and of
Sarasvati, the Indian Pallas-Athene, or Minerva, patroness
of learning ; some boys from one of our Sanskrit schools
chanted benedictory verses in the classical language of the
Vedas ; two Parsi Mobeds offered a prayer to Ahura Mazda
and lit the fire of sandalwood in a silver brazier ; the saintly
Medankara and a colleague intoned the Jayamangalam in
Pali ; and a Muslim Maulvi from Hyderabad, with strong,
clear voice, recited a prayer from the Koran. Then followed
my official discourse, of which the following extracts are
made from the report of the Madras Mail : —

“ We are met together, Ladies and Gentlemen, upon an
occasion that is likely to possess an historical interest in
the world of modem culture. The foundation of a Library



39© Old Diary Leaves

of such a character as this is among the rarest of events, if,
indeed, it be not unique in modem times. We need not
enumerate the great libraries of Western cities, with their
miHions of volumes, for they are, rather, huge storehouses
of books; nor the collections of Oriental literature at the
India Office, and in the Royal and National Museums of
Europe ; nor even the famed Saraswati Mahal, of Tanjore :
all these have a character different from our Adyar Library,
and do not compete with it. Ours has a definite purpose
behind it, a specific line of utility marked out for it from
the beginning. It is to be an adjunct to the work of the
Theosophical Society ; a means of helping to effect the
object for which the Society was founded, and which is
clearly stated in its constitution. Of the three declared
aims of our Society —

‘‘The first is: ‘To form a nucleus of the Universal
Brotherhood of Humanity, without distinction of race,
creed, or color.*

“ The second : ‘ To promote the study of Aryan and
other Eastern literatures, religions, and sciences.*

“The first is the indispensable antecedent to the second,
as the latter is the logical consequence of the former. It
would be impracticable to bring about any friendly co-
operation by the learned of the several ancient faiths and
races for the study of comparative religion and archaic
philosophy and science, without first getting them to
consent to work in mutual kindliness; and, on the other
han4 the eatablishmmt of this fraternal spirit would
natura&y stimulate research into the records of the past, to



The Opening Ceremony 391

discover, if possible, the basis of religious thought and
human aspiration. Strife comes of mutual misunderstand-
ing and prejudice, as unity results from the discovery of
basic truth. Our Society is an agency of peace and
enlightenment, and in founding this Library is but carrying
out its policy of universal goodwill. We want, not so
much number of books, as books of a useful sort for our
purposes. We wish to make it a monument of ancestral
learning, but of the kind that is of most practical use to
the world. We do not desire to crowd our shelves with
tons of profitless casuistical speculations, but to gather
together the best religious, moral, practical, and philo-
sophical teachings of the ancient sages. We aim to collect
whatever can be found in the literature of yore upon the
laws of nature, the principles of science, the rules and
processes of useful arts. Some Aryaphiles are thoroughly
convinced that the forefathers had rummaged through the
whole domain of human thought, had formulated all
philosophical problems, soimded all depths and scaled all
heights of human nature, and discovered most, if not all,
hidden properties of plants and minerals and laws of
vitality ; we wish to know how much of this is true. There
are some so ignorant of the facts as to affirm their disbelief
in the learning of the ancients and the value of the
contents of the old books. To them, the dawn of human
wisdom is just breaking, and in the Western sky. Two
centuries ago — as Flammarion tells us — the Jesuits,
Schillers, and Bayers proposed to have the stars and
constellations rechristened with Christian instead of



392 Old Diary Leaves

Pagan names: the Sun was to be called Christ \ the Moon,
Mary Virgin; Saturn, Adam; Jupiter, Moses; etc., etc.;
the orbs would have shone none the less brightly, and
sectarianism would have been gratified! In something of
the same spirit, some of our improved Aryans seem
disposed to obliterate the good old orbs of knowledge and
set up new ones — putting out Vyasa, Manu, Sankara,
Kapila, and Patanjali, the Aryan luminaries ; and lighting
up Comte, Haeckel, Huxley, Spencer, and Mill. It would
not be so reprehensible if they would be content to see all
great and shining lights

* . . . . admitted to that equal sky.*

We are all for progress and reform, no doubt, but it is
yet to be proved that it is a good plan to throw away a
valuable patrimony to clutch at a foreign legacy. For my
part, I cannot help thinking that if our clever graduates
knew as much about Sanskrit, Zend, and Pali literature as
they do of English, the Rishis would have more, and
modern biologists less, reverence. Upon that impression,
at any rate, this Adyar Library is being founded.

“With the combined labor of Eastern and Western
scholars, we hope to bring to light and publish much
valuable knowledge now stored away in the ancient
languages, or, if rendered into Asiatic vernaculars, still
beyond the reach of the thousands of earnest students who
are only familiar with the Greek and Latin classics and
their European derivative tongues. There is a widespread
conviction that many excellent secrets of chemistry,
metallurgy, medicine, industrial arts, meteorology, agri-



The Opening Ceremony 393

culture, animal breeding and training, architecture, engineer-
ing, botany, mineralogy, astrology, etc., known to former
generations, have been forgotten, but may be recovered
from their literary remains. Some go so far as to affirm
that the old sages had a comprehensive knowledge of the
law of human development, based upon experimental
research. I confess that I am one of such, and that I am
more and more persuaded that the outcome of modern
biological research will be the verification of the Secret
or Esoteric Philosophy. This firm conviction has made
me so anxious to begin as soon as possible, while we are
in health and strength, the gathering together of the present
Library, and it shall not be my fault if it does not achieve
its object within the lifetime of the majority of the present
audience. If the ancient books are as valuable as some
allege, the sooner we prove it the better; if they are not,
we cannot discover the fact too speedily. That intellectual
marvel of our times, Sir William Jones, had a better
opinion of the merit of Sanskrit literature than our
improved Aryans, it would appear, ‘I can venture to
affirm,' says he, in his Discourse before the Asiatic Society,
delivered at Calcutta, February 20th, 1794 — ‘I can

venture to affirm, without meaning to pluck a leaf from
the never-fading laurels of our immortal Newton, that the
whole of his theology, and part of his philosophy, may be
found in the Vedas, and even in the works of the Sufis.
The tnost subtle spirit^ which he suspected to pervade
natural bodies, and, lying concealed in them, to cause
attraction and repulsion; the emission, reflection, and



394 Diary Leaves

refraction of light ; electricity, calefaction, sensation, and
muscular motion, is described by the Hindus as a fifth
element y endued with those very powers; and the Vedas
abound with allusions to a force universally attractive,
which they chiefly ascribe to the Sun, thence called Aditya,
or the Attractor.’ Of Sri Shankara’s commentary upon
the Vedanta, he says that ‘ it is not possible to speak with
too much applause of so excellent a work; and I ana
confident in asserting that, until an accurate translation of
it shall appear in some European language, the general
history of philosophy must remain incomplete’: and he
further affirms that ‘ one correct version of any celebrated
Hindu book would be of greater value than all the disser-
tations or essays that could be composed on the same
subject.’

‘‘An entire Upanishad is devoted to a description of the
internal parts of the body — an enumeration of the nerves,
veins, and arteries ; a description of the heart, spleen, and
liver, and of pre-natal development of the embryo. If you
will consult the most recent medical authorities, you will
find the very remarkable fact — one recently brought to my
notice by a medical member of our Society — that the course
of the sushumna, or spinal tube, which, according to the
Aryan books, connects the various chakramSy or psychic
evolutionary centres in the human body, can be traced
from the brain to the os coccyx*, in fact, my friend has
kindly shown me a section of it under a strong lens. Who
knows, then, what strange biological and psychical dis-
coveries may be waiting to crown the intelligent rcseardies



The Opening Ceremony 395

of the modem anatomist and physiologist who is not above
consulting the Aryan text-books? ‘There are not in any
language (save the ancient Hebrew)/ says Sir William Jones,
^ more pious and sublime addresses to the Being of bdngs,
more splendid enumerations of his attributes, or more
beautiful descriptions of his visible works, than in Arabic,
Persian, and Sanskrit/ But the theme is inexhaustible,
and I must resist the temptation to collate the many
accessible testimonies of some of the greatest scholars of
our own time to the richness, value, and interest of the
ancient books of Asia. In Europe and America these
pn^und students and thinkers are working patiently, in
sympathetic collaboration with colleagues, Asiatic and
European, in India, Ceylon, Burma, Japan, China, Egypt,
Assyria, and other Eastern countries.

“You will observe. Ladies and Gentlemen, from what
precedes, that the Library we are now founding is neither
meant to be a mere repository of books, nor a training
school for human parrots who, like some modern Pandits,
mechanically learn their thousands of verses and lacs of
lines without being able to explain, or perhaps even under-
stand, the meaning ; nor an agency to promote the
particular interests of some one faith or sectarian sub-
division of the same ; nor as a vehicle for the vain display
of literary proficiency. Its object is to help to revive
Oriental literature ; to restablish the dignity of the true
Pandit, Mobed, Bhikshu, and Maulvi ; to win the regard of
educated men, especially that of the rising generation, for
the sa^ oi old, their teachings their wisdom, their noble



39^ Old Diary Leaves

example ; to assist, as far as may be, in bringing about a
more intimate relation, a better mutual appreciation, between
the literary workers of the two hemispheres. Our means
are small, but sincere motive and patient industry may
offset that in time, and we trust to deserve public confi-
dence. As an example of one branch of the work we have
mapped out for ourselves, I beg to ask your present
acceptance of copies of a catechetical synthesis of that
branch of Hindu religious philosophy known as the Dwaita
Doctrine of Sri Madhwacharya. The compiler, our learned
and respected townsman M. R. Ry. P. Sreenevas Row,
intends to follow this up with similar works upon the other
two great religious schools of the Vishishthadwaita and
Adwaita, founded respectively by Sri Ramanuja Acharya
and Sri Sankaracharya. The Buddhist Catechism — of copies
of which, in the name of Mrs. Ilangakoon, a worthy
Buddhist lady of Ceylon, I also ask your acceptance —
will be succeeded, as my time shall permit, by catechisms
of the Zoroastrian and Mahomedan faiths, written from
the standing-points of followers of those religions re-
spectively.

“ On behalf of the subscribers to the Library Fund, and of
the General Council of the Theosophical Society, I now
invoke upon this undertaking the blessing of all Divine
powers and of all other lovers of truth, I dedicate it to the
service of mankind, and I now declare it founded and duly
opened.*'


The reader will see in this inauguration discourse the



The Opening Ceremony 397

groundwork laid for that Oriental Institute which it is our
hope to bring into existence at Adyar in the fulness of time.
The work is, in point of fact, already half done. We have
(a) in the Headquarters property buildings and grounds that
leave but little to be desired ; {b) five dwelling-houses in
the Indian style for the free use of Library Pandits ; {c) a
large bathing-tank for castemen; (d) large permanent out-
door brick dining-floors for use at any time ; {e) large wells
of pure, sweet water; {f) two libraries of Oriental and
Western books, with shelf-room for 10,000 more; (g) a
superb meeting- and lecture-hall and commodious class-
rooms ; {h) bedrooms for European staff officers ; (/) a tidal
river under the house windows which cools the air, the blue
sea a half-mile off in full sight, from which fresh breezes
blow towards us daily, and groves of cocoanut palm, mango,
banyan, and coniferous trees to give shady walks and
retreats to those who incline towards' meditation; (J)
towards the ;;^2 0,000 capital, without which it would be
childish for me to float the scheme, we have rs. 25,000 of
Permanent Fund invested ; the possible proceeds of the
White Bequest, which within the next few years may (so
thinks the executor, Mr. Barnes) give us some jQ^ooOy
but which cannot now be counted as an asset; and the
capital, stock, and income of the Theosophist and other
belongings which have been bequeathed to the Society.
Little as these may seem at first sight, yet no one can
deny that the prospects of the Adyar Oriental Institute
are infinitely better than they were on that opening day
in 1886, when the Library’s carven doors were swung open



398 Old Diary Leaves

for the first time, and my inaugural address was deHiaered
before that mixed audience of people of many races and
various creeds. Any day, some enlightened and philan-
thropic friend may send me what is lacking to start the
Institute on a sound financial footing; in fact, I am sure
of it.

Most of the Delegates stayed over for T. Subba Row's
fourth and last lecture on the Gitd, on the morning of the
30th, which was a masterpiece of literary and oratorical
ability ; after which the crowd melted away, and when the
year 1886 closed, the house was restored to its normal
quiet. Thus ended the eleventh annual chapter of the
Society's history.


CHAPTER XXVIII.

MORE TOURING IN CEYLON AND WESTERN INDIA.

W E now cross the threshold of 1887, one of the busiest
and most fruitful periods of our history. The year's
programme was sketched out in Executive Council on the
9th January, and on the 22 nd I sailed for Colombo, where
I arrived on the 24th. The leaders of the Ramanya
Nikiya at once took me to Piyagale to assist in celebrating
the first anniversary of the death of their chief priest,
Ambagahawatte, whose cremation was recently described in
this history. I addressed the large crowd present, and,
later, privately met in consultation the whole body of priests
of the Ramanya. I warned them solemnly against allow-
ing themselves, on the strength of their deceased leader's
reputation, to cultivate self-righteousness and its con-
comitant, hypocrisy; I had observed, I told them, the
symptoms of sectarianism and narrow-mindedness showing
themselves, which I deprecated as diametrically opposed to
the spirit of the Lord Buddha's teaching. The warning

399


400 Old Diary Leaves

was needed, and, I fancy, it would do no harm if it were
repeated at the present day.

On the 27th I started for Badulla, a thriving station in
the Uva District, situate about 4000 ft. above sea-level, and
possessed of a climate thoroughly renovating to European
constitutions which have become debilitated by too long
residence in the tropical lowlands. The railway from
Colombo, vid, Kandy and Nanu Oya, which now runs
to Bandarawela through some of the finest and most
picturesque scenery in the world, had then been carried
only as far as Nanu Oya, in the heart of the richest
planting country, and so I was taken on the rest of
the way in a special mail-coach. From the drivers seat
we enjoyed the exquisite treat of the landscape views that
opened out before the eye at every bend of the post-road.
We stopped for the night at “ Wilson's Bungalow,” a
Government rest-house, which we were glad enough to reach,
for the road after dark was dangerous enough at any time
by reason of its short curves and precipices, but now made
much more so by the fact of our driver's being half drunk.

I don’t think I ever had a more anxious time than then,
between nightfall and our arrival at the rest-house ; I must
have invented a half-dozen different ways of leaping or
climbing over coach and driver towards the land-side, in
case our bibulous Automedon should chance to drive his
team over the brink of the chasm. All this was, however,
soon forgotten with the appearance of a hot supper and a
blazing wood fire, which the sharp, frosty air of the plateau
made most grateful. And, by the way, nothing is more



Touring in C^ton and Wesleffl India 401

delightful and suggestive of home to the dweller in the
Tropics, th^ the Setose of shivering one gets at the hill-
stfations and the longing for a big fire in one’s room. One
can have this experience after a few hours' climbing travel
from the steaming plains to Simla, Mussoorie, Darjiling,
Ootacamund, or Kodaikinal ; he can mount from India to
Europe, so to say, within five hours.

Our coach started at 6.45 the next morning, the air fresh,
the sun shining, the landscapes like pictures freshly painted
on the slopes and valleys and peaks about us: At the
severhmile-post from Badulla one party of friends met and
escorted us, at the four-mile-post another, and we entered
town in a far-stretching procession of all the Buddhist
notables of the place. We were lodged in comfortable
quarters and given every necessary thing ; the new Buddhist
flag waved everywhere in the breeze, and a “Welcome”
arch and escutcheon stood before our door. At 4 p.m. I
lectured in the Sapragamuva Divali, and, later, offered
flowers to the image of the Buddha in the temple
Mutydnangand, a shrine said to be 2000 years old. Here
occurred a striking incident. W. D. M. Appuhami, a
Vedarrachi, or Native Doctor, had a remarkably clever son
of ten years, who was showing much precocity in picking up
Sanskrit from his father’s books, and whose young mind
had a strong religious bent. The parents, especially the
mothet — a gentle, sweet-eyed woman — being also full of
rdigioiis fervor, wished to consecrate their child to the
ascetic fife of the pansala, or viharc^, and so brought him to
me at the time of my flower-puja, and gave him into my



402


Old Diary Leaves

hands to do with him what I liked. So, taking the little
chap into my arms, I thrice held him out towards the old
statue of the Buddha, each time repeating the familiar
ascription: Namo^ Tassa^ BhagavattOy ArahattOy Satnmd
Sambudhassd, Then, returning him to the parents, I told
them what to do to accomplish their object. To anticipate
events somewhat, the boy did enter the Sangha, and I saw
him at Galle in 1893 when there with Mrs. Besant and the
Countess Wachtmeister.

The next day I had started for Colombo on my return ;
that night slept again at the Wilson Bungalow ; rose at 3,
to go on to Nanu Oya ; took train for Kandy and reached
there at 2 p.m., only to fall into the toils of a Committee
who had got up a big perahiray or procession, which
took me (blushing with shamefacedness under the wonder-
ing gaze of European loiterers, and feeling every inch a fool)
through the streets to my lodgings, with rattle of drum,
screech of pipe, clang of cymbals, and contortions of devil-
dancers — whose antics were made familiar to Londoners at
the India-Ceylon Exhibition at EarFs Court three years
ago. In fact, those very dancers had all danced before me
in ptraheras at one or another place in Ceylon during past
years. At Kandy I gave various lectures to adults and
children, held meetings of the local T. S. Branch, and went
on to Colombo on the 3rd February.

I had the pleasure of presenting to the High Priest,
Sumangala, Captain Fieron of the French Navy and two
others, on behalf of my dear old friend. Captain Courmes,
of the same service. Sumangala is always glad and much



Touring in Ceylon and Western India 403

interested to see Europeans who have given attention to
Buddhism, and always thanks me for bringing them to the
College. Captain Fieron was well versed in the principles
of the religion, and a long conversation was held between
the visitors and the High Priest, through myself as in-
terpreter, with the results of which both parties were
apparently much delighted.

Among the lectures delivered in and about Colombo this
time was one to the lepers, who had sent a very urgent
request to me to visit them and give them the Pancha
Sila and a religious discourse as to their meaning. This
unhappy class are segregated at Colombo on a grassy,
palm-embellished islet a few miles from town, where
Government has commodious buildings for their occupancy
and medical treatment. They themselves have built a
little preaching-hall in which Buddhist religious emblems
are kept, and are overjoyed when they can get any Buddhist
to come and teach them something about their religion.
It is a frightful experience, however, to face such an
audience and see the distortions and mutilations caused
in the human body by this pest of mankind. I had to
shut my eyes a moment and brace myself up to the revolt-
ing sights before me, before beginning the Sila ceremony
with the solemnly resounding Pali words of the opening
sentence. Then, again, some extra interest was given to
the occasion by the thought that perhaps one might get
infected with the microbes of the awful disease, as Father
Damien had and others. Of course, it was but a remote
chance at best, yet it was one, just as it depends on one's


404 OkJ Diary Leaves

karma whether the bullet of Private X, of the enemy*?
regiment in front of one’s position shall find its billet in
one’s body or elsewhere; and until our doctors know
more of the cause and cure of leprosy, such precautionary
reflections are excusable. Well, the afflicted ones at Leper
Island were very grateful for the visit and forgot the
mutilations of their hands and their necessarily unlovely
ajqjearance, when they joined their palms together in front
of their foreheads, and sent after me towards the flower-
festooned barge their mournful cry of Sndhu / Sadku /

The same evening I found myself in quite a different
scene, when, at our Colombo Headquarters, we held the
annual elections for officers of the Branch, and all, of
every caste, sat together at the usual dinner.

To Galle my programme took me next, and thither I
went by coach on the 7th. Outside the town the late
Mr, Simon Perera, President of our Branch, and the other
chief Buddhists, met me, and we entered Galle in procession.
During the week I spent there, I was, as usual, kept busy
with lectures to adults, talks to youth, arbitrating in
quarrels between rival societies, seeing Bulatgama* —
HL P, B’s Father-in-God ” of 1880 — and doing other things
that came my way. I was pleased with a visit made me
by Comelis Appu, my first paralytic patient of 1885, the
predecessor of thousands who came after him. His
pawdysis had not returned after my treatment of him, and
his gratitude was correspondingly fervent. But all my
paiticnts did not have such good luck.

On^ nay return to Colombo I began compiling' the



Touring in Ccyioji and Western India 405

-epitome of Buddhist morals, since widely known under
the title of The <j<dden Rules of Buddhism. It is incrediUe
how ignorant the Ceylon Buddhists were of the merits of
their own j-eligion, and how incapable of defaiding it from
unscrupulous Missionaries who were then much more than
now — though too much even now — in the habit of reviling
their neighbor’s faith in the hope of advancing the interests
of their own. To meet this want the little monograph in
question was compiled.

It is not a pleasant thing to say aught against the dead,
but the dead and the living are alike in the eye of the
historian who but records events and leaves Karma to work
out its own adjustments. At the time in question I had
every reason to be dissatisfied with the behavior of
Megittuwatte, the orator, the champion of Buddhism at
the famous intellectual tournament at Panadure which
proved a terrific blow to Missionary work. He was a
man of mixed characteristics and motives. He had helped
me to raise the Sinhalese National Buddhistic Fund in
the Western Province, and when the Trust Deed was
being drafted had given us no end of bother. His aim
seemed to have been to get the absolute control of the
money, regardless of the rights of all who had also helped
in the raising of the funds; and at this time, four years
later, his vindictiveness and combativeness burst out afresh.
He attacked the Colombo Branch, asked why they had
not opened schools throughout the Province, and raved
away as though a lac or two or three had been collected
instead of a beggarly rs. 4000, the interest on which would



4o6


Old Diary Leaves


be only rs. 400, and of that only one half, under the
terms of the Trust, could be used for aiding Buddhist
schools. From having been my enthusiastic panegyrist,
he had now turned to the other side, and, always a specious
and silvery-tongued man, had begun to drag the amiable
High Priest into his way of thinking, and to make inevitable
a breach between us, which to Sinhalese Buddhism at that
time would have been very harmful He had asked me to
lecture at his temple at Kotahena on the i8th, which I did
to a great crowd ; but one may guess my feeling of anger
and disgust when I learnt that the fiery discourse in
Sinhalese, with which he followed my lecture, was a
venomous attack on the Colombo B. T. S. and myself.
Sumangala was present and seemed shaken in his friend-
ship for me, but joined with Megittuwatte in asking me
to lecture on the following evening at the same place.
The next morning, while thinking how I could escape
from the trap that was being fixed for me to walk into, I
learnt that a steamer of the British India line would sail
that forenoon for Bombay, so I got my things quickly
packed, called a carriage, bought my ticket, and by 11.30
A.M. was on the wide ocean, sailing away from the wily
fowler who had spread his net for a bird too old to be
caught so very easily. I left my parting compliments
for him, with a message that he might lecture in my
place !

During the nineteen years of close intercourse between
Sumangala and myself, this was the only time when there
was even a small chance of a breach being made in oqr



Touring in Ceylon and Western India 407

friendship. Megittuwatte did his best to crush our brave
little group of hard workers in the Colombo Branch. He
even started a small paper, in which, for months, he
exhausted his armory of invectives, but all to no purpose.
The only result was to weaken his influence, lessen his
popularity, and expose himself as a selfish, uncharitable,
and pugnacious man, while actually strengthening our hold
on the public sympathy.

Reaching Bombay on the fifth day, I was kindly
welcomed by our colleagues and put up in the Society’s
rooms, from the windows of which I had one of the
prettiest panoramas of land and sea imaginable. The
large audience which greeted me at our old lecturing-place,
Framji Cowasji Hall, showed that our removal to Madras
had not destroyed our hold on the affections of the Bombay
public. After a week there I went on to Bhaunagar, the
very misnamed “ model Native State ” of Sir Edwin Arnold,
which, with much that was fair-seeming on the outside,
had more or less moral rottenness, I fear, inside.* Sir
Edwin was treated with lavish hospitality, and having
revisited the East predisposed to see everything rose-
colored, he did not lift the lids of the gorgeous caskets
in India and Ceylon and see the foul linen so often kept
within. During the minority of the late Maharajah many
public works had been carried through by the agents of
Government, and so Bhaunagar is called a progressive State,
and we may let it pass at that. My host and friend on
this occasion was, of course, the Maharajah’s cousin. Prince

^ Of late years things have greatly improved, I am happy to say.



^1^ Old Diaiy Leaves

Harisinhji, F.T.S., and my visit to him was a most ideasant
episode.

I exchanged visits with most of the high officials of the
State, had an audience and long talk with the Maham^ah,
and also paid my respects to the late ex-Dewan Udaiya-
shankar Gouriashankar, C.S.I., then an octogenarian and
nominal sanyasi. I say nominal because, while officially
retired from the world and clad in the red-yellow cloths
of the Indian ascetic, and wearing a large string of beads
around his neck, he still clung to his immense fortune, and
his three anterooms were crowded with the same worldly-
looking courtiers as one sees in the apartments of all
Native prime ministers. I tried to get him to promise to
devote large sums to religious purposes, but he always
changed the conversation, and I finally took my leave
with a different opinion of his sanctity from that which
Sir Edwin gives in his book of travels, and has expressed
elsewhere. It is the rule, not the exception, throughout
India, that retired Government pensioners who, throughout
a long official career have been immersed in worldly
interests, assume the externals of piety when the goal of
their incarnation comes within sight ; but I have my own
opinion about their having any real change of heart ”
and inward purification.

I had the pleasure while at Bhaunagar of being joiined
by Mr. E. T. Sturdy, of New Zealand, who has since
then played a prominent part in our Society’s affiaiirs. He
accompanied Prince Harisinhji and myself to Junagad,
the next Native State on our pjrograuime. fji the Hindu



Touring in Ceylon and Western India 409

Dewan of this Muslim State, Mr. Haridas Viharidas, J
found one of the ablest, most energetic, and highminded
men I had met in India : in nervous activity and clearness
of judgment he was of the Western rather than the Oriental
type. Everything possible he did for us. Among other
things he took us to see a very fine collection of Indian
lions and other animals in the Nawab^s Sirkar Bagh, and
what was still better, to see the world-famous rock at
Oirnar on which the Emperor Dharmasoka had had
inscribed, two thousand years ago, one of his noble Edicts.
By request, this being a Muslim State, 1 lectured on
Islam,” the Nawab’s brother-in-law occupying the chair.
The next day, in the High School, by request of the
Hindu community, I lectured on Theosophy, as from the
Hindu point of view. The Dewan Sahib was chairman,
and kindly headed a subscription for the Adyar Library
with the sum of rs. 200. He also arranged for me a
Durbar of the strange religious sect founded by the Swami
Narayan a few years before. It differs from all other
Indian sects in its Head being a family 7 ?ian and dressing
in layman's clothes. Under him are a great body of
ascetics, who wear the red-yellow cloths of the ordinary
sanyasi, and another group or class of householders, who
attend to all the business affairs of the fraternity — a sort
of lay brothers, so to say. Though but a young sect it
had amassed a good deal of wealth, I was told, and the
richness of the temple where the Durbar was held, especially
flopr of pure Italian marble skilfully matched and laid,
aod its gilt railing behind which were the cloths, wooden



41.0 Old Diary Leaves

sandals, and staff of the late Swamiji, confirmed that
impression. I asked the presiding functionary to tell me
what signs of spiritual power the Founder had given, and
was told that he had healed some diseases and done
certain phenomena beyond the power of ordinary persons.
It then appeared to me as plain as day what H, P. B.
and I might have done in India for our own enrichment
and glorification if we had displayed our respective gifts
— hers of phenomena, mine of healing — and played upon
the ever-ready credulity of the masses by the falsehood
of a special divine mission.

We left for Bhaunagar again on the 15th (March), and
visited other places of interest there. The grand carved
doors of the Adyar libiary, on which are represented the Ten
Avadras of Vishnu, were the gift of Harisinhji, and at Bhau-
nagar were awaiting my inspection before shipment. Imagine
my surprise on finding that each avatara panel was flanked
by tiny medallions in which were carved emblems which the
Native artisan thought would be most acceptable to the
European taste. There they were, a silent sermon for our
edification ; on one, a pistol ; on another, a corkscrew ; on
a third, a soda-water bottle ; on a fourth, a padlock, etc. !
And the innocent carver could not understand in the least
the expression of horror that came into my face when I saw
these artistic monstrosities. His own look of blank astonish-
ment was too much for my gravity, and I exploded in
laughter, giving him, no doubt, a suspicion that I was not
altogether sane. The doors were not shipped until the
offensive symbols had been cut out and replaced with lotus



Touring in Ceylon and Western India 41 1

buds, as they now stand On the i8th Mr. Sturdy left me
for Ceylon to attend to some Society business there, and on
the next day I went on with Harisinhji to his private estate
at Varal. We reached the confines of the village after dusk,
and a torchlight procession, with Brahman ic chants, floral
showers and wreaths, escorted me to the Princess house.
Then followed sixteen days of sweet rest and friendly inter-
course; by day working at correspondence and inspecting
the farms and fruit-gardens, in the evening sitting together
on Indian carpets laid on the grass, the air perfumed with
floral scents, my friend and I smoking, his beloved wife
talking to us in her soft, musical tones, and the household
servants and feudal retainers grouped in the background to
listen to the music and songs of the Princess sitar player ;
above us the stars and the azure sky of the Indian night
On the evening of the 25th there came a troupe of Brahman
jugglers and comedians, whose performances were most
skilful. There were plate-spinning on sticks, with bodily
twists and contortions ; dancing on naked sword-blades with
the bare feet, and on wooden sandal-soles, which had no peg
or strap for the toes to catch hold of ; balancing of a goglet
(Indian decanter) of black glass on the head, and the working
of it forward to the nose, backward to the nape of the neck,
and sidewise to the temples, and many other feats of skill,
all wonderful. I supposed this was the last of them, but
the next evening, as we sat out in the starlight, there suddenly
rose the cry, ‘‘ Hari ! Hari 1 Mahade-^-va ! at the bottom
of the garden, and I saw striding towards us a tall, majestic
figure made up like the familiar picture of Siva himself as


412


Old Diary Learn


•the Yogi— matted locks, staff, tiger-skin mantle aid all, a
most impressive surprise. He came to an appointed spot
near us, and then we had a sort of mystery play enacted,
Siva doing a number of isanas, or yogic posturings, and other
gods performing their respective parts, with as finished skill
as our Irest actors could have done on our prepared
A— to me— jarring note was the buffoonery of a sort of
clown, personating a Bania retail merchant hailing with
customers, exceedingly well done, yet quite mharcnonious
with the religious play of the gods led by the mighty Siva.
Tl»e -next day this latter actor gave us a small proof of his
yogic training by burying his head in the ground and
keeping it there some time, the loose earth having been
thrown in and pressed about his head by an attendant.

My visit reached its close at last, and on the 5th April
the Prince and I left Varal for Limbdi, the enlightened ruler
of which State had invited me to pay him a visit.



CHAPTER XXIX.


THUGS — THE PRINCE OF WALES IN DANGER.

B oth Nature and the Prince gave us a warm welcome
to Limbdi, our next station, for the mercury stood at
102"* Fahr. in the shade, and Th^kur Saheb Jaswantsinhji
Fatehsinhji did everything to show his pleasure in our visit.
Limbdi is a small Kathiawar State of the second class (its area
is 344 sq. miles), whose rulers are of the Jhala Rijput caste —
that is to say, hereditary warriors and possessed of the usual
vices and virtues of the class, the former active in the olden
time of fightings and struggles, the latter now developing
rapidly under the changed conditions of to-day. Among
the Rajput Princes of Kithidwdr there are, however, some
who do not throw great credit upon their stock — drinking,
gambling, and amusement filling up the round of their years.
But the Limbdi Thakur is an honor to his family and his
people, well educated, kindly, an enlightened ruler, and*
dfeeply interested in the profounder questions of thought
He and Harisinhji were schoolfellows, I believe, at

413



414 OM Diary Leaves

Rajkumar College, where the reigning cricket favorite,
Ranjitsinhji, and all the young Chiefs of Kdthiiwdr have
been and are educated under the eye of the Government.
His Private Secretary, Mr. Khimchund, F.T.S., and other
gentlemen met us on arrival at the station, and conducted
us to the place assigned for our entertainment. The Dewan,
Harilal, called in the morning, and the Prince received us
at the Palace at 1.30 p.m. We had a long and friendly
talk together about Theosophy and Hindu religion, in
which His Highness is greatly interested. He showed us
in his fine library a shelf, where I saw Isis Unveiled^ the
volume of my lectures, and other theosophical literature, all
bearing marks of having been much handled. The Palace,
a new construction, is a handsome building, and in the
Durbar, or reception-room, we had the opportunity to
admire, if we so chose, a large gold and silver framed gMi^
or throne-seat, with a pair of carved, silver-mounted arm-
chairs with lion-head ornaments, for visiting dignitaries to
occupy on occasions of ceremony. Considering that the
State has a population of only some 50,000, and an annual
revenue of, say, ;£'2 5,ooo to ;^3o,ooo, it seemed to me that
so much display was rather unnecessary; yet that is the
Rajput character, and there is nothing to be said' by outsiders,
save this — which I have said before — that if the commercial
travellers for the great jewelry houses of Bombay and
Calcutta were less glib as talkers and less cunning in playing
off the vanities of Indian ruling princes against each other,
there would be fewer of such costly toys as these thrones,
chairs, and sofas in Indian palaces, and less financial



Thugs — Prince of Wales in Danger 415

embarrassment felt when paying the bills. There seems no
remedy save the interference of the Paramount Power, and
yet it is hard to see how even that can be resorted to with-
out invading the private rights of both buyers and sellers*
It would be possible to create some sort of a safeguard
about the young Princes in one way, viz., by educating
them at the Rajkumar Colleges as sensibly and practically
as the Royal Princes of Great Britain have been educated,
so that they might at least begin their rule with characters
well grounded in the homely virtues, and not, as at present,
spoilt in boyhood by sycophantic flattery, and left to be the
prey of tradesmen who bribe the durharis and charge the
exorbitant commissions in the bill. 1 beg pardon for having
been led into this digression, but the sight of the costly
seats in the Palace of Limbdi brought up before me the
recollection of this great evil as I have seen it exhibited
throughout India. The poor victimized Rajahs, Thakurs,
Nawabs, and Maharajahs of this country are sponged upon
by whites to an extent that nobody would believe who had
not seen it himself and got the facts at first hand. This,
however, is not at all a propos of our host, the Thakur
Saheb, whose sweet hospitality calls for my most kind and
friendly remark. Each day of our visit he came and took
Prince Harisinhji and myself out for a drive and to show us
the sights. One day he took us to see his Guru, a Sanyasi,
whose feet he worshipped in the Eastern fashion, by prostra-
tions and the placing of the teacher’s feet on his own head.
We all sat on the carpet cross-legged, and for a couple of
hours or so discussed religious questions. It was a pictu*



416 Old Diary Leaves

re^^ue scene, and would have made the subject ( 5 f an
excdlent photograph.

One day, at the Prince’s request, I lectured in the palace
Durbar Hall on Mesmerism, and as my friend Mr. L; V. V.
Naidu, who was with me as volunteer Private Secretary, is,
fortunately, very susceptible to my influence, I was able to
show some interesting scientific experiments. His Highness,
after the usual evening drive, returned with us to our
bungalow, and spent another hour in talk about Mesmerism
and Hypnotism, with illustrative experiments on my friend.
After we had called at the Palace (on the 8th April) to
say farewell, the Prince sent to our lodgings a present of
rs. 500 for the Aclyar Library, with a very kind and too
complimentary letter to myself.

From Limbdi we went on to Baroda, the grand capital
city of the Gaikwar Maharajah, where we were received as
State guests and lodged sumptuously. The new Palace ie
one of the finest buildings in India, and compares favorably
with European palaces which are not fortresses. The
Gatkwar is one of the premier feudatories of the British
Government, and, at the same time, one of the most
intellectual and best educated. My only complaint against
him is that he was so thoroughly anglicized by his English
tutor as to have got out of touch with his ancestral religion.
In my various discussions with him at Baroda, Calcutta, and
Ootacamund, he has always posed as agnostic, and shown
a decided scepticism about the existence of spiritual powers
in naan. I have* had talks by the hour, most interesting
yet unsatisfactory, because of his ignorance of the facts now



Thugs — Prince of Wales in Danger 417

proven by modern psychical research. His manners are
most courteous, and there is an entire absence of that
reserve and hauteur one somehow expects to see in Asiatic
Princes.

A much more congenial spirit to me is Mr. Manibhai
Jasbai, then Naib Dewan (Under-Secretary of State, as one
might say), a man of the highest character and most
brilliant acquirements. When H. P. B. and I first came to
Bombay, in 1879, he was Dewan of Kutch, and from the
beginning showed a real interest in our work and in our-
selves personally. Naturally one of my first visits was to
the house of my old friend, in company with my other old
and dear friend J. S. Gadgil, Judge of the Baroda Varishta
(High) Court. The next day I lectured at the College to
students, but many adults, including H.E. the Dewan
Saheb, Mr. Cursetji, Chief Justice; Judge Gadgil, Mr.
Manibhai, and others, were present. After the lecture the
Dewan Saheb took me for a drive, and later he and several
other notables of the State spent a couple of hours at my
quarters in conversation, about Mesmerism among other
things; and as the rumor of my Limbdi experiments on
“ Doraswamy ” had reached town, I was asked to repeat
them for the instruction of the company present.

On the following day the Dewan Saheb headed a sub-
scription in aid of the Adyar Library, with the gift of rs.
200, and Messrs. Gadgil and Manibhai followed suit. I
was very ill that day from having eaten some bad plantains
and milk for breakfast, but I determined to stick to my
programme, despite the friendly protests of Mr. Gadgil and



4i 8 OM Diary Leaves

olUera; so at 3.25 p.m. we took train for which we

reached at 8, and were put up at the Travellers’ Bungalow
on the banks of the River Tapti, During my stay the
Surat T. S. (an efflorescence of the Sanatan Dharma Sabha)
was formed with that most respected, unselfish, and pious
Mr. Navtamram Ootamram Trivedi as President. Under
his fostering care the Branch has been ever since one of the
best on our roll, and, with the accession of Dr. Edal Behram,
Surat has been one of the strong centres of our movement
in India. Among others who acquired membership during
my visit occurs the notable names of the popular Guzerati
poet, Vijiashankar Kavi, and Dr. Nariman, the Civil
Surgeon, a learned Parsi gentleman.

We reached Bombay on the 17th, and from thence, two
days later, went on to Poona, that great centre of pro-
gressive ideas and intellectual culture. Lectures were given
at Heerabagb and the Albert Edward Institute to large
audiences, after which we returned to Bombay and I took
up the task of preparing the programme for my projected
tour through Northern India — the Central and North-
Western Provinces, Punjab, Behar, and Bengal. It was
printed for circulation, and from the copy now before me
I cite a passage or two as of general interest, via. : it says>
that “ by strict economy the tour expenses have been so re-
duced that the share payable by each Branch will not exceed
rs. 17. . . . If I rupee {is, 4d.) per diem be also given, this
will cover every expense for fuel, milk, and food required at
the station, gnd bought elsewhere. Col. Qlpott. particulaiJy
notifies Branches ta pay no than this ox^ his- account



Thugs — Prince of Wales in Danger 419

to anybody for anything. This caution is suggested by
the wasteful g^erosity often hitherto indulged in by his
friends^ as well as by impositions practised upon them in
his name. The travelling expense account covers every
item for tongas, bullock diks, steamboat fares, meals at
railway stations, extra’ luggage charges, porterage, etc., etc/*
It was most disagreeable for me to seem to wish to interfere
with the hospitable impulses of my affectionate colleagues
and friends, but I really could not stand by quietly and see
sometimes hundreds of rupees thrown away on my visits
when the merest trifle would have satisfied all my neces-
sities. Anyhow, the precaution was a good one> for the
10,000 miles of my tour of 1887 were made at the cost of
less than ^100, everything included. I was much amused,
on arriving at a certain station in Bengal, to see how literally
the following paragraph in the printed Programme Notes
bad been complied with : —

“Branches will kindly have ready upon Col. Olcott’s
arrival' the following articles, the cost of which may be
deducted from the perdiem allowance, viz : — 2 large earthen
water-pots ; firewood ; i seer of milk ; i loaf bread ; 1 seer
sugar. Also one Mahomedan coolie to assist in the
kitchen.**

Before the greeting saltations were fairly over, <me of
the Reception Committee took me aside and showed me
that the articles 1 required had all been brought^-^ th^
station platfem.1 A queei^ place for me to set up mp
kitchen^ to be sure*



420


Old Diary Leaves

It must not be inferred from what precedes, however,
that an outsider could travel so cheaply in India, for in my
case there were no hotel bills to pay, I travelled second-
class everywhere, I was a vegetarian, and my food cost less
than a pet dog's would in England or France.

I note an entry in my Diary for April 25, 1887, to the
effect that “ very bad news is received to-day from Ostende
about my dear ‘chum's* health. The physicians report
H. P. B. as lying between death and life. But she will not
die yet." She didn't.

With K. M. Shroff, Dr. Ray, and Tookaram Tatya I paid
a visit to the Bai Sakerbai Hospital for Animals, one of
the worthiest charities in all India. The initiative of this
benefaction was either made by our colleague Mr. Shroff,
or he was the one who made it the great success it is. Mr.
Shroff went into the great bazar of Bombay, got the
shetts or headmen of the different classes of traders to call
them together separately, addressed them upon their
duties as Hindus to care for the brute creation, and
actually persuaded them to self-impose a tax on their
trade returns for the upkeep of such a Hospital: the
headmen agreeing in each case to be responsible for the
collection of the tax. In this way an annual income of
some rs. 30,000 — if I rightly remember — was assured.
He then persuaded the high-minded, philanthropic wife
of Sir Dinshah Maneckji Petit, Bai Sakerbai, to give a
suitable piece of land and, I think, necessary buildings.
The Hospital being thus founded, Mr. Shroff set other
forces to work, and got the Bombay Government to take



Thugs — Prince of Wales in Danger 421

the wise step of attaching the Hospital to the Veterinary
College, thus at once affording to the students the best
possible chance for professional training, and giving the
sick animals every necessary medical and surgical help.
If a monument should ever be erected to Mr. Shroff he
ought to be represented, as Sri Krishna is, leaning against
a cow. For infinitely smaller services than his, hosts of
men have been decorated by the Government of India.

On the 27th April I started for the North, my first
objective point being Nagpur, in the Central Provinces.
I was alone with Babula, my servant, Prince Harisinhji
having left me in Guzerat, and L. V. V. Naidu at Bombay.
It was the hot season and travelling was about the most
unpleasant thing to do, the mercury standing even at
midnight at about loo'" Fahr. Some friends tried to
persuade me not to incur the risk of heat-apoplexy, often
so fatal to Europeans, but I was quite willing to take the
chances, and so held to my programme. At Nagpur I
was kept busy day and evening with conversazioni, initia-
tions, visits, Branch formation, and public lectures to
packed crowds, with the heat of a furnace, almost, to bear.
We got at this station one of our most important members,
Mr. C. Narainswamy Naidu, the leading Pleader of the
Central Province, whose activity in Society matters,
including the Adyar Conventions, up to the time of his
death, everybody knows. No good scheme for promoting
its interests went unhelped by him, no call was made in
vain. At the close of my lecture in the Native theatre,
Nagpur, on “ Chitragupta,” Mr, Narainswamy threw over


422 OM Diary Leaves

Riy ‘shtmWers — as Indian Princes do to guests— red
Kashmir shawl, handsomely gold-embroidered. A number
nf European officials showed a considerable interest in
Theosophy, attended the lectures, and some of them
joined the Society. To ttoshangabad next, a day*s train
journey, with the heat at 106*, and nothing to suggest the
need of a blanket or overcoat. Elsewhere I have described
the beauty of a moonlight scene on the steps of the great
bathing-ghdt on the bank of the sacred Nerbudda River,
the silvery splendor of the massive stone staircase, the
white-domed temples, and the river flowing along between
its history-crammed banks. The night of my arrival I
received two addresses on the platform of the ghit, the
company sitting on Oriental carpets and the whole picture
an Asiatic one. There was not even one European
costume to mar its effect, as I wore my Indian muslin
dress because of the oppressive heat. I lectured at the
Same place the next evening on the necessity for promoting
the study of Sanskrit. On the third evening the Branch
celebrated its Anniversary, Brahman Pandits reciting bene-
dictory slokas, after which the Branch members distributed
wheat to beggars after the ancient custom. The evening’s
proceedings closed with another lecture by myself. Each
morning, before sunrise, I enjoyed the luxury of a swim in
the sacred stream. On the 5th May I went on to
Jubbulpore, the home of my old friend, Nivaran Chandra
Mukerji, and his family, all most interested in the work
and welfare of our Society.

A notable incident of my visit to this station was a tall



Thugs — Pfince of Wales itt t)anger 423

at the Prison, ^eiie I saw some of the very Thugs, Dacoits,
and Prisoners described in Col. Meadows TayloPs thrittfng
Indian tales. One old man told me he had “ only killed
one man," thus seeming to imply that he was a very
pattern of moderation. He showed me how they handle
the roomal (handkerchief) in strangling — a very shnple
and efficacious process. Shall I describe it? Perhaps
not, lest it might suggest to some ripened yet not actually
developed assassin the easiest, quietest, least brutal way Of
disposing of a troublesome witness or other chosen victim.
!3oubtless the thing has been described in print before,
but that is not my fault; let everyone look to his own
karma. I saw at another prisoi\ once an old Thug who
had killed many men, and who, at the request of the Heir
Apparent, had practically shown him how to do the trick,
by putting the roomal about the Royal neck and giving a
preliminary twist. I was told by a Jail Officer that on
seeing a strange fire of ferocity flame up in the Thug^s eyes
at that moment, he stopped the experiment on the instant.
Had he not, the l^rince might have had his neck broken,
for the skilful Thug kills his man by a single twist of the
roomal, before his body has time to fall to the ground.

Thuggee is now practically extinct in India, but it was
a fearful pest while it lasted. The Thugs were hereditary
assassins, ostensibly cultivators, and, in fact, they did work
their farms during a portion of the year, after which they
would start out on their expeditions of pillage and murder,
followed by the blessings of their families, the approval ol*
their tainted neighbors, and the protection of Native rulers,



424


Old Diary Leaves

who shared with them the fruit of their spoils, and gave
them refuge when danger threatened. From father to son,
generation after generation, the tradition of the glory of
their calling was "handed down, and the training of their
youth was most carefully attended to. In the History of the
Thugs (Nattali & Bond, London, 1851) the author says : —

** The children of Thugs, during their more tender years,
are, it appears, kept in ignorance of the occupation of
their fathers. After a time they are permitted to accom-
pany them; but a veil is thrown over the darker scenes
of the drama. To the novice, indeed, the expedition
presents nothing but an aspect of pleasure. He is mounted
on a pony ; and being, by the laws of the Thugs, entitled
to his share of the booty, he receives a portion of it in
presents suited to his years — the delight attending the
acquisition being unalloyed by any consciousness of the
means by which it has been obtained. The truth reveals
itself by degrees. In a short time the tyro becomes aware
that his presents are the fruits of robbery. - After a while,
he has reason to suspect that robbery is aggravated by a
fouler crime; at length, suspicion passes into certainty;
and, finally, the pupil is permitted to witness the exercise
of the fearful handicraft which lie is destined to pursue.
The moral contamination is now complete ; but it is long
before the disciple is entrusted with the performance of
the last atrocity. He passes through a long course of
preparatory study .... before being elevated to the dignity
of a strangler f



Thugs — Prince of Wales in Danger 425

The book from which the above is taken is doubtless
out of print, but one can get a graphic account of
Thuggee, that most detestable of crimes, by reading
Meadows Taylor^s Confessions of a Thug^ which is
procurable almost anywhere. My reader will understand
with what painful interest and loathing I gazed at the
conscienceless assassins before me in the Jubbulpore Prison,
wondering how many times each had inveigled unsuspecting
travellers to their doom, and broken their spines with a
twist of his fatal noose. From the conquest of Mysore
in 1799 to 1808 the practice counted its victims by
hundreds annually, some of the more audacious villains
had been concerned in above two hundred murders, and
it has been computed that a Thug of fifty years has slain
at the very least ten victims a year during the twenty-five
years of his active work. Here is a nice problem in karma
for the metaphysical Theosophist to work out. Whose
the greater crime, the father strangler who deliberately
corrupts his son and destroys his moral sense, or the child
whose murderous arm has been trained to destroy life ?


CHAPTER XXX.


H. P. B. FOUNDS “ LUCIFER/'

T he disturbing factor in our Indian Branch formation
is, as above noticed, the constant transfer of Govern-
ment servants from one station to another. This makes
it always impossible to forecast the term of a Branch's
activity, as that depends upon the length of stay at the
station of the onS, two, or three leading spirits who caused
the Branch to come into being, lead its members in
theosophical work, and make it seem to their colleagues
that without them the Branch must collapse. For this
reason it is always wise, where possible, to put residents
of the town, such as pleaders, merchants, doctors, or
teachers, not in Government service, into the offices of
President and Secretary, when the cleverer or more
enthusiastic Government employ i is likely to be trans-
ferred within the next few months. But, if the system
of transfers sometimes causes the temporary collapse of
Branches, it also tends to the resuscitation of collapsed

Branches or the formation of new ones by the transfer gf

426


H. P. B. founds “Lucifer” 427

ihfise piWiotits theosb^hicd workers to ^tadons wheit flidr
litSp is most naiSed. So mores on this ponderous Indian
Official machine, and, concomitantly, the theosophical
movement in India surges ahead, ever broadening and
stren^hehing, ever settling down upon the Strong founda-
tions which we have laid for it in the Indian heart.

The foregoing remarks are ^ propos of the languishing
states in Which I found the Nagpur T. S. and the Sanskrit
School, for whose upkeep I had raised a generous sum
at a public meeting two years previously. Several of our
best wodring members had been transferred.

I reached Benares again on May 9th {1887), and was
most kindly received at the station and put up in a
garden-house of Babu B. S. Bhattacharji, of Gaya, a can-
didate for membership in our Society. I stopped here
three full days, visited the late venerable Swami Bhaska-
rananda, whose welcome to me was hiost 'Cordial, and
Mijji, the Yogtnl. One lecture at the Town Hall on
The Book of Chitragupta ” was my only public appearance
this time, and on the 12 th I went on to Allahabad — now
like a banquet-hall deserted, after the departure of the
Sinnetts, in whose house had been the old local focus of
the movement. Without them and without H. P. B. the
town seemed empty. In fact, this tearing away of H. P. B.
from me was constantly brought up in my mind by visiting
the stations where she and I had been together, having
out first Indian experiences and dreaming over dreatos
for the revival of Eastern learning and religion. Otie
wouid need to have been so closely joined to her as I



428 Old Diary Leaves

was in this world-work, to realize what it must have been
to me to go over the old ground and see the old faces
of friends. Ahi! Ahi! O Lanoo, these meetings and
partings are fraught with sorrow. But you and I know
how many ages we have worked together under the
guidance of the One ; how many more of like relationships
lie before us. Valg^ Salve /

The heat? Awful, wilting, metal-melting. I went to
see my friend the Swami Madhow Dass, the compiler of
Sayings of Grecian Sages^ and had an agreeable talk
with that good Sage. My rooms were thronged daily
with conundrum-asking young metaphysicians and amateur
agnostics, whose ardor was not damped by the rise of the
mercury. On the T5th I lectured at the Kyastha Patshdla
on ‘‘The Other World,’’ but in so weak a condition of
body that I had to sit during the last half of the discourse.
This was the immediate result of dysenteric symptoms
brought on by indigestible food, aggravated by the intense,
debilitating heat. The next day I was worse, and felt so
used up that my friends begged me to stay quiet a few
days ; but I could not afford to waste time with so long an
itinerary before me, so I went on to Cawnpore, arrived
there at 5 p.m., and was most affectionately welcomed.
They put me up at the large bungalow of H.H. the
Maharajah of Burdwan, where Damodar and I stopped in
1883, and at which occurred the convincing phenomenon of
the introduction into my locked tin office-box of a letter
from one of the Masters, which was described in an earlier
chapter. Dr. Maheqdran^th Ganguli, F.T.S., finding me



H. P. B. founds “Lucifer” 429

SO weak, strongly recommended my taking chicken broth,
which, after some hesitation, I did, thus breaking the vege-
tarian course of diet which I had been following for several
years. The effect was instantaneous, my physical strength
poured into me in full force, and by the next day I was
quite recovered. From that time on I did not return to
vegetable diet until about two years ago, when I did so
on the advice of the French clairvoyant, Mme. Mongruel
(queerly appropriate name for the occasion!), with the
happiest results. A Hindu banquet to forty Bengali
gentlemen, given in my honor by Babu Nilmadab Banerji
on the same day, and a second lecture on the next,
followed, and at midnight I took train for Aligarh, where
three days were spent profitably in the usual way. Next
came Bulandshahr. I was here publicly insulted by a
boorish civilian, my first experience of the kind in India.
This man was a bigoted cad wholly ignorant of Indian
literature, correspondingly intolerant, and devoid of good
breeding. However, I settled him, to the satisfaction of
my audience. The weather w^as now so hot and the
audiences so uncomfortably large, that we held our meetings
out-of-doors whenever possible, carpets and mats being
spread on the grass, and chairs placed for the more im-
portant personages, durbar fashion, in parallel lines facing
each other. Meerut and then Hard war, the pilgrimage
resort at the head waters of the sacred Ganges, came next.
A great Sanskrit Revival Convention was sitting, at the
latter place, at the call of the aged Dewan Ramjas, retired
Prime Minister of Kapurthala State, whose idea was to



430


C^d Diary Leaves

a laigp and stnc% patjonal SocLet;]^ of San^rU,
PandjtSr to work together for the revival of the ancLent
religion and literatpre* By request, I addressed the Con-
vention, ^^Bharata Dh 2 u:ma Maha Mandek’’ 9ind when
npiy address was finished,, Resolutions, of thanks to uiyself
and of confidence in the Theosophical Society were adopted
by acclamation. This was a good point to score, for, owing
to my open profession of Buddhism, and H. P. B/s, tlie
Society had always been looked at askance as, perhaps,
secretly hostile to Hinduism, and, possibly, a Buddhistic
agency of propaganda, though not the least cause had been
given for so. unjust a mr^representation of our policy as a
Society. The fact is, eclecticism in. religion is the least
conceivable attitude of mind to sectarians, whatsoever form
of religion they may follow,^ and our Society is to-day in
Burma, and to a nuich less extent in Ceylon, suspected of
ultra-Hinduism because of Mrs. Besapt’s bold avowal of her
religious preferences, as it was, fifteen years agp, of being
exclusively Buddhistic, because of its two Founders and
Damodar having taken the Five Precepts from Dharmarama
Terunnanse at Galle, in iSBo, in presence of a great
multitude of excited Buddhists. But time scatters alt
illusions, and the truth at the end prevails.

It is worth the while of an Anglo-Indian to visit Hardwor
for the sake of the view of the grand scenery and the

* It almost seems as if they ^ottght divine truth to be an biverted
pyiiamid, of whioh Ums hasc^ spsaading upward and cwtward, stoaivea
the whole religiops influx,, and the apex->the discharge-point— 'rests,
upon theit particular altar. Outside the pyramid, nothing, save
Untnidii



H. P. B. founds “ Lucifer ” 431

bathing in thi^ clear cold current of the rushing Ganges. I
mingled with the throng of bathing pilgrims daily, in the
water, to my great refreshment. On the ist June» the great
bathing day, I could compare the crowd to nothing else
than bees swarming, and the noise to a prolonged roar of
a storm-blast. Tire Police, under an European director,
were very rough to the poor pilgrims, pushing and knocking
them about like a mob of cattle. But so it is everywhere,
in whatsoever direction one looks, harshness the rule,
gentleness and patience the exception.

On the last morning of my visit I strolled up the paved
way leading from the bathing-ghat towards the mountain,
and was greatly shocked at something I saw. Squatting
on the pavement was a group of three, an elderly Hindu
woman, a young man — apparently her son — and a Brahman,
Between them, some human bones and ashes done up in a
dkfty cotton cloth. A chaffering, like what I heard once at
an Irish fair for a pig, was going on, the angry y<hc6s raised,
ofiers and refusals — on the one part, humble faith ; on the
other, priestly greed. The issue was as to how much the
priestly shark should have for throwing the bones and-
ashes into the swift-slipping water. A glance at the man's
face was enough to fill me with disgust and indigxuition,
and 1 felt the greatest inclination to pitch him* into the
rive^ with the bones tied about his neck. This is one o#
^ d^h^ to which the sublime religion of the Rishis
has sank in the hands of the degraded scum who ofhdalo
ki so inany temples, defiling the sanctuary of the goda by
tjiieil moiuil efSuvia* The more honor to those whi> kee^



432 Old Diary Leaves

the faith of their forefathers as, consciously, custodians of
a great treasure, and square their lives of usefulness with
their religious professions.

Lahore next, where H.H. the late Maharajah of Kashmir
had placed his palace — a dilapidated building — at my
disposal, and where a company of soldiers could have been
given quarters. The energetic Pandit Gopinath, F.T.S.,
had arranged all the details of my visit, and kept me busy
with crowds of visitors and daily lectures in the several
quarters of the city. This was the capital of Runjit Singh,
the warrior king of the Sikhs, surnamed the Lion of the
North. A great man was he and a great soldier, but not a
lovable character — rather a man of iron. Every good work
on psychology tells the story of the burial of the Hatha
Yogi, Haridas, for six weeks, in a tomb specially built in
the Maharajah’s garden, his subsequent exhumation and
resuscitation, and his dismissal by the king with costly
presents. On this occasion, as during my previous visits to
Lahore, I searched after elderly men who had been eye-
witnesses to the marvel of Yoga, and found one in an old
Sikh Sirdar, whose account agreed, in the chief particulars,
with those of Dr. Macgregor and Sir Claude Wade. In
fact, there can be no question whatever as to the prime fact
that this man had, by Yoga, acquired the power of suspend-
ing animation to the limit of at least forty days, and could
suffer himself to be tied up in a bag and kept all that time
in a sepulchre, without the chance of eating, drinking, or
even breathing, and with guards keeping watch over it day
and night to prevent the possibility of trickery. He was no



H. P. B. founds “Lucifer” 433

saintf wa$ Haridas, as I have explain^ in previous notices
of the case, but yet he could do this wonderful thing ; and
I should be glad if every student of occult science could
realize that strictly moral attributes are by no means indifr'
pensable for the psychical phenomena exhibited by spiritual
mediums, mesmerizers, hypnotizers, healers of the sick,
clairvoyants, prophets of sorts, and other possessors of
abnormal faculties which pertain to the astral body and
function on the astral plane. Think, for one moment, of
the worthless characters of many of these surprise-workers,
in our day as at previous epochs, and the truth will be seen.
At the same time, the reader must not run off with the idea
that all disease-curing, clairvoyance, and seership is confined
to the lower self ; far from it, for the Adept acquires all the
Slddhs, and can thus have access to all repositories of
knowledge, and work manifold wonders for the good of
mankind. But He takes no fees, creates no scandals,
does no wrong to a living being ; He is our benefactor,
our Teacher, our Elder Brother, our exemplar; a sacred
radiance broods over Him, He is a light of the race.

The outcome of my visit was the formation of a Branch
under the name of the Lahore Theosophical Society, and I
then went on to Moradabad. Here 1 found, as District
Judge, our old friend Ross Scott, C.S., our fellow-passenger
on the ill-fated ** Speke Hall,” and ever our brave colleague
who had stood up for us through good report and evil re-
port, despite the whole force of Anglo-Indian prejudice. On
this occasion he most willingly took the chair at my lecture,
and spoke most kindly of the movement and of ourselves.

28



434 Old Diary Leaves

Next oh to Bareilly for lectures, receptions, and inspec-
tions of our own Sanskrit School and another, both
jSourishing. While I was here the monsoon broke and
the mercury dropped from 98* to 82®, and life was again
bearable. At Bara-banki, the home of Pandit Purmeshwari
Das, there was much interest shown in our work, I saw
here a real curiosity in the shape of a dwarf, 32 inches high,
perfectly formed, 23 years of age, a clever fellow, and a
salaried office-messenger or chuprassi.

With the rains came swarms of bugs and all sorts of
insects, which had been brought to life by the kindly
moisture in the ground. I found this out beyond mistake
at Fyzabad, where, the Museum Hall becoming uncomfort-
ably crowded, we adjourned to a lawn outside. A table
with two sheltered candles being placed for me, and the
audience accommodated with chairs and carpets, I began
my (extempore) lecture on “ Chitragupta,” and managed to
go on for a quarter of an hour, but by that time I was
surrounded by a swarm of evil-smelling bugs, attracted by
the lights, and was forced to stop. It would have amused
anyone to have seen me standing there, with my figure
lighted up by the candles, going ahead with my discourse as
best I could; bugs crawling up the legs of my pyjamas,
crawling up the sleeves of my Indian chapkan^ slipping
down my neck, getting into my eyes, ears, nose, and mouth ;
I, shaking my garments and hunting after them in my neck,
stamping my feet, and brushing them out of my hair ; and
the smell — well, think of that of the potato-bug, that mal-
odorous pest, to touch which is to have one’s fingers tainted*



H. P. B. founds “Lucifer” 435

That was my predicament at Fyzabad, and one can imagine

/

that it was not conducive to extemporaneous religious
discourse. At last I had to give it up in despair, so, to put
as good a face on my discomfiture as possible, 1 said:
^‘Gentlemen; It is a law of physics that two bodies
cannot simultaneously occupy the same space. We have, it
seems, intruded upon a meeting of the National Bug
Congress, The Delegates from the four quarters are, as you
see, crowding me from the four quarters, so I close my
speech and move an adjournment.” The next evening I
lectured inside the building, great open pans of water being
placed on the floor, into which the bugs, under some
mysterious attraction, fell, and I was able to get through
my lecture more or less comfortably. While at Fyzabad I
was driven to the beautiful park and bathing-gh^t, at the
site where Sri Rama, the Avatar, is said to have made his
last appearance on earth, and which possesses, on that
account, a character of great sacredness.

All this district was Indian classical ground. From
Fyzabad I travelled towards Gorakhpur, crossing the Gogra
River from Ayodhya, Rama's ancient capital, by a steam
ferry. What would Rama and his Court have thought of
that !

Bankipur and Durbhunga followed after Chupra, which was
next after Gorakhpur. At Chupra, among my foreign letters
I received one from H. P. B. which distressed me much.
She had consented to start a new magazine with capital
subscribed by London friends of hers, while she was still
editor and half proprietor of the Theosophist—^ most unusual



436 Old Diary Leaves

and unbusinesilike proceeding. Besides other caUtei,
aabng them the persuasion of English Molds, a reason
which strongly moved her to this Was that Mr. Cooper*
Oakley, her own appcnntee as Managing Editor, had more
or les6 sided with T. Subba Row in a dispute which had
sprung up between him and H, P. B. on the question
whether the “principles” which go to the make-up of a
human being were seven or five in number* Subba Row
had replied in our pages to an article of hers on the
subject, and her letters to me about it were most bitter
and denunciatory of Cooper^Oakley, whom she, without
reasonable cause, charged with treachery. It was one of
those resistless impulses which carried her away sometimes
into extreme measures. She wanted me to take away his
editorial authority, arid even sent me a foolish document,
like a power-of-atlomey, empowering me to send him to
CoteOtry, so to say, and not allow any galley-proof to
pass to the printer until initialed by myself. Of course, I
remonstrated strongly against her thus, without precedent,
setting up a rival competing magazine to hurt as much as
possible the circulation and influence of our old-established
m-gan, on the title-page of which her name still appeared.
But it was useless to protest ; she said she was determined to
have a magazine in which she could say what she pleased,
and in due time Lucifir appeared as her personal organ,
and I got on as well as I could without her. Meanwhile, a
intetChange of letters went on between us. She Was
at Aon, more or less, with Mr. Sinnett, and before
IMs Ms settled, a numb^* of seceders from his Londxm



H. P. B. founds “ Lucifer ” 437

Lodge organized as the Blavatsky Lodge, and met at her
house in Lansdowne Road, where her sparkling personality
and vast knowledge of occult things always ensured full
meetings.

The Maharajah of Durbhunga, whose guest I was at
Bankipore and his own capital, who was a member of our
Society and professedly my warm friend, drove me out
and spent hours in discussions with me, but on my leaving,
neidier came to bid me farewell nor sent me a rupee on
account of his voluntarily offered yearly subscription towards
the Society’s expenses, nor even for my travelling expenses —
a discourtesy that no Branch, however poor, had ever paid
me. I have never said a word about it before, but I
believe the cause of his sudden disaffection was his dis-
covery that I would not do a certain act of sorcery for him,
one that many Indian Rajas have had tried for them* If I
am mistaken, then his behavior after this was perfectly
inexplicable.

Jamalpur, a new town built up by the Railway Company,
and where it has very extensive machine-shops and a great
many houses and cottages for its employis^ which it rents
to them at fixed cheap rates, was my next objective point.
I was enabled to get through a lot of my correspondence
here* the office duties of our members giving me the
necessary leisure. We celebrated the fourth anniversary of
the local Branch, and I, after lecturing twice, proceeded on
to Monghyr, where a new Branch was organized. I then
came to Bhagulpur, the home of my blind patient, Babu
Badrinath Banerji, about whose most strange recoveries



438 Old Diary Leaves

under my mesmeric treatment, and relapses into blindness,
I have written elsewhere. These relapses were sad enough,
yet the enjoyment of a whole year’s eyesight after one day’s
treatment was not so bad a bargain after all. Badrinath
Babu profited by my healing passes, in the restoration of
his sight for the third time, and when I left the station
was quite able to get about without help and to read the
papers of the day.

A gratifying incident occurred after an address of mine
at the Taj Naraen College, to the Boys’ Moral Society.
Besides the Hindu students there were many Muslim ones,
so I framed my discourse on “ Man and his Duties ” so as
to make it applicable to the followers of the Prophet as well
as to the others. On my resuming my seat a handsome
Muslim Maulvi rose, and in a most eloquent discourse
thanked me for my references to the moral code of Islam.

Berhampur, seat of an old, active, ever-staunch Branch
which has played so noted a part in our early Indian history,
gave me a royal welcome. I was the guest of Dr. Ram
Das Sen, the Orientalist, so well known in Western lands,
and after the usual public and private meetings, I left for
Murshedabad, where my friend the Nawab had bidden me
to visit him at his Palace. I stopped over night with him,
lectured on “ Islam ” to a very uncomfortably packed house,
took his Dewan into membership, and then returned to
Calcutta once more. So ended this long circuit of my ten
thousand mile Indian Journey of 1887.



INDEX


A

Adept at Pondich^ry, 17.

Adepts, Portraits of, 155 et seq.
Adoui, 304.

Adyar and H. P. B., 378,

,, Building, Description of, 75.
,, Building Schemes, 324.

„ Library, Inception of, 246.
Aligarh and the phenomenal mis-
sive, 30.

Allahabad visited, 25.

„ and the Coulomb affair,

291.

„ in 1887, 427-

American Difficulties, 364.

An Ancient Shrine, 401.

Anantapur, 305.

Animal Fights, 49.

,, Hospital, 420.

“ Apport of Letter, 31.

Arnold, Sir Edwin, 159.

„ ,, Reception in

Ceylon, 341.
Artistic Inspiration, 158.

Astrology, 241.

Atmaram Swami, 59.

Aura in Disease, 142.

„ under treatment, 142.

“Auric” Spheres, 28.


I ^

Bangalore, 373.

„ Dewan of, 374.
Bankipore, 437,

Banon, Captain A. , 290.

Bareilly visited, 29, 434.

Baroda visited, 60, 416.

„ Gaikwar of, 61.

Behram, Dr. Edal, 418.

Bellary, 304.

Benares in 1887, 427.

Berhampur, 438.

Bhaunagar, 407.

Bhima Grantham y the genuine, 244.
,, ,, Questions raised

by, 245-6.

Bimlipatam visited, 67.

Bishop Bigandet, 209.

Bishop’s Blessing, A, 384.

Blind Badrinath Banerji (Case of),

437 *

Blindness cured, 18.

I Bombay, 21, 295, 407, 418.

Bricks and Mortar, 337.

Brown, Mr. W. T., 20, 36, 326.
Buddhist Defence Committee, 72,

358-

Mission, Correspondence
on, 120 et sgq.


439


440


Index


Bttddhlit Mission, History of, ii8.
M tt Progress of,

„ Catechism translated, ai i.

M Flaff, 3JI.

„ Pumic Worship, 356 et

Bulandshahr, 429.

Burma, Visit to, 200 et seq.


Coulombs, Fate of the, 195 et i$q*
„ The, 74.

Cremation v. Burial, 34S.
Crookes, Mr. {Sir Wffiam), 145.
Cuddapah, 385.

Curious accident to picture, 321.
Customs of Kashmir Court, 48.


C


Cahagnet, Alphonse, and his
work, 247.

Caithness, Countess of, 79.

Captain Courmes, 78.

Carnival at Nice, 83-4.

Caste and the T. S. , 69.

Caves and Jungles^ effect in Russia,
71 -

Cawnpore, Lecture at, 290.

„ Again, 428.

,, Events at, 25-7,

Ceylon visited,

,, Again visited in 1887, 399.

,, Cremation Ceremony, 342
et seq,

,, Religious differences in, 342
et seq,

Chakravarti, Mr. G. N., 288.
Change in Theosophist^ 31 1.

Charcot, Professor, 153.
Clairvoyance an 4 Police, 83.
Coimhatpre Branch organised, ii.
Colkpse of T. S. in U.S.A., 385.
Colombo, Work in, 72.

Colour prejudice in India, 279.
Committee of T. S. and Coulomb
case, 192.

Convention in Colombo, 352.

„ of 1883, 63.
Conversazioni, value of, 139-140.
Cooper-Oakley, Mr., 31 1.

Cowes, Dr, Flllott, 364, 385.
Coulomb Antecedents, 187 et seq.
Conspiracy, 179 et seq.
Scandal, enects of, 196 et
seq.


D

Damodar, Astral Visit, 33,

,, Disappears, 51, 266 et

seq,

, , Progress of, 26.

,, Returns, 54.

Damodar’s Diary, 260 et seq.
Dangerous Drive, A, 400.

Darjiling, 254.

Dedication, A, 401.

Defence of Hinduism, 272 et seq.
Degenerate Buddhists, 355,
Degraded Priesthood, 431.

Delhi visited, 33,

Difficulties at Adyar, 217 seq.
Dinner at Junior Athenaeum, 95.
Discomfited Orientalist, A, 287.

Du Prel, Baron Carl, 171, 172.,
Durbhanga, Strange Conduct of
Prince of, 437.

Dwaita Catechism^ 338-


E

Earthquake Experience, 277,
Eastern Customs, 49.

Economical Touring, 418 et seq.
Education, Lecture on, 297.
Epileptic Attack cured, 294.

Evans, Colonel and Mrs., 80.

** Evil Eye,” the Ejfplanation pf,
146 et seq,

Ewen, Mr., Clairvoyance of, 141.
Executive Committee su^estedy
226.

Expulsion of official at Jaipur,
Ezekiel, Mr., Kabbalist, 295,


})



Index 441


F

Fever and Native Remedies, 353.
Fire at Madras, 331.

Flammarion, Camille, 80.

Floating Fire Festival at Mylapore,
340 *

France, Theosophy in, 324 et seq»
Friendly Weather Elementals, 289.
F3rzabad and its ** live-stock,” 434.


G

Galle, 404.

Ganges, Bathing in the, 431.
Gebhard, Frau, 164, 317.

Germany, Theosophy in, 166.
Ghazipore visited, 25.

Gimar Rock Inscription, 409.

Gooty visited, 304.

Gopinath, Pandit, 57.

Government Service, effect in T. S.,
426.

Guyot, Yves, 15 1.


H

Hackett, Rev. Mr., 292.
Haemmerl 4 , Madame, 80.
Handwriting Experts, value of, 235
et seq.

Hartmann, Dr. F., appears, 62.

,, ,, takes Buddhist

precepts, 65.

Hardwar, Convention at, 430.
Haridas, the Hatha Yogi, 432.
Harisinhji, Prince, 383.

Hatha Yoga, Instance of, 24.
Healing a Paralytic, 12.

Healings suspended by order, 22.
Hermetic T. S. founded, 94.
Hodgson, Dr., 103.

Hoffmann, Herr von, 168.
Hoshangabad, 422.

H. P. B., Attitude towards, i lo-i 1 1.
,, at Ostende, 331.

j rr» _ j-l -.-.O

JL V/AAW UWJl

et seq.


H, P. B., Character sketch, 313-

,, Culinary Ignorance, II.

,, Difficult to work with,

221.

,, in exile, ^10 et seq,

,, in society, 2.

,, and Keely, 386.

,, Leaves for Europe, 223.

,, Letter on Secret Doctrine^

366.

,, Phenomena by, 10.

,, Russian spy m3rth, 220.

,, Serious illness, 206 et ^eq,

,, Slanders by Coulombs,

246.

,, S. P. R. Report, 102.

,, Speech at Madras, 186.

,, Sphere of work described,

II.

,, Story of childhood, 9.

,, Successors appointed, 379.

HUbbe-Schleiden, Dr., 172.
Hyderabad, 18 seq^^ 299.
Hypnotic Cures, 88.

Hypnotism, Schools of, 153 et seq.


I

Idols, how to make, 251.

Indian Art and European Taste !
410.

Indian Papers on the Conspiracy,
184 et seq.

Infallibility in the T. S., 228 et seq.
Ingratitude of the Healed, 12,

,, ofT. S. Members, 219.
Inspiration, Sources and Method of,
367 et seq.

Invitation from King Thebaw, 23.
Islam, Lecture on, 285.


j

JAMALPUR visited, 437.
ewish Joke, A, 296.


29



442 Index


Joke by the P. T. S., 339.

J ubbulpore School for Princes, 23
,, revisited, 292, 422.
Judge, W. Q., on Astrology, 243.
Juggling Skill, 41 1.


K

Kandy and Processions, 402.
Kapurthala, Visit to, 58.

Karma, Working of, 361 et seq,
Karur, 323.

Kashmir, Maharajah of, 43, 47.

,, ,, Munificence to

T. S., 57.

Keely and the S. D.,” 386.
Kingsford, Anna, 92 et seq.
KingThebaw’s Invitation, 213.


L

Lahore, Events at, 36 et seq,

„ again, 432,

Leadbeater, Mr. C. W., in Ceylon,

355.

Lecture to Lepers, 403.

Lectures in Calcutta, 272.

Letter to Dr. HUbbe-Schleiden,
168.

Letter from the Master K. H. , 38.
Levi Eliphas, 165.

Library at Adyar, in embryo, 327.

,, Building begun, 336.

„ opening, 388 et seq,

„ progresses, 372, 383.

Limbdi visited, 413.

Lionising in London, 98.

Literary Activity, 383.

London Lodge T. S., 90.

Lucifer founded by H. P. B, , 435.
Lucknow ‘ ‘ a sink, ** 284.

,, visited, 29.


M


Magnetism of Audiences, 290.
Maharajah of Durbhanga, 281.

Maji of Benares, 271.

,, ,, Death of, 280.

„ „ Visit to, 280.

Maji’s Revelations to Damodar, 262.
Man^ a Fragment of Forgotten
History ^ 233.

Marble Rocks, The, 24.

Master K. H. appears at Lahore,

36.

Master’s Letter, A, 365.

Master’s Message, A, 91,

Max, Gabriel, 17 1.

Max Muller, Prof., misstatement by,
176.

Medankara, Buddhist Bhikku, 87.
Medical Certificate, A, 319.

Mqjittu watte, 405.

Mesmeric Experiments, 80.

„ in Burma, 204.

,, ,, More, 211, 215.

Missionary, A Fair-minded, 292.

„ Clique, A, 293.

Model Reception, A, 19.

Mohini and the .Esthetic Lady, 95,
Monkeys at Fyzabad, 282.
Moradabad, 433.

Morgan, General, and Coulombs,
226.

Mysterious Telegraph Peon, 53.
Mystery Play, A, 411.

Multiple Membership disallowed,

97.


N

“ Nadigranthams,” 243.
Nagpur, 294, 421.
Narainswamy Naidu, 294, 421.
Narayani Sect, 409.

Nerbudda River, 422.

Nudda, Prince of, 257.


O


Madhavdas, Swami, 292.
Madras T. S. Anniversary, 17.


Occult World published, 97.
Official Address, Dec. 1885, 327-8.



Index


443


Official Correspondence, 4 et seq,
„ Recognition, 3
Ootacamimd, 3.

Ooty, Stay at, 3.

Opening of the Library, 388.
Oriental Institute to come, 397.


P

Palanquin Journey, 270.

Pali and Sanskrit, 387.

Palm Grove by night, 354.

Paris visited, 86.

Phenomena and Science, 32.
Phenomenal Letters, 90, 168, 176.

,, Rupees, 64.

„ Memory, 3CX) et seq.
Phenomenon at the Gebhards’, 176.
Photographic Forgery, A, 360.
Pomar, Duchesse de, Visit to, 79.
Pondich6ry, I4* .

,, Amusing Reception at,

14.

,, Lecture in French at,

15 seq,

„ An Adept at, 17.

Poona, 20, 21, 295, 418.
Posthumous Humanity^ 363.

Praed, Mrs. Campbell, 148.

„ ,, „ Affinities, 158.

Prevision, a case of, 215.

Prophecies, New and Old, 237 et
seq.

Psychic Conditions in lecturing, 28.
Psychical Research Society’s Report,
103 etseq.

Psychological Phenomenon ex •
plained, 333.


R

Rajput Rulers, 413 seq,

Rama’s Capital, 435.

Rangoon, 20Z et seq.

Reflections on the Master’s Visit, 39
et se^.

Reminiscence of the War Depart-
ment, 350.


Reputation cheaply made, 286.
Retirement pressed and rejected,
329-30.

Return to India, 183.

Robert the Mesmerist, 80.

„ I) Story of, 82.

Row, Sir K, Seshadri Iyer, 376.


S

Sanskrit School proposed, 25.
Sanskrit and Pali, 387.

Sarat Babu and Tibet, 255 et seq,
Schmiechen’s Paintings, 156,
Schroeder, Herr, Magnetiser, 169.
Scott, Judge Ross, 433.

Scottish T. S. founded, 160.

Secret Doctrine, The, Plan of, 200.
,, ,, ,, Conditions of

production,

370-71.

,, ,, ,, MS. of, 3 ^ 5 *

„ ,, ,, Subba Row’s

opinion of,

I . 385.

„ „ „ in progress,

317-

Secunderabad, 303.

Seeds sown for C. H. College, 323.
Sen, Dr. Ram Das, 438.

Seven, the Mystic, 380.

Shroff, Mr. K. M., 420.

Shway Dag6n described, 201 et seq.
Sibylline Books, 242.

Siddhis, higher and lower, 433.
Snake-stone tested, 304.

Solovioff, 178, 308.

Some Statistics of Work, 335.

S. P. R. Methods, 31.

,, Examination, 100.

,, R^ort, loi.

Spedalieri, Baron, 78.

Stack, Mr., Experiments with,

143 -

Sturdy, Mr. E. T., 408.

Subba Row and H. P. B., 358.

,, I) at Headquarters, 381.

„ ,, Lectures on the Gltd,

387.



444


Index


Subba Row Medal Fund, The, 65.
„ „ on Astrology, 243.

„ „ Opinion of “S. D.,*

385-

Sumangala, Visit to, 402.

Surat, 418.


T

Tbj Narain and his College, 254.
The T. S. and “ Reforms, ’°7o.
Theosophical Pollen Grains, 366.
Theosophische Gesellschaft Ger-
mania, 166.

Theosophy and Presbyterianism,
161.

Thought Currents, 144.

„ Forms, 149.

,, Transference, 139 et seg.
Thugs, 423 et seq.

Tookaram Tatya, 295.

Tour for Propaganda, 248 et seq.

,, in Northern India, 253.

Trials of 1885, 306.


V


Vegetarian Cookery, i.

„ Diet, 2.

,, ,, temporarily aban-

doned, 429.

Verification of Phenomena, 34.
Voyage to Europe, 76.


W


Wachtmeister, Countess, 317.
Wagner and Buddhism, 170.
Weber, Baron von, 327.
Westernized Hindus, 257*


Z


ZSCHOKKB, Story of, 67.
Zouave Jacob, 86,


PaiNTBD BT NEILL AND CO., LTD., EDINBURGH.


