EARLY GREEK 
PHILOSOPHY

John Burnet

9

Digitized by Google

1

17 <~ v. .

Digitized by Google

Digitized by Goqgle

i

}

i

i

Digitized by Google

EARLY 
GREEK PHILOSOPHY

UY

JOHN BURNET, M. A.

FELLOW OF MEKTON COLLEGE, OXFOllD

Ilepi (xtv twv oVtwv tijv aXrjOtiav «tkoVow, ra 8' ovra virc'AajSoi' 
«mi ra cuV0t/t<x povov. — Aristotle

LONDON AND EDINBURGH

ADAM AND CHARLES BLACK

1892

Digitized by Google

Digitized by Google

PREFACE.

0-

No apology is needed for the appearance of a work 
dealing with Early Greek Philosophy. The want 
of one has long been felt ; for there are few 
branches of philology in which more progress 
has been made in the last twenty years, and the 
results of that progress have not yet been made 
accessible to the English reader. My original 
intention was simply to report these results ; but 
I soon found that I was obliged to dissent from 
some of them, and it seemed best to say so dis- 
tinctly. Very likely I am wrong in most of these 
cases, but my mistakes may be of use in calling 
attention to unobserved points. In any case, I 
hope no one will think I have been wanting in the 
respect due to the great authority of Zeller, who 
was the first to recall the history of philosophy 
from the extravagances into which it had wandered 
earlier in the century. 1 am glad to find that 
all my divergences from his account have only 
led me a little further in the path that he struck 
out.

I am very sensible of the imperfect execution of

Digitized by Google

vi

PREFACE.

some parts of this work ; but the subject has 
become so large, and the number of authorities 
whose testimony must be weighed is so great, that 
it is not easy for any one writer to be equally at 
home in all parts of the field.I have consulted the student's convenience by 
giving references to the seventh edition of Hitter 
and Preller (ed. Schultess) throughout. The 
references to Zeller arc to the fourth German 
edition, from which the English translation was 
made. I have been able to make some use also of 
the recently published fifth edition (1892), and all 
references to it are distinguished by the symbol Z.' 
I can only wish that it had appeared in time for 
me to incorporate its results more thoroughly.

I have to thank many friends for advice and 
suggestions, and, above all, Mr. Harold H. Joachim, 
Fellow of Merton College, who read most of the 
work before it went to press.

J. B.

Digitized by

CONTENTS.

IXTHonrcTION, .

The Milesian School,.

CHAPTER T

CH APTER it - 
Science and Religion,.

CHAPTER TIT 
Hkrakj.i-itms or Ephksqs,

CHAPTER TV.

Parmenidea of Elba, .

CHAPTER V. 
Empedokles of Akraqas.

CHAPTER VI. 
Anaxagoras of Ki.a/qmenai. .

CHAPTER VII

The Pythagoreans,

CHAPTER VTIT 
The Vouxoer Eleatick.

CHAPTER T\ 
The Revival or Philosophy in Ionia.

Note on the Sources, 
Index,

l-AOF.s

l-2ft

30-S2

S3- 198

129-179

1SQ-2 0 Q

207-271

2m

30 1- 3 21

322 347

348 3fi9 
370 370

vii

ABBREVIATIONS.

Arch. Archiv fiir Gachichte der Philosophic. Berlin, Georg 
Reimer.

Dox. Ihxographi Gra-ci. Colleyit, recaisuit, ProUgomcnis India- 
bu*q\ic imlauit Hermann Dirk. lVrlin 1879.

B. P. Historia Philotophur (ir<r<c\ Ttsiimonui Audorum coit- 
Ugerunt Xoti«pi.e inxtruxerunt. H. Hitter ft L. PrelUr. 
Editio xeptiuia, quam atrarerunt Fr. Schnltt.tx ft Ed. Well- 
mann. Gotlia 1888.

Zkllkk. Die Phibmphu da- Grixhrtt, dnrtprtdU von Dr. Eihntrd 
y.' Un\ Erst a- Thai, Virrte A v fluff, . Leipzig 1870.

Digitized by Goc

INTRODUCTION

I. It was not until the traditional view of the world The cosmo- 
and the customary rules of life had broken down, that l2te?if C eariy

Greek philo-Digitized by Goc

INTRODUCTION

I. It was not until the traditional view of the world The cosmo- 
and the customary rules of life had broken down, that l2te?if C eariy

Greek philo-

the Greeks began to feel the needs which philosophies of sophy. 
nature and of conduct seek to satisfy. Nor were those 
needs felt all at once. The decay of popular morality 
hardly set in till the traditional view of nature had 
altogether passed away ; and, for this reason, the earliest 
philosophers busied themselves almost exclusively with 
speculations about the world around them. In due 
season, Logic was called into being to meet a fresh want. 
The pursuit of cosmological inquiry beyond a certain 
point inevitably brought to light a wide divergence 
between science and common sense, which was itself a 
fresh problem demanding some solution, and moreover 
constrained philosophers to study the means of defending 
their paradoxes against the prejudices of the unscientific 
many. Later still, the prevailing interest in logical 
matters raised the whole question of the origin and 
validity of knowledge ; while, almost at the same time, 
the breakdown of the traditional morality gave rise to 
Ethics. The period in the history of Greek thought 
which precedes the rise of epistemological and ethical 
speculation has thus a distinctive character of its own, 
and may fitly be treated apart. 1

1 It will be observed that Demokritos falls outside the period thu.s 
limited. The common practice of treating this younger contemporary of

I

Digitized by

2 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

The tradi- II. Even in the earliest times of which we have anyI

Digitized by

2 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

The tradi- II. Even in the earliest times of which we have any

the world, record, the traditional view of the world is fast passing 
away, and we are left to gather what manner of tiling it 
was from the stray glimpses we get of it here and there 
in the older literature, to which it forms a sort of sombre 
background, and from the many strange myths and 
stranger rites that lived on, as if to bear witness of it to 
later times, not only in out-of-the-way parts of Hellas, 
but even in the " mysteries " of the more cultivated 
states. So far as we can see, it must have been essen- 
tially a thing of shreds and patches, ready to fall in 
pieces as soon as stirred by the fresh breeze of a larger 
experience and a more fearless curiosity. The only 
attempt at an explanation of the world which it could 
otter was a wild story of the origin of things, only to be 
matched for puerile cruelty and obscenity among the 
worst inventions of the lowest races of mankind. In 
short, the earliest Greek view of nature was nothing more 
nor less than a form of that world - wide superstition 
which has its roots deep down in the peculiar constitution 
of the savage mind.

This is hardly, perhaps, the picture of the earliest 
state of the Greek intellect with which most of us have 
been familiar; but the evidence which anthropologists 
have brought in supjiort of it is, in its cumulative force, 
overwhelming. Such a story as that of Ouranos, Gaia, 
and Kronos is plainly, as Mr. Lang has shown in Custom 
and Myth, in all essential features, on precisely the same 
level of thought as the Maori tale of Papa and liangi ;

Sokrates along with the " pre-Socratie philosophers" has obscured the true 
course of historical development. Demokritos comes alter Protagoras, 
and his theory is everywhere conditioned by the episteruological problem. 
See Victor Brochard, )>>otn<jom* rt Dcmoaiu {Arrh. ii. 36S).

Digitized by Gock

INTRODUCTION. 3Digitized by Gock

INTRODUCTION. 3

while in its details the Greek myth is, if anything, the 
more savage and disgusting of the two.

The fact is that we allow ourselves to he too easily 
misled by metaphors about " the childhood of the race," 
though even these, if properly understood, are suggestive 
enough. Our ideas of the true state of a child's mind 
are derived, not so much from observation and the 
recollection of our own early feelings and thoughts, as 
from that theory of antenatal existence which has found, 
perhaps, its highest expression in Wordsworth's Ode on 
the Intimations of Immortality. We transfer these ideas 
to the race generally, and thus we come to think of the 
men who made and repeated myths as simple, innocent 
creatures who were somehow nearer than we are to the 
beginning of things, and so, perhaps, saw with a clearer 
vision than ours. (A truer view of what a child's 
thoughts really are will help to put us on the right 
track. Left to themselves, children are most often tor- 
mented by vague terrors of surrounding objects which 
they fear to confide to any one. Their games are really 
based upon an animistic theory of things, and they are 
great Ijelievers in luck and in the lot. They are devotees, 
too, of that " cult of odds and ends " which is fetichism ; 
and the unsightly old dolls which they often cherish 
more fondly than the choicest products of the toy-shop, 
remind us forcibly of the ungainly stocks and stones 
which Pausanias found in the Holy of Holies of many a 
stately Greek temple. ' In this sense, then, we may say, 
if we please, that primitive men were childlike ; but we 
must also bear in mind that the childhood of the race 
included the maturity of individuals. We must think of 
the makers of myth as having all the vices and passions 
of grown men, with only the thoughts and experience of

4

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.4

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

children to keep them in check ; and, if we once realise 
what this means, we shall be at no loss to account for 
those horrible tales, which were hardly less shocking to 
the Greeks of a later age than they are to ourselves. 
But after all, even in the days of Thales, the world was 
already very old. Those Greeks who first tried to under- 
stand nature were not at all in the position of men 
setting out on a hitherto untrodden path. There was 
already in the field a tolerably consistent view of the 
world, though no doubt it was implied and assumed in 
ritual and myth rather than explicitly present to con- 
sciousness. The early thinkers did a far greater thing 
than merely make a beginning ; by turning their backs 
upon the savage view of things, they renewed their 
youth, and with it, as it proved, the youth of the world, 
at a time when the world seemed in its dotage.

The marvel is that they were able to do this so 
thoroughly as they did. A savage myth might be pre- 
served here and there to the scandal of philosophers ; 
fetiches, totems, and magic rites might lurk in holes and 
corners with the moles and with the bats, to be unearthed 
long afterwards by the curious in such matters. But the 
all-pervading superstition, which we call primitive because 
we know not how or whence it came, was gone for ever ; 
and we find Herodotos noting with unfeigned surprise 
the existence among " barbarians " of beliefs and customs 
which, not so very long ago, his own forefathers had 
taught and practised as seriously as ever did Libyan or 
Scyth. Even then, he might have found most of them 
surviving on the " high places " of Hellas.

Traces of the III. In Homer we find very few traces of primitive

traditional .

vu w in early cosmogony, and most of them occur in that strange episode

literature.

Digitized by Google

INTRODUCTION.

5traditional .

vu w in early cosmogony, and most of them occur in that strange episode

literature.

Digitized by Google

INTRODUCTION.

5

of the Fourteenth Book of the Iliad, known as the AlO<i 1. Homer. 
airaii). In it we meet with a considerable number of 
ideas which are otherwise foreign to Homeric theology, 
and these are just the exceptions that prove the rule. 
Even if we cannot follow Gruppe in regarding the whole 
episode as a parody of a theogonical poem, we must at 
least admit with Diels that it is full of theogonical 
reminiscences. 2 Now the ideas which formed the stock- 
in-trade of early theogonies are not treated in the J to? 
dird-H) with any degree of seriousness or respect. The 
poet, we cannot but feel, has no reverence at all for 
the " holy marriage " of heaven and earth. And yet 
this was then the central feature of many local religions, 
just as it is in many a rustic celebration to-day.

It is not until we come to Hesiod that we find our- 2. He*io,i. 
selves in a really savage atmosphere, which recalls that 
of Samoan or Mangaian cosmogony, or of the more 
unpleasant parts of the Indian Brdhmanas. Are we to 
suppose, then, that the Greeks, after once attaining the 
comparatively high level of reasonableness which we find 
in the Homeric poems, were suddenly plunged once more 
into savagery ? Surely not. It is far more likely that 
in the Tlwxjony we have a sort of reactionary mani- 
festo written deliberately for the purpose of saving the 
old traditions, already threatened by the new spirit. 
Hesiod says that, as the Muses have already shown 
their power in fiction, it will be well for them to show 
that they can sing truth also ; and this certainly sounds 
like a covert attack upon epic poetry. Nor is this differ- 
ence between Homer and Hesiod hard to understand. 
We can readily believe that the adventure-loving aristo-

- See Gruppe, Griechitche Cnlte undMythn, i. pp. (314, 623, and Diels 
in Arch. ii. p. 90.

Digitized by Google- See Gruppe, Griechitche Cnlte undMythn, i. pp. (314, 623, and Diels 
in Arch. ii. p. 90.

Digitized by Google

T> EARLY (1REEK PHILOSOPHY.

erats, for whose amusement Homer sang, would care but 
little for the old folk-tales so dear to the farmer of Askra. 
With them, a sort of panhellenic polytheism, the Olym- 
pian mythology in short, had taken the place of primitive 
inonolatry. 8 But such things as the J to? airait) show 
clearly enough that the epic poet's silence was due rather 
to reticence than to ignorance, and that he had already 
the beginnings of the belief that certain stories were 
" not pious to relate." We infer, then, that at any rate 
with a certain class of society in Asiatic Hellas, the 
traditional view of the world was fairly discredited at 
least as early as the time when the Homeric poems were 
composed. But in Hesiod we hear for the first time the 
voice of the common people in close alliance with the 
local priesthoods of continental Greece, and so we get a 
more antique tradition.

It would, however, be wrong to see in the Thcogony a 
mere recrudescence of the old superstition. Nothing can 
ever be revived just as it was ; for in every revival there 
is a polemical element which differentiates it completely 
from the older idea which it vainly seeks to reproduce. 
Hesiod, after all, could not but be touched by the new 
spirit which trade and adventure had awakened across 
the sea. His work is, in truth, but one symptom among 
others of that very decay of the old ideas which he 
sought to arrest ; for it is an attempt to fuse into a 
single system all the myths he could come by, and 
system is necessarily fatal to so wayward a thing as 
mythology. Hesiod no less than Homer teaches a syn- 
cretistic polytheism ; the only difference is that in his 
ease this is more directly based upon the legends attached 
to the local cults, which he thus sought to invest with 
5 Cf. Robertson Smith, Religion of the Seinti?*, i. pp. 39, 40.Digitized by Google

INTRODUCTION.

7

the lustre of a panhellenic significance. The result is, of 
course, that the myth becomes primary and the cult 
secondary, a complete inversion of the primitive relation. 
Nor is it only by this attempt at system that Hesiod 
shows himself the child of his time. We also find in 
the Thcogony the beginnings of what we must call specu- 
lation. Hesiod is not content, as the old tradition 
doubtless was, to begin with Ouranos and Gaia. We 
have two new stages in the evolution, namely, Chaos and 
Eros. The conception of Chaos represents a distinct 
effort to picture the beginning of things. It is not a 
formless mixture, like the toku - va - tohu of the first 
chapter of Genesis, but rather, as its etymology indicates, 
the yawning gulf or gap where nothing is as yet. 4 We 
may be pretty sure that this is not primitive. Savage 
man does not feel called upon to form an idea of the 
very beginning of all things. The other figure, that of 
Eros, is introduced in order to explain the impulse to 
production which gives rise to the whole evolution. 
The history of philosophy shows what a fruitful idea 
this was.

We have records of great activity in the production 3. The coam«». 
of cosmogonies during the whole of the sixth century 8oni * ts ' 
B.C. We know something of the systems of Epimenides, 
Pherekydes, and Akousilaos. The earliest Orphic cosmo- 
gony goes back to the same period. 5 The feature which 
is common to all these speculations is the attempt to get 
, behind the Gap, and to put Chronos 0 or Zeus in the first

* Cf. the Orphic x*'!** and the Scandinavian Giintnn<ja-<jap.

5 This was the view of Lobeck with regard to the " Rhapsodic Theo- 
gony" described by Dama&kios. It has been revived by Otto Kern 
(De Orj)hei Epimenidis Pherecydis theoyonii*, 18SS).

" Not, of course, al>straet time. Sec Zeller, p. 72, n. 3 (Eng. trans. 
v p. 91, n. 2). There was, no doubt, some confusion with Kronos.

Digitized by Google" Not, of course, al>straet time. Sec Zeller, p. 72, n. 3 (Eng. trans. 
v p. 91, n. 2). There was, no doubt, some confusion with Kronos.

Digitized by Google

8 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

place. It is this which Aristotle has in view when he 
distinguishes the " theologians " who derive things from 
Night, from those who were half-theologians, half-philo- 
sophers, and put what was best at the beginning. 7 It 
is obvious, however, that this process might be carried 
on indefinitely, and that it is the very reverse of 
scientific, so we have nothing to do with the cosmo- 
gonists in the present inquiry, except in so far as 
they can be shown to have influenced the course of 
more sober speculation. Indeed, the Orphic theories do 
not really carry us beyond the Maoris. The strange 
hymns in which that remarkable people relate the origin 
of things represent, if anything, a higher level of thought 
than was attained in Greece before the rise of the 
Milesian school. The example quoted by Mr. Andrew 
Lang in Myth, Ritual and Religion* contains a very 
subtle deduction of the Eros which Ilesiod simply took 
for granted.

Genemi char- IV. What, then, was the step in advance which placed

ncteiistics of A . _ . . _ - . ' , ,

early Greek the Ionian cosmologists once for all above the level or

ctiMiiolo"y.

the Maoris ? Grote and Zeller make it consist in the 
substitution of impersonal causes acting according to law 
for personal causes acting arbitrarily. But the distinction 
between personal and impersonal was not really much 
felt in antiquity, and it is surely a mistake to lay such 
stress on it as most historians have done. It seems 
rather that the real advance made by the scientific men 
of Miletos was that they left off telling tales. They 
gave up the hopeless task of describing what was when 
as yet there was nothing, and asked instead what all 
things really are now.

7 Mtt. N, 4. 10916, 8. 8 Vol. ii. p. 28.

Digitized by Googl

INTRODUCTION. 97 Mtt. N, 4. 10916, 8. 8 Vol. ii. p. 28.

Digitized by Googl

INTRODUCTION. 9

The great principle which underlies all the specula- e* mhito

, n ih il.

tions of the early cosraologists, though it is first explicitly 
laid down by Parmenides, is that Nothing comes into 
being out of nothing, and nothing passes away into nothing. 
They saw, however, that particular things were always 
coming into being and passing away again, and from this 
it followed that the existence of particular things was no 
true or stable existence. The only things that were real 
and eternal were the original matter which passed through 
all these changes and the motion which gave rise-to them, 
to which was soon added that law of proportion or compen- 
sation which, despite the continual becoming and passing 
away of particular things, secured the relative perma- 
nence and stability of the various forms of existence that 
go to make up the world. That these were in fact the 
leading ideas of the early cosmologists, cannot, of course, 
be proved till wo have given a detailed exposition of 
their systems ; but we can show at once how natural it 
was for such thoughts to occur to them. The problem 
of change and decay is always that which first excites 
the wonder which, as Plato says, is the starting-point of 
all philosophy. Besides this, there was in the Ionic 
nature a vein of what we call sentimentalism which led 
it to brood much upon the instability of things. Even 
before the time of Thales, we find Mimnermos of 
Kolophon deeply impressed by the sadness of the passing 
away of youth ; in Anakreon we may perceive some- 
thing of the same gentle melancholy ; aud, later still, 
the lament of Simonides, that the generations of men 
pass even as the leaves of the forest, touches a chord 
already struck by the earliest singer of Ionia. 0 Now, 
so long as men could believe that everything they saw

9 Simonides, fr. 85, 2 Bergk. Cf. //. vi. 146.

Digitized by Google9 Simonides, fr. 85, 2 Bergk. Cf. //. vi. 146.

Digitized by Google

10 KAKLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

was alive like themselves, the spectacle of the unceasing 
death and new birth of nature would do no more than tinge 
their thoughts with a certain sadness, which would find 
its appropriate expression in such things as the Linos 
dirges which the Greeks borrowed from their Asiatic- 
neighbours ; 10 but, when primitive Animism, which had 
seen conscious life everywhere, was gone, and poly- 
theistic mythology, which had personified at least the 
more striking natural phenomena, was going, it must 
have seemed that there was nowhere any abiding reality. 
Nowadays, we are accustomed, for good and for ill, to 
the notion of dead things, obedient, not to inner im- 
pulses, but solely to mechanical laws. But this is not the 
view of the natural man, and we may be sure that, when 
first it forced itself upon his mind, it must have provoked 
a strong sense of dissatisfaction. Iielief was only to be 
had from the reflection that as nothing comes from 
nothing, nothing can pass away into nothing. There 
must, then, be something which always is, something 
fundamental which persists throughout all change, and 
ceases to exist in one form only that it may reappear in 
another.

*I>«W So far as I know, no historian of Greek philosophy has 
clearly laid it down that the word which was used by the 
early cosmologists to express this idea of a permanent and 
primary substance was none other than (f>v<TL<; ; and that 
the title Jlepl <f>vaem t so commonly given to philo- 
sophical works in the sixth and fifth centuries B.C., does 
not mean, " On the Nature of Tilings," — a far later use

,c The word «:>.,.#• seems to be the Pho-nician U^tf {ai-lanu), "Woe is 
ris ! " from which the Greeks extracted a mythical personage called Linos. 
On Adoms-Thammu/, Lityerses, and Osiris, see Frazer, Golden Bough, 
vol. i. ].. -J7^

Digitized by Go<

INTRODUCTION. HDigitized by Go<

INTRODUCTION. H

of the word, — but simply, " Concerning the Primary Sub- 
stance." Both Plato and Aristotle use the term in this 
sense when they are discussing the earlier philosophy, 11 
and the history of the word shows clearly enough what 
its earliest meaning must have been. In Greek philo- 
sophical language, 0uat? always means that which is 
primary, fundamental, and persistent, as opposed to that 
which is secondary, derivative, and transient ; what is 
" given," as opposed to what is made or becomes. It is 
that which is there to begin with. It is true that 
Aristotle also identifies <f>v<ri<; with the best or most 
normal condition of a thing ; but that is just because, in 
his philosophy, the goal of any development is held 
to be prior to the process by which it is reached. 
Such an idea was, of course, wholly unknown to the 
pioneers of philosophy. They sought the explanation of 
the incomplete world we know, not in the end, but in 
the beginning. It seemed to them that, if only they 
could strip oil' all the modifications which Art and 
Chance and Fate had introduced, they would get at the 
ultimately real ; and so the search after (pva^, first in 
the world at large, and afterwards in human society, 
became the chief interest of the age with which we are 
about to deal.

The word apxv, by which the early cosmologists are 
usually said to have designated the object of their search, 
is purely Aristotelian. It is perfectly natural that it 
should be employed in the well-known historical sketch 
of the First Book of the Metaphysics ; for Aristotle is 
there testing the theories of earlier thinkers by his own 
doctrine of the four causes. But Plato never uses the

11 For instance, Plato, Lmc*, 802 II ; Aristotle, n,y*. 193«, 9-31 ; Met. 
10146, 32.

Digitized by Google

12

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.11 For instance, Plato, Lmc*, 802 II ; Aristotle, n,y*. 193«, 9-31 ; Met. 
10146, 32.

Digitized by Google

12

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

term in this connection ; and, us a matter of fact, it 
does not once occur in the genuine fragments of the 
early philosophers, but is altogether confined to the 
Stoic and Peripatetic handbooks from which most of 
our knowledge is derived, and these simply repeat 
Aristotle. Zeller has pointed out in a footnote 12 that 
it is a complete anachronism to refer the subtle Aristo- 
telian use of the word to the beginnings of speculation. 
To Anaximander apx*l could only have meant " begin- 
ning," and it was far more than a beginning that the 
early cosmologists were looking for ; it was the eternal 
ground of all things. 13

There is one very important conclusion which follows 
at once from the account just given of the meaning of 
<f)u<rt<i, and this is, that the search for the primary sub- 
stance really was the thing which chiefly interested the 
Ionian philosophers. Had their main object been, as 
Teichmuller held it was, the explanation of celestial and 
meteorological phenomena, they would hardly have 
entitled their works Ilepl <£u<rea)9 ; we should have had 
instead Ilepl Koafiov, or rather Ilepl oupavov. And this 
view we shall find confirmed by a study of the way in 
which Greek cosmology developed. The growing thought 
which may be traced through the successive represen- 
tatives of a given school is always that which concerns 
the primary substance, while the astronomical and other 
theories are, in the main, peculiar to the individual 
thinkers. Teichmuller undoubtedly did good service by 
liis protest against the treatment of these theories as 
mere isolated curiosities. They form, on the contrary, 
as will appear, coherent systems which must be looked

u Zeller, p. 203, n. 2 (Eng. trans, p. 243, n. 2). 
,a Sec, further, Chap. I. n. 57.

Digitized by Googl

INTRODUCTION.

13u Zeller, p. 203, n. 2 (Eng. trans, p. 243, n. 2). 
,a Sec, further, Chap. I. n. 57.

Digitized by Googl

INTRODUCTION.

13

at as wholes. But it is true none the less that Greek 
philosophy began, as it ended, in the search for what 
was lasting and abiding in the flux of things.

V. But how could this give back to nature the life "Hyiozoism." 
of which it had been robbed by advancing knowledge ?

Simply by making it possible for that life, which had 
hitherto been supposed to reside in each particular thing, 
to be transferred to the one thing of which all others 
were merely passing forms. The very process of birth, 
growth, and decay might now be regarded as the exer- 
cise of the unceasing activity of the one ultimate reality. 
The place of Animism was, in fact, taken by what has 
been called " Hylozoism." The term is, however, most 
misleading if it suggests to us any analogy with the 
later systems which commonly go by the name. These 
were based upon a denial of the separate reality of life 
and spirit ; while, in the days of Thales, and even, as we 
shall see, in those of Anaxagoras, the distinction between 
matter and spirit had not been felt, far les3 formulated 
in such a way that it could be denied. The uncreated, 
indestructible, self-moving, living reality of which these 
early thinkers were in search was body or even matter, 
if we choose to call it so, but it was not matter in the 
sense in which matter is contrasted with spirit.

VI. Xow that we have sketched in brief outline the The cause* of 
traditional theory of the world, and indicated the main the traditional 
characteristics of the view which displaced it, we lmist worR f th * 
turn to the consideration of the causes which led to the 
downfall of the one and the rise of the other. Fore- 
most among these undoubtedly was the widening of the

Greek horizon, effected by the great extension of mari-

Digitized by Google

14

EARLY CiRKKK PHILOSOPHY.Greek horizon, effected by the great extension of mari-

Digitized by Google

14

EARLY CiRKKK PHILOSOPHY.

time enterprise which followed the decay of the Phoeni- 
cian naval supremacy. The scene of the old savage 
stories had, as a rule, been laid just outside the bound- 
aries of the world known to the men who believed them. 
Odysseus does not meet with Circe or the Cyclops or the 
Sirens in the familiar yEgean, but in those western 
regions which lay beyond the ken of the Greeks at the 
time the Odyssey was composed. Now, however, the 
West was beginning to be familiar too, and the fancy of 
the Greek explorers led them to identify the lands which 
they discovered, with the various spots visited by the 
.hero of the national fairy tale. It was soon ascertained 
that the monstrous beings in question were no longer to 
l>e found there, and the belief grew up that they never 
had been there at all. So, too, the Milesians had settled 
colonies all round the Euxine. The colonists went out 
with % Apya) ira<rv fieXovaa in their minds ; and, at the 
same time as they changed the name of the Inhospitable 
to the Hospitable Sea, they localised the indeterminate 
" far country " of the primitive tale, and made Jason 
fetch the Golden Fleece from Kolchis. Above all, the 
Phokaians had explored the Mediterranean as far as the 
Pillars of Herakles, and the discovery that the " endless 
paths" of the sea they knew had definite boundaries 
must, as (J rote has said, have moved men's minds in 
much the same way as did the discovery of America in 
later days. A single example will illustrate the process 
which must have been going on continually. The 
Greeks had an old belief in a certain Atlas, whose name 
means " he that bears up," and whose business it was 
to keep Ouranos and Gaia apart after they had been 
separated by the hatchet or sickle of Kronos. He 
answered, in fact, to the sky-supporting Ku of the Man-

Digitized by Googl

INTRODUCTION'.

15Digitized by Googl

INTRODUCTION'.

15

gaians. 14 The Greek explorers gave the name to a cloud- 
capped mountain in Africa — a fanciful identification 
easily to be matched in the language of sailors in our 
own day; and, when once this had been done, the old 
myth was doomed. It was impossible to go on for long 
believing in a god who was also a mountain, conveni- 
ently situated for the trader to steer by, as he sailed to 
Tartessos in quest of silver.

VII. In this connection by far the most important Allied 44 o,i 
question, however, is that of the nature and extent of ences. 1D<Ul 
the influence exercised by what we call "Oriental" ideas 
upon the Greek mind. It is a common idea, even now, 
that the Greeks borrowed their philosophy from Egypt 
and Babylon, though the Greek writers are one and all 
quite unconscious of any such debt. Herod otos would 
not have omitted to mention it had lie known anything 
of it ; for it would have continued his own view as to 
the Egyptian origin of Greek religion and culture. Plato, 
who had a great respect for the Egyptians on other 
grounds, nevertheless implies that they had no gift for 
philosophy at alL 1 -" 1 Aristotle speaks only of the origin of 
mathematics in Egypt, though, if he had ever heard of 
an Egyptian philosophy, it would have suited his pur- 
pose better to mention that. 10 It was only at a far later 
date, when Greek and Oriental thought were drawing 
together, that Egyptian priests and Alexandrian .lews 
began to vie with one another in discovering the sources 
of Greek philosophy in their own past. Sanehuniathon 
and Mochos or Moschos became the order of the day,

» Lang, Myth, Ritual and Reliyiou, i. 129. 
R< P . 485 E.

16 Met. A, 1. 981/*. 23. Cf. Zeller. p. 37 (Kng. trans, p. W>).

Digitized by Google

16

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY» Lang, Myth, Ritual and Reliyiou, i. 129. 
R< P . 485 E.

16 Met. A, 1. 981/*. 23. Cf. Zeller. p. 37 (Kng. trans, p. W>).

Digitized by Google

16

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY

and even such things as the thoroughly savage myth of 
Isis and Osiris were first allegorically interpreted accord- 
ing to the ideas of the later Greek philosophy, and then 
declared to be the original sources of that philosophy. 
At the llenaissance, this absurd farrago was revived 
along with everything else, and was made much of by 
the Florentine Academy and the Cambridge Platonists. 
Even Cud worth speaks complacently of the ancient 
" Moschical or Mosaical " philosophy taught by Thales 
and Pythagoras ! Ideas of this sort are always reappear- 
ing, even at the present day ; and it seems that no 
refutation of any particular form of them can guarantee 
us against their reappearance iu another. The view that 
certain esoteric doctrines found their way into Greece 
through the mysteries ought to have been disposed of 
once and for all by Lobeck's Aylaophamvx. The fanciful 
theories of Iiuth and Gladisch have been completely 
overthrown by Zeller, and yet we are still asked to 
regard the philosophy of Herakleitos " in the light of the 
idea of the mysteries " aud of Egyptian theology. We 
shall have occasion later on 17 to show how illusory all 
this is ; at present it is desirable to point out once for 
all that not only is there an entire absence of any 
evidence that any Oriental nation with which the Greeks 
ever came in contact had anything which can be called 
philosophy or science till they learnt it from the Greeks, 
but there is even abundance of evidence that the tradi- 
tional view of the world, with all its savage absurdities, 
maintained its ascendency among them long after it had 
practically disappeared from Greece. ls We are justified,

Chap. III. §65.

19 Ed. Meyer's Geachichte Alttrthums is a good corrective for exag- 
gerated views of Oriental wiadum.

Digitized by GoogleChap. III. §65.

19 Ed. Meyer's Geachichte Alttrthums is a good corrective for exag- 
gerated views of Oriental wiadum.

Digitized by Google

INTRODUCTION. 1 7

then, in laying down that the Greeks did not borrow their 
philosophy from the Orientals, and that for the very good 
reason that the Orientals had no philosophy at all to borrow.

But it would be quite another thing to say that Greek 
philosophy originated independently of all Oriental influ- 
ences. That it might not have done so, we will not 
undertake to say ; but we can hardly doubt that the 
elementary knowledge of empirical astronomy and men- 
suration which the Greeks appear to have derived from 
Egypt and Babylon did act as a powerful stimulus to 
independent inquiry. It cau hardly be an accident that 
philosophy arose among the Iouians just when communi- 
cation with these countries was easiest; and it is signifi- 
cant that the very man who was said to have introduced 
mathematics from Egypt into Greece was also the first 
of the cosmologists. Now this debt is freely acknow- 
ledged by the Greeks. They admit that the beginnings 
of their mathematics came from Egypt, and it is there- 
fore important for us to ascertain, if possible, what 
Egyptian mathematics really amounted to. We shall 
see that even here the Greeks were really original.

VIII. There is a papyrus 19 in the Khind collection at Egyptian 
the British Museum which affords us an instructive eu * 
glimpse of geometry as it was understood on the banks 
of the Nile. It is true that this papyrus was written in 
the reign of one of the Hyksos, and therefore considerably 
before the time of Thales ; so it may, perhaps, be taken 
as an objection to our putting it in evidence, that, for all

19 I am mainly indebted for the information which follows to Cantor's 
VorUxungen ikbtr Gcchichtt der MathematiL; i. 46-G3. Sec also Mr. Gow's 
Short History of Greek Mathematics, §§ 73-80 ; and Friedlein, Btitr. zur 
OWi. dcrMatlu ii. [1872J.Digitized by Google

18

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

we know, great progress might have been made in the 
interval between Aahmes, the writer of the Rhind 
papyrus, and the visit of Thales to Egypt. There is 
also, however, an inscription on the temple of Horns at 
•Edfu, describing certain lands granted to the priests by 
Ptolemy XL, who reigned in the first century B.C. ; and 
this shows conclusively that in Egypt geometry, like 
everything else, had been stereotyped by the priests at 
least as early as, and probably much earlier than, the 
time at which Aahmes wrote. Although the inscription 
was set up two centuries after the publication of Euclid's 
Elements, it still adheres to the old methods of the Khind 
papyrus. And there is another objection to the use we 
propose to make of that papyrus, which is equally dis- 
posed of by the same document. It is sometimes said 
that the treatise of Aahmes is a mere laud-surveyor's 
handbook, and that it presupposes a more scientific 
geometry as its basis. The Roman Jt/rimrnsorea, it is 
pointed out, remained very considerably below the level 
of the geometry of their time, and Aahmes may have 
done the same. It might be a sufticient reply to this to 
say that no one can have a right to assume anything of 
the sort in the absence of any positive evidence on the 
subject. Hut, waiving this, it is probably enough to 
point out that the consecration of the methods of the 
papyrus, to which the inscription of Edfu bears witness, is 
good evidence that these, and these alone, constituted the 
sacred geometry of the Egyptians. Had the priests them- 
selves possessed anything resembling the Greek geometry, 
they would have had no scruple in making use of it.

Having thus established our right to regard the Khind 
papyrus as evidence of the state of Egyptian geometry in 
the time of Thales, let us now examine its methods more

Digitized by

INTRODUCTION.

19Digitized by

INTRODUCTION.

19

closely. We see at once from it that such geometry as 
existed in Egypt was studied entirely for practical pur- 
poses. Herodotos, who tells us that it arose from the 
necessity of measuring the lands afresh after the inunda- 
tions, 20 is obviously far nearer the truth than Aristotle; 
who says that it grew out of the leisure enjoyed by the 
priestly caste. 21 We may be sure that the essentially 
Greek idea of the noble use of leisure never dawned 
upon an Egyptian mind. Aahmes looks at his problems 
entirely from the land-surveyor's and the pyramid- 
builder's point of view. He constantly neglects small 
fractions ; and, in calculating the area of triangles, he 
always assumes that they have one right angle, even 
when the other data exclude such an assumption alto- 
gether. This is the attitude of the artificer, who only 
requires that an angle should be as nearly a right angle 
as is necessary for the purposes of his art, and not that 
of the geometer who is a seeker after truth. The most 
interesting thing in the papyrus is, however, the collection 
of exercises in the construction of equal angles. It is 
obvious that this is a problem which presents itself in 
the building of pyramids, and the Egyptians hit upon an 
ingenious method of solving it. This consisted in find- 
ing what they called the scqt of the angle, that is, 
the numerical ratio between 
the pin: in us Al> ami half the 
Hchatdit BC. If we premise that 
1 ell = 7 palms, the following 
example explains itself: —

Uckatcbt (BC)-:.560 ells.

Piremus (AB) =- 250 ells. 
. • . srqt — i?,J ells = 5^ palms.

» ii. 109. 21 J/W. A, 1. 1»81A, 23-25.

Digitized by Google

20Uckatcbt (BC)-:.560 ells.

Piremus (AB) =- 250 ells. 
. • . srqt — i?,J ells = 5^ palms.

» ii. 109. 21 J/W. A, 1. 1»81A, 23-25.

Digitized by Google

20

In other words, for every ell in half the base, there will 
be 5 ^3 palms in the side. The practical application is 
obvious. If you have the base of your pyramid marked 
out, and you know the scqt, you have only to measure the 
number of ells in any part of the base BD', to erect a 
wooden post A'D', and, with a rope knotted at intervals 
of 5 ^5 palms, you can find the point A' in the side of 
the pyramid. This seems to have been the highest point 
reached by Egyptian geometry; and that the G reeks 
learnt as much as this from the Egyptians is rendered 
highly probable by their adoption of the word pircmus 
into their language, though in a different sense. It is, 
however, likely that, from a comparatively early period, 
they generalised this rule of thumb into a theory of 
proportional triangles which admitted of an indefinite 
variety of applications in the measurement of inacces- 
sible distances (§ 5). This generalisation suggested in 
due time the idea of geometry as a pure science, the 
type of what our knowledge of the world should be ; 
and this view was expressed in the new name ra fia0i)- 
fiara, which soon took its place alongside of yecofierpia, 
a literal translation from the Egyptian hiuiu. We owe 
the beginnings of scientific geometry to the Pythagoreans, 
and it happens that we can easily test the progress made 
by them and others during the period we are about to 
study. Thales learnt from the Egyptians all that they 
could teach him, and, at the end of the period, Demo- 
kritos is able to say : " I have listened to many learned 
men, but not one has yet surpassed me in the construction 
of figures out of lines accompauied by demonstration — 
not even the Egyptian ' harpedonapts ' as they call them." 2222 K. P. 145 A. The word kfT%\nm*r*t is, ns Cantor first pointed out, 
a Greek one, and means simply " cord- fastener." The landscape-gardeuer

-

Digitized by Google

INTRODUCTION. 21

IX. The other source from which the Ionians derived Babylonian

astronomy.

materials for their cosmology is the Babylonian astronomy. 
Here again, however, we note that what they borrowed 
was merely empirical, while all their science was original. 
I take the following statements as to the astronomy of 
the Babylonians from Professor Sayce's Hibbert Lectures. 2 * 
As he attributes (p. 371) a far greater influence upon 
the development of Greek science to Babylonian cosmo- 
logy than I can allow, he will probably be regarded as an 
impartial witness. Our earliest source of information on 
the subject, he tells us, is the " Observations of Bel," said 
to have been compiled for King Sargon. These observa- 
tions are of the most minute and careful kind, but they 
are utterly devoid of all scientific character. There is 
no theory of the heavens implied in them ; there is 
nothing but a record of events. Nor are these events 
recorded for any scientific purpose. In the words of 
Professor Sayce : " If a war with Elam had followed an 
eclipse of the sun on a particular day, it was assumed 
that a recurrence of the eclipse on the same day would 
be followed by a recurrence of a war with Elam " (p. 398). 
Nay, so ignorant were the Babylonians of the true nature 
of the recurrences which they had observed, that they 
actually expected the weather to follow a cycle of the 
same kind, and made elaborate records of it accordingly. 
To say, then, that Anaximander, with his magnificent 
hypothesis as to the structure of the heavens, owed his 
astronomy to the observatory at Ur of the Chaldees, is 
clearly absurd.

laying out a flower-bed is tlie modern representative of the "harpedonapts," 
and may fairly be credited with as much knowledge of geometry.laying out a flower-bed is tlie modern representative of the "harpedonapts," 
and may fairly be credited with as much knowledge of geometry.

* See also the same writer's artiele "Babylonia" in the Encydopadia 
Bi'Uannka.

Digitized by Google

22 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

We may sum up all this by saying that the Greeks 
did not borrow either their philosophy or their science 
from the Oriential peoples. They did, however, get from 
Egypt certain rules of mensuration which, when general- 
ised, gave birth to geometry ; while from Babylonia they 
learnt that the phenomena of the heavens recur in cycles 
with the greatest regularity. This piece of knowledge 
undoubtedlv had a great deal to do with the rise of 
science; for to the Greek it suggested further questions 
such as the Babylonian did not dream of.

■

The scientific X. It is necessary to say something as to the scientific

theea^Greek worth of the philosophy we are about to study. We 
fo*m..iog>. j iave j ugt sepn t | iat o r j enta j peoples were, at thetheea^Greek worth of the philosophy we are about to study. We 
fo*m..iog>. j iave j ugt sepn t | iat o r j enta j peoples were, at the

time of which we write, considerably richer than the 
Greeks in accumulated facts, though these facts had 
certainly not been observed for any scientific purpose, 
and their possession never suggested a revision of the 
primitive view of the world. The Greeks, however, saw 
in them something which could be turned to account, 
and they were never as a people slow to act on the 
maxim, Chmun prend .son lien pariout oil il le trouve. 
The most striking monument of this spirit which has 
come down to us is the work of Herodotos ; and the 
visit of Solon to Croesus which he describes, however 
unhistorical it may be, gives a very lively and faithful 
picture of it, Crcesus, in the episode referred to, tells 
Solon that he has heard much of "his wisdom and his 
wanderings," and how, from love of knowledge (<f>i\o- 
ao<f)€(ov), he has travelled over much land for the purpose 
of seeing what was to be seen (0ea)/nV eiveicev). The 
words dewpir), $i\o<ro<$>ir), and iaropir) are, in fact, the 
catchwords of the time, though they had, we must

Digitized by Google

INTRODUCTION.

23Digitized by Google

INTRODUCTION.

23

remember, a very different meaning from that which they 
were afterwards made to bear at Athens. The idea 
which underlies them all may, perhaps, be best rendered in 
English by the word Curiosity ; and it was just this great 
gift of curiosity, and the desire to see all the wonderful 
things — pyramids, inundations, and so forth — that were 
to be seen, which enabled the Greeks to pick up and 
turn to their own uses such scraps of knowledge as they 
could come by among the barbarians. No sooner did a 
Greek philosopher know half a dozen geometrical pro- 
positions, and the fact that the phenomena of the heavens 
recur in cycles, than he set to work to look for law 
everywhere in nature, and, with a splendid audacity, 
almost amounting to vfipts, to construct a system of the 
universe. We may smile, if we please, at the strange 
medley of childish fancy and true scientific insight which 
these Titanic efforts display, and sometimes we feel 
disposed to sympathise with the sages of the day who 
warned their more daring contemporaries " to think the 
thoughts befitting man's estate " (avOpdoTriva cppoveetv). 
But we shall do well to remember at the same time that 
even now it is just such hardy anticipations of experience 
that alone make scientific progress possible, and that 
nearly every one of the early inquirers whom we are 
about to study, made some permanent addition to the 
store of positive knowledge, besides opening up new 
views of the world in every direction. Nor would it be 
correct to think of their speculations as having been 
entirely in the air. The nature of our tradition, which 
deals almost entirely with Placita?* — " results," as we 
should call them, — tends undoubtedly to create this 
impression; but, for all that, there are not wanting

84 See Xote on Source*, B.

Digitized by Google

24 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.84 See Xote on Source*, B.

Digitized by Google

24 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

traces of careful and minute investigation of nature. 
The most striking instance of this occurs, where perhaps 
we should least expect to find it, in Xenophanes. That 
philosopher was in every way the least strictly scientific 
of them all, and yet we happen to know that he supported 
one of his theories by a careful examination of fossils 
and petrifactions in such widely scattered localities as 
rams, Malta, and Syracuse (§ 49). Anaximander's map 
(§ 11), however imperfect it may have been, must have 
been a most laborious undertaking, and we can hardly 
suppose that he introduced the gnomon and jwlos merely 
that the Spartans might know the time. They served 
him, of course, to make those observations which led to 
his discovery of the obliquity of the ecliptic. We shall 
have to insist a good deal on the absence from early 
Greek cosmology of anything like mere dogma.

The greatest difficulty, however, that stands in the way 
of a fair appreciation of the really scientific character 
which belongs to the early Greek cosmology is its 
dependence on the geocentric hypothesis, and consequent 
identification of astronomy and meteorology. Strange as 
it may seem to us, these two branches of science could 
not be distinguished so long as the earth was supposed to 
occupy the centre of the Kosmos which extended from it 
to the heavens. And, indeed, the very idea of a Kosmos 
in the Greek sense of the word, or an Ouranos, as it was 
called originally, is foreign to our ways of thinking. 
We have, therefore, no word in English that exactly 
represents the idea. It will be convenient to adopt the 
term World for the purpose ; but then we must bear in 
mind that it does not refer solely, or even chiefly, to the 
earth, but includes everything within the heavens which 
are generally regarded as spherical. The word Universe

Digitized by Go

■

INTRODUCTION. 25Digitized by Go

■

INTRODUCTION. 25

is far too wide ; it means the All ; ami in all the early 
cosmologies, except the Eleatic, there was held to be a 
great deal outside the circle of the heavens, and therefore 
outside the Kosmos. Nay, there were often supposed to 
be innumerable Worlds in the Universe.

The science of the sixth century b.c. was occupied 
mainly with those parts of the world that were " aloft " ; 
and these, of course, include, along with the heavenly 
bodies, such things as clouds, rainbows, and lightning. 
It was therefore possible for Xenophanes to identify the 
heavenly bodies with fiery clouds without going beyond 
the limits of scientific probability.

Now, in judging all this, we must bear in mind that 
science inevitably and rightly began with the most obvious 
hypothesis, and that it was only the thorough working 
out of this that could show its inadequacy. With the 
gradual accumulation of data a more comprehensive 
hypothesis became necessary, no doubt; but the simpler 
one was quite sufficient to begin with. We have nothing 
whatever to do with the relation of scientific hypotheses 
to ultimate reality. They never had, nor have they now, 
any direct relation to that at all. They are formula' 
according to which we group the appearances of the 
sensible world, and by means of which we are enabled 
to represent, in a form admitting of calculation, their 
dependence on one another. And that is why science 
does not really accumulate, but is entirely transformed 
by each fresh hypothesis. It is only the data that 
accumulate ; and when we say that a new hypothesis is 
" truer " than that which preceded it, we mean merely 
that it enables us to co-ordinate a larger number of these 
data. Hence, further, the study of the history of science 
can yield only negative results. We cannot adopt for

Digitized by Google

2G EARLY ORKEK PHILOSOPHY.Digitized by Google

2G EARLY ORKEK PHILOSOPHY.

ourselves hypotheses which were only intended to explain 
far more limited data than we now possess. On the 
other hand, we may be saved from the error of setting up 
as the ultimate truth of things, formuhe which were 
worked out hundreds of years ago, and cannot possibly 
explain anything now, for the simple reason that a vast 
mass of fresh data lias since accumulated. And this 
negative result cannot be regarded as useless; for it 
sometimes seems as if much of the metaphysical ground- 
work of modern science were in this very position. The 
hypotheses of such men as Demokritos are even now 
given out as the latest generalisation of empirical science.

I do not, of course, mean to attack scientific men for 
speaking habitually of the content of their hypotheses as 
if it were the thing in itself. Language is so constructed 
that this is inevitable ; and when they are not writing 
popular philosophy, scientific men know quite well what 
a scientific hypothesis really is. I only claim for the 
early Greek inquirers that we should extend a similar 
indulgence to them. Their data were vastly less, and so 
their hypotheses were far less comprehensive and far less 
available for purposes of calculation. But if they sought for 
formula' which would enable them to co-ordinate the data 
they had, then they were in the true sense scientific men.

And we ought further to remember with gratitude 
that to the (J reeks we owe the conception of an exact 
science which should take in the whole world as its 
object. They fancied — absurdly enough, no doubt — that 
they could work out this science at once. We some- 
time make the same mistake nowadays ; and it can no 
more rob the Greeks of the honour of having been the 
first to see the true, though perhaps unattainable, ideal 
of all science, than it can rob our own scientific men of

Digitized by Google

INTRODUCTION. 27Digitized by Google

INTRODUCTION. 27

the honour of having brought this ideal nearer to us than 
it was to the Greeks. For it is still knowledge of the 
kind foreseen and attempted by them that we are in 
search of. It would be foolish to say that, but for the 
Greeks, we should have no science at all. History has 
nothing to do with the " might have been." But history 
does teach us that science has never existed except 
among those peoples which the Greeks have influenced. 
Even Indian science came from Hellas in the train of 
Alexander's army ; for any Sanskrit dictionary will show 
that the scientific terminology of the Hindus is Greek in 
its origin. Nor do I believe that such philosophical 
systems as the Nyaya and the Sankhyfi would ever have 
arisen apart from Greek influences. Of course the 
mysticism of the Upanishads and of Buddhism were of 
native growtli and profoundly modified philosophy. But 
they were religious, and not scientific in their origin.

XL The attainment of clear views regarding the Early phiio- 
earliest Greek philosophy has been appreciably retarded ^tua"" 1 10 
by the mistake which Hegel made when he sought for 
the explanation of its development in the dialectical 
evolution of certain concepts — Being, Not-being, Becom- 
ing, and so forth. For all early Greek thought moved 
wholly in the region of what Hegel calls the Vorsidluny, 
and was not, therefore, philosophy at all in his sense of 
the word. When an early Greek philosopher speaks of 
to ov, he does not mean Being, but Body ; to firj 6v is 
empty Space, and not Not - being. There is always 
before the mind of an Anaximander or a Herakleitos a 
perfectly clear pictorial idea, his system is thoroughly 
anschaulich. "When, therefore, we seek to understand 
these systems, what we have to do is not to think them

Digitized by

28Digitized by

28

by meaus of rational concepts, but to picture them in 
our minds by means of images. We do not understand 
the view we are studying till we have done this, and we 
ought even to be able to draw a diagram of it on paper.

"School* "of XII. There is still one point which requires elucida- 
]hiiuM>i>h). ^ ^ ^ through this volume it is

assumed that regular " schools " of philosophy existed 
from the very beginning. Now it has become almost a 
commonplace to say that this is an anachronism, and 
that the tradition which represents the Ionian and other 
cosmologists as standing one to another in the relation 
of master and scholar, is a mere invention of later times. 
This idea seems to be derived from Bacon, who more 
than once commends the older philosophers for not 
having formed schools as Plato and Aristotle did. It is 
difficult, however, to imagine where he can have found 
anything to justify this contrast. All the tradition is 
against it, and the whole theory rests upon a mistaken 
idea of the way in which early civilisation really 
develops. Diels has brought this point out very 
clearly. 25 In almost every department of life, he ob- 
serves, the corporation at first is everything and the 
individual nothing. Greek medicine originated with the 
guild of the Asklepiads, epic poetry was developed by the 
Homeridai, the craft of sculpture was at first the secret 
of the Daidalids. Surely, then, we should expect to find 
that science too, in those early days, owed its advance- 
ment rather to the joint efforts of bodies of men than to 
the solitary researches of a gifted individual here and 
there. Further, it is practically certain that the later 
schools of Greek philosophy were organised as quasi-

' A See H. Diels, Utber die <iHt*ten Philotophmschultn der Griechai, in 
PhiloHophischt Auftatzt Eduard Zdkr ywidmtt, Leipz. 1887, pp. 239-260.

Digitized by Google

INTRODUCTION. 29' A See H. Diels, Utber die <iHt*ten Philotophmschultn der Griechai, in 
PhiloHophischt Auftatzt Eduard Zdkr ywidmtt, Leipz. 1887, pp. 239-260.

Digitized by Google

INTRODUCTION. 29

religious societies (didaot), the members of which led to 
a certain extent a common life. 20 Xenophon represents 
even the companions of Sokrates as sharing a common 
table. 27 Is it likely that associations of this kind grew 
up at the end of the fifth century B.C. ? Lastly, we have 
one admitted instance of a philosophic guild, that of 
the Pythagoreans. And it will be found that the hypo- 
thesis, if it is to be called by that name, of a regular 
organisation of scientific activity will alone explain all 
the facts. The development of doctrine in the hands of 
Thales, Anaximander, and Anaximenes, for instance, can 
only be understood as the elaboration of a single idea 
in a school with a continuous tradition. There is no 
need, then, to set aside the unanimous voice of antiquity 
on this subject. We have the authority of Plato for 
speaking of the " Eleatic band," — an expression hardly 
applicable to the two or three men whose names have 
come down to us, — and he also speaks of " the men of 
Ephesos," the Herakleiteaus, as if they formed a strong 
body in his own day. 28 The traditional statements as to 
the relations of mastership and discipleship between 
early philosophers go back to no less an authority 
than Theophrastos, and we shall therefore assume fear- 
lessly with Diels, that, besides the head of the school for 
the time being, there was always a circle of scholars who 
took part in the researches of the master, and kept up 
the traditions of the society. Of course we cannot 
strictly prove it at the present stage of our inquiry, but 
every chapter of this volume will furnish fresh evidence 
of this unduly neglected truth.Cf. Usenei's pujxr on the Organisation of the Academy ami the Peri- 
patos, in Prat**. JahM. liii. p. 1 sqq. ; and v. Wiluniowitz-Mullendorf's 
Antigonon ton Kaiysto*, p. 263 sqq. 
* Mtm. iii. 14. 1. » Soph. 242 D ; Thuiil. 179 E.

Digitized by Google

CH AFTER I.

THE MILESIAN SCHOOL

Miietos and 1. It was at Miletos that the earliest school of scientific

Lydia.

cosmology had its home. At the time it arose, the 
Milesians were in an exceptionally favourable position 
for literary and scientific as well as for commercial pur- 
suits. They had, indeed, come into conflict more than 
once with the neighbouring Lydians, whose rulers were 
now bent upon extending their dominion to the coast ; 
but, towards the end of the seventh century n.c, Thrasy- 
boulos, tyrant of Miletos, had succeeded in making terms 
with King Alyattes, and an alliance was concluded 
between them, which not only saved Miletos for the 
present from a disaster like that which befell Smyrna, 
but also secured it against molestation for the future. 
Even half a century later, when Cnusus, resuming his 
father's forward policy, made war upon and conquered 
Ephesos, Miletos was still able to maintain the old 
treaty - relation ; and never, strictly speaking, became 
subject to the Lydians at all. 1 We can hardly doubt 
that the sense of security which this exceptional position 
must have fostered had something to do with the rise of 
scientific inquiry. Material prosperity is necessary as a 
foundation for the highest intellectual effort ; and, at this

1 On the history of Miletos during this period, s*m; Grote, chap. xvii. ; 
Holm, chap, xxiii. ; Meyer, G**ch. de« Alterthum*, § 487 »\t\.

Digitized by Goo?

THE MILESIAN SCHOOL.

31

time, Miletos was in possession of all the refinements of 
life to a degree unknown in continental Hellas.Digitized by Goo?

THE MILESIAN SCHOOL.

31

time, Miletos was in possession of all the refinements of 
life to a degree unknown in continental Hellas.

Nor was it only in this negative way that the Lydian 
connexion may have favoured the growth of science at 
Miletos. What would at a later date have been called 
Hellenism was, it would seem, traditional with the 
dynasty of the Mermnadai. There may well be some 
truth in the statement of Herodotos, that all the " soph- 
ists" of the time flocked to the court of Sardeis. 2 The 
tradition which represents Croesus as what we should call 
the "patron" of Greek wisdom, was fully developed in 
the fifth century n.c. ; and, however unhistorical its 
details may be, it must clearly have some sort of founda- 
tion in fact. Particularly noteworthy is " the common 
tale among the Greeks," that Thales accompanied Croesus 
on his luckless campaign against Pteria, apparently in 
the capacity of military engineer. Herodotos, indeed, no 
doubt quite correctly, disbelieves the story that he 
diverted the course of the Halys. 3 But he does not 
attack it on the ground of any antecedent improbability ; 
and it is quite clear that those who reported it found no

3 Heroil. i. 29. Some other points may be noted in continuation of 
what has been said as to the " Hellenism " of the Mermnadai. Alyattes 
had two wives, one of whom, the mother of Cnesus, wa-s a Karian ; the 
other wits an Ionian, and by her he had a son railed by the Greek name 
i'antaleon (ib. 92). The offerings of Gyges were pointed out in the 
treasury of Kypselos at Delphoi (ib. 14), and those of Alyattes were one 
of the "sights" of the place (if*. 25). Cra-stis also showed great liber- 
ality to Delphoi {ih. 50), and to many other (Jreek shrines ib. 92). He 
gave most of the pillars for the great temple at Kphesos. The stories of 
Miltiades (vi. 37) and Alkmeon {ib. 125) should also be mentioned in this 
connexion.' Herod, i. 75. He disbelieves it because he had heard, probably from 
the Greeks of Sinope, of the great antiquity of the bridge on the royal 
road between Ankyra ami Pteria. Ramsay, Axin Minor, p. 29. Xan- 
thos recorded a tradition that it was Thales who induced Cm-sus to 
ascend his pyre when he knew a shower was coming (fr. 19).

32

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

difficulty in accepting the relation which it presupposes 
between the philosopher and the king. Nor are other 
indications wanting that, during this period, the Lydians 
assimilated Greek culture to a remarkable degree. In 
the next century, Xanthos, a native of Sardeis, wrote a 
history of his own country in the Greek tongue ; while, 
even before Thales, Alkman had introduced Lydian music 
into Hellas by setting it to Greek words. From such 
facts as these we conclude that it is quite possible the 
Lydian monarchs really did do something to stimulate 
the new ardour of scientific inquiry among their Hellenic 
dependants.

It should be added to all this that the Lydian alliance 
would greatly facilitate intercourse with Babylon and 
Egypt. With both these countries Crcesus was on 
friendly terms ; and in them were to be found, as we 
have seen, the empirical data on which a scientific know- 
ledge of the world might be based. It is noteworthy, 
too, that Amasis of Egypt had the same Hellenic sym- 
pathies as Crcesus, and that the Milesians possessed a 
temple of their own at Naukratis. 4

I. THALES.

Thales* 2. There can be no doubt that the founder of the 
Milesian School, and therefore the first of the cosmo- 
logists, was Thales. 5 But all that we can really be said

* Milesians at Naukratis, Herod, ii. 178, where Amasis is said to have 
been ^xixxu*. He subscribed to the rebuilding of the temple at Delphoi 
after the great fire (ib. 180).* Milesians at Naukratis, Herod, ii. 178, where Amasis is said to have 
been ^xixxu*. He subscribed to the rebuilding of the temple at Delphoi 
after the great fire (ib. 180).

5 Simplieius, indeed, quotes from Theophrastos the statement that 
Thales had many predecessors (Dox. p. 475, 11). This, however, need 
not trouble us ; for the scholiast on Apollonios Rhodios (ii. 1248) tells us 
that Theophrastos made Prometheus the first philosopher. In other

(.

Digitized by Google

THALES.

33

to know about his life comes from Herodotos ; and even 
his statements must be received with great caution, for 
the romance which gathered round the names of the 
Seven Wise Men was already pretty fully developed 
when he wrote. He tells us, in the first place, that 
Thales was of Phoenician descent. Some ancient writers

rr

interpreted this to mean that he came of a " Kadmeian " 
stock which had emigrated in early days from Boiotia ; 
others declared that he was himself a Pluenician by 
birth. 0 The name of his father, Examyes, which looks as 
if it were Karian, suggests, however, a more probable 
explanation. We know that the Greeks did not always 
distinguish very clearly between Karians and Phoenicians. 
It is even possible that the Kadmeian settlers may have 
tried to legitimise their position in Karia by making use 
of the idea that Phoenicians and Karians were much the 
same thing, and that, in occupying the Karian towns, 
they were only resuming possession of their old homes. 
If we consider, further, that Thales was supposed to have 
introduced certain rules of navigation from Phcenicia, 7 we 
shall see how naturally the statement reported by Hero- 
dotos would come to be made. At any rate, the Karian 
name borne by the father of Thales lends no support to 
the view that he was a Semite ; for the Karians were an 
Aryan people who had been almost completely assimi- 
lated by the Milesians. We find upon the monuments 
Karian and Greek names alternating in the same families ; 
and there is therefore no reason to suppose that Thales

words, he prefaced his Opinions by a rationalistic explanation of certain 
cultnre-myths.

8 Herod, i. 170 (R. P. 8c) ; D. L. i. 22 (R. P. 8 H).

7 Kallimachos, ap. D. L. i. 22. Thales is alluded to as a practical 
inventor in Plato, /jV;>. x. 600 A, no doubt because of his improvements 
in navigation.

3

•

Digitized by Google

34

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

was anything else than an ordinary Milesian citizen, 
though perhaps with Karian blood in his veins. 8 
The e« ni.se 3. By far the most remarkable statement that Hero-

forctold bywas anything else than an ordinary Milesian citizen, 
though perhaps with Karian blood in his veins. 8 
The e« ni.se 3. By far the most remarkable statement that Hero-

forctold by

Thaks. dotos makes about Thales is that he foretold the eclipse 
of the sun, which put an end to the war between the 
Lydians and the Medes. 0 Now, we have every reason to 
believe that he was quite ignorant of the true cause of 
eclipses. Anaximander and his immediate successors 
certainly were so, 10 and it is surely incredible that the 
right explanation should once have been given and then 
forgotten so soon. Even supposing, however, that Thales 
had known the cause of eclipses, no one cau believe that 
such scraps of elementary geometry as he may have 
picked up in Egypt would ever have enabled him to 
calculate one from the elements of the moon's path ; it 
is not surprising, then, that many scholars should simply 
have disbelieved the story altogether. 11 And yet the 
evidence is far too strong to be rejected offhand. The

8 See Diels, Thahs cui Semite? (Arch. ii. 165 sqq.), and Immisch, Zn 
ThaleH Ahkunft (ib. 51 f»). The variant «x» for 'E^Cv led 
Schuster (Act. Sor. Phil. Lips. iv. 328 &qq.) to suppose that the father 
of Thales was really ealled Samuel, and was therefore a Semite. The 
reading in question, however, arises merely from a corruption, of which 
Diels has skilfully explained the origin. The name Examyes occurs also 
in Kolophon (Hermesianax, Leontion, fr. 2 ? 38 Bgk.), and may be com- 
j»ared with other Karian names such as Cheraniyes and Panamycs. For 
proof that Karian was an Aryan language, see Meyer in liezz. Btitr. 
x. 147 ; and, for the confusion of Kalians and Phoenicians, Athen., 
Ddpn. p. 174, where we are told that Karia was culled Phoinike by 
Korinna and Bakchylides.

9 Herod, i. 74.

10 For the theories held by Anaximander and Herakleitos, see R, P. 
14 C, and §§ 18, 58.9 Herod, i. 74.

10 For the theories held by Anaximander and Herakleitos, see R, P. 
14 C, and §§ 18, 58.

» So especially Martin (AVr. Arch. ix. p. 170 sqq.), who holds that 
what Thales really did was to discover the tme cause of solar eclipses. 
This is most improbable (see last note), and the statement of Actios to 
that effect (ii. 24. 1) is at best a conjecture like Martin's own. The 
objections of Martin do not apply to the view given in the text, which is 
that of Tannery {Science he.Kenc, p. 55 sqq.).

Digitized by Google

THALKS.

85

testimony of Herodotos to an event which must have 
happened about a hundred years before his own birth 
may, no doubt, be deemed insufficient ; but that of Xeno- 
phanes, authenticated by Herakleitos and Demokritos, is 
a very different matter, and this is what we have really 
to deal with. 12 Xenophanes was, in all probability, a 
disciple of Anaximander, and he may quite well have 
seen and spoken with Thales. In any case, he must 
have known scores of people who were able to remember 
what happened, and he had no conceivable interest in 
misrepresenting it. The prediction of the eclipse, then, 
is better attested than any other fact about Thales what- 
soever, and the evidence for it is about as strong as for 
anything that happened in the early part of the sixth 
century B.C.

Now it is not impossible to predict eclipses without 
knowing their true cause. It seems, indeed, that the 
Babylonians actually did so, and this fact is suggestive 
enough. Moreover, as it happens, we know something of 
their method of calculation. On the basis of their astro- 
nomical observations, they had made out a cycle of 223 
lunar months, commonly (though, it seems, erroneously) 
called the Saros, within which eclipses of the sun and 
moon recurred at equal intervals of time. 13 It is true 
that this would not have enabled them to predict eclipses12 D. L. i. 23 : x«r« <n»«f afTfXtyr.reu x«i iki***; ixXu^ut 
xau 17»**«{ «y«i/Ti.\, Z( $rr» EtHrtfttt •» t? vtpt tZi itrrp$X*ytt/f*i*** Irvpla,

mvrii **4 Hif*f«mr *ai 'Hf»i»r*t taufni^u, fiaprvpu V aurm **i 'l\pi*Xur»t

13 The firHt to call attention to the Chahhean cycle in this connexion 
sterns to have been the Rev. George Costard, Fellow of Wad ham College. 
Sec hi* I)is*trtation on the Use of Agronomy in History (London 1764), 
p. 17. According M Assyriologists, the Sar was really a period of 3600 
years (Saycc, " Babylonia," in Emycl. Brit.) ; still, even if there has 
l»een some mistake about the name, there can be no doubt that the cycle 
iu question was known at Babylon.

Digitized by Google

36

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.Digitized by Google

36

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

of the sun for a given spot on the earth's surface ; for 
these phenomena are not visible at all places where the 
sun is above the horizon at the time. We do not occupy 
a position at the centre of the earth, and what astro- 
nomers call the geocentric parallax has to be taken into 
account. It would only, therefore, be possible to tell by 
means of the cycle that an eclipse of the sun would be 
visible somewhere, and that it might be worth while to 
look out for it. Now, if we may judge from a report by 
a Chalda*an astronomer which has been preserved, this 
was just the position of tlm Babylonians. 14 They watched 
for eclipses at the proper dates ; and, if they did not 
occur, they announced the fact as a good omen. To 
explain what we are told about Thales no more than this 
is required. He simply said there would be an eclipse ; 
and, as good luck would have it, it was visible in Asia 
Minor, and on a striking occasion. 
Date of 4. The prediction of the eclipse does not, then, throw 
much light upon the scientific attainments of Thales ; 
but, if we can fix its date, it will give us a point from 
which to start in trying to determine the time at which 
he lived. Modern astronomers have calculated that there 
were two eclipses of the sun visible in Asia Minor about

14 Sec George Smith, As*i/rian DixcoverieM [1875], j>. 409. The inscrip- 
tion which follows was found at Kouyunjik : —

"To the king my lord, thy servant Abil-Istar.

" Concerning the eclipse of the moon of which the king my lord sent to 
me ; in the cities of Akkad, Borsippa, and Nipur, observations they made, 
and then in the city of Akkad we saw part. . . . The observation was 
made, and the eclipse took place.

"And when for the eclipse of the sun we made an observation, the 
observation was made and it did not take place. That which I saw with 
my eye* to the king my lord I send."

Digitized by Googl

THALES.

37Digitized by Googl

THALES.

37

the time required; one in 610, the other in 585 B.C. 15 
Now several ancient chronologists actually give 585 B.C. 
as the date of the eclipse, 16 and this is too striking 
a coincidence to be lightly set aside. The only real 
objection is that, according to the figures given by 
Herodotos, Astyages would have been king of the Medes 
in that year, whereas we are told expressly that the 
battle was between Alyattes and Cyaxares. Assyrio- 
logists, however, assure us that the Median chronology 
of Herodotos is falsified by the mistaken idea that 
Cyrus became king of the Medes in the same year as 
he became king of the Persians. He did not really 
succeed in dethroning Astyages till 550 B.C., eight years 
later ; and, accordingly, we must put all the dates based 
on the era of Cyrus' accession eight years forward. 
The result of this correction is that we save our date 
by a year. Astyages did not ascend the throne till

584 B.C., and Cyaxares would still be king of the Medes 
in the year of the battle. 17 We may take it, then, that 
the eclipse foretold really was that of May 28th (O.S.),

585 B.C., 18 and we may infer that the scientific activity 
of Thales dates back at least to that year.

It is interesting, as a confirmation of the date thus 
fixed, to observe that, according to Demetrios Phalereus, 
Thales " received the title of sage " — he seems to regard 
it as a sort of honorary degree — in the archonship of

15 Airy in Phil. Tram, cxliii. p. 179 s M q.

M Eudemos g.ive the date roughly as 01. L. Pliny, however (Hi«t. 
Nat. ii. 12. 53), gives Oi. XLVIII. 4 (585 B.C.) ; ami this agrees with 
Jerome's Abr. 1432.

17 Meyer, Oesch. dci Alt'rth. §§ 413 and 401. This disposes of Tannery's 
objection to tho date 585 n.c.

•» Or, according to the Gregorian calendar, May 22nd. See the note in 
Uebcrwtg, p. 33 (Eng. trans.).

38

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.•» Or, according to the Gregorian calendar, May 22nd. See the note in 
Uebcrwtg, p. 33 (Eng. trans.).

38

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

Damasias; and that, according to the Marmor Pariuni, 
is just the year f>85 B.c. w It has also been proved by 
Diels that Apollodoros fixed the " floruit " of Thales in 
the very same year. 20 It seems to me that all these 
coincidences can only be explained on the supposition 
that some trustworthy authority — say Hekataios — 
actually recorded that the eclipse occurred during the 
otherwise memorable archonship of Damasias.

5. The introduction of Egyptian geometry into Hellas 
is universally ascribed to Thales. That he did actually 
visit Egypt is probable, for he had a theory of the 
inundations of the Nile. In a well-known passage 
Herodotos gives three explanations of the fact that this 
alone of all rivers rises in summer and falls in winter.- 1 
As his custom is in such cases, he does not name the

19 Demetrios Phalcrens, ap. I). L. i. 22 (R. P. 8 B). For the date of 
Damasias, see Diels, Ueher die Berliner Fragment* dtr 'a n«;uri<«, 
p. 11, n. 2. It does not seem to me that the Politeia itself points to 
another date, as Mr. Kenyon thinks. On the contrary, as I read the 
passage (p. 33, K), the date fixed by Dopp (Qfi<r«tiowH tie Mam. Par. 
p. 59) is diroctly confirmed by it. The years of ' ' Anarchia " are 590 and 
586 D.c, and the archonship of Damasias follows immediately after tin- 
second of these.30 According to our text of D. L. i. 37 (R. P. 8 A), Thales was born 
in 01. XXXV. (640-637 B.C.), and died, seventy - eight years old, in 
01. LVIII. (548-545 B.C.). These figures cannot, of course, be reconciled 
with each other, and we must assume a mistake somewhere. Diels has 
withdrawn the explanation which ho gave in the Rhein'uiche* Museum, 
xxxi. 15 (R. P. 8a). He now holds that the year of the floruit has 
been confused with that of the birth of Thales, and, further, that th.« 
archon Damasias of 639 B.C. has been confused with his namesake of 
585 B.C. Wo may assume that Apollodoros made Thales die in 547 B.C., 
the year before the "ruin of Ionia" which he foresaw, and that he fix*l 
his floruit in 585 B.C., the year of the eclipse. The regular assumption 
of Alexandrian chronology is that the £*un falls in the fortieth year, so 
Thales would be born in 625 b.c. Now 625 to 547 gives just the seventy - 
eight years required. Sosikrates, on the other hand (ap. D. L. I.e. ) t 
counting from 01. XXXV. (the date of Damasias I.) to 01. LVIII., said, 
in round numbers, that he died at the age of ninety.

31 Herod, ii. 20.

Digitized by Google

THALES.

30

authors of those explanations ; but the first of them, that 
1 which attributes the floods to the Etesian winds, is

ascribed to Thales in the Placita** and also by many later 
writers. Diels has shown that all those statements are 
derived from a treatise, On (he Rise of the Nile, attributed 
to Aristotle and known to the Greek commentators, but

* now extant only in a Latin epitome of the thirteenth

century. 23 In this work the names of the authors of the 
three theories mentioned by Herodotos were given, the 
first being ascribed to Thales, the second to Euthymenes 
of Massalia, and the third to Anaxagoras. Where did

► Aristotle, or whoever wrote the book, get these names ?► Aristotle, or whoever wrote the book, get these names ?

We think naturally once more of Hckataios, whom 
Herodotos so often reproduces without mentioning his 
name ; and this conjecture is much strengthened when 
we find that Hekataios actually mentioned the otherwise 
obscure Euthymenes. 24 We may perhaps conclude, then, 
that Thales really was in Egypt ; and that Hekataios, in 
describing the Nile, took account, as was only natural, of 
his distinguished fellow-citizen's views.

It would lead us too far afield to discuss here the 
nature and extent of the mathematical knowledge 
brought back by Thales from Egypt, but it seems 
desirable to point out that most writers who have 
treated the subject have seriously misunderstood the 
character of the tradition. 25 In his commentary on the 
First Book of Euclid, Proclus enumerates, on the author- 
s' Act. iv. 1. 1 (Dot. p. 384).

23 Dox. pp. 226-229. The Latin epitome will be found in Val. Rose's 
edition of the Aristotelian Fragments.

24 Hekataios, fr. 278 (Miillcr, F. If. O. vol. i. p. 10).

: » See Cantor, Vorkaungen wtbtr Geschichte <hr Afathanatik, i. p. 
112 hqq.; and Allnian, Greek Gtomttry from Thalt* to Euclid, in 
Htrnuithtna, iii. pp. 164-174.

i

Digitized by Google

40

EARLY (JKEEK PH

*

THY.i

Digitized by Google

40

EARLY (JKEEK PH

*

THY.

ity of Eudemos,- 1 ' certain propositions which he says 
were known to Thales. One of the theorems with which 
he credits him is that a triangle is determined by a side 
and two angles. This he must have known, says Proclus 
(or rather Eudenios), as otherwise he could not have 
measured the distances of ships at sea from a watch- 
tower. Here we see how all these statements arose. 
Certain remarkable feats in the way of measurement were 
traditionally ascribed to Thales, 27 and it was assumed 
that he must have known all the propositions which 
these imply, lint this is quite an illusory method of 
inference. What Thales brought from Egypt was 
mensuration and not mathematics ; nor have we any 
ground for supposing that he knew any more about the 
rationale of the rules he followed than did the author of 
the Rhind papyrus. Perhaps, indeed, he gave those rules 
a wider application than the Egyptians had done. Still, 
mathematics, properly so called, did not come into exist- 
ence at all till some time after Thales. 
Th»W as a G. Thales appears once more in the pages of Herodotos

politician.

some time before the fall of the Lydian empire. He is 
said to have urged the Ionian Greeks to unite iu a federal 
state with its capital at Teos. 28 We shall have occasion 
to notice more than once in the sequel that the early 
schools of philosophy were in the habit of trying to in- 
fluence the course of political events; and there are many

x Eudenios wrote the first histories of astronomy and mathematics, just 
as Theophrastos wrote the first history of philosophy; but he could have 
no trustworthy information as to the earliest period, for no mathematical 
writings belonging to it had been preserved.- 7 Measurement of the height of pyramids by the length of their shadow, 
Pliny, //. X. xxxvi. 12. 82; and Plutarch, $<]>(. Sap, Conr. 147 A. 
Thales is said to have taxujht this to the Egyptians. Distance of ships at 
yea, Proclus, in Euci., ed. Friedlein, p. 04. 
Herod, i. 170 (R. P. 8c).

Digitized by Go<

THAI.ES.

41

things, for instance the part played by Hekataios in the 
Ionian revolt, which point to the conclusion that the 
scientific men of Miletos took up a very decided position 
in the stirring times which followed the death of Thales. 
It is this political action which has gained the founder 
of the Milesian School his undisputed place among the 
Seven Wise Men ; and it is owing mainly to his position 
as one of those worthies that the numerous apocryphal 
anecdotes which were told of him in later days attached 
themselves to his name. 21 *

7. If Thales ever wrote anything, it soon was lost, and Uncertain

character «>f

the works which were written in his name did not, as a the tradition, 
rule, deceive even the ancients. 30 Aristotle professes to 
know something about the views of Thales ; but he does 
not pretend to know the way they were arrived at, nor 
the arguments by which they were supported. He does, 
indeed, make certain suggestions, which are repeated by 
the doxographers as statements of fact ; but he himself 
simply gives them for what they are worth. 31 There is 
another difficulty in connexion with the doxographical 
tradition. Many a precise looking statement in the 
Placita has no other foundation than the habit of 
ascribing any doctrine which was, roughly speaking, 
characteristic of the whole Ionic " Succession" to "Thales 
and his followers," and so producing the appearance of a 
definite statement about Thales. But, in spite of all 
this, we need not doubt that Aristotle was correctly 
informed with regard to the leading points at least in 
the cosmology of Thales. We have seen traces of» The story of Thales falling into a well (Plato, Theait. 174 A) is 
nothing but a fable teaching the usclessness of ; the anecdote about 
the "corner" in oil (Arist. Pol. A. 11) was doubtless invented in opposi- 
tion to it.

» See R. P. S</. 51 R. P. ib.

Digitized by Google

:M*tKTt

reference to him in Hekataios, and nothing can be more 
likely than that later writers of the school should have 
quoted the views of its founder. We may venture, 
therefore, upon a conjectural restoration of the cosmology 
of Thales. In this we shall be guided by what we know 
for certain of the subsequent development of the Milesian 
School; for we should naturally expect to find its 
characteristic doctrines at least foreshadowed in the 
teaching of its earliest representative. But all this must 
be taken for just what it is worth ; speaking strictly, we 
do not know anything about the views of Thales at all. 
conjectural 8. The statements of Aristotle with regard to the

uccount of tho

cMKnioiogy of cosmology of Thales may be reduced to three —

(1.) The earth floats on the water. 32 
(2.) Water is the material cause 33 of all things. 
(3.) All things are full of gods ; and the magnet is alive, for 
it has the power of moving iron. 34

The first of these three statements has often been 
brought into connexion with the Egyptian and Baby- 
lonian cosmogonies. 35 Tannery will not allow that Thales 
did any more than introduce from Egypt the view that 
the earth floats upon the waters, that our world is a sort

* Dt Calo, B, 13. 294a, 28 (R. P. 9 B). Later writers added that 
Thales gave this as an explanation of earthquakes. Cf. Aetios, iii. 15. 1 ; 
and Seneca, Q. X. iii. 13. This is probably the conjecture of some 
'* Homeric allegoric," who wished to explain the epithets \*t»riytu»s and 
\?0*I x **t. Cf. Diels, Dox. p. 225.M Mtt. A, 3. 9836, 20 (R. 1\ 9 A). I haw said "material cause," 
because Aristotle has rr.t rn*Crt\t *tx.*t (9836, 19), and that means 
rtt if tint itiu i?x*t (ib. 7).

M Dc An. A, 5. 411a, 7 (R. P. 10 A); ib. 2. 405a, 19 (R. P. 10a). 
D. L. i. 24 (R. P. ib.) adds amber. It is tantalising that Aristotle does 
not name the author of the " notes" to which he refers.

55 For the oldest Egyptian cosmology, see Masp^ro, Jfittoire Anciennt, 
pp. 27-30 ; and for the Babylonian Baau, Sayce, Enryd. Brit. (loc. cit.) 
and GVw<*w, i. 2.

Digitized by Google

THALES.

43

of bubble in the primeval liquid mass, and that the 
heavenly bodies sail across the upper surface of that 
bubble, the watery firmament, in boats. It would, indeed, 
be rash to say that Thales was wholly uninfluenced by 
ideas of this kind. But the Milesian School was, as we 
shall see more and more, a society with a continuous 
tradition ; Thales was its acknowledged founder, and he 
could not have been so in any true sense if he had not 
gone a step farther thau this. We must also take into 
account the second of the three statements given above. 
It is expressed in Aristotelian terminology, but it would 
undoubtedly mean that Thales had said water was the 
fundamental or primary matter, of which all other sub- 
stances were mere transient forms. It was, we know, 
just such a primary substance that the Milesian School, 
as a whole, was seeking, and it is unlikely that the 
earliest answer to the great question of the day should 
have been the comparatively subtle one given by Anaxi- 
raander. We are, perhaps, justified in holding that the 
greatness of Thales consisted just in this, that he was 
the first to ask, not what was the original form of matter, 
but what is the primary form of matter now ; or, more 
simply still, " What is the world made of ? " The 
answer he gave to this question was : water. ^9. Aristotle and Theophrastos, followed by Simplicius Wattr. 
and the doxographers, suggest several explanations of this 
answer. By Aristotle these explanations are given as 
avowedly conjectural; but, as was pointed out above, 
they are repeated by later writers as if they were quite 
certain. 36 The most probable view of them seems to me

M Met. A, 3. 9836. 22 ; Aet. i. 3. 1 ; Simpl. Phy*. 36 D (R. P. 9 
A. C. t). The last of the reasons given by Aristotle, namely, that Thales 
was influenced by early cosmogonical views as to Okeanos and Tethya,

Digitized by Google

44

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

to be that Aristotle simply ascribes to Thales the argu- 
ments used At a later date by Hippon of Samos in support 
of a similar thesis. 37 This would account for their 
physiological character. The rise of scientific medicine 
had made biological arguments very popular in the fifth 
century ; but, in the days of Thales, the prevailing 
interest was not physiological, but what we should call 
meteorological, and we must therefore try to understand 
the theory from this point of view.

Nor is it very hard to see how considerations of a 
purely meteorological kind may have led Thales to adopt 
the view he did. Of all the things we know, water 
seems to take the most various shapes. It is familiar to 
us in a solid, a liquid, and a vaporous form, and so 
Thales may well have thought that he saw the world- 
process from water and back to water again going on 
before his very eyes. The phenomenon of evaporation 
naturally suggests everywhere that the fire of the heavenly 
bodies is kept up by the moisture which they draw from 
the sea. Even at the present day, the country people 
speak of the appearance of sunbeams as " the sun draw- 
ing water." Water comes down again in the rain ; butstands on a different footing from the rest. It is given merely as the 
view of "some," and this makes it all tho more strange that Brandis 
(Gtseh. d. Or. Rom. Phil. i. p. Ill) should have regarded it as the 
genuine tradition. It is not so strange that most manuals of philo- 
sophical history rej>eat this as if it were quite certain. "Who are the 
" some " to whom Aristotle refers ? Krische (For#ch. 36, n. 1) suggested 
that some of the "Sophists" were intended ; but surely it is more natural 
to suppose that Aristotle is simply quoting Plato, who makes this point 
in Thtait. 181 B, and k'rat. 402 13. It is true that he is speaking 
primarily of HcrakMtos in those places, but he is also thinking of 
the older doctrines from which Herakleiteanism was developed. Now 
these references in Plato are plainly ironical and playful, so the wholo 
theory falls to the ground.

37 Of. Dt An. A, 2. 2 [K. P. 173 R), with the passages referred to

in the last note.

Digitized by

THALES. 45

> .

i

only, so the early cosmologists thought, to pass in turn 
into earth. This view seems strange to us, but it may 
have seemed natural enough to men who were familiar 
with the river of Egypt which had formed the Delta, and 
with the torrents of Asia Minor which bring down 
unusually large alluvial deposits. At the present day 
the Gulf of Latinos, on which Miletos used to stand, is 
completely filled up. Lastly, they thought, earth turns 
once more to water, — an idea derived from the observa- 
tion of dew, night - mists, and subterranean springs. For 
these last were not in early times supposed to have any- 
thing at all to do with the rain. The " waters under the 
earth " were regarded as an entirely independent source 
of moisture. 38

10. We come now to the third of the Aristotelian state- Animism or

Hylozoism ?10. We come now to the third of the Aristotelian state- Animism or

Hylozoism ?

ments quoted above. We shall see that the successors 
of Thales attributed a " plastic life " of its own to matter, 
and were, in the sense explained in the Introduction, 
" hylozoists." If we may judge from such scanty indica- 
tions as we have, Thales had not yet reached this stage. 
The saying that 11 all things are full of gods," which 
Aristotle cites as evidence, is a mere apophthegm of the 
common type, and proves nothing ; while the statement 
that the magnet and amber are alive, implies, if any- 
thing, that other things are not 39 Of one thing, at any 
rate, we may be sure, namely, that Cicero is making a 
mere mistake when he says that Thales believed in a

38 See Chap. IX. § 146. The view here taken most resembles that of the 
"Homeric allegorist" Herakleitos (]{. V. !♦*■). Thnt, however, is a mere 
conjecture too, protably of Stoie, as the others are of Peripatetic-, 
origin.

M Baiimkcr, Da* Problem <1?r Materie, p. 10, w. 1. With the apophthegm 
ascribed to Thales in De An. A, 5. 411a, 7, compare that attributed to 
Herukleitos in Part. An. A, 5. 645a, 17.

Digitized by Google

46

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY'.Digitized by Google

46

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY'.

divine mind which fashioned all things out of water ; 40 
Aristotle tells us quite distinctly that none of the earliest 
cosmologists distinguished the material from the efficient 
cause. 41 He also believed, however, that Thales taught 
the world had a soul, though he is very careful to mark 
this as merely his own conjecture. 42 Aetios then states 
that Thales did, as a matter of fact, teach this doctrine ; 
and he gives it in the stoical phraseology which he 
found, no doubt, in his immediate source, the Vctusta 
Placita* 3 To the same source is doubtless due the 
identification of the " world-intellect " with god. This is 
simply the Stoic doctrine, and has nothing to do with 
Thales. Now Cicero follows closely the author of the 
Epicurean treatise on religion found at Herculaneum, or, 
at any rate, the immediate source of that work. This in 
turn went back to a Stoic epitome of Theophrastos, 
which no doubt " accommodated " the view ascribed to 
Thales by him just as the Vetusta Placita did. Cicero 
goes a step farther. He eliminates the Stoic pantheism, 
aud turns the immanent world-intellect into a Platonic 
tkmiouryos. We have here an excellent instance of the 
way in which the Theophrastean tradition gradually 
degenerated. In this case, nothing is left of it by the 
time it reaches Cicero. 44

40 N. D. i. 25 (R, P. 10c). Dr. Reid proposes to remove the inaccuracy 
by reading deum anlem cam (et) merttem, etc. But Minucius Felix 
(Ocfav. 19) already had the reading of our MSS. (See Mayor on Cic. 
N. D. loc. cit.)

« Met. A, 3. 984a, 17 s< H .

"DrAn. loc. cit. (R. P. 10 A).

« Aet. i. 7. 11 = Stob. Ekl. i. 56 (R. 1\ 10 B).« Met. A, 3. 984a, 17 s< H .

"DrAn. loc. cit. (R. P. 10 A).

« Aet. i. 7. 11 = Stob. Ekl. i. 56 (R. 1\ 10 B).

u On all this, sec Xote on Sources, B, §§ 11, 12 ; Krische, Forschungen, 
p. 34 m[(\. ; Diels, Dox. pp. 125, 128. The Hcrculaneau papyrus is 
unfortunately defective here ; but we know enough of Philodeinos' rela- 
tion to older sources to be pretty sure of what he must have said. It is 
not likely that he had anticipated Cicero's mistake.

Digitized by Google

ANAXIMANDER. 47

II. ANAXIMANDER.

11. The next name that has come down to us is that Life of Anaxb

mander.

of Anaximander, son of l'raxiades. He, too, was a 
citizen of Miletos, and Theophrastos described him as 
an "associate" of Thales. 45 We have seen how that 
expression is to be understood (§ XII.).

According to Apollodoros, Anaximander was sixty-four 
years old in 01. LVIII. 2 (546 B.C.); and this is 
confirmed by Hippolytos, who says that he was born in 
OL XLII. 3 (610 n.c.). 40 We seem to have here some- 
thing more than a mere combination of the ordinary 
type; for, according to all the rules of Alexandrian 
chronology, Anaximander should have " flourished " in 
565 B.C., that is, just half-way between Thales and 
Anaxinieues, and this would make him sixty, not sixty- 
four, in 546. Xow Apollodoros appears to have stated 
expressly that he had met with the work of Anaximander ; 
and his reason for mentioning this must have been that 
he found there some chronological indication which 
enabled him to fix its date without having recourse to 
conjecture. Diels suggests that Anaximader may have 
given his age at the time of writing as sixty-four, and 
that the book may have contained some other statement 
showing it to have been published in 546 B.C. 47 Ferhaps, 
however, this view hardly does justice to the fact that 
the year given is that of the fall of Sardeis and the

**R. P. 11^. Tliat the. words mlm; ««; given by Simplicity**R. P. 11^. Tliat the. words mlm; ««; given by Simplicity

in his commentary to the De drlo {Sckol. Br. 614a, 26), are the original 
words of Theophraidos, is proved by the agreement of Cic. Acad. ii. 
118: popularis tt ttodal'm. The two jmssages represent entirely distinct 
branches of the Theophrastean tradition. See Xot*- on Source*, §§ 7, 12.

« D. L. ii. 2 (R. P. 11); Hipp. H>f. i. C.

c Khtinwhe* Afu«um, xxxi. 24.

Digitized by Google

48

EARLY (iREEK PHILOSOPHY.

subjugation of the Lydian empire by the Persians. It 
may be a more plausible conjecture that Anaximander, 
writing some years later, incidentally mentioned what 
his age had been at the time of that great crisis in the 
fortunes of the Ionian states ; we know from Xenophanes 
that the question, 14 How old were you when the Mede 
appeared ? " was considered an interesting one in those 
days. 48 At all events, we seem to be justified in believ- 
ing that Anaximander was twenty-five years old when 
Thales attracted the notice of the Hellenes by his pre- 
diction of the eclipse, and that he did not publish his 
book till at least forty years after. When he died, we 
do not know. 49

Like his predecessor, Anaximander distinguished him- 
self by certain practical inventions. Favorinus seems 
to have credited him with that of the ynomon ; but this 
can hardly be correct, for Herodotos tells us that the 
Greeks got this instrument from Babylon. Perhaps it 
was Anaximander who first made it known among the 
Greeks. He was also the first to construct a map, and 
Strabo tells us that Hekataios made this the basis of 
his geographical work. 50 It will be noticed that we come

49 Xenophanes, fr. 17 (R. P. 79«).

* It seems to me likely, however, that Apollodoros synchronised 
his death with the tyranny of Polykrates (532 h.c), and that D. L. 
(loc. at.) has confused this with his floruit. For other views, see 
R. P. lie.w Favorinus, an. 1). L. ii. 1 ; Herod, ii. 109 (K. P. 11 and lift). It 
seems that the construction of famous gnomons was ascrilied tradition- 
ally to celebrated philosophers ; that at Delos was referred to Pherekydes 
of Syros. Pliny (//. N. ii. 187) ascribed that of Sparta to Anaxi- 
menes, and not to Anaximander, as Favorinus does. The gnomon was 
simply an upright upon a flat surface. It was not a sun-dial ; but was 
used for determining the points of the compass, the solstices and the 
equinoxes. The Hat sun-dial was not invented till the third century 
n.c, by Aristarchos of Samoa, and its place was taken in early times

Digitized by Go

ANAXIMANDER.

49

across Hekataios very often when we follow up the 
clues given us by what we are told of the Milesian 
cosmologists. In all probability he was a member of 
the school ; for he certainly seems to have maintained 
both the scientific and the political traditions of Thales.

12. Nearly all we know of Anaximander's system is Tiicophnwto* 
derived in the last resort from Theophrastos. 51 As to the der's theory of

i ,, . . ..... the primary

credibility of what we are told on his authority, it is substance, 
enough to remark that the original work of Anaximander, 
which was in the hands even of Apollodoro3, must 
certainly have existed at the time when Theophrastos 
wrote the Opinions. Moreover, he seems once at least 
to have quoted Anaximander's own words ; and we have 
therefore every reason to believe that he wrote with 
the book itself open before him. Here are the remains 
of what he said of Anaximander in the First Book of 
his great work : —Anaximander of Miletos, son of Praxiades, a fellow-citizen 
and associate of Thales, said that the material cause and first / 
rlcment of things was the Infinite, he being the first to intro- 
duce this name for the material cause. 6 ' 2 He says it is neither 
water nor any other of what are now called the elements, 53 but 
a substance different from them which is infinite, from which 
arise all the heavens and the worlds within them. — Plujs. Op. 
fr. 2 {Dox. p. 476 j K. P. 12).

He says that this is eternal and ageless, and that it encom- 
passes all the worlds.— Hipp. Brf. i. 6 (R. P. 13a).

by the polo*, which was a concave hemisphere. See Tannery, Science 
htltent, p. 82. For the map of Anaximander, see Strabo, (J tog. i. 1. 11 
(K. P. 116).

M See the conspectus of extracts from Theophrastos given by Diels, 
Dox. p. 133. Where the word* of the original have been preserved by 
Simplicius, I have given them alone. On the various writera quoted, see 
the Note on Source*, li.

fl2 See below, n. 57.

M Reading ml for «7»«4, with Usener, Analecta Theophraatea, p. 31.

4

Digitized by Google

50

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

Arid into that from which things take their rise they p&ss 
away once more, "as is ordained ; for they make reparation and 
satisfaction to one another r ' 4 for their injustice according to the 
appointed time," as he says in these somewhat jioctical terms. 
— Phy*. Op. fr. 2 (K. P. 12).

And besides this, there was an eternal motion, in the course 
of which was brought about the origin of the worlds. — Hipp. 
lUf. i. G (R. P. 13«).

He did not ascribe the origin of things to any alteration in 
matter, but said that the oppositions in the substratum, which 
was a boundless body/'-"' were separated out. — Simpl. / '/<//*. p. 
150 D (R. P. 14 A). "

The primary , 13. Anaximander taught, then, that there was one

BubhtMiice is . -iii * i • l i •

not one of the eternal, indestructible substance out or which everything

" element*. " .The primary , 13. Anaximander taught, then, that there was one

BubhtMiice is . -iii * i • l i •

not one of the eternal, indestructible substance out or which everything

" element*. " .

arises, and into which everything once more returns ; a 
boundless stock of matter from which the waste of 
existence is continually being made good. This is only 
the natural development of the thought we have ventured 
to ascribe to Thales, and there can be no doubt that 
Anaximander at least distinctly formulated it. Indeed, 
we can still follow to some extent the reasoning which 
led him to do so. Thales had regarded water as the 
most likely of all the things we know to be that of 
which all other substances are forms; Anaximander 
appears to have asked himself how the primary substance 
could be one of these particular substances. His argu- 
ment is preserved by Aristotle, who has the following 
passage in his discussion of the Infinite : —

Further, there cannot be a single, simple, body which is 
infinite, either, as some hold, over and above the elements,

M The impoit;int word ix^x.,, was omitted in the AlUiue Simplicity, 
but Usener [tor rit.) restored it from the MSS. It is not against the 
1;.. undies* that things commit "injustice," hut against one another.

" The Aldine litre had the monstrous word irupart. S.-hlciennacher'a 
conjecture, r»p*n, is now confirmed hy Diels from all the MSS.

Digitized by Google

AXAXIMAXDER." The Aldine litre had the monstrous word irupart. S.-hlciennacher'a 
conjecture, r»p*n, is now confirmed hy Diels from all the MSS.

Digitized by Google

AXAXIMAXDER.

which they then derive from it, any more than without this 
qualification. For there are some who hold that this (i.e. a 
body over and above the elements) is what is infinite, and not 
air or water, in order that the other things may not be destroyed 
by their infinity. They are in opposition one to another,— air is 
cold, water moist, and fire hot,— and therefore, if any one of 
them \rere infinite, the rent tmnbl hare aanfd to hi by thi* time. 
Accordingly they say that what is infinite is something other 
than the elements, and that from it the elements arise. — Arist. 
Phys. T, 5. 204//, 22 (R. P. 12/,).It is clear that in this passage Anaxiniander is con- 
trasted with Thales and with Anaximenes. Xor is there 
any reason to doubt that the account given of his 
reasoning is substantially correct, though, of course, the 
form is Aristotle's own. Anaxiniander was struck, it 
would seern, by the opposition and strife between the 
things which go to make up the world ; the warm fire 
was opposed to the cold air, the dry earth to the liquid 
sea. These opposites seem to be waging constant warfare 
one upon the other, and any predominance of one over the 
other was an " injustice " for which reparation must be 
made. This, at least, seems a more probable explanation 
of the quotation about injustice made by Theophrastos, 
than the commonly accepted view that Anaxiniander 
regarded the separate existence of things as itself a 
wrong. Such an idea would be Indian rather than 
(ireek, and we shall find that "justice" means with 
Herakleitos the observance of an equal balauce between 
the " elements." M But, however that may be, we are 
probably entitled to infer from the passage just quoted 
that Anaximander's thoughts ran somewhat as follows. 
If Thales had been right in saying that water was the 
fundamental reality, it would not be easy to see how

M On the Herakleitean "justice," sec below, § 59.

Digitized by Google

52

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.M On the Herakleitean "justice," sec below, § 59.

Digitized by Google

52

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

anything else could ever have existed. One side of the 
opposition, the cold and moist, would have had its own way 
unchecked, injustice would have prevailed, and the warm 
and dry would have been driven from the field long ago. 
"We must, then, have something which is not itself one of 
the warring opposites we know, something more primitive, 
out of which they arise, and into which they once more 
pass away. That Anaximander called this something by 
the name of <pv<Ti<t, is clear from the doxographers ; the 
current statement that the word apx>i in the sense of a 
"first principle" was introduced by him, is probably due 
to a mere misunderstanding of what Theophrastos says. 57 
conHicting 14. So far all is pretty clear; but when we come to

vu-ws as to , , .

the primary ask what is the proper nature of this boundless some-

suhfttxiife.

thing, we are met at once by a number of difficulties 
which have excited a lengthy controversy. The litera- 
ture of this subject has been steadily growing ever since 
the days of Schleiermacher, who was the first to raise 
the question in its present form, 58 and it is therefore

37 If the words quoted from Theophrastos In Simplieius, p. 13 I>. 
(R. P. 12\ stood by themselves, no one would ever have supposed them 
to mean that Anaximander called the Roundlcss They would37 If the words quoted from Theophrastos In Simplieius, p. 13 I>. 
(R. P. 12\ stood by themselves, no one would ever have supposed them 
to mean that Anaximander called the Roundlcss They would

naturally be rendered: "having been the first to introduce this name 
(i.f. r» a-ruft*} for the ifvr ;" but the words of Hippolytos {R?f. i. 6. 2), 
Tfirt; Ttltautt xa.\'i**f rr,i if%K{, have led nearly all writers to take the 
passage in the less obvious sense. We know, however, that Hipi>olytos is 
not an independent authority; but rests altogether, in the last resort, 
upon Theophrastos, and so the natural view to take is that either his 
immediate source, or he himself, or a copyist, has drop|K>d out t*ut» before 
reCtafi*, just as *»fi'irxf has been corrupted into ««>i<r«(. The other 
passage from Simplieius compared by I'sencr (p. lf>0, 23 D), <wfirn *urit 
ifX** o*su*rat ri i<Teziiut*at, does not seem to me to have anything to do 
with the question. It means simply that Anaximander wis the first to 
name the substratum as the "material cause," which is a different point 
altogether. This is how Neuhauser takes the passage (Anaximcuuler, 
p. 7 sqq.) ; but I cannot agree with him in holding that the word x,xt*u- 
pi*o* is ascribed to the Milesian.

M For this literature see R. P. 11a.

Digitized by Google

AXAXIMANDEK.

53

needful for us to go somewhat into detail on the matter. 
If the discussion does not yield much in the way of 
positive results, it will, at any rate, be of use by calling 
our attention sharply to the fact that certain ideas which 
are quite familiar to us did not exist at all in those early 
days.

We find, then, with regard to Anaximander's " Bound- 
less" four conflicting views, all professing to rest on 
the authority of Aristotle. I hope to show that none 
of these can be historically accurate. They are as 
follows : —

(1.) The "Boundless" is a mixture of all things. 
(2.) The " Boundless " is the indeterminate matter of 
Aristotle.(1.) The "Boundless" is a mixture of all things. 
(2.) The " Boundless " is the indeterminate matter of 
Aristotle.

(3.) The "Boundless" is not, indeed, incorporeal like 
Aristotle's matter, but it is devoid of quality.

(4.) The " Boundless " is something intermediate 
between the elements, or between two of them.

Let us examine these four views one by one.

(1.) The Boundless is a Mixture. — This view has been 
chiefly maintained in modern times by Bitter, who held 
that Anaximander's physics were " mechanical," not 
" dynamical," and that he must therefore be regarded as 
opening the series of the " later Ionian physicists." If 
this were true, it would, of course, destroy our hypothesis 
of a Milesian School altogether ; and certainly the 
passage of the Metaphysics 59 on which Bitter mainly 
relies seems decisive enough. Aristotle is there pointing 
out how his own theory of matter is foreshadowed in 
earlier philosophy, and he does so in these words : " And 
that is what is meant by the One of Anaxagoras — a 
better name for it than ' All things together ' — and the

» Mtt. A, 2. 10696, 18 (R. P. 12c).

Digitized by Google

54 EARLY CREEK PHILOSOPHY.» Mtt. A, 2. 10696, 18 (R. P. 12c).

Digitized by Google

54 EARLY CREEK PHILOSOPHY.

mixture of Empedokles and Anaximander." If the text 
is right, these words can surely have but one meaning, 
namely, that Anaximander regarded the primary sub- 
stance as a mixture in the same sense that Empedokle3 
did. But there are strong reasons, as Liitze has shown, 
for doubting whether the words of Aristotle have .been 
handed down to us correctly. It would be very strange 
that practically no other ancient writer should have 
mentioned the " mixture " of Anaximander if Aristotle 
had spoken of it in this explicit way. Not only so, 
but it is almost as strange to find the mixture of Anaxa- 
goras called the One, as to find the One of Anaximander 
called a mixture. Now, the two names begin with 
the same letters; and if we follow Liitze in simply 
making them change places, everything becomes quite 
intelligible. 00 The passage from Theophrastos, to which 
liitter also appeals in support of his theory, only needs 
to be correctly interpreted to overthrow it altogether, 01 
and there is then nothing left for it to rest on but a 
mistake of St. Augustine's. 02* Liitze, Da* &*u{>»* A mtximanrff r*, p. M. His arguments may be 
summed up as follows. In this passage Aristotle is reading his own 
theory of " potential matter" into the systems of Anaximander, Empe- 
dokles, Anuxagoras, and Demokritos. Hut the names of these philo- 
sophers have got out of their proper order. For (1) the "One" which i.s 
here attributed to Anaxagoras is identilied with the " mixture " ; whereas 
tho "mixture" is elsewhere described its a "many," and the attribute of 
unity reserved for Nous (so, e.</.. in Mtt. A, N. 9Sihi, 30 wnp). Further, 
(2) in Phy*. A, 4. 187a, 20 (h\ P. 12c), the '-One" of Anaximander i.s 
expressly contrasted with the "mixture" of Anaxagoras, just as it would 
be here if we transposed the two names. Lastly, (3) the chronological 
order usually observed by Aristotle demands the transposition. The 
words /m>.™» ykp $ 'ifjttu *mt* we must then regard as a glo=>s. See, 
however, Z.* p. 205, n. 1.

61 A p. Simpl. Phy*. p. 27 D (R. V. 12r). The word !«;»•» uudouhtcdly 
refers to Anaxagoras, not to Anaximander, as Hitter supj»osed.

"-Augustine, Cir. Dti, viii. 2 (Dor. 173). He has simply confused 
Anaxagoras with Anaximander, as is shown by what he goes on to say.

Digitized by Google

AXAXIMANDER.

55"-Augustine, Cir. Dti, viii. 2 (Dor. 173). He has simply confused 
Anaxagoras with Anaximander, as is shown by what he goes on to say.

Digitized by Google

AXAXIMANDER.

55

(2.) TJie Boundless is "Indeterminate Matter" — The 
passage from the Metaphysics, when emended, leaves us 
with an identification of Anaximander's "Boundless" 
and Aristotle's "indeterminate potential matter." That 
this is an anachronism we can see at once ; and we may 
say so without any disrespect to the great authority of 
Aristotle. That philosopher knew very well that he 
himself was the inventor of the theory in question ; even 
Plato, he held, had not formulated it clearly. But he is 
always on the outlook for anticipations of his own views 
in the systems of earlier thinkers, and it is not surpris- 
ing that he should have seized eagerly on Anaximander's 
theory as a misunderstood presentiment of one like his 
own. Theophrastos merely follows Aristotle in this 
matter, and the doxographers follow him.

(3.) The Boundless is body loithout quality. — Schleier- 
macher's great contribution to our knowledge of Anaxi- 
mander was his proof that the Boundless was a body. 
Since he wrote, this has hardly been questioned. He 
held also, however, that this boundless, corporeal mass 
was totally devoid of quality, and therefore imperceptible 
by the senses ; and this is perhaps the view which has 
found most favour in this country. Like the others, 
however, it is an anachronism. Quality is a category 
which belongs to a far later stage of thought than 
Anaximander's. It is, no doubt, only by an effort that 
we can realise a state of men's minds to which the 
distinction between a thing and its qualities was not 
obvious ; but we must make this effort if we wish to 
understand early Greek philosophy. Anaximander could 
never have thought of denying quality of the Bound- 
less : he had not even words to do so in. Nor could 
he have supposed that a thing might exist and yet

5656

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

be imperceptible to the senses. Aristotle tells us over 
and over again that this supposition was one that never 
occurred to the early philosophers ; and, in refuting the 
doctrine of a boundless something prior to the elements, 
he always proceeds on the assumption that it must be 
both corporeal and sensible. 68

(4.) The Boundless is something intermediate between the 
" elements." — Aristotle in several places speaks of those 
who take as their first principle something " over and 
above " or " beside " tiie elements. These passages are 
universally allowed to refer to Anaximander. In other 
places, again, he speaks of something intermediate or 
" between " the elements as the material cause. 64 Nearly 
all the Greek commentators refer this also to Anaxi- 
mander; 65 but since the time of Schleiermacher, few 
modern writers have been found to agree with them. 
The only two with whose writings I am acquainted are 
Friedrich Liitze and Joseph Neuhiiuser, who, in my 
opinion, have proved between them that all these 
passages do, after all, refer to no one else.

Schleiermacher and his followers base their arguments 
mainly upon a passage in the Physics, which they take 
to mean that the upholder of the "intermediate some- 
thing," whoever he was, derived all other things from it

M So Phy*. r, 4. 203a, 16 ; 2046, 22 (R. P. 126), and elsewhere.

M Aristotle sneaks four times of something intermediate between Fire 
and Air {Grn. Corr, B, 1. 3286, 35 ; ib. 5. 332a, 21 ; Phy*. A, 4. 187a, 14 ; 
Met. A, 7. 988a, 30). In five places we have something intermediate 
between Water and Air (Met. A, 8. 989a, 13 ; (Jan. Corr. B, 5. 332a, 21 ; 
Phy*. r, 4. 203a, 18 ; ib. 5. 205a, 27 ; Dt C<rlo, V, 5. 3036, 12). Once 
{Phy*. A, 6. 1896, 1) we hear of something between Water and Fire.85 So Alexander (R. P. 1*^6), Simplieius, Themistios, and Philoponos. 
The exceptions are Nikolaos of Damascus and Porphyry who follows hitn. 
They refer the passages to Diogenes of Apollonia, which is certainly 
wrong, as the fragments of that philosopher prove. See below, § 156, 
fr. 6.

Digitized by Google

ANAXIMANDER.

57

by rarefaction and condensation ; whereas Anaximander 
derived his " opposites " from the One by " separating 
out." In itself, the passage might, perhaps, bear this 
meaning well enough ; but the Greek commentators did 
not take it so. The context, too, favours an interpreta- 
tion which presents no difficulty to our view ; w so we 
may set this passage aside if only some positive indica- 
tion is forthcoming that Aristotle meant the Boundless of 
Anaximander when he spoke of the " intermediate some- 
thing." Now, the way this is enumerated along with 
Water, Air, and Fire irresistibly suggests the way in which 
Anaximander's name is usually associated with those of 
Thales, Anaximenes, and Herakleitos. Again, in the 
passage from the Physics, partially quoted above (p. 50), 
which is referred to Anaximander by Zeller himself, the 
something " between " the elements is substituted later 
on for the something " beside " them, as if there were no 
difference at all. 67 In the De Gcncratione the same two 
phrases are used as if they were quite interchangeable, 
and are also identified with " the Boundless ; " 68 and thisM Phy*. A, 4. 187a, 12 (partially quoted R. P. 12c). The two r f i*„ 
mentioned are not two "modes of becoming " (viz. "separating out" and 
"rarefaction and condensation"), but two ways of regarding the All as 
one. The context shows that this is so, and Philoponos explains it 
quite correctly {Schol. Br. 334/>, 38). Next, according to Simplicius, 
Themistios, and Philoponos, these two rpiwu are— (1) the substratum is 
one of the three elements ; (2) it is something intermediate. We should 
put a stop after for the words ««i »V«j h introduce a fresh snl>-

ject, and Simplicius devotes to them a fresh section of his commentary. 
Viewed in this light, the passage really asserts what it is disposed to 
disprove.

97 Phy*. T, 5. 204b, 22 sqq. (K. P. 12h). /.oiler refers ri <xm?i ri 
#r«/£i;« in this passage to Anaximander. Now, at the end, the whole is 
recapitulated as follows (205n, 25) : »*i i,i r.Zr ,L4u t ri U »«; iwuf,, wZp 
irt'tnri* riYt yrit <r*» fu'itX mXk' n Zivp r it fa. n ri ft'trn murvr.

«* Oen. Corr. B, 1. 328A, 31. Here we have, firstly, T^iT.fci. t.iJt*. 
rt «» **, %uf t rri* ; a little farther on, fiimt vXr.t xm.fi ri tipr.pi** ; and two 
lines below, the same thing is referred to as ri i*up» rtZr:

Digitized by Google

58

EARLY It KEEK PHILOSOPHY.Digitized by Google

58

EARLY It KEEK PHILOSOPHY.

not once only, but twice. 01 * If we refuse to refer all 
these passages to Anaximander, we must assume that 
Aristotle bestowed great attention on some thinker whose 
very name has been lost, and who not only agreed with 
many of Anaximander's views, but also, as is proved by 
a passage in the Dc Ca'lo y made use of some of his 
most characteristic expressions. 70 Surely it is simpler to 
assume that Schleiermacher and Zeller have erred from 
momentary forgetfulness of the kind and degree of 
historical truth we must expect to find in Aristotle's 
critical discussions; and that, even if Anaximander 
himself never said anything about an " intermediate 
something," it may yet have seemed to Aristotle that 
this was a correct account to give of what he really 
meant.

For we cannot regard the question as settled by the 
expressions of Aristotle. He may have found it con- 
venient to call the Boundless something intermediate 
between the elements, just as at other times he found it 
convenient to regard it as indeterminate matter. There 
was no room in his own system for anything corporeal 
and sensible prior to the opposites. Body with him is 
just that which exhibits opposite qualities — hot and 
cold, moist and dry ; so we need not be surprised if, in 
attempting to fit the Boundless of Anaximander into his 
own system, he fluctuates between these two views. When 
he is thinking of it as something prior to the opposites, he

w The second passage is Cm. Covr. P», f>. 332a, 20: el pk* oul' £kk» vl 
yt TtLfit, TBLurm, »7tt fjtirti rt <i'tp»{ «ai v'3ar« ( » *if«f %mj <ruf»s, i'xpi ftt»

-raxing *«) *vpi f , t*» Yt Xi*riripi. Here, of course, the word ««v has 
its "explicative" force (Bonitz, Index, . r »02a, 7). The conclusion is: £fr 
tin. ifJi£ir«/ n»nvrt*t ixu*« $i1W»rt t »tx\f farl ri*n ri &rnp*i mrni ri

• l ' De O/o, r, 5 (R. P. 12//}.

Digitized by Go

ANAXIMANDER.

59• l ' De O/o, r, 5 (R. P. 12//}.

Digitized by Go

ANAXIMANDER.

59

naturally regards it as a kindred conception to his own 
Matter; when its corporeality is prominent in his 
thought, he can only speak of it as something in- 
termediate between the elements. That Anaximander 
cannot have said this, however, is proved by the simple 
consideration that the elements were never heard of 
before Empedokles, and that no one could possibly have 
thought of them before Tarmenides. 71

We conclude, then, that all four views distort the 
theory of Anaximander, interpreting it as they all do by 
the categories of a later age. Yet each has some truth 
in it. We may admit that the Boundless contains all 
things without regarding it as a mixture, a view which 
implies a theory of irreducible elements just as much as 
the fourth. We may allow that Aristotle was light in 
regarding it as the precursor of his own Matter, without 
losing sight of the fact that it was a sensible body. Wti 
may allow that, strictly speaking, Anaximander would 
have had to deny all qualities of it, if such denial had 
been possible to him. We shall allow, lastly, that when 
once the notion of elements had arisen, the most accurate 
description of it was that it was intermediate between 
them. But we shall not confuse our account of Anaxi- 
mander by crediting him with conceptions which did not 
exist at all in his time.

15. Anaximander's reason for conceiving the primary The primary 
substance as boundless was, no doubt, that indicated by infinite!" " 
Aristotle, namely, " that becoming might not fail." It 
is not very likely, however, that these words are his own.

71 On the conception of " elements,'" see Chnp. V. § 84.

rj Phy*. V, S. 208a, 8 (R. P. 12a). The argument at the beginning of 
Phy*. r, 4. 2036, 7 P. 13), is often ascribed to Anaximander ; but it 
bears the mark of the Eleatic dialectic, and no doubt belong to Alelissos.

Digitized by Google

60

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.Digitized by Google

60

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

The doxographers, indeed, took them 80 ; but we have 
seen how apt they are to reproduce the mere suggestions 
of Aristotle as statements of fact. The doctrine of the 
boundlessness of the primary substance was not in any 
way peculiar to Anaximander ; it was the universal belief 
till the time of Parmenides. No doubt, however, the 
way in which Anaximander regarded the world would 
bring home to him with more than common force the 
need of a boundless stock of matter. The " opposites " 
of which the world consists are, we have seen, always at 
war with one another, and this strife is marked by 
" unjust " encroachments on either side. To redress the 
balance, they must be absorbed once more in their 
common ground ; and this would lead in the long run to 
the destruction of everything but the Boundless itself, 
were there not an inexhaustible supply of it from which 
" opposites " might continually be " separated out " afresh. 
For the Boundless is no abstract conception, but bound- 
less matter or body. Kven if Anaximander spoke of 
" the Boundless " as well as of " boundless substance," he 
did not mean infinity, but simply that which is infinite. 
As Zeller puts it, following Schleiermacher and Aristotle, 
" the Boundless " is not subject but predicate ; for both 
Aristotle and Simplicius, who no doubt follows Theo- 
phrastos in this as in other things, speak of it distinctly 
as a body. 73

It will be seen that, throughout the foregoing dis- 
cussion, we have assumed that Anaximander's word 
"boundless" refers to spatial infinity. It has been 
maintained, however, by Teichmuller and Tannery, that 
its meaning really is " qualitatively indeterminate," and 
this view seems to be implied in much that has been

" 3 Ariat. Phy*. r, 8. 208a, 8 ; Sin.pl. p. 150 D (R, P. 12a, 14 A).

Digitized by

ANAXINIANDER.

61" 3 Ariat. Phy*. r, 8. 208a, 8 ; Sin.pl. p. 150 D (R, P. 12a, 14 A).

Digitized by

ANAXINIANDER.

61

written on the subject in this country. That we must 
regard it as an anachronism, follows from what has been 
said as to quality above; but a few additional proofs will 
not be amiss. In the first place, there is no evidence 
that the word uircipov could possibly have suggested this 
meaning to any one who had not studied Plato's rhilebos, 
or, at any rate, the writings of Philolaos, if Philolaos 
ever wrote at all. Secondly, the primary substance, we 
are told by Hippolytos in the Theophrastean extract 
quoted above, was " infinite and contained all the worlds." 
To interpret the word irepiixuv here as signifying " to 
contain potentially," is to ignore the meaning it bears 
everywhere else in the early cosmologists, that, namely, 
of " encompassing " the heavens. Again, the testimony 
of Aristotle on the point is quite unequivocal. He tells 
us that number and " what is outside the heavens " are 
supposed to be infinite, " because they never fail in our 
thought ; " and if what is outside the heavens is infinite, 
then body must be infinite, and there must be innumer- 
able worlds. 74 This must refer to Anaxiniander among 
others. Above all, Anaximenes, the successor of Anaxi- 
mander in the Milesian School, retained his doctrine of 
<f>v(Tis aireipos, and yet he said that this was Air, or 
rather Mist, which cannot be called " qualitatively inde- 
terminate " in any sense of that expression.

Let us resume the results of our inquiry so far, and 
try to picture in our minds the world as it was imagined 
by Anaxiniander. "We have a boundless mass, which is 
not any one of the opposites we know, stretching out to 
infinity on every side of the heavens which bound the 
world we live in. This mass is a body, and out of it our 
world once emerged by the " separating out " of the

7 * Phys. r, 4. 203&, 23.

Digitized by Google

G2 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.7 * Phys. r, 4. 203&, 23.

Digitized by Google

G2 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

opposites, moist and dry, warm and cold. In our world 
these are at strife, and they encroach upon one another. 
The warm, for instance, commits injustice in summer, and 
the cold in winter. So they will all one day be absorbed 
again in the Boundless, and our world will cease to be. 
The opposites 16. Not only does the Boundless encompass the 
jjaratcd worlt ^ it a j so « steers tlie course of all things." This

metaphor does not seem to fit in very well with the 
general theory of Anaximander ; and, if it be true that 
Thales adopted the Egyptian idea that the heavenly 
bodies sail across the firmament in boats (§ 8), it would 
have been much more natural in his mouth. At any 
rate, we shall find the idea of celestial boats once more 
in close connexion with the steering power of the primary 
substance when we come to Herakleitos (§ 58).

The doxographers tell us that it was the "eternal 
motion" which brought into being "all the heavens and 
all the worlds within them." It does not seem at all 
certain, however, that Anaximander himself used the 
phrase " eternal motion " ; it appears rather to be Aris- 
totle's version of what he found stated about the " separ- 
ating out " of opposites, and to be meant simply to point 
the contrast with the Kleatics who denied motion alto- 
gether. 75 Theophrastos and the doxographers, of course, 
reproduce Aristotle. Teichmiiller, however, identified the 
"eternal motion" with the diurnal revolution of the 
heavens, — a view in which he has been followed by 
Tannery. The Boundless he regarded as a great spheri- 
cal mass which, by its rotation, produced the earth and 
the heavenly bodies, thus making Anaximanders cosmo-

75 Sen Nenhauser. Aiuiximnmltr, p. '282. In J/< t. A, f». 9S67/. 14, the 
"etcrn.il motion " appears as a inert- inference of Aristotle's; the words 
■yitrutrif yi ri <ri» WOllhl otherwise be superfluous.

Digitized by GoogDigitized by Goog

ANAXIMANDER

63

logy a real anticipation of the nebular hypothesis. 76 The 
fundamental mistake here, of course, is that the diurnal 
rotation, which belongs to the world within the heavens, 
is attributed to the Boundless outside them ; and, when 
we come to discuss the question of the plurality of 
worlds, it will be obvious how fatal to the theory this 
consideration is. Meantime we may note some other 
objections. Teichmuller relies much on a passage from 
the De Ccclo, where Aristotle says that all who believe 
the world to have come into being represent the earth as 
having been forced to the centre by the circular move- 
ment. This, no doubt, applies to Anaximander amongst 
others, but it is quite irrelevant here ; for it has to do 
only with the formation of the world after it has been 
once for all separated otf from the Boundless. 77 We shall 
have to remember the passage when we come to this part 
of the subject ; here we have to do with the motion of 
the Boundless outside the heavens, not of the opposites 
inside them. In another place Aristotle speaks of the 
eternal circular motion as an ancestral belief ; and, on the 
ground that Anaximander was an Ionian, Teichmuller 
would refer this to him ; but the parallel passage in the 
Metaphysics shows quite clearly that the reference is 
simply to the popular religion, of which Aristotle held 
this to be the forgotten meaning. 78

The " eternal motion," then, is simply Aristotle's para- 
phrase of the " separating out " or " birth " of opposites 
which Anaximander had spoken of but had not more 
precisely defined. It had not occurred to him to explain

7rt Teichmuller, Studien zur (letch. «7r B<yr. |>. 5<i sqq. This view is 
well criticised by Neuh.iuser, Amu-imamUr, \>. 2M sqq.

77 Ik Cah, H f 13. 295re, 9. The other passage which Teichmuller 
quotes is still less to the (mint. See Neuhauser. /o<\ ( if.

78 D* Ctrlo, B, 1. 284a, 2. Cf. Mrt. A, 8. 107l/>, 13.

Digitized by Google

6478 D* Ctrlo, B, 1. 284a, 2. Cf. Mrt. A, 8. 107l/>, 13.

Digitized by Google

64

EARLY GRKKK PHILOSOPHY

how the Boundless gave birth to the opposites at all. 
The first to ask that question was Anaximenes, and he 
said it was by rarefaction and condensation.

0 ^

Tiu* inmimer- 17. We are told that Anaxiniander believed in "in- 
able worlds.

numerable worlds," and it is now usual to regard these 
worlds as an infinite series succeeding one another in 
time. This is Zeller's view, and it has not yet been 
sufficiently reconsidered in the light of the discoveries 
made since his fourth edition. I propose to show that 
these worlds must be regarded as co-existent. There are 
three possible views which may be taken of the state- 
ment that Anaxiniander taught an infinity of worlds. 
The worlds may all be eternal and co-existent, or they 
may be, partially at least, co - existent without being 
eternal, or they may succeed one another in time. All 
Zeller's arguments are directed against the first of these 
positions, none of them apply with any force to the 
second. It may be allowed at once that his disproof 
of the idea that the worlds are eternal and co-existent is 
decisive ; to suppose that Anaxiniander regarded this 
world or any other as eternal, is contrary to all we other- 
wise know of him, and is in direct contradiction with 
the Theophrastean tradition, that he was one of those 
who regarded the world as perishable.™ We have, then, 
to decide between the second aud the third of the views 
enumerated above. Zeller expressly allows that there is 
nothing at all in the second of them which is out of 
harmony with what we know of Anaxiniander; but he 
thinks that all the statements which have come down to 
us point rather to the third, and dismisses the second as 
supported by no sufficient evidence. In answer to this 
I would call attention to the fact that the true character

79 Act ii. 4. 6 ; Dox. p. 331.

Digitized by Google

AXAXIMAXPKR.79 Act ii. 4. 6 ; Dox. p. 331.

Digitized by Google

AXAXIMAXPKR.

of the evidence has been put in an entirely new light by 
Diels, though it is right to add that he himself has not 
drawn from it the conclusion which, as it seems to me, it 
now most naturally yields.

Zeller admits that Stobaios, Simplicius, and St. Augus- 
tine regarded the innumerable worlds as perishable, but, 
partially at least, co-existent. Let us first consider, then, 
what is the nature and value of their testimony. 
Stobaios enumerates Thales, Pythagoras, Empedokles, 
Kkphantos, Tarmenides, Melissos, Herakleitos, Anaxa- 
goras, Tlato, Aristotle, and Zeno as believers in one 
world; Anaximander, Anaximenes, Archelaos, Xeno- 
phanes, Diogenes, Leukippos, Demokritos, and Epicurus 
as upholders of an infinity. 80 Now, there can be no doubt 
what this means; the innumerable worlds of Demo- 
kritos and Epicurus were unquestionably co - existent 
in space, and Anaximander is here put quite on a 
level with them. This is fully admitted by Zeller ; but 
he disputes the authority of the passage on the ground 
that we can have no confidence in a writer who attributes 
innumerable worlds to Anaximenes, Archelaos, and Xeno- 
phanes. I hope to show that, with regard to the first 
two of these, Stobaios is quite right, and to give a 
possible explanation of what is said of the last. 81 His 
second objection to the passage is that the words which 
occur at the end of the enumeration do not apply at all 
to Leukippos, Demokritos, and Epicurus. They certainly 
do not, if we translate them with Zeller, " in every revo- 
lution of the cycle ; " but a comparison of the parallel 
passage in the Placita shows that they mean simply " on

* A*t ii. 1. 2, «; J\ox. p. 327.

* AnaximeneK, § 29 ; Xeiiophanes, ("hap. II. «. 99; Archelaos, 
Chap. IX. § 160.

5

Digitized by Google

fir,

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.* A*t ii. 1. 2, «; J\ox. p. 327.

* AnaximeneK, § 29 ; Xeiiophanes, ("hap. II. «. 99; Archelaos, 
Chap. IX. § 160.

5

Digitized by Google

fir,

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

every side," 82 and there can be no doubt that the phrase 
" innumerable worlds on every side of this one " quite 
appropriately brings out what Zeller himself admits to be 
the general meaning of the passage. But, leaving all this 
aside, we must observe that, while Zeller was formerly 
entitled to reject the authority of the passage, we can no 
longer do so. It is true that the complete list of names 
is not given in the Placita ; but it is given word for 
word by Theodoret, and that is enough to prove that 
it is taken from Aetios. 83 No doubt, then, it comes from 
the Opinions of Theophrastos ; and, if so, it is quite 
trustworthy.

Let us turn now to Simplicius. In his commentary 
on Aristotle's Physics 84 he has the following : —

Those who assumed innumerable worlds, cjj. Anaximander, 
Leukippos, Demokritos, and, later on, E]>ieurus, assumed that 
they came into being and passed away ad infinitum, some 
always coming into being and others passing away.

This is also clear enough ; but Zeller points out that 
Simplicius elsewhere makes the same statement more 
doubtfully. The words to which he refers hardly amount 
to an expression of doubt, however, and in any case they 
seem to me to refer to something else. 85 The statement 
of Simplicius is highly trustworthy ; for it, too, is prob- 
ably based upon Theophrastos.

83 Stob. lias Kara war** npiayuyrjv, but PI lit. has Kara vara* XXf'iSrattt.

Neuhiiuser correctly renders the words: in omnes dimenrionts (Anaxi 
mander, p. 328, n. 2).

83 Theodoret is the only writer who mentions Aetios by name. On the 
filiation of all these authorities, see the Note on Source*, B.

**Schol. Br. 424ft, 43 (R. P. 15ft).83 Theodoret is the only writer who mentions Aetios by name. On the 
filiation of all these authorities, see the Note on Source*, B.

**Schol. Br. 424ft, 43 (R. P. 15ft).

83 Schol. Br. 4S0a, 35. The words *i* 2«*«7 do not necessarily imply a 
doubt ; and, if anything is doubted at all, it is merely that the theory of 
innumerable worlds was derived from the doctrine of an infinite primary 
substance, not the theory itself.

Digitized by Google

ANAXIMANDER.

67

With regard to the passage from St. Augustine, little 
need be said. Zeller admitted that it favoured the view 
we are inclined to take, but Diels has shown that it 
equally supports Zeller's own opinion, 86 so it cannot count 
one way or the other.

We come, lastly, to a very important statement which 
Cicero 87 has copied from Philodemos, the author of an 
Epicurean treatise On Religion, found at Herculaneum, 
or perhaps rather from the source of that work. This 
testimony, I venture to think, has not yet been correctly 
interpreted. " Anaximander's opinion was," says Velleius 
in Cicero, " that there were gods who came into being, 
rising and passing away at long intervals, and that these 
were the innumerable worlds." A great many of the 
difficulties which formerly beset this passage have been 
removed by the researches of Diels, and the rest in 
consequence disappear of themselves. The great source 
of confusion was the statement in the Placita that 
Anaximander taught " the stars of heaven " were gods ; 
but we now know that this is a mere copyist's error, and 
that the Placita had originally not " the stars of heaven," 
but " the innumerable heavens." 88 This is also what 
Stobaios has, and we are therefore entitled to refer it to 
Aetios. Now there is no doubt that, at the time we are 
dealing with, the word ovpavo* was regularly used in the 
sense of the later *oo>to?, so here we have a perfect

* Civ. Dei, viii. 2. See Dox. p. 174, n. 1. 
«* Cic. N. D. i. 25 (R. P. 15).* Civ. Dei, viii. 2. See Dox. p. 174, n. 1. 
«* Cic. N. D. i. 25 (R. P. 15).

88 R. P. 15a. Eusebios, Cyril, and the pseudo-Galen all used tho 
Placita. Eusebios, living at Constantinople, had only inferior MSS., 
and therefore reads, with our texts, mrrifmt »i>f*u»u ( . But Cyril, at 
Alexandria, must have read •niptvt »l?**»C f , for he writes «Vu>w 
a perfectly correct interpretation. The pseudo-Galen has *rupv { »Z, ; 
but that, as Heercn poiuted out, is a mere corruption, arising from the 
contraction 7vuv$.

68

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

agreement among our authorities. But what are we to 
make of the statement that these gods arise and pass 
away " at long intervals " ? This seems always to be 
understood by commentators as referring to intervals of 
time, but there is nothing whatever to prevent our under- 
standing it rather of space. 89 In that case Cicero would 
be in perfect agreement with Simplicius ; an agreement 
explained, of course, by the identity of their ultimate source, 
origin of the 18. The doxographers have not left us in the dark as

heavenly

bodiei. to the process by which the different parts of the world 
arose from the Boundless. The following statement conies 
ultimately from Theophrastos —

lie says that something M capable of begetting hot and cold 
was separated off from the eternal at the origin of this world. 
From this arose a sphere of flame which grew round the air 
encircling the earth, as the bark grows round a tree. "When 
this was broken up and enclosed in certain rings, the sun, 
moon, and stars came into existence. — Ps.-Plut. Strom, fr. 2 
(R. P. U 15).We see from this that when a portion of the Bound- 
less had been separated off from the rest to form a world, 
it first of all differentiated itself into the two opposites, 
hot and cold. The hot appears as a sphere of flame 
surrounding the cold ; the cold, as earth with air 
surrounding it. We are not told, however, in this 
extract how the cold came to be differentiated into earth 
and air ; but there is a passage in Aristotle's MctcoroUtgy 
which throws a good deal of light on the subject. We 
read there —

But those who are wiser in the wisdom of men give an 
origin for the sea. At first, they say, all the terrestrial region

w It seems natural to supjtose that Cicero read ImrTr.umri in his 
authority, and that is almost a technical term for the inlermundia. 
I read n for r«, as Diels suggests (note, in lor.).

Digitized by Gc

AXAXIMAXDER.

was nioist ; and, as it was dried up by the sun, the portion of it 
that evaporated produced the winds and the turnings of the sun 
and moon, while the portion left behind was the sea. So they 
think the sea is becoming smaller by being dried up, and that at 
last it will all be dry.— Meteor. R 1. 3536, 5.

And the same absurdity arises for those who say that the 
earth and the terrestrial part of the world at first were moist, 
I mt that air arose from the heat of the sun, and that the whole 
world was thus increased, and that this is the cause of winds 
and the turnings of the heavens. — lb. 2. 335a, 21 (R. P. 14c).In his commentary on the passage, Alexander tell us 
that this was the view of Anaximander and Diogenes; 
and what he says is amply confirmed by Anaximander's 
theory of the sea as it is given by the doxographers. 91 
We conclude, then, that after the first separation of the 
hot and the cold, the heat of the sphere of flame turned 
part of the moist, cold interior of the world into air or 
mist, — it is all one at this date, — and that the expansion 
of this mist broke up the sphere of flame itself into rings, 
.something like that of Saturn. Possibly these were sug- 
gested to the mind of Auaximander by the appearance 
of the Milky Way. I give the theory which he adopted 
to explain the origin of the heavenly bodies from these 
rings as it has been preserved by Hippolytos, with some 
supplements from Aetios —

The heavenly bodies are wheels of fire separated off from the 
fire which encircles the world, and surrounded by air. And 
they have breathing-holes, certain pipe-like openings through 
which the heavenly bodies are seen. For this reason, too, 
when the breathing-holes are stopped, eclipses occur. And the 
moon appears now to wax and now to wane because of the 
stopping and opening of the outlets. The circle of the sun 
is twenty-seven times the size (of the earth, while that) of

n Soe below, § 19.

Digitized by Google

70

KARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

the moon (is eighteen times as large). 02 The sun is highest 
of all, and lowest are the wheels of the fixed stars. — Hipp. 
Ref. i 6 (R. P. 14 C).

Anaximander said the stars were hoop-like compressions of 
air, full of fire, breathing out flames at a certain point from 
orifices. The sun was highest of all, after it came the moon, 
and below these the fixed stars and the planets. — Aetios = Stob. 
Ekl i. 510 (R. r. 146).Anaximander said the sun was a ring twenty-eight times the 
size of the earth, like a cart-wheel with the felloe hollow and 
full of fire, showing the fire at a certain point, as if through 
the nozzle of a pair of bellows.— Aetios = Plac. il 20. 1 
(R. P. 14ft).

Anaximander held that thunder and lightning were caused 
by the blast. When it is shut up in a thick cloud and bursts 
forth with violence, then the breakage of the cloud makes the 
noise, and the rift gives the appearance of a flash by contrast 
with the darkness of the cloud.— Aet. iii. 3. 1 (Dox. p. 367).

Anaximander held that wind was a current of air (i.e. mist) 
which arose when its finest and moistest particles were set in 
motion or dissolved by the sun. — Aet. iii. 6. 1 (Dox. p. 374).

Rain was produced by the moisture drawn up from the earth 
by the sun. — Hipp. lief. i. 6, 7 (Dox. p. 560).

We saw above that the sphere of flame was broken up 
into rings by the expansion of the air or vapour that its 
own heat had drawn up from its moist, cold interior. 
There are three of these rings, that of the sun, that of 
the moon, and, lastly, nearest to the earth, the circle 
of the stars. This was, no doubt, identified with the 
Milky Way. The circle of the sun was twenty-seven 
times as large as the earth, and that of the moon eighteen 
times, from which we may perhaps infer, with Tannery,

92 The word " nineteen" is inserted by Diels to make Hippolytos agree 
with Aetios (ii. 20. 1, p. 90). With Tannery {Sc. hell. p. 91), I prefer 
" eighteen," and suppose the difference to be due to ono account dealing 
with the internal and the other with the external diameter.

Digitized by Googl

ANAXIMANDER.

71Digitized by Googl

ANAXIMANDER.

71

that the circle of the stars was nine times as large. We 
do not see the whole circle of the rings ; for the mist 
that formed them imprisons the fire, and becomes an 
outer ring of opaque air or vapour. These outer rings, 
however, have round openings at a single point, through 
which the fire escapes, and those openings are the 
heaveuly bodies we see. 03

The explanation which Anaximander gave of thunder 
and lightning was very similar. They were also caused 
by fire breaking through compressed air, that is to say, 
through the storm-clouds. It seems to me probable that 
we have here the origin of the whole theory, and that 
Anaximander really explained the heavenly bodies on 
the analogy of lightning, and not vice versa. This would 
be in perfect agreement with the prevailing meteorological 
interest of the time. 04

19. We turn now to what we are told of the origin of Earth and 
earth and sea from the moist, cold matter which was * ea ' 
"separated off" in the beginning, and which filled the 
inside of the sphere of flame —"The true sense of this doctrine was long obscured by the "windy 
paraphrase" of Achilles, on whom sec Diels, Dox. pp. 18, 19, 25, 26 
(quoted R. P. Sd m and \4b). Even Zeller was misled by this in the 
earlier editions of his great work, and the right view was first given by 
Teichmuller. Achilles fancied that the heavenly bodies were compared 
to wheels because their rays resembled spokes ; but this is duo to a mere 
misunderstanding of the jmssage in the PlacUa, which we still possess and 
can interpret for ourselves. The flames rush forth per mwjni circum 
Hpiraeula mundi, as Lucretius has it (vi. 493). The m-wrnp*t *vXe ( , to 
which these spiratula aro compared, is neither a trumpet, as Achilles 
imagined (loc. cit.), nor yet the meteorological phenomenon known as a 
Tf^trif (Chap. III. w. 53). The word here means simply a j»air of bellows, 
as in Ap. Rhod. iv. 776. The only correction that needs to be made is 
■r if tut nfit ai\*iut for ri*$vt rni$ «'y«3i<* in the Placita (Dox. pp. 29 
ami 156). When Diels made this beautiful emendation he was unaware 
that Cedren, who in the eleventh century a.i>. made extracts from 
Hippolytos, actually has *ip«»f rnxg *lp»1ut.

w See the Introduction, § X.

Digitized by Google

72 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

Thc sea is what is left of the original moisture. The lire 
has dried up most of it and turned the rest salt by scorching 
it.— Aet. = Plar. iii. 16. 1 (R. P. Ur).

He says that the earth is cylindrical in form, and that its 
height is as a third part of its width. — Ps.-Plut. Strom, fr. 2 
(R. P. ib.).

The earth swings free, held in its place by nothing. It stays 
where it is because of its equal distance from everything. Its 
shape is convex and round, and like a stone pillar (?). AVe are 
on one of the surfaces, and the other is on the opposite side. 9 '' — 
Hipp. Ref. i. G (R. P. 14 C).Adopting for a moment the later theory of " elements," 
we see that Anaximander put fire on one side as " the 
hot," and all the rest on the other as " the cold," which 
is also moist. This explains bow Aristotle came to 
speak of the Boundless as intermediate between fire and 
water. And we have seen also that the moist element 
was partly turned into " air " or mist by the fire, which 
explains how he could say the Boundless was something 
between fire and air, or between air and water. 96

The moist, cold interior of the world is not, it will be 
noticed, pure water. It is always called "the moist" or 
" the moist state." This is because it has to be still 
further differentiated under the influence of heat into 
earth, water, and vapour. The gradual drying up of

M The MSS. of Hippolytos have vypi* rr?*yyCx 9 ,. Itoeper reads yvfi* 
[rrptyyvke*], supposing the second word to be a gloss on the 6rst ; but 
Diels has shown {Dox. p. 218) that both are wanted. The first means 
"convex," and applies to the surface of the earth; while the second 
means "round," and refers to its circuit. As to «/•»< XiV*, it is not 
easy to say anything positive. It might, possibly, bo a mere corruption 
of KvXlAfS (cf. Pint. Strom. (R. P. 14c)); but, if so, it is a very old 
one. Actios (iii. 10. 2), who is quite independent of Hippolytos, has 
xififxitti; Roeper suggested *i«»i>j ; Teichmullcr, >.<V*; while

Diels doubtfully puts forward >.Jm */•»#, which he suggests might l>c a 
Theophrastean modernisation of an original >.<rti? {Dox. p. 218).

96 See above, n. 64.

Digitized by Google

ANAXIMANDEK.

73Diels doubtfully puts forward >.Jm */•»#, which he suggests might l>c a 
Theophrastean modernisation of an original >.<rti? {Dox. p. 218).

96 See above, n. 64.

Digitized by Google

ANAXIMANDEK.

73

the water by the fire is a good example of what Anaxi- 
mander meant by "injustice." And we see how this 
injustice brings about the destruction of the world. The 
fire will in time dry up and burn up the whole of the 
cold, moist element. But then it will not be fire any 
longer ; it will be simply the " mixture," if we choose to 
call it so, of the hot and cold ; that is, it will be the 
same as the Boundless which surrounds it, and will pass 
away into it.

The view which Anaximander takes of the earth is a 
great advance upon anything we can reasonably attribute 
to Thales. It is no longer regarded, in the primitive 
way, as a disc stretching out to the horizon and resting 
on the waters. It occupies the centre of the world, and 
rests upon nothing at all. Still, Anaximander does not 
attain to the idea that it is spherical. He believes that 
we live on a convex disc, and from this the cylindrical 
form follows as a matter of course. The really remark- 
able thing is that he should have seen, however dimly, 
that there is no absolute up and down in the world. 
Not many of the cosmologists who followed him succeeded 
in grasping this fact.

20. We have seen enough to show us that the Animals, 
speculations of Anaximander about the world were of an 
externely daring character ; we come now to the crown- 
ing audacity of all, namely, his theory as to the origin of 
living creatures. The Theophrastean account of this has 
been well preserved by the doxographers—

Living creatures arose from the moist element as it was 
evaporated by the sun. 97 Man was like another animal, namely, 
a fish, in the beginning. — Hipp. lief, i. G (11. P. 16a).

K I accept the emendation of Diels, which is also adopted in It. 1'. [loc. 
cit. ).

Digitized by GoogleK I accept the emendation of Diels, which is also adopted in It. 1'. [loc. 
cit. ).

Digitized by Google

74 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

Further, he says that in the beginning man was born from 
animals of a different species. His reason is, that, while other 
animals quickly find food for themselves, man alone requires a 
prolonged period of suckling. Hence, had he been originally 
such as he is now, he could never have survived. — Ps.-Plut. 
Strom, fr. 2 (R. P. 16).

The first living creatures were produced in the moist element, 
and were covered with prickly integuments. As time went on 
they came out upon the drier part, and, the integument soon 
breaking off, 98 they changed their manner of life. — Aet. = Plac. 
v. 19. 1 (R. P. ih.).

These statements hardly require comment. It has, 
however, been said that the theories advanced by Anaxi- 
mander have no scientific worth, and that they are mere 
dogmas based upon some half-Oriental mythical founda- 
tion ; so it becomes necessary to point out that, by a rare 
piece of good fortune, not only the opinions have been 
preserved, but also the grounds upon which they were 
formed. Now these grounds, however crudely they may 
have been formulated, were, as appears especially from 
the second of the three passages just given, of a 
thoroughly scientific character. The reference to the 
long period of nursing required by the offspring of the 
human race really contains a very acute piece of scien- 
tific reasoning.

Theology. 21. In the course of our discussion on the " innumer- 
able worlds," we found that Anaximander regarded these 
as gods. They were not, however, eternal, but had both 
a beginning and an end in time, 09 the attribute of 
eternity being confined to the boundless primary sub-

w Tannery, Science hellene, \\ 80, n. 1, makes the very plausible sugges- 
tion, that this part of the theory was derived from observation of certain 
aquatic larv<r, t.'j. those of gnats.

w R. P. 15.

Digitized by Googlw R. P. 15.

Digitized by Googl

ANAXIMENES. 75

stance from which they arose. Of course, then, that was 
also regarded as divine. 100 We shall see in the sequel 
how this view developed ; at present we need only note 
the wide interval which separates these " gods " from 
those of popular religion and the anthropomorphic 
poets.

III. ANAXIMENES.

22. Anaximenes of Miletos, son of Eurystratos, was, Life, 
according to Theophrastos, an " associate " of Anaxi- 
mander. 101 If we accept the very probable emendation of 
Diels, Apollodoros said he " flourished " about the time of 
the fall of Sardeis, and died in 01. LX1II. (528-525

B.C.). 10 *

The following table will show, however, that these 
dates were purely conjectural : —

01. Thalen. Anaximenes.

38 Born.

48 Flourished. I torn.

f>8 Died. Flourished.

63 Died.

It will be observed that just twenty-five Olympiads, 
three generations, or a hundred years, are allowed from 
the birth of Thales to the death of Anaximenes, and the 
latter is made to die at the age of sixty simply to make

100 R. P. 13 and 136. 101 Phy*. Op. fr. 3 (Dox. p. 476, 16).

102 According to our text of D. L. ii. 3 (R. P. 17 A), lie "flourished" 
in 01. LXIII. and died at the time of the fall of Sardeis. This was 
formerly supposed to mean the capture of that city by the revolted 
Ionians ; but the statement of Souidas, s.v. (R. P. 17r), that the 
capture by Cyrus in 546 n.c. is meant, is made probable by the fact that 
this is one of Apollodoros' regular eras. Besides, Hippolytos tells us 
(/?</. i. 7 ; R. P. 17 P.) that Anaximenes flourished in 01. LVIII. (549-546 
v.v.). Clearly, then, we must transpose the dates with Diels {lih. J/iw. 
xxxi. 27).

Digitized by Google

*

76 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.Digitized by Google

*

76 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

him lit into the sc/wma. We cannot, therefore, say 
Anything positive as to his date, except that he must 
have been younger than Anaximander, and must have 
flourished before 494 B.C., when the school was doubtless 
broken up by the destruction of Miletos. 
His book. 2'k Anaximenes wrote a book which certainly sur- 
vived until the age of literary criticism ; for we are told 
that he used a simple and unadorned Ionic, 103 very 
different we may suppose, from the poetical prose of 
Anaximander. 104 We may probably trust this criticism, 
which comes ultimately from the scholars of Alexandria ; 
and, if it is just, it furnishes a good illustration of the 
truth that the character of a man's thoughts is sure to 
find expression in his style. We have seen that the 
speculations of Anaximander were distinguished for their 
hardihood and breadth ; those of Anaximenes are marked 
by just the opposite quality. He appears to have 
thought out his system carefully, but he rejects the 
more audacious theories of his predecessor. The result 
is, that, while his view of the world is on the whole 
much less like the truth than Anaximander's, it is, per- 
haps, more fruitful in ideas that were destined to hold 
their ground.

Theory of the 24. Anaximenes is one of the philosophers on whom 
primary sub- 
stance. Theophrastos wrote a special monograph ; 105 and this, of

course, gives us an additional guarantee for the trust- 
worthiness of the tradition derived from his great work, 
the Opinions. The following 100 are the passages which 
seem to contain the fullest and most accurate account of

•« 1). L. ii. 3 (R. P. 17 A).

,w Cf. the estimate of Theophrastos quoted above, § 12. 
,0i On these monographs see Dox. p. 102.

106 See the conspectus of extracts from Theophrastos given by Diels, 
Dox. p. 135.

Digitized by

AXAXIMENES. 77

wliat lie had to say on tlie central feature of the 
system : —106 See the conspectus of extracts from Theophrastos given by Diels, 
Dox. p. 135.

Digitized by

AXAXIMENES. 77

wliat lie had to say on tlie central feature of the 
system : —

Anaximcncs of Miletos, son of Eurystratos, who had been an 
associate of Anaximander, said, like him, that the underlying 
suhstance was one and infinite. He did not, however, say it 
was indeterminate, like Anaximander, but determinate ; for he 
said it was Air.— Phy*. Op. fr. 3 (Dor, p. 476, R. P. 19 P»).

From it, he said, the things that are, and have been, and 
shall be, the gods and things divine, took their rise, while other 
things come from its offspring. — Hipp. lief. i. 7 (R. P. 21).

"Just as," he said, "our soul, being air, holds us together, 
so do breath and air encompass the whole world." — Aet. i. 3. 4 
(R. P. 18).

And the form of the air is as follows. Where it is most even, 
it is invisible to our sight ; but cold and heat, moisture and 
motion, make it visible. It is always in motion ; for, if it were 
not, it would not change so much as it does.— Hipp. Ref. I.e. 
(R. P. 21).

It differs in different substances in virtue of its rarefaction 
and condensation. — Si m pi. Pht/tt. p. 24 I) (R. P. 19 1)).

When it is dilated so as to be rarer, it becomes fire ; while 
winds, on the other hand, are condensed Air. Cloud is formed 
from Air by "felting;" 107 and this, still further condensed, 
becomes water. Water, condensed still more, turns to earth ; 
and when condensed as much as it can be, to stones. — Hipp. 
Ref. I.e. (R. P. 21). 10 »

25. At the first glance, this theory undoubtedly looks Rarefaction 
like a retrogression from the more refined doctrine of comlenwi 
Anaximander to a cruder view; but a moment's reflection 
will show that this is by no means the case. On the 
contrary, the introduction of rarefaction and condensation 
into the theory is really a notable advance. 100 In fact, it107 " Felting " is the regular term for this process with all the 
early eosmologists.

108 A more condensed form of the same doxographical tradition is given 
by Ps.-Hut. Strom, fr. 3 (R. P. 19 A).

Simr-lieius, p. 149 I) (R. P. 19 b), says, according to the MS.

Digitized by Google

78

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

makes the Milesian cosmology thoroughly consistent and 
intelligible for the first time; since it is clear that a 
system which explains everything by the transforma- 
tions of a single substance, is bound to refer all differ- 
ences to a purely quantitative standard. The infinite 
substance of Anaximander, from which the opposites " in 
it " are " separated out," cannot, strictly speaking, be 
thought of as homogeneous throughout, and the only way 
to save the unity of the primary substance, is to treat all 
diversities as due to the presence of more or less of it in 
a given space. And, when once this important step has 
been taken, it is no longer necessary to make the primary 
substance something "other than the elements"; it may 
just as well be one of them. 
Air. 26. The "air" of which Anaximenes spoke was not 
at all what we call by that name. The word dijp is 
still used in its old Homeric sense of vapour or mist. 110 
The discovery that what we call air was corporeal, and 
not identical with empty space, was first made by 
Empedokles. 111 In all the earlier cosmologists, atjp means 
water in a vaporous state, more or less condensed.

It was natural for Anaximenes to fix upon air in 
this sense as the primary substance; for, in the system of 
Anaximander, it occupied the intermediate place between 
the two fundamental opposites, the sphere of flame and 
the cold, moist mass inside it, being produced, indeed, by 
the action of the one upon the other (§ 18). We know 
from Flutarch that Anaximenes fancied air becamereading, that Theophrastos spoke of rarefaction and condensation in the 
case of Anaximenes alow. This is impossible ; we must read «?«rtv for 
rim, with Usener.

110 There is an instructive discussion on the meaning of the word in 
Schmidt, Synonymik, § 35. It is partially quoted in Chap. IV. n, 37.

»» See Chap. V. § 85.

Digitized by Google

ANAXIMEN'ES.

79

warmer when rarefied, and colder when condensed. Of 
this he satisfied himself by a curious experimental proof. 
When we breathe with our mouths open, the air is 
warm; when we breathe with our lips closed, it is 
cold. 112 .

27. This argument from human breathing brings us The world 
naturally to a very curious point in the theory of Anaxi- 
menes, which is attested by the single fragment which has

come down to us. 113 " Just as our soul, being air, holds 
us together, so do breath and air encompass the whole 
world." The primary substance bears the same relation 
to the life of the world as to that of man. The world, 
in fact, is represented as breathing ; it is kept up by the 
draughts of air which it inhales from the infinite mass 
beyond the heavens. Now this, as we shall see, was just 
the Pythagorean view ; 114 and it is, on the whole, more 
likely that Pythagoras got it from Anaximenes than vice 
versa} 15 At any rate, it is an early instance of the 
argument from the microcosm to the macrocosm, and it 
also marks the first beginnings of an interest in physio- 
logical matters.

28. We turn now to the doxographical tradition con- The part, of 
ceruing the formation of the world and its

He says that, as the air was " felted," the earth first came 
into being. It is very broad, and is accordingly supported by 
the air.— Ps.-Plut. Strain, fr. 3 (R. P. 19 A).

In the same way, the sun and the moon and the other

1,3 De pr.frig. 947 (R. P. 20).In the same way, the sun and the moon and the other

1,3 De pr.frig. 947 (R. P. 20).

"3 It is preserved by Aetios, i. 3. 3 (R. P. 18). He got it ultimately 
from Theophrastos, through the biographical work which he used for his 
chapter wtft *tx»*> I>ox. V- 170-

J1 < See Chap. II. § 42.

115 See, however, A. Chiapelli, Zu Pythagoras and Auaximtne*, in Arch. 
i. p. 582 s<i.

Digitized by

HO EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

heavenly bodies, which are of a fiery nature, are supported by 
the air because of their breadth. The heavenly bodies were 
produced from the earth by moisture rising from it ^Vhen 
this is rarefied, fire comes into being, and the stars are com- 
posed of the fire thus raised aloft. There were also l>odies of 
earthy sulwtance in the region of the stars, revolving along 
with them. And he says that the heavenly bodies do not move 
under the earth, as others sup]>ose, but round it, as a cap turns 
round our head. The sun is hidden from sight, not because it 
goes under the earth, but because it is concealed by the higher 
parts of the earth, and because its distance from us becomes 
greater. The stars give no heat because of the greatness of 
their distance.

Winds are produced when condensed air rushes into rarefied ; 
but when it is concentrated and thickened still more, clouds arc 
generated ; and, lastly, it turns to water. 110 — Hipp. ll*>f. i. 7 
(R. P. 21).

The stars are fixed like nails in the crystalline vault of the 
heavens. — Act. ii. 14. 3 (Dox. p. 344).

They do not go under the earth, but turn round it. — Ib. i. 
1(3. 6 (l)»x. p. 346).

The sun is fiery.— Ib. 20. 2 (Dox. p. 348).

It is broad like a leaf.— Ib. 22. 1 (Dox. p. 352).

The heavenly bodies are diverted from their courses by the 
resistance of compressed air.— Ib. 23. 1 (Dox. p. 352).

The moon is of lire.— Ib. 25. 2 (Dox. p. 356).The heavenly bodies are diverted from their courses by the 
resistance of compressed air.— Ib. 23. 1 (Dox. p. 352).

The moon is of lire.— Ib. 25. 2 (Dox. p. 356).

Anaximcnes explained lightning like Anaximander (p. 70), 
adding as an illustration what happens in the case of the sea, 
which flashes when divided by the oars. — Act. iii. 3. 2 (Dox. 
p. 368).

Hail is produced when water freezes in falling ; snow, when 
there is some air imprisoned in the water. —Ib. 4. 1 (Dox. 
p. 370).

The rainbow is produced when the beams of the sun fall on 
thick condensed air. Hence the anterior part of it seems red, 
being burnt by the sun's rays, while the other part is dark,

116 The text is very corrupt here. I retain i *tituki*u.'\i»;, because «c 
arc told above that winds are condensed air, and I adopt Zeller's *7« u ? 
utfiftiTOL,. Z. 5 p. 2A6, n. 1.

Digitized by LiOOQle

ANAXIMENES

81

owing to the predominance of moisture. And he says that a 
rainbow is produced at night by the moon ; but not often, 
because there is not constantly a full moon, and because the 
moon's light is weaker than tliat of the sun. — Schol. A rat. 117 
(Dos. p. 231).

The earth was like the slab of a table in shaj>e. — Act. iil 10. 
3 (Vox. p. 377).

The cause of earthquakes was the dryness and moisture of the 
earth, occasioned by droughts and heavy rains respectively. — 
lb. 15. 3 {Dox. p. 379).The cause of earthquakes was the dryness and moisture of the 
earth, occasioned by droughts and heavy rains respectively. — 
lb. 15. 3 {Dox. p. 379).

We have seen that Anaximenes was quite justified in 
going back to Thales in regard to his general theory of 
the primary substance ; but it cannot be denied that the 
effect of this upon the details of his cosmology was 
unfortunate. The earth is once more imagined as a 
table-like disc floating upon the air. The sun, moon, and 
planets are also fiery discs which float on the air " like 
leaves." It follows that the heavenly bodies cannot be 
thought of as going under the earth at night, but only 
as going round it laterally like a cap or a millstone. 118 
This curious view is also mentioned in Aristotle's 
Meteorology™ where the elevation of the northern parts 
of the earth, which makes it possible for the heavenly 
bodies to be hidden from sight, is also referred to. In 
fact, whereas Anaximander had regarded the orbits of the 
sun, moon, and stars as oblique with reference to the 
earth, Anaximenes regarded the earth itself as inclined. 
The only real advance i3 the clear distinction of the

117 The source of this in Posddonios, who used Theophrastos. Dox. 
I». 231.

118 Theodoret [dr. Aff. Cur. iv. 10) speaks of those who believed in a 
revolution like that of a millstone, as contrasted with one like that of a 
wheel. Dicls {Dox. p. 46) refers these similes to Anaximenes and Anaxi- 
mander respectively. They come, of course, from Actios ( XoU on Sources, 
B, § 10), though they are given neither by Stobaios nor in the Placita.

119 K, 1. 354a, 28 (R. 1\ 21c).

6

82 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

planets, which float freely in the air, from the fixed stars, 
which are fastened to the sky.

The earthy bodies, which circulate among the planets, 
are doubtless intended to account for eclipses and the 
phases of the moon. 120 
innumerable 29. As might be expected, there is the same difficulty

wo rlils.wo rlils.

about the " innumerable worlds " ascribed to Anaximenes 
as in the case of Anaximander, and most of the arguments 
given above (§ 17) apply here also. In addition, we 
must note the following points. Cicero says that Anaxi- 
menes regarded air as a god, and adds that it came 
into being. 121 That there is some confusion here is 
obvious. Air, as the primary substance, is certainly 
eternal. Now, it is quite likely that Anaximenes called 
Air " divine," as Anaximander did the Boundless ; but it 
is certain that he believed as well in gods who came into 
being and passed away. These arose, he said, from the 
air. This is expressly stated by Hippolytos, 1 - and also by 
St. Augustine. 123 These gods can only be the " innumer- 
able worlds." Simplicius, indeed, takes another view ; 12 * 
but I believe he was misled by some Stoic authority.

ia) See Tannery, Science hellcne, p. 153. Teiehmiiller understood the 
references to these daik planets to mean the solid vault of heaven ; Zeller 
formerly regarded them as solid nuclei of the heavenly bodies. For the pre- 
cisely similar bodies assumed by Anaxagoras, see below. Chap. VI. §111.

121 N. D. i. 25 (R. P. 2\h). On what follows see Krisehe, Forgchumjtn, 
p. 52 sqq.

>» Rtf.L 7. 1 (K. P. 21).

123 Civ. Dei, viii. 2 : Anaximenes omnes ixnim causa* injtnito acri dedit : 
nec decs ncgavit aul tacuit ; non (amen ah ipsis acrem factum, ted ipso* 
exaere ortos credidit,

124 Phys.f. 257 1' (R. P. 21a). The passage from the Placita is of far 
higher authority than this from Simplicius. Note, further, that it is 
only to Anaximenes, Herakleitos, and Diogenes that successive worlds are 
ascribed even here. With regard to Anaximander, Simplicius is quite 
clear. For the Stoic view of Herakleitos, see Chap. III. § 62 ; and for 
Diogenes, Chap. IX. § 158.

Digitized by LiOOQle

CHAPTER II.

SCIENCE AND RELIGION.

.30. So far we have not met with any trace of conscious Migration* to

til 6 W r CStDigitized by LiOOQle

CHAPTER II.

SCIENCE AND RELIGION.

.30. So far we have not met with any trace of conscious Migration* to

til 6 W r CSt

opposition between science and popular beliefs, though 
the views of the Milesian cosmologists were really as 
inconsistent with the religions of the people as with the 
mythology of the anthropomorphic poets. 1 Two circum- 
stances combined to hasten on the inevitable conflict, the 
shifting of the scene to the West, and the religious revival 
which swept over Hellas in the sixth century D.c.

The chief figures in the philosophical history of this 
period were Pythagoras of Samos and Xenophanes of 
Kolophon. Both were Ionians, and yet both spent the 
greater part of their lives in the West. The advance of 
the Persian power in Asia Minor had occasioned an 
extensive migration to Sicily and Southern Italy, of 
which Herodotos has given us a vivid idea by sketching 
a few of its most characteristic episodes ; 2 and this must, 
no doubt, have had a great influence on the development 
of philosophy. The new views had probably grown up 
so gradually in Ionia that the shock of conflict and 
reaction was avoided; but this could no longer be the 
case when they were suddenly transplanted to a region 
where men were wholly unprepared to receive them.

1 For the theological views of Anaxiraander and Anaximenes, see §§ 21 
and 29.

a Cf. Herod, i. 170 (advice of Bias), vi. 22 sqq. (Kale Akte).

I

Digitized by Google

84

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.1 For the theological views of Anaxiraander and Anaximenes, see §§ 21 
and 29.

a Cf. Herod, i. 170 (advice of Bias), vi. 22 sqq. (Kale Akte).

I

Digitized by Google

84

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

Another, though a somewhat later, effect of the migra- 
tion was to bring Science into contact with Rhetoric, 
perhaps the most characteristic product of Western Hellas. 
Even in Parmenides we may note the presence of that 
dialectical and controversial spirit which was destined 
to have so great an influence upon Greek thought, and it 
was this fusion of the art of arguing for victory with the 
search for truth that incidentally gave birth to Logic. 3 
The religious 31. We pass now to the second of the two influences 
mentioned above. Recent researches in a different field 
have thrown an entirely new light upon such phenomena 
as the Orphic and other Orgia* which at this time began 
to spread themselves far and wide. \Y r e now know that 
all these religious manifestations were no innovations; 
but, on the contrary, revivals in a slightly altered form 
of what were really very primitive usages iudeed. 5 A 
recrudescence of superstitious feeling and practice is a 
very common thing in all seasons of public anxiety or 
distress ; and this was emphatically such a period in 
Hellas, threatened as it was at once by Persians on the 
east and Carthaginians on the west. An age of despond- 
ency and even of despair was setting in, and this has left 
its mark on all the thought of the time. 6 It does not 
seem likely, however, that this was due to political 
causes alone ; even at Athens, which was not immediately

3 See Introduction, § I. Gorgias is the typical figure.

4 This is the oldest word for what were more often called "Mysteries " 
in later time*. Both words have misleading associations for us. The 
• word On/ia (cf. ifym) means no more than religious rites, which need not

be "orgiastic" in character any more than Mysteries need be mystical.be "orgiastic" in character any more than Mysteries need be mystical.

5 Professor Robertson Smith's Ltcturts on the Religion of the Stmitt* 
[1889] throw more light ujion ancient religion generally than any other 
work known to me. Specially important for our present purpose are pp. 
339 sqq.

6 On this point cf. v. Wilamowitz-Mullcndorf, Horn. Unter*. p. 215 *\<\.

Digitized by

SCIENCE AND RELIGION.

85

threatened, the feeling of disquiet became so strong that 
the medicine-man, Epimenides, had to be fetched from 
Crete to purify the city from the blood-guiltiness con- 
tracted in the suppression of Kylon's attempt to make 
himself tyrant. 7 The legislation of Drakon, too, was 
based upon the same savage idea of guilt, which is alto- 
gether foreign to the Homeric poems. 3 The cloud did 
not wholly pass away till the days of Marathon and 
Salamis ; what wonder, then, if many meanwhile sought 
for comfort in those old rites which had well-nigh been 
forgotten when Hellas was expanding in every direction ? 9 
It was no longer possible, however, to reproduce 
exactly the former state of things. The old worships 
might and did linger on in the more backward parts of 
mainland Hellas ; but, on the whole, trade and adventure 
had been fatal to them. Colonisation must have broken 
up the old kindreds with which the primitive cults were 
inseparably entwined ; and the place of these had been 
taken by an anthropomorphic and more or less pan- 
hellenic polytheism. But now men were craving once 
more for something that would come nearer home to 
themselves ; and, above all, for something more efficacious 
and practical. The Athene and Apollo who were wor- 
shipped all over Hellas could not possibly attend to their 
votaries as the old local deities had attended to the 
narrow circle of tribesmen over whom they presided. 
There was nothing for it, then, but to set up artificial

tt

7 Hut. Solon, 12 (after Hermippos). See the interesting remarks of 
Giote, vol. iii. p. 85 sq.

8 Grote, i. 24. Purification for blood-guiltiness seems to have been first 
mentioned in the AUhiopis of Arktinos. Kinkel, Ep. Gr. Fr. i. 33.

9 A characteristic savage trait in the Athenian jurisprudence of this 
time waa the provision for the trial of inanimate objects iu the Prytaueion 
(Deraosth. Aris(okr. 76).

Digitized by Google

86

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

communities, 10 based, not upon the tie of kindred blood, 
but upon ceremonies of initiation and purification. 11 This 
is not the place for a detailed account of the Greek 
mysteries ; 12 but it may be briefly pointed out that the 
Eleusinian and Orphic Orgia did not differ fundamentally 
from the rest. The Eleusinia gained greater dignity from 
being taken over by the Athenian State, and the Orphika 
seem to have been more widely spread and more highly 
organised than others ; but their origin was similar. 
The former seem to have developed from an imitative 
reproduction of the processes of sowing, growing, reaping, 
threshing, and the like, intended to secure the goodness 
of the crops and vintage by " sympathetic magic " ; the 
latter were an elaborate system of purification and taboo 
intended to protect the " soul " from the ghostly perils to

10 On these associations see Foucart, Le* Associations Religieiuws chrz Irs 
Grfc*. The ifyiZnt attached to an Attic yi*»t had, no doubt, a similar 
origin. The constitution of the society (tlmwat) of Orgeones in the 
Peiraieus is pretty fully known from inscriptions. Of course, many of 
these societies were composed of foreigners who wished to keep up their 
native worships ; but no one was excluded, not even women and slaves. 
Isagoras and his kindred worshipped the Karian Zeus (Herod, v. 66).11 Robertson Smith, loc. cit. : "The leading feature that distinguished 
them (the Semitic mysteries of the seventh century B.C. ) from the old 
public cults with which they came into competition, is that they were not 
based on the principle of nationality, but sought recruits from men of every 
race who were willing to accept initiation through the mystic sacra- 
ments." This applies as well to Greek as to Semitic mysteries, except 
that "barbarians" ^»«» gwiri,) were excluded from the Eleusinia.

12 Lobeck's Aylaophamm is still essential for an understanding of the 
Mysteries. See also Prof. Ramsay's article on them in the Encyclopctdia 
Britannica (where too much weight is attached to the speculations of late 
authorities), and Mr. Purser's Eleusinia, Mytteria, and Orphica, in the 
Dictionary of Antiquities. Mr. J G. Frazer's Golden Bough is full of 
suggestive ideas on this subject ; perhaps he has not strictly proved all 
his points, but he is certainly on the right road. It is well known that 
the drama was derived from magical imitations of the kind referred to in 
the text. Surely the word itself comes from ifi* in its specially religious 
sense, and has not the meaning of 11 pantomime," which Dr. Verrall gives 
it in his Introduction to the Agamemnon, p. xlviii.

SCIENCE AND RELIGION.

87

which it is constantly exposed. These rites certainly 
did suggest to some of the spectators more or less exalted 
ideas of the life to come, but this was wholly foreign to 
their original purpose. Their founders never thought of 
the sublime interpretations of a Pindar or a Sophokles.

32. All this influenced philosophy as it influenced Influence of 
everything else, but not in the way we should mostre^iSSr'

philosophy.32. All this influenced philosophy as it influenced Influence of 
everything else, but not in the way we should mostre^iSSr'

philosophy.

naturally expect. With us a religious movement gener- 
ally means the sudden realisation of a new or forgotten 
idea ; but the Greek mysteries and cults did not embody 
ideas, they contained nothing in the least degree resem- 
bling dogma. The initiated, Aristotle said, were not 
supposed to learn anything, but merely to be affected in 
a certain way and put into a certain frame of mind. 18 
Ancient religions cared nothing for a man's belief, if only 
it did not set him in open opposition to the public 
worship of the State, and, so long as the proper ceremonial 
was correctly performed, any explanation of it that 
occurred to the spectator might be given. He might 
believe or disbelieve that the Mysteries taught the 
doctrine of immortality ; the essential thing was that 
he should duly sacrifice his pig. It follows, then, 
that the Mysteries cannot have suggested any ideas 
to philosophy, and that their influence was merely 
external.

33. The chief way in which religion influenced Greek Phiiowphy «

a life.

thought through such men as Pythagoras was by intro- 
ducing the idea that philosophy was above all things a 
way of life. For good and for evil this view took firm 
hold of the Greek mind ; it was never again lost sight of, 
and the ideal wise man became a standing type. The

13 Arist. ap. Syncs. Dion. 10, p. 271, Krab. : roi ( Tix«//m*«/ f *l ftmtut n

Digitized by

88 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.13 Arist. ap. Syncs. Dion. 10, p. 271, Krab. : roi ( Tix«//m*«/ f *l ftmtut n

Digitized by

88 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

different results to which this gave rise were, however, 
of very unequal value. On the one hand, the ideal, after 
becoming incarnate in Sokrates, led up to the Stoic sage 
and the Christian saint ; on the other, it gave birth to 
the whole brood of impostors whom Lucian has pilloried 
for our edification. It certainly enabled Greek philosophy 
to do for men what religion has done for them in other 
ages ; but it also paved the way for the destruction 
of philosophy itself. The Neoplatonists were quite 
justified in regarding themselves as the spiritual heirs of 
Pythagoras ; and, in their hands, philosophy ceased to 
exist as such, and became theology. And this tendency 
was at work all along ; hardly a single Greek philosopher 
was wholly uninfluenced by it. Perhaps Aristotle might 
seem to be an exception ; but it is probable that, if we 
still possessed a few such " exoteric " works as the Pro- 
treptikos in their entirety, we should find that the 
enthusiastic words in which he speaks of the " blessed 
life " in the Metaphysics and in the Ethics were less 
isolated outbursts of feeling than they appear now. In 
later days, Apollonios of Tyana showed in practice what 
this sort of thing must ultimately lead to. The theurgy 
and thaumaturgy of the late Greek schools were ouly the 
fruit of the seed sown by the generation which immedi- 
ately preceded the Persian War. 14u In Rep. x. 600 A, Plato speaks of Pythagoras as the introducer of a 
private ili f nt &Uv, contrasting him with public legislators like Solon and 
Charondaa. Zeller quotes (p. 5, w. 1) the following examples of fik»vpf 
in the sense of an ascetic way of life : *«i •/ (sc. «' Birxv) Z1i ty<x«r»f •<» 
(Sozomen, If. Ekkl. vi. 33) ; w±rf,» f ftktrafU, of the Therapeutai and 
Essenes (Philo, Dt vita contempl. 893 D). Luciau's Auction of Lirvs is 
a satire on the whole thing. Apollonios of Tyana {c. 50 a.d.) was wor- 
shipped along with Pythagoras by the adherents of his sect.

Digitized by Googl

PYTHAGORAS

•

89

I. PYTHAGORAS.

34. It is no easy task to give an account of Pytha- Character of

the tradition.

goras that can make any claim to be regarded as history. 15 
Our principal sources of information are the Lives com- 
posed by Ianiblichos, Porphyry, and " Diogenes Laertios." 
That of Ianiblichos is a wretched compilation, based 
chiefly upon the work of the mathematical theologian 
Nikomachos of Gerasa, and upon the romance of Apol- 
lonios of Tyana, who regarded himself as a second 
Pythagoras, and accordingly took great liberties with 
his materials. 16 Porphyry stands, as a writer, on a far 
higher level than Ianiblichos ; but his authorities do not 
inspire us with much more confidence. He, too, made 
use of Nikomachos, and of a certain novelist called 
Autonius Diogenes, author of a work entitled, Marvels 
from beyond Thide} 1 " Diogenes Laertios " quotes, as 
usual, a considerable number of authorities, and the 
statements he makes must be estimated according to 
the nature of the several sources from which they were 
drawn. 18 So far, it must be confessed, our material does

15 Sec E. Rohdc's admirable papers, Die Qurllrn de* Iamblichn* in nt-imr 
Biograpkk de* Pythayora* {Rhrin. Mux. xxvi. and xxvii.). 1 have 
followed these closely in this section.15 Sec E. Rohdc's admirable papers, Die Qurllrn de* Iamblichn* in nt-imr 
Biograpkk de* Pythayora* {Rhrin. Mux. xxvi. and xxvii.). 1 have 
followed these closely in this section.

16 Ianiblichos was originally a disciple of Porphyry, and was contem- 
porary with Constantino. The Lift of Pythaijora* has been edited by 
Nauck (1884). Nikomachos of Gerasa (in Arabia) belongs to the second 
century A.D. There is no evidence that he added anything to the authori- 
ties he followed, but these were already hopelessly vitiated by Xeopytha- 
gorean fables. Still it is to him we chiefly owe the preservation of the 
valuable evidence of Aristoxenos.

17 Porphyry's Life of Pylhagorati is the only considerable extract from 
his History of PhUosophy, in four books, that has survived. It was doubt- 
less saved, as Bernays suggests, by the marvels related in it ( Thtophr. 
Schr. p. 1). The romance of Antonins is the original parodied by Lucian 
in his Vera Hirtoria.

18 The imi.ortauce of the life in Diogenes Laertios consists in the fact

Digitized by Google

90 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.18 The imi.ortauce of the life in Diogenes Laertios consists in the fact

Digitized by Google

90 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

not seem very promising. Further examination shows, 
however, that there are a good many fragments of two 
much older authorities, Aristoxenos and Dikaiarchos, 
embedded in the mass, and this gives us some hope. 
These two writers were both disciples of Aristotle ; they 
were natives of Southern Italy, and contemporary with the 
last generation of the Pythagorean School. Both wrote 
accounts of Pythagoras; and Aristoxenos, who was person- 
cilly intimate with the last representatives of scientific 
Pythagoreanism, also made a collection of the sayings of 
his friends. Now the Neopythagorean story, as we have 
it in Iamblichos, is a tissue of incredible and fantastic 
myths; but, if we sift out the statements which go back 
to Aristoxenos and Dikaiarchos, we can easily construct 
a tolerably rational and connected narrative, in which 
Pythagoras appears, not as a miracle-monger and religious 
innovator, but simply as a gifted moralist and statesman. 
We might then be tempted to suppose that we have here 
the genuine tradition ; but Rohde has shown that this 
would be altogether a mistake. There is, in fact, a third 
and still earlier stratum of tradition to be found in the 
Lives, and this agrees with the latest accounts in repre- 
senting Pythagoras as a wonder-worker and as a religious 
reformer.

Some of the most striking miracles of Pythagoras are 
related on the authority of Andron's Tripod, and of the 
work on the Pythagoreans which is ascribed to Aristotle. 19

that it gives us the story current nt Alexandria before the rise of Neo- 
pythagoreauism and the promulgation of the gospel according to Apollonios 
of Tyana.that it gives us the story current nt Alexandria before the rise of Neo- 
pythagoreauism and the promulgation of the gospel according to Apollonios 
of Tyana.

19 Andron of Ephesos wrote a work on the Seven Wise Men, called, 
npi>arently, The Tripod. The title alludes to the well known story. The 
feats ascribed to Pythagoras in the .Aristotelian treatise remind us of an 
ecclesiastical legend. For example, he kills a deadly snake by biting it ; he

Digitized by Goo

PYTHAGORAS.

91

Both of these treatises seem to belong to the fourth 
century B.C. ; and, in any case, they must certainly have 
been written long before the rise of Neopythagoreanism.

And it is only by assuming the still earlier existence 
of this view that we can explain the allusions of Hero- 
dotos. The Hellespontine Greeks told him that Salmoxis 
or Zamolxis had been a slave of Pythagoras, 20 and they 
must therefore have regarded the latter as a man who 
taught strange doctrines concerning the life after death.

It seems, then, that both the oldest and the latest 
accounts agree in representing Pythagoras as a man of 
the class to which Epimenides and Onomakritos belonged, 
in fact, as a sort of " medicine-man." For some reason, 
however, there was an attempt to save his memory from 
this imputation, and that attempt belonged to the fourth 
century B.C. The significance of this will appear in the 
sequel.

35. We may be said to know for certain that Pytha- Life of rytha-

go ran.

goras was a Samian, and the son of Mnesarchos ; and he 
" flourished," we are told, in the reign of Polykrates. 21

was seen at Kroton and Metapontion at the same time; he exhibited his 
golden thigh at Olympia, and was addressed by a voice from heaven when 
crossing the river Kosas. The same authority stated that he was identified 
by the Krotoniates with Apollo Hyperboreios (Arist. fr. 186).

20 Herod, iv. 95 (R. P. 41).20 Herod, iv. 95 (R. P. 41).

21 For the nationality and parentage of Pythagoras we have the excellent 
authority of Herodotos, iv. 95 (R. P. 41 A), and Heraklcitos, fr. 17, Byw. 
<R. P. 24a). There were two widely different dates given for his "Horuit" 
in antiquity. Eratosthenes (ap. D. L. viii. 47) identified him with an 
Olympian victor belonging to 01. XLVIII. 1 (588 n.c. ) ; but this cannot

* be reconciled with what we otherwise know. The other date, given by

Apollodoros, is based on the statement of Aristoxeuos, quoted by Porphyry 
( V. Pyth. 9), that Pythagoras left Samoa from dislike to the tyranny of 
Polykrates (R. P. 44a). This gives 533-2 or 529-8 b.c, according to 
the date assumed for Polykrates (Busolt, Or. Gcsch. ii. p. 233, n. 1). It 
will be noticed that we have here a case where Apollodoros corrects his 
authority Eratosthenes. (See Note oil Sources, D. )

Digitized by Google

92 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

This date cannot be far wrong ; for Herakleitos already 
speaks of him in the past tense. 22 It is also certain that 
he founded his society at Kroton, a city which stood in 
the closest relations with Samos ; but beyond this we 
have only probabilities to guide us.

The extensive travels attributed to Pythagoras by late 
writers are, no doubt, apocryphal. Even the statement 
that he visited Egypt, though it is far from improbable 
if we consider the close relations between Polykrates of 
Samos and Amasis, rests on no sufficient authority ; for 
it first occurs in the Bousiris of Isokrates 23 a work which 
/does not even pretend to be historical. Herodotos, it is 
true, observes that the Pythagorean rule not to wear wool

44

in temples agreed with the Egyptian custom, but he says 
nothing of its having been derived from Egypt. 24 He 
says also in another place that the belief in transmigra- 
tion caine from Egypt, though certain Greeks, both at 
\an earlier and a later date had passed it off as their own. 
He refuses, however, to give their names, so we cannot 
tell whether he was thinking of Pythagoras or not. 25 Nor 
does it matter ; for the Egyptians did not, as a matter 
of fact, believe in transmigration at all, and Herodotos 
was simply deceived by the symbolism of the monuments. 
The other stories as to the wanderings of Pythagoras are 
palpable inventions, and need not even be mentioned here.

Aristoxenos said that Pythagoras left Samos in order 
to escape from the tyranny of Polykrates. 26 This is quite

22 Fr. 1G and 17, Hyw. (R. P. 24 and 24a). 23 11. 28 (R. P. 43).

34 Herod, ii. 81 (R. P. 43a). According to Stein, the oldest family of 
MSS. simply reads, 41 they agree with the so-called Orphics and Pytha- 
goreans." The words xsi B««x<x«rr< . . . Aiyvwrivn are a gloss.

35 Herod, ii. 123. If Herodotos had known of the visit to Egypt he 
would almost certainly have mentioned it here.

38 Ap. Porphyry, Life of Pythagoras, c. 9 (R. P. 44a).

Digitized by Google

PYTHAGORAS. 93

possible ; for, of course, no tyrant would have tolerated 
the formation of a society such as his. On leaving 
Samos, he chose Kroton for his abode, and there estab- 
lished his order. How long he remained in that city we 
do not know ; he died at Metapontion, whither he had 
retired on the first signal of revolt against his influence. 2730. There is no reason to believe that the detailed The Order, 
accounts which have been handed down to us with regard 
to the organisation of the Pythagorean Order rest upon 
any historical basis. In the case of many of these 
statements we can still see exactly how they came to 
be made. The distinction of grades within the Order, 
variously called Mathematicians and Akousmatics, Esoterics 
and Exoterics, Pythagoreans and Pythagoruts; 28 is a mere 
invention designed to explain how there came to be two 
widely different sets of people, each calling themselves 
the disciples of Pythagoras, in the fifth and fourth 
centuries b.c. So, too, the statement that the Pythagoreans 
were bound to inviolable secrecy, which goes back to 
Aristoxenos, 20 is intended to explain why there is no

27 It may be taken as certain that Pythagoras spent his last days at 
Metapontion ; Aristoxenos said so (ap. Iambi. V. Pyth. 249), and Cicero 
(J)e Fin. v. 4) speaks of the honours which continued to be paid to his 
memory in that city (R. P. 48c). Of. also Andron, fr. « (F. H. G. ii. 347).

* For these distinctions see Porphyry ( V. Pyth. 27) and Iamblichos 
( l r . Pyth. 81), quoted K. P. 47 and 47k The name ««.^«™.; is clearly 
related to the «'««r i i*«T« ) with which we shall have to deal shortly (§ 39).29 For the "mystic silence," see Aristoxenos, ap. D. L. viii. 15 (R, P. 
46a). Tannery, Stir le secret dam Ve'cole de Pythagore {Arch. i. p. 28 sqq.), 
thinks that the mathematical doctrines were the secrets of the school, | 
and that these were divulged by Hippasos. But the most reasonable 
view is that there were no secrets at all except of a ritual kind. Aris- 
toxenos and his friends, however, had to make out that the mathematical 
science and the theory of numbers went back to the early days of Pytha- 
gorean ism, and, at the same time, to explain how there was no trace of 
them before the end of the fifth century. For this purpose the theory of 
a "mystic silence" was very convenient.

Digitized by Google

94 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

trace of the Pythagorean philosophy before Philolaos. 
Later on, when it was thought desirable to credit Pytha- 
goras with the whole philosophy of Plato and Aristotle, 
the " mystic silence " was, of course, alleged in explana- 
tion of the fact that the oldest Pythagorean writings 
showed no trace of the theory of Ideas.

The Pythagorean Order was simply, in its origin, a 
religious fraternity of the type described above, and not, 
as has sometimes been maintained, a political league. 30 
It certainly did become a political force ; but for all that 
its primary purpose must simply have been to secure for 
its own members, by means of a system of ritual and 
taboo, a more adequate satisfaction of the religious 
instinct than that supplied by the State religion. It 
was, in fact, an institution for the cultivation of cere- 
monial holiness. From the nature of the case, however, 
an independent society within a Greek State was apt to 
be brought into conflict with the larger body. The only 
way in which it could then assert its right to exist was 
by identifying the State with itself, that is, by securing 
the control of the sovereign power. The history of the 
Pythagorean Order, so far as it can be traced, is, accord-30 Plato, Rep. x. 600 A, implies that Pythagoras held no public office. 
The view that the Pythagorean sect was a political league, maintained 
in modern times by Krische {Dc socu tatU a Pythagora conditio aco/«> 
politico, 1830), goes back, ns Rohde has shown (loc. cit.), to Dikaiarchos, 
the champion of the "Practical Life," just as the view that it was a 
scientific society goes back to the mathematician and musician Aristoxenos. 
The former antedated Archytas, just as the latter antedated Philolaos 
(see Chap. VII. § 114). Grote's good sense enabled him to see this quite 
clearly (vol. iv. p. 329 sq.). It is perhaps worth while to point out the 
absurdity of the connection which Otfried Muller imagined U'tween 
Pythagoreanism and his favourite "Dorian State." Pythagoras was an 
Ionian, and Kroton was not a Dorian but an Achaian city, or, at any rate, 
if we say that the Achaians were Dorians, we must use the word in a 
wider sense than 0. Midler's, and this would deprive his remarks of all 
point.

Digitized by Google

PYTHAGORAS.

95

ingly, the history of an attempt to supersede the State ; 
and its political action is best explained as a mere 
incident of this attempt, The only way in which the 
Pythagoreans could hope to realise their design was by 
allying themselves with the aristocratic party. It was 
obviously more reasonable to try to convert a small 
governing body to Pythagorean ism than to preach to the 
masses, who were never likely to be won over. Indeed, 
a whole State consisting of Pythagoreans alone could 
hardly have maintained its existence ; and this, as we 
know from Porphyry, 31 was one of the arguments em- 
ployed against the society when it was revived at a 
later date. The answer to it was, of course, obvious. 
The Pythagoreans did not wish to convert everybody, 
but aimed at being a " peculiar people."Tor a time the new Order seems actually to have 
succeeded in securing the supreme power, but the reac- 
tion soon came. Under the leadership of one Kylon, the 
democracy of Kroton was able to assert itself victoriously 
against the domination of the religious Order which ruled 
the State. This, we may well believe, had been galling 
enough. The " rule of the saints " would be nothing to 
it ; and we can still imagine and sympathise with the 
irritation felt by the plain man of those days at having 
all his legislation done for him by a set of incompre- 
hensible pedants, who made a point of abstaining frorify 
beans, and would not let him beat his own dog, because x 
they recognised in its howls the voice of a departed 
friend. 32 This feeling would be aggravated by the private ' 
religious worship of the society. Greek democracies

" Dt Afat. I 66.

32 See Xenophanes, fr. 18 (R. P. 73). But it is not quite certain that 
Xenophanes is here referring to Pythagoras.

Digitized by Google

96

EAKLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

could never pardon the introduction of new gods. Their 
objection to this was not, however, that the gods in 
question were false gods. If they had been so, it would 
not have mattered so much. What they could not 
tolerate was that any one should establish a private 
means of communication between himself and the unseen 
powers. This introduced, as it were, an unknown and 
incalculable element into the arrangements of the State, 
which might very likely be hostile to the democracy, and 
was in auy case a standing menace to the mass of the 
citizens, who had no means of propitiating the intruding 
divinity. And it was nearly as bad to worship the 
ordinary gods of the State in a private way ; for it was 
manifestly unfair that any section of the community 
should have access to the supreme dispensers of good 
and ill at times and seasons when the ordinary man was 
excluded. The religious creed of the Greek citizen may,/m short, be summed up in the single tenet promulgated 
by the Delphic oracle/ that all must worship " according 
to the use of the city," and none must be suffered to 
gain the private ear of the gods for the furtherance of

' his own ends. \ Were this the place, it would be interest- 
ing to follow out the history of this feeling, and to show 
how rulers like Peisistratos reconciled the mysteries with 
the interests of the State as a whole by making them a 
matter of national concern.

Aristoxenos' version of the events which led to the 
downfall of the Pythagorean Order is given at length by 
lamblichos. According to this, Kylon was a prominent 
and powerful citizen, whom Pythagoras had declined to 
receive into the society. He therefore became a bitter 
foe of the Order, and from this cause Pythagoras removed 
from Kroton to Metapontiou, where he died. The

Digitized by

PYTHAGORAS.

97

Pythagoreans, however, still retained possession of the 
government of Kroton, till at last the partisans of Kylon 
set fire to Milo's house, where they wore assembled. Of 
those in the house only two, Archippos and Lysis, 
escaped. The rest of the story is somewhat confused in 
the report of Iamblichos ; but, if we adopt the highly 
probable interpretation of Eohde, 33 it can be made out 
well enough. Archippos retired to Taras ; Lysis, first to 
Taras and then to Thebes, where he became later on 
the teacher of Epameinondas. The Pythagoreans who 
remained concentrated themselves at Rhegion ; but, as 
things went from bad to worse, they all left Italy except 
Archytas, and went to Hellas, where they remained till 
the final extinction of the school. 3 *This account has all the air of being historical, and 
agrees very well with what we otherwise know. Of 
course the merely personal motives ascribed to Kylon 
involve a suppression of the truth which is probably 
deliberate ; but, on the whole, we may accept the story 
as a fair statement of what occurred. The mention of 
Lysis proves that these events were spread over more 
than one generation. The coup d'etat of Kroton cannot 
have occurred before 4~>0 B.C., if the teacher of Epa- 
meinondas (b. circa 420 kc.) escaped from it, and it

Jihein. Mu*. xxvi. p. f>t»5, m. 1. 
"The narrative in the text (Iambi. V. Pyth. 2'.0 ; It. P. 49/*) goes 
back to Aristoxcnos and Dikaiarchos (R. P. 49a). There is no reason to 
.suppose that their erroneous view of Pythagoras has vitiated their account 
of what must have been a ]>erfeetly well-known piece of history. Accord- 
ing to the later story, Pythagoras himself was burned to death in the 
house of Milo, along with his disciples. This is merely a dramatic com- 
pression of the whole scries of events into a single scene ; we have seen 
that Pythagoras died at Metapontion before the final catastrophe. The 
valuable reference in Poly bios, ii. 39 (R. P. 49), to the burning of 
Pythagorean m'tlp*. certainly implies that the disturbances went on 
for a very considerable time.

7

Digitized by Google

98 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

may have occurred even later. But it must have beeu 
before 410 that the Pythagoreans left lihegion for 
Hellas; Philolaos was certainly at Thebes about that 
time.98 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

may have occurred even later. But it must have beeu 
before 410 that the Pythagoreans left lihegion for 
Hellas; Philolaos was certainly at Thebes about that 
time.

The political power of the Pythagoreans was now gone 
for ever, and no doubt this was a very good thing for the 
Italian cities. It was even better, however, for the 
Pythagoreans themselves; for it led them to drop the 
merely magical and superstitious parts of their system, 
and enabled them to take their place as one of the 
scientific schools of Hellas. We shall have to consider 
them in this light later on ; it would be an anachronism 
to introduce their numerical philosophy here. 
Wantofevi- ^7. Of the opinions of Pythagoras we know even less

denco as to the

teaching of than of his life. Aristotle clearly knew nothing either of

Pythugora*. . .

ethical or of physical doctrines going back to the founder 
of the society himself. 35 Aristoxenos only gave a stringPythugora*. . .

ethical or of physical doctrines going back to the founder 
of the society himself. 35 Aristoxenos only gave a string

31 When discussing the Pythagorean system, Aristotle always refers 
it to "the Pythagoreans," not to Pythagoras himself. That this was 
intentional seems to be proved l>y the curious phrase : *\ nfi c«» 'ir.Ai'.t, 
Vt Uvfmyifuu (De Calo, IS, 13. 293a, 20). Pythagoras himself 
is only thrice mentioned in the whole Aristotelian corpus. In only, one 
of these places (MM. 1182a, 11) is any philosophical doctrine ascribed to 
him. We are told there that he was the first to discuss the subject of 
goodness, and that he made the mistake of identifying its various forms 
with numbers. But this is just one of the things which prove the late 
date of the Mayna Moralin. In Rh?t. P», 23. 1398ft, 11, we arc told that 
Alkidamas cited the fact of the honours i»aid by the Italiots to the 
memory of Pythagoras to show that all men honour the wise. But this 
does not imply that he was a philosopher ; for the r#p.i' with whom he is 
associated are Archilochos, Sappho, Chilon, Anaxagoras, Solon, and 
Lykourgos. lastly, in the Mrtaphyslcx (A, 5. 986a, 29) we have the state- 
ment that Alkmaion (§ 79) flourished in the old age of Pythagoras. As 
this occurs in the middle of a discussion of the Pythagorean philosophy, 
it might be thought to imply that Pythagoras himself originated that 
philosophy. But, in the first place, the statement is omitted in the best 
MS. (A b ), and is not commented upon by Alexander. In the second 
place, the purpose of the statement, even if genuine, is merely to justify 
the doubts expressed by Aristotle as to the relation between Alkmaiou

Digitized by Google

PYTHAGORAS.

99Digitized by Google

PYTHAGORAS.

99

of moral precepts. 36 Dikaiarchos is quoted by Porphyry 
as asserting that hardly anything of what Pythagoras 
taught his disciples was known except the doctrine of 
metempsychosis, the periodic cycle, and the kinship of all 
living creatures. 37 The fact is, that, like all teachers who 
introduce a new way of living rather than a new view of 
the world, Pythagoras preferred oral instruction to the 
dissemination of his opinions by writing. We are told 
quite distinctly that there were no Pythagorean writings 
of any kind till the time of Philolaos. All that has 
come down to us under the names of the various 
disciples of Pythagoras is pure forgery, of the most 
worthless kind. 38 The whole early history of Pytha- 
goreanism is therefore conjectural, and all we really know 
about the later views of the school is what we are told 
by Aristotle. It will be seen, however, that we do learn 
a good deal from that source, and it is possible to draw 
thence a few inferences as to the earlier forms of the 
doctrine. We may therefore make an attempt to under- 
stand, in a very general way, what the position of 
Pythagoras in the history of (rreek thought must have 
been.

and the Pythagoreans. In fart, it really tells strongly against the view 
that the Pythagorean system originated with Pythagoras. Had it done 
so, how could Aristotle suppose that j»art of it may have been borrowed 
from Alkmaion, who was at least a little later in date? It is worthy of 
notice also that Aristotle {Met. A, 5. 9856, 23) speaks of the Pytha- 
goreans us " conteynoorarti with and earlier than" EmtKxlokles. Anaxa- 
goras, Leukippos, and Demokritos (i» 2i r,vrut **> r,i r»vr**).

M The fragments of the lW«y#/»u«J i<r*<p*ru ( of Aristoxenos are given 
by Muller, F. H. G. ii. p. 272 wjq.

r I'. Pyth. 19 (R. P. 46^.M The fragments of the lW«y#/»u«J i<r*<p*ru ( of Aristoxenos are given 
by Muller, F. H. G. ii. p. 272 wjq.

r I'. Pyth. 19 (R. P. 46^.

38 Porph. Schol. Br. 7t> (K. P. 507>). It was not till the first century 
B.c. tliat Pythagorean writings began to be manufactured in considerable 
numbers. See Diels, Dox. p. 1T.0, and Kin gefiiUchtt* Pythagora*- 
l,uch, in Arch. iii. p. 4f»l sqq. Cf. also Bernays, Die Heraklititchm 
Brief r, n. 1. ' '* -

100 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

" Transmit- y 38. In the first place, then, there can hardly be any 
question that he really taught the doctrine of trans-

mi 
coi

inigration. Herodotos, as we have seen, brings him into 
mnexion with Salinoxis, doubtless on this very ground. 
The belief in metempsychosis is most easily explained 
as an inference from the primitive theory of a kinship 
between men and beasts. We have just seen that 
Pythagoras certainly held this view, 31 ' which is associated 
among savage tribes with a system of taboos upon 
certain kinds of food. If we find that the Pythagorean 
doctrine of transmigration was, as a matter of fact, 
inseparably bound up with restrictions of precisely the 
same nature, this will go far to show that it had its 
origin in the same primitive ideas, and that it was really 
due to something like the savage idea, a revival of 
which would be quite intelligible in connexion with the 
foundation of an artificial religious community. Now, 
that the Pythagorean rule really was an elaborate system 
of taboos is well known. The most familiar of these is 
that upon beans, but the abstinence from animal sacri- 
fices and the use of wool belong to the same class of 
observances.It has, indeed, been doubted by some whether we 
have any right to accept as historical what we are told 
by such late writers as Porphyry on the subject of 
Pythagorean abstinence from animal flesh and beans. 
Aristoxenos, whom we have admitted to be one of our 
oldest sources of information, may be cited to prove 
that the original Pythagoreans knew nothing of these 
restrictions. He undoubtedly said 40 that Pythagoras did 
not abstain from animal food in general, but only from 
the flesh of the ploughing ox and the ram. He also said

» See i». 37. *» Fr. 7.

PYTHAGORAS.

101» See i». 37. *» Fr. 7.

PYTHAGORAS.

101

that Pythagoras preferred beans to every other vegetable, 
as being the mo3t laxative. Aristoxenos, however, is a 
witness who very often breaks down under cross- 
examination, and he usually wrote with some purpose 
quite different from the mere truthful record of facts. 
It is necessary, then, to ask why he takes the trouble to 
make these assertions at all. Now the palpable exaggera- 
tion of his statement about beans shows that he is 
endeavouring to combat what was a deeply-rooted opinion 
in his own time, and we are therefore able to show, out 
of his own mouth, that the tradition which made the 
Pythagoreans abstain from animal flesh and beans already 
existed long before there were any Neopythagoreans 
interested in maintaining such an idea. Still, it may be 
asked what motive Aristoxenos could have had for 
denying the common belief. The answer is simple and 
instructive. He had been the friend of the last of the 
Pythagoreans; and, in their time, the merely superstitious 
part of Pythagoreanism had been dropped, except by 
some zealots whom the heads of the society refused to 
acknowledge. It was natural, then, that they should 
wish to forget the original practices of their Order, and 
Aristoxenos was always ready to lend himself to any 
fraud, pious or otherwise. And now we see how it is 
that he represents Pythagoras himself in so different a 
way from both the older and the later traditions ; it is 
because he gives us the view of the more enlightened 
sect of the Order. Those who clung faithfully to the 
old practices were now regarded as heretics, and all 
manner of theories were set on foot to account for their 
existence. It was related, for instance, fhat they 
descended from one of the " Akousmatics," who had 
never been initiated into the deeper mysteries of the

Digitized by Google

102

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.Digitized by Google

102

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

" Mathematicians." 41 All this, however, is pure inven- 
tion. The satire of the poets of the Middle Comedy 
proves clearly enough that, even though the friends of 
Aristoxenos did not practise ahstinence, there were plenty 
of people in the fourth century, calling themselves 
Pythagoreans, who did. 42 These we regard as the repre- 
sentatives of the original customs of the sect.

/ We know, then, that Pythagoras taught the kinship 
of beasts and men, and we infer that his rule of 
abstinence from flesh was based, not upon either 
humanitarian or ascetic grounds, but simply on taboo. 
This is strikingly confirmed by a fact which we are 
told in Porphyry's Defence of Abstinence. The statement 
in question does not indeed go back to Theophrastos, as 
so much of Porphyry's tract certainly does ; ^ but it is,

41 The sect of the " Akousmatics " were said to descend from Hippasos 
(Iambi. V. I'yth. 81 ; K. P. 47). Now HippaM>s was the author of a 
ftum*a{ >.iy»( (D. L. viii. 7 ; R. P. 47<*}, that is to say, of a superstitious

we are about to consider ; for we are told that it was written 5i«£#xii 
llutayipu. The Akousmatics had no tradition of mathematical science, 
and we have .seen that the Mathematicians explained this by saying they 
were originally an inferior class of Pythagorean students, and that 
Hippasos himself had never been initiated into the higher mysteries. It 
is simply a case of the very common process by which those who have 
kept up the original ideas of a sect come to be looked upon as heretics by 
those who have gone in for "development."

4 - See, for instance, the PythayorizoiMi of Alexis, fr. 2. History has not 
been kind to the Akousmatics; but it is probable that they never quite 
died out, though they may have become iwirtially merged in the Cynic 
sect. The name* of Diodoros of Aspcmloa and Nigidius Figulus help us 
to bridge the gulf between them and A]>ollonios of Tyana.4:5 See IJeruays, Thtophra*to»' SchrifL iib<r FrummUjkeit. Porphyry "a 
tract, Uipi i<r»^r,t iu^i/^«r, was doubtless saved from the general destruction 
of his writings by its conformity to the ascetic tendencies of the age. Even 
St. Jerome made constant use of it in his polemic against Iovianus, though 
he is careful not to mention Porph yry's name (Theophr. Schr. ?i. 2). The 
tract is addressed toCastricius Finnus, the disciple and friond of Plotinos, 
who had fallen away from the strict vegetarianism of the Pythagorean*.

u

igitized by Google

PYTHAGORAS.

103

in all probability, due to Herakleides of Pontos. 44 It is 
to the effect that, though the Pythagoreans did as a rule 
abstain from flesh, they nevertheless ate it when they 
sacrificed to the gods.* 5 Now, among savage peoples, we 
constantly find that the sacred animal is slain and eaten 
sacramentally by its kinsmen on certain solemn occasions, 
though in ordinary circumstances this would be the 
greatest of all impieties. Here, again, we have to do 
with a very primitive belief ; and we need not therefore 
attach any weight to the denials of Aristoxenos. 46

39. We shall now know what to think of the various Akousmat*. 
Pythagorean rules and precepts which have come down 
to us. These are of two kinds, and have very different 
sources. Some of them, derived from the collection of 
Aristoxenos, and for the most part preserved by 
Iamblichos, are purely moral in character, besides being, 
on the whole, very dull. They do not pretend to go

u " The well-known Herakleides of Herakleia in Pontos, who showed 
his versatility, now as a strict Platonist of the school, now as a strict 
Peripatetic, and again as a litterateur of no school at all" (Bernays, 
Theophr. Schr. p. 10), wrote a work on the Pythagoreans (D. L. v. 88) 
in the last of these three capacities.43 The passage occurs De Abst. p. 58, 25 Xauek. : lmp»vn 5» nut *«u ttirtlt 
Hmrtau rZ* \ft^x.»* ™t llufxy $putu t , in Hun ti*t. The part of the work 
from which this is taken comes from one Clodius, on whom see IWnays, 
Theophr. Schr. p. 11. He was probably the rhetorician Scxtus Clodius, 
and a contemporary of Cicero. Bernays has shown that he made use of 
the work of Herakleides of Pontos n. 19). On "mystic sacrifice" 
generally, see Robertson Smith, ltd. Sem. i. p. 276.

48 Porphyry (V. Pyth. c. 15) has preserved a tradition to the effect 
that Pythagoras recommended a flesh diet for athletes (Milo?). This 
story must have originated at the same time as those related by 
Aristoxenos, and in a similar way. In fact, Bernays has shown that 
it comes from Herakleides uf Pontos {Theophr. Schr. n. 8). Iamblichos 
{V. Pyth. 5. 25) and others (D. L. viii. 13. 47) got out of this by 
supposing it referred to a gymnast of the same uame. We see here 
very distinctly how the Neoplatoniats for their own ends endeavoured 
to go back to the original form of the Pythagorean legend, and to explain 
away the fourth century reconstruction.

Digitized by Google

104

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

back to Pythagoras himself ; they are merely the sayings 
which the last generation of " Mathematicians " heard 
from their predecessors. The second class is of a very 
different nature, and the sayings which belong to it are 
called Akousmata* 7 which points to their being the pro- 
perty of that sect of Pythagoreans which had faithfully 
preserved the old customs. A good many of these are 
quoted by Plutarch, who interprets them as "symbols" 
of moral truth, though his interpretations are very far- 
fetched indeed, and it does not require a very practised 
eye to see that they are genuine taboos of a thoroughly 
primitive type. I give a few examples in order that the 
reader may judge what the famous Pythagorean rule of 
life was really like. The numbers are those of Orelli: —1. Not to sit on a quart-measure.

2. Not to step across the beam of a balance.

4. Not to eat the heart.

5. To abstain from beans.

6. Not to taste black-tails (a kind of fish).

7. Not to let swallows share one's roof.

8. Not to stir the fire with iron.

9. Not to put bread in a pot.

10. When the pot is taken off the fire, not to leave the mark 
of it in the ashes, but to stir them together.

29. Do not look in a mirror beside a light.

33. When you rise from tho bedclothes, roll them together 
and smooth out the impress of the body.

If this last rule were not observed, some evil-disposed 
person might stick pins in the impress ! It is much to 
be wished that some competent anthropologist would 
edit these curious remains, and collect the savage 
parallels.

47 These are given in a convenient form by Orelli, Opusc. Grctc. Sentent. 
\>. 60 s<jq.

Digitized by Google

PYTHAGORAS

105

Further examples of the close relation between 
Pythagorean and savage modes of thought might easily 
be given ; but these are probably enough to justify our 
general view. The kinship of men and beasts, the 
abstinence from flesh, and the doctrine of metempsychosis 
all hang together, and form a perfectly intelligible whole 
for any one who has bestowed the slightest attention on 
the mental habits of primitive men everywhere.

40. Were this all we knew of Pvthagoras, we should Scientific

tf ich in"40. Were this all we knew of Pvthagoras, we should Scientific

tf ich in"

be tempted to delete his name from the history of philo- 
sophy altogether, and to relegate him, with Epimenides 
and Onomakritos, to the class ofVmedicine-men. 49 > "YVe 
shall see, however, that such a description of him would 
be quite inadequate. He is a highly ambiguous figure, 
and cannot be disposed of by any single formula. 
Herakleitos says 49 that he had pursued the scientific 
investigation of nature further than any other man. He 
at once qualifies this, however, by adding that he turned 
his " much learning " into an " art of mischief." 50 It is 
clear what Herakleitos means by this " art of mischief." 
He is expressing the same feeling as was in the mind 
of the sillographer Timon of Phlious, a sceptical satirist 
of philosophers who wrote in the third century B.C., when 
lie said that Pythagoras had " fallen away into magical 
opinions in his hunt for men." 51 Still, it remains true 
that Herakleitos acknowledges the scientific eminence of 
Pythagoras, and we must take account of his testimony.

48 Called in Greek yinrif and kyvyT**. 
• Fr. 17, Byw. (11. P. 24 A).

60 I caunot believe that Irrcfln in Herakleitos means anything else than 
n *ip) qUut ;»t^;»». The fragment is ably discussed in Diels' paper 
referred to above, n. 38.

" Timon, fr. 3 (Wachsmuth, Sill. (jr. p. 93) : Uvfmyi^ ™ yir,r« f

106

KARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY." Timon, fr. 3 (Wachsmuth, Sill. (jr. p. 93) : Uvfmyi^ ™ yir,r« f

106

KARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

Herodotos, too, calls Pythagoras " bv no means the 
weakest sophist of the Hellenes." 52 There is not the 
slightest disparagement implied in the use of the word 
" sophist " here ; it was, as we shall have occasion to see 
more than once, the regular word for a scientific man at 
this date. We infer from all this, then, that Pythagoras 
must have had a cosmological theory of some sort. 
What it was can only he guessed ; for, though he 
probably made no secret of it, he did not choose to 
commit it to writing. But certain recent conjectures 
on the subject are at once so probable in themselves, 
and throw so much light upon the development of Greek 
science, that they cannot be passed over in silence. 
Dualism. /41. We know, in the first place, that the Pythagorean 
. philosophy of later times was fundamentally dualist, and 
/ it seems probable that this dualism goes back to the 
/ founder of the school. It will be shown in the Fourth 
V \£hapter that the "Second Part" of the poem of Par- 
menides is, in all probability, a sketch of the early 
Pythagorean cosmology, and its details will be discussed 
from this point of view. Here we shall only take notice 
of the fact that it expounds a dualistic system as the 
common opinion of men, and it is hard to see who these 
" men " can be if they are not the Pythagoreans. Nor 
could anything be more natural than that a system of 
this kind should have arisen just at this time. There 
really was a latent dualism in the strife of opposites upon 
which Anaximander had insisted, and it was sure to come 
out somewhere. We know in addition to this that the 
Pythagoreans of later times held that the two primary 
\ opposites, the Limited and the Unlimited, were brought 
together in a " harmony " which could be numerically

62 Herod, iv. 95 [K. P. 41 A).

I

Digitized by Google

PYTHAGORAS.

10762 Herod, iv. 95 [K. P. 41 A).

I

Digitized by Google

PYTHAGORAS.

107

determined. 53 Now, if Pythagoras himself believed in 
a fundamental dualism ; and if, as all our authorities 
testify, he pursued mathematical and musical studies, 
this theory would naturally present itself to him at once. 
Besides, the way in which Herakleitos uses this very 
word " harmony " suggests irresistibly that he already 
knew of some such view. 54 The statement that Pytha- 
goras was the first to call the world Kosmos is not in 
itself incredible, and would agree very well with this. 53

42. There is, lastly, one point of the greatest import- The world as

breathing.

ance, upon which Tannery, who has done much to clear <• 
up the difficulties of Pythagoreanism, rightly insists. 
Xenophanes, after laying down that the World or God 
was sentient all over, seems to have thought it worth 
while to add that it did not breathe. 56 We have seen 
already that the idea of the world breathing was origin- 
ated by Anaximenes ; but it was also, as we know from 
Aristotle, the view of the later Pythagoreans that different 
substances were separated from one another by the "Air"

M See below, Chap. VII. § 119 sqq. 
64 See below, Chap. III. § 61.

M It is true that the doxographers ascribe the use of the word to 
Anaxinander ami Anaximenes. The former appears, however, to have 
said that the kxu f u •^*>.;, not the iru f » t were gods {supra,

Chap. I. § 17) ; ami this may indicate that the term was unknown.Chap. I. § 17) ; ami this may indicate that the term was unknown.

It is certain that the use of the word in the sense of "world" did not 
belong to ordinary speech. In Herakleitos it has not yet this meaning, 
and even Xenophon sjxiaks of " what the sophists cull the Kwmos " 
{Mem. i. 1. 11). That being so, we naturally ask who is most likely to 
have first used the word in this sense. The answer cannot be doubtful. 
Anaximander regarded the world as a scene of strife and injustice, and 
would hardly, therefore, have applied to it a word which originally meant 
the disciplined order of an army. On the other hand, this is quite in 
accordance with Pythagorean modes of thought.

M D. L. ix. 19 (K. P. 86c). It is true that Diogenes is here quoting 
from a wretched biographical compendium (Dox. p. 10$) ; but this touch 
can hardly be a mere invention.

Digitized by Google

108 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

' which the world inhales from bevond the heavens. 57 I 
cannot but assent to Tannery's contention that this isDigitized by Google

108 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

' which the world inhales from bevond the heavens. 57 I 
cannot but assent to Tannery's contention that this is

/what Xenophanes denied, and he was forced to deny it ; 
for he did not allow, we shall see, that there was any- 
thing outside the world at all. Now, if it is admitted 
that Pythagoras himself originated this theory, we shall 
have to regard the modification which he made in the 
Milesian hypothesis somewhat in the following way. 
Anaximenes had supposed that the world was kept up 
by draughts of vapour or "air" from outside the 
heavens. To Pythagoras this air was identical with 
the space which the geometer studied, and he thought 
of things as made of space bounded in various ways. 
The air was, as Anaximenes had said already, " the 
boundless" or unlimited, and all that Pythagoras 
required in order to construct a world out of it was 
something to limit it. This he found, it seems, in Fire. 58 
Apparently the light element was supposed to contain 
a principle of limit as opposed to the unlimited darkness, 
and we thus come very near the idea of the world as

sr The mo.st important passages are quoted in R. P. 63/>, r, d. See also 
the article Zu Pifthayorcut untl Anaximenes, by Alcssandro Chiapelli, 
iu Archiv. i. p. 582 wpj. This docs not convince mo, however, that 
Anaximenes was influenced by Pythagoras. I have shown above (Chap. 
I. § 25) that the apparent return of Anaximenes to a position resembling 
that of Thales can be abundantly justified, and it will be seen later 
on that the statement of Theophrastos connecting Anaxagoras with 
Anaximenes can be explained without adopting a later date for the 
latter than that given by Apollodoros. (See Chap. VI. § 98 and 
n. 11-14.)5H Such, at least, is the theory expounded by Parmenides (Chap. IV. 
f$ 77). Note the imjtortauce in this connexion of Aristotle's statement that 
Hippasos made lire the first principle (R. P. 47ft)- l f we aro ri ^t in 
regarding him as the representative of the earliest form of Pythagorcanism, 
this becomes very significant. It also suggests, like the use of the word 
Harmony, a j>ossible connexion between Pythagoras and the theory of 
Herakleitos.

Digitized by Google!

XEX0PHANE8.

109

built up of geometrical figures, an idea characteristic of 
the later Pythagorean philosophy.

All this is, as has been said, a hypothesis, which can 
only be justified on the ground that it explains and 
harmonises with what we otherwise know. That it 
does so, to a remarkable degree, will be evident when 
we come to study the polemic of Parmenides and 
subsequent cosmologists. Till then, it can only appear 
more or less plausible ; but we shall have occasion to 
come back more than once to every one of the points 
just mentioned ; and, at the close of our discussion, it 
will be seen that the theory advanced lias as high a 
degree of probability as the nature of the case will allow.

J I. XEXOPHANES.J I. XEXOPHANES.

43. We have seen how the breach of Pythagoras with Life, 
the public religion of his time issued in a return to more 
primitive observances and beliefs ; we have now to con- 
sider a very different manifestation of the same dissatis- 
faction with the theology expounded by the poets. 
Xenophanes of Kolophon denied the ordinary conception"^ 
of the gods altogether. His bitter hostility to common 
religious observances, and still more to the stories which 
the poets had extracted from them, may, perhaps, be in 
part accounted for by the fact that he belonged originally 
to a region where the popular cults were more than^ 
usually cruel and obscene. The cities in the basin of 
the Kayster were inhabited by a very mixed population 
indeed, and there is abundant evidence that the native 
Asiatic element was very strong in them.™ Ephesos

59 Herodotus tolls us that Ephesos and Kolophon did not eeleV.ratc the 
Ionic feast of the Apatouria (i. 147), and we know from inscriptions that

Digitized by Google

110 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

was the headquarters of the worship of the Great 
Mother, whom the Greeks identified with Artemis. This 
goddess was apparently a survival from the days of 
polyandry, and her worship was, therefore, most impure. 
The close vicinity of a cult of this nature may well have 
helped to disgust the young Xenophanes with religion 
altogether.According to Timaios of Tauromenion, who paid great 
attention to chronology, Xenophanes of Kolophon, son of 
Orthomenes, was a contemporary of Hieron and Epi- 
charmos. 00 Hieron reigned at Syracuse from 478 to 467 
B.C., and Kpicharmos is said to have " flourished" in 486. 
Clement of Alexandria and Sextus Empiricus both say, 
however, that Apoliodoros gave 01. XL (= 620 B.C.) 
as the year of Xenophanes' birth. 01 Obviously this is 
impossible, and Diels lias made it probable that Apolio- 
doros said nothing of the sort. 02 In effect, Diogenes 
Laertios, who usually follows Apoliodoros in such 
matters, says that Xenophanes flourished in 01. LX. 
(= 540 B.C.),* 0 or, in other words, just about the time 
that Elea was founded by the Phokaian refugees. This 
was a natural date to fix upon for the reputed founder 
of the Eleatic School ; but, nevertheless, it seems to be 
too early by several year3. Xenophanes cannot well 
have been forty years old in 540 B.c. ; for he tells us 
himself that he was only twenty-five when he left his 
home, and that can hardly have been before 546. He 
says (fr. 24 ; U. 1\ SO):—

they each contained a number of tril>es in addition to the four Ionic ones 
(Musolt, Or. Gtsch. i. p. 216).

wl A p. Clem. Strom, i. p. 353, Potter (R. P. 79 A).

81 Clem. loc. cit.; Sext. Math, i. 267.

«- Rlxin. Mu*. xxxi. 22. Cf. R. P. 796.

« D. L. ix. 20.

Digitized by Googl

XKNOPHANES. Ill

There are by this time threescore years and seven that have 
tossed my careworn soul 6i up and down the land of Hellas ; and 
there were then five and twenty years from my birth, if I can 
say aught truly about these matters.

Indeed, it would almost seem as if this utterance were 
an answer to the question asked in another poem 05 (fr. 
17 ; R. P. 79a) :—Indeed, it would almost seem as if this utterance were 
an answer to the question asked in another poem 05 (fr. 
17 ; R. P. 79a) :—

This is the sort of thing we should say by the fireside in the 
winter-time, as we lie on soft couches, after a good meal, drink- 
ing sweet wine and crunching nuts: "Of what country are 
you, and how old are you, good sir? And how old were you 
when the Mede apj>eared 1 "

Xenophanes, then, was not born before 571 B.c. — that 
is, nearly forty years after Anaximander, who, according 
to Theophrastos, was bis teacher. 06 He must have lived 
on at least till 479 B.C., the year in which the Mede was 
driven from Ionia once more. 07 It is obvious that this is 
quite consistent with the statement that he was con- 
temporary with Hicron and Kpicbarmos, and with the

w According to IJergk (Ly*cfi. ii. 418m, 23), ^«»t/< means a literary 
product, like the Latin rnra. It is true, no doubt, that it cannot be 
*hnply equivalent to but may it not mean cither (1) a life of artistic 
production, or (2) a life of trouble ?

65 It must have been another poem ; for fr. 19 is in elegiacs, fr. 17 in 
hexameters.

" 1). L. ix. 21 {}{. P. 91). The word ™t.» refers to Xenophanes, and 
it is not necessary to make any change in the text {Dox. p. 103). Cf. 
also the statement of Sotion, that Xenophanea was contemporary with 
Anaximander (D. L. ix. 18 ; K. P. 78 H), which is no doubt a misunder- 
standing of this.

87 Clement (K. P. 79 A) quotes Apollodoros as saying that he lived till 
the times of Darcios and Cyrus. It is hardly enough to suppose, with 
Diels (K. P. 79r), that the names arc inverted on metrical grounds. 
Why should Cyrus be mentioned at all ? At first sight it would seem 
more likely that Clement misread Cyrus for Xerxes ; but Hippolytus 
(Ref. i. 14) has X* f Ku f *v J.i^im.. There is clearly some hopeless 
confusion.

Digitized by Google

112 EARLY fl REEK PHILOSOPHY.Digitized by Google

112 EARLY fl REEK PHILOSOPHY.

still more important fact that he is referred to by Hera- 
kleitos in the past tense. 03

When driven from his home, Xenophanes is said to 
have made his living by reciting his compositions in 
Sicily, chiefly, we are told, at Zankle and Katana. 09 It is 
not likely that he ever settled at Elea, as is said by some 
modern writers. 70 The anecdote related of Xenophanes 
by Aristotle in his Rhetoric implies, perhaps, that he 
visited that city, but nothing more. In fr. 24 he seems 
to say that he was still leading a vagrant life in his 
ninety-second year. There is therefore no reason to 
believe that he founded the school of Elea, though it is 
quite likely that Parmenides was to some extent in- 
fluenced by him. 71

44. It is most important for a proper appreciation of 
the teaching of Xenophanes to realise that he was not, 
strictly speaking, a philosopher, but simply a satirist who 
had sat, more or less, at the feet of Anaximander. He 
is almost equally zealous for the reformation of the 
usages of the dinner- table and for that of religion. The

w Fr. 16, Byw. (U. P. 24).

,i9 D. L. ix. 18 (R. P. 79 1$ and 80). The use of the <>l<t name Zankle 
instead of tho later Messana seems to show that this is an old tradition.w Fr. 16, Byw. (U. P. 24).

,i9 D. L. ix. 18 (R. P. 79 1$ and 80). The use of the <>l<t name Zankle 
instead of tho later Messana seems to show that this is an old tradition.

r " It is nowhere expressly stated by any ancient writer that Xenophanes 
ever was at Elea. The reference in Plato (Soph. 242 D), where the 'Kx..- 
««««» M>»; is said to start from him, does not mean this, as is shown by 
the words x*i \n -rpirfi*, whi. h probably refer to the Ionian philosophers. 
It is to be feared that the notice as to the poems on the founding of 
Kolophon and the colonisation of Klea is a lie of Lobon's (Hiller, Ithfin. 
Mux. xxxiii. f>2!'). He gave stichometrie notices of all the Seven Wise 
Men and also of Kpimenides, etc. Notices of this sort have therefore 
no value, unless it can be shown that they probably came from the 
Pinah i of Kallimachos, through some such writer as Hermippos.

For the story referred to, see Rfo t. H, 24. 1400/;, f» (R. P. 81a). Arist. 
M*t. A, 5, only says that Parmenides "is said" to have been the disciple 
of Xenophanes. This weakens the force of the doxographical tradition 
that he was his "successor" {Thtophr. ap. K. P. 91a, etc.).

Digitized by GoogE 
P

XENOPHANES. 113

guests must not drink so much that they cannot get

home without a servant, nor must the conversatiou turn

upon the silly old tales of Titans, Giants, and Centaurs.

It must be free alike from discourteous abuse and trifling

arguments (fr. 21). He is also a great foe to the\

exaggerated estimate of athletic prowess which, as we

may gather from Tindar, prevailed in Sicily under the

Hieronic rfyimc. Why should a city rejoice at an

Olympic victory more than at anything else ? It is not

that which will fill its warehouses or improve its la\vs^

(fr. 19). Xenophanes was, in fact, a typical Ionian; and

therefore the combination of one-sided athleticism and

effeminate luxury, so characteristic of Western Hellas,(fr. 19). Xenophanes was, in fact, a typical Ionian; and

therefore the combination of one-sided athleticism and

effeminate luxury, so characteristic of Western Hellas,

would be peculiarly distasteful to him. He has also, it

is true, something to say of the luxurious ways his own

countrymen had learnt from the Lydians (fr. 20); but,

on the whole, he is chiefly, I take it, to be regarded as ^

satirist who set himself to laugh the Western Greeks out

of their coarse habits and ideas, and to stir them up to

emulation of the refinement which had been so well

understood in the cities of Asia Minor. Now a complete

emancipation from merely traditional views of the world

was beyond doubt one of the chief elements in that

refinement, and for this reason it was a necessary part

of the task which he set before himself to expose the

weaknesses of the popular religion. For the rest, he was /

not content to expound the ideas of Anaximander, without,

as we shall see, making several alterations in them, which

followed directly from his polemic against the common

idea of the gods.

45. Xenophanes is said by Diogenes, who doubtless Writing*.

follows the Alexandrian librarians, to have written

hexameters, elegiacs, and iambics against Homer and

8

Digitized by Google

114 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

-»follows the Alexandrian librarians, to have written

hexameters, elegiacs, and iambics against Homer and

8

Digitized by Google

114 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

-»

Hesiod. 72 All the fragments which deal with God or the 
world are in hexameters, though it by no means follows 
that he composed a single poem on this subject. Only 
fate writers speak of a Poem on Nature ; 73 and it is quite 
possible that, like Epicharmos, Xenophanes expounded 
liis philosophical views incidentally in the course of his 
satirical compositions. The elegiacs were of the didactic 
kiud common at this period, as we see from the specimens 
that have survived. As to the iambics, it is difficult to 
be certain. There is only one very doubtful example 
(fr. 25), and the attack on Homer and Hesiod which has 
come down to us (fr. 7) is in hexameters. But there is 
nothing improbable in the statement that Xenophanes 
also abused the anthropomorphic poets in what was the 
recognised metre for all abuse. The assertion that he 
wrote Silloi has probably no more solid foundation than 
the fact that the sillographer Timon of Phlious (flor. c. 
279 B.C.) put some of his satire upon philosophers into 
the mouth of Xenophanes. 74

The complete text of the poems of Xenophanes seems 
to have been very early lost. Simplicius says quite 
distinctly that he had never met with them, and probably 
they had disappeared long before his time. 75 Our frag- 
ments are therefore very scanty, and sometimes their 
context is obscure. 1 give those which are important for

ri I). L. ix. IS (K. P. 80).

7J A jx>eni vifi $vti*t is referred to by Aetios (i. 3. 12) in quoting a 
wholly imaginary fragment (fr. 8). Cf. also Pollux, vi. 46.

74 See Wachsmuth, SUloyraphorum Gra>corum AVhV/mre [1885], p. 
. r >f» sqq. That Xenophanes wrote Silloi is stated by Strabo (Oeog. xiv. 1. 
28 ; R. P. 80&) and many other late writers. But this does not prove 
that he himself called any of his poems by that name.78 Simpl. Dc O/o, ap. Schol. Br. 506a, 40 (R. P. 80b). The recovery 
of fr. 11 from the Geneva Scholia (n. 78) perhaps shows that the poem 
existed in the days of Kratea of Mallos (c. 167 B.C.).

Digitized by

Goojle

XEXOPHANKS.

115

the cosmology according to Karsten's arrangement, noting 
all departures from his text, except where these are 
adopted and noted in the seventh edition of Kitter and 
Trailer —

(1.) There is one god, the greatest among pods and men, 
neither in form nor thought like unto mortals. R. P. 83.

(2.) He sees all over, thinks all over, and hears all over. 
R. P. 85.

(3.) But without toil he sways 76 ull things hy the thought of 
his mind. R. P. 89//.

(4.) And he abideth ever in the same place, moving not 
at all ; nor doth it befit him to go about, now hither, now 
thither. R. P. 90 I).

(5.) But mortals think that the gods are born as they are, 
and have perception 77 like theirs, and voice and form. R. P. 
83.

(6.) Yes, and if oxen or lions had hands, and could jvaint 
with their hands and produce works of art as men do, horses 
would paint the forms of the gods like horses, and oxen like 
oxen. Each would represent them with bodies according to 
the form of each. R. P. 83.

(Cm.) So the Ethiopians make their gods black and snulv 
nosed; the Thracians give theirs red hair and blue eyes. 
R. P. 83a.

(7.) Homer and Hcsiod have ascribed to the gods all things 
that are a shame and a disgrace among men, thefts and 
adulteries and deception of one another. R. P. 82.

(9.) For we all arise from earth and water. R. P. 86.

(10.) All things are earth and water that come into being and 
grow. R. P. 86.

(11.) The sea is the source of water and the source of wind ; 
for neither would the blasts of winds arise in the clouds and 
blow forth from within them without the mighty sea, nor the

78 Reading with Fremlenthal.78 Reading with Fremlenthal.

77 With Seller (p. 490, n. 1 ; Kng. trans, i. p. 560, n. 1), I prefer Theo- 
doret's ml,h™ to the Utnri r of Clement and Kuschios. It gives a better 
antithesis to fr. 1 and 2.

Digitized by Google

116 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

antral

rivers' streams nor the rain-water in the sky. But the mighty 
sea is the father of clouds ami winds and rivers, 78

(12.) This limit of the earth above is seen at our feet; but 
below iUs roots 79 stretch to infinity. R. P. 8G.

(13.) She that they call Iris is a cloud likewise, purple, 
scarlet, and green to behold. K. P. 80.

(14.) There never was nor will be a man who has clear 
certainty a« to what I say about the gods and about all things ; 
for, even if he docs chance to say what is right, yet ho himself 
does not know that it is so. But all are free to guess. 
K. P. 87.

(15.) These are guesses something like the truth. It P. 
87a.

(16.) The gods have not shown forth all tilings to men from 
the beginning, but by seeking they gradually find out what is 
better. R. P. 87b.

The One. 4G. Let us see, in the first place, what can be made 
/of the statements with regard to what Xenophanes called 
the One and All, and the greatest god. The following 
passage of Simplicius is the first thing that claims our 
attention : — -

Xenophanes said that the first principle was one, or that 
being was one and all, neither finite nor infinite, neither in 
motion nor at rest. (Thin is a mistake derived from the treatise 
on " Melissos, Xvnophane*> and Gorcjias" which Simplirim 
snpjwsed to be the work of Theoph ratios.) Theophrastos admits 
that the mention of this view belongs rather to another inquiry 
than to that into nature ; for Xenophanes identities this One 
and All with God. . . . (Here follow certain erroneous views 
from MXG.) . . . But .Nicolas of Damascus notes, in his 
Treatise on the Gods, that Xenophanes affirmed his first79 Ft. 11 has just boon recovered in its entirety from the Genevo.se 
Scholia on Homer. S<«e Arch. iv. 652, and Chap. IX. n. 7.

78 I have restored the original metaphor from Aristotle (R. P. 86M ; 
what Achilles gives is a mere paraphrase. For the " roots of the earth," 
ef. Hosiod, Works and Days, 19. I have not attempted to translate or 
amend the corrupt ««* fu r>.«;*».

Digitized by Go

XENOPHANES.

117

principle to bo infinite and immovable. Alexander, however, 
Bays he made it finite and spherical, because of its equality in 
every direction. Siinpl. Phys. p. 22 D (li. P. 88 B and 90 D).

It is clear that Siniplicius is completely at a loss. He 
finds in Alexander certain statements which seemed to 
come from Theophrastos ; but cannot possibly be recon- 
ciled with those of the Mdissos, Xenophanes, and Gorgias, 
which he believed to be also the work of Theophrastos. 80 
Alexander said that the One of Xenophanes was finite, 
and the other source declared that it was neither finite 
nor infinite. Lastly, to make matters worse, Nicolas of 
Damascus affirmed that it was infinite. Is it possible 
for us to get at the truth of the matter ?

In the first place, we must, of course, discard the state- 
ment that the One was neither finite nor infinite. The 
source from which it comes is worthless as evidence for 
Xenophanes. In the second place, we must admit that, 
according to Theophrastos, the One of Xenophanes was 
finite, and that Alexander of Aphrodisias gave a perfectly 
true report of what he said. 81 But, on the other hand,m For a clear statement of the present state of the question as to 
M. X. G., see R. P. 88. The suggestion made long ago by Bergk, in his 
Littertitunjeschichte (ii. 418), docs not seem, however, to have received as 
yet the attention which it deserves. Why, indeed, should the argument* 
of Xenophanes have been foisted in between those of Mclissos and Zeno? 
Is it not more likely, as liergk supposes, that we have in M. X.G. the end 
of a Peripatetic tre itise dealing with the whole Eleatic School, and that it 
was originally preceded by an account of Zeno, Parincnidcs, and perhaps 
of Xenophanes? This would account for the ambiguity of its title, and 
for many other things besides. Of course Siniplicius, who took the whole 
for a work of Theophrastos, supposed the central part to deal with Xeno- 
phanes ; but we have his own confession that he was unacquainted with 
the original (It. P. 806). See, too, Z. 5 , p. 500 sqq.

81 This follows from a comparison of the doxographers. See Diels, Box. 
Prol. pp. 108, 112, 113, 140, and the commentary on the jiassages there 
referred to. I do not think it necessary to suppose with Tannery (Science 
hellhu, p. 135) that the statement in M. X. G. is an attempt to reconcile

Digitized by Google

118

KARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

asmDigitized by Google

118

KARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

asm

we must insist that the fragments do not in any way 
justify such a statement, and that fr. 12, especially, is 
quite inconsistent with it. Now, we gather from the 
report of Alexander, as given by Simplicius, that the 
reason alleged by Theophrastos for his statement that 
Xenophanes held the All to be finite and spherical was 
that he had said it was " equal in every direction " ; and 
there can be no doubt that he actually did say this. 
Not only Hippolytos, but also a much older authority, 
namely, the sillographer Timon of Phlious, bears witness 
to it. 82 If we had to allow that this implies the finite- 
ness and sphericity of the All, we should undoubtedly be 
forced to accept the statement of Theophrastos ; but there 
is another course open to us. The fact is, that the term 
" infinite " was not used with any precision before the 
time of Zeno, and it cannot surely be doubted that Xeno- 
phanes might have spoken of the " boundless " All which, 
nevertheless, was " equal in every direction." If he did 
so, the statement of Theophrastos is sufficiently accounted 
for, and we are not bound to try to find room for an 
infinite earth and an infinite scther within a finite 
universe. And, if we understand the well-known refer- 
ence of Aristotle to Xenophanes as Zeller dues, the 
question is really settled by it. In the First Book of the 
Metaphysics we read that, while Pannenides made the 
One finite and Melissos made it infinite, " Xenophanes 
did not explain himself at all, and does not seem to have 
laid hold of either nature (i.e. finitude or infinity), but 
said, with reference to the whole universe " (for surelythe contradiction between Theophrastos and Nicolas. It is quite likely 
that a later Eleatic philosopher, coining after Zeno, by whom the anti- 
nomies of the notion of infinity were first worked out, should have taken 
up the position there described. 
82 Hipp. litf. i. 14, Timon, p. 148 W (R. P. 85a).

Digitized by

XENOPHANES.

119

the words mean only this, and not " looking up to the 
vault of heaven "), " that the One was God." This seems 
to indicate that, while Aristotle found in the poem of 
Xenophanes the statement that the earth stretched down- 
wards to infinity, — he quotes it himself, — he also found 
certain expressions which to him implied that the One 
was finite. He knew also that the One was the world, 
and he therefore concluded, very naturally, that Xeno- 
phanes had not specially considered the subject at all, 
and that he was himself unaware of the contradiction 
involved in his statements. This, however, is almost 
incredible. We can easily allow for a good many incon- 
sistencies and contradictions in a writer of the stamp of 
Xenophanes, but this would really be too glaring even 
for him. We conclude, then, that h e did in fa ct ascri bed 
to^ the world the boundlessness which Anaximander had/ 
confined to the primary substance, and it follows from! 
this that he also denied any plurality of co-existing) 
world s. Now, it will be remembered that Anaximander 
had held that the " innumerable worlds " were gods, and

*

this brings us face to face with the very difficult question 
of the supposed monotheism of Xenophanes.

47. If there was one thing upon which all historians w»« Xeno

^ phanefl a*

this brings us face to face with the very difficult question 
of the supposed monotheism of Xenophanes.

47. If there was one thing upon which all historians w»« Xeno

^ phanefl a

of Greek philosop hy were agreed, it was that Xenophanes mouotheist? 
taught a pure monotheism in opposition to popular 
anthropomorphic polytheism. This has lately, however, 
been called in question by J. Freudenthal, and he has at 
least shown that the point demands a much more careful 
examination than it has usually received. We must not 
draw hasty conclusions from the fact that the first words 
of fr. 1 happen to be " One god." Indeed, if we read on 
with any attention, we come at once to a very surprising 
phrase ; and Freudenthal, in fact, contends that this line,

Digitized by Google

120 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

which is commonly quoted as a declaration of monothe- 
istic belief, is really just the opposite. To say that there 
is " one god, the greatest among gods and men," is not to 
preach monotheism, but to make open confession of poly- 
theism j 83 and "gods" are similarly recognised by Xeno- 
phanes in several places. 84 Further, if we set aside, as of 
no authority, the Melwsos, Xenophanes, and Gorgias, there 
is no ancient writer who expressly and unambiguously 
credits Xenophanes with a belief in one god only, while 
there are several who speak of his belief in "gods." 85 
Freudenthal concludes, accordingly, that, while Xeno- 
phanes identified the world or the All with his "greatest 
\god," he allowed besides a number of " departmental 
igods " — -earth, water, Eros, and the like.This view has not met with the assent of Zeller and 
Diels. The latter, indeed, makes the important admission 
that the entire development of the idea of god among the 
Greeks tends in the direction of the view unfolded by 
Freudenthal with so much acuteness and learning. Indeed, 
monotheism in the fifth century B.C. would be something 
of an anachronism. He feels, however, a serious difficulty 
in accepting it, and points especially to the statement of 
Aristotle, that " Xenophanes, who was the first of all 
these (i.e. the Eleatics) to regard all things as One (for 
Parmenides is said to have been his disciple) . . . asserted,

83 Franz Kern felt this so strongly that he proposed to regard fr. 1 as 
belonging to a time before Xenophanes had clearly formulated his mono- 
theistic views {Beitr. zur Darstellwuj de.r PkUosopheme des X. p. 4, n. 2). 
But we must not press a proverbial formula too hard.

w Freudenthal holds that fr. 14, 1G, 21 can have no meaning except in 
the mouth of a polythcist ( Th. d. X. p. 8).

83 Arist. Rhtt. B, 23. 13096, 6 (It. P. 81), and Cicero, De Div. I 5 
(after Poseidonios) : Colophoniivt Xenophanes unu* qui decs exfic dicerct 
divinationcm funditus tm.itulit. But these passages do not really imply 
polytheism, Z. 4 p. 532, n. 2.

Digitized by Googl

XEXOPHAXES.

121Digitized by Googl

XEXOPHAXES.

121

with reference to the whole universe, that the One was 
god.**** Zeller is even more uncompromising, 87 and insists 
chiefly upon an extract from Theophrastos in the pseudo- 
lMutarchean Slromateis, to the effect that " Xenophaues 
lays down as to the gods that there is no leadership 88 
among them ; for it is impious to suppose that any of 
the gods is under a master, and no one of them stands 
in need of anything whatsoever." 89 It is clear, he says, 
that if this is so, the " greatest of the gods " must be the 
only god. We must allow, I think, that Zeller is right 
as against Freudenthal in his interpretation of this 
passage. The latter will have it, that it only excludes a 
44 despotic " government of the gods by the greatest among 
them ; but this can hardly be maintained. 90 It is another 
question whether it is not merely part of the polemic 
against anthropomorphic gods, that is, according to Greek 
ideas, against gods in any real sense whatever. Xeno- 
phanes might, perhaps, have as little objection to calling 
the parts of the world gods as he had to calling the

&Sftt. A, 5. 9S6&, 20 (R. V. 84). It is worth while noting that in 
Arch. i. 99, n. 1, Dicls retracts the doubts which lie had expressed in 
Dox. pp. 110, 111, with regard to the genuineness of this passage. The.se 
were based upon the un-Aristotelian voeabulury and style. He has, how- 
ever, shown, in his interesting paper in Arch. i. p. 494 sqq., that Aris- 
totle designedly used a different style in those popular and introductory 
parts of his writings which were addressed to a public brought up on 
Plato and Isokrates. This accounts sufficiently for the peculiarities of the87 Freudenthal's work, Die Theologk dc* Xtnophnnw, was reviewed by 
Zeller in the Deutsche Lilt era (urzdtuntj lor 188*5, p. 1595 sqq. and by 
Diels in Arch. i. p. 97. To these criticisms Freudenthal replied in Arch. 
i. p. 3*22 sqq. Lastly, Zeller refuted his interpretation of the passage 
from the Stromaltis in Arch. ii. p. 1 sqq. 
68 Can this be reconciled with fr. 1 ?

® I'lut. Strom, fr. 4 ; Dox. p. 580 : oV»f«/'ur«/ Vt *«i «rif< »f «i>ltf*iag

iytuetiaf U *vr»T( »C<rr.(' el yitp JV<»» Si £i«rf<w <ri>* rHi tnhTfimi ri

*° Arch. i. p. 338 sqq.

Digitized by Google

122 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

whole world god, provided always that the word was 
taken in a non-natural sense. I shall come back to this 
point presently, but first I should like to make one 
suggestion. Is it quite certain that the statement of the 
Stromaleis does not come from the Melissos, Xenophanes, 
and Gorgias? 91 We know that Simplicius took this for 
the work of Theophrastos ; may not the pseudo-Plutarch 
or his source have done the same ? With regard to the 
passage of Aristotle, it is perhaps enough to remark 
that it is not the same thing to say that the One is 
god, as to say that God is one. Lastly, if there is no 
evidence for the polytheism of Xenophanes, there is just 
as little for his monotheism, 
Go.LnJthe 48. There is, I believe, one way of explaining these

world.world.

difficulties which does justice alike to the weighty argu- 
ments of Freudenthal and the objections of Zeller and 
Diels. We must evidently start from the fact that 
Xenophanes was chiefly interested in the overthrow of 
the anthropomorphic religion of the poets. It is also 
clear that he would most naturally look for arms with 
which to combat this in the teaching of the Milesian 
School which had influenced his youth. If, then, we can 
show that his theory is just such a modification of Anaxi- 
mander's as we might expect to find under the circum- 
stances, we shall be entitled to believe that we have 
found what we may call its true centre of gravity. The 
view of Anaximander was, we have seen, that the in- 
numerable worlds, which come into being and pass away 
in the " Boundless," were gods. This was, however, open 
in one respect to precisely the same objections that 
Xenophanes was in the habit of urging against the

01 The passage of M. X. G. is given R. P. 89 A. It contains a piece of 
Eleatic dialectic inconceivable before the days ol Zeno and Melissoa.

Digitized by Go

XEXOPHAN'KS.

123

popular theology. "It is equally impious," he said, "to 
say that the gods have come into being and to say that 
they will pass away. In either case you have to say 
that there is a time when the gods are not." 92 If, then, 
the universe is really a god, there cannot be anything 
more primary than itself. There can be no eternal sub- 
stance from which it is " separated out," and into which 
it is once more absorbed. Nor must you say, with 
Anaximenes and Pythagoras, that it is kept up by air 
which it breathes from outside. It itself must be eternal 
and boundless. Again, since there is nothing outside it 
at all, there can be no other world, and it must therefore 
be the " greatest god." It must also be immovable, or 
it could not be eternal.The question now arises whether we can fiud room for 
other gods inside the world, as well as for the divine 
world itself, and it will be seen that this difficulty 
vanishes the moment we realise that Xenophanes did not 
believe in- anything like a personal god at.alL To us it 
naturally seems as if, in the early fragments, he were 
expounding an exalted and pure theology, because he 
denies of his " greatest god " a number of predicates 
which we have learned to regard as incompatible with 
the divine nature. We accordingly jump to the conclu- 
sion that Xenophanes declared God to be a spirit. But 
the conception of spirit as something different from 
matter did not yet exist, except in a rude animistic 
sense, and what Xenophanes proclamed as the ".greatest 
^gad " was nothing more nor less than what we call the 
material world. When he says that this " sways all 
things. by the thought of its mind," he means no more 
than Anaxiniander had meant by saying that his mate-

•* Ariat. Rhet. B, 23. 13996, 6 (R. P. 81).

124

EARLY GREKK PHILOSOPHY.•* Ariat. Rhet. B, 23. 13996, 6 (R. P. 81).

124

EARLY GREKK PHILOSOPHY.

rial substratum " steers the course of all t hing s." Now 
we are not left altogether in the dark with regard to 
the departmental gods. They also were reduced^ to 
material phenomena. Iris was not the messenger between 
heaven and earth, but merely a coloured cloud (fr. 13), 
and the so-called Dioskouroi were likewise masses of 
vapour ignited by the rapid motion of the ships upon 
which they alight. 93 No doubt other "ods were similarly 
explained away. To a Greek this would seein_mere 
atheism; and Xenophanes certainly meant to say thal_tke 
gods were natural phenomena, rather than thaLjjatiira-1 
phenomeua were gods. And the same is true of his 
" greatest god." He was probably far more interested in 
showing that the ouly greatest god there was, was simply 
the world, than in making out that the world was^god. 
We may therefore paraphrase fr. 1, " there is one (so- 
called) god, who is the greatest among (so-called) gods." 
No doubt there is still a contradiction here ; but it is 
simply what we shall see is the fundamental contradic- 
tion of the whole system. There is no greater difficulty 
in this juxtaposition of God and gods, than there is in 
the similar juxtaposition of " the All " and " all things." 
Cosmology. 40. We have seen that Xenophanes denied the con- 
ception of the primary substance altogether. In other 
respects he would seem to have followed as closely in the 
footsteps of Anaximander as this important modification 
would allow. He is, however, thoroughly sceptical as to 
all cosmological theories whatsoever, and it is probably 
to these that fr. 14 chiefly applies. And this is natural

M Aet. ii. 18. 1 (Dot. p. 347). The reading of the MSS., ««r«

vx^xduxatrct, is old, for it is given both by tho Placita and 
Stobaios ; hut it impossible not to be tempted by Karsten's *«<ri r*.

Digitized by Google

XRXOPHANES.

125vx^xduxatrct, is old, for it is given both by tho Placita and 
Stobaios ; hut it impossible not to be tempted by Karsten's *«<ri r*.

Digitized by Google

XRXOPHANES.

125

enough. So long as he was on purely negative ground 
he felt sure of himself ; but the conception of the All at 
which he had arrived, by the process of denying the 
views of Anaxiniander and the poets, was obviously 
incapable of explaining anything at all. How could the 
immobility of the whole be reconciled with the motion of 
its parts ? How could the One be also many ?

We ourselves, he tells us, like everything else which 
comes into _ being and grows, arise from earth and water 
(fr. 9, 10). This is, of course, the Anaximandrian view ; 
but Xenophanes appears to have satisfied himself of its 
truth by a consideration of the imprints of animals and 
vegetables found in stone. 04 The importance of this has 
been pointed out in the Introduction* The earth is not, 
however, as Anaxiniander had taught, a cylinder of 
definite height. Its roots stretch endlessly downwards, 
just as the air extends endlessly upwards. 90 This is a 
natural consequence of the belief that existence must be 
boundless, which was first denied by Parmenides, taken 
along with the conviction that, since the world is divine, 
there cannot be anything outside it. He also held that 
the earth stretches out boundlessly on every side ; 97 a 
view which Tannery regards as due to the same senti- 
mental longing as that expressed by Sully-Prudhomme in 
the lines —

■

" Que sa face ne soit pas ronde, 
Mais sVU nde toujours, toujours ! "

It is true that the feeling here described is not 
unconnected with the ascription to the world of the 
boundlessness which Anaximander had confined to the

94 Hipp. Itff. i. 14 (R. P. 86a). 95 Infrod. § X.

w Arist. DcOtlo, 15, 13. 294a, 21 (R. P. 806). 
97 Hipp. Htf. i. 14 (R. P. »6.).

Digitized by Google

126 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.94 Hipp. Itff. i. 14 (R. P. 86a). 95 Infrod. § X.

w Arist. DcOtlo, 15, 13. 294a, 21 (R. P. 806). 
97 Hipp. Htf. i. 14 (R. P. »6.).

Digitized by Google

126 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

undifferentiated primary substance outside it ; but surely 
the latter is the more immediate source of Xenophanes' 
theory. Lastly, the earth is being gradually dissolved 
once more in the water, and will revert in time to its 
primitive condition of mud. The treatise on the Inde- 
structibility of the World, which goes by the name of 
Philo, seems to have preserved some of the arguments by 
which this view was defended. We read there that 
" some " held that the earth had hitherto grown at the 
expense of the sea. The islands of Rhodes and Delos 
had gradually arisen from the waters. The " mighty 
gulfs of mighty seas" have been turned into land, and 
are sown and harvested ; witness the pebbles and shells 
which are found inland. And, if the sea has been 
lessened in tins way, it will next be the turn of the 
earth. 98 This theory no doubt explains the ascription to 
| Xenophanes of a belief in innumerable worlds. 99

Xenophanes also made some important changes in 
Anaxiinander's theory of the heavenly bodies, the motives 
of which it is not always easy to guess. Perhaps he 
thought the latent dualism of the older view led to 
dangerous consequences, and therefore resorted to a theory

88 Diels, Dox. p. 486, 17 sq. Cf. Prol. p. 106, where it is shown that 
most of the i*aasage comes from Theophrastos. The absurd etymologies 
and the quotation from Pindar found in the text are, of course, the private 
projierty of the forger. We seem to hear echoes of the versification of 
Xenophanes in many places. The agreement of the argument with that 
of Hipp. Ref. i. 14. 5, and Arist. Mt.0-.or. A, 14, is, however, the chief 
reason for believing the passage to refer to Xenophanes.99 Xenophanes is mentioned in the list of those who upheld an infinity 
of worlds, given by Aetios, ii. 1. 3; and D. L. ix. 19 (R. P. 86c) t says 
he maintained xirptvt *xtip»vi »!> <rap«\\<kxT»ut K. It is true that the 
source of this passage is some wretched biographical handbook (Dox, 
168^ ; but, for all that, there are echoes of Theophrastos in it. I believe 
that what he said was that the worlds of Xenophanes did not rc«ax;.arn<>, 
i.e. that they did not "overlap" (in time) like those of Anaximander.

Digitized by Google

XENOPHAXRS. 127

in some respects like that of Anaximenes. At any rate, 
lie gave up the position that fiery vapour was as primi- 
tive as mud, and taught that the heavenly bodies arose 
from sparks collected out of the moist exhalation of the 
sea. They are, in fact, clouds which light up at night 
" like coals," aud go out in the day-time. 100 It is not very 
easy to see how he reconciled this with the view that the 
sun is the cause of these very exhalations; but we cannot 
hope to make Xenophanes consistent. He appears to 
have said also that, while the sun was of some use in 
the ordering of the world, the moon was a superfluous 
adjunct. 101 This was, doubtless, a part of his polemic 
against the popular gods.

As the eartli extends indefinitely as a flat plain east 
and west, it follows that the heavenly bodies must travel 
across it in straight lines, and that the same sun, moon, 
and stars never pass over us twice. They only appear to 
go round the earth because of their distance. This prob- 
ably means that as they get farther from us, they appear 
to come nearer and nearer to the horizon. A curious 
feature of the theory was, that when the stars in their 
courses came above certain uninhabited regions they at 
once went out. Further, as the earth does not only 
stretch boundlessly east and west, but also north and 
south, there must be many suns ami moons travelling 
parallel to one another over its different zones. 102We have said enough to show that Xenophaues was 
not, properly speaking, a philosopher, and still less a

100 Theophr. Phy*. Op, fr. 16 (K. P. 80r). Dicl« has shown that this 
passage conies more directly from Theophrastus than usual. He is quoted 
by name, and *vfX* is a Theophrastean word. It occurs also in the 
parallel passages.

'°' Aetios, ii. 30. 8.

w» For all this see Aet. ii. 24. P, and Hipp. Re/, i. 14. 3.

I

Digitized by Google

128

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

scientific cosmologist. To reconcile the immovable " All " 
with the strange account he gives of " all things "_ would 
be impossible. Yet the very contradictions in which 
Xenophanes entangled himself were of the utmost im- 
portance for the history of philosophy, and it is therefore 
necessary for us to understand clearly how he became 
involved in them. To put it briefly, it was because he 
ascribed all the predicates of Anaximander's Boundless, 
with the important exception of motion, to the world 
within the heavens. The result is, of course, an insoluble 
contradiction. But it was, nevertheless, a true instinct 
which led him, almost accidentally, to the idea that the 
ground of the world must be found withiu the world 
itself. To show how this could be, was the next task 
which philosophy had to undertake.

uigili

by GoogU

CHAPTER III.

HERAKLEITOS OF ENIESOS.

50. Diogenes, no doubt following Apollodoros, tells us Lif."of Herak

leitos.uigili

by GoogU

CHAPTER III.

HERAKLEITOS OF ENIESOS.

50. Diogenes, no doubt following Apollodoros, tells us Lif."of Herak

leitos.

that Herakleitos of Ephesos, son of Blyson, " nourished " 
in 01. LXIX. (504-501 u.c.) ; 1 that is to say, just 
in the middle of the reign of Pareios, with whom 
several traditions connected him. 2 It is more important, 
however, for our purpose to notice that, while he refers 
to Pythagoras and Xenophanes by name and in the past 
tense (fr. 16), he is in turn distinctly referred to by 
Parmenides (v. 4G sqq.). These references are sufficient 
to mark his proper place in the history of philosophy. 
Zeller holds, indeed, that he cannot have published his 
work till after 478 B.C., on the ground that the expulsion 
of his friend Hermodoros, alluded to in fr. 114, could 
not have taken place before the downfall of Persian 
rule. If that were so, it would certainly be very 
difficult to see how Parmenides could have known the 
views of Herakleitos ; but there is no need to accept 
Zeller's conclusion in this matter. There is no difficulty 
in supposing that the Ephesinns may have sent one of 
their foremost citizens into banishment at a time when 
they were still paying tribute to the Great King. The 
Persians never took from the Greek States their internal

i D. L. ix. 1 (H. r. 22).

« Bernaya, Die UnaklUi^htn Dritfc, p. 13 sqq.

9

♦

Digitized by

1,30

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

self-go verninent, and the spurious Letters of Herakleitos 
show that the accepted view in antiquity was that the 
expulsion of Herniodoros took place duriug the reign of 
Dareios. 3self-go verninent, and the spurious Letters of Herakleitos 
show that the accepted view in antiquity was that the 
expulsion of Herniodoros took place duriug the reign of 
Dareios. 3

Sotion had preserved or invented a statement that 
Herakleitos was a disciple of Xenophanes, 4 which is 
clearly impossible; for Xenophanes must have left 
Kolophon for ever before Herakleitos was born. It is 
more likely that he was not a disciple of any one ; but 
it is clear, at the same time, that he was acquainted both 
with the Milesian cosmology and with the poems of 
Xenophanes. He also knew something of the theories 
taught by Tythagoras (fr. 17).

Of the life of Herakleitos, we really know nothing 
at all. The origin of most of the statements bearing on 
it is quite transparent. 5 To accept the unexplained 
residue as historical is an utterly uncritical proceeding, 
though not by any means unexampled. 
Hi* book. r»l. We do not know the title of the work of Herak- 
leitos, 0 if, indeed, it had one at all, and it is not very

3 P.ernays, o/k cit. p. 20 s<[<i. * Ap. 1). L. ix. 5 (K. P. 22r>.

•'• See Patin, JItiaklit* E'tnheit«khrr, p. 3 s<pj. Herakleitos said (fr. 
«iS) that it was death to .souls to become water ; and we are told accord- 
ingly that he died of dropsy. He said (fr. 114) that thu Ephcsians should 
h ave their city to their children, aud (fr. 79) that Time was a child play- 
ing draughts. We are therefore told that he refused to take any part in 
public life, and went to phiy with the children in the temple of Artemis. 
He said (fr. >S5 ) that corpses were more Jit to be cast out than dung ; aud 
we are told that he covered himself with dung when attacked hydropsy, 
lastly, he is said to have argued at great length with his doctors because 
of fr. 58. For these tales see D. L. ix. 3-5. It apjtcars that even such 
writers as Hermippos and Neanthes of Kyzikos believed them. Cf. tin; 
stories about Empedokles discussed in Chap. V. § 61.u The variety of titles enumerated by D. L. ix. 12 (R. P. 23/*) seems to 
show that none was authentically known. That of " Muses " comes from 
Plato, Soph. 242 1). The others are mere " mottoes " (Schuster) pre- 
lixed by Stoic editors, aud intended to emphasise their view that the 
subject of the work was ethical or political (L>. L. ix. 15 ; K. P. 23c).

Digitized by Google 
i

HERAKLEITOS.

131

easy to form anything like a clear idea of its contents. 
We are told that it was divided into three discourses ; 
one dealing with the universe, one political, and one 
theological. 7 It is not at all likely this division goes 
back to Herakleitos himself; all we can infer from the 
statement is that the work fell naturally into these three 
parts when the Stoic commentators took their editions of 
it in hand. There is the less reason for doubting this, 
however, as the poem of Empedokles followed much 
the same order of topics.

The style of Herakleitos is proverbially obscure, and 
got him the nickname of "the Dark" in antiquity. 8 
He employs images without any indication of the point 
of comparison ; and hi3 frequent use of irony, oxymoron, 
and pregnant expressions makes the interpretation of 
isolated fragments very difficult His plays upon words, 
too, which prepared the way for the etymological fancies 
of Kratylos, are sometimes a little confusing." Now the 
fragments about the Delphio god and the Sibyl (fr. 11 
and 12) seem to show that Herakleitos was conscious of 
writing a somewhat oracular style, and we are tempted 
to ask why he did so. All possible and impossible 
explanations have been given. Schuster held that he 
wished to conceal his meaning in order to avoid an 
accusation of impiety; Teichmuller maintained that he 
wished to hide his profound theological views from the

7 D. L. ix. :» (It. P. 23). Mr. By water lists followed this hint in his 
arrangement of the fragment*. The three sections are 1-90, 91-97, 
HS-130.7 D. L. ix. :» (It. P. 23). Mr. By water lists followed this hint in his 
arrangement of the fragment*. The three sections are 1-90, 91-97, 
HS-130.

H K. P. 23a. The epithet i txtTiwt is of late date, hut Timon of 
Pillions already called him «'i*i*rr( (fr. 28, Waehsm.).

" The style of Herakleitos is well characterised hy Uompcr/, Zu Hrrnk- 
lit* Uhrt (S;tzu,H,*b?r. d. IfiVw. AL [1886] p. 977 so^.}, and Patin, 
HtrakliU EiuiniUlthrc [1880], p. 11 t*jq.

1

Digitized by Google

132 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.1

Digitized by Google

132 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

profane vulgar. But Schlciermacher and Zeller have 
shown that all this is illusory. The truth is simply that 
there was as yet no such thing as a clear scientific prose 
style. Herakleitos could not find any but metaphorical 
language in which to express the new thoughts which 
had taken possession of his mind. Perhaps, too, we 
may even go so far as to admit that his contempt for 
the mass of mankind made him somewhat indifferent to 
the requirements of his readers. If men cared to dig fur 
the gold they might find it (fr. 8) ; if not, they must be 
content with straw (fr. 51). This seems to have been the 
view taken by Theophrastos, who said that the headstrong 
temperament of Herakleitos sometimes led him into in- 
completeness and inconsistencies of statement. 10 But that 
is a very different tiling from studied obscurity and the 
disciplina arcani ; if Herakleitos does not go out of his way 
to make his meaning clear, neither does he hide it (fr. 11). 
Thefia- 52. The first collection of Ilerakleitean fragments 
was that of Schleiermacher ; but the richest mine was 
unknown when he wrote, namely, the Ninth Book of the 
refutation of all Heresies, by Hippolytos. This contains 
an attempt to show that the heresy of the Monarchian 
Xoetos was really derived from Herakleitos, not from 
the Gospel; and everything is quoted that can be twisted 
so as to favour this view. There can be little doubt 
that Hippolytos must have written this with the original 
before him ; and that is more than we can be sure of 
in the case of any other writer who professes to quote 
Herakleitos. I give a version of the fragments according 
to the arrangement of Mr. Bywater's exemplary edition. 11

10 Cf. P. L. ix. 6 (R. p. 24).

11 For the history of the Hcrakleitean text, see the literature referred 
to in R. p. 22a, and especially the essays of Deruays Abh. i.).

Digitized by Go

HERAKLEITOS. lo311 For the history of the Hcrakleitean text, see the literature referred 
to in R. p. 22a, and especially the essays of Deruays Abh. i.).

Digitized by Go

HERAKLEITOS. lo3

(I.) It is wise to hearken not to me but my argument, 
and to confess that all things arc one. 1 - R. P. 32.

(2.) Though this discourse is true evermore, 15 yet men arc as 
unable to understand it when they hear it for the first time as 
before they have heard it at all. For, although all things 
happen in accordance with the account I give, men seem 
as if they had no experience of them, when they make 
trial of words and works such as I set forth, dividing each 
thing according to its nature and explaining how it truly 
is. But other men know not what they are doing when 
you wake them up, just as they forget what they do when 
asleep. R. P. 25.

(3.) Fools when they do hear are like the deaf; of them 
does the proverb bear witness that they are absent when 
present R. P. 24a.

(4.) Fyes and ears are bad witnesses to men, if they have 
souls that understand not their language. R. P. 34.

(5.) The many have not as many thoughts as the things they

S..hleiermacher, too, is still well worth study. Lassalle and Schuster ar* 
painful reading. That so much learning ami acuteness should have been 
thrown away is almost tragic. Teichmiiller is brilliant and suggestive, 
hut finds a disproportionate number of mares' nests. The chief reoent 
additions to the literature are the tracts of Gompcrz and Patin referred to 
above (n. 9), along with the Quellenstudien zu Htraklit of the latter in the 
Fe*t*chrift far Ludirig Urlich* [1880]. A useful summary of all the views 
which have been taken as to the real meaning of Herakleitos will be found 
prefixed to the translation published by Mr. Patrick at Baltimore.13 Mr. Bywater adopts Miller's correction i7»«u for iAimm. If we do not 
make this change and insert f» in Hipp. Itef. ix. 9 (cf. Philo, Ley. All. 
iii. 3, quoted in Mr. Bywater's note), we shall have to say that Hippoly- 
toa attributed some very strange phraseology to Herakleitos, and that 
the fragment he quoted in no way supported the point he was trying to 
make. Bernays shows less than his usual acumen in contending that 
Miller's reading would turn H. into an Eleatic (<V™. Abh. i. 82).

" I hive no hesitation in understanding the word xiyt, with Zeller 
(p. 572, m. 2; Eng. trans, ii. p. 7, «. 2), simply as 44 argument," "dis- 
course," "theory," " description," or the like. The Stok interpretation, 
as we find it in Marcus Aurelius, iv. 46 (R. P. 2hh\ must be rejected 
altogether ; the word xiy«t did not mean Reason at all in early days. 
Patin (Htr. Stud. p. 67) objects that it would be absurd for II. to say 
that his discourse had always existed. So it would ; but ti*r»t means 
" being true " (Stein on Herod, i. 30). Cf. note on fr. 92.

Digitized by Google

134

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

meet with ; nor, if they do remark them, do they understand 
them, though they believe they do. 14

(6.) Knowing not how to listen nor how to speak.

(7.) If you do not expect the unexpected, you will not find 
it ; for it is hard to be sought out and difficult. 11

(8.) Those who seek for gold dig up much earth and find a 
little. R. P. 36//.

(10.) Nature loves to hide. R. P. 27/

(11.) The lord whose is the oracle at Delphoi neither 
utters nor hides his meaning, but shows it by a sign. 
R. P. 23a.

(12.) And the Sibyl, with raving lips uttering things solemn, 
unadorned, and unenibellished, reaches over a thousand years 
with her voice because of the god in her. R. P. 23a.

(13.) Am I to prize these things above what can be seen, 
heard, and learned ? 10 R. P. 31.

(14.) . . . bringing untrustworthy witnesses in support of 
disputed points.(13.) Am I to prize these things above what can be seen, 
heard, and learned ? 10 R. P. 31.

(14.) . . . bringing untrustworthy witnesses in support of 
disputed points.

(15.) The eyes are more exact witnesses than the ears. 17 
R. P. 34/>.

(1G.) The learning of many things teacheth not understand- 
ing, else would it have taught Ilesiod and Pythagoras, and again 
Xenophanes and Hekataios. R. P. 24.

(17.) Pythagoras, son of Mnesarchos, practised inquiry 
beyond all other men, and made himself a wisdom of his own, 
which was but a knowledge of many things and an art of 
mischief. 18 R. P. 24a.

14 This is directed against the common Greek proverb (Oi/. xviii. 13»> ; 
Archil, fr. 70), that men's wisdom extends just as far as their experience. 
It dors not extend so far, says Hcrakleitos.

15 I have departed from the punctuation of Mr. ttywatcr here, and 
supplied a fresh object to the verb as suggested by C. om perz {A rch. i. 100).

'* It seems to me that we may take the fragment in this way even if wt> 
do not accept Schuster's view that Herakhitos was a Positivist. "These 
things" I take to be the cosmogonies, etc., of the poets. In the sanw 
way, we may probably infer from Polybios, iv. 40, that fr. 14 referred to 
the i>oets.

17 Cf. Herod, i. 8. The application is, no doubt, the same as that «»f 
the last two fragments. Personal inquiry is better than tradition.

18 See Chap. II. ». 50. I omit i«jug«pi»r r«vr«, rkt Iny^fm; with 
Sehleiermaeher. The words were inserted in an age when Irrfin was

Digitized by Google

I

HERAKLEITOS. 135

(18.) Of all whose discourses I have heard, there is not one 
w ho attains to understanding that wisdom is apart from other 
tilings.Digitized by Google

I

HERAKLEITOS. 135

(18.) Of all whose discourses I have heard, there is not one 
w ho attains to understanding that wisdom is apart from other 
tilings.

^ (19.) Wisdom is one thing. It is to know the thought by 
'frhich all things are steered through all things. K. P. 32. 
| (20.) This order, which is the same in all things, no one 
ftf gods or men has made ; but it was ever, is now, and ever 
shall be an everliving Fire, fixed measures of it kindling and 
fixed measures going out. 19 R. P. 28.

(21.) The transformations of Fire are, first of all, sea (and 
half of the sea is earth, half fiery storm-cloud).- 0 . . . K. P. 28//.

(22.) All things are exchanged for Fire, and Fire for all 
tilings, as wares are exchanged for gold anil gold' for wares. 
R. P. 28.

(23.) (The earth) is liquefied, and the sea is measured by the 
same tale as before it became earth.' Jl R. P. 31.

(24.) Fire is want and satiety. R. P. 29a.

(25.) Fire lives the death of earth, and air lives the death of 
fire ; water lives the death of air, earth that of water. R. P. 
30 A.

(2G.) Fire will come upon and lay hold of all things.- 2 
R. P. 29a.

(27.) How can one hide from that which never sinks to 
rest 7

(28.) It is the thunderbolt that steers the course of all 
things. R. P. 2Sh.

(29.) The sun will not exceed his measures ; if he does, the 
Erinyes, the avenging handmaids of Justice, will find him out. 
R. P. 31.

supposed to mean research in libraries. The intention of the intcrpola- 
tion is to prove that Pythagoras really did write books.

19 The term mi*f*»t here probably means world-order, not world. The 
word pirfa is an accusative of the internal object.

10 On the word *fnrrnp t sec below, § 58, n. 53.19 The term mi*f*»t here probably means world-order, not world. The 
word pirfa is an accusative of the internal object.

10 On the word *fnrrnp t sec below, § 58, n. 53.

21 I read itm^iirau yn *m'i iikmeem furfurtti because of D. L. ix. 9 (R. 1*. 
29), *■«>.<» « *u T«it yy.r j^uttut. Cf. also Duhner's correction of Aetios (Dox. 
p. 281a, 1 ; b, 5), /tkt« «\«£«A*ui»>i» ri>* yn* vxi r$u xi/fis X^ ril (f*'*" 
libri) «V«rauWci.

22 It seems to me most likely that the words up*%7 ««/ were inserted by 
Hippolytos in order to get the Christian idea of a

Digitized by Google

1

«

136 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

il

(30.) The limit of East and West is the Bear; and oppos jjjiC*- 
the Bear is the boundary of bright Zeus. 23 
(31.) If there were no sun, it would be night. 
(32.) The sun is new every day. n 
(33.) *SVc above, Chap. I. w. 12. | 
(34.) The seasons that bring all things.

(35.) Hesiod is most men's teacher. Men think he knew 
very many things, a man who did not know day or night '. 
They are one. 24 R. P. 31 b.

(36.) God is day and night, winter and summer, war am' 
peace, satiety and hunger; but he takes various shapes, just a.- 
lire, 25 when it is mingled with different incenses, is name* 
according to the savour of each. K. P. 316.

(37.) If all things were turned to smoke, the nostrils would 
distinguish them.

(38.) Souls smell in Hades. It. P. 38r/. w

(39.) It is cold things that become warm, and what is 
warm that cools; what is wet dries, and the parched is 
moistened.

(40.) It scatters things and brings them together; it ap- 
proaches and departs.

(41, 42.) You cannot step twice into the same rivers; for 
fresh waters are ever flowing in upon you. K. P. 2Ga.

(43.) Homer was wrong in saying: "Would that strife 
might perish from among gods and men ! " He did not see that 
he was praying for the destruction of the universe ; for, if his 
prayer were heard, all things would pass away. 27 K. P. 27*7.(44.) War is the father of all and the king of all ; and some 
he has made gods and some men, some bond and some free. 
K. P. 27.

(45.) Men do not know how that which is drawn in different 
directions harmonises with itself. The harmonious structure of

' a The Arktos is doubtless Ursa Major, but thc.^*» is hurdly Arcturus 
(Teiehmuller). It seems to me to lie simply the clear noon-day sky, jmt 
for fiienftfipi*.

34 Hesiod said one was the child of the other.

" Heading o*.*mf <*Zf for »K»e<rip with Dicls.

24 For the probable meaning of these two fragments, sec below, § 68. 
The words «/x>irW«< ykf «-«»r* come from Sinipl. in Cat. [Schoi Br. 
2$}, and seem to me genuine.

H ERA K LEITOS.

137

the world depends upon opposite tension, 28 like that of the bow 
and the lyre. R. P. 27.

(46.) It is opposition 29 that brings tilings together.

(47.) The hidden harmony is better than the open. R. P. 
L'7.

(48.) Let us not conjecture at random about the greatest 
things.

(49.) Men who love wisdom must be acquainted with very 
many things indeed.

(50.) The straight and the crooked jKith of the fuller's comb 
is one and the same.

(51.) Asses would rather have straw than gold. R. P. 24a.

(51a.) Oxen are happy when they find bitter vetches to eat. 
IL P. 40/;.

(52.) The sea is the purest and the impurest water. Fish 
can drink it, and it is good for them ; to men it is undrinkable 
and destructive. R. P. 39f.

(53, 54.) Swine like to wash in the mire rather than in clean 
water, and barnvard fowls in dust.

(55.) Every beast is tended with blows.

(56.) Same a* 45.

(57.) Good and ill are the same. R. P. 39r.

(58.) Physicians who cut, bum, stab, and rack the sick, then 
complain that they do not get any adequate recompense for it. :,u 
K. P. 39r.(57.) Good and ill are the same. R. P. 39r.

(58.) Physicians who cut, bum, stab, and rack the sick, then 
complain that they do not get any adequate recompense for it. :,u 
K. P. 39r.

(59.) You must couple together things whole and tilings not 
whole, what is drawn together and what is drawn asunder, 
the harmonious and the discordant. The one is made up of all 
things, and all things issue from the one.

(60.) Men would not have known the name of justice if there J 
were no injustice.

(61.) Men themselves have made a law for themselves, not 
knowing what they made it about ; but the gods have ordered 
the nature of all things. Xow the arrangements which men

■

29 I read w«x;»™. f from I'r. f>tj, Hyw. On *-*x;vt,»x«,-, .see below, n. GO, 
snd Chap. IV. n. 11.

59 Perhaps «*»T,i» s » lias here a more primitive sense, such as "opposite 
friction " <ef. lit*).

30 Adopting Mr. Hy water's reconstruction of the fragment given in his 
critical note.

Digitized by Google

138

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

have made are never constant, neither when they are right 
nor when they are wrong ; but all the arrangements which the 
gods have made are always right, both when they aro right 
and when they are wrong ; so great is the difference. 31 R. I*. 
37c.

(62.) We must know that war is the common and justice is 
strife, and that all things come into being and pass away (?) 
through strife.

(63.) . . . for they are undoubtedly allotted by destiny. n2

(64.) All the things we see when awake are death, 33 even as 
the things we see in slumber are sleep. R. P. 34/>.

(65.) Wisdom is one only. It is willing and unwilling to be 
called by the name of Zeus. K. 1\ 32.

(66.) The bow (/Jios) is called life (/?«*), but its work is 
death. R. P. 40<-, note 2.

(67.) Mortals are immortals and immortals are mortals, the 
one living the other's death and dying the other's life. 
R. P. 38.(67.) Mortals are immortals and immortals are mortals, the 
one living the other's death and dying the other's life. 
R. P. 38.

(68.) For it is death to souls to become water, and death to 
water to become earth. T>ut water comes from earth ; and, 
from water, soul. R. P. 30 15.

(69.) The way up and the way down is one and the same. 
R. P. 29,/.

(70.) The beginning and the end are common (to both paths).

(71.) You will not find the boundaries of soul by travelling 
in any direction. R. P. 33*/.

(72.) It is pleasure to souls to become moist. R. P. 386.

(73.) A man, when lie gets drunk, is led by a beardless 
lad, knowing not where he steps, having his soul moist. 
R. P. 34.

(74-76.) The dry soul is the wisest and best."' 1 R. P. 34.

al Cf. R. P. 37. I have not hesitated to substitute the words given by 
Ps.-Hippok rates, Dt Diceta, i. 11 (R. P. 37e), for the paraphrase of the 
Homeric scholiast. They have unquestionably the truo Herakleitean 
ring. See n. 6(5.

*• That is, I suppose, war, strife, ami the like, which arc spoken of in 
the foregoing fragments. 
*» That is, they are the death of Fire (fr. 25).

** This fragment is interesting because of the great antiquity of the 
corruptions which it has suffered. I cannot help thinking that Stephanos

Digitized by Go

HERAKLEITOS.

139

(77.) Man is kindled and put out like a light in the night- 
time.

(78.) The quick and the dead, the waking and the sleeping, 
the young and the old, arc the same ; the former are changed 
and become the latter, and the latter in turn are changed into 
the former. R. P. 39.

(79.) Time is a child playing draughts, the kingly power is a 
child's. R. P. 32a.

(80.) I have sought to know myself. R. P. 40.

(81.) We step and do not step into the same rivers ; we are 
and are not. R. P. 2Ga.

(82.) It is a weariness to lal>our at the same things and to be 
always beginning afresh.

(83.) It finds rest in change.(82.) It is a weariness to lal>our at the same things and to be 
always beginning afresh.

(83.) It finds rest in change.

(84.) Even the ingredients of a posset separate if it is not 
stirred.

(85.) Corpses are more tit to be cast out than dung.

(86.) When they are born, they wish to live and to meet 
with their dooms— or rather to rest, and they leave children 
behind them to meet with dooms in turn.

(87-89.) A man may be a grandfather in thirty years.

(90.) Those who are asleep are fellow-workers. . . .

(91.) Wisdom is common to all things. Those who speak

saw the true state of the case more clearly than most of his successors 
have done ; and, judging from his obeli, Mr. Hy water seems to think so 
too. According to him we should read : ACn ^v%h rtfirim **', «>iVt«, 
fan (or rather fa*— the Ionic form would only appear when the word got 
into the text) being a mere gloss upon the somewhat unusual uCn. 
When once fan got into the text, *Cn became *uyn, and we get the 
sentence: "the dry light is the wisest soul," whence the siccutn lumen 
of Bacon. Now this reading is certainly as old as Plutarch, who, in his 
life of Romulus, c. 28, takes *uyn to mean lightning, as it sometimes does, 
and supposes the idea to be that the wise soul bursts through the prison 
of the body like dry lightning (whatever that may be) through a cloud. 
I do not think that Clement's making the same mistake proves anything 
at all (Zeller, p. 643, n. 2 ; Eng. trans, i. p. 80, n. 2), except that he had 
read his Plutarch. The idea implied as to the relation between soul and 
body is Neoplatonic. Lastly, it is worth noticing that, though Plutarch 
must have written *»yn t the MSS. vary between *Zrn and *lrn. Tho 
next stage is the corruption of the corrupt *lyn into •» yn. This yields 
the sentiment that " where the earth is dry, the soul is wisest,'' and is as 
old as Philo (see Mr. Bywater's notes).

Digitized by Google

140

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.Digitized by Google

140

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

with intelligence must hold fast to the common as a city IT'S^Vvis 
fast to its law^ and even more strongly. For all human 1 tn w 
are fed by one thing, the divine. It prevails as much as"* 1 ■ i: 
will, and suffices for all things with something to spare 1 '-'. 
K. P. 35.

(92.) Though wisdom 35 is common, yet the many live as if 
they had a wisdom of their own. K. P. 3G.

(93.) They are estranged from that with which they have 
most constant intercourse.

(94.) It is not meet to act and speak like men asleep.

(95.) The waking have one and the same world, but the 
sleeping turn aside each into a world of his own.

(96.) The way of man has no wisdom, but that of the gods 
has. R. P. 37.

(97.) Man is called a baby by god, even as a child by a man. 
K. P. 37.

(98, 99.) The wisest man is an ape compared to god, just as 
the most beautiful ape is ugly compared to man.

(100.) The people must light for its law as for its walls. 
R. P. 40.

(101.) Greater deaths win greater portions. R. P. A0d. 
(102.) Gods and men honour those who are slain in battle. 
R. P. 40./.

(103.) "Wantonness needs to be extinguished even more than 
a conflagration. R. P. 40d.

(104.) It is not good for men to get all they wish to get. It 
is disease that makes health pleasant and good ; hunger, plenty 
and weariness, rest. R. P. 40/>.

(105-107.) It is hard to fight with desire.'""' "Whatever it 
wishes to get, it purchases at the cost of soul. R. P. 40</.

(108, 109.) It is best to hide folly; but it is a hard task in 
times of relaxation, over our cups.

(110.) And it is the law, too, that we obey the counsel of 
one. R. P. 4 Of/.

35 I read rev ^«>tw» instead of r«Z x'»y$v here. It is t« fy«»iti» which is 
said to be "common" in fr. 91, of which this seems to be the direct 
continuation. The *«<»»{ >.iy»f of the Stoics accounts for the change.36 1 suppose tuuif to be used in the Homeric sense. The gratification of 
desire implies the exchange of dry soul-fire (fr. 71 for moisture (fr. 72).

-

HERAKLEITOS.

141

(111.) For what thought or wisdom have they? They 
follow the poets and take the crowd as their teacher, knowing 
not that there are many had and few good For even the best 
of them choose one thing above all others, immortal glory 
among mortals, while most of them fill their bellies like beasts. 
R. P. 24a.

(112.) In Pricne lived liias, son of Teutamas, who is of more 
account than the rest. (He said, " Most men are bad.")

(113.) One is as Urn thousand to me, if he be the best. 
R. P. 24a.

(114.) The Ephesians would do well to hang themselves, 
every grown man of them, and leave the city to beardless 
youths; for they have cast out Hermodoros, the best man 
among them, saying : " AVe will have none who is best among 
us ; if there be any such, let him be so elsewhere and among 
others." R. P. 22/>.

(115.) Dogs bark at every one they do not know. R. P. 24a.

(116.) . . . (The wise man) is not known because of men's 
want of belief.

(117.) The fool is fluttered at every word. K. P. :367/.

(118.) The most esteemed of those in estimation knows how 
to feign; yet of a truth justice shall overtake the artiticcrs of 
lies and the false witnesses. 37

(119.) Homer should be turned out of the lists and whipped, 
and Archilochos likewise. R. P. 24.

(120.) One day is equal to another.

(121.) Man's character is his fate.

(122.) There awaits men when they die such things as they 
look not for nor dream of. R. P. 38^/.

(123.) . . . that they rise up and become the guardians of 
the hosts 38 of the quick and dead. R. P. 38//.

(124.) Night-walkers, Magians, priests of P.akchos and 
priestesses of the wine- vat, mystery-mongers. . . .

(125.) The mysteries into which men arc initiated are unholy. 
R. P. 40.

- 7 The reference is doubtless to Homer or Hesiod.(125.) The mysteries into which men arc initiated are unholy. 
R. P. 40.

- 7 The reference is doubtless to Homer or Hesiod.

M Adopting the correction suggested by Mr. Dywater in his critical 
note. The reading suggested in tho note to R. 1*. ed. 7 (i» f«? i«»r«,- or 
iJtf»»r«f ), also deserves consideration.

Digitized by Google

142 early <;reek philosophy.

(126.) And they pray to these images, as if one were to talk 
with a man's house, knowing not what gods or heroes are. 
K. P. 40V.

(1 27.) For if it were not to Dionysos that they made a pro- 
fession and sang the shameful phallic hymn, they would be 
acting most shamelessly. Put Hades is the same as Dionysos 
in whose honour they go mad and keep the feast of the wine- 
vat. R. P. 4G>.

(129, 130.) They purify themselves hy defiling themselves 
with blood, just as if one who had stepped into the mud were 
to go and wash his feet in mud.

Thi'.iox.i- 53. It will be seen that some of these fragments areThi'.iox.i- 53. It will be seen that some of these fragments are

.litioii. ' very fur from clear, and there are probably not a few of 
which the meaning will never be recovered. We natur- 
ally turn, then, to the doxographers for a clue to guide 
us through the labyrinth ; but, as ill-luck will have it, 
they are far less instructive with regard to llerakleitos 
than we have found them in other cases. We have, in 
fact, two great difficulties to contend with. The first is, 
the unusual weakness of the doxographical tradition 
itself. Hippolytos, upon whom we can generally rely 
for a fairly accurate account of what Theophrastos really 
said, derived the material for his first four chapters, which 
treat of Thales, Pythagoras, Herakleitos, and Empedokles, 
not from the excellent epitome of Theophrastos which he 
afterwards used, but from a wretched biographical com- 
pendium.*' For the most part, this seems to have consisted 
of apocryphal anecdotes and apophthegms. It was based, 
further, on some writer of Succession* who regarded 
Herakleitos and Empedokles as Pythagoreans. They 
are therefore placed side by side, and their doctrines are

30 On the source used by Hippolytos in the first four chapters of Ha/. 
i., see Diels, Dox. p. 145. "We must carefully distinguish Hrf. i. and 
llff. ix. as sources of information about Herakleitos.

Digitized by Googl

HEXAKLEITOS.

143Digitized by Googl

HEXAKLEITOS.

143

hopelessly mixed up together. The link between Herak- 
leitos and the Pythagoreans was Ilippasos of Metapon- 
tion, in whose system, as lias been mentioned already, 
Hre played an important part. Theophrastos, following 
Aristotle, had spoken of the two in the same sentence, 
and this was quite enough to put the writers of Succes- 
sions off the track. 40 The extreme limit of confusion is 
reached by Justin, who, in a careless extract from the 
riacita, actually makes Herakleitos a Metapontine. We 
are forced, then, to look to the more detailed of the two 
accounts 41 of the opinions of Herakleitos given in Diogenes 
J^aertios, which goes back to the Vet unfa Placita, and is, 
fortunately, pretty full and accurate. All the other 
sources are more or less tainted.

The second difficulty which we have to face is even 
more serious. Schleiermacher rightly insisted upon the 
fact that most of the commentators upon Herakleitos 
mentioned in Diogenes were Stoics, 42 and it is likely that 
their paraphrases were sometimes taken for the original. 
Now, the Stoics held the Ephesian in peculiar veneration, 
and therefore sought to interpret him as far as possible 
in accordance with their own system. Further, they were 
more than usually unscrupulous in " accommodating " 4:{ 
the views of earlier thinkers to their own, and this has

40 Aiist. Mil. A, .1. OS }a, 7 (R. 1*. 47') ; Theophr. Phtjx. Op. up. Simpl. 
Phy*. '.Yi D (R. V. 2»r).

41 For these double accounts see Did*, Dux. p. 1<J3 so,., ami Xutt on 
Sutures, B, 8 15.

42 D. L. ix. lf» (R. P. 2:\r\.41 For these double accounts see Did*, Dux. p. 1<J3 so,., ami Xutt on 
Sutures, B, 8 15.

42 D. L. ix. lf» (R. P. 2:\r\.

43 The word *v>».xntv* is used for this by Philodemos, />♦ Pietatt, e. 13 ; 
and Cicero {X. D. i. 41) rentiers it by (tcrummodarr. C'hry.sippos in 
particular gave a great impulse to this sort of interpretation, and tilled 
his books with quotations of all sorts which were supposed to supjxu t 
Stoic theories (Krisdir, For»ch. p. 4i*0\ Good examples are Aet. i. l.j. 
1, 28. 1 ; iv. 3. l'J, where distinctively Stoic views arc ascribed to Herak- 
leitos.

i

Digitized by Google

144 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

had very serious consequences. In particular, the Stoic 
theories of the world-intellect and the world-conflagration 
are constantly ascribed to Herakleitos by our authorities, 
and the very fragments are often adulterated with scraps 
of Stoic terminology. 
The discovery o4. Herakleitos looks down, not only upon the mass of

of Honikleitos. . ,. ....of Honikleitos. . ,. ....

men, but even upon all previous inquirers into nature. 
Such an attitude can be explained only on the supposition 
that he believed himself to have attained insight into some 
important truth which had not been hitherto recognised, 
though it was, as it were, staring men in the face (fr. 9:V). 
Clearly, then, if we wish to get at the central thing in 
his teaching, we must try to find out of what he was 
thinking when he launched into all those denunciations 
of human dulness and ignorance. This is the point to 
which Tutin has chiefly called attention. He has insisted 
that we must regard the whole system in the light of the 
answer we give to this question ; and there can be no doubt 
that his procedure, if practicable, is a sound one. Now 
the answer to the question which has just been asked 
seems to be given in two fragments, 18 and 45. From 
these we gather that the truth which has hitherto been 
ignored is that the many apparently independent and 
conflicting things we know are really one, and that, on 
the other hand, this one is not something which does not 
admit of multiplicity, but that it is also many. The 
" strife of opposites " is really a " harmony." From this 
it naturally follows that wisdom is not the acquirement 
of a knowledge of many things, regarded as separate and 
conflicting, but is the perception of the underlying 
harmony of the warring opposites. It consists, not in a 
mass of information, but in the clear apprehension of the 
single fact (fr. 19) that opposites are one, that they are

Digitized by Googl

HERAKLEITOS. 145Digitized by Googl

HERAKLEITOS. 145

but the two faces of the lire which is the thought 
that rules the world. The statement that this really 
is the fundamental thought of Herakleitos is con- 
firmed by Philo, who, no doubt, had the complete 
work before him. He says : " For that which is 
made up of both the opposites is one ; and, when 
the one is divided, the opposites are disclosed. Is 
not this just what the Greeks say their great and 
much belauded Herakleitos put in the forefront of his 
philosophy as summing it all up, and boasted of as a 
new discovery ? " 44 We shall take the various elements 
of this theory one by one, and see how they are to be 
understood.

55. Xenophaues, by denying that the One could move The one and

r J J ° the Many.

or change, had made it impossible for himself to explain 
the changeful and moving Many, and was left face to 
face with an unsolved and insoluble contradiction, which 
did not, in all probability, disturb him very much. 
Herakleitos, by a partial return to the Milesian system, 
and by denying of the One everything which would 
render it incapable of explaining the world, once more 
made possible a coherent cosmology. That his system 
was really worked out in opposition to Xenophaues seems 
highly probable, though it has often been disputed on 
the ground that when Xenophaues spoke of the One he 
meant God. We have seen, however, that God with 
him was just the world. To arrive at the One, " you 
must," says Herakleitos, " couple together things whole 
and things not whole," that is, you must take account 
both of its unity and its division ; for " the One is made 
up of all things, and all things issue from the One " 
(fr. 50). The One does not, in fact, stand alongside of

" Philo, Her. Dir. J/rr. 43 (It. P. 27*-).

io

Digitized by Google

146

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

all tilings, but includes them. They are in it, and it in 
them* 5" Philo, Her. Dir. J/rr. 43 (It. P. 27*-).

io

Digitized by Google

146

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

all tilings, but includes them. They are in it, and it in 
them* 5

The credit of having been the first to see that the One 
and the Many could be reconciled, is expressly assigned 
to Herakleitos by Plato. In the Sophist (242 D), the 
Kleatic stranger, after explaining how the Eleatics and 
their predecessors (no doubt the Milesians) had main- 
tained that what we call many is really one, proceeds —

But certain Ionian and (at a later date) certain Sicilian Muses 
remarked that it was safest to unite these two things, and to 
say that reality is both many and one, and is kept together by 
Hate and Love. "For," say the more severe Muses, "in its 
division it is always being brought together" (cf. fr. 59) ; while 
the softer Muses relaxed the requirement that this should 
always bo so, and said that the All was alternately one and at 
peace through the power of Aphrodite, and many and at war 
with itself because of something they called Strife.

In this passage the Ionian Muses stand, of course, for 
Herakleitos, and the Sicilian for Empedokles. We 
remark also that the differentiation of the one into manv, 
and the integration of the many into one, are both eternal 
and simultaneous, and that this is the ground upon 
which the system of Herakleitos is contrasted with that 
of Empedokles. We shall come back to this point 
again. Meanwhile we confine ourselves to this, that 
Herakleitos announced the doctrine of identity in and 
through difference as a means of bridging over the gulf 
which Xenophanes had allowed to subsist between " the 
All" and "all things."43 Patin lias reconstructed the beginning of the work of Herakleitos in 
accordance with this, taking the fragments in the order, 1, 2, 93, £>, 3. 
Ill, 91, 92. This, no donbt, fairly represents the theory; but I see no 
reason for believing that H. delivered himself of his whole doetriue at 
the very beginning of his book. Philo (foe. cii.) does not necessarily 
mean this.

Digitized by Google

HERAKLEITOS. 147

We must be careful, however, not to imagine that 
what Herakleitos thus discovered was a logical principle. 
Tli is was the great mistake of Lassalle's book. 46 The 
identity in and through difference which he proclaimed 
was purely physical ; logic did not yet exist, and as the 
principle of identity had not been formulated, it would 
have been impossible to protest against an abstract 
application of it The identity which he explains as 
consisting in difference is simply that of the primary 
substance in all its manifestations. This identity had 
already been clearly realised by the Milesians, but they 
had found a difficulty in the difference. Anaximander 
had treated the strife of opposites as an " injustice," and 
what Herakleitos set himself to show was that, on the 
contrary, it was the highest justice (fr. G2).* The source of his error was Hegel's really extraordinary statement 
that there was no proposition of Herakleitos that he had not taken up 
into his own logic {Getch. d. Phil. i. 328). The example which he cites 
is the statement that Bein** does not exist any more than not-Being, for 
which he refers to Arist. Met. A, 4. This, however, is not there ascribed 
to Herakleitos at all, but to Leukippos or Demokritos, with whom it 
t ieant that space was as real as matter (§ 151). Aristotle does, indeed, 
tell us in the M,>taphy*ic* that "Kome" think Herakleitos say* that the 
same thing can lie and not be ; but he adds that it does not follow that a 
man thinks what he says (Met. l\ 3. 10056, 24). I take this to mean that, 
though Herakleitos did make this assertion in words, he did not mean by 
it what the same assertion would naturally have meant at a later date. 
Herakleitos was speaking only of nature, the logical meaning of the words 
never occurred to him (Kmminger, Vors. Ph. n. d. Iltr. dts Ar. p. 49). 
This is confirmed by K, 5. 10t52s, 31, where we arc told that by being 
questioned in a certain manner H. could be made to admit the principle 
of contradiction ; as it was, he did not understand what he said. In 
other words, he was unconscious of its logical bearing.

These passages show clearly enough that Aristotle was aware that the 
theories of Herakleitos were not to be understood in a logical sense. On 
the other hand, this does not prevent him from saying that according to 
the view of Herakleitos, everything would be true (Mrt. A, 7. 1012a, 24 ,. 
If we remember the true account of his attitude to earlier thinkers, this 
will not lead us to suspect cither his good faith or his intelligence. (Sec 
Xute on Source*, A. § 2.)

Digitized by Google

148

KARLY ORKKK PHILOSOPHY.Digitized by Google

148

KARLY ORKKK PHILOSOPHY.

Kir*. 56. All this made it necessary for him to seek out 
some new primary substance, lie wanted, not merely 
something out of which the diversified world we know 
might conceivably be made, or from which opposites 
could be " separated out," but something which of its 
own nature Mould pass into everything else, while every- 
thing else would pass in turn into it. This he found in 
Fire, — real fire, of course, "that burns and crackles," as 
Teichmiiller puts it. The idea that he used lire as a 
symbol, or meant by it something inaccessible to the 
senses, is a mere survival of the interpretation of early 
Greek thought which Zeller fiually overthrew. 47 And it 
is easy to see why he should have fixed upon fira If 
we consider the phenomenon of combustion, even as it 
appears to the plain man, we shall understand this at47 Yet even Zeller speaks of a symbol in this connexion. That the 
Fire of Hcrakleitos was something on quite the same level as the "Air " 
of Anaxinienes is, however, clearly implied in such passages as Arist. Mrt. 
A, 984a, 5. In support of the view that something different from 
common fire is meant, Plato, Krat. 413 C, is sometimes quoted ; but a con- 
sideration of the context shows that the jwussage will not bear this inter- 
pretation. Plato is there discussing the fanciful derivation of 3;*<w.» from 
}<«-!•», and we must admit that Uwas a prominent Herakleitean con- 
ception, and that a good deal that is here said may be the authentic 
doctrine of the school. Hut Sokrates goes on to complain that when 
he asks what this is which "goes through" everything, he gets very 
inconsistent answers. One says it is the sun. Another asks if there 
is no justice after sunset, and says it is simply fire. A third says it is 
not fire itself, but the heat which is in fire. A* fourth identities it with 
the Nous of Anaxagoras. Now all we are entitled to infer from this is 
that different accounts were given in the Herakleitean School These 
were a little less crude than the original doctrine of the master, but for 
all that not one of them implies anything immaterial or symbolical. The 
view that it was not fire itself, but Heat, which "passed through" all 
things, is related to the theory of Hcrakleitos as Hippo's Moisture is 
related to the Water of Thales (Chap. IX. § 146). It is quite likely, too, 
that some Herakleitcans attempted to fuse the system of Anaxngoras with 
their own, just as Diogenes of Apollonia tried to fuse it with that of 
Anaxinienes (Chap. IX. S 158).

Digitized by Google

HERAKLEITOS.

149Digitized by Google

HERAKLEITOS.

149

once. The quantity of fire in a flame burning steadily 
appears to remain the same, the flame seems to be what 
we call a " thing." And yet the substance of it is con- 
tinually changing. It is always passing away in smoke, 
and its place is always being taken by fresh matter from 
the fuel that feeds it. This is just what we want. If 
we regard the world as an "ever-living fire" (fr. 20), we 
can understand how it is always becoming all things, 
while all things are always returning to it.

57. This necessarily brings with it a certain way of Flu*, 
looking at the change and movement of the world. Fire 
burns continuously and without interruption. It is 
therefore always consuming fuel and always liberating 
smoke. Everything is either mounting upwards to serve 
as fuel, or sinking downwards afte,r having nourished the 
flame. It follows that the whole of reality is like an 
ever-flowing stream, and that nothing is ever at rest for 
a moment. The substance of the things we see is there- 
fore in constant change. Kven as we look at them, 
some of the matter of which they are composed has 
already passed into something else, while fresh matter 
has come into them from another source. This theory is 
usually summed up, appropriately enough, in the phrase 
" All things are flowing," though, as it happens, it cannot 
be proved that this is a quotatiou from Herakleitos. It 
has even been maintained by Schuster that Herakleitos 
did not hold this view at all ; though the statements of 
Plato do not really admit of any other interpretation. 
"Nothing ever is, jivery thing is becoming; " "All things 
are in motion like streams;" "All things are passing, 
and nothing abides ; " " Herakleitos says somewhere 
that all things pass and naught abides; and, comparing 
things to the current of a river, he says that you cannot

Digitized by Google

150 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHYDigitized by Google

150 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY

step twice into the same stream" (cf. fr. 41), — these 
are the terms in which Plato, who had been a Herak- 
leitean in his youth, describes the system. And Aris- 
totle says the same thing, " All tilings are in motion," 
" nothing steadfastly is." 48 It is needless to collect 
further testimony; for, if this can be doubted, then 
everything we suppose ourselves to know about Greek 
philosophy may be doubted also. We affirm, then, that 
Herakleitos held that any given thing, however stable in 
appearance, was merely, so to speak, a section in the 
stream, and that the matter composing it was never the 
same in any two consecutive moments of time. We shall 
see presently how he conceived this process to operate ; 
meanwhile we remark that the idea was not altogether a 
novel one, and that it is not the central point in the 
system of Herakleitos. The Milesians, we have seen, 
held a similar view. The flux of Herakleitos was at 
most more unceasing and universal. 
The Upward 58. Herakleitos appears to have worked out the

ami I^own-

ward path. details of the perpetual flux with reference to the sug- 
gestions of Anaximenes. 40 It is unlikely, however, that 
he explained the transformations of matter by means of 
rarefaction and condensation. 50 Theophrastos, it appears,-* 
suggested that he did ; but he allowed that it was by no 
means clear. The passage from Diogenes which we are 
about to quote has faithfully preserved this touch. 51 In 
the fragments, at any rate, we can find nothing about 
rarefaction and condensation. The expression used is

« Sec Plato, Theait. 152 D ; Krat. 401 D, 402 A ; Arist. Top. A, 11. 
1046, 22 ; Dt Calo, r, 1. 2986, 30 ; Phys. e, 3. 2536, 9.

*» See above, Chap. I. § 24. For the metaphor of "exchange," see Mr. 
Jtywater'B note on fr. 22.

80 See, however, Dicls' remark quoted R. P. 29c.

61 D. L. ix. 7 : 5' tifii Uriltroj.

Digitized by Google

HERAKLEITOS.

15180 See, however, Dicls' remark quoted R. P. 29c.

61 D. L. ix. 7 : 5' tifii Uriltroj.

Digitized by Google

HERAKLEITOS.

151

"exchange" (fr. 22); and this is certainly a very good 
name for what happens when fire gives out smoke and 
takes in fuel instead.

It has been pointed out already that, in default of 
Hippolytos, our best account of the Theophrastean doxo- 
graphy of Herakleitos is the fuller of the two accounts 
given in Diogenes Laertios. It is as follows : —

His opinions on particular points are these

He held that Fire was the element, and that all things were 
produced in exchange for fire, and that they arise from con- 
densation and rarefaction, lint he explains nothing clearly. 
All things were due to opposition, and all things were in flux 
like a river.

The all is finite and the world is one. It arises from fire, and 
is consumed again by tire alternately through all eternity in 
certain cycles. This happens according to fate. That which 
leads to the becoming of the opposites is called War and Strife ; 
that which leads to the final conflagration is Concord and Peace, 
(Thi* is the Stoic interpretation.)

He called change the upward and the downward path, and 
held that the world goes on according to this. When fire is 
condensed it becomes moist, and when collected together it 
turns to water ; water being congealed turns to earth (the con- 
jecture of Theophrastos) ; and this he calls the downward path. 
And, again, the earth is in turn liquefied, and from it water 
arises, and from that everything else ; for he refers almost 
everything to the evaporation from the sea. This is the path 
upwards. R. P. 29.

He held, too, that exhalations arose both from the sea and 
the laud ; some bright and pure, others dark. Fire was 
nourished by the bright ones, and moisture by the others.He held, too, that exhalations arose both from the sea and 
the laud ; some bright and pure, others dark. Fire was 
nourished by the bright ones, and moisture by the others.

He does not make it clear what is the nature of that whicli 
surrounds the world. He held, however, that there were bowls 
in it with the concave sides turned towards us, in which the 
bright exhalations were collected and produced flames. These 
were the heavenly bodies.

The flame of the sun was the brightest and warmest ; for the 
other heavenly bodies were more distant from the earth ; and

Digitized by Google

152

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

for that reason gave less light ami heat. The moon, on the 
other hand, was nearer the earth ; hut it moved through an 
impure region. The sun moved in a bright and unmixed 
region, and at the same time was at just the right distance from 
us. That is why it gives more heat and light. The eclipse* 
of the sun and moon were due to the turning of the bowls 
upwards, while the monthly phases of the moon were produced 
by a slight turning of its bowl.

Day and night, months and seasons and years, ruins ami 
winds, and things like these, were due to the different exhala- 
tions. The bright exhalation, when ignited in the circle of 
the sun, produced day, and the preponderance of the opposite 
exhalations produced night. The increase of warmth proceed- 
ing from the bright exhalation produced summer, and the 
multiplication of moisture from the dark exhalation produced 
winter. He assigns the causes of other things in conformity 
with this.

As to the earth, he makes no dear statement about its nature, 
any more than he does alx>ut that of the bowls. 
These, then, were his opinions. K. 1\ 31/>.As to the earth, he makes no dear statement about its nature, 
any more than he does alx>ut that of the bowls. 
These, then, were his opinions. K. 1\ 31/>.

It is obvious that, if we can trust this passage, it is 
of the greatest possible value ; and that, upon the whole, 
we can trust it has been shown by Diels. It bears the 
marks of its source clearly upon it, and that source is 
none other than the Vetusta Placita from which Aetios 
also drew. It follows the exact order of topics to which 
all the doxographies that are derived from the great 
work of Theophrastos adhere. First we have the 
primary substance, then the world, then the heavenly 
bodies, and lastly, meteorological phenomena. We con- 
clude, accordingly, that it may be accepted with the 
exceptions, firstly, of the probably erroneous conjecture 
of Theophrastos mentioned above ; 52 and secondly, of a 
piece of Stoical interpretation due to the Vrtusta Placita.

Let us look at the details of the theory. The pure

" Sec above, n. 50.

Digitized by Google

H K R A K LEITOS . 153Let us look at the details of the theory. The pure

" Sec above, n. 50.

Digitized by Google

H K R A K LEITOS . 153

elemental fire, we are told, is to be found chiefly in the 
sun. This, like the other heavenly bodies, is a trough 
or bowl, or perhaps a sort of boat, with the concave side 
turned towards us, in which the bright exhalations from 
the sea collect and burn. How does the fire of the sun 
pass into other forms ? If we look at the fragments 
which deal with the downward path, we find that the 
first transformation that it undergoes is into sea, and we 
are further told that half of the sea is earth and half of 
it Trpi)<nr)p (fr. 21). The full meaning of this we shall 
see presently, but we must settle at once what 7rprjaTtjp 
is. Many theories have been advanced upon this sub- 
ject ; but, so far as I know, no one has yet proposed to 
take the word in the sense which it alwavs bears else- 
where, that, namely, of hurricane accompanied by a fiery • 
waterspout. 53 Yet surely this is just what is wanted. It 
is amply attested that Herakleitos explained the rise of 
the sea to fire by means of the bright evaporations ; and 
Schleiermacher pointed out long ago that we want a 
similar meteorological explanation of the passing of the 
fire back into sea. We want, in fact, something which 
will stand equally for the smoke produced by the burn- 
ing of the sun, and for the intermediate stage between 
fire and water. What could serve the turn bettor than 
a fiery waterspout ? It suffieientlv resembles smoke to 
be accounted for as the product of the sun's combustion, 
and it certainly comes down in the form of water. And 
this view becomes, I submit, a practical certainty when 
it is taken in connexion with the strangely neglectedM Soneca (Q. N. ii. f>6) calls it vjueu* turbo. Cf. Herod, vii. 42 and 
Lvicr. vi. 424. The opinions of early philosophers on the stibject of these 
phenomena are collected in Actios, iii. 3. The wpr,rrnp of which Anaxi- 
munder spoke is, of course, an eutirely different word (Chap. I. n. 9'i).

Digitized by Google

154

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

Teport of Aetios as to the Herakleitean theory of T-prjcr- 
rfjp€^. They were due, we are told, " to the kindling and 
extinction of clouds." 54 In other words, the bright 
vapour, after kindling in the bowl of the sun and goinj* 
out again, reappears as the dark fiery storm-cloud, and so 
passes once more into the sea, At the next stage we 
find water continually passing into earth. We are 
already familiar with this idea (§ 9), and no more need 
be said about it. Turning to the " upward path," we find 
that the earth is liquefied in the same proportion as the 
sea becomes earth, so that the sea is still " measured by 
the same tale" as before (fr. 23). Half of it is earth 
and half of it is irpijaTijp (fr. 21). This must mean 
that, at any given moment, half of the sea is taking the 
downward path, and has just been fiery storm-cloud, while 
half of it is going up, and has just been earth. In 
proportion as the sea is increased by rain, water passes 
into earth; in proportion as the sea is diminished by 
evaporation, it is fed by the earth. Lastly, the ignition 
of the bright vapour from the sea in the bowl of the sun 
completes the circle of the " upward and downward path." 
Its beginning and end are the same, namely, fire (fr. 70). 
Measure for 59. The question now arises, How is it that, in spite of

measure. ...measure. ...

this constant flux, things appear relatively stable ? The 
answer of Herakleitos was that it is owing to the observ- 
ance of the " measures " of each form of matter, in 
virtue of which its aggregate bulk in the long run 
remains the same, though its substance is constantly 
changing. Certain " measures " of the " ever-living fire " 
are always being kindled, while like "measures" are 
always going out (fr. 20) ; and these measures the sun

*« Act. iii. 3. 9: Vfnrrnpmt it ««r« iifZ, Urpnrut xa, r£irur (*C. 'H>««Aut»j

Digitized by Google

■

i 
i

HERAKLEITOS. 155

will not exceed (fr. 29). All things are "exchanged" 
for fire, and fire for all things (fr. 22); and this implies 
that fire will take as much and no more than it gives, if 
the exchange is to be just; and that it will be just, at 
least in the long run, is guaranteed by the Erinyes, who 
appear here, as in Homer," as the guardians of what we 
call "natural law." The sea, too, preserves its "measures" 
(fr. 23), and it follows necessarily from this that the eartli 
does so as well.

The " measures " are not, however, absolutely fixed, at 
least in one respect. We must allow for periodical 
encroachments of water upon fire, and of fire upon water, 
which produce the alternation of night and day, summer 
and winter. The subject is an obscure one, and we are 
at first sight confined to what Diogenes tells us about it ; 
none of the fragments seem to deal with this at all. 
There are, however, as Bernays lias shown, certain 
obviously Herakleitean utterances in the pseudo-Hippo- 
kratean Hepi SiaLTtjs which do refer to it. 50 The following 
sentence especially must have been copied straight out 
of Herakleitos : —

And in turn each (i.e. fire and water) prevails, and is pre- 
vailed over to the greatest and the least dogree that is possible. 
For neither can prevail altogether for the following reasons. If

M //. xix. 418. This function of the Erinyes was jointed out by 
Welcker.M //. xix. 418. This function of the Erinyes was jointed out by 
Welcker.

a « The presence of Herakleitean matter in this work was first pointed 
out by J. M. Ocsncr in his Dt animabus Htraclili tt Hippocralis ex hitiiLi 
lihro i. de diata ditputatio [1752J. Schlciermacher entirely neglected this 
Kource, to which attention was called once more by Bernays in his IJerac- 
iitea [1848] (Ges. Abh. i. 1 sqq.). The relevant parts of the De Dicrta 
aro printed as an appendix to Mr. Hywatcr's edition of the fragments. 
Hernays, it should be said, seriously over-estimated the amount of Herak- 
leitean material which can be derived from this source. A great deal of 
it is obviously from Anaxagoras. The treatise itself seems to belong to 
the eclectic medical reaction described in Chap. IX. § 107.

Digitized by Google

150 EARLY URKKK philosophy.

tire a«ivaii'-<** to the utiii- -t limit of th«- waw-r. its nourishment 
fails it. It retires then, to a place where it can get nourish- 
ment. And if water advance- to the utmost limit of the k>, 
movement fails it. At that point, then, it stands still ; and, 
when it stands still, it has no longer }»o«er to resist, but is at 
once consumed as nourishment for the tire that falls upon it 
For these realms neither ran prevail altogether, lint, if at any 
time either should in any way be overcome, then none of the 
things that exist would be as they are now. So long as things 
are as thev are, fire and water will alwavs be too, and neither 
will ever fail. — l\s.-Hipp. I)<? Dintx, i.The last sentence shows conclusively that the passage 
deals with the world at large. This, however, is not the 
subject of the book from which it is taken. The author 
of the tract is trying to apply what Herakleitos had said 
of the world as a whole to the human body. Some- 
times, however, he allows something to stand which 
1 strays the original application of the passage, and in 
these cases we may be certain that we have got a genuine 
quotation. We are entitled, then, to take this passage 
along with what Diogenes tells us about the bright and 
dark exhalations ; and, if the two things fit together, we 
may be pretty sure that we have got the authentic 
doctrine.

The ultorna- GO. We see, then, that the "measures" are not to be

timi of <liiy

u, i h, ; i t" regarded as always absolutely equal. They are determined 
only by a maximum and a minimum. I5ut this does not 
interfere with the "justice" of the "exchange," because 
the preponderance of water is always succeeded by an 
equal preponderance of fire, and rice verm. Herakleitos 
also showed how the balance was restored. Neither fire 
nor water can exist without the other, and therefore the 
encroachment of either is necessarily followed by a com- 
pensatory encroachment of the other. This oscillation

Digitized by Google]

HKRAKLEITOS.

157

explains the alternations of clay and night, winter and 
summer.Digitized by Google]

HKRAKLEITOS.

157

explains the alternations of clay and night, winter and 
summer.

Diogenes tells us that fire was kept up by the bright 
vapours from land and sea, and we have already seen 
bow this is to be understood. What are the " dark " 
vapours which increase the moist element ? With some 
diffidence, I venture to suggest that they are simply 
darkness itself. We know that the idea of darkness as 
mere privation of light is not natural to the unsophisti- 
cated mind. We shall see that Empedokles announced 
it as a remarkable discovery that night was simply the 
shadow of the earth, 57 and we sometimes hear even now 
of darkness "thick enough to cut with a knife." I 
suppose, then, that Herakleitos believed night and winter 
to be produced by the rise of darkness from earth and 
sea, — he knew, of course, that the valleys were dark 
before the hill-tops, — and that this darkness, being moist, 
so increased the watery element as to put out the sun's 
light. This, however, destroyed the power of darkness 
itself. It could no longer rise upwards unless the sun 
gave it motion, and so it becomes possible for a fresh 
sun (fr. 32) to be kindled, and to nourish itself at the 
expense of the moist element for a time. But it can 
only be for a time. The sun, by burning up the bright 
vapour, deprives himself once more of nourishment, and 
the dark vapour again gets the upper hand. It is in this 
sense that "day and night are one" (fr. 35). The one 
necessarily implies the other, and they are therefore to 
be regarded as merely two sides of the one, in which 
alone their true ground of explanation is to be found 
(fr. 36).

Summer and winter were easily to be explained in the

67 Cf. v. ico.

Digitized by Google

153 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.Summer and winter were easily to be explained in the

67 Cf. v. ico.

Digitized by Google

153 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

same way. We know that the solstices and equinoxes 
were a subject of the greatest interest in those days, and 
it was natural for Herakleitos to see in the retreat of the 
sun farther and farther to the north the gradual encroach- 
ment of the moist element, which must produce in time 
an equal encroachment of fire, which will lengthen the 
days and give rise to summer. 58 
strife ami 61. We are now in a position to understand the law

harmony.

of strife or opposition which manifests itself in the " race 
in opposite directions," as Theophrastos probably called 
the " upward and downward path." 59 At any given 
moment, each of the three forms of matter, Fire, Water, 
and Earth, is made up of two equal portions, — sub- 
ject, of course, to the oscillation just described, — one of 
which is taking the upward and the other the downward 
path. Now, it is just the fact that the two halves of 
everything are being " drawn in opposite directions," this 
" opposite tension," or " friction of opposite motions," that 
"keeps things together," and maintains them in an equi- 
librium which can only be disturbed temporarily and 
within certain limits. It thus forms the " unseen har- 
mony " of the universe (fr. 47), though, in another aspect 
of it, it is Strife. Bernays has pointed out that the 
word " harmony " meant originally " structure," and the 
illustration of the bow and the lyre shows that this idea 
was present. On the other hand, that taken from the 
concord of high and low notes shows that the musical 
sense of the word, namely, an octave, was not wholly 
absent. Now, it was certainly the Pythagoreans that 
mixed up the two senses of the word, and it is difficult48 See the Dt Diceia, i. 5, and compare with it fr. 35 and 36. This 
theory was adopted from Herakleitos hy Kleanthes (fr. 29, Pearson). 
M It is called •»«rr..5,.«;« in Aft. i. 7. 22 (Dox. p. 303).

Digitized by Google

HEKAKLKITOS

159

not to suspect a reference to their theory. Herakleitos 
seems to point out that the harmony of the world was to 
he found just in that " Strife of Opposites " upon which 
Anaximander had insisted, and which had probably led 
Pythagoras into dualism (§ 41). As to the " bow and 
the lyre" (fr. 45), I think that Professor Campbell has 
best brought out the point of the simile. " As the arrow 
leaves the string," he says, " the hands are pulling oppo- 
site ways to each other, and to the different parts of the 
bow (cf. Plato, Rep. 4. 439); and the sweet note of the 
lyre is due to a similar tension and retention. The secret 
of the universe is the same." 60 War, then, is the father 
and king of all things, in the world as in human society 
(fr. 44); and Homer's wish that strife might cease was 
really a prayer for the destruction of the world (fr. 43).

We know from Philo that Herakleitos supported his 
theory of the attainment of harmony through strife by a 
multitude of examples ; and, as it happens, some of these 
ran be recovered. There is a remarkable agreement 
between a passage of this kind in the pseudo-Aristotelian 
treatise, entitled The Ko&mos, and the Hippokratean work- 
to which we have already referred. That the authors of 
both drew from the same source, namely, Herakleitos, is . 
probable in itself, and is made practically certain by the 
fact that this agreement extends in part to the Letters of 
Jfrrakleiios, which, though spurious, were certainly com- 
posed by some one who had access to the original work. 
The argument clearly was that men themselves act just 
in the same way as Nature, and that it is therefore sur-60 Campbell's Thrtttetutt ('2nd ed.), p. 244. I assume that Herukleitas 
did not say both <r«XiW»»#f and **yl*rp»rtf. The latter epithet conies, no 
doubt, from I'urmenides, v. 51 (R. P. 94 B), whi< h, ns wo shall see, refers 
to homething rather dilferent (Chap. IV. w. 11;.

Digitized by Google

1G0

EARLY GRKKK PHILOSOPHY.

prising that they do not recoguise the laws by which she 
works. It is true that they are most estranged from that 
with which they are most familiar (fr. 93). Two of the 
exam] ties given are certainly Herakleitean. The painter 
produces his harmonious effects by the contrast of colours, 
the musician by that of high and low notes. " If one 
were to make all things alike, there would be no delight 
in them." There are a number of similar examples in the 
Hippokratean tract, some of which must certainly come 
from Herakleitos; but it is not easy to separate them 
from the later additions.' 51 
Alleged con- G2. The account which has now been given of the

flagratioli of °

the world. cosmology of Herakleitos is, I submit, consistent with 
itself, with the most intelligible fragments, and with 
Plato ; but it is in direct contradiction with the state- 
ments of most writers, ancient and modern. They affirm 
that Herakleitos taught the doctrine of the alternate 
formation of the world out of fire, and its reabsorption 
in fire by a general conflagration. Ancient authors very 
generally ascribe to him the Stoical theory of Ekpyroshi ; 
and all modern writers, with the exception of Schleier- 
macher, Hegel, and Lassalle, follow them in this. Some 
— as, for example, Schuster — throw doubt upon the con- 
tinuous process altogether ; most, with Zeller, admit both

" See mi .ill this Putin's Quelhn*(ndifn, refciTfd to above, n. 11. The 
sentence (A Ditrta, i. p. (543, Kuhn): r* p't* tlx »Tim*», £

uvr$7ei ratrm y 'mrtu . . . *«i * 0«v>.#»r«< kk, S. fin £.vX«i.r«<, has the trueuvr$7ei ratrm y 'mrtu . . . *«i * 0«v>.#»r«< kk, S. fin £.vX«i.r«<, has the true

Herakleitean ring. This, too, can hardly have had another author : " They 
trust to their eyes rather than to their understanding, though their eyes 
are not fit to judge even of the things that are seen. Hut 1 speak these 
things from understanding." These words are positively grotesque in the 
mouth of the medical compiler ; but we are accustomed to hear such 
things from the Kphesiun. Other examples which maybe genuine are 
the image of the two men sawing wood, — " one pushes, the other pulls" 
(« f. ri «»ti;m»), and the illustration from the art of writing.

Digitized by Go

HERAKLEITOS. 161

a continuous process and a periodical conflagration. 
Zeller makes, however, the important admission that the 
two are really irreconcilable. 62 To me it seems that the 
theory of a general conflagration is not merely irreconcil- 
able with the other views of Herakleitos (he might have 
held it for all that), but that it is denied by him in so 
many words. I hold, therefore, that the conflagration was 
not universal, but simply an oscillation in the " measures " 
like that which produces day and night, summer and 
winter, only on a larger scale.Taking, first of all, the evidence of the fragments 
themselves, I would observe that the " measures " of 
fr. 20 and fr. 29 must refer to the same thing, and that 
1 they must surely be interpreted in the light of fr. 23. 
If this be so, fr. 20, and more especially fr. 29, directly 
contradict the idea of a general conflagration, which 
would be a great violation of the " measures " of fire. 63 
Secondly, the metaphor of " exchange," which is applied 
to the transformations of fire in fr. 22, points in the 
same direction. When gold is given in exchange for 
wares and wares for gold, the sum or " measure " of each 
remains constant, though they change owners. All the 
wares and all the gold do not come into the same hands. 
In the same way, when anything becomes fire, something 
of equal amount must cease to be fire, if the "exchange" 
is to be a just one ; and that it will be just, we are 
assured by the watchfulness of the Erinyes (fr. 29), who 
see to it that the sun does not take more than he gives. 
Of course there is, as we have seen, a certain variation ; 
but it is strictly confined within limits, and is immedi-

" Zeller, p. 638 sq. (Eng. trans, ii. p. 75 sq.).

5J If any one doubus that this is really the meaning of the " measures," 
let him compare the use of the word by Diogenes of Apollonia, fr. 4.

II

Digitized by Google

162

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.5J If any one doubus that this is really the meaning of the " measures," 
let him compare the use of the word by Diogenes of Apollonia, fr. 4.

II

Digitized by Google

162

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

ately compensated by a variation in the other direction. 
Thirdly, fr. 43, in which Herakleitos blames Homer for 
-desiring the cessation of strife, is very conclusive. The 
cessation of strife would mean that all things should 
simultaneously take the upward or the downward path, 
and cease to " run in opposite directions." If all things 
took the upward path, we should have a general confla- 
gration. Now, if Herakleitos had himself held that this 
was the appointment of fate, would he have been likely to 
upbraid Homer for desiring so necessary a consummation ? 
Fourthly, we note that in fr. 20 it is the actual order of 
the world, 6 * and not merely the " ever-living fire," which 
is said to be eternal ; and it appears also that its eternity 
depends upon the fact that it is always kindling and 
always going out in the same " measures " or proportion, 
or that an encroachment in one direction is compensated 
by a subsequent encroachment in the other. Lastly, 
Lassalle's argument from the concluding sentence of the 
passage from the Ilepl hiaLr^, quoted above, is really 
untouched by Zelier's objection, that it cannot be Herak- 
leitean because it implies that all things are fire and 
water. It does not imply this, but only that man, like 
the heavenly bodies, oscillates between fire and water ; and 
this is just what Herakleitos actually taught. It does 
not appear either that the measures of earth varied at all. 
Now, in this passage we read that neither fire nor water 
can prevail completely, and a very good reason is given 
for the statement, — a reason, too, which is quite in con- 
formity with the other doctrines of Herakleitos. But, on 
Zelier's view, both fire and water do prevail completely 
at different periods of the world's history.64 1 hold with Bernays that mirpn does not mean "world " in Herakleitos 
but " the order of the world " ; but the meaning is the same in any case.

Digitized by Google

HERAKLE1T0S. 163

As to the fragments which have been supposed to 
countenance the theory of a general conflagration, I 
would point out, firstly, that they are far from being 
the most important and certain of the utterances of 
Herakleitos ; and, secondly, that they are by no means 
unambiguous. In fr. 24 we have the words "Want" 
and " Plenty," and there can be no doubt that the Stoics 
understood these as metaphorical expressions for their 
Diakosmesis and Ekpyrosis. If, however, we look at the 
context in Ilippolytos, we see that what Herakleitos 
really said was that Fire was (at once) Want and Plenty 
(cf. fr. 36). This is a very expressive way of describing 
the continuous process of combustion, and, in view of 
the metaphor of " exchange," we might almost paraphrase 
it by saying that Fire is at once demand and supply, 
which, wo know, have the same " measures." Fire has 
always plenty, for it is always giving away its substance 
in fiery storm-cloud ; and it is always in want, for it 
needs to be kept up by a constant supply of bright 
vapour. Nor is fr. 26 any more inconsistent with our 
interpretation. Fire will certainly come upon all things ; 
but upon each in turn, not upon all at once. It will 
not adopt the suicidal policy of destroying its means of 
nourishment, which will only hold out if it consumes 
them gradually and at the same time renews them, if it 
recedes as far as it has encroached. This, too, is the 
real meaning of what we are told of the Great Year.** 
It is the time taken by the encroachment of fire and itsw The statements as to the precise duration of this cycle vary very 
much. It seems, however, to have stood in 6ome relation to tho cycle of 
the " upward and downward path " of the soul (§ 66). Herakleitos called 
a generation a month (fr. 88), and it is natural to suppose he meaut a 
month of the "great year," but this seems not to be the case ; for, accord- 
ing to Ccnsoriuus {Dt die not. 18. 11), the latter was 10,800 years, and,

Digitized by Google

164 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

subsequent retreat, the re-enactment on a larger scale 
of the alternation of day and night, summer and 
winter.

We have seen already how explicit is the testimony 
of Plato to the eternity and simultaneity of the differ- 
entiation of the one into many and the integration of the 
many into one. Nor does Zeller really succeed in 
explaining it away. He is compelled to add to his 
paraphrase of Plato's words the statement that " Herak- 
leitos did not intend to retract this principle in his 
doctrine of a periodic change in the conditions of the 
world ; if the two doctrines are not compatible, it is a 
contradiction which he has not observed." 66 All that 
need be said about this is that, if it were true, the 
" severer Muses " would hardly have deserved the tribute 
which Plato pays them, and the point of the contrast 
with Empedokles would be altogether lost.Nor do the statements of Aristotle imply a universal 
conflagration. In the course of his discussion on infinity 
he takes occasion to say that, even if we do not hold, 
with Anaximander and Anaximenes, that there is an 
infinite primary substance, it is still impossible to main- 
tain that all things are or become one thing, as Herak- 
leitos, for instance, held that "all things at a certain 
time become fire." 67 Zeller makes much of this; but I 
itannot see that there is anything at all either in the 
words of Aristotle or the context in which they occur to 
exclude the idea that he is speaking simply of the con- 
version into fire, which every tiling periodically undergoes

according to Aetios (ii. 32. 3), 18,000. Now, 30 X 360= 10,800 yearn, 
ro that a generation would be a day in the "great year" (Tannery, 
Science heltine, p. 168, n. 1).

66 Zeller, p. 637 sq. (Eng. trans, ii. p. 73 sq. ).

K Phys. r, 205a, 3 ; Met. K, 1067a, 4.

Digitized by Google 
i

HERAKLEITOS. 165

in the course of its "upward and downward" journey. 
Indeed, the use of the present tense seems even to make 
this a more natural interpretation than the other. 68 In 
the other passage upon which Zeller relies, Herakleitos is 
coupled with Empedokles as holding that the heavens are 
alternately as they 'are now and in some other condition. 69 
This, however, need not mean that the Kosmos as a 
whole becomes fire ; it is quite sufficiently accounted for 
if we assume that, in the course of the Great Year, a 
period of encroachment on the part of fire was followed 
by a compensatory regress, so that the " measures " are, 
in the long run, preserved.Lassalle collected a number of passages from post- 
Aristotelian writers which contradicted, as he thought, 
the view that Herakleitos maintained a general conflagra- 
tion of the world. There can be no doubt, however, that 
Zeller is right in his criticism of most of these. Never- 
theless there still remain two at least which deserve 
notice, and which had already been insisted upon by 
Schleiermacher. Marcus Aurelius, who elsewhere accepts 
the usual interpretation of his sect, clearly shows in one 
place 70 that he had misgivings about it. " So that these 
things too," he says, " are taken up once more into the 
Reason of the universe (Stoic phraseology), whether it is 
by a periodical conflagration, or by a renovation effected 
by eternal exchanges." Lastly, Plutarch, in his dialogue

w The use of *t*»t« instead of «r«'»r« is by no means conclusive ; nor 
can I see that the context decides against the interpretation 1 have given. 
It seems to me that Aristotle would most likely have said yi»»Vi#V«< or 
yitiritu had ho meant what Zeller supjK>scs.

6 - J De Calo, A, 2796, 16 : ./ Y i»«AXA£ irt pi, tSrmt, Srt Yt £\\* f 
[ftupiutm] («<*. f «ri rit »ir / i*«») »«i rturt iu ItariKu* »Zr*t, »rx\f 'Epw. i

70 X. 7: Z*n Km rmZr* kx*k*$t***i tU ri* t»Z >.ly»t. un mmrm

Digitized by Google

166

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

called The Failure of the Oracles, 71 puts into the mouth of 
Kleombrotos, one of his personages, the following remark- 
able utterance : " I hear all that from many people, and 
I see the Stoic conflagration trespassing on the verses of 
Hesiod, just as it does on the writings of Herakleitos and 
the verses of Orpheus." These statements are all the 
more remarkable from their disagreement with what was 
the universal belief at the time they were written. They 
show that it was possible for careful students of the 
original work to find there a very different meaning from 
that which the Stoic "accommodators" professed to see in it.( 'orrclntion of 63. There are a number of Herakleitean fragments 
ophite*. wl . . ch form a clagg b ^ themgelveg) an(i are araon g the

most striking of all the utterances that have come down 
to us. The common characteristic of these is, that they 
assert in the most downright way the identity of various 
things which are usually regarded as opposites. The clue 
to the meaning of all these statements is obviously to be 
found in the account already given of the similar assertion 
that day and night are one. We have seen that Herak- 
leitos meant to say, not that day was night or that night 
was day, but simply that they were two sides of the 
same process, namely, the oscillation of the " measures " 
of fire and water, and that neither would be possible 
without the other. Any explanation that can be given 
of night will also be an explanation of day, aud vice versa; 
for it will be an account of that which is common to 
both, and manifests itself now as one and now as the 
other. Moreover, it is just because it has manifested itself 
in the one form that it must next appear in the other ;

71 415 F: axtv* r«£r', ?0»J, TiXk&i *<u •>« <rh* 2rw<xti» lm*vf*ei*, ZfTi?

Digitized by Google

HERAKLEITOS.

1G7

for this is required by the law of compensation or 
•Justice.71 415 F: axtv* r«£r', ?0»J, TiXk&i *<u •>« <rh* 2rw<xti» lm*vf*ei*, ZfTi?

Digitized by Google

HERAKLEITOS.

1G7

for this is required by the law of compensation or 
•Justice.

This is, of course, only a particular application of the 
universal principle that the primary fire is one even in 
its division. It itself is, even in its unity, both plenty 
and want, war and peace (fr. 36). In other words, the 
" satiety " which makes fire pass into other forms, which 
makes it seek " rest in change " (fr. 82, 83), and " hide 
itself" (fr. 10) in the "invisible harmony" of opposi- 
tion, is only one side of the process. The other is the 
" want " which leads it to consume the bright vapour as 
fuel. The upward path is nothing without the down- 
ward (fr. 69). If either were to cease, the other would 
cease also, and the world would disappear ; for it takes 
both to make an apparently stable reality.

All the other utterances of this kind are to be ex- 
plained in the same way. If there were no cold, their 
would be no heat ; for a thing can only grow warm if, 
and in so far as, it is already cold. And the same thing 
applies to the opposition of wet and dry (fr. 39). These, 
it will be observed, are just the two primary oppositions 
of Anaximander, and Herakleitos is showing that the war 
between them is really peace, for it is the common 
element in them (fr. 62) which appears as strife, and 
that very strife is justice, and not, as Anaximander had 
taught, an injustice which they commit one against the 
other, and which must be expiated by a reabsorption of 
both in their common ground. 72 The strife itself is the 
common ground (fr. 62), and is eternal.

The most startling of all these sayings is undoubtedly 
that which affirms that good and evil are the same (fr. 
57). This does not mean in the least, however, that good

7J Chap. I. § 13.

Digitized by Google

1G8 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.7J Chap. I. § 13.

Digitized by Google

1G8 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

is evil or that evil is good, but simply that they are the 
two inseparable halves of one and the same thing. Nor 
are the words used in their moral sense. He means 
simply that a thing can become good only in so far as it 
is already evil, and evil only in so far as it is already 
good, and that all depends on the contrast. The illus- 
tration given in fr. 58 shows this clearly enough. Tor- 
ture, one would say, was an evil, and yet it is made a 
good by the presence of another evil, namely, disease; as is 
shown by the fact that surgeons actually expect a fee for 
inflicting it upon their patients. Justice, upon the other 
hand, which is a good, would be altogether unknown were 
it not for the existence of injustice, which is an evil (fr. 
GO). And this is why it is not good for men to get 
everything they wish (fr. 104). They might think that 
this would be the greatest of goods; but, just as the 
cessation of strife in the world at large would mean iU 
destruction, so the disappearance of hunger, disease, and 
weariness would involve also the disappearance of satis- 
faction, health, and rest.

This leads to a theory of the universal relativity of 
good which prepares the way for the doctrine of Prota- 
goras, that " Mau is the measure of all things." 73 Even 
the rcductio ad absurdum of that doctrine (probably 
derived from Antisthenes), which Plato brings forward 
in the Theaitctos only to dismiss it again as a piece of73 Plato's exposition of the theory of the relativity of knowledge in the 
Theailetos (152 D sqq.) can hardly go back to Herakleitos himself. 
Plato sets himself to show how Herakleiteanism might naturally give rise 
to such a doctrine. If the soul is a stream and things are a stream, then 
of course, knowledge is relative. Very possibly the later Hcrakleiteans 
had worked out the theory in this direction, but in the days of Herakleitos 
himself the problem of knowledge had not yet arisen. His theory of 
knowledge was, no doubt, confined to the singlo tenet that fire is wise, and 
the dry soul knows best.

Digitized by

HERAKLEITOS. 169

eristic, is foreseen and frankly accepted by Herakleitos. 
Asses must judge for themselves what is good for them, 
and they would rather have straw than gold (fr. 51). 
Sea-water is good for fish and bad for men (fr. 52). 
Swine, for preference, wash in the mire (fr. 53); and 
certainly, if only you are dirty enough, that will make 
you relatively clean.But, for all that, IIerakleito3 is not a believer in 
absolute relativity. There is, doubtless, great danger of 
our reading modern ideas upon this subject into the 
words of the first thinker who raised this great question ; 
but the following statement seems to be justified by the 
fragments. We must bear in mind that the process of 
the world is not merely a circle, in which case we should 
have an absolute relativity, but an " upward and down- 
ward path." At the upper end, where the two paths 
meet, we have the pure elemental fire, in which, as there 
is no separation, there is no relativity. We are told 
expressly that, while to man some things are evil and 
some things are good, all things are good to God (fr. 61). 
Now by God there is no doubt that Herakleitos meant 
Tire. He also calls it the " one wise," and perhaps said 
that it " knows all things." I prefer, however, not to call 
it the Absolute, with Lassalle, for that designation obscures 
the fact that it is real physical fire. At the same time, 
there can hardly be any doubt that Herakleitos meant to 
say that in it the opposition and relativity which are uni- 
versal in the world disappear. It is doubtless to this that 
fr. 96, 97, and 98 refer.

64. Herakleitos speaks of " wisdom " or the " Wise The Wise 
in two senses. We have seen already that he said 
wisdom was "something apart from everything else," 
meaning by it the perception of the unity of the many ;

Digitized by Google

170

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.Digitized by Google

170

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

and he also applies the term to that unity itself, regarded 
as the " thought that directs the course of all things." 
This is synonymous with the pure fire which is not 
differentiated into two parts, one taking the upward and 
the other the downward path. That alone has wisdom ; 
the partial things we see have not. We ourselves are 
only wise in so far as we are fiery. 
Theology. 65. With certain reservations, Herakleitos was pre- 
pared to call the one Wisdom by the name of Zeus, 
Such, at least, appears to be the meaning of fr. 65. 
What these reservations were, it is easy to guess. It is 
not, of course, to be pictured in the form of a man. In 
saying this, Herakleitos would only have been repeating 
what had already been laid down by Anaximander and 
Xenophanes. He agrees further with Xenophanes in 
holding that this " god," if it is to be called so, is one ; 
though, we shall see, in another sense there are many 
gods, just as with Xenophanes. Herakleitos further 
disagrees both with Anaximander and Xenophanes in 
identifying god with the primary substance and not with 
the world. His polemic against popular religion seems to 
have been more thoroughgoing than that of Xenophanes, 
in that it was directed rather against the rites and 
ceremonies themselves, than against their mere mytho- 
logical outgrowth. He gives a list (fr. 124) of some of 
the most characteristic religious figures of his time, and 
the context in which the fragment is quoted shows that 
he in some way threatened them with the wrath to come. 
He comments upon the absurdity of praying to images 
(fr. 126), and the strange idea that blood -guiltiness can 
be washed out by the shedding of blood (fr. 130). He 
seems also to have pointed out that it was absurd to 
celebrate the worship of Dionysos by cheerful and licen-

Digitized by Google

HERAKLEITOS.

171Digitized by Google

HERAKLEITOS.

171

tious ceremonies, while Hades was propitiated by gloomy 
rites (fr. 127). According to the mystic doctrine itself, 
the two were really one ; and the one Wisdom ought to 
be worshipped in its integrity.

The few fragments which deal with theology and 
religion hardly suggest to us that Herakleitos was in 
sympathy with the religious revival of the time, and yet 
we have lately been asked to consider his system " in 
the light of the idea of the mysteries ; " 74 and even a 
sensible critic like Tannery has been led, by his too com- 
plete reliance upon the ingenious but erratic Teichmuller, 
to treat Herakleitos mainly as a theologian. Our atten- 
tion is called to the fact that he was " king " of Ephesos, 
that is, priest of the branch of the Eleusiuian mysteries 
established in that city, which was also connected in 
some way with the worship of Artemis or the Great 
Mother. 75 These statements are, to say the least of it, 
very doubtful ; but, even if they were true, what would 
follow ? We ought surely to have learnt from Lobeck 
by this time that there was no " idea " in the mysteries 
at all ; and on this point the results of recent anthropo- 
logical research have abundantly confirmed those of 
philological and historical inquiry. The mysteries were, 
however, it is alleged, an elaborate symbolisation of the 
alternation of life and death, sleeping and waking, night 
and day, summer and winter. It is not explained why 
any one should have thought it desirable to symbolise 
these obvious facts. Ancient religion is very practical, 
and it is hard to see what was to be gained by so fantastic 
a proceeding. Nor is it clear that Herakleitos, or indeed

74 K. Pfleidercr, Die Philosophic des Heraklit von Ephesxu in Lichle dtr 
Mi/Ktirienulee [1S86].

7i Antisthencs (the writer of Succession*), ap. K. P. 24. Cf. R. P. 246.

172 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY74 K. Pfleidercr, Die Philosophic des Heraklit von Ephesxu in Lichle dtr 
Mi/Ktirienulee [1S86].

7i Antisthencs (the writer of Succession*), ap. K. P. 24. Cf. R. P. 246.

172 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY

any one possessed of even moderate intelligence, had to 
resort to mysteries to learn so simple a lesson. Teich- 
miiller also pressed into the service the obscure sentence 
(fr. 127), which asserts, incidentally, the identity of 
Hades and Dionysos. This is explained by means of a 
myth which is related by St, Clement of Alexandria ; but 
which does that Father little credit, and positively ex- 
plains nothing at all. 7 * It is almost a sufficient refutation 
of these views to point out that they have been arrived 
at by starting from the latest sources and the most un- 
intelligible fragments, a method which violates every 
principle of sound criticism, and can therefore lead to 
nothing. It is surely better to start from those fragments 
which it is really possible to make out, and to look at 
the more difficult ones in the light of the results so 
attained. It will then be found that, while some of the 
obscurer fragments will still remain obscure, the theo- 
logical interpretation of them is absolutely excluded. 
Not that Herakleitos was absolutely unaffected by the 
religious movement described in the last chapter; but 
his attitude towards it was, in the main, one of con- 
temptuous hostility. 
Man. 66. The world being such as we have seen, what is 
man ? Aristotle tells us that Herakleitos regarded the 
soul of man as fire, since he identified it with the bright 
exhalation, 77 a statement which is abundantly confirmed 
by later writers, 78 and, as we shall see, by the fragments 
that have come down to us. There is, however, a possible 
misinterpretation of it, against which we must carefully78 I do not propose to quote this disgusting story; but, for the benefit 
of those who know it, it may be well to point out that "he who forgets 
the way" is simply the drunken man of fr. 73.

77 Dt An. A, 2. 405a, 25 (K. P. 30r). " 8 R. P. 33<£

Digitized by Google

HERAKLEITOS.

173

guard. Herakleitos cannot have distinguished the soul 
as spiritual from the body as material. Man is made 
up, just like the world at large, of three things, fire, 
water, and earth. But, just as in the macrocosm fire is 
identified with the one wisdom, so in the microcosm the 
fire alone is conscious. When it has left the body, the 
remainder, the mere earth and water, is altogether worth- 
less (fr. 85). We have here, it is true, the rudiments 
of the distinction between soul and body, but we have 
nothing more. The fire is to be regarded as material, 
and as of just the same nature with that which " bums 
and crackles " on the hearth.

The parallelism between man and the world, of which 
he is a part, is in every way complete. The fire which 
animates him is subject to the " upward and downward 
path," just as much as the fire of the world. The Tlepl 
SiaiT7)<; has preserved the obviously Herakleitean sen- 
tence : " All things are passing, both human and divine, 
upwards and downwards." 79 We are just as much in 
perpetual flux as anything else in the world. We are 
and are not the same for two consecutive instants (fr. 
84). The fire in us is perpetually becoming water, and 
the water earth ; but, as the opposite process goes on 
simultaneously we appear to remain the same. 80

G7. This, however, is not alL Like the world, man sleep and

r * I. 5 (p. 62, 21, Hyw.).G7. This, however, is not alL Like the world, man sleep and

r * I. 5 (p. 62, 21, Hyw.).

80 We seem to have a clear reference to this in Epicharmos (ap. D. L. 
iii. 10): " Look now at men too. One grows and another passes away, 
and all are in change always. What changes in its substance and never 
abides in the same spot, will already be something different from what 
has jjassod away. So thou and I were different yesterday, nnd are now 
quite other people, and again we shall become others and n over the same 
again, and bo on in the same way." This is put into the mouth of a 
debtor who does not wish to pay. See Bernnys on the «^«»«>i»#f xiyn 
(C/r*. Abh. i. p. 109 sqq.).

174 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

is subject to a certain oscillation in his " measures " of 
fire and water, and this gives rise to the alternations of 
sleeping and waking, life and death. The locus classicus 
on this subject is a passage of Sextus Empiricus, which 
reproduces the account of the Herakleitean psychology 
given by Ainesidemos (Skeptic, c. B.C. 80-a.d. 50). 81 It 
is as follows (R. P. 33): —The natural philosopher is of opinion that what surrounds 
us 82 is rational and endowed with consciousness. According 
to Herakleitos, when wo draw in this divine reason by means 
of respiration, we become conscious. In sleep we forget, but 
at our waking we become conscious once more. For in sleep, 
when the openings of the senses close, the mind which is in us 
is cut off from contact with that which surrounds us, and only our 
connexion with it by means of respiration is preserved as a sort 
of root (from which the rest may spring again) ; and, when it 
is thus separated, it loses the power of memory that it had 
before. When we awake again, however, it looks out through 
the openings of the senses, as if through windows, and coming 
together with the surrounding mind, it assumes the power of 
reason. Just, then, as embers, when they are brought near the 
fire, change and become red-hot, and go out when they are taken 
away from it again, so does the portion of the surrounding mind 
which sojourns in our body become irrational when it is cut oiF, 
and so does it become of like nature to the whole when contact 
is established through the greatest number of openings.

In this passage there is obviously a very large 
admixture of later phraseology and of later ideas. In 
particular, the identification of " that which surrounds 
us " with the air cannot be Herakleitean ; for Herak-

Sextus quotes "Ainesidemos according to Herakleitos." Natorp 
holds {Forachtuifjen, p. 78) that Ainesidemos really did combine Herak- 
lciteanism with Skepticism. Diels, on the other hand (Dox. pp. 210, 
211), insists that Ainesidemos only gave an account of the theories of 
Herakleitos. This controversy does not affect the use we make of the

83 T 4 mpiix" Opposed to hut parallel with r» <ri;o£o ri» k i<r fit*.

Digitized by Google

HERAKLEITOS.

17583 T 4 mpiix" Opposed to hut parallel with r» <ri;o£o ri» k i<r fit*.

Digitized by Google

HERAKLEITOS.

175

leitos can have known nothing of air, which in his day 
was identified with mist (§ 26). The reference to the 
pores or openings of the senses is probably foreign to 
TIerakleitos also ; for this was an idea first started by 
Kmpedokles (§ 95). Lastly, the distinction between 
mind and body is far too sharply drawn. On the other 
hand, the important role assigned to respiration may very 
well be Herakleitean ; for we have met with it already in 
Anaximenes. And we can hardly doubt that the striking 
simile of the embers which glow when they are brought 
near the fire is genuine (cf. fr. 77). The true Herak- 
leitean doctrine doubtless was, that sleep was produced 
by the encroachment of moist, dark exhalations from the 
water in the body which cause the fire to burn low. In 
a soul where the fire and water were evenly balanced, 
the equilibrium would be restored in the morning by an 
equal encroachment of the fire upon the water.

But in no soul are the fire and water thus evenly 
balanced for long. One or the other acquires a decisive 
predominance, and the result in either case is death. 
Let us take each of these cases in turn. It is death, we 
know, to souls to become water (fr. 68); but this is just 
what happens to souls which seek after pleasure. For 
pleasure is a moistening of the soul (fr. 7 2), as may be 
seen in the case of the drunken man, who, in pursuit of 
it, has moistened his soul to such an extent that he 
does not know where he is going (fr. 73). Eveu in 
gentle relaxation over our cups, it is more difficult to 
hide folly than at other times (fr. 108). This is why 
it is so necessary for us to quench wantonness (fr. 103): 
for whatever our heart's desire insists upon it purchases 
at the price of our life, that is, of the fire within us (fr. 
10.")). Take now the other case. The dry soul, that

176 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.176 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

which has least moisture, is the best (fr. 74); but the 
preponderance of fire causes death as much as that of 
water. It is, however, a very different death, and wins 
"greater portions" for those who die it (fr. 101). 
Apparently those who fall in battle share this fate (fr. 
102). We have no fragment which tells us directly 
what it is, but we shall see that the class of utterances 
which we are about to look at next leaves little doubt 
upon the subject. Those who die the fiery and not the 
watery death, become, in fact, gods, though in a different 
sense from that in which the one Wisdom is god. It is 
probable that the corrupt fragment 123 refers to this 
unexpected fate that awaits men when they die. 83 
Man.Fpwar.1 68. We have not even yet got to the end. Just as

and Down- J °

ward path. summer and winter are one, and necessarily reproduce 
one another by their " opposite tension," so do life and 
death. They, too, are one, we are told ; and so are youth 
and age. It follows that the same soul will be now 
living and now dead; that it will only turn to fire or 
water, as the case may be, to recommence once more its 
unceasing upward and downward path. The soul that 
has died from excess of moisture sinks down to earth ; 
but from the earth comes water, and from water is once 
more exhaled a soul (fr. 68). So, too, we are told (fr. 
67) that gods and men are really one. They live each 
other's life, and die each other's death. Those mortals 
that die the fiery death become immortal, they become 
the guardiaus of the quick and the dead (fr. 123); and 
those immortals become mortal in their turn. Every-83 We need not hesitate to ascribe to Heraklcitos the view that the dead 
become guardian demons of the living ; it appears already in Hesiod, 
Works and Day*, 121. As Bernays pointed out (Her. Br. p. 38 sq.}, the 
theory expounded by Plato in Phaido. 72 A, is simply a development of 
this. Plato had been a Herakleitean in his youth.

Digitized by Google

HERAKLEITOS

177

thing is really the death of something else (fr. 64). The 
living and the dead are continually changing places (fr. 
78), like the pieces in a child's game of draughts 
(fr. 79).

■

But why should those who have become gods consent 
to sink once more into human life ? For the same 
reason, says Herakleitos, as fire is always in motion, 
namely, satiety, which is also want, and the impossibility 
of enjoying good without evil. The real weariness is 
continuance in the self-same state (fr. 82), and the real 
rest is change (fr. 83). Rest in any other sense than 
this would be tantamount to dissolution (fr. 84). So 
they are born once more, and the cycle is repeated.

This cycle, according to Herakleitos, might be gone 
through in the course of three generations. A man 
might reappear as his own grandchild even in the short 
space of thirty years (fr. 87-89).This cycle, according to Herakleitos, might be gone 
through in the course of three generations. A man 
might reappear as his own grandchild even in the short 
space of thirty years (fr. 87-89).

Before leaving this subject, we must say a few words 
on two of the most obscure fragments of Herakleitos (37 
and 38). These seem to be correlative, and to mean 
that while, on the one hand, if all things became vapour, 
the sense of smell would still have an object ; on the 
other, when man himself becomes vapour, he still retains 
that sense. I think the clue to these curious statements 
is to be found in what Theophrastos tells us of the 
probably Pythagorean view reported by Parmenides in 
the second part of his poem. According to this, even 
dead bodies, which consist solely of the dark element, 
retained a perception of everything silent, cold, and 
dark. 84 In the same way, Herakleitos seems to say that 
the fiery part of man, when separated from the earth and 
water, retains a perception of what is fiery. Now the

w Chap. IV. n. 56.

12

Digitized by Google

178 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

fiery element is perceived primarily by the sense of smell, 
and therefore that is retained even by what we should 
call "disembodied souls." Similarly, if jxr impossibiU 
all things were to revert to the unity of fire, the sense of 
smell would still have an object upon which to exercise 
itself. It must be admitted, however, that all this is 
extremely doubtful. 
Kthicsof 69. In his History of Ethics** Kostlin rightly insists

Hemkieitoi.. ^ e importance of the moral teaching of Herak-Hemkieitoi.. ^ e importance of the moral teaching of Herak-

leitos. Unfortunately, however, he has been misled by 
Schuster into reducing it to something like a " common- 
sense " theory of Ethics. The " common " upon which 
Herakleitos insists is, nevertheless, something very dif- 
ferent from public opinion, for which, indeed, he had the 
greatest possible contempt (fr. 111). It is, in fact, his 
strongest objection to "the many," that they live each 
in his own world (fr. 95), as if they had a private 
wisdom of their own (fr. 92); and public opinion is 
therefore just the opposite of " the common."

The Ethics of Herakleitos are to be regarded as a 
corollary of his anthropological and cosmological views. 
Their chief requirement is that we keep our souls dry, 
and thus assimilate them to the one Wisdom, which is 
fire. This is what is really "common," and the greatest 
fault is to act like men asleep (fr. 94), that is, by letting 
our souls grow moist, to cut ourselves off from com- 
munion with the reason in the world, conceived in the 
naively materialistic way with which we are now familiar. 
We do not know what were the consequences which 
Herakleitos deduced from his rule that we must hold 
fast to what is common, but it is easy to see what their 
nature must have been. The wise man would not try to

85 Ge*ch. d. Ethik, i. j>. 100 sijq.

Digitized by Google

HERAKLEITOS. 179

secure good without its correlative evil. He would not 
seek for rest without exertion, nor expect to enjoy con- 
tentment without first suffering discontent. He would 
not complain that he had to take the bad with the good, 
but would consistently look at things as a whole.Herakleitos prepared the way for the Stoic world-state 
by comparing " the common " to the laws of a city. And 
these are even more than a type of the divine law ; they 
are imperfect embodiments of it. They cannot, however, 
exhaust it altogether ; for in all human affairs there is an 
element of relativity (fr. 91). "Man is a baby com- 
pared to God." Such as they are, however, the city 
must fight for them as for its walls ; and, if it has the 
good fortune to possess a citizen who has a really dry 
soul, he is really as good as ten thousand (fr. 113); for 
in him alone is " the common " embodied.

CHAPTER IV.

PA KM EN IDES OF KLEA.

Life. 70. Parmenides, sou of Pyres, was a citizen of Hyele, 
Elea, or Velia, a colony founded in Oinotria by refugees 
from Phokaia in 5 06 R.c. 1 His date is not easily fixed 
with certainty. Diogenes tells us that he " flourished " 
in 01. LXIX. (504-501 iu\); and this was doubtless the 
ilate given by Apollodoros.*- On the other hand, Plato 
says quite distinctly that Parmenides came to Athens in 
his sixty-fifth year, accompanied by Zeno, and conversed 
with Sokrates, who was then ciuite young. 3 Xow 
Sokrates was just over seventy when he was put to 
deatli in !>99 B.C.; and therefore, if we suppose him to 
have been an ephebos, that is, from eighteen to twenty 
years old, at the time of his interview with Parmenides, 
we get 451-449 n.c. as the date of that event. I do 
not hesitate to accept this, 4 especially as the year given by 
Diogenes would make the birth of Parmenides some years 
earlier than the foundation of Elea, of which city he is said

1 K. 1\ 91. For the foundation of Elea, see Herod, i. lCii **y\. It was 
on the coast of Lueania, south of Poseidonia (Piestum).

2 1). L. ix. 23 (R. P. 91). Cf. Diels, Xhein. i/t«. xxxi. 34. 
» Farm. 127 B (R. P. 91</>.2 1). L. ix. 23 (R. P. 91). Cf. Diels, Xhein. i/t«. xxxi. 34. 
» Farm. 127 B (R. P. 91</>.

* I cannot believe that the interview of Sokrates with Parmenides is a 
mere figment of Plato's, though, of course, the dialogue reported is purely 
imaginary. Had Plato brought the two men together for purely dramatic 
purposes, he would hardly have invited criticism by giving exact figures 
as to the ages of Parmenides and Zeno. Xor would he have referred to 
the meeting in two other passages of his works [Soph. 217 C, and Thtait. 
lNi F .

Digitized by Google

PARMENIDES.

181

to have been a native. I cannot explain the origin of the 
mistake. Diels holds that Apollodoros merely synchron- 
ised Parmenides with Herakleitos, but it is very strange 
that he should have neglected the data furnished by Plato.We have seen already (§43) that Aristotle records a 
tradition which made Parmenides the disciple of Xeno- 
phanes ; but the value of this testimony is diminished by 
the doubtful way he speaks. It is clear that he had no 
authentic information on the point. It is, we also saw, 
very unlikely that Xenophanes actually founded the 
school of Elea, though it is quite possible he visited 
that city. He tells us himself that, in his ninety-second 
year, he was still wandering up and dawn (fr. 24). At 
that time Parmenides would be well advanced in life. 
Nor was Xenophanes at all the sort of man whom we 
should expect to find gathering disciples round him and 
establishing a school. More probably his influence on 
Parmenides, if he really had any, was of a different 
kind. His vigorous satire may have awakened in the 
mind of the younger man that dissatisfaction with 
Pythagorean dualism which, as we shall see, was his 
starting-point. And we must not overlook the statement 
of Sotion, preserved to us by Diogenes, that, though 
Parmenides "heard" Xenophanes, he did not "follow" 
him. According to this account, our philosopher was 
the " associate " of two Pythagoreans, Araeinias and 
Diochaites, " a poor but noble man to whom he after- 
wards built a shrine as to a hero." It was Ameinias and 
not Xenophanes that " converted " Parmenides to the 
philosophic life. 5 This has undoubtedly the air of a

s D. L. ix. 21 (R. P. 91). Sotion, in his Sncctx Won-*, separated Par- 
menides from Xenophanes and associated him with the Pythagorean* 
{Doz. 146-148), and D. L. follows him here (Dox. p. 166).

Digitized by Google

182 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.Digitized by Google

182 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

trustworthy tradition, and the shrine erected by Par- 
menides may well have been extant later to bear witness 
to it. It should also be mentioned that Strabo describes 
l*armenides and Zeno as Pythagoreans, and that Kebes 
talks of a " Parmenidean and Pythagorean way of life." 0 
Zeller explains all this by supposing that, like Empe- 
dokles, Parmenides approved of and followed the Pytha- 
gorean mode of life without adopting the Pythagorean 
system. It is possibly true that Parmenides believed in 
a "philosophic life" (§ 33), and that he got the idea 
from the Pythagoreans ; but there is absolutely no trace, 
either in his writings or in what we are told about him, 
of his having been in any way affected permanently by 
the superstitious elements in Pythagoreanism. The 
writing of Empedokles is obviously modelled upon that 
of Parmenides, and yet there is an impassable gulf 
between the two. The touch of charlatanism, which is 
such an unpleasant feature in the copy, is altogether 
absent from the model. It is true, no doubt, as O. Kern 
has pointed out, that there are traces of Orphic ideas in 
the poem of Parmenides ; 7 but they are all to be found 
either in the allegorical introduction, or in the second 
part of the poem; and we need not therefore believe 
they were taken very seriously. Now Parmenides was 
a western Hellene, and had probably been a Pythagorean. 
It is therefore not a little remarkable that he should be 
so free from the common faults of his age and country. 
As regards the relation of Parmenides to the Pythagorean 
system, we shall have something to say later on. At

6 Strabo, Oeog. vi. 1 ; Keb. Tab. 2 (R. P. 91c). Kebes was probably 
the (Pythagorising) cynic (Chap. II. n. 42) mentioned by Ath. Dtipji. 
156 D (Sittl. Or. Litt. ii. 276).

7 Zn Parmenides, Arch. iii. p. 173 sqq. : ^/xu vtXvTtni (v. 14) and 
the }*iu*tk ivKrif arc distinctly Orphic.

Digitized by Googl

PARMKNIDES.

IS:]7 Zn Parmenides, Arch. iii. p. 173 sqq. : ^/xu vtXvTtni (v. 14) and 
the }*iu*tk ivKrif arc distinctly Orphic.

Digitized by Googl

PARMKNIDES.

IS:]

present we need only note further that, like most of the 
oldest philosophers, he took part in politics ; and Speu- 
sippos recorded that the magistrates of Elea made the 
citizens swear every year to abide by the laws which 
Parmenides had given them. 8

71. Parmenides was really the first philosopher to The poem, 
expound his system in metrical language. As there is 
a good deal of confusion on this subject, it deserves a 
few words of explanation. In writing of Empedokles, 
Mr. J. A. Symonds says : " The age in which he lived 
had not yet thrown off the form of poetry in philo- 
sophical composition. Even Parmenides had committed 
his austere theories to hexameter verse." Now this is 
altogether wrongly put. The earliest philosophers, 
Anaximander, Auaximenes, and Herakleitos, all wrote 
in prose, or what they meant for prose, and the only 
Greeks who ever wrote philosophy in verse at all were 
just these two, Parmenides and Empedokles ; for Xeno- 
phanes was not primarily a philosopher any more than 
Epicharmos. Empedokles copied Parmenides; and he, 
no doubt, was influenced by the writings of Xenophanes. 
15 ut the thing was an innovation, and one which luckily 
did not maintain itself.

The fragments of Parmenides are preserved for the 
most part by Simplicius, who fortunately inserted them 
in his commentary, because in his time the original 
work was already rare. 9 I follow the arrangement of 
Karsten, adopting, however, the improved text of Diels.

The steeds that bear me carried me as far as ever my heart 
desired, since they brought me and set me on the renowned 
way of the goddess, who with her own hands conducts the man

■ Ap. D. L. ix. 23 (R. P. 91). Cf. Strabo, vi. 1 (R. P. 91c). 
» Simpl. Phys. 144, 25 D (R. P. 95).

Digitized by Google

184 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.■ Ap. D. L. ix. 23 (R. P. 91). Cf. Strabo, vi. 1 (R. P. 91c). 
» Simpl. Phys. 144, 25 D (R. P. 95).

Digitized by Google

184 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

who knows through all things. On what way was I borne 
T) along ; for on it did the wise steeds carry me, drawing my car, 
and maidens showed the way. And the axle, glowing in the 
socket — for it was urged round by the whirling wheels at each 
end — gave forth a sound as of a pipe, when the daughters of the 
Sun, hasting to convey me into the light, threw back their veils

10 from oft" their faces and left the abode of Night.

There are the gates of the ways of Night and Day, fitted 
above with a lintel and below with a threshold of stone. They 
themselves, high in the air, are closed by mighty doors, ami 
Avenging Justice keeps the keys that open them. Her did

1") the maidens entreat with gentle words and skilfully persuade 
to unfasten without demur the bolted bars from the gates. 
Then, when the doors were thrown back, they disclosed a wide 
opening, when their brazen hinges swung back wards in the

-0 sockets fastened with rivets and nails. Straight through them, 
on the broad way, did the maidens guide the horses and the car, 
and the goddess greeted me kindly, and took my right hand 
in hers, and spake to me these words : —

" "Welcome, noble youth, that comest to my abode on the car

2o that bears thee tended bv immortal charioteers ! It is no ill 
chance, but justice and right that has sent thee forth to travel 
on this way. Far, indeed, does it lie from the beaten track of 
men ! Meet it is that thou shouldst learn all things, as well 
the unshaken heart of persuasive truth, as the opinions of

30 mortals in which is no true belief at all. Yet none the less 
shalt thou learn of these things also, since thou must judge 
appro vedly of the things that seem to men as thou guest 
through all things in thy journey." R. P. 93.

THE WAY OF TRUTH.THE WAY OF TRUTH.

Come now, I will tell thee — and do thou hearken to my 
saying and carry it away — the only two ways of search that 
,'55 can be thought of. The first, namely, that It is, and that it is 
impossible for anything not to be, is the way of conviction, 
for truth is its companion. The other, namely, that It is not, 
and that something must needs not be,— that, I tell thee, is a 
wholly untrustworthy path. For you cannot know what is

Digitized by Google

PARMEXIDES.

185

not — that is ini possible — nor utter it ; for it is the same thing 40 
that can be thought and that can be. 10 R. P. 94a.

It needs must be that what can be thought and spoken of is ; 
for it is possible for it to be, and it is not possible for what is 
nothing to be. This is what I bid thee ponder. I hold thee 45 
back from this first way of inquiry, and from this other also, 
upon which mortals knowing naught wander in two minds ; for 
hesitation guides the wandering thought in their breasts, so that 
they are borne along stupefied like men deaf and blind. Un- 
discerning crowds, in whose eyes the same thing and not the 50 
same is and is not, and all things travel in opposite directions ! 11 
R. P. 94/;.

For this shall never be proved, that the things that are not 
are ; and do thou restrain thy thought from this way of inquiry. 
Xor let habit force thee to cast a wandering eye upon this 55 
devious track, or to turn thither thy resounding ear or thy 
tongue ; but do thou judge the subtle refutation of their 
discourse uttered by me. 1 '-' One path only is left for us to 
speak of, namely, that It is. In it are very many tokens that 
what is, is uncreated and indestructible, alone, complete, 13 im- 60 
movable and without end. Xor was it ever, nor will it be ; for 
now it t>, all at once, a continuous one. For what kind of origin 
for it will you look fori In what way and from what source10 This is how Zeller takes these much disputed words. For the 
construction, cf. i«VJ w*, (v. 34), Ur, yk f u**i (v. 43), ri kiyu* ti > a> r» r

(».). Wo read, of course, Ur» not i,r/,, with Zeller, 512, n. 1 (Eng. 
trans, i. 584, w. 1).

11 In v. 44 I road prili* V tlx im* with Simplicius, and understand 
after it. The 9 , *xitrft*$t *iXtut»; has, I believe, nothing to do with

the T*ki*r0v»( if/win, but is a rendering of Hit «>*> ««r». Zeller doubts 
the reference to Herakleitos here, mainly on chronological grounds. W« 
have seen, however, that Herakleitos may very well be earlier than he 
allows (§ 50). See Hernays, Qt*. Al>h. i. 62, m. 1, and Diels, Philotophcn-

" I read nxOnw with Kaisten, and kiy», for xiy». \»y, { does not 
mean " reason " as opposed to sense.

13 I read v *vk»piki( instead of «Z\»> f*cv*$yt>H. Plutarch (a<lr.

Col. 1114 D) gives i#n yap «ik)ui*i(, which points to this; and 
Simplicius more than once applies the term ix»fux»[ to the li» of Par- 
menides [e.g. Phy*. 137, 15 1)). The epithet u»t>y»yt>i( would surely be 
an anachronism ; it comes from Plato's Timaio*, 31 \\, where it has its 
proper force.

Digitized by Google

18(3 KARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY

could it have drawn iU increase 1 I shall not let thee say nor 
think that it came from what is not; for it can neither be

Go thought nor uttered that what is not is. And, if it came from 
nothing, what need could havo made it arise later rather than 
sooner? Therefore must it either be altogether or be not at 
all. Nor will the force of truth suffer aught to arise besides 
itself from that which in any way is. Wherefore, Justice does

70 not loose her fetters and let anything come into being or pass 
away, but holds it fast. R. P. 94C-95.

" Is it or is it not f " Surely it is adjudged, as it needs must 
be, that we are to set aside the one way as unthinkable and 
nameless (for it is no true way), and that the other path is real" Is it or is it not f " Surely it is adjudged, as it needs must 
be, that we are to set aside the one way as unthinkable and 
nameless (for it is no true way), and that the other path is real

75 and true. How, then, can what is be going to l>e in the 
future? Or how could it come into being? If it came into 
being, it is not ; nor is it if it is going to be in the future. 
Thus is becoming extinguished and passing away not to \*e 
heard of. R. P. 9,V.

Nor is it divisible, since it is all alike, and there is no more 
of it in one place than in another, to hinder it from holding

80 together, nor less of it, but everything is full of what is. Where- 
fore all holds together ; for what is, is in contact with what is.

Moreover, it is immovable in the bonds of mighty chains, 
without beginning and without end ; since coming into being 
and passing away have been driven afar, and true belief has

t<5 cast them away. It is the same, and it rests in the self-same 
place, abiding in itself. And thus it remaineth constant in its 
place ; for hard necessity keeps it in the bonds of the limit 
that holds it fast on every side. Wherefore it is not per- 
mitted to what is to be infinite ; for it is in need of nothing ; 
while, if it were infinite, it would stand in need of everything. 14 
R. P. 96.

90 Look steadfastly with thy mind at things afar as if they 
were at hand. You cannot cut off what anywhere is from hold- , 
ing fast to what is anywhere ; neither is it scattered abroad 
throughout the universe, nor does it come together. R. P. 96a. 
It is the same thing that can be thought and for the sake of

14 I cannot restore this line. Simplicius tfives ^ i»» i' «» ihw,, 
which is metrically impossible. In the rendering I have given I follow 
Zcller, though with many doubts.

Digitized by

PARMENIDES.

187Digitized by

PARMENIDES.

187

which the thought exists ; for you cannot find thought without 95 
something that is, to which it is betrothed. 15 And there is not, 
and never shall be, any time other than that which is present, 
since fate has chained it so as to be whole and immovable. 
Wherefore all these things are but the names which mortals 
have given, believing them to be true — coming into being and 100 
passing away, being and not being, change of place and altera- 
tion of bright colour. R. P. 97.

Where, then, it has its farthest boundary, it is complete on 
every side, equally poised from the centre in every direction, 
like the mass of a rounded sphere ; for it cannot be greater or 105 
smaller in one place than in another. For there is nothing 
which is not that could keep it from reaching out equally, nor 
is it possible that there should be more of what is in this place 
and less in that, since it is all inviolable. For, since it is equal 
in all directions, it is equally confined within limits. R. P. 98.

THE WAY OF OPINION.

Here shall I close my trustworthy speech and thought about 110 
the truth. Henceforward learn the opinions of mortals, giving 
ear to the deceptive ordering of my words.

Mortals have settled in their minds to speak of two forms, 
one of which they should have left out, 16 and that is where 
they go astray from the truth. They have assigned an opposite 115 
substance to each, and marks distinct from one another. To the 
one they allot the fire of heaven, light, thin, in every direction 
the same as itself, but not the same as the other. The other is 
opposite to it, dark night, a compact and heavy body. Of these 1 20 
I tell thee the whole arrangement as it seems to men, in order 
that no mortal may surpass thee in knowledge. R. P. 99.

Now that all things have been named light and night, and 
, the things which belong to the power of each have been 
assigned to these things and to those, everything is full at onceNow that all things have been named light and night, and 
, the things which belong to the power of each have been 
assigned to these things and to those, everything is full at once

55 Sec above, u. 3. The meaning given to Ti^T^m* is only a suggestion 
(Stepli. Thes. *.«••). I can make nothing of the other renderings proposed.

19 Supplying after ti xfi"* »*"»■,. This seems obvious ; but those

who hold that Parmenides is here expressing his own views arc obliged to 
render "one of which it is wrong to speak of without the other." So 
Simpl. Phye. 31, 10 D.

Digitized by Google

188 KARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

125 of light and dark night, both equal, since neither has aught to 
do with the other. K. P. 100.

The narrower circles are filled with unmixed fire, and those 
surrounding them with night, and in the midst of these rushes 
their portion of fire. In the midst of these circles is the 
divinity that directs the course of all things ; for she rules over 
130 all painful birth and all begetting, driving the female to the 
embrace of the male, and the male to that of the female. 
R. P. 101 A.

First of all the gods she contrived Eros. R. P. ih.

• ••• . • • a

And thou shalt know 17 the origin of all the things on high, and 
135 all the signs in the sky, and the resplendent works of the 
glowing sun's clear torch, and whence they arose. And thou 
shalt learn likewise of the wandering deeds of the round-faced 
moon, and of her origin. Thou shalt know, too, the heavens 
that surround us, whence they arose, and how Necessity took 
1 40 them and bound them to keep the limits of the stars . . . how 
the earth, and the sun, and the moon, and the sky that is 
common to all, and the Milky Way, and the outermost Olympos, 
and the burning might of the stars arose. R. P. 101 13, C.

Shining by night with borrowed light, wandering round the 
earth.

1 i:> Always straining her eyes to the beams of the sun.

• •••••••Shining by night with borrowed light, wandering round the 
earth.

1 i:> Always straining her eyes to the beams of the sun.

• •••••••

For as at any time is the condition of the flexible limbs, so is the 
state of men's minds ; for that which thinks is the same, namely, 
the substance of the limbs, in each and every man ; for their 
thought is that of which there is most in them. 18 R. P. 102 1J.

17 Stein ascribes these verses to Empedokles.

18 This fragment of the theory of knowledge which was expounded in 
the second part of the poem of Parmcnides must be taken in connexion 
with what we are told by Theophrastos in the Fragment on Semation 
(Dox. p. 499, cf. ?i. 32). It appears from this that he laid down that the 
character of men's thought depended upon the preponderance of the light 
or the dark element in their bodies. They are wise when the light 
element predominates, and foolish when the dark gets the upper hand. 
Ver. ISO refers to the theory of generation ; see below, § 79.

Digitized by Googl

PA RM EN IDES.

189

On the right boys ; on the left girls. 150

• • • • • • •

Thus, according to men's opinions, did things come into 
being, and thus they are now. In time (they think) they will 
grow up and pass away. To each of these things men have 
assigned a fixed name. R. P. 102</.72. In the First Part of his poem, we find Parmenides 44 it 
chiefly interested to prove that It is ; but it is not quite 
obvious at first sight what it is precisely that is. He says 
simply, What is, is. To us this does not seem very clear, 
and that for two reasons. In the first place, we should 
probably never think of doubting it, and we cannot, 
therefore, understand why it should be asserted with such 
iteration and vigour. In the second place, we are 
accustomed to all sorts of distinctions between different 
kinds and degrees of reality, and we do not see which 
of these is meant. Does Parmenides refer to the world 
of sense or the world of ideas ; concrete existence or 
abstract being ; matter or spirit ? Now, we have already 
seen more than once that all these questions would have 
been absolutely meaningless to an early Greek philo- 
sopher, and the system of Parmenides is the best touch- 
stone for our understanding of this fundamental historical 
truth. " That which is," with Parmenides, is primarily 
what, in popular language, we call matter or body ; only 
it is not matter as distinguished from anything else. It 
is certainly regarded as spatially extended; for it is 
quite seriously spoken of as a sphere (v. 102 sqq.). 
Moreover, Aristotle tells us that Parmenides believed in 
none but a sensible reality, which does not mean with him 
a reality actually perceived by the senses, but one which 
might be so perceived if the senses were more perfect

Digitized by Google

190

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.Digitized by Google

190

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

than they are.™ The assertion that It is amounts, then, 
to this, that the universe is a plenum ; and that there is 
no such thing as empty space, either inside or outside the 
world. From this it follows at once that there can be 
no such thing as motion. Instead of endowing the One 
of Xenophaues with an impulse to change, as Herakleitos 
had done, and thus making it capable of explaining the 
world, Parmenides dismissed change as an illusion. He 
showed once for all that if you take the One seriously 
you are bound to deny everything else. All previous 
solutions of the question, therefore, had missed the point. 
Anaximenes, who thought to save the unity of the primary 
substance by his theory of rarefaction and condensation, 
did not observe that, by assuming there was less of 
what is in one place than another, he virtually affirmed 
the existence of what is not, or empty space (v. 78 sqq.). 
The Pythagorean explanation implied that empty space 
or air existed outside the world, and that it entered into 
it to divide the different substances (§ 42). It, too, 
assumes the existence of what is not. Nor is the theory 
of Herakleitos any more satisfactory ; for it is based upon 
the contradiction that fire both is and is not (v. 46 sqq.).

The allusion to Herakleitos in the verses last referred 
to has been doubted ; though, it would seem, upon 
insufficient grounds. Zeller points out quite rightlyThe allusion to Herakleitos in the verses last referred 
to has been doubted ; though, it would seem, upon 
insufficient grounds. Zeller points out quite rightly

1U Sec Baumker, Dir Einhcit dt* ParmtnidtUcheu Stitndt* (Jahrh. 
/. Ma**. Phil. [18S6J p. :>41 sqq.). and Da* Probl. d. Mat. p. f.O sqq. 
For the statement of Aristotle, ef. Dt Carlo, r, 1. 21)86, 21. The Neo- 
platonists, of course, saw in the One of Paruienides their own "intelligible 
world," and from this point of view Simplicius {Phys. 14o\ 31 calls 
the spherical form a " mythical figment." Eudemos, however, had quite 
correctly explained that Parmenides meant to speak of the material 
universe (»vp**ci) ; cf. fr. 12 (Spengel), ap. Simpl. Phi/*. 133, 25 I). "The 
Being of which Parmenides speaks is the very same Being of which our 
senses present us with a deceptive image "' (Baumker;.

Digitized by Googi

PARMEXIDES. 191Digitized by Googi

PARMEXIDES. 191

that Herakleitos never says tliat Being and not-Being 
are the same (the common translation of v. 50); and, 
were there nothing more than this, the reference might 
well seem dubious. The statement, however, that, 
according to the view in question, "all things travel in 
opposite directions" (v. 51), can hardly be understood 
of anything but the " upward and downward path," the 
"race in opposite directions" of Herakleitos (§ 58). It 
therefore seems worth while to point out that Par- 
menides does not attribute the view that Being and 
not-Being are the same to the philosopher whom he is 
attacking. He means simply that, in the eyes of some 
people, " what is," that is to say the primary substance, 
both is and is not, that it is at once the same and not 
the same. This is the natural meaning of the words; 
and it furnishes a very accurate description of the 
theory of Herakleitos, that fire was one in all its differ- 
ences, and that it remained the same though it passed 
into other forms, namely, water and earth. At the 
same time, it is quite wrong to say that the system of 
Parmenides was constructed in opposition to that of 
Herakleitos.

73. The great novelty in the poem of Parmenides is The method of 
the method of argument. He first asks what is the Pftr,ncni,k8 - 
common presupposition of all the views with which 
he has to deal, and he finds that this is the existence of 
empty space. The next question is whether this can be 
thought, and the answer is that it cannot. If you think 
at all, you must think of something. Empty space is 
nothing, and you cannot think of nothing. Therefore 
empty space does not exist. Philosophy hod not yet 
learned to make the suicidal admission that a thing 
might be unthinkable and nevertheless exist. Only

Digitized by Google

192 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY

that can be which can be thought (v. 40) ; for thought 
exists for the sake of what is (v. 94).Digitized by Google

192 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY

that can be which can be thought (v. 40) ; for thought 
exists for the sake of what is (v. 94).

This method Parmenides carries out with the utmost 
rigour. He will not have us pretend that we think 
what we must admit to be unthinkable. It is true that 
if we resolve to allow nothing but what we can under- 
stand, we come into direct conflict with the evidence of 
our senses, which present us with a world of change and 
decay. So much the worse for the senses, says Par- 
menides (v. 52 sqq.). To many this will doubtless seem 
a fatal mistake on his part, but let us see what history has 
to say on the point. The theory of Parmenides is the 
inevitable outcome of a monistic materialism, and his bold 
declaration of this fact destroyed that theory for ever. If 
he had lacked courage to work out the prevailing views of 
his time to their logical conclusion, and to accept that 
conclusion, however paradoxical it might seem to be, men 
might have gone on in the endless circle of opposition, 
rarefaction, and condensation, one and many, for ever. 
It was the thoroughgoing dialectic of Parmenides that 
made progress possible. Philosophy must now cease to be 
monistic or cease to be materialistic. It could not cease 
to be materialistic; for the incorporeal was still un- 
known. It therefore ceased to be monistic, and arrived 
at the atomic theory, which, so far as we know, is 
the last word of the view that the world is matter in 
motion. Having worked out its problems on those 
conditions, philosophy next attacked them on the other 
side. It ceased to be materialistic, and found it possible 
to be monistic once more, at least for a time. The 
progress would have been impossible but for that faith 
in reason which gave Parmenides the courage to reject 
as untrue what was to him unthinkable, however strange

Digitized by Google

PARMENIDES.

193Digitized by Google

PARMENIDES.

193

the result might be. And, even from his own point of 
view, he was right. The unthinkable always remains 
unthinkable, and nothing can be gained by pretending 
to admit its truth. It is true that if we refuse to allow 
the truth of what cannot be thought we have to leave 
nut a great deal of reality, and our theory will therefore 
be partial. In that respect, however, it will only share 
the common lot of all things human, and that we cannot 
mend. What does concern us most is that, if we persist 
in pretending to hold beliefs which cannot be thought, 
our theory will be just as partial, and it will, besides, 
be certainly untrue from top to bottom ; while, if we 
hold to what we can think, it will be partial, indeed, 
but a part of the truth. We cannot take more of 
reality into our view of the world than it already 
contains except by learning to regard the data in a 
new way, and this we can do only if we have first 
thought out what we know already to its logical 
conclusion.

74. Parmenides goes on to develop all the con- The results, 
sequences of the admission that is. It must be 
uncreated and indestructible. It cannot have arisen out 
of nothing ; for there is no such thing as nothing. Nor 
can it have arisen from something ; for there is no room 
for anything but itself. What is cannot have beside it 
any empty space in which something else might arise ; for 
empty space is nothing, nothing cannot be thought, and 
therefore cannot exist. What is, never came into being, 
nor is anything going to come into being in the future. 
" Is it or is it not ? " If it is, then it is now, all at 
once. Time is a mere figment (v. 06 sq.).

That Parmenides was really denying the existence of 
empty space, and not maintaining a theory of abstract

*3

Digitized by Google

194

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.That Parmenides was really denying the existence of 
empty space, and not maintaining a theory of abstract

*3

Digitized by Google

194

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

Being, was quite well known to Plato. He says 20 that 
Parmenides held " all things were one, and that the 
one remains at rest in itself, having no place in which to 
move'' Aristotle is no less clear. In the De Ccclo il he 
lays it down that Tarmenides was driven to take up the 
position that the One was immovable just because no 
one had yet imagined that there was auy reality other 
than sensible reality.

That which is, is; and it cannot be more or less. 
There is, therefore, as much of it in one place as in 
another, and the world is a continuous, indivisible plenum. 
From this it follows at once that it must be immovable. 
If it moved, it must move into an empty space, and there 
is no empty space. It is hemmed in by what is, by the 
real, on every side. For the same reason, it must be 
finite, and can have nothing beyond it. It is complete 
in itself, and has no need to stretch out indefinitely into 
an empty space which does not exist. Hence, too, it is 
spherical It is equally real in every direction, and the 
sphere is the only form which meets this condition. Any 
other would be in one direction more than in another. 
And this sphere cannot even move round its own axis ; 
for there is nothing outside of it with reference to which 
it could be said to move. 
I'artnenides 75. To sum up. What U, is a finite, spherical,

the father of . .

materialism, motionless corporeal plf num, and there is nothing beyond

it. The appearances of multiplicity and motion, empty- 
space and time, are illusions. We see from this that the 
primary substance of which the early cosmologists were 
in search has now become a sort of " thing in itself." It 
never quite lost this character again. What appears 
later as the elements of Empedokles, the so - called

20 Thcait. 180 E.

21 r, l. 2986, 21.

Digitized by Goog20 Thcait. 180 E.

21 r, l. 2986, 21.

Digitized by Goog

PARMKNIDES. 195

" homoeomeries " of Anaxagoras and the atoms of Leukip- 
pus and Deinokritos, is just the Parmeuidean " Being." 
Pannenides is not, as some have said, " the father of 
idealism ; " on the contrary, all materialism depends 
upon his view of reality.

76. It is commonly said that, in the Second Part of The < pinkm*

of men.

his poem, Pannenides offers a dualistic theory of things 
as his own conjectural explanation of the actual, sensible 
world. 22 This view is derived ultimately from the Aris- 
totelian commentators, who saw in the Way of Truth a 
discussion of the Neoplatonist " intelligible world," and in 
the Way of Opinion an explanation of the "sensible 
world." With his usual clear-sightedness, Alexander of 
Aphrodisias, indeed, seems to have taken a more reason- 
able view of what Parmenides really meant; but Sim- 
plicity argues against him with much earnestness and 
ingenuity. 23

It need hardly be said that such subtleties were as far 
as possible from the mind of Pannenides himself. He 
lays it down in the most unequivocal manner that there 
is no truth at all in the cosmology of the Way of Opinion ; 
and he gives it, not as his own hypothesis, but simply as 
the belief of " mortals," that is to say, of his contempor- 
aries. Xow, those who held views of this kind were not 
the Milesians, certainly, nor Uerakleitos ; for these were— The view in question derives some support from the expressions of 
Aristotle. He certainly .says that P. was compiled to accommodate him* 
.self to appearances, and to assume that while reality was one according to 
reasoning, it was many according to sense [Met. A, 5. 986^, 31). He 
also attributes the dualist cosmology of the Second Part to Pannenides 
himself in a number of places {e.g. Phys. A, 5. 188a, 20) ; but that is a 
very natural manner of sj>caking in any case. We must remember that 
tin* distinction between the world as it is for thought and the world as it 
is for sense was first clearly established by Plato. 
Simpl. Phjs. 38, 24 sqq. D.

Digitized by Google

196

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

monists like Parmenides himself. Still less can they be 
ordinary, unphilosophieal people ; it is true that the 
theory is based upon ordinary sense -perception, but 
nevertheless the mass of men are very far indeed from 
believing in a systematic cosmology such as that here 
expounded. No one seems to be left but the Pytha- 
goreans ; and, in fact, as was shown by Krische, 24 many 
of the details unquestionably do belong to the cosmology 
of that sect. We shall come back to this presently : 
meanwhile we must try to find an answer to the very 
natural question why Parmenides thought it worth while, 
to put into hexameter verses a view of the world which 
he believed to be radically false. Here again we have 
only to look at what he says himself, and the solution

ii

will be apparent. It was, he tells us (v. 31), in order 
that the reader might be in a position to criticise and 
refute the rival theory. In other words, Parmenides was, 
as we have seen, a dialectician, aud he finds it necessary 
to work out the opposite view, for just the same reason 
that Plato found it necessary to write in dialogue. The 
philosophy of Parmenides is, in some sort, a critical 
philosophy, and criticism must have an object. Of course 
he admitted that men really are subject to all the illusions 
which their senses present to them. He held it to be of 
vital importance that they should get behind these and 
come in contact with the real truth of things. Further,

"* Forsrliiniffcn, pp. 07-1 1<'», where the passage of Actios about to be 
quoted is admirably discussed. Diels ((*♦-/*•• i* din (Hhxtrn P hil< mophe.it- 
Mchu!rnd< r (t'rifchoi, in Ph'do*. Auf#, Ed. Zdlnr (jmridmtf, p. 253) objects 
to Tannery's revival of this theory on the ground that the two "forms" 
of Parmenides may be identified w ith the Warm and the Cold of Anaxi- 
mander, or the Ran? and the Dense of Anaximenes ; but the dualism of 
the theory seems much too fundamental ami decided for that. In his 
Einptdokln* und Gorgias (SitzumjM)Cr. dnr Bed. Akad. 1884, p. 352). 
Diels now speaks of Parmenides as " strongly l'ythagorising in his a^«."

Digitized by Google

<

PARMENIDES. 197Digitized by Google

<

PARMENIDES. 197

this was to be done by argument, by dialectic. It was, 
therefore, of importance to know these illusions thoroughly; 
and, to this end, it was well to take the most coherent 
account of them that had been given. That Parmenides, 
living at the time he did, and in Southern Italy, should 
have looked upon the Pythagorean system as the final 
explanation of the world that could be given from the 
false standpoint of the senses, is only natural. We may 
therefore hope to get from him some information as to 
what Pythagoreanism really was in his day, and thus 
both to supplement what was said in Chap. II. and to 
prepare for the inquiry which will occupy us in Chap. VII.

77. The view that the Second Part of the poem ofTheduaiiHt

cosmology.

Parmenides is nothing but a summary of contemporary 
Pythagorean cosmology is, doubtless, incapable of rigorous 
demonstration, but it can be made extremely probable. 
The entire history of Pythagoreanism up to the eud of 
the fifth century H.c. is, as has already been pointed out, 
conjectural ; but, if we find in Parmenides ideas which 
are wholly unconnected with his own view of the world, 
and if we find precisely the same ideas in later Pytha- 
goreanism, the most natural inference will surely be that 
the later Pythagoreans derived these views from their 
predecessors, and that they formed part of the original 
stock-in-trade of the society to which they belonged. 
This will only be confirmed if we find that these ideas 
are simply developments of those parts of the old Ionian 
cosmology which had been rejected by Xenophanes. 
We have seen (§ 48) how the latter dropped all those 
parts of A naxim anders system that seemed to lead to 
dualism, and we shall not be surprised to find that these 
were just what Pythagoras fixed upon and worked into 
his own system. Pythagoras came from Samos, which

Digitized by Google

198

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.Digitized by Google

198

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

always stood in the closest relations with Miletos ; and 
it was not, so far as we can see, in his cosmological views 
that he chiefly displayed his originality. It has been 
pointed out above (§ 42) that the idea of the world 
breathing came from Anaximenes, and we need not In? 
surprised to find traces of Anax inlander as well.

As has been said already, the fundamental dualism of 
the Way of Opinion certainly creates a presumption in 
favour of the view that the system described in it is early 
Pythagoreanism. So far as we know, there were no 
other contemporary dualists to whom Pannenides could 
have referred. The question that now arises is simply 
whether it is possible to show that the particular form 
of dualism with which we have to do here can or can 
not be identified with that which we are justified on 
other grounds in ascribing to the Pythagoreans of the 
first half of the fifth century B.C.

Now, if we were confined to what Aristotle tells us on 
this subject, it would be almost impossible to make out a 
ease ; but his statements require, as usual, to be examined 
with a certain amount of care. He tells us, first of all, 
that the two elements of Pannenides were the Warm and 
the Cold. 26 In this he is so far justified by the frag- 
ments that, since the Fire of which Pannenides speaks 
is, of course, warm, the other element, which has all the 
opposite qualities, must of necessity be cold. But, never- 
theless, the habitual use of the terms " the warm " and 
" the cold " is an accommodation to Aristotle's own 
system. In Pannenides himself they were simply one 
pair of attributes amongst others which distinguished the 
two " forms."

23 Ti tx f w xmi ri 4v X ,'„. M,t. A, 3. P84ft, 3 : .1. 986ft, 31 ; Phjs. A. 
5. 18Srr, 20 ; Urn. Corr. A, 3. 318ft, 0 ; 15, 3. 330ft, 14.

Digitized by Google

PARMEXIDES.

19923 Ti tx f w xmi ri 4v X ,'„. M,t. A, 3. P84ft, 3 : .1. 986ft, 31 ; Phjs. A. 
5. 18Srr, 20 ; Urn. Corr. A, 3. 318ft, 0 ; 15, 3. 330ft, 14.

Digitized by Google

PARMEXIDES.

199

Still more misleading is Aristotle's identification of 
these with Fire and Earth. 20 It is not quite certain that 
he meant to say Parmenides himself made this identifica- 
tion ; 27 but, on the whole, it is most likely that he did, 
and Theophastros certainly followed him in this. 28 It is 
another question whether it is accurate. We know that 
the earth was made of the dense element; 29 and the 
suggestion of Zeller/ 10 that this was the sole basis of the 
theory, is in every way probable. Simplicius, who had 
the poem before him (§ 71), after mentioning Fire and 
Karth, at once adds "or rather Light and Darkness;" 31 
and this is suggestive enough. Lastly, Aristotle's identi- 
fication of the dense element with " what is not," :Vi the 
unreal of the First Part of the poem, is not very easy 
to reconcile with the view that it is earth, though it 
seems to be sufficiently justified by v. 114. On the 
other hand, if we suppose that the second of the two 
" forms " which " should have been left out " is the 
Pythagorean Air or Void, we get a very good explanation 
of Aristotle's identification of it with " what is not." 
We seem, then, on the whole, to be justified in simply 
neglecting the identification of the dense element with 
earth altogether.** The further statement of Theophrastos,

M Phy*. A, 5. 188a, 20 ; M<t. A, 5. 9866, 31 (R. P. 99a).

* Pnndis (Comm. EUat. 107) ami Karsten {Rdiqnm, i. 222) heM that 
Aristotle merely gave this as his own inference ; hut Zeller rightly points 
out that we must not press the won Is «7tt Tvp **i >n» kiyvr.

* Phys. Op. fr. 0 (Dox. p. 4S2 ; R. P. 99a). So also all the doxo- 
graphers down to Cicero, Acml. ii. 118 (after Kluitomachos). R. P. i7>.

2a Pint. Strom, fr. 5 (Dor. p. 581): >.«yu It rh* y** <reZ <rv**»v x.*r*fpvUr»s

mifti ytyit'mu.2a Pint. Strom, fr. 5 (Dor. p. 581): >.«yu It rh* y** <reZ <rv**»v x.*r*fpvUr»s

mifti ytyit'mu.

30 Zeller, p. 520, v. 1 {Eng. trans, p. 593, n. 2).

31 Phy*. 25, 16 D. 3 - Met. A, 5. 0866, 35 (R. P. 99a).

aj This disposes of the difficulty which Tannery finds here (.SWcmv 
hd/hie, p. 226 sq.). The subtle element does not, we shall see, correspond 
to the Unlimited, hut to the Limit.

Digitized by Google

200

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

that the Warm was the efficient cause and the Cold the 
material or passive/* 4 is intelligible enough if we identify 
them with the Limit and the Unlimited respectively ; 
but is not, of course, to be regarded as strictly his- 
torical.

We have seen that Simplicius, with the poem of 
Parmenides before him, corrects Aristotle by substituting 
Light and Darkness for Fire and Earth,""' and in this he 
is amply borne out by the fragments which he quotes. 
Parmenides himself calls one " form " Light, Flame, and 
and Fire (v. 116, 122), and the other Night (v. 119). 
We have now to consider whether these can be identified 
with the Pythagorean Limit and Unlimited. We have 
seen good reason to believe (§42) that the idea of the 
world breathing really belonged to the earliest form of 
Pythagoreanism,^ and there can be no difficulty in 
identifying this " boundless breath " with Darkness, 
which stands very well for the Unlimited. "Air" or 
mist was always regarded as the dark element/ 57 And 
that which gives definiteness to the vague darkness is 
certainly light or fire, and this may account for the

■

34 Theoj.hr. ritys. Op. fr. 6 (Dux. p. 1S2 ; R. P. 90a), followed by the 
doxographers.

35 See ,,. 31.

r6 For the Aristotelian references to this, see R. P. 63 B, r/.■

34 Theoj.hr. ritys. Op. fr. 6 (Dux. p. 1S2 ; R. P. 90a), followed by the 
doxographers.

35 See ,,. 31.

r6 For the Aristotelian references to this, see R. P. 63 B, r/.

37 Note the identification of the flense element with "air" in Pint. 
Strom., quoted w. 29; and see Schmidt, (IriechLscIi? Sifnonj/mik, § 35: 
"The idea of air, as we understand it, was unknown in early antiquity : 
yet wind and breath suggested a mysterious something that tilled the 
space ahove the land and the water, as far as the clouds and beyond them. 
It was believed that this element was apprehended visibly in the clouds, 
and accordingly, in Homer, the word «u> signifies the mist which is 
extended generally over all the earth, shuwing itself as the bluish 
veil which obscures objects when we look out over wide stretches of 
country." Cf. Chap. I. § 26* and Chap. V. § 85. Darkness was first 
proclaimed to be a mere shadow and not a real thing by Empedokles 
(Chap. III. § Gl).

Digitized by Googl

PAUM EN IDES.

201

prominence given to that element by Hippasos. :i8 We 
may probably conclude, then, that the Pythagorean dis- 
tinction between the Limit and the Unlimited, which we 
shall have to consider later (Chap. VII.), made, its first 
appearance in the naively realistic form which Parmenides 
describes. The darkness or " air " of which he speaks 
is simply another name for the unreal, of which he had 
spoken in the First Part of his poem, and which should 
have been left out altogether (v. 113).

78. We must now look at the general cosmical view The heavenly 
which was expounded in the Second Part of the poem. 
The fragments are scanty, and the doxographical tradition 
hard to interpret ; but enough remains to show that here, 
too, we are on Pythagorean ground. All discussion of 
the subject must start from the following important 
passage of Actios : —Parmenides held that then; were crowns close together and 
encircling one another, formed of the rare and the dense element 
respectively, and that between these there were other mixed 
crowns made up of light and darkness. That which surrounds 
them all was solid like a wall, and under it is a fiery crown. 
That which is the midmost of all the crowns is also solid, and 
surrounded in turn by a fiery circle. The central circle of the 
mixed crowns is the cause of movement and becoming to all the 
rest. He calls it " the goddess who directs their course," " the 
Key-bearer," and "Necessity." (Aet. ii. 7. 1 ; K. P. 101 1).)

The first thing to be noted here is that the " crowns " 
of which Parmenides spoke are certainly not spheres, as 
is often supposed. The language used does not even 
suggest that the outermost of all, which is " solid like a 
wall," is so. The picture presented to us is rather that 
of a number of concentric rings like those of Anaximander 
(§ 18); and we shall see when we come to the details

38 Aiist. M.t. A, 'X 984a, 7 [U. P. 47c).

Digitized by Google

202

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

that this view is strikingly borne out by the fragments. 
The great difference is that, according to Aetios, the rings 
described by Parmenides were closely fitted together 
without any interval between them. They were, in fact, 
just like a nest of cylindrical boxes. Now this last com- 
parison is actually used by Plato in the description oi' 
the Kosmos which he has inserted in his famous Myth 
of Er the Armenian, 39 and that description is clearly 
Pythagorean in substance.Coming to details it is clear, in the first place, that 
the solid ring on the outside is the "outermost Olympos " 
(v. 141), a distinctively Pythagorean idea. Immediately 
within it is a fiery circle, the Pythagorean Ouranos 
(v. 137), called also the a ther by Parmenides (v. 141). 
If we can trust Aetios so far, the planet Venus, which 
Parmenides identified as the morning and evening star, 40 
the sun, and the fixed stars were in this region. 41 It 
must, however, be allowed that the point seems rather 
doubtful. The solid region in the middle is, of course, 
the earth. I see no reason for supposing that this was 
regarded as spherical. 42 If it was, we should only, su

I\<p. x. 010 1). Plato calls the rings rf«»3t/'x«i, not xC*\n (Anaxi- 
mander) or «-T!p*»a<' (Parmenides) ; but, in any ease, they are not tin 
spheres which played so important a part in later Greek astronomy.

4 " So Aet. ii. lf>. 7 (confirmed as a doxographical tradition by D. L. 
viii. 14). The identification of the morning and evening star was also 
ascribed to Pythagoras (D. L. loc. rif.); and this so far confirms our 
view. Achilles (Dox. 19, n. 2) gave the priority in this discovery to th«- 
poet Ibykos of Itheginn, who was at Samos in the days of Pythagoras, ami 
may have learnt it from him.

*' Aet. ii. ]'». 7.

*' D. L. ix. 21 certainly says so ; but that passage has been filtered 
through a biographical Compendium (Dux. 166). From viii. 48 wo 
gather that the word used by Theophrastos was not *peu?»ulvs but 
wrpyyix*, which would apply to a ring just as well as to a sphere. 
Xote that the priority in this matter also is claimed for Pythagoras 
{Phi/*. Op. fr. 17 ; Dojc. p. 492).

Digitized by Google

PARMENIDES.

203Digitized by Google

PARMENIDES.

203

far as I can see, have one ring formed of the dense 
element, namely, the outermost Olympos, which is con- 
trary to what we are told by Aetios in the passage 
quoted above. We shall see presently that there is 
another reason for regarding the earth as annular. The 
tiery circle which surrounds the earth is simply the 
luminous atmosphere, which must be carefully dis- 
tinguished from the dark "air" or mist.

Aetios tells us that between these encircling rings of 
the rare and the dense element there were mixed crowns 
composed of both. Here we have, fortunately, an im- 
portant fragment (v. 12G sqq.) to help us. From this 
it appears that these crowns are really made up of a 
narrower crown of fire, surrounded by one of night, 
within which rushes the flame. This is simply the 
theory of Anaximander (§ 18), and nothing can be more 
likely than that Pythagoras adopted it from him. We 
note, however, that in the Myth of Er the planets are 
no longer rings of fire hidden, except at a single point, by 
dense rings of air, but apparently globes of fire situated 
at a single definite point on the rings. 43 This points, doubt- 
less, to a development within the Pythagorean society.

In the same fragment which we have just been dis- 
cussing, we are told (v. 128) that "in the midst of 
these" is "the goddess who directs the course of all 
things." Aetios, or his source, very naturally took this 
to mean " in the middle of the mixed crowns," which 
have just been described. But the words of Parmenides 
himself might just as well mean "in the midst of all the 
crowns " ; that is to say, in the centre of the Kosmos, 
inside the circle of the annular earth. What is more, 
Simplicius, who had the complete poem before him,

43 Rep. x. loc. cit.

Digitized by Google

204 EARLY (JRKKK PHILOSOPHY.43 Rep. x. loc. cit.

Digitized by Google

204 EARLY (JRKKK PHILOSOPHY.

certainly understood that this goddess was in the centre. 44 
Now, here again we have a distinctively Pythagorean 
idea, that of the Hestia or central fire (§ 125). Appar- 
ently Tarnienides went on to describe how other god>, 
beginning with Kros (v. 133), were produced from 
this. 46

Actios makes some other mistakes about this goddess 
which it is worth while to notice in passing. He says 
.she was called "the Key-bearer" 40 and "Justice," which 
is clearly due to a confusion with the goddess who opens 
the gate to Parmenides in the allegorical introduction to 
his poem (v. 14). Dut, if we were not in a position 
to explain this mistake, what floods of mystical inter- 
pretation it would have let loose ! It would be the 
easiest thing in the world to find a key-bearing goddess 
in Kgypt, — Thmei, with her well-known symbol, would 
serve the turn admirably, — and rarmenides would be 
.>hown up as a mere plagiarist from the Book of the 
Dead. On the other hand, when Actios says that the 
goddess was also called Necessity, he is probably right ; 
for this agrees admirably with the Myth of Ec. 47

In the present state of the subject it would be 
unsafe to venture further than this in the discussion

44 Phy*. 34, H D (R. P. 101//. This view is adopted by Krivlio, 
Zcllcr, and Diels ; but bow they can accept it without regarding the 
earth as annular I do not understand. Cicero (X. D. i. 11. 28 ; R. 1*. 
U»l ; /) makes the opposite mistake of regarding the goddess herself as a

« Philodetnos (J)e Piet. 68, Gompcrz ; Dor. p. 534) tells us that 
Parmenides made his first god inanimate (a commonplace of Epicurean 
criticism), and identified the gods begotten of it with the passions of 
men. Cicero (A T . 1). i. 11. 2S ; R. P. 101.7) mentions in particular War, 
Discord, and Desire.46 The MSS. of Stobaios have *X»^tI^«», which would be still m >r 
absurd ; but we must clearly read n\r1iv-/9i with Fiilleborn.

* : Plato, lirp. x. loc. cit.

Digitized by Googl

PARMENIDES

205

of astronomical details; 48 I can only hope that the 
account given will seem intelligible so far, and that the 
Pythagorean character of the system expounded has been 
made clear.

79. If we remember that Kroton, in the fifth century Physiological

J theories.

B.C., was the seat of a famous medical school, 4 " we shall 
not be inclined to doubt that the Pythagoreans paid some 
attention to the human body. As a matter of fact, the. 
name of the Krotoniate Alkmaion has been handed down 
as representing this tendency within the society/ 10 and 
we are accordingly prepared to find that Parmenides, in 
describing the views of his contemporaries, was obliged 
to say something on physiological as well as cosmological 
matters.

Man, according to the view which he expounds, first 
arose from the primitive slime/' 1 This was Anaximan- 
der's view (§ 20), and may well have been adopted by 
the Pythagoreans. Further, he was composed, like every- 
thing else, of the warm and the cold element. In dealing 
with the problem of generation, Parmenides attacked the

48 The following points may be noted among those which require 
further examination. The sun and moon, which were of tiro (Act. ii. 
•JO. 8, 25. 3), were said to be equal in size, and the moon derived its light 
from the sun {ih. 26. 2). This was because some of the dark element was 
mingled with its fiery substance, whence, too, it was called 4io)»Q**r, t 
(ih. 30. 4). Both sun and moon were separated otr from the Milky Way 
(i7#. 20. 8a), which derives its peculiar colour from the mixture of the 
dense and the rare in it.

* 9 Herod, iii. 131. The physician Demokedes married the daughter of 
the Pythagorean Milo {ih 137).* 9 Herod, iii. 131. The physician Demokedes married the daughter of 
the Pythagorean Milo {ih 137).

M I). L. viii. 83 (II. P. f>5c). It is true, as Krische observes (Furncfi. 
p. 6f>), that Aristotle (Md. A, 5. 986a, 27 *pp) does not say that Alk- 
maion was a Pythagorean ; he rather implies that he was not. But this 
merely means that Aristotle did not lind in his teaching any trace of the 
later Pythago lean ism which he knew.

51 D. L. ix. 22 (U. P. 102 A), adopting the reading of the Basel edition, 
lkv« f for nkUui.

Digitized by Google

200

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

question of what determines the sex of the offspring 
males came from the right, and females from the left 
side (v. 150)/'- Women had more of the warm element, 
and men more of the cold,'* 3 a view diametrically opposed 
to that of Empedokles (§ 94).

Parmenides is classed by Theophrastos M with those 
who explained perception by similars. It is the prepon- 
derance of the warm or the cold element in a man that 
determines the character of his thought (v. 140 sqq.). 5Ji 
Death is caused by the removal of the fiery element, 
but even corpses retain a perception of what is cold 
and dark.^

In all this we see the first beginnings of an interest in 
biological matters which continued to grow steadily in 
the hands of Empedokles and others throughout the 
whole of this period, and we cannot be far wrong in 
ascribing this to the influence of the Pythagorising 
Asklepiads of Kroton. We must now turn to the con- 
sideration of the etlect which the dialectic of Parmenides' 
First Part had upon the subsequent course of philosophy.

9: Some verses from the discussion of this subject have been preserved 
in a Latin translation by Cadius Aurelianus (fifth century A.U.). Ve mort>. 
rhrun. iv. 9 (K. P. 102a). Cf. Act. v. 7. 4, alun- with the remarks of 
Niels {Vox. p. 194)." Arist. Purl. An. B, 2. 648a, 28; Goi. An. A, 1. 765ft, 19. With this 
is connected the statement that women first an»e in the south, aud nun 
in the north (Act. v. 7. 2).

a * V< St its. 1.

M The words ra yip *rxii» irn tizfta. (v. 149) are correctly paraphrased 
by Theophr. dt S<„.s. 13 : ««ri ™ lxip£>i\>.» irrb i y*im (K. P. 102 C); cf. 
Alex, in Met. p. 263, lionitz : « ( au ri «-Xi««'C«" *«' iri*p*T,u* b r»

rmf4.MT4Kv h*ttrt* {nr. r§u fyntiv) y t *»,ui*tu. It is unnecessary to <lo

more than allude to the extraordinary mistake Hegel makes about this 
(Gt*ch. d. Phil. i. 277).

M Theophr. V, Sais. 4 (R. P. 102 C).

Digitized by Googl

CHAPTER V.

EMPEDOKLES OK AKRAGAS.

80. The belief that all things must be fundamentally Pluralism, 
one thing, was common to all the philosophers we have 
hitherto studied. The earliest had held that the different 
substances which we perceive in the world were all mere 
passing forms of some one underlying substance, be it 
Water, or Air, or Fire, or something which is none of 
these. But now Parmenides has shown that, if we are 
serious in holding that this one substance really is, 
we must make up our minds to abandon the idea that it 
can take different forms. The senses, which present to 
us a world of change and multiplicity, are deceitful. 
From this conclusion there was no escape ; the time was 
still to come when philosophers would seek the unity of 
the world in something which, from its very nature, the 
senses could never perceive. It is true, no doubt, that 
the One of Parmenides is not, as a matter of fact, so per- 
ceived ; but that is altogether the fault of the senses. 
We have not yet got to the stage where it is possible to 
regard the same world as one for thought though many 
for sense. The One, it still seemed, could not co-exist 
with the Many.We find, accordingly, that from the time of Parmenides 
to that of Plato, all thinkers in whose hands philosophy 
made any real progress abandoned the monistic hypo- 
thesis. Those who still held by it for the most part

207

Digitized by Google

208

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

adopted a purely critical attitude, and confined them- 
selves to a dialectical defence of the theory of Parmenides 
against the new views. Some taught the doctrine of 
Herakleitos in an exaggerated form ; some continued to 
expound the systems of the early Milesians. This, of 
course, showed a want of true insight into the problem ; 
but even those philosophers who saw that Parmenides 
could not be left unanswered, were by no means equal to 
their predecessors in power and thoroughness. Philosophy 
does well, no doubt, to reject a " cheap and easy Monism," 
which simply sets the problem of multiplicity aside ; but 
it cannot with impunity lose sight of what must always 
be its ultimate end, the interpretation of the world as a 
single whole. The corporealist hypothesis had proved 
itself unable to bear the weight of a monistic structure, 
and no other was available till the discussions of the 
" Sophists " and Sokrates suggested to Plato that a thing 
might be real without being a body. Meanwhile, a 
thoroughgoing pluralism, that is to say, an atomic theory, 
might have some value, if not as a final explanation of 
the world, yet at least as an intelligible view of a part of 
it. Any pluralism, on the other hand, which stops short 
of the atoms, like that of Empedokles and Anaxagoras, 
will achieve no permanent result, however many may be 
the brilliant aprrrus which it embodies. It will still 
remain ;m attempt to reconcile two things which cannot 
be reconciled, and may always, therefore, be developed 
into contradictions and paradoxes. 
LifeofKmpe- 81. Empedokles was a citizen of Akragas in Sicily.His father's name, according to the best accounts, was 
Meton. 1 His grandfather, also called Empedokles, had

1 Tim name is amply attested by Aotios (i.e. Theophrastos), i. 3. '20 
(R. P. 131 A), by Timaios, and by Apollodoros. Satyros, however, called

Digitized by Google

EMPEDOKLES. 209

won a victory in the horse-race at Olympia in OL LXXI. 
(496 B.C.). 2 This proves that the family was both illus- 
trious aud public-spirited. To breed horses for the great 
games was always looked upon as an act of public 
munificence, not as a sign of private ostentation and 
vanity.

Apollodoros fixed the floruit of Empedokles in 01. 
LXXXIV. (444 B.C.). This is the date of the foundation 
of Thourioi; and it appears from the quotation in Diogenes 
that it was selected simply on account of the statement 
made by the almost contemporary biographer, Glaukos of 
Khegion, that Empedokles visited the new city shortly 
after its foundation. The date thus arrived at, taken in 
connexion with the statements of Aristotle and Herak- 
leides that Empedokles died at the age of sixty, would 
yield the result that he was born in 484 and died in 
424 B.C. 3 But we are in no way bound to believe that 
Empedokles was just forty years old at the time of that 
event in his life which can most easily be dated. This 
is the assumption made by Apollodoros; but there are, as 
Zeller has pointed out, and Diels now admits, a number 
of reasons for thinking that the date he thus arrives at ishim Kxainctos. There was an Olympic victor of that name in 01. Xf'II., 
who was also a citizen of Akragas (Diod. xiii. 82), and this may have given 
rise to the mistake. A letter, professing to be from the jwn of Telauges, 
son of Pythagoras, and addressed to Philolaos, called Kmpedokles the son 
of Archinomos {]). L. viii. 53) ; but this letter, as Neanthes of Kyzikos 
observed, deserves no credit (R. 1\ 129«/). It appears to havo formed 
part of a forged correspondence intended to connect Kmpedokles with the 
Pythagoreans (ef. K. P. 48 A, b, and «. 12, below).

2 For this we have the authority of Apollodoros {]). L. viii. f>2 ; R. P. 
129), who follows the Olympic Victor* of Eratosthenes, who in turn 
api>ealed to Aristotle. Herakleides of Pontos, in his \Ufi {n. 14),

spoke of the elder Kmpedokles as a " breeder of horses " (R. P. 129a); and 
Tituaios mentioned him as a distinguished man in his Fifteenth Book. 
Later writers, of course, made Kmpedokles himself the Olympic victor.

* 1L P. 129.

'4

Digitized by Google

210

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

too late by some eight or ten years. 4 It is, indeed, most 
likely that Empedokles did not go to Thourioi till after 
his banishment from Akragas, and he was probably more 
than forty years old when that happened. All, therefore, 
that we can be said to know of his date is, that his grand- 
father was still vigorous in 49 G B.C.; that he himself was 
active at Akragas after 472, the date of Theron's death ; 
and that he died later than 444 B.C.Even these indications are enough to show that his 
boyhood must have coincided with the reign of Theron, 
the tyrant who co-operated with Gelon of Syracuse in 
the repulse of the Carthaginians from Himera, and under 
whom Akragas attained to such a height of splendour and 
prosperity. Theron's son and successor, Thrasydaios, was, 
however, a man of a very different character. Before his 
accession to the throne of Akragas, he had ruled in his 
father's name at Himera, and had completely estranged 
the affections of the inhabitants. Theron died in 472 B.C., 
Thrasydaios came to rule in his stead, and at once dis- 
played all the vices and follies usual in the second holder 
of a usurped dominion. After a disastrous war with 
Hieron of Syracuse, he was driven out ; and Akragas 
enjoyed a free government till it fell before the Cartha- 
ginians more than half a century later. 5

In the political events of the next few years, Empe- 
dokles certainly played an important part; but our infor- 
mation as to those events is of a very unsatisfactory

* Diels, Empfdokh* uml Gonjia*, n. 2 (Sitzungsber. d. A'. Preuss Akad. 
1884). Theophrastos said that Empedokles was born "not long after 
Anaxagoras " (Dox. p. 477, 17n) ; and Alkidamas made him the fellow- 
pupil of Zeno under Parmenides, and the teacher of Gorgias (see below, 
n. 18^. Now Gorgias was a little older than Antiphon (6. 01. LXX.), so it 
is clear we must go back at leant to 490 B.C. for the birth of Empedokes.

6 On all this see Professor Freemau's History of Sicily.

Digitized by. Google

EMPEDOKLES.

2116 On all this see Professor Freemau's History of Sicily.

Digitized by. Google

EMPEDOKLES.

211

kind. Diogenes lias extracted from the Sicilian historian 
Timaios one or two stories illustrating the political action 
of Erapedokles. These stories are obviously genuine 
popular traditions picked up by Timaios himself about a 
hundred and fifty years afterwards ; but, like all popular 
traditions, they are somewhat confused. The picturesque 
incidents are remembered, but the essential parts of the 
story, which alone could make it intelligible, are dropped 
altogether. Still, we may be thankful that the " collector 
of old wives' tales," 0 as sneering critics called him, has not 
attempted to rationalise the traditions, but has enabled us 
to measure the historical importance of Empedokles for 
ourselves by giving us a glimpse of the way in which he was 
pictured by the great-grandchildren of his contemporaries.

We read, then, 7 that once he was invited to sup with 
one of the " rulers." Traditiou delights in such vague 
titles. "The supper was well advanced, but no drink 
was brought in. The rest of the company said nothing, 
but Empedokles was righteously indignant, and insisted 
on wine being produced. The host, however, said he was 
waiting for the serjeant of the Council. When that 
official arrived, he was appointed ruler of the feast. The 
host, of course, appointed him. Thereupon he began to 
give hints of an incipient tyranny. lie ordered the 
company either to drink or have the wine poured over 
their heads. At the time, Empedokles said nothing, but 
next day he led both of them before the court, and had 
them condemned and put to death — both the man who 
asked him to supper and the ruler of the feast." Surely 
a sharp punishment for so slight a display of incioismc !

6 He is called yf*«rv>.\ixrplm. in Souidas, *.t\ The view taken in the 
text as to the value of his evidence is that of Holm.6 He is called yf*«rv>.\ixrplm. in Souidas, *.t\ The view taken in the 
text as to the value of his evidence is that of Holm.

• Timaios, fr. £8a (up. D. L. viii. 63), F. H. G. i. p. 214.

Digitized by Google

212

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

And yet the story, unintelligible as it is, has its value 
as showing that Empedokles was remembered long after 
as an uncompromising champion of democratic equality. 
The next tale is like it. It is to the effect that Empe- 
dokles prevented the Council from granting his friend 
Akron a piece of land for a family sepulchre, on the 
ground of his eminence in medicine, and supported his 
objection by a punning epigram. 8 Lastly, we are told 
he broke up the assembly of the Thousand — doubtless 
some oligarchical association or club. 9 It was perhaps 
in consequence of this that he was offered the king- 
ship, which Aristotle tells us he refused. 10 At any 
rate, it is quite evident that Empedokles was the great 
democratic leader at Akragas in those days, though we 
have no clear knowledge of what he did.

But there is another side to the public character of 
Empedokles which Timaios found it hard to reconcile 
with his political views. He claimed to be a god, and to 
receive the homage of his fellow-citizens in that capacity. 
Of this the fragments from the Purifications furnish ample 
evidence. The fact is that Empedokles was not a mere 
statesman ; he had also a good deal of the " medicine- 
man " about him. According to Satyros, who most likely 
followed Alkidamas, 11 Gorgias actually affirmed that he

* D. L. viii. 65. The epigram runs thus—

»xp»* Itirpi* y A*pv* \\xpctyx*r7is* Turpi; *xp«o 
xpvvru xfir.utot ixei; n*Tt>ii«i ixitrdrrf.* D. L. viii. 65. The epigram runs thus—

»xp»* Itirpi* y A*pv* \\xpctyx*r7is* Turpi; *xp«o 
xpvvru xfir.utot ixei; n*Tt>ii«i ixitrdrrf.

9 Timaios, fr. 88 {ap. D. L. viii. 66), F. H. G. i. p. 213. The text runs : 
vfTift* it i 'far. xai r« £fX<»v ifpttfutt xetrtkvn, rvttrr*; in itij rplm. 
The word kfpuvua. Imnlly suggests a legal council, and <rvn<rr*>at4 is most 
naturally used of a conspiracy. For in ir* rpl* I would suggest in 
mvr.pU, or some such phrase.

10 I). L. viii. 63. Probably Aristotle mentioned this in his SophUt ; 
cf. w. 16.

11 D. L. viii. 59 (R. P. 129). Diels suggests (Emp. u. Gorg. p. 358)

Digitized by Google

KMPEDOKLES.

213

had been present when his master was performing his 
magical tricks. We have seen in Chap. 1 1. what this sort 
of thing means, and we need not here repeat what was 
said there on the causes and character of the religious 
movements so common in this period of Greek history.But there is one point in connexion with the religious 
activity of Empedokles that must not be passed over in 
silence. Otto Kern has shown very strong reasons indeed 
for believing that he knew and constantly imitated the 
so-called Rhapsodic Theogony, ascribed to Orpheus and 
partially preserved by Damaskios. 1 - If this be so, we 
cannot be far wrong in believing also that he was an 
adherent of the great Orphic sect which was so powerful 
in Hellas at this time. Everything seems to point to 
this conclusion, and the subject is most important for 
the historian of Greek religion. Here it only comes in 
incidentally. We must remember that Empedokles was 
an Orphic preacher if we wish to form a just idea of the 
character of the man ; yet it is not as a religious teacher 
that we have to consider him at present, but as a repre- 
sentative of the scientific tradition which starts from 
Thales. We should only confuse matters by bringing the 
Orphic theology into a history of philosophy ; for its influ- 
ence upon the development of science was purely external.

that the fvtmit of Alkidamas was a dialogue, in which Corgias was the 
chief shaker.

n See Introd. n. f», ami O. Kern, Emjwdoklf* und die Orphiker (Arch. 
i. p. 498 sqq.). The view that Kmpedokles was not an Orphic, hut a 
Pythagorean, is, however, as old as Timaios, who said (1). L. viii. 54 ; 
K. P. 129) that he was expelled from the Order for " appropriating dis- 
courses." Xeanthes of Kyzikos added that the Pythagoreans in eon- 
sequence made a rule never to impart their secrets to a maker of verses 
(K. P. \29d). All this falls to the ground with the theory of an esoteric 
Pythagorean doctrine (Chap. II. § 116). The forged letters which made 
Empedokles a disciple of Hippasos and Brontinos were rejected even hy 
Xeanthes.

Digitized by Google

214

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.Digitized by Google

214

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

Diogenes relates a number of marvels performed by 
Empedokles. For the most part, these are nothing but 
inferences from his own writings, on much the same level 
as the anecdotes of Herakleitos discussed above (§ 50, 
«. 5). Timaios related how Empedokles had weakened 
the force of the etesian winds by hanging bags of 
asses' skins on the trees to catch them. He had 
certainly said, in his exaggerated way, that the know- 
ledge of science as taught by him would enable his 
disciple to control the winds (v. 26); and this, along 
with the fabled windbags of Aiolos, is sufficient to 
account for the tale. 13 We are also told how Empe- 
dokles brought back to life a woman who had been 
breathless for thirty days. The verse where he asserts 
that his teaching will enable Pausanias to bring the 
dead back from Hades (v. 32) shows how this statement 
may have arisen. 14 Again, we hear that he sweetened 
the pestilent marsh between Selinous and the sea by 
diverting the rivers Hypsas and Selinos into it. We 
know from coins that this purification of the marshes 
actually took place, but we may doubt whether it was 
attributed to Empedokles till a later time. 15

We see, then, that the anecdotes which have come 
down to us with regard to the political action and the 
miraculous achievements of Empedokles have no very

13 I follow the wilder form of the story given by D. L. viii. 60, and not 
the rationalised version of Plutarch (Ar/r. Col. 1 126). The epithets 
«Xi;«»i««t and x*).t/rx*ifA*{ were perhaps bestowed by some sillographer 
in mockery ; cf. i*ifi**«tmt.

u The lUfl «r*» of Herakleides, from which it is derived, seems to 
have been a sort of philosophical romance. The words ait; (D. L. viii. 60) : 
'Hpnxktilr.f Si i» rm Wfl fnri kx, Hrnvraux tfn-yr.rarfa, mvrit rit Tip t«»13 For these coins see Head, Hittoria Xumontm, p. 147 sqq. Karsten 
thought that Em]>edokles was actually represented on them, but the view 
of Eckhel {Duett: Xumm. u 239) is now accepted by the best authorities.

Digitized by Google

EMPEDOKLES. 215

solid basis. But they undoubtedly point to something 
real; and Aristotle was able to asciibe to Empedokles 
the beginnings of Khetoric, 10 while Galen makes him the 
founder of the Italian school of Medicine. 17

It will be observed that in the traditional account of 
the life of Empedokles we hear surprisingly little of his 
theory of nature. The only hints we get of it are in 
certain statements as to his teachers. Alkidainas, who 
had good opportunities of knowing, made him a fellow- 
student with Zeno under Parmenides. This is both 
possible and likely. 18 Theophrastos also made him a 
follower and imitator of Parmenides. 19 But the further 
statement of Alkidainas, that Empedokles " heard " Pytha- 
goras, must rest upon some confusion, 20 and it is not at 
all likely that he knew anything of Anaxagoras. 21

Tradition told many marvels as to the death of Empe- 
dokles. He was supposed, as every one knows, to have 
leapt into the crater of Etna that he might be deemed

16 Aristotle's Sophist, ap. Sext. Math. vii. 6, and 1). L. viii. 57 (R. P. 
129*/); cf. Quint. ln*t. Or. iii. 1. 8. Die]* has shown (Em p. u. Gorg.) 
that many of the rhetorical artifices of Gorging are already to be found in 
the poem of Eni|>edokles. Our oldest authority for the statement that 
(Jorgias was a pupil of Empedokles is Satyros (R. P. 129); but he 
seems to have derived his information from Alkidainas, the pupil of 
Corgias himself.17 Therap. 1 ; Pliny (//. X. xxix. 3) speaks of Akron as the founder of 
the Empirical sect, and says that its adherents were Emptdoclis physiri 
auctoriiate commenduti. The medical work in prase which went at 
Alexandria by the name of Empedokles (n. 28) was doubtless forged by 
the empiricists to give additional weight to this tradition.

18 For the dates of Parmenides and Zeno, see Chap. IV. § 70, and 
Chap. VIII. § 129.

19 Ap. I). L. viii. 53 (R. P. 129).

J0 Perhaps Alkidamas said ,, the Pythagoreans ;" this is a very common 
source of error.

21 It is true that Anaxagoras was a little older than Empedokles, but it 
is more likely that he borrowed from his younger contemporary than vice 
versa. See below, Chap. VI. § 103.

Digitized by Google

216 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.Digitized by Google

216 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

a god. This appears to be a malicious invention 22 
designed to counteract the effect of another talc set on 
foot by his adherents to the effect that he had been 
snatched up to heaven in the night. 28 Both stories 
would easily get accepted ; for there was no local tradi- 
tion at all as to the death of Empedokles. He did not 
die in Sicily, but in the Peloponnese, or, perhaps, at 
Thourioi. He had gone, it seems, to Olyrnpia, the scene 
of his grandfather's triumph, in order to have his 
religious poem recited to the Hellenes; his political 
enemies were able to prevent his return, and he was 
seen in Sicily no more. 2 * 
Writing*. 82. Empedokles was the second philosopher to ex- 
pound his system in verse, if, as is only right, we leave 
the satirist Xenophanes out of account. He was also 
the last among the Greeks ; for the forged Pythagorean 
poems may be neglected. In antiquity, the poems of 
Parmenides and Lucretius are the only other instances 
of the same thing ; and Lucretius imitates Empedokles, 
just as Empedokles imitated Parmenides. It is easy to 
see that poetry is quite unsuited for philosophical or 
scientific writing. It was not, as cannot be too often 
repeated, the form in which philosophy first appeared ; 
for Auaximander, Anaximenes, and Herakleitos wrote in 
prose, or what was meant for prose. The adoption of

22 R. P. 129A. The story is always told with a hostile purpose. In 
one of the absurd epigrams in D. L. viii. 7f>, it is suggested that Emp. 
went up to study the crater and fell in by accident ; and this view is 
actually adopted by Bayle.

23 R. P. ib. This was the story told by Herakleides of Pontos.23 R. P. ib. This was the story told by Herakleides of Pontos.

: * Tiinaios took the trouble to refute the common stories at some length 
(D. L. viii. 71 8<j. ; R. P. ib.). He was quite positive that Emp. never 
returned to Sicily. Nothing can be more likely than that, when wander- 
ing as an exile in the Peloponnese, he should have seized the opportunity 
of joining the colony at Thourioi, which was a harbour for many of the 
•'sophists" of this time.

Digitized by Google

EMPEDOKLES.

am

217

poetry as a vehicle for their teaching by Parmenides and 
Empedokles was due to purely accidental causes. These 
were, first, the vogue of the quasi-philosophical satire of 
Sicily, represented by Xenophanes and Epicharmos ; and, 
secondly, the use of the metrical form in the productions 
of the Orphic sect.

Of course, the poetical imagery creates a difficulty 
for the interpreter ; but we should probably be wrong 
in rating this too highly. It cannot be said that it is 
much harder to extract the philosophical kernel from 
the verses of Empedokles than from the prose of Herak- 
leitos. It is not easy to write prose now, and in the 
fifth century B.C. it was much harder. Even Anaxagoras 
wrote an intolerable style, and a fairly good philosophical 
prose is to be found first in Melissos and Diogenes of 
Apollonia.

There is considerable divergence of opinion as to 
the poetical merit of Empedokles. The panegyric of 
Lucretius is well known. 25 Aristotle says in one place 
that Empedokles and Homer have nothing in common 
but the metre ; in another, that Empedokles was " most 
Homeric." 26 To my mind, there can be no question that 
he was a genuine poet, far more so than Parmenides. 
No one doubts nowadays that Lucretius was one, and 
Empedokles really resembles him very closely. Pessim- 
ism leads itself to imaginative treatment, and, besides, 
Empedokles was a man of extremely vivid perceptions.83. We have more abundant remains of the writings The remains, 
of Empedokles than of any other early Greek philosopher. 
If we may trust our manuscripts of Diogenes and of 
Souidas, the librarians of Alexandria estimated the Poem

** Lucr. i. 716 sqq.

"Pott. 1. 14476, 18 ; of. fr. 59, 14856, 8.

Digitized by Google

218 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPH^-

c/i. Nature, and the Purifications together as 5000 verses, 
of which about 2000 belonged to the former work. 27 Stein 
succeeded in getting together 451 verses, of which he 
refers 351 to the cosmological work, and only 100 to 
the religious. Besides the two poems, the Alexandrian 
scholars possessed a prose work of COO lines on medicine 
ascribed to Empedokles. This was no doubt spurious. 2 * 
The tragedies and other poems which were sometimes 
ascribed to the philosopher seem really to belong to a 
younger writer of the same name, who is said by Souidas 
to have been his grandson. 29 I

I give the remains of the two poems as they are 
arranged by Stein : —

BOOK I.

And do thou give ear, Pausunias, son of Anchitos the 
wise ! :!0

• •••••

For .straitened are the powers with which their IkhIUv parts 
are endowed, and many are the woes that hurst in on them and 
blunt the edge of their careful thoughts ! They behold but a 
5 brief span of a life that is no life, and, doomed to swift death,

are borne away and fly off like smoke. Each is convinced of

_ _

17 D. L. viii. 77 ; cf. Souidas, *. r.

'* 8 Sec above, n. 17, and Stein, Empedorfr*, p. 7.

Hieronymos of Rhodes declared (I). L. viii. 48) that he had met with 
forty-three of these tragedies; hut set- Stein, lor. cif. The |*>em on the 
Persian Wars, which Hieronynios also ivfers to (I). L. viii. 57), seems to 
have arisen from un old corruption in the text of Arist. Probl. 9296, 16, 
where Bekker still reads i» reU ily«*»r. The same passage, however, is 
said to occur U ™, (fvr^t, in Mttvor. ±, 4. 382a 1, though there, too, E b 
reads Uyri*«f.90 The i>oem opens with an address to Pa usanias of Gela, insisting (1) 
upon the hopelessness of complete knowletlge and the necessity for in- 
vestigation of detail (vv. 2-23), while at the same time (2) presenting a 
highly coloured picture of the results that this investigation will achieve 
(vv. 24-32).

Digitized by Google

KM PEDOKLES.

219

that alone which he lias chanced upon as he is hurried to and 
fro, and idly fancies he has found the whole. So hardly can 
these things be seen by the eyes or heard by the ears of men, 
so hardly grasped by their mind ! Thou, 31 then, since thou 
hast found thy way hither, shalt learn no more than mortal 10 
mind has seen. 32 R. 1\ 130.

........

But, O ye gods, turn aside from my tongue the madness of 
those men. 33 Hallow my lips and make a pure stream flow from 
them ! And thee, much-wooed, white-armed Virgin Muse, do 
I beseech, that I may hear what is lawful for the children of a 
day! Speed me on my way from the al>ode of Holiness and 15 
drive my willing car ! Constrain me not to win garlands of 
honour and glory at the hands of mortals on condition of 
speaking in my pride beyond that which is lawful ami right, and 
only so to gain a seat upon the heights of wisdom. R. P. ih.

Go to now, consider with all thy powers in what way each 
thing is clear. Hold nothing that thou seest in greater credit 20 
than what thou hearest, nor value thy resounding ear above the 
clear instructions of thy tongue ; 34 and do not withhold thy 
confidence in any of thy other bodily parts by which then; 
is an opening for understanding, 35 but consider everything 
in the way it is clear. R. P. ib.

• . ■ . . . * •• . ■ . . . * •

31 The person here addressed is still Pausanias, and the speaker Kmpe- 
dokles. The view of Hergk and others, that a goddess is the speaker, as 
with Parnienides, is refuted by the invocation at the beginning of Book 
III. (vv. 33S-341), which has been recovered from Hipjtolytos since Bergk 
wrote. Besides, the participles, etc., are masculine throughout. Se« 
Stein, EmpedoclU Frarpnenta, p. 19 sqq.

** I adopt Pan/erbieter's Srvm for lf*pi*.

33 No doubt Xcnophanes and Parnienides. I l>clieve that v. 146 sqq. 
should be inserted here.

** The sense of taste, not speech. So already Karsten, after Schneider, 
Lex. Or.

38 I follow Stein in the punctuation of this passage (comma after 
and mkXttt closely with yvl»*). Zeller puts a full stop after with 
Bergk and Karsten, thus getting exactly the opposite sense. But there 
is no contrast here between sensation and thought ; the word **u is used 
in its original wide sense. The paraphrase given by Sextus (R. P. 130) is 
substantially correct, if we allow for later phraseology.

Digitized by Google

220 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

And thou shalt learn all the drugs that arc a defence against 
25 ills and old ago, since for thee alone shall I accomplish all this. 
Thou shalt arrest the violence of the weariless winds that arise 
and sweep the earth, laying waste the corn-fields with their 
hreath ; and again, when thou so desirest, thou shalt bring 
their blasts back again with a rush. Thou shalt cause for men. 
a seasonable drought after the dark rains, and again after the 
30 summer drought thou shalt produce the streams that feed the 
trees as they pour down from the sky. Thou shalt bring back 
from Hades the life of a dead man.™

........

Hear first the four roots of all things : 37 shining Zeus, life- 
35 bringing Hera, Aidoneus, and Nestis dripping with tears, the 
well-spring of mortals. 38 K. P. 131 A.

.....••«........

Hear first the four roots of all things : 37 shining Zeus, life- 
35 bringing Hera, Aidoneus, and Nestis dripping with tears, the 
well-spring of mortals. 38 K. P. 131 A.

.....••«

And I shall tell thee another thing. There is no coming 
into being of aught that perishes, nor any end for it in baneful 
death ; but only mingling and separation of what has been 
mingled. Coming into being is but a name given to these by 
men. R. P. 131 Jl.

40 But, when the elements have been mingled in the fashion of 
a man and come to the light of day, or in the fashion of the 
race of wild beasts or plants or birds, then men say that these 
come into being ; anil when they are separated, they call that, as 
is the custom, woful death. I too follow the custom, and call it 
so myself. 39

........

45 Fools !— f or they have no far-reaching thoughts— who deem

36 Quoted by D. L. viii. 60 (after Satyros). The verses cannot come 
from the Purification*, as Sturz believed, for that poem is addressed, not 
to a single person, but to the citizens of Akragas. Nor can it come from 
the (spurious) medical work, as maintained by Karsten, for that was in 
prose (n. 17).

37 The first half of Book I. (down to v. 129) gives the general theory of 
the eternal elements and their perishable combinations.

38 On the interpretation of this verse see below, § 85, and Diels, Dox. p. 
90. n. 3. The xfav*<uf** (ipertit* is the rri^c ; cf. Aet. i. 3. 20.

38 These lines are preserved in a very corrupt state by Plutarch (Adr. 
Col. 1113), but the meaning is quite clear. The •! refers to the four 
elements personified.

■

■ -

Digitized by Google

KMPEDOKLKS.

Mill

221

that what before was not comes into being, or that aught can 
l>erish and be utterly destroyed. For it cannot be that aught 
tan arise from what in no way is, and it is impossible and 
unheard of that what is should j>erish ; for it will always be, 40 50 
wherever one may keep putting it. R. I*. 13W.A man who is wise in such matters would never surmise in 
his heart that, so long as mortals live what men choose to call 
their life, they are, and suffer good and ill ; while, before they 
were formed and after they have been dissolved they are, it 
seems, nothing at all. R. P. ib.

Rut it is ever the way of low minds to disbelieve the better 55 
sayings. Do thou learn as the sure testimonies of my Muse 
bid thee, and divide the argument in thy heart.

. . . Joining one choice argument to another, not to finish 
one path 41 . . . for what is right may well be said even twice.

I shall tell thee a twofold tale. At one time things grew to GO 
be one only out of many ; at another, that divided up to be 
many instead of one. There is a double becoming of perishable 
things and a double passing away. The coming together of all 
things brings one generation into being and destroys it ; the 
other grows up 42 and is scattered as things become divided. 65 
And these things never cease, continually changing places, at 
one time all uniting in one through Love, at another each 
borne in different directions by the repulsion of Strife. Thus, 
as far as it is their nature to grow into one out of many, and 
to become many once more when the one is parted asunder, so 70 
far they come into being and their life abides not. Rut, 
inasmuch as they never cease changing their places continually, 
so far they are immovably 43 as they go round the circle of 
existence. R. P. 132.

• •••••••

But come, hearken to my words, for it is learning that 
increaseth wisdom. As I said before, when I declared the "5

+> I read yitf rS y Ut«< with IWerbieter. The MSS. of M. X. G., 
where the verse is quoted, have fnnrfat.

41 I ado^it Knatz's f*.r,n for un'n xiyut of the MSS. (Emjtftloclta,

]'. 7, in Seheiltt Philul. Hvnnanno Usenet' obiattr, Bonn 1 Si*l . )

*- We must certainly retain tuftur* here with Stein.

43 Adopting runzcibietei's *x»*?;.

Digitized by Google

222]'. 7, in Seheiltt Philul. Hvnnanno Usenet' obiattr, Bonn 1 Si*l . )

*- We must certainly retain tuftur* here with Stein.

43 Adopting runzcibietei's *x»*?;.

Digitized by Google

222

EARLY CREEK PHILOSOPHY.

heads of my discourse, I shall toll thee a twofold tale. At one 
time things grew together to l)e one only out of many, at 
another they parted asunder so as to be many instead of one ; — 
Fire and Water and Earth and the mighty height of Air, 44 
dread Strife, too, apart from these and balancing every one of

SO them, and Love among them, their equal in length and breadth. 
Her do thou contemplate with thy mind, nor sit with dazed 
eyes. It is she that is deemed to be implanted in the frame of 
mortals. It is she that makes them have kindly thoughts and 
work the works of peace. They call her by the names of Joy

Sf> and Aphrodite. Her has no mortal yet marked moving among 
the gods, 45 but do thou attend to the undeceitful ordering of my 
discourse. R. P. 132.

For all these are equal and alike in age, yet each has a 
different prerogative and its own |>eculiar nature. And nothing 
comes into being besides these, nor do they pass away ; for, if 
f 0 they had been passing away continually, they would not be 
now. K. P. 132.

• •••••••

Nor is any part of the whole empty. "Whence, then, could 
aught come to increase it I 4 ' 5 "Where, too, could these things 
perish, since no place is empty of them 1 They are what 
95 they are ; but, running through one another, different things 
continually come into being from different sources, yet ever 
alike. R. P. 132.

........

Come now, look at the things that bear witness to my earlier 
discourse, if so be that there was any form left out in the

** We must retain the *lfipat of Clement ami Plutarch here. Tho 
miftt of Simplicius is a mere interpretation. See below, § 8. r >.** We must retain the *lfipat of Clement ami Plutarch here. Tho 
miftt of Simplicius is a mere interpretation. See below, § 8. r >.

45 The MSS. of Simplieius have fttr «#«-«<«-<» and ptr Sraim. I accept 
Fr. Knatz's convincing ftirk <W<» («/'• rit. p. 8). The "gods" are, of 
course, the elements.

46 I have inserted Stein's v. 91 after v. 134 (see note, in loc), and have 
substituted for it here—

rtv -rettrit i aiiiw xm»?. ir#Vi» »Jv ti *' ixiA^«< ; 
which Apelt has restored in M. X. G. 9766, 25, from the Cvdex Li}v*u , n*i«, 
neglected by Bekker, though already collated by Beck. Stein's v. 92 
has been fabricated from M. X. G. 9756, 11, and doe,** not seem to me to 
be EmpcdokW at all.

Digitized by Googl

EMPEDOKLES.

am

223

earlier list. 47 Behold the sun, everywhere bright and warm, 
ami all the immortal things that are bathed in its heat and 
bright radiance. 48 Behold the rain, everywhere dark and cold j 100 
and from the earth issue forth things close-pressed and solid. 
When they are in strife all these are different in form and 
separated ; but they come together in love, and are desired by 
one another. K. P. 132.

For out of these have sprung all things that were and are 
and shall be, — trees and men and women, beasts and birds and 105 
the tishes that dwell in the waters, yea, and the gods that live 
long lives and are exalted in honour. R. P. 132*.

For these things are what they are ; but, running through 
one another, they take different shapes — so much does mixture 
change them. 49 R. P. 132//.

....••». 
For, of a truth, they {i.e. Love and Strife) were aforetime 110 
and shall be ; nor ever, methinks, will boundless time be 
emptied of that pair. And they prevail in turn as the circlo 
comes round, and pass away before one another, and increase in 
their appointed turn. R. P. 132cFor these things are what they an; ; but, running through 
one another, they become men and the other races of mortal 115 
creatures. At one time they are brought together into one 
order by Love ; at another, again, they are carried each in 
different directions by the repulsion of Strife, till once more 
they grow into one and arc wholly suMued.™

Just as when painters are elaborating temple-offerings, men 120 
whom Metis has well taught their art, — they, when they have 
taken pigments of many colours with their hands, mix them in 
a harmony, more of some and less of others, and from them 
produce shapes like unto all things, making trees and men and 
women, beasts and birds and fishes that dwell in the waters, 125

c I read Xtriluk» s t*x,r» pttfn. The MSS. of Simplkius have /utfi, 
not puffy, though they read x<W£i;X». For t he use of cf. Farm. 113.

48 Reading ipfipr* Y iV/ flu with Diels. For the word TJ.,, cf. v. 266, 
«. 74. The reference is to the moon, etc., which arc made of solidified 
.Air, and receive their light from the tiery hemisphere. See below, § 91.

49 For the reading here see Diels, Hfrmt* t xv. 163. 
"* Heading with Diels (Hermex, xv. 163)—

%"*»* if i» rvftfv*T* rt xi» Intifft yi»«T«,.

Digitized by Google

224 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY

yea, and gods, that live long lives, and are exalted in honour, — 
so let not the error prevail over thy mind, 51 that there is any 
other source of all the perishahle creatures that appear in 
countless numbers. Know this for sure, for thou hast heard 
the tale from a goddess. 5 - 
1 30 Come, I shall now tell thee first of all '' 3 the beginning of the 
sun, and the sources from which have sprung all the things we 
now behold, the earth and the billowy sea, the damp mist and 
the Titan air that binds his circle fast round all things. 
K. P. 135a.It was spherical . . . naught of the whole was empty and 
naught superfluous. :A 
135 In it is distinguished neither the bright form of the sun, no, 
nor the shaggy earth in its might, nor the sea, — so fast was the 
god bound in the close covering of Harmony, spherical and 
round, rejoicing in his circular rest," K. P. 133 A.

But when Strife was grown great in the limbs of the god 
140 and sprang forth to claim his prerogatives, in the fulness of the 
alternate time set for them by the mighty oath, . . . for all the 
limbs of the god in turn quaked. K. P. 133 A and B.

[Everything heavy and everything light it (Strife) separated 
apart. R. P. 133c] 56

. . . Without affection and incapable of mixing.

41 Reading with Blass (Jahrb.f. Phil. u. Pad. 1883, p. 19)-

cf. Hcsychios : **mt*- »,*«t«. This is practically what the MSS. of 
Simplicius give, and Hesychios has many Empedoklean glosses.

s - The " goddess" is, of course, the Muse. CF. v. f>6.

M The section referred to by Arist. Phy*. B, 4. 196a, 22, as the 
KmrfjLCTekt* begins here.

bi I have inserted Stein's v. 91 here because M. X. 0. 976b, 27 shows 
it referred to the Sphere. Mr. By water suggests that «,">*, here and 
rl*>«r (v. 138) are adjectives, not nouns.

M The text of v. 138 must be wrong. I cannot see how can 
mean "rest." We must read with Buttmann, who inserts ti to fill 
tip the line. This makes it necessary to take *$*7 f n as an adjective (see 
last note).

M This verse lias been fabricated from the passage of Plutarch, quoted 
K. P. 133 B. Stein's line will not even scan. Diels has certainly made 
a hexameter of it, but it is better away altogether. It cannot be 
reconciled with Arist. De Ccelo, a, 2. 309rt, 20, where we are told that 
Emp. gave no account of lightness and weight.

Digitized by Google

EMPEDOKLES.

225

. . . The heaped up mass. . . . 145Digitized by Google

EMPEDOKLES.

225

. . . The heaped up mass. . . . 145

If the depths of the earth and the vast air were infinite, a 
foolish saying which has been vainly dropped from the lips of 
many mortals, though they have seen but a little of the 
All. ... 57 R. P. SGb.

The sharp-darting sun and the gentle moon. But (the sunlight) 
is gathered together and circles round the mighty heavens. 5 * 150

It 59 flashes back to Olympos with untroubled countenance. 
K. P. 135r.

PiUt the gentle flame (of the eye) has but a scanty portion of 
earth. 60

Even so the sunbeam, having struck the broad and mighty 
circle of the moon, returns at once, running so as to reach the 
sky. 61

It circles round the earth, a borrowed light, as on the track 
of a car. 155

For she gazes at the sacred circle of the lordly sun opposite.

And she scatters his rays away into the sky above, 62 ami 
casts a shadow on as much of the earth as is the breadth of the 
pale-faced moon.

It is the earth that makes night by coming before the ICO 
lights.

... of deserted, blind-eyed night.

And many fires burn beneath the earth. 63

* : See above, m, 33. The lines are referred to Xenophanes in M. X. (J. 
976*7, 35.

88 Karstcn (followed by Mullnch) makes several strange mistakes abont 
tliis verse. Surely ix^ut comes from ix%m, " to gather," not (!) from 
«A»J«, "to roll."

99 Sr. " the earth," of which the sun is a reflexion. See below, § 91.

w ' This verse is misplaced by Stein, who referred it to the moon. Ste 
K. P. p. 140, n. 1.

«• Plutarch {Dr/ac. in orb. lun. 929) has—

tut avyri rv\pa*at rtXti**lr,t xu*X»i tvfv*

Diels (Herttutt, xv.) has constructed the next line —

x*'i jut>«v, «inV «»»iX/i titus in «^«>«r 'Ur., 
from the Armenian version of Philo. 
« I read—

as suggested by Stein in hia note.

03 Reading hut with Diels (cf. Hesychios, ihr rt«?«f, yn), or »uh^ f 
(cf. riXivs, v. 353).

'5

Digitized by Google

226

EARLY GREEK P

PHY.as suggested by Stein in hia note.

03 Reading hut with Diels (cf. Hesychios, ihr rt«?«f, yn), or »uh^ f 
(cf. riXivs, v. 353).

'5

Digitized by Google

226

EARLY GREEK P

PHY.

The sea with its silly tribe of fertile fish.

Salt was solidified by the impact of the sun's beams. 
1C5 Sea, the sweat of the earth. ... R. P. 135k

But the air sunk down upon the earth with its long roots ; ,A 
for thus it chanced to be running at that time, though often it 
runs otherwise. R. P. 135r/.

(Fire) swiftly rushing upwards. . . .

But now I shall retrace my steps over the paths of song that

170 I have travelled before, drawing from my saying a new saying. 
When Strife was fallen to the lowest depth of the vortex, 65 and 
Love had readied to the centre of the whirl, in it do all things 
come together so as to be one only ; not all at once, but coming 
together gradually each from different quarters ; and, as they

lTocame together, Strife retired to the extreme boundary. Yet 
many things remained unmixed, alternating with the things 
that were being mixed, namely, all that Strife not fallen yet 
retained ; for it had not yet altogether retired perfectly to the 
outermost boundaries of the circle. Some of its members still

180 remained within, and some had passed out. But in proportion 
as it kept rushing out, a soft, immortal stream of blameless Love 
kept running in, and straightway those things became mortal 
which had been immortal before, those things were mixed that 
had been unmixed, each changing its path. And, as the}' were 
mingled, countless tribes of mortal creatures were scattered

185 abroad endowed with all manner of forms, a wonder to behold. 
R. P. 134.

• •••••• •185 abroad endowed with all manner of forms, a wonder to behold. 
R. P. 134.

• •••••• •

For all of them — sun earth, sky, and sea, — fit in with all 
the parts of themselves, the friendly parts which are separated 
oil" in perishable things. In the same way, all those things that 
190 are more adapted for mixture, are united to one another in 
Love, made like by the power of Aphrodite. But they them-

The conjecture of Diels, /<*•«?,- for ptZ*ti{Hermt>i t xv. p. 164), had Wn 
already suggest* d by Karsten, but no change is really required. We may 
have "roots" of air as well as of earth. Cf. Chap. II. n. 79. Tin* 
reference, no doubt, is to the period of Love ; and Empedokles is thinking 
of the marriage of Zeus and Hera, as suggested by Knatz (op. cit. p. 6 ), 
who compares Aisch. fr. 41, and Eur. fr. 836, Dind.

The " lowest depth " is not, as might be supposed, the centre ; but is 
the same thing as the "extreme boundary" (v. 178).

Digitized by Google

EMPEDOKLES. 227

selves (i.e. the elements) differ as far as possible in their origin 
and mixture and the forms imprinted on each, being altogether 
unaccustomed to come together, and very hostile, under the 
influence of Strife, since it has wrought their birth. 60

Thus all things have thought by the will of fortune. . . .195 
And, inasmuch as the rarest things came together in their 
fall. . . .

Fire is increased by Fire, Earth increases its own mass, and 
Air swells the bulk of Air.

And the kindly earth 07 in its well-wrought 68 ovens received 
two parts of shining Xestis out of the eight, and four of 200 
Hephaistos ; and they became white bones, divinely fitted 
together by the cements of Harmony. R. P. 138r.

And the earth meets with these in nearly equal proportions, 
with Hephaistos and Water and shining Air, anchoring in the 20'> 
perfect havens of Kypris, — either a little more of it, or less of 
it and more of them. From these did blood arise and the 
various forms of flesh. R. P. 138c.(As a baker) cementing barley-mual with water. . . . 69

. . . tenacious Love. . . .

BOOK II.

But if your assurance of these things was in any way 210 
deficient as to how, out of Water and Earth and Air and Fire 
mingled together, arose the colours and forms of all those mortal 
things that have been fitted together by Aphrodite, and so an;

* J For the text here followed (»i/*Mt miriW, \<ru rpn y'mmt U f yi*) t see 
Diels, IhrrntM, xv. p. 165.

* 7 The following lines describe the formation of iwrixhable combination* 
of the four elements. We are told in Siuipl. Phyt. 300, 20 D, that they 
belonged to the First Book.

« I read tiry*r«t with Simpl. Phys. p. 300 D.

« These words are twice quoted by Aristotle (Meteor. 382a, 1 ; Probl. 
9296, 16). The masculine gender shows that the subject cannot bo Love ; 
and Karsten is, no doubt, right in holding that Empedoklcs brought in th<« 
simile of a baker here. Cf. the " ovens " of v. 199, and the image implied 
in v. 216.

Digitized by Google

228

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY

now come into being, how both tall trees anil the fishes of the 
sea (arose). . . .

215 And even as at that time Kypris, plying her pleasant task, 
after she had moistened the Earth in water, gave it to swift fire 
to harden it. R. P. 1 35?/.215 And even as at that time Kypris, plying her pleasant task, 
after she had moistened the Earth in water, gave it to swift fire 
to harden it. R. P. 1 35?/.

All of those which are dense within and rare without, having 
received a moisture of this kind at the hands of Kypris. . . . 
And so tall trees bear eggs, first of all olives. . . . 
220 Wherefore late-born pomegranates and blooming apples, 70 . . . 
Wine is the water putrefied in the wood, under the bark. 
For, if thou takest them (trees and plants) to the close 
recesses of thy heart and watchest over them kindly with fault- 
less care, then thou shalt have all these things in abundance 
225 throughout thy life, and thou shalt gain many others from 
them ; for each grows ever true to its own character, according 
as its nature is. But if thou strivest after things of a different 
kind, as is the way with men, ten thousand woes await thee to 
blunt thy careful thoughts. All at once they will cease to live 
230 when the time comes round, desiring each to reach its own 
kind ; for know that all things have wisdom and a share of 
thought.

Love hates necessity. 71

This thou mayest see in the heavy-backed shell-fish that 
dwell in the sea, in nurmr and burcinia and the stony-skinned 
235 turtles. In them thou mayest see that the earthy j«irt dwells 
on the uppermost surface.

Hair and leaves, and the thick feathers of birds, and the 
scales that grow on mighty limbs, are the same thing.

But the hair of hedgehogs is sharp-jointed and bristles on 
their backs.

210 • • • 0ut °f w «ich (Fire and Water) divine Aphrodite 
fashioned unwearying eyes . . . Aphrodite working them 
together with the rivets of love . . . since they first grew 
together in the hands of Kypris.

70 These fragmentary lines are what remains of the Empedoklean them v 
of fruits. Apparently it was explained that pomegranates and apples had 
many seeds instead of a single kernel, because they ripen late.71 Stein has taken rather more than this from Plutarch, perhaps 
rightly.

Digitized by Google

EMPEDOKLES.

.) »7 (\

. . . the liver full of blood.

It (Love) made many heads spring up without necks, and 
arms wandered bare and bereft of shoulders. Eyes strayed up 245 
and down in want of foreheads. R. P. 137a.

. . . this marvellous mass of mortal linihs. At one time all 
the limbs that are the body's portion are brought together into 
one by Love, and flourish in the high season of life ; and again, 
at another time they are severed by cruel Strife, and wander 250 
<-ach in different directions by the breakers of the sea of life. 
It is the same with shrubs and the fish that make their homes 
in the waters, the beasts that make their lairs in the hills, and 
the birds that sail on wings. R. P. 137a.

But, as divinity was mingled still further with divinity, these 
things joined together as each might chance, and many other 255 
tilings beside them continually arose. Many creatures with 
faces and breasts looking in different directions were born ; 
some, offspring of oxen with faces of men, while others, again, 
arose as offspring of men with the heads of oxen, and creatures 
in whom the nature of women and men was mingled, furnished 260 
with sterile 72 parts. R. P. 1376.

. . . Shambling oxen with undivided hoofs. 73 . . .

Come now, hear how the Fire as it was separated caused the 
night^born shoots of men and tearful women to arise ; for my 
tale is not off the point nor uninformed. AVhole-natured forms 265 
first aroso from the earth, having a portion both of water and 
lire. 74 These did the fire, desirous of reaching its like, cause to 
grow, showing as yet neither the charming form of women's 
limbs, nor yet the voice and parts that are proper to men. 
R. P. 137r.

. . . But the substance of (the child's) limbs is divided 270 
between them, part of it in men's and part in women's (body).

And upon him came desire as he mingled with her through 
sight.. . . But the substance of (the child's) limbs is divided 270 
between them, part of it in men's and part in women's (body).

And upon him came desire as he mingled with her through 
sight.

. . . And it was poured out in the pure parts ; and when it 
met with cold women arose from it.

Reading rri<)« f with Diels, Hermes, xv. loc. cit. 
73 Reading m*fir'cx*\* with Karsten.

7 * Retaining ttlut (i.e. tiff), which is read in the MSS. of Simplieius. 
Ci'. v. 99, n. 43.

Digitized by Google

230

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

275 . . . The two diverging harbours of Aphrodite.

For in its wanner part the womb brings forth males, and that 
is why men are darker, more sinewy, 75 and more hairy. 
Just as when rennet rivets and binds white milk. . . . 
280 On the tenth day of the eighth month the white putrefac- 
tion 76 arose.

Know that effluences flow from all things that have come 
into being. R. P. 132ft.

So sweet lays hold of sweet, and bitter rushes to bitter ; acid 
comes to acid, and warm couples with warm. 
285 Water fits better into wine, but it will not (mingle) with oil. 
R. P. 132ft.

The bloom of scarlet dye mingles with the gleaming linen. 
Thus 77 do all things draw breath and breathe it out again. 
All have bloodless tubes of flesh extended over the surface of

290 their bodies ; and at the mouths of these the uttermost surface 
of the skin is perf orated all over with pores closely packed 
together, so as to keep in the blood while a free passage is cut 
for the air to pass through. Then, when the yielding blood 
recedes from these, the bubbling air rushes in with an impetuous 
surge ; and when the blood runs back it is breathed out again.

295 Just as when a girl, playing with a water-clock 78 of shining 
brass, puts the orifice of the pipe upon her comely hand, and

79 Reading with Diels (Henw*, xv. he. cit.) : i» yap hputrip* 
ippmtt it/.i7» yzerrr, and Utttwrtptt for itipJiie-rtpti.79 Reading with Diels (Henw*, xv. he. cit.) : i» yap hputrip* 
ippmtt it/.i7» yzerrr, and Utttwrtptt for itipJiie-rtpti.

76 This extraordinary phrase evidently means milk. Perhaps there is a 
punning allusion to arvfc, "beestings," which, however, has the first vowel 
long.

77 This important passage is quoted by Arist. De Rtsp. 
473a. The fact that the form is that of a Homeric simile 
should not blind us to the truth that what we have hen- 
is really an experiment.

79 The shape of the klepsydra is shown by the an- 
nexed figure. The water escaped drop by drop through 
a single orifice at a. The top b was not altogether open, 
but was perforated so that the air might exert its pres- 
sure on the water inside. The instrument was filled by 
plunging it in water upside doxen, and stopping the orifice 
at a with the finger before taking it out again. The ai>. 
vofffii; (v. 296) and the wptpiit tfi wif* (v. 303) signify 
the orifice at a, while the rpiftmrm, *v**i (v. 299) and tin- 
CL wCxm, rj/i»7t (v. 305) are the perforations at b.

Digitized by Googl

EMPEDOKLES.

Mill.

231Digitized by Googl

EMPEDOKLES.

Mill.

231

dips the water-clock into the yielding mass of silvery water, — 
the stream does not then flow into the vessel, but the hulk of 
the air inside, pressing upon the close packed perforations, 
keeps it out till she uncovers the compressed stream ; but then 300 
air escaj>es and an equal volume of water runs in. Just in the 
same way, when water occupies the interior of the brazen vessel 
and the opening and passage is stopped up by the human hand, 
the air outside, striving to get in, keeps back the water at the 
gates of the sounding strainer, 79 pressing upon its surface till 305 
she lets go with her hand. Then, on the contrary, just in the 
opposite way to what happened before, the wind rushes in and 
an equal volume of water runs out to make room. Even so, 
when the thin blood that surges through the limbs rushes back- 
wards to the interior, straightway the stream of air comes in 310 
with a rushing swell; but when the blood returns the air 
breathes out again in equal quantity.

(The dog) with its nostrils tracking out the fragments of the 
beast's limbs, which the tender breathing of its feet has left in 
the copse. 80

Thus all things have their share of breath and smell. 
........

The fleshy sprout (of the ear).* 1 315 
And even as when a man, 82 thinking to sally forth through a 
stormy night, gets him ready a lantern, a flame of flashing fire, 
fastening to it horn plates to keep out all manner of winds ; 
and they scatter the blast of the winds that blow, but the 320 
light leaping out through them shines across the threshold 
with its unyielding rays inasmuch as it is liner ; even so did

79 Reading M/*t7» with Sture. The reference must be to the perforations 
at b. The epithet turnx'tof must surely be wrong.

80 See Diels, lltrmts, xv. loc. cit. We must read *^«t* with Butt- 
mann and not tiX<*«t«.80 See Diels, lltrmts, xv. loc. cit. We must read *^«t* with Butt- 
mann and not tiX<*«t«.

81 Diels (Emp. u. (Jorg. p. 362) has retracted the emendation rdf*»tv 
ovrtZ* which he proposed in his note on Theophr. dc Stm. 9 {Dox. p. 
501), comparing v. 348.

83 On this corrupt and difficult passage sec Diels in Ilerme*, xv. 171, 
and Blass in N. Jahrb. f. Phil. u. Pad. 18S3, p. 19. In v. 318 I trans- 
pose the comma after £^a f) and in v. 325 I read Jm**.* with the latter.

Digitized by Google

232

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY

love surround the elemental fire in the round pupil and confine 
it with membranes and fine tissues, which are pierced through 
and through with innumerable passages. They keep out the 
325 deep water that surrounds the pupil, but they let through the 
fire, inasmuch as it is finer. R 1*. 139</.

One vision is produced by both the eyes.

(The heart), dwelling in the sea of blood that runs in 
opposite directions, where men's thoughts chiefly revolve ; 
for the blood round the heart is the thought of men. R I*. 
139e.

330 For the wisdom of men grows according to what is before 
them. R. P. 139 B.

And just so far as they grow to be different, so far do 
different thoughts ever present themselves to their minds (in 
dreams). 83 R. P. 139r.

For it is with earth that we see Earth, and Water with 
water ; by air we see bright Air, by fire destroying Fire. By 
335 love do we see Love, and Hate by grievous hate. For out of 
these are all things formed and fitted together, and by these do 
men think and feel pleasure and pain. R. P. 139 A and C.

BOOK III.

If ever, as regards the things of a day, immortal Muse, thou 
340 didst deign to take thought for my endeavour, then stand by 
me once more as I pray to thee, 0 Kalliopeia, as I utter a pure 
discourse concerning the blessed gods. R. P. 140 A.

Blessed is the man who has gained the riches of divine 
wisdom ; wretched ho who has a dim opinion of the gods in 
his heart. R. P. 140 B.Blessed is the man who has gained the riches of divine 
wisdom ; wretched ho who has a dim opinion of the gods in 
his heart. R. P. 140 B.

It is not possible for us to set God before our eyes, 84 or to

M That the reference is to dreams we learn from Simpl. Dt An./. 56t\ 
M On the construction here see Diela, Hermes, xv. Loc. ciL

Digitized by Google

EMPEDOKLES.

233

lay hold of him with our hands, which is the hroadest way of 345 
I>ersuasion that leads into the heart of man. For he is not 
furnished with a human head on his body, two branches do 
not sprout from his shoulders, he has no feet, no swift knees, 
nor hairy parts ; but he is only a sacred and unutterable mind 350 
Hashing through the whole world with rapid thoughts. R. P. 
140 C, D.

PURIFICATIONS.

Friends, who inhabit the great town below the yellow rock 
of Akragas and up on the heights of the city, 85 busy in goodly 
works, safe harlxmrs for the stranger that claims respect, men 
unskilled in meanness, all hail. I go about among you an 355 
immortal god, no mortal now, honoured by all as is meet, 
crowned with fillets and flowery garlands. Straightway, 
whenever I enter with these into the flourishing towns, 
reverence is done me by men and women ; they go after me 
in countless throngs, asking of mo the way to gain ; some 3C0 
desiring oracles, while some, who for many a weary day have 
been pierced by the grievous pangs of all manner of sickness, 86 
beg to hear from me the word of healing. R. P. 129 F.

But why do I harp on these things, as if it were any 
great matter that I should surpass mortal, perishable men 1 365

Friends, I know indeed that truth is in the words I shall 
utter, but for men the assault of belief upon their hearts is 
grievous and hateful.

There is a decree 87 of necessity, an ancient ordinance of the

— — . . .

83 After quoting these verses, D. L. viii. 54 adds, according to Cobet's

text, /t'tya* it t»» ' Axpacyarr* it-riT* \\oreif*.'ik\* y in) (numeral— — . . .

83 After quoting these verses, D. L. viii. 54 adds, according to Cobet's

text, /t'tya* it t»» ' Axpacyarr* it-riT* \\oreif*.'ik\* y in) (numeral

omitted ?) ftvp*itt *lri* *«T**«t/». This lady is otherwise unknown to 
fame, and the Palatine SIS. reads w$r*ft»f «XAw. This is clearly a gloss, 
intended to jioiut out that, while Timaios apparently supposed the 
"Akragas" of v. 352 to bo the city, others held it to be the river. 
(Sturz, prof. p. xxix.). I believe that the rock is rueaut, and insert 
t after *iXius in order to get the proper antithesis between the irru 
down by the river, and the wiJut up on the rock. If there is any objec- 
tion to calling the rock yellow, we may read Z«ti»v with Bergk. 
"* Reading «/ ii n r«t/r*» with Bergk.

87 Adopting the emendation of Bernays, ftp* for xpv/*", communicated 
by Diels to Kern (Arch. i. 505). Gorgias, the pupil of Emp., speaks

Digitized by Google

234

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

370 gods, eternal and sealed fast by broad oaths, that whenever one 
of the daemons, whoso portion is length of days, sinfully 
pollutes his hands with blood, 88 he must wander thrice ten 
thousand seasons from the abodes of the blessed, being born

375 throughout the time in all manners of mortal forms, changing 
one toilsome path of life for another. For the mighty Air 
drives him into the Sea, and the Sea spews him forth on the 
dry Earth ; Earth tosses him into the beams of the blazing

380 Sun, and he flings him back to the eddies of Air. One takes 
him from the other, and all reject kini. One of these I now 
am, an exile and a wanderer from the gods, the bondsman of 
insensate strife. R. P. 141 A.

For I have been ere now a boy and a girl, a bush and a bird 
and a glittering* 9 fish in the sea. R. P. 141 B.

a • • • • , * • •

385 I -wept and I wailed when I saw the unfamiliar land 
where were Birth and Sudden Death and troops of Dooms 
besides, and loathsome sicknesses and putrefactions and fluxes. 90 
K. P. 141 C.385 I -wept and I wailed when I saw the unfamiliar land 
where were Birth and Sudden Death and troops of Dooms 
besides, and loathsome sicknesses and putrefactions and fluxes. 90 
K. P. 141 C.

........

of an ^^twfia (Enk. lid. p. 94). Necessity is an Orphic

personage.

88 I retain f*»*> and omit v. 372, with Knatz (Empedoclea, p. 6). 
as a marginal gloss from lies. Theog. 793. Tlic form «/uymV«f is 
incredible.

* I do not profess to know what i>.>.»v t means, but the common 
rendering "dumb" rests only on the absurd ancient etymologies given 
in Karsten's note. I suspect that Ixx«f is really the source of the 
intensive *ii\>.v. We find the word and its cognates applied to fawns 
(Oil. xix. 228), fish (Soph. Ai. 1297), small birds and young snakes 
(Hesych. x.i: \>.kt-rtii(). The original sense, then, would seem to be 
vtixlkts. Cyril reads fa&ftti, and Cedren adds **) i» 'OXuftria favs. 
This last touch refers to the bloodless sacrifice offered by Emp. at 
Olympia (cf. u. 96).

w I read $i>,t n tU* s r» with Knatz [Emp. p. 9) ; Theon of Smyrna 
paraphrases the words by yiti<r, { *«i <php*. We have here an application 
of the commonplace that the first thing new-born children do is to cry. 
Virgil's description of Orcus {Atn. xi. 273 sqq. ) is modelled either on 
this or a common Orphic source, more probably the latter. I have 
followed Stein's view as to v. 387. He says, "versus Karstenio 
suspectus : immerito ; nam ifym rt fwrrji, in quibus seriorem setatem 
odoratus est, aut sudor intellegcnda sunt aut/ccc/um morbi genus."

Digitized by Google

KMPEDOKLES.

235

They wander in darkness up and down the meadow of Ato. 
Pobbed of tho blessed life.

• •••••••

From what honour, from what a height of bliss have I fallen 390 
to go about among mortals here on earth.

We have come down under this roofed-in cave. wl• •••••••

From what honour, from what a height of bliss have I fallen 390 
to go about among mortals here on earth.

We have come down under this roofed-in cave. wl

• • . . . , . . 
There were 9 * Chthonie and far-sighted Ileliope, bloody Dis- 
cord and gentle-visaged Harmony, Kallisto and Aischre, Speed 395 
and Tarrying, lovely Truth and dark-faced Uncertainty, Birth 
and Decay, Sleep and Waking, Movement and Immobility, 
crowned Majesty and Meanness, Silence and Voice. R. P. lile.

. .

Alas, O wretched race of mortals, twice unblessed : such 400 
are the strifes and groanings from which ye have been 
l>orn !

(The goddess) clothing them with a strange garment of 
flesh"

. . . Earth that envelops the man.

From living creatures he made them dead, changing their 
forms. M

........

Nor had they 05 any Ares for a god nor Kydoimos, no nor 405 
King Zeus nor Kronos nor Poseidon, but Kypris the Queen. . . .

81 According to Porphyry, who quotes this line (De Antra Nymph, 
c. 8), these words were spoken by the " powers " who conduct the 
soid into the world. Tho "cave" is not originally Platonic but 
Orphic.

93 This passage is closely modelled on the Catalogue of Nymphs in //. 
2, 39 sqq. Chthonie is fouud already in Pherekydes (D. L. i. 119); 
Hcliope is prolnbly tho moon. The text becomes corrupt near the end, 
but I have given what seems to be the meaning.

w 1 have retained a>.kiy>»r, as nearer the MSS., though a little hard to 
interpret. On the subsequent history of the Orphic chiton in gnostic 
imagery see Bernays {Theophr. Schr. n. 9). It was identified with the 
coat of skins made by God for Adam.

** Retaining the MS. reading with Dills, Hermt*, xv. loc. cit.

w The dwellers in the Golden Age.

Digitized by Google

I

236 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.** Retaining the MS. reading with Dills, Hermt*, xv. loc. cit.

w The dwellers in the Golden Age.

Digitized by Google

I

236 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

Her did they propitiate with holy gifts, with animals kneaded 
out of meal 90 and perfumes of cunning fragrancy, with 
410 offerings of pure myrrh and sweet - smelling frankincense, 
tasting on the ground libations of brown honey. And the 
altar did not reek with pure bull's blood, but this was held in 
the greatest abomination among men, to eat the goodly limbs 
after tearing out the life. K. P. 142 15.

• •••••••

415 And there was among them a man of rare knowledge, most 
skilled in all manner of wise works, a man who had won the 
utmost wealth of wisdom; for whensoever he strained with 
all his mind, he easily saw everything of all the things

420 that are now (though he lived) ten, yea twenty generations of 
men ago. 97

For all things were tame and gentle to man, both beasts and 
birds, and friendly feelings were kindled everywhere. Trees 
flourished with perpetual leaves and with perpetual fruit, 
hanging down 98 with abundance of fruit all the year round. 
K. P. 142a.

425 This is not lawful for some and unlawful for others ; but the 
law for all extends everywhere, through the wide-ruling air and 
the infinite light of heaven. R. P. 142 A.

Will ye not cease from this accursed slaughter '? See ye not

* Tho MSS. of Porphyry have yf**r*7 f rt which is out of the

question. Nor does the emendation of Bernays (adopted in R. P.) 
convince me. I venture to suggest /*«*r»7f, on the strength of the story 
related by Favorinus (ap. D. L. viii. 53) as to the bloodless sacrifice 
offered by Emp. at Olympia. Cf. Ath. Deipn. p. 3 E ; Philostr. V. 
Ajtoll. i. 1 ; Souidas, s.v. 'Eft*.* 7 These lines were already referred to Pythagoras by Timaios (D. L. 
viii. 54). The difficulty is that he did not live tcu, not to speak of 
twenty, generations before Emp. Nor is the suggestion of Diels (Hermes, 
xv. p. 161, 7i. 2), that earlier embodiments of Pythagoras, as Hennotimos, 
Euphorbos, etc., are meant, very convincing. A comparison of v. 418 
and v. 405 suggests that Emp. is still speakiug of the Golden Age, and I 
have little doubt that Orpheus is the personage referred to. But the 
allusion must have been vague, for D. L. tells us {loc. cit.) that "some " 
even thought of Parmenides.

w Reading ««r„V with Lobeck.

Digitized by Google

EMPEDOKLES.

am

237

that ye are feasting on one another in the thoughtlessness of 
your hearts. R. P. 142&.

And the father lifts up his own son in a changed form and 430 
slays him with a prayer. Infatuated fool ! And they are 
dragged along begging mercy from the madman, while he, deaf 
to their cries, slaughters them in his halls and gets ready the 
evil feast. In like manner does the son seize his father, and 
children their mother, tear out their life and eat their flesh. 435 
K. P. ib.

a

Ah, woe is me that the pitiless day of death did not destroy 
me ere ever I wrought evil deeds of devouring with my lips ! 
R. P. ib.

Among beasts they 99 become lions that make their lair on 
the hills and their couch on the ground; and laurels among 
trees with goodly foliage. K. P. 141/;.

Abstain wholly from laurel leaves. 440

• •••••••

Wretches, utter wretches, keep your hands from beans !

Wash your hands, cutting the water from live springs in tin* 
unyielding brass. 100 R. P. 153, n. 1.

Fast from wickedness ! R. P. ib.

• •••••••

Therefore are ye distraught by grievous wickednesses, and 445 
will not unburden your souls of wretchod sorrows.Fast from wickedness ! R. P. ib.

• •••••••

Therefore are ye distraught by grievous wickednesses, and 445 
will not unburden your souls of wretchod sorrows.

But, at the last, they appear among mortal men as prophets, 
song-writers, physicians, and princes ; and thence they rise up 
as gods exalted in honour, sharing the hearth of the other gods 450 
and the same table, free from human woes, safe from destiny, 
and incapable of hurt. R. P. 141c.

09 Those who have purified themselves.

100 For the metaphor of "cutting" water here, cf. Vahlen on Arist. 
Poet. 21, 14576, 13, and Diels, Ihrme*, xv. 173. The use of brass or 
bronze in such ceremonies is universal.

Digitized by Google

238 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

Errj^ioUe* 84. At the very outset of his poem, Empedokles is 
^LV*. 1 **^ careful to mark what he conceives to be the difference 
between himself and all previous inquirers. He speaks 
almost angrily of those wh<», though their experience was 
only partial, professed to have found the whole (v. 7) ; 
and it is clear from v. 11 that some pretty strong 
language on the subject must have immediately preceded 
it. No doubt he is thinking mainly of Parmenides. 
His own position is not, however, a sceptical one. He 
only deprecates the attempt to construct a theory of the 
universe offhand instead of simply trying to understand 
each thing we come across " in the way in which it is 
clear" (v. 19). And this means that we must not, like 
Parmenides, reject the assistance of the senses (v. 22); 
for, weak though they are, they are the only channels 
through which knowledge can enter our minds at all. 
We must make use of them all and neglect the testimony 
of none, not even that of taste (v. 21).After an exordium of this kind, we naturally look for 
nothing but modest scientific research ; but we soon 
discover that Empedokles is not very mindful of his own 
warnings. He, too, sets up a system which is to explain 
everything, though that system is no longer monistic. 
We need not, however, be too hard on him for this. 
He is by no means the only philosopher who has himself 
fallen into the very same error that he was able to see 
quite clearly in the case of others. As Diels puts it, 
his natural dogmatism gradually gains the upper hand, 
and that is all.

Zeller holds that the system of Empedokles was an 
attempt to mediate between Parmenides and Herakleitos. 
It is, however, very difficult to find any trace of 
specially Herakleitean doctrine in it. It would be

Digitized by Google

EMPEDOKLES. 239Digitized by Google

EMPEDOKLES. 239

truer to say that he aimed at mediating between 
Eleaticism and the evidence of his senses. The con- 
nexion with Parmenides is, however, quite obvious. He \ 
repeats, almost in the same words, the Eleatic argument 
for the sole reality and indestructibility of "what is" 
(vv. 45-54, 91-93); and his idea of the "Sphere" is 
clearly derived from the Parmenidean description of the 
universe as it truly is. 101 Parmenides had held that the 
reality which underlies the illusory world presented to 
us by the senses was a corporeal, spherical, continuous, 
eternal, and immovable plenum, and it is from this 
that Empedokles starts ; it forms, as it were, the 
problem which he sets himself to solve. Given the 
sphere of Parmenides, he seems to have said, how are we 
to get from it to the world as we know it ? How are 
we to introduce motion into the immovable plenum ? 
Now Parmenides need not have denied in the abstract 
the possibility of motion within the Sphere, though he 
was bound to deny all motion of the Sphere itself; but 
such an admission on his part, had he made it, would 
not have served to explain anything. If any part of the 
Sphere were to move, the room of the displaced matter 
must at once be taken by other matter, for there is no 
empty space. This matter, however, would be of pre- 
cisely the same kind as the matter it had displaced ; for 
all "that is" is one. The nett result of the motion 
would, then, be precisely the same as that of rest; it 
could account for no change. Put, Empedokles must 
have asked, is this assumption of perfect homogeneity in 
the Sphere absolutely necessary ? Evidently not ; it is 
simply the old unreasoned feeling (§ IV.), that all

m Cf. Emp. 138 with Parm. 103. Observe, too, the clearly intentional 
contrast of Emp. SG and Pann. 112.

Digitized by Google

240

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.m Cf. Emp. 138 with Parm. 103. Observe, too, the clearly intentional 
contrast of Emp. SG and Pann. 112.

Digitized by Google

240

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

existence must be fundamentally one. If, instead of 
this, we were to assume a number of really existent 
things, it would be quite possible to apply all the 
predicates of rarraenidean reality to each of them, and 
all the forms of existence we know might be explained 
by the mingling and separation of those ultimate realities. 
The conception of "elements," to use a later term, 1 ** 
was found, and the required formula follows at once. 
So far as regards particular things, it is true, as our 
senses tell us, that they come into being and pass away ; 
but, if we have regard to the ultimate elements of which 
they are composed, we shall say with Parmenides that 
" what is" is uncreated and indestructible (vv. G9— 73). 
The four ele- 85. The elements or "roots of all things" (v. 33) 
which Empedokles assumed were the four which have 
since become traditional, Fire, Air, Earth, and Water 
The great distinction between this list and everything 
that had preceded it is the recognition of Air as some- 
thing which really exists. It is neither confused, on the 
one hand, with empty space, which Empedokles denied 
altogether (v. 91); nor, on the other, with mere vapour 
or mist exhaled by the sea (a>)p). That Empedokles 
was quite clear as to the corporeal nature of what we 
call Air, is proved by the account he gives of respiration 
(v. 287 sqq.), and the experiment with the Uepsydra by 
which this account was supported ; but we see also 
from the same passage that he did not call it ajp, as 
later writers do, but aWtjp, a word which is generally best 
rendered by "sky" in English. The word arjp, on the1W Eudemos said (ap. Simpl. Phys. 7. 13 D) that Plato was the first te- 
nse the word «rT«£«r<»>, properly the elementary sound represented by a 
letter, in the sense of "element." This is confirmed by the way the word 
is introduced in Theait. 201 E. The original term was f*ffn.

Digitized by Google

EMPEDOKLES. 241

other hand, was never used in this sense by Empedokles

himself, but always meant the moist vapour which rises

from the sea. In the actual remains of the poem it

occurs but once, and clearly with this meaning (v. 132);

we shall see, however, when we come to the theory of

sensation (§ 95), that it was also referred to elsewhere

and identified with water. Now, from this peculiarity

of nomenclature a vast deal of confusion has arisen.

loiter writers mostly substitute the more usual word in

their accounts of Empedokles. In this, taken by itself,

there is no harm ; for there is no doubt that the

philosopher meant by the one word exactly what they

meant by the other. In translating the fragments I

have therefore followed their example, and written Air

throughout when Empedokles speaks of this element.

If we make this transposition, however, we must find

some other word for the moist vapour, and this later

writers, as a rule, failed to do. We shall see presently

how this piece of carelessness has confused what they

say. I have here, as elsewhere, used the word Mist for

the steam from the sea which condenses into wind and

clouds. This will prevent all confusion.

The mythological names which Empedokles gave to

the four "roots" are, in the main, an accident of the

poetical form in which he saw fit to cast his system.

Possibly we may see in them the influence of Orphic

ideas ; but they no more imply real personification than

the reference to the sphere as a god in v. 142, or the

identification of the world or worlds with a god or gods

by Anaximander, Anaximenes, or Xenophanes. Wethe reference to the sphere as a god in v. 142, or the

identification of the world or worlds with a god or gods

by Anaximander, Anaximenes, or Xenophanes. We

might, therefore, pass these names by in silence, if it

were not that there has been a great deal of controversy

as to their appropriation to the various elements, and

16

i

Digitized by Google

242

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.were not that there has been a great deal of controversy

as to their appropriation to the various elements, and

16

i

Digitized by Google

242

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

that this controversy throws a very interesting light on 
the confusion with regard to Air which we have just 
been discussing. In vv. 33-35, then, we read of 
" shining Zeus, life-bringing Hera, Aidoneus, and Nestis." 
As to the last of these there cau be no doubt ; whether 
she was a Sicilian goddess or not, the description given 
of her shows that she must stand for Water. Nor has 
any one doubted till quite recently 103 that Zeus must 
stand for Fire ; the whole controversy has hitherto 
turned on the other two. In antiquity some, following 
the Homeric allegorists, made Hera the Earth and 
Aidoneus the Air, a view which has found its way into 
Stobaios. Its origin is as follows. It was the aim of 
the "allegorists" to find in Horner the sources of all 
philosophy ; and they assumed accordingly that Etupe- 
dokles must have borrowed the Homeric " Air " or mist. 
Now this is the dark element, and therefore it is fitly 
represented by Aidoneus. Again, "life-bringing" was 
an old epithet of the earth. The other view identified 
Hera with the Air and Aidoneus with the Earth, and 
this latter opinion has been almost unanimously adopted 
in modern times. 104 On the other hand, if we bear in 
mind that it was " shining ' aether,' " and not dark " air," 
that Empedokles made an element, we shall be disposed 
to accept Fr. Knatz's view that the sky-god, Zeus, was 
meant to stand for this. The Homeric allegorists saw 
as much, but they made the mistake of identifying the 
"aather" with Fire, a meaning which it certainly has 
with Anaxagoras. As for Aidoneus, nothing can be more 
natural than that a Sicilian poet, with the hot springs

103 Fr. Knatz, Empedodea {Scheda Philologies Hemianno Uxcner 
MeUct [1891], p. 1 sqq.).

m On all this see Diels, Dox. p. 88 sqq.

Digitized by Google

EMPEDOKLES.

243103 Fr. Knatz, Empedodea {Scheda Philologies Hemianno Uxcner 
MeUct [1891], p. 1 sqq.).

m On all this see Diels, Dox. p. 88 sqq.

Digitized by Google

EMPEDOKLES.

243

and volcanic phenomena of his country in mind, should 
regard the god of the lower world as a fire-god. We 
conclude, then, that " Nestis " is Water ; " Aidoneus," Fire; 
" life-bringiug Hera," Earth; and "shining Zeus," the sky 
or aether. For Zeus was always associated with the bright 
blue sky in Greek minds, and the Air of Empedokles is 
referred to as " heaven " in one passage (v. 187). The 
dark air or mist is no element at all, but a form of Water.

Empedokles regarded the " roots " of all things as 
eternal. Nothing can come from nothing or pass away 
into nothing (v. 48 sqq.) ; what is is, and there is no 
room for coming into being and passing away (v. 90 sqq.). 
Further, Aristotle tells us, he taught that they were 
unchangeable. 105 This Empedokles expressed by saying 
that they "are what they are" (vv. 94, 108), and are 
"always alike" (v. 95). Again, they are all "equal" 
(v. 87), — a statement which puzzled Aristotle, 106 but is 
quite intelligible from the naively realistic standpoint 
of Empedokles. Above all, the elements are ultimate. 
All other bodies, Aristotle tells us, 107 might be divided 
till you came to the elements ; but Empedokles could 
give no account of those without saying (as he does not) 
that there is an element of which Fire and the rest are 
in turn composed. This criticism comes merely to this, 
that Empedokles falls short of giving a complete account, 
because he spoke neither of a single substratum of all 
the elements nor of ultimate atoms. In other words, he 
was forced by the stage of development at which he 
stood to be a pluralist, but he was not a sufficiently 
thoroughgoing one (§ 80). In one place, 108 Aristotle goes

106 Gen. Corr. B, 1. 3296, 1. 106 Gen. Corr. B, 6. 333a, 16.106 Gen. Corr. B, 1. 3296, 1. 106 Gen. Corr. B, 6. 333a, 16.

107 Gtn. Corr. A, 8. 3256, 19 < V R. 1*. 131/). 
M DeC<t.o r, 6. 305a, 1.

244

EARLY OKEKK PHILOSOPHY.

so far as to suggest that he really meant to expound a 
view very similar to the atomic theory, though he did 
not succeed in doing so clearly ; and this hint was not 
lost upon later writers, who had a praiseworthy but 
unintelligent desire to read into early thinkers all the 
later doctrine they possibly could. S<> we actually rind 
the theory of " elements before the elements " referred 
to Empedokles in the doxographers, in spite of Aristotle's 
express statements to the contrary. 101 *

Empedokles was quite confident that his " four 
roots " were an exhaustive enumeration of the elements 
(vv. 96 sqq., 127 sqq.). Tin's confidence was based 
upon his belief that they sufficiently accounted for all 
the qualities presented by the world to the senses ; Fire 
accounted for light and heat, Water for darkness and 
cold, Earth for solidity and hardness (v. 98 sqq.). We 
have no record of the qualities ascribed to Air, except 
that it receives the epithet " bright"

Aristotle twice 110 makes the statement that, though 
Empedokles assumes four elements, he treats them as 
two, opposing Fire to all the rest. This, he says, we can 
see for ourselves from his poem. So far as the general 
theory of the elements goes, it is impossible to see any- 
thing of the sort ; but, when we come to the origin of 
the world (§ 90), we shall find that Fire certainly plays 
a leading part as the source of motion, just as it does in 
all early cosmologies, and this may he what Aristotle 
meant. It is also true that in the biology (§§ 92-94) 
Fire fulfils a unique function, while the other three act 
more or less in the same way. But we must remember 
that it has no pre-eminence over the rest : all are equal.,l * So Actios, i. 13. 1 (Uox. V . :U2), and i. 17. 3 (/'oar. p. 3i:>). 
m Met. A, 4. 985«, 31 ; G'eu. Con: li, 3. 3306, 19 (K. P. 131;/).

Digitized by Goo

KMPEDOKLKS.

245

85* Empedokles starts, as we have seen, from an strife and

X<OVti»

original state of the " four roots," which only differs from 
the Sphere of Parmenides in so far as it is a mixture, 
and not a perfectly homogeneous and continuous mass. 
The fact that it is a mixture of completely heterogeneous 
substances makes change and motion possible ; but, were 
there nothing outside the Sphere which could enter in, 
like the Pythagorean " Air," to separate these substances, 
nothing could ever arise from them. Empedokles accord- 
ingly assumed the existence of such a substance, and he 
gave it the name of Strife, in accordance with the usual 
terminology of cosmologists since the time of Anaxi- 
mander. Now the effect of this alone would be to 
separate all the elements in the Sphere completely, and 
then nothing more could possibly happen ; something 
else was needed to bring the elements into union once 
more. This Empedokles found in Love, which he 
regarded as the same impulse to union that is implanted 
in human bodies (vv. 82-86). He looks at it, in fact, 
from a purely physiological point of view, and not at all 
as the Pythagoreans and Herakleitos had regarded Har- 
mony. The difference characterises in a striking way 
the increased interest in physiological matters which 
marked the fifth century B.C. This was connected with 
the rise of scientific medicine, and we have seen that 
Empedokles was supposed to have had a share in that 
movement. For the rest, he is not a little proud of his 
physiological generalisation. No mortal had yet marked, 
he says, that the very same Love which men know in 
their bodies had also a place among the gods, that is, a 
cosmological significance (v. 35 and ??.).It is most essential to observe that the Love and Strife 
of Empedokles are no incorporeal forces, but corporeal

Digitized by Google

246

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

elements just like the other four. At the time, this was 
inevitable ; nothing incorporeal had yet been dreamt 
of. Naturally Aristotle is not a little puzzled by this 
characteristic of what he regarded as efficient causes. 
" The Love of Empedokles," he says, 111 "is both an efficient 
cause, for it brings things together, and a material cause, 
for it is a part of the mixture." And Theophrastos 
expressed the same idea by saying 112 that Empedokles 
sometimes gave an efficient power to Love and Strife, 
and sometimes put them on a level with the other four. 
The verses of Empedokles himself leave no room for 
doubt that the two were thought of as spatial and 
corporeal. All the six elements are called "equal" 
(v. 87). Love is said (v. 80) to be "equal in length 
and breadth" to the other elements, and Strife is 
described (v. 79) as equal to each of them in weight.

The function of Love is to produce union ; that of 
Strife, to break it up again. Aristotle, however, quite 
correctly points out 118 that in another sense it is Love 
that divides and Strife that unites. When the Sphere 
is broken up by Strife, the result is that all the Fire, 
for instance, which was contained in it comes together 
and becomes one ; and again, when the elements are 
brought together once more by Love, the "heaped up 
mass" (v. 145) of each of them is divided. In another 
place, Aristotle says that, while Strife is assumed as the 
cause of destruction, and does, in fact, destroy the Sphere, 
it really gives birth to everything else in so doing. It 
follows that we must carefully distinguish between the 
Love of Empedokles and that "attraction of like for

1,1 Met. A, 10. 10756, 3.

112 Phyt. Op. fr. 3 {Dox. p. 477) ; ap. Simpl. Phys. 25 D {R. P. 1326).

113 See the passages quoted R. P. 132».

Digitized by Google1,1 Met. A, 10. 10756, 3.

112 Phyt. Op. fr. 3 {Dox. p. 477) ; ap. Simpl. Phys. 25 D {R. P. 1326).

113 See the passages quoted R. P. 132».

Digitized by Google

KMPKDOKLKS.

247

like " to which he also attributed an important part in 
the formation of the world. This latter attraction is not 
an element distinct from the others ; it depends simply, 
as we shall see, upon the proper nature of each element, 
and it is only able to take effect when Strife divides the 
Sphere. Love, on the contrary, is something that comes 
from outside and produces an attraction of unlikes.

86. This brings us naturally to the question of how Mixture and

separation.

Empedokles conceived the mixture and separation of 
elements to operate. When Strife has once separated 
them, what is it that determines the direction of their 
motion ? In his poem Empedokles seems to have given 
no further explanation of this than that each " happened 
to run" in a certain direction (v. 167). Plato severely 
condemns this in a well-known passage of the Laws} 11 
on the ground that no room is thus left for design. 
Aristotle also blames him for giving no account of the 
Chance to which he ascribed so much importance. Nor 
is the Necessity of which he also spoke further ex- 
plained. 115 Strife enters into the Sphere at a certain 
time in virtue of Necessity, or " the mighty oath " 
(v. 141); but we are left in the dark as to the origin of 
this.

The expression used by Empedokles to describe the 
movement of the elements i3 that they " run through each 
other" (v. 108). Aristotle tells us 116 that he explained 
mixture in general by " the symmetry of pores." And 
this is the explanation of the " attraction of like for 
like." The " pores " of like bodies are, of course, much 
the same size, and these bodies can therefore mingle

"« X. 889 B.

» a Gtn. Corr. B, 6. 334a, 1 ; Phy*. e, 1. 252a, 5 (R. P. 132*). 
Otn. Corr. A, 8. 3246, 34 (R. P. 132A).

Digitized by Google

248

EARLY CiREEK PHILOSOPHY"« X. 889 B.

» a Gtn. Corr. B, 6. 334a, 1 ; Phy*. e, 1. 252a, 5 (R. P. 132*). 
Otn. Corr. A, 8. 3246, 34 (R. P. 132A).

Digitized by Google

248

EARLY CiREEK PHILOSOPHY

easily. On the other hand, a finer body will " run " 
straight through a coarse one without becoming mixed, 
and a coarse body will not be able to enter into the pores 
of a finer one at all. It will be observed that, as 
Aristotle is not slow to point out, this view really implies 
something like the atomic theory ; but there is no 
evidence that Empedokles himself was conscious of that. 
Another question raised by Aristotle is even more 
instructive. Are the pores, he asks, empty or full? If 
empty, what becomes of the denial of the void ? It* 
full, why need we assume pores at all ? These questions 
Empedokles would have found it hard to answer. They 
point to a real want of thoroughness in his system, and 
mark it as a mere stage in the transition from Monism 
to Atomism.

The four 87. From all that has just been said, it will be clear

|>eriiHls.

that we must distinguish four periods in the cycle of 
change. First of all, we have the Sphere in which all 
the elements are mixed together by Love. Secondly, 
there is the period when Love is passing out and Strife 
coming in, when, therefore, the elements are partially 
separated and partially combined. Thirdly, comes the com- 
plete separation of the elements, when Love is banished 
entirely from the world, and Strife has given free play to 
the attraction of like for like. Lastly, we have the 
period when Love is gradually bringing the elements 
together once more, and Strife is passing away. This 
brings us back in time to the Sphere, and then the cycle 
begins once more. Now it is clear that a world such 
as ours can exist only in the second and fourth of these 
periods ; and it is clear, too, that, if we are to understand 
Empedokles, we must discover to which of these two 
periods our present world belongs. This is plainly theDigitized by Google

EMPEDOKLES.

249

capital question ; for the explanation of all details must 
depend upon whether we are to assume that Love or 
Strife is now on the increase. It is always, so far as I 
can see, assumed that we are now living in the fourth 
period ; 117 I hope to show that we are in the second, 
that is, in the period when Strife is steadily gaining the 
upper hand.

88. That a world of perishable things arises both in The present

world the

the second and the fourth of the periods just enumerated work of strife, 
is stated in so many words by Empedokles (vv. G3-65); 
it is therefore very unlikely that, as Zeller suggests, 
he himself was not perfectly clear as to which of these 
we are now living in. Let us look at the external 
testimony, which, by Zeller's own admission, is entirely 
in favour of this world's being the second period and 
not the fourth. Aristotle says in one place 118 quite 
distinctly : " He holds that the world is in a similar con- 
dition now in the perioil of Strife as formerly in that of 
Love." From another passage 119 it appears that Empe- 
dokles altogether omitted to describe the origin of the 
world in the period of Love, which he could hardly have 
done if it had been our present world. Against this 
Zeller has nothing to say except that all the fragments 
and notices seem to refer to the fourth period. I hope it 
will appear from the detailed account of the cosmology I 
am about to give that this is not so, and that the ideas 
of Empedokles were clearer than Zeller gives him credit 
for.

89. To begin, then, with the " Sphere," in which the The "Sphere."' 
four "roots" of all things are thoroughly mixed together

1,7 Zeller, p. 712 ; Karston, Iidiqma\ ii. p. 392 ; Tannery, Science 
Ullcne, p. 308.

"» Gen. Corr. R, 6. 331a, 5. De Calo, V, 2. 301a, 14.

Digitized by

250 KARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.1,7 Zeller, p. 712 ; Karston, Iidiqma\ ii. p. 392 ; Tannery, Science 
Ullcne, p. 308.

"» Gen. Corr. R, 6. 331a, 5. De Calo, V, 2. 301a, 14.

Digitized by

250 KARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

by Love. The fragments which deal with this stage are 
not very numerous (vv. 134-138), as is only natural, 
seeing that the description of such a state of things would 
very soon be exhausted. We note, however, that in 
v. 142 the Sphere is spoken of as a god, aud Aristotle 
more than once 120 refers to it in the same way. We 
shall come back to this in discussing the Empedoklean 
theology. More often 121 Aristotle speaks of the Sphere 
as " the One,'' a name doubtless derived from such verses 
as 61, 67, and 76. At the same time, there is clearly a 
slight Aristotelian " development " here. It is not quite 
the same thing to say that things come together " into 
one," as Empedokles has it, and to say that they come 
together into " the One " ; the latter expression suggests 
that they lose their distinct and proper character in the 
Sphere, which thus becomes something like the " inde- 
terminate matter" of Aristotle. Such a view was quite 
foreign to Empedokles ; in the Sphere, as in their separa- 
tion, Fire, Air, Earth, and Water " remain what they are." 
Aristotle's difficulty as to the unity of the Sphere further 
led him to the assertion, which he makes, in one place 
quite positively and in another very doubtfully, 122 that 
Love was the substratum of " the One " in just the same 
sense as the Fire of Herakleitos, the Air of Anaximenes, 
or the Water of Thales. This strange statement we are 
now in a position to understand. It is by no means 
enough to say with Karsten that Love here stands for " the

»» Gen. Corr. B, 6. 3336, 21 (R. P. 133A) ; Met. B, 4. 1000a, 29 (R. P. 
132.). Cf. Simpl. Phys.f. 258r (R. P. 133/>).

»« Gen. Corr. A, 1. 315a, 7 (R. P. 133A) ; Met. A, 4. 985a, 28 (R. P. 
132/) ; ib. B, 4. 1000a, 28 (R. P. ib.).»« Gen. Corr. A, 1. 315a, 7 (R. P. 133A) ; Met. A, 4. 985a, 28 (R. P. 
132/) ; ib. B, 4. 1000a, 28 (R. P. ib.).

122 Met. B, 1. 996a, 4 ; r, 4. 1001a, 12 (R. P. 133/). The second of 
these passages does not pretend to be anything more than Aristotle's 
inference. Cf. also Met. I, 2. 10536, 15.

Digitized by Google

KMPEDOKLES.

251

reign of Love"; this hardly improves the sense at all. 
Aristotle could never have said what he does say if he had 
not been well aware that Love was a corporeal element 
just as much as the " four roots." He could not under- 
stand how the elements could come together " into one," 
or " into the One," without losing their individuality in 
it ; and lie assumes, quite naturally from the standpoint 
of his own system, that they all become merged in Love ; 
in fact, he is here involved in much the same difficulty 
as that we have discussed already in the case of Anaxi- 
mander (§ 14). His doubts arise from the same source, 
namely, that he insists on trying to apply his own theory 
of potentiality and actuality to early philosophers who 
never dreamt of anything like it. His reason for doing 
this is explained in the Note on the Sources, and we must 
remember that he really was quite well aware that, as 
a matter of historical fact, he himself had invented 
" potentiality and actuality," and also that " the One " of 
Kmpcdokle8 was really a mixture.It is unnecessary to discuss here the interpretations 
of later writers like John Philoponos and Simplicius. 123 
Sometimes, with Aristotle, they say that the Sphere 
is a mixture of "actual" or "potential" elements, 
sometimes it is "indeterminate matter," sometimes 
" the efficient cause." Lastly, it appears as the Neo- 
platonist " intelligible world." To us, however, it must 
be none of these, but simply a round mass con- 
taining all the " four roots " thoroughly mixed together 
by Love, a corporeal substance which pervades the 
whole of it. Hate, another corporeal substance, is 
outside, no doubt surrounding the Sphere in a circular 
layer. This is quite capable of being represented in

,a For these see Karsten, ii. pp. 322 sqq. and 369 sqq.

252

EARLY CSRKKK PHILOSOPHY.

•Sfi

a spatial perception, as all early Greek philosophical 
theories are.

Formation of 90. At the appointed time, Strife begins to enter into

the world.

the Sphere and Love to go out of it (v. 139 sqq.). The 
fragments by themselves throw very little light on the 
details of this process; but fortunately Aetios and the 
riutarchean Stromatcis have between them preserved a 
very fair tradition of what Theophrastos said on the point.

Empedokles held that the Air was first separated out and 
secondly Fire. Next came Earth, from which, highly com- 
pressed as it was by the impetus of its revolution, Water gushed 
forth. From the water Mist was produced by evaporation. 
The heavens were formed out of the Air and the sun out of the 
Fire, while terrestrial tilings were condensed from the other 
elements.— Act. ii. 6. 3 (Dos. p. 334; K. P. 135 A).Empedokles held that the Air when separated off from the 
original mixture of the elements was spread round in a circle. 
After the Air, Fire running outwards, and not finding any other 
place, ran up under the solid ice that now surrounded the Air. 
There were two hemispheres revolving round the earth, the one 
altogether composed of fire, the other of a mixture of air and a 
little, fire. The latter he supposed to l>e the Night. The origin 
of their motion he derived from the fact of fire preponderating 
in one hemisphere owing to its accumulation there. — Ps.-Plut. 
Strom, fr. 10 (Dos. p. 58*J ; K. 1*. 135«).

The first of the elements to be separated out by 
Strife, then, was Air, which took the outermost position 
surrounding the world (cf. v. 13.°>). We must not, how- 
ever, take the statement that it surrounded the world 
" in a circle " too strictly. It appears that Empedokles 
rather regarded the heavens as shaped like an egg. 1 - 4 As 
Zeller points out, the appearance which it presents to the 
eye may partially account for this, but it is still more 
likely that we have here a trace of Orphic ideas. At

iU Aet. ii. 31. 4 (Doz. p. 363).

Digitized by Google

KMPEDOKLKS.

am

253

any rate, the outer circle of the Air became solidified 
or frozen, and we thus get a crystalline vault as the 
boundary of the world. We note here the curious view 
that it was Fire which solidified the Air and turned it 
to ice. Fire in general had a solidifying power. 125

In its upward rush (v. 168) Fire displaced a portion 
of the Air in the upper half of the concave sphere formed 
l»y the frozen sky. This air then sunk downwards, 
carrying with it a small portion of the fire. Thus the 
two hemispheres, mentioned in the passage from the 
Stromateis, are produced : one, consisting entirely of fire, 
the diurnal hemisphere ; the other, the nocturnal, con- 
sisting of air with a little fire.The accumulation of Fire in the upper hemisphere 
disturbs the equilibrium of the heavens and causes them 
to revolve ; and this revolution not only produces the 
alternation of day and night, but serves by its rapidity 
to keep the heavens and the earth in their respective 
places. This Empedokles illustrated, Aristotle tells us, 
by the simile of a cup of water whirled round at the end 
of a string. 126 The verses which contained this remark- 
able account of so-called " centrifugal force " have, unfor- 
tunately, been lost ; but the simile is quite in keeping 
with the manner of Empedokles.

91. It will be observed that day and night have been The sun,

... moon, star

explained without the slightest reference to the sun. an.i earth. 
Day is produced solely by the light of the fiery diurnal 
hemisphere. What then is the sun ? The Plutarchean 
Stromateis 127 again give us the answer : " The sun is not 
fire in substance, but a reflexion of fire like that which 
comes from water." Plutarch himself, in his tract,

1K R. P. 135r. 136 R. P. 1356.

127 Strom, fr. 10 (Dox. 582, 11 ; R. P. 135c).

Digitized by Google

254

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.1K R. P. 135r. 136 R. P. 1356.

127 Strom, fr. 10 (Dox. 582, 11 ; R. P. 135c).

Digitized by Google

254

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

entitled, Why does the Pythia no longer give Metrical 
Responses ? makes one of the interlocutors sa}' : " You 
laugh at Empedokles for saying that the sun is a product 
of the earth, arising from the reflexion of the light of 
heaven, and once more 'flashes back to Olympos with 
untroubled countenance'" (v. 151). 128 Aetios says: 1 ** 
"Empedokles held that there were two suns; one, the 
archetype, the fire in one hemisphere of the world, filling 
the whole hemisphere [always stationed opposite its own 
reflexion] ; the other, the visible sun [its reflexion in the 
other hemisphere, that which is filled with air mingled 
with fire], produced by the reflexion of the earth, which 
is round, on the crystalline sun, and carried round by the 
motion of the fiery hemisphere. Or, to sum it up shortly, 
the sun is a reflexion of the terrestrial fire."

Tliese passages, and especially the last of them, are by 
no means so clear as we could wish ; but they all point 
to the conclusion that the sun is nothing but the light of 
the sky reflected from the earth on that part of the sky 
itself which is opposite to it. From this it follows, of 
course, that the appearance which we call the sun is the 
same size as the earth. Ferhaps we may explain the 
origin of this extraordinary view as follows. It had just 
been discovered that the moon shone by reflected light. 
There is always a tendency to give any novel theory a 
far wider application than it really admits of ; and so, in 
the early part of the fifth century B.C., men saw reflected 
light everywhere ; the Pythagoreans held a very similar

128 nifi t»v /An xi*' *y« »»» ^» n«^««», 400 B (R. P. if>.). We must 
keep the MS. reading -rtfi yr* with BeruarJakis. The reading in R. P. is 
only a conjecture of Wyttenbach's.128 nifi t»v /An xi*' *y« »»» ^» n«^««», 400 B (R. P. if>.). We must 
keep the MS. reading -rtfi yr* with BeruarJakis. The reading in R. P. is 
only a conjecture of Wyttenbach's.

129 Act. ii. 20. 23 (Dox. p. 350). It seems to mo that two inconsistent 
accounts have been mixed together here. I have indicated this by 
brackets.

Digitized by Google

EMPEDOKLES.

am

255

view. What is quite incomprehensible is how Euipe- 
dokles could imagine the reflexion which we call the sun 
to be carried round by the diurnal revolution of the 
heavens.

This last consideration shows how incomplete were the 
scientific ideas of Empedokles, and it is therefore all the 
more remarkable to find that he was quite aware light 
takes some time to travel, though its speed is so great as 
to escape our perception. 130 He can hardly have arrived 
at this knowledge experimentally ; it is an inference from 
bis theory of " effluences."

" The moon," we are told in the Stromutcis, " was com- 
posed of the air cut off by the fire ; it was frozen just like 
hail, and had its light from the sun." It is, in other words, 
a disc of frozen air, of the same substance as the solid 
sky which surrounds the heavens. Diogenes says that 
Empedokles taught it was smaller than the sun, and Aetios 
tells us that it was only half as distant from the earth. 131

Empedokles did not attempt to explain the fixed stars 
by reflected light, nor even the planets. They were fiery, 
made out of the fire which the air carried with it when 
forced beneath the earth by the upward rush of fire at 
the first separation, as we saw above. The fixed stars 
were attached to the frozen air, the planets were those 
which moved freely. 132

Empedokles was acquainted (v. 157 sqq.) with the 
true theory of solar eclipses, which, along with that of 
the moon's light, was the great discovery of this period. 
He also knew (v. 1G0) that night is simply the shadow

130 Arist. De Sentu, 6. 446a, 25 ; Dt An. B, 7. 41 S6, 20.130 Arist. De Sentu, 6. 446a, 25 ; Dt An. B, 7. 41 S6, 20.

131 Strom, fr. 10 {Doz. 582, 12; R. P. 135c) ; D. L, viii. 77 ; Aet. ii. 31. 1 ; 
cf. Doz. p. 63.

*** Aet. ii. 13. 2 and 5 {Doz. pp. 341, 342).

Digitized by Google

25G

EARLY (SREKK PHILOSOPHY.

of the earth, and not a sort of exhalation, as had been 
previously supposed.

Wind was explained from the opposite motions of the • 
fiery and airy hemispheres. Rain was caused by the 
compression of the Air, which forced any water there 
might be in it out of its pores in the form of drops. 
Lightning was fire forced out from the clouds in much 
the same way. 133

Turning now to the earth, we find that it was at first 
mixed with water, but the increasing compression caused 
by the velocity of the world's revolution made the water 
gush forth, so that the sea is called " the sweat of the 
earth," a phrase to which Aristotle objects as a mere 
poetical metaphor. This seems reasonable enough, 
especially as Empedokles went on to explain the salt- 
ness of the sea from this analogy. 134 
organic com- 92. The remainder of the First Book seems to have 
been taken up with an attempt to show how the four 
elements, mingled in different proportions, gave rise to 
perishable things, such as bones, flesh, and the like. 
These, of course, are all the work of Love ; but this in 
no way contradicts the view taken above as to the period 
of evolution to which this world belongs. Love is by no 
means banished from the world yet, though one day it 
will be. At present, it is still able to form all sorts of 
combinations; but, just because Strife is ever increasing, 
they are all perishable, and will be resolved once more 
into the elements.

The possibility of organic combinations depends upon

133 Aet. iii. 3. 7 ; Simpl. De Cido, J. 155r, Arist. Mtttor. B, 9. 3696, 
12, with Alexander's commentary.

Mtttor. B, 3. 357a, 24 ; Aet. iii. 16. 3 (R. P. 1356) ; cf. the clear 
reference in Arist. Meteor. B, 1. 3536, 11.Mtttor. B, 3. 357a, 24 ; Aet. iii. 16. 3 (R. P. 1356) ; cf. the clear 
reference in Arist. Meteor. B, 1. 3536, 11.

Digitized by Google

KMPEDOKLES.

257

the fact that there is still water in the earth, and even 
fire (v. 162). The warm springs of Sicily were a proof 
of this, not to speak of Etna. These springs Empedokles 
appears to have explained by one of his characteristic 
images, drawn this time from the heating of warm 
baths. 135 It will be noted that, while he is thoroughly 
epic in his treatment of similes, they are nearly all drawn 
from human inventions and manufactures.

The formation of organic combinations takes place, 
then, in the earth, which is moistened by water mingled 
with air and hardened by fire. Here another simile of 
the same sort seems to have come in ; Love was a baker, 
and the earth her oven (v. 208).

93. At the beginning of his Second Book Empedokles riant*, 
went on to explain how plants and animals were formed 
from the four elements under the influence of Love and 
Strife. The fragments which deal with trees and plants 
are v v. 2 1 5-23 1 ; and these, taken along with certain Aris- 
totelian statements and the doxographical tradition, enable 
us to make out pretty fully what his views were. We start 
as usual from Aetios. The text of his statement is very 
corrupt ; but it may, perhaps, be rendered as follows : —

Empedokles says that trees were the first living creatures to 
grow up out of the earth, before it was solidified by fire, 136 and 
before day and night were distinguished ; that, from the sym- 
metry of their mixture, they contain the proportion of male and 
female ; that they grow owing to the heat which is in the earth 
rising upwards, 1 ' 7 .so that they are parts of the earth just asm Seneca, Qiwit. Xat. iii. 24 : " Faeere solemn* draeones et miliaria 
ft complines formas in qui bus a? re tenni fistulas stniimns ; nt saq>e 
eundem ignetn arnbiens aqua per tantum lluat spntii quantum efficiendo 
ealori sat est. frigida itaque iutrat, eflluit calida, idem sub terra Empe- 
tloclea existirnat fieri."

I propose *f„ rcvf) <r,W;,«, (of. Plac. iii. 1G ; K. P. 135/,).

u7 I read 3<*^»/*i»«t/ for the MS. iiaifvpiuv.

17

Digitized by Google

258 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

embryos are parts of the womb ; that fruits are excretions of 
the water and fire in plants, and that those which have a 
deficiency of moisture shed their leaves when that is evaporated 
by the summer heat, while those which have more moisture 
remain evergreen, as in the case of the laurel, the olive, and the 
palm ; that the differences in taste are due to variations in the 
particles contained in the earth and to the plants drawing 
different jmrticles from it, as in the case of vines ; for it is not 
the difference of the vines that makes wine good, but that of 
the soil which nourishes them.— Aet. v. 26. 4 (R 1\ 13G).

In the Dc Anima, m Aristotle finds fault with Empe- 
dokles for explaining the double growth of plants, upwards 
and downwards, by the opposite natural motions of the 
earth and fire contained in them. For " natural motions" 
we must, of course, substitute the attraction of like for 
like (§ 86). Theophrastos says much the same thing. 139 
The growth of plants, then, is to be regarded as an 
incident in that separation of the elements which Strife 
is bringing about ever more and more. Some of the fire 
which is still beneath the earth (v. 162) meeting in its 
upward course with earth, still moist with water and 
" running " down so as to " reach its own kind," unites 
with it, under the influence of the Love still left in the 
world, to form a temporary combination, which we call a 
tree or plantAt the beginning of the pseudo- Aristotelian Treatise 
on Plants, 140 we are told that Empedokles attributed 
desire, sensation, and the capacity for pleasure and pain 
to plants. This follows also from v. 230, which is 
quoted by Sextus in the same connexion.

Further, Empedokles rightly saw that the two sexes 
are combined in plants. This is mentioned by Aetios,

m B, 4. 4\5b, 28. 139 De causis plantarum, i. 12. 5.

J *° A, 1. 815a.

Digitized by Goog

EMPEDOKLES.

259

and is discussed in the pseudo-Aristotelian Treatise on 
Plants. If we may so far trust that Byzantine transla- 
tion from a Latin version of the Arabic, we get a most 
valuable hint as to the reason. Plants, we are there 
told, came into being " in an imperfect state of the 
world," 141 in fact, at a time when Strife had not so far 
prevailed as to differentiate the sexes. We shall see 
shortly that the same remark applies to the original race 
of animals in this world. It is strange that Empedokles 
never observed the actual process of generation in plants, 
but confined himself to the statement that they spon- 
taneously " bore eggs " (v. 210), that is to say, fruit, as a 
mere excretion. Nevertheless his view as to the relation 
of the sexes in plants was not rediscovered till shortly 
before the time of Linnreus, and our botanical nomen- 
clature still bears traces of a view which he had already 
transcended. 142

The nutritive functions of plants are explained by the 
symmetry of the pores, and the consequent attraction of 
like for like. This is the meaning also of what we are 
told above as to the different flavours of wines. In the 
same way Empedokles accounted for the fact that some 
plauts are evergreen and others not. Some plants shed 
their leaves because the pores of their roots are too 
narrow to take in food as quickly as is required, and 
those of their leaves too wide to keep it. The evergreens 
have a symmetry in their pores, so that nourishment 
comes in continuously.In respect of nutrition and growth, then, as in respect 
of generation, plauts represent an earlier and less differ-

,u A, 2. 8176, 35: i» u W %x*rr

149 For instance, Filix mas and the like. See E. II. F. Meyer, Gesch. 
dtr Botanik, vol. i. p. 55 scj.

Digitized by Google

260

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

entiated stage of evolution than, animals. They remain 
a part of the earth which bears them, as the embryo is 
a part of the uterus.

94. As is well known, Empedokles held that animal 
organisms were evolved out of all manner of monstrous 
forms by a sort of survival of the fittest. The difficulties 
which have been felt as to this part of the system all 
arise from a failure to observe that he really describes 
two evolutions of animal organisms which take exactly 
opposite courses, one belonging to the period of the 
world's history when Strife is prevailing more and 
more, the other to that when Love is making headway. 
If we confuse the two, we cannot expect to attain 
any clear notion of the theory. The clue is furnished 
by two passages in Aristotle, where v. 244 is quoted 
and referred to the period of Love. 14:{ So, too, in 
another, the same verse is cited with the additional 
remark that the separate parts were subsequently united 
by Love. 144 This is exactly what we should expect ; 
Strife had prevailed, and everything was separated. 
The evolution of animals in this period is simply a stage 
in the process of unification which culminates in the 
Sphere.

Aristotle severely criticises Empedokles for the part 
which he assigns to chance in the evolution of animals. 
"We may suppose," he says, "that all things have fallen 
out accidentally just as they would have done if they had 
been produced with an end in view. Certain things have 
been preserved because they were accidentally put together 
in a fitting manner, while those which were not so put 
together have perished and are perishing, as Empedokles>* 5 De Calo, r, 2. 300/;, 29 (R. P. 137«) ; Gen. An. A, IS. lllh, IP. 
xu Dt An. r, <j. 400,1, :J0 (R. P. ib.).

Digitized by Google

EMPEDOKLES.

says of the oxen with human faces." 145 One curious 
instance of a favourable variation has been handed down. 
Vertebration was explained by Empedokles as due to an 
early invertebrate animal having tried to turn round, and 
broken its back in so doing. This variation was a favour- 
able one, and accordingly survived. 146

In the third period of the cycle, then, the period 
opposed to the one in which we are now living, the 
different parts of animals made their appearance separ- 
ately (v. 244 sqq.) ; but gradually, as Love increased more 
and more, these came together and formed various com- 
binations (v. 254 sqq.). Some of these were monstrosities 
(v. 256 sqq.), and perished from want of adaptation to 
their environment; those, however, which happened to 
be suitably constructed survived.

Now let us look at the origin of animals in our period 
of the world, the period when Hate is increasing. First 
of all we have " whole-natured forms" (v. 265), in which 
neither sex nor species are yet distinguished. These are 
just what we should expect at a time when Hate is only 
beginning to make its power felt. Later on, when Hate 
has still further increased, we get the present condition of 
things with the actual distinctions of sex and species. This 
account seems to me to explain all the fragments we possess 
on the subject ; I am not aware that it has yet been given. 147

The cause of growth in animals as in plants is fire 
striving upwards from desire to reach its like, the fire in 
the sky (v. 267). They themselves are also composed 
of fire and water in definite proportions (v. 266).

,M Phy*. B, 8. 198b, 29 (R. P. 137a). 
»* Ari*t. Part. An. A, 1. 640a, 19.

u7 Cf. Act. v. 19 (R. P. 137), where the four periods are accurately 
distinguished.

Digitized by Google

262 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.u7 Cf. Act. v. 19 (R. P. 137), where the four periods are accurately 
distinguished.

Digitized by Google

262 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

The distinction of the sexes was the most important 
result of the gradual differentiation brought about by the 
entrance of Hate into the world. Empedokles differed 
from the theory given by Parmenides in his Second Part 
(§ 79) in holding that the warm element preponderated 
in the male sex, and that males were conceived in the 
warmer part of the uterus (vv. 273,278). The foetus 
was formed partly from the male and partly from the 
female semen (v. 270) ; and it was just the fact that the 
substance of a new being's body was divided between the 
male and the female that produced desire when the two 
were brought together by sight (v. 272). The male 
semen acts on the female like rennet on milk (v. 279). 
A certain symmetry of the pores in the male and female 
semen is, of course, necessary for procreation, and from 
its absence Empedokles explained the sterility of mules. 
The children most resemble that parent who contributed 
most to their formation. The influence of statues and 
pictures on the fancy of pregnant women was also noted, 
however, as modifying the appearance of the offspring. 
Twins and triplets were due to a superabundance and 
division of the semen. 148

As to the growth of the foetus in the uterus, Empe- 
dokles held that it was enveloped in a membrane, and 
that its formation began on the thirty-sixth day and was 
completed on the forty-ninth. These numbers are the 
squares of six and seven respectively. The heart was 
formed first, the nails and such things last. Inspira- 
tion did not begin till the time of birth, when the 
fluids round the foetus were withdrawn. Birth took 
place in the ninth or seventh month, because the day 
had been originally nine months long, and afterwards

148 Act. v. 10. 1; 11. 1; 12. 2; 14. 1.

Digitized by Google

EMPEDOKLES.

263148 Act. v. 10. 1; 11. 1; 12. 2; 14. 1.

Digitized by Google

EMPEDOKLES.

263

seven. Milk arises on the tenth day of the eighth 
month. 149

Death was regarded by Empedokles as the final 
separation by Strife of the fire and earth in the body, 
each of which had all along been striving to " reach its 
own kind." Sleep was a temporary separation to a 
certain extent of the fiery element. 150 At death the 
animal is resolved into its elements, which perhaps enter 
into fresh combinations, perhaps become permanently 
united with the " heaped up mass " of " their own kind." 
There can, of course, be no question here of an immortal 
soul.

Even in life, Empedokles held, we may see the attrac- 
tion of like to like operating in animals just as we saw 
it operate in the upward and downward growth of 
plants. Hair is fundamentally the same thing as foliage 
(v. 230); and, generally speaking, the fiery part of 
animals tends upwards and the earthy part downwards, 
though there are exceptions, as may be seen in the case 
of certain shell-fish (v. 233 sq). These exceptions are 
only possible because there is still a great deal of Love 
in the world. We see the attraction of like for like also 
in the different habits of the various species of animals. 
Those that have most fire in them fly up into the air ; 
those in which earth preponderates take to the earth, as 
did the dog which always sat upon a tile. 151 Aquatic 
animals are those in which water predominates. This 
does not, however, apply to fishes, which are very fiery, 
and take to the water to cool themselves. 152

149 Aet. v. 15. 3; 21. 1; Dox. Prof, p. 190. 
160 Act. v. 25. 4 (Dox. p. 437).

m Aet. v. 19. 5 {Dox. p. 431) ; cf. Arist. Eth. End. H, 1. 1235a, 11. 
153 Arist. De Re*p. 14. 478a, 8 ; Thcophr. Dt cam. plant, i. 21.

Digitized by Google

I

264 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.m Aet. v. 19. 5 {Dox. p. 431) ; cf. Arist. Eth. End. H, 1. 1235a, 11. 
153 Arist. De Re*p. 14. 478a, 8 ; Thcophr. Dt cam. plant, i. 21.

Digitized by Google

I

264 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

Empedokles paid great attention to the subject of 
respiration, and his very ingenious explanation of it lias 
been preserved in a continuous form (v. 287 sqq.). We 
breathe, he held, through all the pores of the skin, not 
merely through the organs of respiration. The cause of 
the alternate inspiration and expiration of the breath was 
the movement of the blood from the heart to the surface 
of the body and back again, which was explained by an 
illustration taken from the klcpsydra. It must be said 
that this passage gives us a high idea of Empedokles as 
an observer; he seems to be just on the verge of 
anticipating both Harvey and Torricelli.

The nutrition and growth of auimals is, of course, 
easily to be explained from the attraction of like to like. 
Each part of the body has pores into which the appro- 
priate food will fit. Pleasure and pain were derived 
from the absence or presence of like elements, that is, of 
nourishment which would fit the pores. Tears and 
sweat arose from a disturbance which curdled the blood ; 
they were, so to say, the whey of the blood. 153 
Perception. 95. For the theory of perception held by Empedokles 
we have the original words of Theophrastos : —

(7.) Empedokles speaks in the same way of all the senses, 
and says that perception is due to the " effluences " fitting into 
the passages of each sense. And that is why one cannot judge 
the objects of another; for the passages of some of them are 
too wide and those of others too narrow for the sensible object, 
so that the latter either goes through without touching or 
cannot enter at all R. P. 139r/.

He tries, too, to explain the nature of sight. He says that 
the interior of the eye consists of fire and water, while roundHe tries, too, to explain the nature of sight. He says that 
the interior of the eye consists of fire and water, while round

143 Nutrition, Act. v. 27. 1 ; pleasure and pain, ib. iv. 9. 15 ; v. 23. 1 ; 
tears aud sweat, v. 22. 1.

Digitized by Google

KMPKDOKLES.

Mm

2G5

about it is eartli and ' : air," 1:>4 through which its rarity enables 
the fire to pass like the light in lanterns (v. 316 sqq.). The 
passages of the fire anil water are arranged alternately ; through 
those of the fire we perceive light objects, through those of the 
Water, dark ; each class of objects fits into each class of passages, 
and the colours are carried to the sight by effluence. R. I*. U>.

(8.) But eyes are not all composed in the same way ; some 
are composed of like elements and some of opposite ; some have 
the fire in the centre and some on the outside. That is why 
some animals are keen -sighted by day and others by night. 
Those which have less fire are keen-sighted in the daytime, for 
the fire within is brought up to an equality by that without ; 
those which have less of the op]>ositc (i.e. water), by night, for 
then their deficiency is supplemented. Hut, in the opposite 
case, each will behave in the opposite manner. Those eyes in 
which fire predominates will be dazzled in the daytime, since 
the fire being still further increased will stop up and occupy the 
pores of the water. Those in which water predominates will, 
he says, suffer the same at night, for the fire will be obstructed 
by the water. And this goes on till the water is separated off 
by the air, for in each case it is the opposite which is a remedy. 
The best tempered and the most excellent vision is one com- 
posed of both in equal proportions. This is practically what he 
says about sight.(9.) Hearing, he holds, is produced by sound outside, when 
the air moved by the voice sounds inside the ear; for the sense 
of hearing is a sort of bell sounding inside the ear, which he 
calls a " fleshy sprout" When the air is set in motion it strikes 
upon the solid }>arts and produces a sound. Smell, he holds, 
arises from respiration, and that is why those smell most keenly 
whose breath has the most violent motion, and why most smell 
comes from subtle and light bodies. As to touch ami taste, he 
does not lay down how nor by means of what they arise, except 
that he gives us an explanation applicable to all, that sensation 
is produced by adaptation to the pores. Pleasure is produced 
by what is like in its elements and their mixture; pain, by what 
is opposite. R. P. ib.

lw That is, watery vapour, not the elemental air or *ltr.p [§ i>;>). It is 
identical with the "water" mentioned below.

Digitized by Google

266

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

(10.) And he gives a precisely similar account of thought 
and ignorance. Thought arises from what is like and ignorance 
from what is unlike, thus implying that thought is the same, or 
nearly the same, as perception. For after enumerating how we 
know each thing by means of itself, he adds, " for all things are 
fashioned and fitted together out of these, and it is by these 
men think and feel pleasure and pain" (v. 336 sq.). And for 
this reason we think chiefly with our blood, for in it of all 
parts of the body all the elements are most completely mingled. 
R. P. 139 C.(11.) All, then, in whom the mixture is equal or nearly so, 
and in whom the elements are neither at too great intervals nor 
too small or too large, are the wisest and have the most exact 
perceptions; and those who come next to them are wise in 
proportion. Those who are in the opposite condition are the 
most foolish. Those whose elements are separated by intervals 
and rare are dull and laborious ; those in whom they are closely 
packed and broken into minute particles are impulsive, they 
attempt many things and finish few because of the rapidity 
with which their blood moves. Those who have a well- 
proportioned mixture in some one part of their bodies will be 
clever in that respect. That is why some are good orators and 
some good artificers. The latter have a good mixture in their 
hands, and the former in their tongues, and so with all other 
special capacities. R. P. ib.

Theophrastos goes on to criticise Empedokles from his 
own point of view. These objections do not concern us 
here ; what we have to do is to understand the theory 
itself. Perception is caused by the meeting of an 
element in us with the same element outside. This 
takes place when the pores of the organ of sense are 
neither too large nor too small for the "effluences" 
which all things are constantly giving off (v. 281). It 
is not right to make too much of the principle here laid 
down (v. 333 sqq.) that like is known by like. There 
is no idea of a necessary correlation between the "reason"

Digitized by GoogI

EMPEDOKLES. - 267Digitized by GoogI

EMPEDOKLES. - 267

in us and " the reason in the world." On the contrary, 
the knowing subject, if we may call it so, is just as much 
corporeal through and through as the world outside it. 
As Zeller points out, the theory is most easily worked 
out in the case of smell and taste. Smell was explained 
by respiration. The breath drew in along with it the 
small particles which fit into the pores. From Aetios 155 
we learn that Ernpedokles proved this by the example of 
people with a cold in their head, who cannot smell, just 
because they have a difficulty in breathing. We also 
see from v. 313 that the scent of dogs was referred to in 
support of the theory. Hearing was explained by the 
motion of the air which struck upon the cartilage inside 
the ear and made it sound like a bell.

The theory of vision is more complicated ; and, as 
riato adopted most of it, it is of great importance in the 
history of philosophy. The eye, then, was conceived, as 
by Alkmaion (§ 79), lM to be composed of fire and water. 
Just as in a lantern the flame is protected from the wind 
by horn (v. 316 sqq.), so the fire in the apple of the 
eye is protected from the water which surrounds it in 
the pupil by membranes with very fine pores, so that, 
while the fire can pass out, the water cannot get in. 
Sight is produced by the fire inside the eye going forth 
to meet the object. This seems strange to us, because 
we are accustomed to the idea of images being impressed 
upon the retina. We wonder why Ernpedokles, who came 
so near the truth about smell and hearing, should have 
adopted so different an explanation of vision. But if 
we forget our superior knowledge for a moment, we shall 
see that, to the plain man, looking at a thing seems very 
much more like an action proceeding from the eye than

150 iv. 17. 2 {Dox. p. 407). ™ Theoj.hr. Sens. 26.

2G8 EARLY iiREEK PHILOSOPHY.150 iv. 17. 2 {Dox. p. 407). ™ Theoj.hr. Sens. 26.

2G8 EARLY iiREEK PHILOSOPHY.

a mere passive state. There are reasons for this into 
which we cannot go at present ; we need only remark 
that Empedokles is much more nearly right than any 
one who supposes that what we actually see is the image 
on the retina.

Empedokles was quite aware, too, that " ellluences," as 
he called them, came from things to the eyes as well ; 
for he defined colours as " effluences from things fitting 
into the pores and perceived." 157

Theophrastos tells us that Empedokles made no dis- 
tinction between thought and perception, a remark which 
had already been made by Aristotle. 158 It is, of course, 
perfectly accurate. Reason, the faculty of abstract con- 
ception, had not yet been distinguished from perception, 
any more than incorporeal realities had been distinguished 
from body. The chief seat of perception Empedokles 
held to be the blood, in which the four elements are most 
evenly mixed, and especially the blood near the heart. 150 
This does not, however, exclude the idea that other parts 
of the body may perceive also ; indeed, Empedokles held 
that all things have their share of thought (v. 195). 
But the blood was specially sensitive because of its finer 
mixture. From this it naturally follows that Empedokles 
adopted the view, already maintained in the Second Part 
of the poem of Parmenides (v. 146), that our knowledge 
varies with the varying constitution of our bodies (v. 
:>30 sqq.). This consideration became very important

137 See Diels, Emp. u, Corg. p. 349. The definition U quoted from 
(iorgios by Plato, Meno. 76 D, where we must read xpr.uir»> for rxr/*dr»* 
with the ingenious corrector of Yen. T.

158 Dt An. B, 7. 4186, 20.

1,0 R. P. 139e. It is an anachronism to say that Emp. said that the 
''soul" was in the Mood. He knew nothing of '* souls " except in the 
form of ghosts, which arc corporeal.

Digitized by Google

EMPEDOKLES.

MCI

2G9Digitized by Google

EMPEDOKLES.

MCI

2G9

later on as one of the foundations of skepticism ; but 
Empedokles himself simply drew from it the conclusion 
that we must make the best use we can of our senses, 
and check one by the other (v. 19 sqq.).

90. The theoretical theology of Empedokles was ex- Theology ami

religion.

pounded in Book III. of his Poem on Nature; his 
practical religious exhortations, in another work called 
the Purifications. The former reminds us of Xeno- 
phanes, the latter of Pythagoras and the Orphics. 
There is no contradiction here. A polemic against 
the anthropomorphic polytheism of the poets was quite 
consistent with a return to religious ideas of a more 
primitive type. For we must separate clearly these

■

two things, the theology and the religion of Empedokles. 
The latter stands in no direct connexion with the cosmo- 
logy, and is probably in the main Orphic ; the theology, 
on the other hand, formed a part of the Poem on Nature, 
and must surely have a close relation to it.

To begin with the purely theoretical theology. We 
are told in the earlier part of the poem that certain 
" gods " are composed of the elements ; and that there- 
fore though they " live long lives " they must pass away 
(v. 107). These perishable gods are, no doubt, the 
same as the " ihemons " whom we shall have to consider 
presently. We have seen that the elements and the 
Sphere are also called gods, and in Book III. (v. 344 sqq.) 
we suddenly come upon a deity who is described, as 
Xeller justly remarks, almost in the words of Xeno- 
phanes. He holds quite rightly that these verses do not 
imply monotheism ; and we may add that in this respect 
they are just like the similar utterances of Xenophanes. 
Surely, then, we may infer that here Empedokles is really 
speaking of the Sphere, just as Xenophanes was speaking

Digitized by Google

270

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.Digitized by Google

270

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

of the World when he described the divine nature, 
especially as Hippolytos distinctly states that this was 
so. 1 *'

If we turn now to the practical religious preaching of 
the Purifications, we find that everything turns on the 
doctrine of so-called metempsychosis. On the general 
significance of this doctrine enough has been said above 
(§ 38); the details given by Enipcdokles are peculiar. 
According to a decree of Necessity, " daemons " who 
have sinned are forced to wander from their home in 
heaven for three times ten thousand seasons (v. 3G9 sqq.). 
lie himself is such an exiled divinity, and has fallen 
from his high estate to become the slave of raving 
Strife (v. 382). The four elements toss him from one 
to the other with loathing (v. 377 sqq.); and so he has 
not only been a human being and a plant, but even a 
fish (v. 381). The only way to purify oneself from the 
taint of original sin was by the cultivation of ceremonial 
holiness, by purifications, and abstinence from animal 
flesh. For the animals are our kinsmen (v. 430), and 
it is parricide to lay hands on them. In all this there 
are undoubtedly certain points of contact with the 
cosmology. We have the "mighty oath" (v. 370, cf. 
v. 141), the four elements (v. 377 sqq.), Hate as the 
source of original sin (v. 382), and Kypris as queen in 
the Golden Age (v. 407). But these points are neither 
fundamental nor of great importance. And, as Zeller 
rightly points out, there are really contradictions between 
the two poems. Still, these are not quite so insuperable

180 Be/, vii. 31 (R. P. 140c). So Arist. Met. R, 4. 10006, 3, calls the 
sphere r»i iLlau?d.t*irT*r»i ti'oi. It is very noteworthy, too, that Hippolytos 
adds after v. 349 the words, fn» x*i !*■».- irro *vr», which seems

to be a corrupted verse from the original.

Digitized by Google

EMPEDOKLES

SO

271to be a corrupted verse from the original.

Digitized by Google

EMPEDOKLES

SO

271

as he thinks. It is quite true that the permanence of a 
spiritual soul, an individual personality, is quite irrecon- 
cilable with the physical theory we have been studying 
(§ 94); but Empedokles says nothing whatever about 
" souls." All he needs would be amply provided for by 
the reappearance of the same corporeal elements in 
different combinations ; and this, indeed, seems to be 
hinted at in v. 395. Empedokles had also laid down 
in his cosmological poem that the gods were made of the 
four elements, and therefore mortal (v. 107); so there 
is no difficulty here. We may conclude, I think, that 
Zeller has been prejudiced by his own use of the 
misleading word Scelenwandcrung to describe the doctrine 
of Empedokles. Nor is there any difficulty about the 
Golden Age, if we adopt the view taken above as to the 
four periods. It is to be referred to the time when Hate 
was just beginning to separate the elements, and before 
it got decidedly the upper hand. I do not mean for a 
moment that the religious teaching of Empedokles is to 
be deduced from his cosmology, or even that the two can 
be completely reconciled ; I only mean that they are so 
nearly in harmony that Empedokles need never have 
noticed their divergence.

L

Digitized by Google

r

CHAPTER VI.

AN'AXAGORAS OF KLAZOMENAI.

Dntrnnd 07. All that Apollodoros tells us with regard to the 
i.wiy hfi. q j Anaxagoras seems to rest upon the authority ofL

Digitized by Google

r

CHAPTER VI.

AN'AXAGORAS OF KLAZOMENAI.

Dntrnnd 07. All that Apollodoros tells us with regard to the 
i.wiy hfi. q j Anaxagoras seems to rest upon the authority of

Demetrios Phalereus, who said of him, in the Register oj 
Arehons, that he began to study philosophy, at the age 
of twenty, in the archonship of Kallias or Kalliades at \ 
Athens (4S0 B.C.). 1 This date was most probably derived 
from a calculation based upon the philosopher's age at the 
time of his trial, which Demetrios had every opportunity 
of learning from sources now no longer extant. Apollo- 
doros inferred that Anaxagcras was born in 01. LXX. 
(f> 00-4 9 7 B.C.), and he adds that he died in 01. 
LXXXVIII. 1 (4*28 B.C.). lie doubtless thought it 
natural that he should not survive Perikles, and still 
more natural that he should die the same year as Plato 
was born.' 2 Besides all this, we have a further state- 
ment, of doubtful origin, but probably due to Demetrios 
also, that Anaxagoras lived at Athens for thirty years 
altogether. This looks like a genuine tradition; 3 and

1 I). L. ii. 7 (R. I*. 117 B), with the perfectly certain correction referred 
to R. P. 117/'. The Athens of 1^0 li.t . would hardly he a place to '* begin 
philosophising " '■

■ For the statements of Apollodonw see P. L. ii. 7 (R. 1\ 117 B) ; and

for the date of Plato's birth, P. L. iii. 1 <R. P. 239).

31 P. L. lor. rit. In any ease the statement is no mere calculation of

Apollodoros'; for he would certainly have made Anaxagoras forty years

272

Digitized by Google

ANA X AG OR AS.

273

if we accept it, we get from about 462 to 432 ac. as 
the period of his residence in that city.272

Digitized by Google

ANA X AG OR AS.

273

if we accept it, we get from about 462 to 432 ac. as 
the period of his residence in that city.

There can be no doubt that these dates are very nearly 
right. Aristotle tells us 4 that Anaxagoras was older than 
Kmpedokles, who was born about 490 B.C. (§ 81); and 
Theophrastos said 5 that Einpedokles was born " not lone; 
after Anaxagoras." Demokritos, too, seems to have said 
that he himself was a young man in the old age of 
Anaxagoras, and he must have been born about 4G0 n.c." 
We shall find further confirmation of all this when we 
come to consider the date of the trial.

Anaxagoras was born at Klazomenai,and Theophrastos 
tells us that his father's name was Hegesiboulos. 7 The 
names of both father and son have a decidedly aristocratic 
sound, and we may therefore assume that they belonged 
to a family which had won distinction in the State. Nor 
need we reject the tradition that Anaxagoras neglected 
his possessions to follow science. 8 It is certain, at any 
rate, that in the fourth century lie was already regarded 
as the type of the man who leads the " theoretic life ; " !) 
and there must have been some ground for this view. 
Of course the story of his contempt for worldly goods 
was seized upon later by the historical novelist, and

<>M at the date of his arrival in Athens, ami thiswouM allow twenty-fight 
years at mo«t for his residem-e then'. The trial cannot have been later 
than 432 H.C., and may have been earlier.

* Mtt. A, li. 9M«, 1*1 (K. P. 119a).

1 Phyx. Op. fr. X {Dor. V . 477), aj.. Sin.j.l. Phy*. 19 I) (R. P. 129t<).

6 D. L. ix. 41 (R. P. 1 44 B). On the date of Dernokrito*, see Chap. IX.

M. IS.

7 Phy*. Op. fr. 3 {Dos. \k 478), repeated l»y the doxograjihers.

* [Plato] Hipp. 2S3 A: 79V**vrii* yitp 'Amjat)»^ rvp&rtai t\ 
Cut*' *«t«Xh£^i»t*» y*p air* «r«XX<v» ^muartif ntra fjuXnvai nxi *T*Xirai 
Tm*Tx' turn *ur«» «>«rr» rtp^wtm. L'\. Pint. Ptr. Hi.* [Plato] Hipp. 2S3 A: 79V**vrii* yitp 'Amjat)»^ rvp&rtai t\ 
Cut*' *«t«Xh£^i»t*» y*p air* «r«XX<v» ^muartif ntra fjuXnvai nxi *T*Xirai 
Tm*Tx' turn *ur«» «>«rr» rtp^wtm. L'\. Pint. Ptr. Hi.

a Arist. Elk. Xik. K, 8. 1179a, Vi. Cf. Eth. EwL A, 4. 1215/*, 6 and 15; 
121Ga, 10.

IS

274

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

tricked out with the usual apophthegms. These do not 
concern us here.

One incident belonging to the early manhood of 
Anaxagoras is recorded, namely, his observation of the 
huge meteoric stone which fell into the Aigospotauios 
in 469 n.c. 10 Our authorities tell us that the philo- 
sopher predicted this phenomenon, which is plainly 
absurd. But we shall see reason to believe that it 
may have occasioned one of his most striking departures 
from the earlier cosmology, and led to his adoption of 
the very view for which he was condemned at Athens. 
At all events, the fail of the stone made a profound 
impression at the time, and it was still shown to tourists 
in the days of Pliny. 
Ration to 08. Cicero, Diogenes, Strabo, the pseudo - Galen,

the Ionic

School. Euscbios, and Augustine all speak of Anaxagoras as the 
pupil of Anaximenes. 11 This is, of course, altogether 
impossible ; Anaximenes most probably died before 
Anaxagoras was born. But it is not enough to say, 
with Schaubach and Zeller, 12 that the statement is a 
mere mistake arising from the fact that the name of 
Anaxagoras followed that of Anaximenes in the Snc- 
(TKHums™ This is true, no doubt ; but it is not the

w I). L. ii. 10 (K. P. 118a). Pliny, H. X. ii. f»S, gives the date as 
Ol. LXXV1II. 2 (467 B.C.); the Marmot- Pari u m points rather to 469. 
The eurious may he referred to the Kev. Cieorge Costard's dissertation, 
entitled, T/ie U*c of Agronomy in History and Chronology exemplified in 
an Inquiry into the Fall of the Stone into the ,F<jot<j>otamo« t saul to have 
been fort told by Anaxngoran. London 1764.11 Cie. X. D. i. 26 (after Philodemos) : Ana.ra.nora* qui accepit ab 
Aruuimtnt diteiplinam {i.e. t**vrt) ; P. L. pr. 14 (R. P. 4), and ii. 6 ; 
Strain), xiv. 3. 36 (R. P. 117 A) ; Euseb. P. E. x. 14, p. 504 ; Ps. -Galen, 
H. Phil. 3 ; Auk. Civ. Dti, viii. 2.

13 Zeller, 870, n. 2 (Eng. trans, ii. p. 326, u. 2). Cf. Schaubach, Anax. 
Claz. Fragm. p. f>.

13 See Xote on Sources, C.

Digitized by Google

!

ANAXAGORAS. 275

whole truth. We have the original source of the 
doxographical tradition in a fragment of Theophrastos 
himself, which states that Anaxagoras had been " an 
associate of the philosophy of Anaximenes." 14 Now 
this expression has a very distinct meaning if we accept 
the view as to " schools " of science set forth in the 
Introduction} 5 It means that the old Ionic School 
survived the destruction of Miletos in 49-1 n.c, and 
continued to flourish in the other cities of Asia. It 
means, further, that it produced no man of distinction 
after its third great representative, and that " the 
philosophy of Anaximenes" was still taught by whoever 
\v;ls now at the head of the society. This is important ; 
for, as we shall see (§ 154), Schleiermacher tried to 
make out that the system of Diogenes of Apollonia came 
between those of Anaximenes and Anaxagoras, and that 
his philosophy formed the transition between the two.In view of this and other similar theories, it may be 
well to indicate brieHy here the conclusions to which we 
shall come in the next few chapters with regard to the 
development of philosophy during the first half of the 
fifth century n.c. We shall find that, while the old 
Ionic School was still capable of training great men, 
it was now powerless to keep them. Anaxagoras, as 
we shall see, went his own way; Melissos (§ 137) and 
Leukippos (§ 147), though they still retained enough of 
the old views to bear witness to the original source of 
their inspiration, were too strongly influenced by the 
Eleatic dialectic to remain content with the theories of 
Anaximenes. It was left to second-rate minds like

14 Phy*. Op. fr. 4 (Dor. p. 478): a,«?«>;,«, ^ y« f 'HyK„fak.v 
" Jntrod. § XII.

Digitized by Google

276

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

Diogenes to champion the orthodox system, while third- 
rate minds like Hippon of Samos even went back to 
the cruder theory of Thales. Tlie details of this antici- 
patory sketch will become clearer as we go on ; for the 
present, it is only necessary to call the reader's atten- 
tion to the fact that the old Ionic Philosophy now forms 
a sort of background to our story, just as Orphic and 
Pythagorean religious ideas have done in the preceding 
chapters.AimxngoiM 09. Anaxagoras was the first philosopher to take up 
his abode at Athens. We are not to suppose, however, 
that he was attracted thither by anything in the character 
of the Athenians. Xo doubt Athens at this time had 
become the political centre of the Hellenic world; but 
it had not yet produced a single scientific man, nor had 
any Athenian shown the slightest tendency in the direc- 
tion of philosophy. On the contrary, the temper of the 
citizen body was and remained hostile to free inquiry of 
any kind. The religious views of the Demos were of 
the narrowest kind, and hardly any people has sinned 
more heavily against the liberty of science. Sokrates, 
Anaxagoras, and Aristotle fell victims in different degrees 
to the bigotry of the populace, though, of course, their 
offence was political rather than religious. They were 
condemned, not as heretics, but as innovators in the , 
.state religion. Still, as a recent historian observes, 
" Athens in its flourishing period was far from being a 
place for free inquiry to thrive unchecked." 10 It is 
this, no doubt, which has been in the minds of the 
numerous writers who have represented philosophy as t 
something un-Greek. It was in reality thoroughly Greek,

]r - Holm, Gr. Gcsch. ii. 334. The whole chapter is well worth muling 
in this connexion.

Digitized by Google

AXAXAGORAS.

277

though it was thoroughly un- Athenian. For the famous 
speech of Perikles depicts the Athenians, not as they 
were, but as they should have been ; and we must not 
forget Nikias and Anytos, Strepsiades and Dikaiarchos, 
Lampon and Diopeithes, when we speak of the Athenian 
spirit. We might as well forget M. Homais when we 
generalise about the French.It seems most reasonable to suppose that Perikles 
himself brought Anaxagoras to Athens, just as he brought 
everything else he could. Holm has shown with much 
skill how the aim of that great statesman was, so to say, 
to Ionise his fellow-citizens, to impart to them some- 
thing of the flexibility and openness of mind which 
characterised their kinsmen across the sea. In this en- 
d favour he was ably seconded by his wife, Aspasia of 
Miletos, who therefore became the standing butt for the 
ribaldry of those scurrilous poets who were willing to 
pander to orthodoxy and obscurantism. She may very 
well have introduced the Ionian philosopher to the 
Poriklean circle, of which he was henceforth a chief 
ornament. The Athenians in derision gave him the 
nickname of Nous. 17

Be this as it may, the close relation in which Anaxa- 
goras stood to Perikles is placed beyond the reach of 
doubt by the testimony of Plato. In the Phuidros 18 he 
makes Sokrates say : " For all arts that are great, there 
is need of talk and discussion on the parts of natural 
science that deal with things on high ; for that seems 
to be the source which inspires high - mindedness and 
effectiveness in every direction. Perikles added this

17 Pint. Ptr. 4 (R. P. 117^). I/ollow Zeller, 871, n. 4 (Eng. tians, ii. 
327, ». 4), in regarding tin* sobriquet a* derisive. 
« 270 A (It. P. 117/ij. Of. Pint. Pa. 4 (R. P. ib.).

Digitized by Google

278

KARLY (;KKKK PHILOSOPHY.

1

very acquirement to his original gifts. He fell in, it 
seems, with Anaxagoras, who was a scientific man ; and, 
satiating himself with the theory of things on high, and 
having attained to a knowledge of the true nature of 
intellect and folly, which were just what the discourses 
of Anaxagoras were mainly about, he drew from that 
source whatever was calculated to further him in the 
art of speech."A more difficult -question is the alleged relation of 
Kuripides to Anaxagoras. The oldest authority for it is 
Alexander of Aitolia, poet and librarian, who lived at 
the court of Ptolemy Philadelphos (c. 280 n.c). He 
referred to Euripides as the " nursling of the ancient 
Anaxagoras." h> A "reat deal of ingenuitv has been ex- 
pended in trying to find the system of Anaxagoras in 
the choruses of Euripides ; but, it must now be ad- 
mitted, without result. The system of the poet, so far 
as he had one, was quite different, something more like 
orthodox Ion ii ism. 20 The famous fragment on the 
blessedness of the scientific life might just as well refer 
to any other cosmologist as to Anaxagoras, and indeed 
suggests far more naturally a thinker of a more primitive 
type. 21 On the other hand, t here is also a fragment 
which distinctly expounds the central thought of Anaxa- 
goras, and could hardly be referred to any one else." 
AVe may conclude, then, that Euripides knew the philo-

,,J A p. Cell. JV\ A. xv. 20. The statement is related Uy D. L. ii. 101, 
and many later writers.

See v. Wilamowirz - Mullondorf, AnaUcta Euriiridta, ]>. 102 sq<j. 
Yahkenaer {Diatr. de Eur. p. dr. rtl. p. 26) tir.st raised this question.

The fr. is quoted R. P. 117<\ The words $Crt»f and xiru.it ,

iyrp* carry us hack rather to the older Milesians. Note the propriety 
with which Euripides us.s the words Irrofi* and xor^t ("order," nut 
" world"). 
-Ii. P. 1196.

Digitized by Google

ANAXAGORAS.

279

sopher and bis views, but preferred a system more nearly 
resembling that of Diogenes.Digitized by Google

ANAXAGORAS.

279

sopher and bis views, but preferred a system more nearly 
resembling that of Diogenes.

100. We now come to the sorrowful ending of The trial. 
Anaxagoras' residence at Athens. Shortly before the 
outbreak of the Peloponnesian War, the enemies of 
Perikles began a series of attacks upon him through 
his friends. 23 Pheidias was the first to sutler, and 
Anaxagoras was the next. That he was an object 
of special hatred to the religious party need not sur- 
prise us, even though the charge made against him 
does not suggest that he went out of his way to hurt 
their susceptibilities. The details of the trial are 
somewhat obscure, but we can make out a few points 
quite clearly. The first step taken was the intro- 
duction of a psephism by Diopeithes, the same whom 
Aristophanes laughs at in The Birds?* enacting that an 
impeachment should be brought against those who did 
not practise religion, and taught theories about " the 
things on high."^ What happened at the actual trial 
is very differed/ related. Sotiou in his Siwassions, 
Satyros in his Lit-?*, Hermippos, and Hieronymos, gave 
hopelessly conflicting accounts. 26 It is no use attempting 
to reconcile these, as some writers have tried to do ; nor 
is it very hopeful to adopt the theologians' device of 
assuming two trials, though this is actually done by 
Bayle. It is enough to insist upon what is certain. 
Now we know positively from Plato what the accusation

3 Both Ephoros (represented by Dio-1. xii. 38) an<l the source of Plut. 
/Vr. 32, made these attacks immcd intely precede the war. This may, 
however, he pragmatic ; they perhaps occurred earlier.

u Hird-i, 988. Aristophanes had no resj»ect lor orthodoxy when com- 
bined with democratic opinions.

24 Plut. Per. 32 (R. P. 117 C). For the procedure, see the article 
"Eisangelia" in Diet. Ant.

36 These accounts are repeated by D. L. ii. 12-14. It is worth while

Digitized by Google

280 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.36 These accounts are repeated by D. L. ii. 12-14. It is worth while

Digitized by Google

280 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

■was. 27 It was that Anaxagoras taught the sun was a 
red-hot stone, and the moon earth ; and we shall see that 
he certainly did hold these views (§ 111). For the 
rest, the most plausible view is that Anaxagoras was 
got out of prison and sent away by Perikles. 28 We 
know from Plato's Kriton that such things were possible 
at Athens.

Driven from his adopted home, Anaxagoras naturally 
went back to Ionia, where at least he would be free to 
teach what he pleased. He settled at Lampsakos, a 
colony of Miletos, and we shall see reason to believe 
that he founded a school there. 29 Probably he did not 
live long after his exile. The Lampsakenes behaved very 
differently from the Athenians. They erected an altar 
to his memory in their market-place, dedicated to Mind 
and Truth ; and the anniversary of his death was long 
kept as a holiday, it was said at his own request. 30 
Writings. 101. Diogenes expressly includes Anaxagoras in his

to pnt the statements of Sa tyros and Sotion side V 1 tie in order to show 
the unsatisfactory character of the biographical t: * j on : —

Sot ion. Satyro*.

Accuser. Kleon. Thoukydidea s. of Melesias.

Charge. Calling the sun a red-hot Impiety and Medismf.). 
mass.

Sentence. Fined live talents. , Sentenced to death in absence.

Ibnnippoa represents Anaxagoras as already in prison under sentence 
of death when Perikles shamed the people into letting him otF. Lastly, 
Hieronymos says he never was condemned at all. Perikles brought him 
into court thin and wasted by disease, and the judges acquitted him out of 
. ompassion ! The Medism alleged by Satyros no doubt comes from Ste*im- 
brotos, who made Anaxagoras the friend of Themistokles instead of Perikles. 
This, too, explains the accuser's name (Husolt, Gr. Oc*ch. p. 306, n. 3). 
27 Apol. 26 D.'* Pint. Nit. 23 (R. P. U7c). (T. Per. 32 (R. P. 117 I». 
» Chap. IX. § 159.

** The oldest authority for the honours paid to Anaxagoras is Alkidamaa, 
the pupil of Gorgias, who said these were still kept up in his own time, 
Arist. Ithit. B, 23. 13986, Cf. Aelian, W II. viii. 19.

Digitized by Google

ANAXAGORAS

281

list of philosophers who left only a single book, and he 
has also preserved the accepted criticism of it, namely, 
that it was written " in a lofty and agreeable style." 31 
There is no evidence of any weight to set against this 
explicit testimony, which comes ultimately from the 
librarians of Alexandria. 32 The story that Anaxagoras 
wrote a treatise on perspective as applied to scene-paint- 
ing is most improbable ; 33 and the statement that he 
composed a mathematical work dealing with the quad- 
rature of the circle is due to a mere misunderstanding 
of an expression in Plutarch. 84 We learn from the 
passage in the Ajwlogy, referred to above, that the works 
of Anaxagoras could be bought at Athens for a single 
drachma ; and that the book was of some length may be 
gathered from the way in which Plato goes on to speak 
of it. 35 In the sixth century a.d. Simplicius was still 
able to procure a copy ; 30 and it is to him we owe the 
preservation of all our fragments, with one or two very 
doubtful exceptions. Unfortunately his quotations seem 
to be altogether confined to the First Book, that 
dealing with general principles, so that we are left

31 1). L. i. 16; ii. 6 (tt. V. 5 B; 122 A).

3 - Solum Wh (Ah. C/az. Frtojm. p. bl) fabricated a work entitled ri 
Tf«t Ai£i»i«* out of the pseudo- Aristotelian De planti*, 817a, 27. But 
the Latin version of Alfred, which is the original of the Greek, has 
simply tt id to dicit Icchiiuon ; and this appears to be due to a failure to 
make out the Arabic text from which the Latin version was derived. Cf. 
Meyer, Ge*ch. d. Hot. i. 60.33 It comes from Vitruvius, vii. pr. 11. A forger, seeking to decorate 
his production with a great mime, would think naturally of the philo- 
sopher who was said to have taught Euripides.

34 I'lut. De Ezilio, 607 F. The words merely mean that he used to draw 
mathematical figures relating to the quadrature of the circle on the prison 
lloor.

35 A/*>1. 26 D-E. The expression /3,',3Xi* perhaps implies that it filled 
more than one roll.

M Sim pi. also speaks of

Digitized by Google

282 karly grkek philosophy.

somewhat in the dark with regard to the treatment of 
details.

Menu**" ^ ^ ra o meuts were edited for the first time by

Schaubach in 1827, and again by Schorn in 1829. I 
have given the numbering of Schorn, though I am obliged 
to reject his arrangement. The translation is based 
upon the new recension of Simplicius by Diels, which 
has also been followed in tlie seventh edition of Kitter 
and Preller.

(1.) All things were together" 7 infinite both in number and 
in smallness, — for the small, too, was infinite. And when all 
tilings were together, none of them could be distinguished 
because of their smallness. For air and aether prevailed over 
all things, being both of them infinite ; for amongst all things 
these are the greatest both in quantity and size. R. P. 120.

(2.) For 3 * air and arther are separated off from the mass that 
surrounds the world, and the surrounding mass is infinite in 
quantity. R. P. ib.(2.) For 3 * air and arther are separated off from the mass that 
surrounds the world, and the surrounding mass is infinite in 
quantity. R. P. ib.

(3-10.) And since these things are so, we must suppose that 
there are contained many things and of all sorts in all (the 
worlds) that are brought together, germs of all things, with all 
sorts of shapes, and colours, and savours (R. P. ib.)* 9 and that 
men have been formed in them, and the other animals that 
have life, and that these men have inhabited cities and culti- 
vated fields, as with us : and that thev have a sun and moon 
and the rest, as with us ; and that their earth brings forth for 
them many things of all kinds, of which they gather together 
the best and use them for their dwellings (R. P. 127A). Thus 
much have I said with regard to separating off, that it will not be 
only with us that tilings are separated otr, but elsewhere too. 40

37 Simplicius tells us (R. P. 120) that this fragment was at the begin- 
ning of the First Book. The familiar sentence, quoted by I). L. ii. 6 
(R. P. 122 A) and others, is not Anaxagoras" at all, but a summary of his 
doctrine, due probably to Theophrastos.

• K Kr. 2 occurred "shortly after" fr. 1 (Simpl. loc. rit.).

39 Fr. 3 also occurred "shortly after" (Simpl. loc. rit.). For my inser- 
tion of "the worlds," sec below, § 110.

40 I have made fr. 10 continuous with fr. 3, because this is dono, not

Digitized by Google

ANAXA(iOKAS.

283

(11.) . . . as these thus revolve and are separated off by the 
force and speed. And the speed makes the force. And their 
sj)eed is like nothing in speed of the tilings that are now among 
men, but in every way many times as quick. 41(4.) But before they were separated off, when all tilings were 
together, not even was any colour distinguishable ; for the 
mixture of all things prevented it, — of the moist and of the 
dry, ami the warm and the cold, and the light and the dark 
[and much earth being in it], 4 - and of a multitude of innumer- 
able genus in no way like each other. For none of the other 
things either is like any other. R. P. 120.

(f>.) In every tiling there is a portion of everything except 
Nous, and there are some things in which there is Nous also. 
K. P. 127A.

(6.) All other things partake in a portion of everything, 
while Nous is infinite and self - ruled, and is mixed with 
nothing, but is alone, itself by itself. For if it were not by 
iUelf, but were mixed with anything else, it would partake in 
all things if it were mixed with any ; for in everything there 
is a portion of everything, as has been said by me in what goes 
before, and the things mixed with it would hinder it, so that 
it would have power over nothing in the same way that it has 
now being alone by itself. For it is the thinnest of all things 
and the purest, and it has all knowledge about everything and 
the greatest strength ; and Nous has power over all things,

once only, but twice, by Sim in his Com mm/arii on th' Phy-iiv* (pp. 35 
and 157 D), and once also in that on the D< Ctio if. Ht»). The conclud- 
ing words {rmurm pi* t>t>* u«i XtXiwT«i Tip, tk; irtupir,*} »ri tlx <J» Tetp r.uU

f*i*6* *x»xfJutt, *a\ *x\r.) are not given in R. 1'., and Schorn sup-

posed they belonged to Siniplieiu.s. The Aldine read «V«x„Vi* f ; but we 
now know from the apparatus of Piels that the best MSS. (P K) have 
preserved the Ionic *-r»*plri*i, thus leaving no doubt aa to the source from 
which the sentence conies. That fr. 4 is also given immediately alter 
fr. 3 in another place (p. 15t> D ; K. P. 120) makes no difference, for it is 
clearly marked otf by the parenthetic $rrl.41 The place of fr. 11 is settled by that of fr. 10. It came "shortly 
after" (Simpl. Phy*. p. 3. r » D).

43 I can make nothing of the words yr lS **x>.r S imvrn. We expect t.J 
m F *„o »«; r,Z 9vx*»i (cf. fr. 6), and iMihaps the doubtful words are a gloss 
upon tvxm, which has displaced the original text.

284

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

both greater and smaller, that have life. And Nous had power 
over the whole revolution, so that it l>egan to revolve in the 
beginning. And it began to revolve first from a small begin- 
ning ; but the revolution now extends over a larger space, and 
will extend over a larger still. 43 And all the things that are 
mingled together and separated off and distinguished are all 
known by Nous. And Nous set in order all things that were 
to be and that were, and ail things that are not now and that 
are, and this revolution in which now revolve the stars ami 
the sun and the moon, and the air and the aether that are 
separated off. And this revolution caused the separating olf, 
and the rare is separated olF from the dense, the warm from the 
cold, the light from the dark, and the dry from the moist. 
And there are many portions in many things. But no thing is 
altogether separated off nor distinguished from anything else 
except Nous. And all Nous is alike, both the greater and the 
smaller ; while nothing else is like anything else, but each 
single thing is and was most manifestly those things of which 
it has most in it. R. 1\ 123.

• •••••••

(7.) And when Nous began to move things, separating otf 
took place from all that was moved, and so far as Nous set in 
motion all was separated. And as things were set in motion 
and separated, the revolution caused them to be separated much 
more.

(8.) The dense and the moist and the cold and the dark 
came together where the earth is now, while the rare and the 
warm and the dry (and the bright) went out towards the 
further part of the aether." K. 1\ 124 A.(9.) From these as they are separated off earth is 
solidified ; for from mists water is separated off, and from 
water earth. From the earth stones are solidified by the 
cold, and these rush outwards more than water. R. 1\ 
124 A.

(12.) But Nous has power over all things that are, and it is 
now where all the other things are, in the mass that surrounds

Heading Wl for \*tl. 
u On the text of this fr. see R. P. 124a. I follow Schorn in inserting 
al.so xau to \<*nvf6* from Hippolytos.

Digitized by Google

ANAXAG011AS.

285

the world, and in the tilings that have been separated off and 
that arc being separated off. 4r>

(13.) Nor are the things that are in one world divided nor 
cut off from one another with a hatchet, neither the warm from 
the cold nor the cold from the warm. K. P. 1 23^.

(14.) And when those things are being thus distinguished, 
we must know that all of them are neither more nor less ; for 
it is not possible for them to be more than all, and all are 
always equal. R. P. 120.

(15.) Nor is there a least of what is small, but there is always 
a smaller; for it is impossible that what w should erase to be 
by being divided. 4 ' 3 P>ut there is always something greater 
than what is great, ami it is equal to the small in amount, and, 
compared with itself, each thing is both great and small. K. P. 
126a.

(1G.) And since the portions of the great and of the small 
are equal in amount, for this reason, Ujo, all things will be in 
everything; nor is it possible for them to be apart, but all 
things have a portion of everything. Since it is impossible for 
there to be a least thing, they cannot be separated, nor come to 
be by themselves; but they must be now, just as they were in 
the beginning, all together. And in all things many things are 
eontained, and an equal number both in the greater and in the 
smaller of the things that arc separated off.(17.) The Hellenes are wrong in using the expressions coming 
into being and passing away ; for nothing comes into being or 
passes away, but mingling and separation takes place of things 
that are. So they would be right to call coming into being 
mixture, and passing away separation. R. P. 111).

103. The system of Anaxagoras, like that of Enipe- Anaxago™ 
dokles, aimed at reconciling the Eleatic doctrine that cessols. pre 
corporeal substance is unchangeable with the existence

w Fr. 12 is given thus by Sim pi. Phy*. 157 D : « 2i »ay* iv« Uri n *<xtr*

K<*4 »t/v ifT<» '/»« xati Tec <ra»roc, i> rsy *ro).kv Tipii%»*rt t xa.\ iv reif Tf*e-

xitfutt, xai i» r»7{ irtxixfiu'ttDtf. Diel.s (ad loc.) suggests: * S» »«£/, «i; iu 
T«ri, xeipTX xa'i *Z* ten* . . . x*i i» rt?; uTixfifurt xa, It r«7( uTi^.^in,;. 
I prefer i Si t»v f iV*» r Un «p*rit, >

Mi Observe Zeller's beautiful emendation of this fr., t»m for ri ur.

Digitized by Google

286 EARLY CJREEK PHILOSOPHY

of a world which everywhere presents the appearance of 
coming into l>eing and passing away. The conclusions 
of Parmenides are frankly accepted and restated. 
Nothing can he added to all things ; for there cannot be 
more than all, and all is always equal (fr. 14). Nor can 
anything pass away. What men commonly call coming 
into being and passing away is really mixture and 
separation (fr. 17).This last fragment reads almost like a prose paraphrase 
of Kmpedokles (vv. 80-03); and it is in every way* 
probable that Anaxagoras derived his theory of mixture 
from his younger contemporary, whose poem was most 
likely published before his own treatise. 47 On the other 
hand, the refusal of Anaxagoras to admit the existence of 
entirely disparate and irreducible elements was doubtless 
due to his early connexion with the Ionic School. He 
certainly had to maintain a pluralist doctrine of some 
sort, if he wished to give an account of motion and 
change; for Parmenides had shown that these could not 
be reconciled with a materialistic monism. But, on the 
other hand, everything changes into everything else, 48 
and therefore the theory of Einpedokles is insufficient 
He had altogether separated the warm element, Fire, 
from the cold element, Water ; but Anaxagoras saw that 
things were not "cut off with a hatchet" (fr. 13) in this 
way. On the contrary, the true formula must be : Thrrc 
is a portion of everything in everything (fr. 5).

inevo7- hing 10 ^' A P nrt of tlie ar e ument bv which Anaxagoras

4 " This is doubtless the meaning of the words rut tpyut umptt in Arist. 
Mtt. A, 3. i»84rt, 12 (K. 1\ 119a); though !py* certainly docs not mean 
44 writings " or o/wra omnia, hut simply 44 achievements." The other 
possible interpretations are "more advanced in his views" and "inferior 
in his teaching" (Zeller, p. 917, n. 3).

* Arist. Phys. A, 4. 187/*, 1 (K. 1\ 123a).

Digitized by Google

AXAXAGORAS.

287* Arist. Phys. A, 4. 187/*, 1 (K. 1\ 123a).

Digitized by Google

AXAXAGORAS.

287

sought to prove this point lias been preserved in a 
corrupt form by Aetios, and Diels has recovered some 
of the original words from the scholiast on St. Gregory 
Nazianzene. " We use a simple nourishment," he said, 
" when we eat the fruit of Demeter or drink water. But 
how can hair be made of what is not hair, or flesh of what 
is not flesh ? " 4!) This is just the sort of question that the 
early Milesians must have asked, only the physiological 
interest has now definitely replaced the meteorological. 
"We shall find a similar train of reasoning in Diogenes of 
Apollonia (fr. 2).

The statement that there is a portion of everything in 
everything, is not to be understood as referring simply to 
the original mixture of things before the formation of the 
worlds (fr. 1). On the contrary, even now "all things 
are together," and everything, however small and how- 
ever great, has an equal number of "portions" (fr. 16). 
A smaller particle of matter could only contain a smaller 
number of portions, if one of those portions ceased to be ; 
but if anything is, in the full rarmenidean sense, it is 
impossible that mere division should make it cease to be 
(fr. 15). Matter is infinitely divisible ; for there is no 
least thing, any more than there is a greatest. But 
however great or small a body may be, it contains just 
the same number of " portions," that is, a portion of 
everything.

105. What are these "things" of which everything The portions, 
contains a portion ? It is usual to represent the theory 
of Anaxagoras as if he had said that wheat, for instance, 
contained small particles of flesh, blood, bones, and the 
like ; but we have just seen that matter is infinitely

« Aet. i. 3. 5 (Dox. p. 279). Sec R. P. 123/ and n. 1. I read .«,*£. 
with Uscner.

Digitized by Google

288

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.« Aet. i. 3. 5 (Dox. p. 279). Sec R. P. 123/ and n. 1. I read .«,*£. 
with Uscner.

Digitized by Google

288

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

divisible, and (fr. 10) that there are as many " portions " 
in the smallest particle as in the greatest. This is fatal 
to the common view. If everything was made up of 
minute particles of everything else, we could certainly 
arrive at a point where everything was " unmixed," if 
only we carried division far enough.

We owe the solution of this difficulty to the acumen 
of M. Tannery.'' 0 In fr. 1.3 the examples given of things 
which are not " cut oiX from one another with a hatchet " 
are the hot and the cold; and, in other places (fr. 4, 8), 
mention is made of the other traditional *' opposites " of 
the Milesian School. Aristotle says that, if we suppose 
the first principles to be infinite, they may either be one 
in kind, as with Demokritos, or opposite.'' 1 Simplicius, 
following Porphyry and Themistios, refers the latter view 
to Anaxagoras ; 52 and Aristotle himself implies that the 
opposites of Anaxagoras had as much right to be called 
first principles as the " homoeomeries."

It is of those opposites, then, and not of the different 
forms of matter, that everything contains a portion. 
Every particle of matter, however large or however small 
it may be, contains every one of those opposite qualities. 
That which is hot is also to a certain extent cold. Even 
snow, Anaxagoras affirmed, was black ; M that is, even the 
white contains a certain portion of the opposite quality. 
It is enough to indicate the connexion of this with the 
views of Ilerakleitos (§ 63).

80 Science, hellrn^ ]>. 283 s«jtj.

31 Phy*. A, 2. 21. The uncertainty of the text does not aflW-t

•>ur inference from it.

5J Phijs. 44 I). It should he nott.nl, however, that Alexander rejected 
thin interpretation.

51 Phys. A, 4. 187a, 25.

44 Sext. Pyrrh. i. 33 <K. P. 12S6).

Digitized by Google

A N" A X AGOR AS.

28951 Phys. A, 4. 187a, 25.

44 Sext. Pyrrh. i. 33 <K. P. 12S6).

Digitized by Google

A N" A X AGOR AS.

289

Had Anaxagoras possessed the conception of quality, 
all this could have been made much clearer. It is only 
obscure because he is obliged to call the primary oppo- 
sites " things." We have seen already (§ 14) how this 
came about.

106. These "things" or qualities, though each is Seeds, 
present in everything, may be combined in very different 
proportions, and thus it is that the seeds or' germs, or, 
as we should say, molecules of different substances, are 
distinguished. Each " seed " contains all " things " (or 
qualities), but each is most obviously of that quality 
which predominates in it (fr. 6). The seeds of fire 
contain portions of cold, but the portions of heat so 
far prevail that we call it hot.

It is these "seeds" that Aristotle spoke of as ofioto^ieprj. 
This word has nothing to do with the system of Anaxa- 
goras himself; it belongs entirely to Aristotle's own 
biological theory. 55 No doubt Anaxagoras, in conformity 
with the physiological interest of the time, spoke chiefly 
of the seeds of flesh, bone, and the like. Such things are 
called " homoeomerous " in the biological works of Aris- 
totle to distinguish them from the organs, and the term 
means simply that they can be divided into parts which 
are of the same nature as the whole. 50 The word 
summed up conveniently the class of things which 
were regarded as primary combinations of the ele- 
mentary " things " or opposite qualities, but we cannot

" See Bonitz, /ml. s.v. The i^.^n are intermediate between the 
element*, of which they ate compounded, and the organs, which arc made 
up of them. The distinction between ipm/tip* and *ff*ti$ptf* corresponds 
to Bichat's fundamental distinction between tissues and organs. Cf. 
Lewes, Aristotle, p. 279.

50 Cf. Gen. Corr. A, 1. 314ft, IS (K. I\ 119a). The explanation given 
by Aetioa, i. 3. 5 (R. P. 123/), is quite wrong.

1950 Cf. Gen. Corr. A, 1. 314ft, IS (K. I\ 119a). The explanation given 
by Aetioa, i. 3. 5 (R. P. 123/), is quite wrong.

19

Digitized by Google

290

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

infer anything at all from it as to the views of Anaxa- 
goras himself.

107. Aristotle, then, was quite justified in calling the 
seeds of Anaxagoras homoiotmrovs, because, as a matter 
of fact, the forms of matter which he regarded as primary 
combinations of the opposites belonged to the class of 
things to which Aristotle himself gave that name. The 
examples he cites w are bone, flesh, marrow, and the 
like, which Empedokles had regarded as compounds (v. 
199 sqq.). Fire, Air, Earth, and Water, on the contrary, 
which Empedokles had made the most primitive of all 
things, were now regarded as secondary combinations of 
these seeds. 68 We see here how the physiological interest 
was growing at the expense of every other.

From all this it follows that, when " all things were 
together," and when the different seeds of things were 
mixed together in infinitely small particles (fr. 1), the 
appearance presented would be that of one of what had 
hitherto been regarded as the primary substances. As a 
matter of fact, they did present the appearance of " air and 
jether"; for the qualities (things) which belong to these 
prevail in quantity over all other things in the universe, 
and everything is most obviously that of which it has 
most in it (fr. (i). Here, then, Anaxagoras attaches him-

:,T Cf the quotations in H. P. Ufa.:,T Cf the quotations in H. P. Ufa.

M OV«. Con: A, 1. 31 4«, 24 (R. P. 12.1). The won! *«„xi ff *U was 
used also by Demokritos, who most likely got it from Anaxagoras ; it occurs 
in the pseudo-Hip]>okratean iu f l Wr*,, i. Great difficulty has been 
caused by the api>aient inc lusion of Water and Fire among thp in 
Mrt. A, 3. 984a, 11 (K. 1'. UPa). This cannot mean that in the system 
of Aristotle himself Water and Fire were called »^f<«^t^, for the rr»^u« 
are always carefully distinguished from the apatsuipr. Bonitz's proposal to 
translate "as fire and water were in the system of Eui]»edokleg," is m>t 
very convincing either. I prefer to regard the wort Is l\*f « *i f as

a (perfectly correct ) gloss upon •£'«■«. In the next clause I read ir/.* f for 
£kx*t with Zeller. Cf. also l)r O/o, V, 3. 302/., 1 (If. V. U9a).

Digitized by Googl

ANAXAdORAS,

291

self to Anaximeues. The primary condition of things, 
before the formation of the worlds, is much the same in 
both ; only, with Anaxagoras, the original mass is no 
longer the primary substance, but a mixture of innu- 
merable seeds divided into infinitely small parts.This mass is infinite, like the air of Anaximenes, and 
it supports itself, since there is nothing surrounding it. 50 
Further, the " seeds " of all things which it contains 
are infinite in number (fr. 1). But, as the innumerable 
seeds may be divided into those in which the portions 
of cold, moist, dense, and dark prevail, and those which 
have most of the warm, dry, rare, and light in them, we 
may say that the original mass was a mixture of infinite 
Air and of infinite Fire. The seeds of Air, of course, 
contain " portions " of the " things " that predominate in 
Fire, and vice verm ; but we regard everything as being 
that of which it has most in it. Lastly, there is no void 
in this mixture, an addition to the theory made necessary 
by the arguments of Parmenides. It is, however, worthy 
of note that Anaxagoras added an experimental proof of 
this to the purely dialectical one of the Eleatics. Aristotle, 
indeed, laughs at his torturing of bladders and shutting 
up of air in water-clocks, and quite correctly observes 
that these experiments proved no more than that air was 
something, a corporeal substance. 60 But this was really 
very much to the point; for, as has been noted more than 
once, what Aristotle called Air, had been regularly 
identified with empty space until the days of Empedokles 
and Anaxagoras.' 51

108. Like Empedokles, Anaxagoras required some Nous.

Arist. Plot*, r, 5. 205ft, 1 (R. P. 122c). 
«" Phy*. Z, tf. 213a, 22 (R. 1\ 126). 
" C hap. II. § 42.

•

Digitized by Google

292

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.Arist. Plot*, r, 5. 205ft, 1 (R. P. 122c). 
«" Phy*. Z, tf. 213a, 22 (R. 1\ 126). 
" C hap. II. § 42.

•

Digitized by Google

292

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

external cause to produce motion in the mixture. Body, 
1'armenides had shown, would never move itself, as the. 
Milesians had supposed. This external cause Anaxagoras 
called by the name of Nous. It was this which mad** 
Aristotle say that he " stood out like a sober man from 
the random talkers that had preceded him," 62 and he has 
accordingly been generally credited with the introduction 
of the suprasensible into philosophy. The disappoint- 
ment expressed both by Plato and Aristotle as to the 
way in which Anaxagoras worked out the theory should, 
however, make us pause to reflect before accepting a too 
exalted view of it. Plato 63 makes Sokrates say : " I once 
heard a man reading a book, as he said, of Anaxagoras', 
and saying that it was Mind that ordered the world and 
was the cause of all things. I was delighted to hear of 
this cause, and I thought that he really was right. . . . 
But my extravagant expectations were all dashed to the 
ground when I went on and found that the man made no 
use of Mind at all. He ascribed no causal power what- 
ever to it in the ordering of things, but to airs, and 
a'thers, and waters, and a host of other strange things." 
Aristotle says: 04 "Anaxagoras uses Mind as a (feus rx 
machina to account for the formation of the world ; and 
whenever he is at a loss to explain why anything neces- 
sarily is, he drags it in. But in other cases he makes 
anything rather than Mind the cause." These utterances 
may well suggest a prima facie suspicion that the Nous 
of Anaxagoras did not really stand on a very much higher 
level than the Love and Strife of Empedokles, a sus- 
picion which will only be confirmed when we look at 
what he himself has to say on the point.

" Met. A, 3. 984/;, 8 sqq. (R. P. 121).

« Maul. 97 B (R. P. 12*/). M Met. A, 4. 985a, 18 (R. P. 12JW)." Met. A, 3. 984/;, 8 sqq. (R. P. 121).

« Maul. 97 B (R. P. 12*/). M Met. A, 4. 985a, 18 (R. P. 12JW).

Digitized by Google

ANAXAGORAS.

293

In the first place, Nous is unmixed (fr. 8), and does 
not, like other things, contain a portion of everything. 
This would hardly be worth saying of an immaterial 
mind ; no one would suppose that to be hot or cold. 
The result of its being unmixed is that it " has power 
over" everything, that is to say, in the language of 
Anaxagoras, it causes things to move. 63 Herakleitos 
had said as much of Fire, and Empedokles of Strife. 66 
Further, it is the " thinnest " of all things, so that it can 
penetrate everywhere, and it would be meaningless to 
say that the immaterial is " thinner " than the material. 
It is true that Nous also "knows all things"; but so, 
perhaps, did the Fire of Herakleitos 67 and certainly the 
Air of Diogenes. 68 Zeller holds, indeed, that Anaxagoras 
meant to speak of something incorporeal ; but he fully 
admits that he did not succeed in doing so, 69 and this 
is historically the important point. Nous is certainly 
imagined as occupying space; for we hear of greater and 
smaller parts of it (fr. 8).

The truth probably is that Anaxagoras substituted 
Nous, still conceived as a body, for the Love and Strife 
of Empedokles simply because he wished to retain the 
old Ionic doctrine of a substance that " knows " all 
things, and to identify this with the new theory of a 
substance that " moves " all things. Perhaps, too, it was 
his increased interest in physiological as distinguished 
from purely cosmological matters that led him to speak

'* The word *p*nu* does not really mean anything more than the old 
; cf. Arist. Pfnja. «, ft. 2666, 24. The interpretation given in IM 
An. r, 4. 429a, 18, is nnhistorieal. 
"Chap. III. §56; Chap. V. § 85.

87 Fr. 1, Byw., if we retain the MS. In any ease, the phrase

r» rofit implies this view. 
"Fr. 3, 4, Schorn (R. P. 162, 163). 
• Zeller, p. 888.87 Fr. 1, Byw., if we retain the MS. In any ease, the phrase

r» rofit implies this view. 
"Fr. 3, 4, Schorn (R. P. 162, 163). 
• Zeller, p. 888.

Digitized by Google

204

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

of Mind rather than soul. The former word certainly 
suggests design more clearly than the latter. But, in 
any case, the originality of Anaxagoras lies far more in 
the theory of matter than in that of Nous. 
Formation of 109. The formation of a world starts with a rotatory

the worlds.

motion which Nous imparts to a portion of the mixed 
mass in which "all things are together" (fr. 7), and this 
rotatory motion gradually extends over a wider and wider 
space. Its rapidity (fr. 2) produced a separation of the 
rare and the dense, the cold and the hot, the dark and the 
light, the moist and the dry (fr. 6). These are not, uf 
course, the primary opposites called by this name, hut 
" seeds " of things in which one or other of the opposites 
predominates. This separation produces two great masses, 
the one consisting of the rare, hot, light, and dry, called 
the "^Ether"; 70 the other, in which the opposite quali- 
ties predominate, called "Air" (fr. 1). Of these the 
yEther or Fire took the outside while the Air occupied 
the centre (fr. 8), according to the invariable view of all 
cosmologists since Anaximander.

The next stage is the separation of the air into clouds, 
water, earth, and stones (fr. 9). In this Anaxagoras 
follows Anaximenes closely. In his account of the origin 
of the heavenly bodies, however, he showed himself much 
more original. We read at the end of fr. 9 that stones 
" rush outwards more than other things," and we learn 
from the doxographers that the heavenly bodies were 
explained as stones torn from the earth by the rapidity 
of its revolution and made red-hot by the speed of their70 Note that Anaxagoras uses "air" where Empcdoklcs had said 
"ivther" (§ 8f»). ".Ether" with Anaxagoras is equivalent to Fire; .t. 
Arist. Df Ctrlo, r, 3. 302/,. 4 (R. P. 1246), and ib. A, 3. 2716, 24 : A*. 
it x<t7aLx,fi,Ttii tZ Wouart tcvt? ev xaki;- c>«/u«$u y*f mliifa m*rt <ruf»s.

Digitized by Google

ANAXAGORAS. 29.5

own motion. 71 Perhaps the fall of the meteoric stone at 
Aigospotamoi had something to do with the origin of this 
theory. It may also be observed that, while in the 
earlier stages of the world-formation we are guided chiefly 
by the analog}* of water rotating with light and heavy 
bodies floating in it, we are here reminded rather of a sling.

110. That Anaxagoras adopted the ordinary Ionian innumerable 
theory of innumerable worlds is perfectly clear from fr. 3 W ° rld *' 
and 10, which we have no right to separate from each 
other. 72 The last words of fr. 10, in particular, prove

clearly that Nous has caused a rotatory movement in 
more parts of the boundless mixture than one. The 
passage of Aetios, upon which we relied with regard to 
Anaximander, certainly includes Anaxagoras among those 
who held there was only one world ; but this testimony 
cannot be considered of the same weight as that of the 
fragments. 73 Zeller's reference of fr. 10 to the moon is 
very improbable. Is it likely that any one would say 
that the inhabitants of the moon " have a sun and moon 
as with us " ? 74

111. The cosmology of Anaxagoras is clearly based Cownoio^. 
upon that of Anaximeues, as will be obvious from a com- 
parison of the following passage of Hippolytos 75 with the 
quotations given in Chap. I. (§ 28): —

(3.) The earth is flat in shape, and remains suspended because 
of its size and because there is no vacuum. 76 For this reason

71 Act. ii. 13. 3 (Dox. p. 311) ; R. V. I'Hr.

72 Sec above, n. 40.

75 Aet. ii. 1. See al>ove, Chap. II. n. 80.71 Act. ii. 13. 3 (Dox. p. 311) ; R. V. I'Hr.

72 Sec above, n. 40.

75 Aet. ii. 1. See al>ove, Chap. II. n. 80.

74 Further, it can be proved that the passage occurred quite near the 
beginning of the work, long before anything can have Wen said about the 
moon. Fr. 3 came "shortly after" fr. 2, which came "shortly after" 
fr. 1, which was the beginning of the book. See above, note* 37, 38, 39.

71 Rff. i. 8. 3 sqq. {Dox. p. 562).

7 " The second reason, viz. that there is no vacuum, is doubtless an

Digitized by Google

29G

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

the air is very strong, and supports the eartli which is borne up 
by it

(4.) Of the moisture on the surface of the earth, the sea arose 
from the waters in the earth, . . . and from the rivers which 
flow into it. 77

(5.) Rivers take their being both from the rains and from the 
waters in the earth ; for the earth is hollow, and has waters in 
its cavities. And the Nile rises in summer owing to the water 
that comes down from the snows in Ethiopia. 78

(6.) The sun and the moon and all the stars are fiery stones 
ignited 79 by the rotation of the aether. Under the stars are 
the sun and moon, and also certain bodies which revolve with 
them, but are invisible to us.

(7.) We do not feel the heat of the stars because of the great- 
ness of their distance from the earth ; and, further, they are not 
so warm as the sun, because they occupy a colder region. The 
moon is below the sun, and nearer us.

(8.) The sun surpasses the Peloponnesos in size. The moon 
has not a light of her own, but gets it from the sun. The 
course of the stars goes under the earth.(8.) The sun surpasses the Peloponnesos in size. The moon 
has not a light of her own, but gets it from the sun. The 
course of the stars goes under the earth.

(9.) The moon is eclipsed by the earth screening the sun's 
light from it, and sometimes, too, by the bodies below the moon 
coming before it. The sun is eclipsed at the new moon, when 
the moon screens it from us. Uoth the sun and the moon turn 
in their courses owing to the repulsion of the air. The moon 
turns frequently, because it cannot prevail over the cold.

(10.) Anaxagoras was the first to determine what concerns the 
eclipses and the illumination of the sun and moon. And he said 
the moon was of earth, and had plains and ravines in it. The 
Milky Way was the reflexion of the light of the stars that were 
not illuminated by the sun. Shooting stars were sparks, as it 
were, which leapt out owing to the motion of the heavenly 
vault.

addition made by An. to the old theory. The Eleatic discovery ih here 
pressed into the service of Milesian views.

77 The text here is very corrupt, but we may gather the doctrine of 
Anaxagoras from other sources, e.g. Aet. iii. 16. '2.

78 Reading AU t ,x,u,7 % for i f %T»n from Diod. i. 38 and Aet. iv. 1. 3. 
n Reading ip*v f irfitT*t with Usener.

Digitized by Google

AXAXACJORAS. 297

(11.) Winds arose when the air was rarefied by the sun, and 
when things were burned and made their way to the vault of 
heaven and were carried off. Thunder and lightning were pro- 
duced by heat striking upon clouds.

(12.) Earthquakes were caused by the air above striking on 
tli at beneath the earth ; for the movement of the latter caused 
the earth which floats on it to rock.(12.) Earthquakes were caused by the air above striking on 
tli at beneath the earth ; for the movement of the latter caused 
the earth which floats on it to rock.

All this confirms in the most striking way the state- 
ment of Theophrastos, that Anaxagoras had belonged to 
the school of Anaximeues. The flat earth floating on the 
air, the dark bodies below the moon, the explanation of 
the solstices and the annual course of the sun and moon 
by the resistance of air, the explanations given of wind 
and of thunder and lightning, are all derived from the 
earlier inquirer. 80

112. "There is a portion of everything in everything Biology, 
except Nous, and there are some things in which there 
is Nous also" (fr. 5). In these words Anaxagoras laid 
down the distinction between animate and inanimate 
tilings. He tells us that it is the same Nous which "has 
power over," that is, sets in motion, all things that have 
life, both the greater and the smaller (fr. G). There is 
nothing new in this ; since the time of Anaximenes it 
had been the current doctrine (§ 27). The Nous in 
living creatures is the same in all (fr. G), and from this 
it followed that the different grades of intelligence which 
we observe in the animal and vegetable worlds depend 
entirely on the structure of the body. The Nous was the 
.same, but it had more opportunities in one body than 
another. Man was the wisest of animals, not because 
he had a better sort of Nous, but simply because he had 
hands. 81 This view is quite in accordance with the

w See above, Chap. I. § 28.

w Arist. Part. An. A, 10. 687a, 7 (R. P. 127ft).

Digitized by Google

208 EARLY OREEK PHILOSOPHY.

previous development of thought uj)on the subject. Pai- 
menides, in the second part of his poem (v. 14G sqq), 
liad already made the thought of men depend entirely 
upon the constitution of their limbs.As all Nous is the same, we are not surprised to find 
that plants were regarded as living creatures. If we 
may trust the pseudo-Aristotelian Treatise on Plants* 2 
so far, Anaxagoras argued that they must feel pleasure 
and pain in connexion with their growth and with the 
fall of their leaves. Plutarch says 83 that he called plants 
" animals fixed in the earth."

Both plants and animals originated in the first 
instance from the iravairepfiia. Plants first arose when 
the seeds of them which the air contained were brought 
down by the rain-water, 84 and animals originated in a 
similar way." Like Anaximander, Anaxagoras held 
that animals first arose in the moist element. 86 
Perception 113. In these scanty notices, we seem to see traces 
of a polemical attitude towards Empedokles, and the 
same may be observed in what we are told of the 
theory of perception adopted by Anaxagoras. The 
account which Theophrastos gives of this 87 is as 
follows : —

(27.) But Anaxagoras says that perception is produced by 
opposite ; for like things cannot be affected by like. Ho 
attempts to give a detailed enumeration of the particular 
senses. We see by means of the image in the pupil ; but no 
image is cast upon what is of the same colour, but only on 
what is diirerent. With most living creatures things are of a

« A, 1. 815a, 15 (R. P. 127 1U 83 Q. Nat. 1 (R. P. 127 C).

"Theophr. Hi*t. Plant, iii. 1. 4 (R. P. 127 A). 
86 IrenaMis, arlv. Her. ii. 14. 2 (R. P. 127a). 
* Hipp. Kef. i. 8. 12 {Dox. p. 5M). 
K De St its. 27 sqq. {Dox. p. 507 j.

Digitized by Google

ANAXACiORAS

299

different colour to the pupil by day, though with some this is 
so hy night, and these are accordingly keen-sighted at that 
time. Speaking generally, however, night is more of the same 
eolour with the eyes than day. And an image is cast on the 
pupil by day, lx?cause light is a concomitant cause of the image, 
and because the prevailing colour casts an image more readily 
upon its opposite.(28.) It is in the same way that touch and taste discern their 
objects. That which is just as warm or just as cold as we are 
neither warms us nor eools us by its contact ; and, in the same 
way, we do not apprehend the sweet and the sour by means of 
themselves. "We know cold by warm, fresh by salt, and sweet by 
sour, in virtue of our deficiency in each ; for all these are in us 
to begin with. And we smell and hear in the same manner ; 
the former by means of the accompanying respiration, the latter 
by the sound penetrating to the brain, for the bone which 
surrounds this is hollow, and it is upon it that the sound falls.

(29.) And all sensation implies pain, a view which would 
seem to l>e the consequence of the first assumption, for all 
unlike things produce pain by their contact, And this pain is 
made perceptible by the long continuance or by the excess of a 
sensation. Brilliant colours and excessive noises produce pain, 
and we cannot dwell long on the same things. The larger 
animals are the more sensitive, and, generally, sensation is 
pro]K>rtionatc to the size of the organs of sense. Those animals 
which have large, pure and bright eyes see large objects and 
from a great distance, and contrariwise.

(30.) Ami it is the same with hearing. Large animals can 
hear great and distant sounds, while less sounds pass un- 
perceived ; small animals perceive small sounds and those 
near at hand. It is the same too with smell. Rarefied 
air has more smell ; for, when air is heated and rarefied, 
it smells. A large animal when it breathes draws in the 
condensed air along with the rarefied, while a small one 
draws in the rarefied by itself; so the large one perceives 
more. For smell is better perceived when it is near than 
when it is far by reason of its being more condensed, while 
when dispersed it is weak. But, roughly speaking, large 
animals do not perceive a rarefied smell, nor small animals a 
condensed one.

Digitized by GoogleDigitized by Google

.300 EAKLY GUEEK PHILOSOPHY.

This theory marks a notable advance upon that of 
Einpedokles, and it was a happy thought of Anaxagoras 
to make sensation depend upon irritation by opposites, 
and to connect it with pain. Many modern theories are 
based upon a similar idea.

That Anaxagoras regarded the senses as incapable of 
reaching the truth of things, is shown by the fragments 
preserved by Sextus. But we must not, for all that, 
turn him into a skeptic. The saying preserved by 
Aristotle 88 that " things are as we suppose them to be," 
has no value at all as evidence. It comes from some 
collection of apophthegms, not from the treatise of 
Anaxagoras himself ; and it had, as likely as not, a 
moral application. What we may probably gather from 
Sextus is that he said " the weakness of our senses 
prevents our discerning the truth." 89 This meant 
simply, as the example given shows, that we do not see 
the " portions " of everything which are in everything, 
for instance the portions of black which are in the 
white. Our senses simply show us the portions that 
prevail (fr. G).

M Met. A, 5. 10006, 25 (It. P. 1-2 So).

** Math. vii. 90 (R. P. 128}. That the fragment quoted is genuine, is 
rendered probable by the Ionic ifavftmns.

Digitized by

CHAPTEtt VI r

THE PYTHAGOREANS.

1 14. We saw above (§ 30) how the Pythagoreans, after The Pytha

* ... gorean School.Digitized by

CHAPTEtt VI r

THE PYTHAGOREANS.

1 14. We saw above (§ 30) how the Pythagoreans, after The Pytha

* ... gorean School.

losing their supremacy in Kroton and the other cities of 
southern Italy, first concentrated themselves at lihegion. 
It may have been here that the foundations of what is 
called the Pythagorean philosophy were laid. On the 
breaking up of the school at Rhegion, Archytas, we are 
told, stayed behind in Italy, while Philolaos and Lysis, 
the latter of whom had escaped when a young man from 
the massacre at Kroton (§ 36), betook themselves to 
Hellas, settling finally at Thebes. It would seem that 
Archytas carried on the political traditions of the Order 
in his native city of Taras, though it is unlikely that he 
kept up the superstitions on which its power was 
originally based. He appears simply as a gifted general 
and statesman. According to Aristoxenos, he was never 
beaten in the field. 1 Besides this he was a scientific 
man, and to him is ascribed the discovery of mathe- 
matical mechanics.' 2 As to Philolaos, we know from 
Plato 3 that he was at Thebes some time during the last

1 I). L. viii. 79 (R. P. :»0 II, d). The main facts about Archytas rest 
ii]K)ii the authority of Aristoxenos ; hut unfortunately he has got mixed 
up with the romance which passes for Plato's life.

* D. L. viii. 83 (K. P. :,0 B).

3 PhaiU. CI I) (K. P. ;»0<i). He was "heard" hy Sinimia* and Kcbes, 
who were present at the death of Sok rates in 399 B.C.

301

Digitized by Google

.102 KARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

quarter of the tifth century, B.C. Lysis was later on the 
teacher of Epameinondas.* The last generation of the 
school is represented by the friends of Aristoxenos. 5 
Pythagorean 115. Every one now admits that such things as the

writings.writings.

Giihhn Verses 0 and the treatises that go by the names of 
Ocellus Lucanus 7 and Timaios Lokros 8 are late forgeries. 
As to the alleged fragments of Arehytas, too, there is 
now a pretty general agreement. 9 But, as it is still 
widely believed that the remains of Philolaos are 
authentic, a more careful examination of the evidence 
becomes needful.

The earliest express mention of the work from which 
these fragments come is that of Demetrios Magnes, who 
wrote in the first century i».c. lie had undoubtedly 
seen the book, for he quotes a few words from the 
beginning of it. 10 All previous references are of a very 
peculiar character, as has been well shown by Mr. 
Hywater. 11 Hermippos, the pupil of Kallimachos, said 
that he had read in "some writer" that Plato had

< Iaml.l. I'. Pyth. 250 (after Aristoxenos); R. P. \\\h. VS. Diod. x. 11. 
2; Neauthcs, fr. 18 (F. H. G. Hi. 5). 
• I). L. viii. 15 (R. P. 51).

r ' An attempt has, indeed, hoen made by v. Wilamowitz-Mollendorir to 
show that the (tolden VrrwA belong to an early date, but it must 
certainly be pronounced a failure. See Diels, Arch. iii. p. 458.

7 The fragments an; given F. P. G. i. ■'583.

"This is a mere extract from Plato's Tiuifiion done into Doric. It is 
generally printed in editions of Plato's works.

'♦The fragments are given in F. P. G. i.— See the literature referred 
in K. V. 50./.

>" I). L. viii. 85 (K. P. 52fc). The quotation does not quite agree 
with any of the fragments given by Stohaios, but it is of similar 
character.

11 On the Fragments attributed to PhihAnn* the Pythagorean (Jouni. 
of /'hil. i. p. 21 sqq.). The genuineness of the fragments was 
maintained by lioeckh (Phi/olao* (its pythayoreern Lehrtn ucJtst dm 
Rrurhxt \Wken *iint» W*>rkex, 1810), and impugned by Val. Rose [Com/it. 
de Ari»t. I'tbr. ofd. H auct. 1854), who regarded them as a com-

Digitized by Google

THE PYTHAGOREANS. 303Digitized by Google

THE PYTHAGOREANS. 303

bought the work from the relatives of Philolaos in Sicily, 
and had copied his Timaios out of it. 12 Satyros, the 
}>upil of Aristarchos, is equally vague. According to 
him, Plato bought from Philolaos " three Pythagorean 
1 looks," which are not actually said to have been by 
Philolaos himself. 13 Still earlier, Timon of Phlious says 
simply that Plato bought " a little book for a great sum," 
and learnt " to write Timaios " out of it. 14 There are 
other references to this story, but they are equally 
indefinite and inconsistent. 15 Every one has heard of 
the book, but no one has seen it ; and, the further back 
we go, the less is known about it. As Mr. Bywater 
says, 10 the history of the work ascribed to Philolaos before 
the time of Demetrios Magnes " reads like the history, 
not so much of a book, as of a literary ignis fatuus 
floating before the eyes of imaginative writers." If such 
a book had ever existed, surely Aristotle would have 
mentioned the views of Philolaos somewhere. 17 Further, 
even if there was such a book, it cannot have been the 
same as that from which our fragments come ; for that 
has no special affinities with the Timaios, but rather, if 
anything, with the Phihhos.

Mr. P>ywater has not discussed the origin of this

paratively early forgery, and C. Schaarschmidt (7)iV aiiif h/irhr Schrifl- 
fit'llrrti d<H Ph'doluu*, 18*34), who relegate* I them to the first 
century B.r.

J * D. L. viii. 7. Note the vagueness of the expression r.»* t*» 
tuyyfup'itt*.

,J L>. L. iii. 11.

'« A p. Gcll. iii. 17 (R. V. 50a). 
14 See D. I,, viii. 4. 7.

} " Loc. rit. p. 29. Mr. By water compares the supjM.srtl hook to (he 
notorious De trilni* imjtOHtoriltm.

17 His very name occurs once only in the Aristotelian corpus, viz. Eth. 
End. B, 8. 122f>«, 33, where what we are told seems to he an apophthegm 
of the usual unauthentic ty|>e.

304 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPKY.304 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPKY.

phantom treatise ; but to me it seems possible that Aris- 
toxenos was the person in whose fertile brain it first 
arose. He was always on the outlook for an opportunity 
to damage Sokrates and Plato, and it is to him we owe 
the astounding piece of information that the Republic 
was copied from a book by Protagoras. 18 The story 
about the origin of the Timmos certainly sounds like 
a companion statement to this.

We have now to consider the work from which the 
actually existing fragments are taken. This certainly 
existed in the first century n.c, when Demetrios Magnes 
saw it. It was in three books, and Proclus refers to it 
by the title of Bah ha i} 9 Boeckh accepted all the frag- 
ments which Stobaios had extracted from it, but no one 
will now go so far as this. The lengthy extract from the 
part of the work, entitled The Soul, is given up even by 
Zeller, who maintains the genuineness of the rest. 20 To 
begin with, it is written in a dialect which may best be 
described as Cockney Doric, that is to say, Attic of the 
decadence tricked out with long alphas and omegas. It 
even contains terms which we know to have been in- 
vented by Aristotle and Plato, 21 so we need not further 
discuss it. But the other fragments are more important: 
for, as has been mentioned, Zeller still regards them as 
authentic. It will be admitted that this view is not 
prima facie probable ; for there is no external evidence 
to show that they are derived from a different source ; it 
would seem reasonable, then, to accept all or reject all, 
unless the internal evidence were simply overwhelming.

18 A p. D. L. iii. 25. 19 Boeckh, op. rit. p. 24.

■ J0 The passage is given, R. I\ f>7, and is discussed by Mr. Hywater, op. 
rit. p. 39 sqq. Cf. Zeller, 261, n. 3 (Kng. trans. 314, m. 2).

21 For instance: ri» ~i; Ki**ra; **J ftirxfriXa;, tt'ipyu** i.i}itt tii,

Digitized by Googl

■

THE PYTHAGOREANS. 30521 For instance: ri» ~i; Ki**ra; **J ftirxfriXa;, tt'ipyu** i.i}itt tii,

Digitized by Googl

■

THE PYTHAGOREANS. 305

This, however, it is as far as possible from being. What- 
ever the system expounded in the fragments may be, it 
is assuredly not that which Aristotle attributes to the 
Pythagoreans ; on the contrary, it is, as was mentioned 
above, much more like the theory of Plato's Phileboa. 
And it is hardly correct to say that there are no traces 
in these fragments of later language and thought; there 
are really a considerable number. 22 But the most con- 
vincing proof of late origin is the simple experiment of 
stripping off the Doric forms. We find then that what 
we have left is nothing else than the philosophic prose 
invented by Aristotle.

11G. It will now be clear that our only chance of The problem, 
discovering what Pythagorean ism really was will depend 
upon the use of other sources than the supposed frag- 
ments of Philolaos. These sources are, however, of very 
different value. Zeller has done much to clear the way 
for an intelligible account of the Pythagorean philosophy 
by stripping it of the more recent accretions which have 
attached themselves to it. These are mainly of two 
kinds. We have, first of all, the Platonic elements which 
forced their way into the system at the time when the 
Academy under Speusippos was drawing closer and closer 
to the Pythagoreans. The opposition of the " monad " 
and the "indeterminate dyad" belongs to this class. i5- For instance i?x*, in the Aristotelian sense, fr. 1 (It. P. 56), iTa*, 
fr. 3 (K. P. 53), the five Platonic dements, fr. 20 (If. P. 67a). For 
more, see Mr. Ry water, op. cit. We may note also that the numbers are 
not said to /*' thing* in the way Aristotle deserilie-*. We hear of an un- 
knowahle underlying i<rr« (R. P. ;'i6), which is simply the Ari>tote!ian 
*Xr. Things merely haw numl>er, ami this makes them knowahle, 
hardly an early idea or possible before the rise of (jnantitativc science. 
In any case, the unknowable substance of fr. 4 cannot be the same as the 
numbers, which are pre-eminently knowahle (fr. 3).

23 Zeller, p. 330 s.pj. (Kng. trans, p. 386 wpp, where in 1. 12 read "the 
odd and the even" for "the crooked and the straight"). Aristotle says

20

Digitized by Google

I

>

30G EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.20

Digitized by Google

I

>

30G EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

Secondly, we have the fantastic theology of the Neopy- 
thagoreans, where the opposition of the Limit and the 
Unlimited appears as one between God and Matter. 24 It 
Ternains to be seen, however, whether we are not entitled 
to go rather farther in this direction than Zeller himself 
has done. The system, even as he describes it, seems 
too remote from the rest of the early philosophy. In the 
words of a recent writer, " the pre-Sokratic philosophy is 
like a dialogue which the Pythagoreans iuterrupt without 
knowing what is the subject under discussion." 25 
The Numbers. 1 1 7. As is well known, the fundamental doctrine of 
the Pythagoreans was that things are Numbers. This has 
led many to speak of their philosophy as holding a middle 
place between the purely physical systems of the Ionian s 
aud the metaphysical theories of the Eleatics. We have 
seen already (Chap. IV.) that the Eleatics intended their 
system to be a physical one just as much as the Ionians 
did ; we have now to show that Pythagoreanism too was, 
like all early Greek philosophy, an attempt to explain 
the sensible world from a sensible origin, and not an 
idealistic, or even a semi-idealistic hypothesis. Aristotle 
has been at the pains to warn us against this very mis- 
conception. He tells us that, " though the Pythagoreans 
made use of less obvious first principles and elements 
than the rest, seeing they did not derive these from

distinctly Met. A, 6. 9s7/>, 2. r <) that "to set up a dyad instead of the 
Unlimited regarded as one, and to make the Unlimited consist of the 
(ireat and Small, is distinctive of Plato." (R. P. 60a.) Zeller surely 
makes an unnecessary concession with regard to this passage (Zeller, p. 
339, n. 1; Eng. trans, p. 396, n. 1).

2 * Zeller, p. .'MO s<pj. (Eng. trans, p. 397 sqq.).2 * Zeller, p. .'MO s<pj. (Eng. trans, p. 397 sqq.).

- 4 Joel, Zur (rcsch. tier Zahlprinzipien in tier dr. Phil. (Zschr. f. Phil 
X. F. 97, p. 184). The best account of Pythagoreanism known to me is 
that of liaumker, Da* Problem dcr Maleric, p. 33 s(\<\. I have made 
free use of this.

■

Digitized by Google

THE PYTHAGOREANS.

307

t, nis 
t not ^

it is 3

sensible objects," their discussions were nevertheless con- 
cerned with nature alone. They described the origin of 
the heavens, and observed its parts and phenomena, 
" agreeing, apparently, with the other cosmologists in 
holding that reality is just what can be perceived by 
the senses, and is contained within the compass of the 
heavens." 26 It is clear from the way in which Aristotle 
goes on to speak of this in the same passage that he was 
very much puzzled by it. Though they confined them- 
selves to the sensible, the first causes which they assumed 
were quite adequate to explain realities of a higher kind, 
and were even more applicable to these than to natural 
phenomena.' 27 And certainly if the Pythagoreans had 
meant by " numbers " what Aristotle himself meant, his 
surprise would be sufficiently justified ; but we must 
assume, without proof, that they did mean this. 
prima facie unlikely that the idea of abstract numbers 
existed at all at this date ; and it is still more unlikely 
that, if it did, the Pythagoreans should have been so com- 
pletely emancipated from the naive realism of their times 
as to assert that the world was made of abstractions.

118. Let us look at this last point more closely.lThc Numbers 
According to Aristotle, 28 the Pythagoreans held that theT 
elements of number were the elements of things, and, 1 
therefore, that things were numbers. To us, accustomed 
as we are from childhood to the multiplication table, such 
an assertion seems simply meaningless. We are so 
familiar with the idea of counting without counting• 6 Met. A, 8. 9896, 29 »\t[. (R. P. 76a). I read \*r»*»Tip*n for ixrtw,- 
with Alexander and lion it/.. CI', also N, 3. 1091a, IS: x«^u«r»«t/<r<

* Met. ib. 990a, 5.

Mtt. A, ft. 986a, 1. Note that a little lower down he refers ll.e 
mini hers to the material cause (986a, 15).

Inot abstract.

Digitized by Google

308

EARLY CREEK PHILOSOPHY.

anything, that it is only by an effort we can realise what 
a very abstract process this is. 29 It is certain, however, 
that, natural as it may be to us to speak of numbers as 
things that can exist by themselves, it was long before 
men learnt to think of a number, except as a number of 
something.

Our suspicion that the Pythagorean numbers were 
not what we should call by that name, that is to say, 
abstract numbers, is abundantly confirmed by Aristotle. 
They were, he tells us, intended to be mathematical 
numbers, but they were not " separated from the objects 
of sense." 30 They could not really be mathematical 
numbers, since bodies were made up of them. 31 Lastly, 
there is no doubt that the Pythagoreans said that the 
real world was made of numbers. 32

This explains another of Aristotle's statements. The 
Pythagoreans are several times classed with Plato as 
holding that the elements of numbers have an independent 
reality of their own, and are not mere predicates of some- 
thing else. 33 At first sight this might seem to be a con-

29 Even in this case it is, no doubt, truer to say that we count the phu< s 
in the numerical series, which represent in an abstract form all possible 
contents. Sec BosaiHpict, Loyic, i. p. 1G7.

» Mrt. M, 6. 1080/,, 16; N, 3. 1090a, 20.» Mrt. M, 6. 1080/,, 16; N, 3. 1090a, 20.

31 "That bodies should l>e composed of numbers, and that that numb.-r 
should be mathematical, is impossible," M,t. M. 8. 10S3/>, 11. " Ky 
making natural bodies out of numbers, things that have lightness and 
weight out of what has neither weight nor lightness, they appear to b<- 
talking of another world («i^«v«;) and ot her bodies, not of those that arc 
objects of sense," if>. N, 3. 1090a, 32.

a - "There is no other number but that of which the world is composed." 
M*.t. A, 8. 9896, 21. "They construct the whole heavens out of num- 
bers," ih. M, 6. 1030/,, 18; />< GV/o, r, 1. 300a, 15. "The whole 
heavens are a harmony and a number," Met. A, 5. 986a, 2.

33 "They did not think that the limit and the unlimited and the one 
were certain other substances (ftruf), as Fire or Water, or something 
else of that nature ; but that the unlimited itself and the one itself

Digitized by Google

THE PYTHAGOREANS. 309

tradiction of Aristotle's other assertion that the numbers 
were not separated from the objects of sense ; and 
certainly, if he did not go on to point out the difference 
between the Pythagoreans and Plato, it would be so. 
He is, however, verv careful to mark this difference. 
Plato agreed with the Pythagoreans, he says,* 4 in holding 
that unity, for instance, was a reality ; but he differed 
from them in believing that it was separable from the 
objects of sense. In short, we may say that, whereas 
the Pythagoreans maintained that numbers were realities 
because they had not yet learnt to distinguish them from 
that of which they were numbers, Plato, who did so dis- 
tinguish them, could yet affirm their reality because he 
held there were other kinds of reality than that of 
sensible objects.

119. What, then, are these numbers which can be The element*

of nurnbcr

so easily identified with things ? We shall be better («) Limit and 
. . . . . ■ • « .the Unlimited.119. What, then, are these numbers which can be The element*

of nurnbcr

so easily identified with things ? We shall be better («) Limit and 
. . . . . ■ • « .the Unlimited.

able to answer this question if we consider, lirst, the 
" elements of number," which, as Aristotle tells us, were 
the same as the elements of things. These were the Odd 
and the Even, identified with the Limit and the Un- 
limited respectively. Now Aristotle clearly indicates 
that the Unlimited of the Pythagoreans differed from 
that of Plato in being spatial. His argument against 
it in the Physics is based entirely on this assumption. 
If, he says, the Unlimited is itself a reality, and not 
merely the predicate of some other reality, every part of

were the real essence of the things of which they are predicated, and 
that is why they said that number was the real essence of everything," 
Mtt. A, 5. 987", 1!». "Some, like the Pythagoreans and Plato, make 
the unlimited in itself a reality, not as an attribute of something else," 
Phy*. r, 1. 203/1, 4.

a * Plato makes the numbers something beside the objects of per- 
ception, while they say the numbers are the things themselves," Met. A, 
o, y87o, 27, and often.

Digitized by Google

310

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.Digitized by Google

310

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

it must be unlimited also, just as every part of air is air.^ 
The same is implied in the statements that the Unlimited 
extends outside the heavens, and that, in the formation 
of the world, the Unlimited was limited by the central 
Fire (§ 125). The Pythagorean Unlimited is, in fact, 
the res externa ; it is an early attempt to conceive Space 
in a realistic way, and not merely as the place of body. 
Being an early attempt, it was not very successful ; and, 
if the Pythagoreans did not make the Unlimited a mere 
predicate of Air like Anaximenes (§§ 24-2 G), they fell 
into the opposite extreme of simply identifying it with 
Air and the Void. So, at least, we are told by Aristotle, 
though there is no trace of this in the supposed fragments 
of Philolaos *

The Limit must, of course, be strictly correlative to 
the Unlimited. It will then be a spatial limit, and not 
an ideal one.

The element* 120. This distinction between the Limit and the

of number.

(/>) The odd Unlimited was held by the Pythagoreans to be identical

ami Kven.

with that between Odd and Even. The reasons which 
have been assigned for this identification, which does 
not seem to be of much importance to the system, are 
contradictory and in part unintelligible. 37 If, however, 
we keep closely to our only trustworthy authority, 
Aristotle, it will perhaps be possible to make out what

35 Phyi*. r, 1. 204a, 20 sqq. Aristotle nowhere objects to the unlimit«-d 
of Pluto on grounds of this sort.

36 "The Pythagoreans say that there is empty space, and that it enters 
into the world {•i>f**i ( ), which is regarded as breathing, from the infinite 
breath outside," Phy*. a, 6. 213/>, 23 (R. P. 6iic). In " Philolaos," 
however, air is one of the live elements (fr. 20, R. P. 67 A). This space 
or air iitfiZ" rkt $Crnt, i.e. keeps substances apart, gives them extension.37 The corumentatoi's usually say that even numbers were called un- 
limited because they could be halved indefinitely, which, us Simpliciu* 
points out in Phy*. p. 455, 20 D., is not the case.

\

Digitized by Google

THE PYTHAGOREANS.

311

was meant. In the Physics we are told, according to the 
most probable interpretation, that it is the inclusion of 
the even in things that gives rise to unlimitedness ; in 
proof of which it is pointed out that the gnomon, which, 
added to a square produces another square, must itself 
consist of an odd number of squares.

€

f

9

h

c

h

a

d

•

If three squares, b, r, d y are added to the square </, we 
get a square ; and so, too, if five squares, c, f, y, li, i, are 
added to that. Or, expressing the same thing arith- 
metically, we may say it is a property of every odd 
number that, if added to the number which occupies the 
same place in the numerical series as it itself does in the 
series of odd numbers, the result is a square number. 
Thus:—

3 + I s =2* 
5 + 2 2 = 3* 
7 + 3 2 = 4 2 
and 2n — 1 lf=nr

The addition of even numbers would yield, on the 
contrary, what the Pythagoreans called an oblong 
number. 88 The artificial character of all this shows

38 Phyt. T, 4. 203(T, 10 : x*i »t miv t# kxuf* »T>«/ ri mfrw r»Zrt ykp 
i»«r«A«ft/5«»«jUi»»» *•) vxt rtu vifirrtZ Ttf*i*ttxir»* raf't^u* r»7s tir*

Digitized by Google

312 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

_ A

that it does not beloug to tbe groundwork of the 
system.Digitized by Google

312 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

_ A

that it does not beloug to tbe groundwork of the 
system.

Tb«- nnriiUr* 121. We can now return to the consideration of what 
»i*tL»L ^ numbers made up of the elements Limit and the 
Unlimited, Odd and Even, really are. We are told that 
these elements are brought together in a Harmony, and 
produce the Even-Odd identified by Aristotle with the 
One,™ which partakes in the nature of both. The One 
or unit, then, is the Unlimited once limited; and, as the 
Unlimited is space, we see that the Pythagoreans, when 
they spoke of the One, meant a point. In the same way, 
the number two means a line, three a plane, four and all 
higher numbers, the series of regular pohjhalra. The 
theory that things are numbers, then, comes simply to 
this, that things are built up of geometrical figures, that 
they are portions of space limited in a variety of ways. 40 
This explanation is not accepted by Zeller, and we 
must therefore consider briefly the objections which he 
urges against it. His first point is that the undeniably 
spatial character which the numbers have in the Pytha- 
gorean cosmology is only one out of the many which 
they assume. The unit is not merely a point, but also 
the soul ; two is not merely a line, but also opinion ; 
time, as well as space, comes into the world from outside 
the heavens. It was only, in fact, in their cosmological

ixtifitt*- cHutiot V u*an t«6t9v ri ruufcm*** it) rZr ifitfiZv Ttftrihfi'i*vi yap 
rZr ytv/iim* Tip) ri i'» xtt) X*if); ir't fj.it i>.Xo ecu ylynrtai rl i73*f, es-i

it i». This was the reading both of Simplieius and Alexander; but the 
•words kui x»pis are very difficult. Siinplieius, amplifying a suggestion of 
Alexander's, takes it to mean %»?)» Ttfttinus tr%rf**rixri( (Phys. 15? D), 
i.e. as referring to the arithmetical as opposed to the geometrical con- 
struction. Is concealed in it T

*»Theo. Smyrn. p. 22, 5 Hilh r (R. P. 53a).*»Theo. Smyrn. p. 22, 5 Hilh r (R. P. 53a).

40 See Arist. Met. II, 2. lO^b, 1.1 (R. P. 64a >. Aristotle is certainly 
right in what he says as to points, lines, and surfaces ; but it was a mis- 
take to call them limits. See § 121 and n. 45.

Digitized by Google

THE PYTHAGOREANS.

313

aspect that the numbers were regarded as spatial. Now, 
if the Pythagorean cosmology were only one part of the 
system among others, this would be a strong argument ; 
but Zeller has himself furnished the answer to it in his 
admirable proof 41 that the whole system, so far as it 
was philosophical at all, was purely cosmological. If 
the Pythagoreans really did call the soul a unit, it 
was merely a fancy. The categories with which they 
worked did not furnish them with the means of dis- 
tinguishing the soul from a point, and it would certainly 
never have occurred to them to imagine it as non-spatial. 
It was a " harmony " of the Limit and the Unlimited like 
everything else.

Zeller's next argument is drawn from what he calls 
the purely arithmetical character of the theory ; but this 
would be very hard to establish. Arithmetic, as distinct 
from geometry, can hardly be said to have existed at all 
at this date. In the time of Plato the properties of 
11 umber were studied by means of geometrical construc- 
tions, and even so late as Euclid this was still the case." 1 '- 
There is evidence enough that the Pythagoreans followed 
the same method ; why else should we hear of " square " 
and "oblong" numbers, and why should odd numbers 
have been called gnomons ?

Lastly, Zeller urges that the Odd and the Even were 
the original elements of numbers, and that the Limit and 
the Unlimited were later additions to the theory. To

41 Zeller, p. 432 sqq. (Eni;. trans, i. p. 498 sqq.).41 Zeller, p. 432 sqq. (Eni;. trans, i. p. 498 sqq.).

* 3 See e.sp. Then it. 147 1) sqq., and comjwire the method of Euclid, 
vii.-ix. The use of the zero was unknown in antiquity, ami this inadr 
all modern arithmetical methods impossible. The value of jtosition lot 
purpose* of calculation was an Indian invention. The rudimentary 
form of it represented by the nhaens belonged to >.*y t rr,xr, not to

314

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.314

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

this we may answer that it is far more probable that the 
Limit and the Unlimited developed naturally from some 
such beginning as we find in the second part of Par- 
menides (§ 77). They are ideas which the earlier course 
of Greek thought would suggest by itself, while the Odd 
and Even are only identified with them by a tour de force. 
But, after all, Zeller substantially agrees with the view 
we have adopted ; for he admits that the numbers are 
spatial in the Pythagorean cosmology, and he also holds 
that the cosmology was really the whole system. 
The numbers ^ 122. It is clear that, if the world is to be regarded as 
Iiiatiai'ngurciJ built up of points, lines, and surfaces, these cannot be 
the abstractions which mathematicians call by these 
/names. Modem geometers regard points, lines, and 
surfaces as limits ; but, as we have seen, the Pytha- 
| goreans thought they were a " Harmony " or compound 
1 of the Limit and the Unlimited. From this it follows 
'that their points will have magnitude, their lines breadth, 
and their surfaces thickness. Or, what comes to the 
same thing, a modern geometer regards a line as having 
only one dimension ; the Pythagoreans identified it with 
the number two. 43 Surely this is how we must under- 
stand what Aristotle tell us about Eurytos in the Meta- 
physics." In order to find the number of anything he 
used to set pebbles side by side in the shape of the thing 
and then count them. This was simply a graphic way of 
showing how many dimensions a thin" had, taking a 
single pebble as one dimension. That Eurytos pushed 
this to absurd extremities, and tried to find the numbers

« Met. Z, 11. 1036/., 12 (R. P. 65a).

*» Met. N, 5. lOy-26, 10. Eurytos was a .lisnple of Philalaos (R, V. 
51a) ; yet tins shows he heM far more primitive views than those of 
the supposed fragments.

Digitized by Google

THE PYTHAGOREANS,

315Digitized by Google

THE PYTHAGOREANS,

315

of men, animals, and vegetables by this process, may or 
may not be true.

If a single pebble represents the unit, then the 
point must have magnitude. Aristotle says as plainly 
as possible that the Pythagoreans did regard the 
point in this way. 45 Zeller holds that this is a mere 
inference of Aristotle's ; and Ritter, though he insists 
upon the spatial character of the numbers, agrees with 
Zeller in this. But we must not ignore the fact that 
the point is already a compound of the Limit and the 
Unlimited, that is, that it contains something of the m 
exhnm. And it is quite easy to believe that, just as the 
Pythagoreans did not rise to the conception of abstract 
number, so they did not succeed in representing to them- 
selves abstract determinations of space. It is, indeed, 
the assumption that points have magnitude which makes 
the whole theory possible. Given points of this kind, 
lines can be constructed from them, surfaces from these 
lines, and bodies from these surfaces. It was, as we 
shall see (§ 132), against this assumption that the 
criticism of Zeno was directed.

123. It was only natural that the Pythagoreans should other appli-

cfttionn of ttic

attempt to apply their theory of numbers to all existing 
things. The distinction between body and the incor- 
poreal was still unknown, and there seemed to be no \ 
reason why everything should not be made up of points 
just like the framework of the heavens. By far the* Met. M, 6. 10806, 19-20, 30 33 ; 8. 10S3o, 14-17; Dt Colo, r, 1 
(11. I\ 64a), where it is said that the same objection* apply to the 
construction of the world out of numbers as to the construction out of 
surfaces in Plato's Timaio*. Later writers, of course, s|>cak as if the 
Pythagoreans had meant mathematical points without magnitude, and 
therefore identify *pJfiii and *ip*s. Cf. Alex, in Met., .SVW. Br. f»51a 
(K. V. 64); Xikomachos, Ih*L Ar. p. 84, 8 Hoche (R. V. 6.«i>. Ritter 
adopted practically the same view.

Digitized by Google

316 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

greater number of the statemeuts which have come down 
to us on this subject are, however, mere fancies of later 
times; only a few are guaranteed by the authority of 
Aristotle. 40 Indeed, Aristotle specially notes that the 
Pythagoreans only gave numerical definitions of a few- 
things, a statement which of itself is enough to dispense 
us altogether from considering the great bulk of the 
traditional definitions. The examples which he gives are 
Opportunity, Justice, and Marriage. All these certainly 
lend themselves easily enough to numerical definition. 
Justice was apparently defined as a square number. 
Opportunity was identified with the number Seven on 
various fanciful grounds derived from the importance of 
that number in human life. The second teeth come at 
the seventh year, puberty at the fourteenth, the beard at 
the twenty-first. 47 Besides, as Aristotle ironically adds, 
there are seven vowels, seven strings in the lyre, seven 
Pleiads, and Seven against Thebes ! 4S Marriage was the 
first harmony between the male (odd) and the female 
(even), that is to say, the number Five. To the same 
class of ideas belongs the celebrated table of opposites, 41 ' 
to which we must not attach too much importance, as is 
often done.

Aristotle thinks it necessary to refute these ideas in a 
passage of the Metaphysics™ which has hardly perhapsAristotle thinks it necessary to refute these ideas in a 
passage of the Metaphysics™ which has hardly perhaps

1,1 Met. M, 4. 107SA, 21 (R. P. GO). The statements in Theol. Arithm. 
.v ,'G (H. P. 6GM, are destitute of authority.

47 For all this see Alex, in Alr.t. p. 28, 24 Bonitz (R. P. GOr). 
Met. X, 0. 1093«, 13 (R. P. ih.).

*" This table is given in Arist. Met. A, f. (R. P. f»o).

Met. A, S. <U'0«, IS (R. P. OSe). I venture to think that Zeller, p. 
302, n. 1 (Eng. trans. p. 421, «. 1), has been prevented from seeing the 
true force of this passage by his neglect of the spatial character of the 
numbers. I would translate thus : " For, seeing that, according to them, 
opinion and opportunity are in a given part of the world, and a little 
above or below these Injustice and Separation and Mixture, in proof of

Digitized by Google

THE PYTHAGOREANS.

317

been correctly understood. Th»* Pythagoreans held, lie 
tells us, that in one part of the world Opinion prevailed, 
while a little ahove or below it were to be found Injustice 
or Separation or Mixture, each of which was, according 
to them, a number. Put in these very same regions of 
the world were to be found bodies having magnitude 
which were also numbers. How can this be, since 
Justice has no magnitude ? Plato, indeed, got out of the 
difficulty by distinguishing ideal or intelligible from 
sensible or materialised numbers ; but the Pythagoreans 
made no such distinction, and therefore, according to 
Aristotle, they are forced to identify purely ideal things 
with magnitudes.

So far Aristotle; and it must be confessed that, if 
these explanations of what are essentially objects of 
thought, and not of sense, in terms of geometrical con- 
struction, had been in any degree important to the 
system, it would be difficult to consider it seriously. 
They are surely, however, mere outworks, a mere sport of 
the analogical fancy, such as we often meet with, even inwhich they allege that each of these is a numW 'am. pit, A h j ; ami. 
s.-eing that it is alx. the case ruling with Bonit/, that tin-re is

already in that given region a number of magnitudes made up of numbers 
no m^l to iiwrt r«Zr» or tmlri) because keeping t lie MS. 2,«) the>«- 
ahVetions of number go along with each class of regions, — sowing that thev 
hohl these two things, the q motion arises whether the number which we 
are to understand >-.u \\ >>\w of the>e things /'opinion, ete,l to be is the 
same {om. «lr»(, A b ) as the number in th»- heavens V/nWi main u/> th+ 
material imitvrse) or a dilh-rent one." This inteq>tetati.»u has been 
suggested by that of Emminger ■ [\'or*. Phil. n. ;*v-, though I cannot see

how he call iemler T>.rJ» ( rmt rvtirrm/tiw uiyt/»>, "tine Moi'jr ro>< 
znxfimmi nh'jhH'l- n Ifryrifm." 1 cannot doubt that, these i*.\y'\t* aic 
the extended figures which, the Pythagoreans belli, were composed [ri»ir- 
t*t*4) of the elements of Number, the Limited and the Unlimited, or, as 
Aristotle here calls them, the xeifri of number, that is, the Odd and Even. 
Zeller's view that "celestial bodies" are meant is nearer the truth, but 
the application is too narrow. Nor is it the number <»f those bodies which 
in in question, but their spatial dimensions, etc. See now Z* p 3M, w. 1.

318

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

recent^ systems. We must not allow a few stray caprices 
of this kind to hide from us the central doctrine of the 
Pythagoreans.318

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

recent^ systems. We must not allow a few stray caprices 
of this kind to hide from us the central doctrine of the 
Pythagoreans.

Nor does the formula, that the Pythagoreans con- 
founded the symbol with the conception symbolised, seem 
historically adequate. It would be truer to say that the 
important rnnpppt.inn, nf 1 wymHl not yet exist, and 
that the Pythagoreans, since they described the soul and 
a point in the same way, did not, scientifically speaking, 
see any difference between them. Of course they did not 
believe practically that their souls were points, but that 
makes no difference. Science lags behind common sense 
in some respects as much as it goes before it in others. 
For common sense is only wrong when it takes itself for 
knowledge ; it really contains, in an indistinct way, much 
that science has not yet assimilated. 
TheDecaJ 124. It was natural that the Pythagoreans should

and Tctrnktys. p , ? . ,

attribute a mysterious importance to the decimal system 
of counting. Aristotle expressly criticises them for 
looking on it as something essential to the nature of 
number as such. There is no perfect number, he says ; 
for only that is perfect which has nothing outside it, 
and number, being infinite, has always something out- 
side it. 51

The number Four, called the Tdraktys, was also 
regarded with peculiar veneration, no doubt because it 
was the number which first constituted solid bodies. 5 -

11 Phy*. r, 6. 206//, 32. Met. A, 5 (R. P. 54«). So, in ProH. 9106, 
24, the question is raised, why all men count up to ten; and the Pytha- 
gorean view is mentioned only to be set aside for the simple explanation 
that men have ten lingers. A Thraeian tribe is mentioned who counted 
only up to four. The Pythagorean view was that, alter ten, the numbers 
were simply repeated.'* R. P. 54a. This is the original Ti t ral ly*, and 1+2 + 3 + 4 = 10. 
The account given in the text seems the most probable explanation, though

Digitized by Google

THE PYTHAGOREANS. 319

These fancies, and others like them, seem to be somehow 
natural to the human mind.

125. We have had occasion to mention before (§ 7S) The cosmo-

l0' r V

that the Pythagoreans did not place the earth in the ° ' 
centre of the world. That was occupied by the cpn^ nl 
firje, which was apparently identified with the monad, the 
first harmony of the Limit and the Unlimited. Aristotle 
tells us 53 that, when the one was formed, the parts of the 
Unlimited nearest it were gradually drawn in and limited 
by it. A number of mythological names were given to 
this central fire ; such as Hestia, " the watch - tower," 
" the castle," or " the throne " of Zeus.

Round the central fire revolve the spheres of the ten 
heavenly bodies, namely, the heaven of the fixed stars, 
the five planets, the sun, the moon, the earth, and the 
Antichthon. The " harmony of the spheres " was a 
natural inference from this. M

The earth rotates round the central fire, which we 
never see, because the side upon which we live is always 
turned away from it. When it is on the same side of 
the central fire as the sun we have day ; when it is on 
the other side, night. As the earth is always turned 
away from the central fire, we never see the Antichthon 
which is nearer the Hestia; but, for all that, the Antich- 
thon may eclipse the moon by getting between it and the 
sun. We see from this that it is derived from the " dark 
planets " of the Ionic School, and is meant to account for

Arist. De CWo, A, 1. 268a, 10, makes the Pythagoreans assign special im- 
portance to the Triad, on the ground that body lias three dimensions. 
This view must have heen held by later (PlatonLsing) Pythagoreans.53 Met. N, 3. 1091a, 17 ; cf. Stob. ELI. i. 488 (K. P. 68), though the 
source of the latter passage suspect. The i'lkixptui* t*» mt^um* and 
the distinction between r»<fl* and «/»>t« are fatal to its authenticity.

51 Aet. iii. 11 (R. P. 6i>c). For the harmony of the spheres see Arist. 
Ih Cctlo, B, 9. 2906, 12 (R. P. 68 li).

Digitized by Google

320

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

the greater frequency of lunar as compared with solar 
eclipses/* 5 We have seen that at this date the sun was 
commonly supposed to shine by reflected light as well as 
the moon (§ 91); and there can be no doubt that this 
was the Pythagorean view. The details cannot, however, 
be made out. Aristotle tells us nothing about it, whilo 
the doxographical tradition is inconsistent, and based on 
spurious documents. 
Th- : rn- 126. Outside the heavens the Unlimited stretches

litnit€<i

boundlessly, just as with the Ionians, and it is identified 
on the one hand with Air, and on the other with Dark- 
ness. In the Physics, Aristotle expressly calls it " breath," 
and he adds, that the world inhales space from outside.-"* 
This is merely an application of the old theory of Anaxi- 
menes (§ 27).

According to Eudemos, the Pythagorean Archytas 
proved the infinity of space by asking whether, if one 
went to its farthest boundary, one could stretch out one's 
hand with a stick or not/ 7 Aristotle has preserved another 
argument, which is ascribed to Xouthos. If there is no 
empty space, he said, there can be no rarefaction and 
condensation, and any movement would make the world 
overflow. 58

Tiling like- 127. We hear a good deal of a Pythagorean theory

IK'HJK-8 <>f ,

mimbei*. that things are not properly speaking numbers, but 
merely " likenesses " of numbers. This was the version 
given by Aristoxenos, so we ought probably to under-

" That this was the real origin of the Antichthon appears from Arist." That this was the real origin of the Antichthon appears from Arist.

J)c CVp/o, 1), 13. Iti'lhy 21 : iviu; fa ioKit kx'i tX i iiu trvuscrx runvra (like the 
Antichthon) UVi^wftti <pipirt*i Tif>i ri pirtr «a7» uhrXa. iiek rrjn WiTbivir.f^ 
rni yr.i. ito *aJ retf rr.f ffik»*r; txXu^u; T>.tt»vf * rets reZ r.Xiav yiynrftz,

fafit' x. r. i. Of course the otlier idea given in M>t. A, 9S6a, 3 (R. 1\ 
69/>), may have been operative too.

M R. P. 63 1$, r. w Simpl. Phys. 467, 26 D (R. P. 63(/>.

" Aiist. Phy*. A, 9 (R. P. 63/).

Digitized by Google

THE PYTHAGOREANS.

321

stand that it was the view of the last generation of the 
school, and arose under Platonic influence. It is certainly 
implied in the statement of the MeUtphysifs that Plato 
I'orrowed his theory of " participation " from the Pytha- 
gorean " imitation," ™ but the reverse is more probable. 
The fact is, no doubt, that Aristotle was led into making 
the statement referred to by Aristoxenos or some of his 
friends, who would have no hesitation in ascribing to the 
I'iirly Pythagoreans, or even to Pythagoras himself, the 
doctrines of contemporary Platonising members of the 
sect. This is not to impute to Aristotle a gross error in 
the history of philosophy ; for we must remember that, 
in the absence of any Pythagorean literature, he would 
necessarily derive much of bis knowledge from oral 
communications of this kind. In later times the decep- 
tion was carried still further, and a letter was forged in 
the name of Theano, wife of Pythagoras, to the effect 
that her husband did not say tilings were made "out of 
number," but " according to number," ,w which is practic- 
ally the doctrine of " Philolaos."M*t. A, fi. °-$7/', 10 (K. V. 51'/). What tlii.s " imitation " means wo 
*<•' from Mft. A, 5. !>S5/», '27 (R. l\ 54//). where Aristotle says that the 
1'vthatforeans, brought up as they were in mathematical studies, were led 
tn adopt their peculiar theory from observing many likenesses in things to 
munliers. These i/Mtiiftmr* he further explains to he the fanciful analogies 
discnswil in § 123 ; hut it is innedible that a serious system should have 
had such an origin.

*' Ap. Stob. Ekl. i. 302 (K. l\ 5 b/, /,<.). Simplicius (/%«. p. 453, 
13 I)) and other late writers aserit-e the view that the numbers are xmf*- 
ii.>u«T«, ail<l things, euituuara, to Hippasos and the Akousjiiati. s (K. 1'. 
47c) !

21

Digitized by Google

CHAPTER VIII.

TIIK YOUNC.KK KLEATICS.

Keiationto 128. Tin: systems we have just been studying were

predecessors

' all fundamentally pluralist, and they were so because 
Parmenides had shown that, if we take a corporeal 
monism seriously, we must ascribe to reality a number 
of predicates which are wholly inconsistent with our 
experience of a world which everywhere displays 
multiplicity, motion, and change (§ 80). The four 
inorganic elements of Empedoklcs and the innumerable 
organic elements of Anaxtigoras were both of them 
conscious attempts to solve the problem which Par- 
menides had raised (§§ 84, 103). There is no evidence, 
indeed, that the Pythagoreans were directly influenced 
by Parmenides, but there system was pluralist like the 
rest. Now it was just this prevailing pluralism that 
Zeno criticised from the Eleatic standpoint ; and his 
arguments were especially directed against Pytha- 
goreanism (§ 132), which his master Parmenides had 
already attacked in its earlier form (§ 77). Melissos, 
too, criticises Pythagoreanism (§ 143), but he tries to 
find a common ground with his adversaries bv main- 
taining the old Ionian thesis that reality is infinite 
(§ 141).

Digitized by Google

ZENO.

323

I. ZENO OF ELEA.Digitized by Google

ZENO.

323

I. ZENO OF ELEA.

129. According to Diogenes, 1 Zeno flourished in 01. Life. 
LXXIX. (464-46 1 B.c). This date has probably been 
arrived at merely by making him forty years younger 
than his master Parmenides. We have seen already 
(§ 70) that the meeting of Parmenides and Zeno with 
the young Sokrates 2 cannot well have occurred before 
449 B.C., and Plato tells us that Zeno was at that time 
" nearly forty years old." He must, then, have been 
born about 489 k.c, some twenty-five years after Par- 
menides. He was the son of Teleutagoras, and the 
statement of Apollodoros that he had been adopted by 
Parmenides is due solely to a misunderstanding of the 
language of Plato in the Sophist. 3 He was, Plato further 
tells us, 4 tall and of a graceful appearance.

Like Parmenides and most other early philosophers, 
Zeno seems to have played a considerable part in the 
politics of his native city. Strabo ascribes to him some 
share of the credit for the good government of Elea, and 
says that he was a Pythagorean. 5 This statement may 
be true, provided we understand by it that he was 
initiated in the Pythagorean " mysteries," and not that 
he was a member of the Pythagorean School discussed in 
our last chapter. He appears to have come into conflict 
with the ruler of his native city, and the story went 
that, when asked to reveal the names of his fellow-

1 D. L. ix. 29 (U. I\ ]03a).

' Parm. 127 B (H. P. 9ld). The visit of Zeno to Athens is confirmed 
l»y Hut. Per. 4, which may very likely he based on some contemporary 
source. From this passnge it would appear that Zeno (and therefore 
Parmenides ?) was a member of the Periklean circle.

3 Soph. 241 D (R. P. 103a). * Parm. loc. eit.

3 Geog. vi. 1. 1 (R. P. 91 r).

324

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.3 Soph. 241 D (R. P. 103a). * Parm. loc. eit.

3 Geog. vi. 1. 1 (R. P. 91 r).

324

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

conspirators, he bit out his tongue and spat it in the 
tyrant's face ! (? There seems to be some reference to 
these events in the passage of Aristotle's Rhetoric? which 
says men are led to acts of violence by an opportunity 
of avenging either their father or their mother, as in the 
case of Zeno.

writings. 130. Diogenes says there were many hooks of Zeno's 
extant ; 8 and Souidas mentions some titles which probably 
come from the Alexandrian catalogues." It is very 
unlikely, however, that these Udonged to works written 
by Zeno himself. The exposition of Zeno's reasoning in 
syllogistic form must always have been a very tempting 
school exercise; and even Aristotle in the Physic*™ 
quotes an argument of Zeno's from a dialogue which 
can hardly have been written by him. In fact, it is 
extremely unlikely, to say the least of it, that Zeno ever 
wrote dialogues. Aristotle himself seems to have implied 
that he did not, 11 so we must probably understand his 
allusion in another place 12 to a passage where " the 
answerer and Zeno the questioner " occurred as referring 
to a dialogue by some other writer in which Zeno was 
the chief speaker, and which was very possibly the same 
as that from which he quotes in the Phi/sics.

From the description given in Plato's Parmcnidcs 
we get an idea of what Zeno's chief and, no doubt, only

fi P. L. ix. 26, following the Alexandrian biographers.

' A, 12. 13726, 5. " D. L. ix. 26 (R. P. 103).

» Souidas, h.v. (R. P. 10.V).

10 Phy*. II, .1. 250a, 20 (R. P. 104a). This must refer to the dialogue 
from which Simplicius quotes (Phy*. /. 2'or ; R. P. 104) in his com- 
mentary on the passage. But this cannot have been by Zeno ; fur Prota- 
goras was considerably junior to him. Some work of a similar character 
to the <pvn*if of Alkidamns is no doubt meant (cf. Chap. V. n. 11).11 A p. D. L. iii. 4 8 (R. P. 10:3V). 
"Soph. El. 170//, 22 (R. P. ib.).

Digitized by Googl

ZENCX

325

work was like. It contained more than one " discourse," 
and these discourses were suhdivided into sections, each 
dealing with some one presupposition of his adversaries." 
We owe the preservation of Zeno's arguments against 
the Pythagorean view, that reality is a sum of spatial

before him was not the original work, 15 but some 
secondary authority like the Mdissos, Xenophanes, and 
Gorgias, perhaps an earlier portion of the same work now 
no longer extant. The arguments relating to motion have 
been preserved by Aristotle himself; 10 but he, as his 
custom is, has restated them in his own language.

131. Aristotle in his Sttphiat 1 ' called Zeno the in- Dialectic, 
ventor of dialectic, and this is, no doubt, substantially 
true; though, as we have seen (§ 73), the beginnings at 
least of that method of arguing were contemporary with 
the foundation of the Eleatic School. Tlato 18 gives us 
a spirited account of the style and purpose of Zeno's 
book which he puts into his own mouth- 
In reality, this writing is a sort of reinforcement for the 
argument of Parmenides against those who try to turn it into 
ridicule on the ground that, if reality is one, the argument 
becomes involved in many absurdities and contradictions. This 
writing argues against those who uphold a Many, and gives 
them back as good and letter than they gave ; its aim is to 
show that their assumption of multiplicity will be involved in 
still more absurdities than the assumption of unity, if it is 
sufficiently worked out.

ls Parm. 127 C. Plato speaks of the tirst ixihet; of the first >.cy { . 
Simplicius refers to the former us \*, X u f n^»r; 
>« /%*. 140, 30 D. (R. P. 105 H).

15 The language is hardly that of Zeno's time, and once (U. P. 105«) 
Simplicity confessedly quotes at second hand from Kudemos.

18 Phy*. Z, 9. 2396, 9 s*pp " Ap. D. L. ix. 25 (R. P. 103).15 The language is hardly that of Zeno's time, and once (U. P. 105«) 
Simplicity confessedly quotes at second hand from Kudemos.

18 Phy*. Z, 9. 2396, 9 s*pp " Ap. D. L. ix. 25 (R. P. 103).

"Parm. 128 C (R. P. W.Sd).

Digitized by Google

1

326 EARLY ft REEK PHILOSOPHY.

The method of Zeno was, in fact, to take one of 
his adversaries' fundamental postulates and to deduce 
from it two contradictory conclusions. This is what 
Aristotle meant by calling him the inventor of dialectic, 
which is just the art of arguing, not from true premises, 
but from premises admitted by the other side. The 
theory of Parinenidcs had led to conclusions which 
contradicted the evidence of the senses, and Zeno's 
object was not to bring fresh proofs of the theory itself, 
but simply to show that his opponents' view led to 
contradictions of a precisely similar nature. If we 
remember this, we shall not be in any danger of com- 
mitting the common error of crediting Zeno himself with 
the beliefs expressed in the major premises of his 
arguments. On the contrary, we shall be prepared to 
rind that the propositions from which he deduces the 
unreality of plurality and motion are always such as he 
himself could not have maintained at all. They are 
invariably the presuppositions of his opponents. 
Zeno and 132. The view that Zeno's dialectic was mainly

Pythagorean-

ism. directed against the Pythagoreans, has been maintained

with most force in recent times by Tannery 19 and 
Biiumker. 20 It will be noticed how much clearer the 
historical position of Zeno becomes if we follow Tlato 
in assigning him to a somewhat later date than is usual. 
We have first rarmenides, then the pluralists, and then 
the criticism of Zeno. It was this that called the atomic 
theory into existence by showing that, if we are to retain, 
as the pluralists did, the rarmenidean view of the in- 
destructible reality of body, without adopting the para- 
doxical conclusion that there is no multiplicity or19 Scknce hellene, p. 249 sqq.

80 Da* rroblcm da' Matcrie, p. 60 sqq.

Digitized by Google

zeno. 327

movement, we can only do so by setting a limit to 
divisibility. Such was certainly the view which Aris- 
totle took of the historical development. 21 Zeller holds, 
indeed, that it was merely the popular form of the belief 
that things are many that Zeno set himself to confute ; 22 
but this can hardly be maintained. The postulate from 
which all his contradictions are derived is the view that 
space, and therefore body, is made up of a number of 
discrete units, and it is surely quite untrue to say that 
the plain man believes anything of the kind. Nor is it 
at all probable that Anaxagoras is aimed at. 23 We know 
from Plato that Zeno's book was the work of his youth. 24 
Suppose even that it was written when lie was thirty, 
that is to say, about 459 B.C., Anaxagoras was just 
taking up his abode at Athens at that time, 25 and it 
is very unlikely that Zeno had ever heard of him. 
There is, on the other hand, a great deal to be said 
for the view that Anaxagoras had read the work of 
Zeno, and that his emphatic adhesion to the doctrine 
of infinite divisibility was due to the criticism of his 
younger contemporary. 20

133. The polemic of Zeno was directed in the first what is the

unit ^

instance against the Pythagorean view of the unit. 
Kudemos, in his Physics? 7 quoted from him the saying 
that " if any one could tell him what the one was, lie 
would be able to say what things are." The commentary

21 Phy*. A, 3. 1S7«, 1 (R. P. 105c). 
- Zeller, p. 530 (Eng. trans, p. 612).

,J This is the view adopted by Stallhaum in his edition of the Par- 
intnidts (p. 25 sqq.). Windelbund (p. 157) makes the peculiarly unhappy 
suggestion that Zeno was arguing against the atomic theory.

» Farm, loc. cit. w Chap. VI. § 99.

* Cf., for instance, Anaxagoras, fr. 14, with R. P. 105 B, and R. P. 
12fi« with 105 C.

* Ap. Simpl. Phy*. 138, 32 D (R. P. 105«)» Farm, loc. cit. w Chap. VI. § 99.

* Cf., for instance, Anaxagoras, fr. 14, with R. P. 105 B, and R. P. 
12fi« with 105 C.

* Ap. Simpl. Phy*. 138, 32 D (R. P. 105«)

Digitized by Google

328

EAKLY (I KEEK PHILOSOPHY.

of Alexander uti this, preserved by Simplicius, 28 is quite 
satisfactory. " As Eudemos relates," he says, " Zeno the 
disciple of Parmenides tried to show that it was impos- 
sible that things could be a many, seeing that there was 
no unit in things, whereas ' many ' means a number of 
units." Here we have a perfectly clear reference to the 
Pythagorean view that everything may be reduced to a 
sum of points. This is what Zenu denied, and it is his 
greatest title to remembrance that he was the first t<> 
grasp clearly the mathematical view of the point as 
position without magnitude.

This Zeno proved by what Aristotle calls--' the argu- 
ment from dichotomy. As preserved by Simplicius, this 
ran as follows : —

If things are a many, they must bo just as many as they 
art*, and neither more nor less. Now, if they are as many as 
they are, they will be finite in number.

Uut again, if things are a many, they will be infinite in 
number; for then* will always be other things between them, 
and others again between these. R. P. 10f> K

Two contradictory conclusions are here drawn from the 
same postulate. If a line is made up of points, we 
ought to be able to answer the question : " How many 
points are there in a given line ( " On the other hand, 
you can always divide a line or any part of it into two 
halves ; so that, if a line is made up of points, there will 
always be more of them than any number you assign. 
The point u 134. Zeno's argument against the reality of the point,

nothing.

as preserved by Simplicius, is as follows : —

If things are a many, they are both great and small ; so great

Phy*. 99, 13 D.

Phy*. A, 3. 187a, 1 (11. P. 105c).

Digitized by Google

ZENO

329as preserved by Simplicius, is as follows : —

If things are a many, they are both great and small ; so great

Phy*. 99, 13 D.

Phy*. A, 3. 187a, 1 (11. P. 105c).

Digitized by Google

ZENO

329

as to be of an infinite magnitude, ami s»» small as to have no 
magnitude at all.

That which has neither magnitude nor thickness nor hulk, 
will not even be. " For," he says, " if it be added to any other 
thing it will not make it any larger ; for nothing can gain in 
magnitude by the addition of what has no magnitude, and thus 
it follows at once that what was added was nothing. 30 . . . Hut 
if, when this is taken away from another thing, that thing is no 
less ; and again, if, when it is added to another thing, that does 
not increase, it is plain that what was added was nothing, ami 
what was taken away was nothing. K. P. 105 A.

But, if we assume that the unit is something, each one must 
have a certain magnitude and a certain thickness. One part of 
it must be at a certain distance from another, and the same may 
be said of what surpasses it in smallness ; 31 for it, too, will have 
magnitude, and something will surpass it in smallness. It is all 
the same to say this once and to say it always ; for no such part 
of it will be the last, nor will one thing be non-existent com- 
pared with another. So, if things arc a many, they must be. 
both small and great, so small as not to have any magnitude at 
all, and so great as to be infinite. K. P. 105 C.If we bold that the point has no magnitude, — and 
this is required by the argument from dichotomy, — then 
everything must be infinitely small. Nothing made up 
of points without magnitude can itself have any magni- 
tude. On the other hand, if we insist that the units of 
which things are built up are something and not nothing 
we must hold that everything is infinitely great. The 
line is infinitely divisible; and, according to this view, it 
will be made up of an infinite number of units, each of 
which has some magnitude.

That this argument really does refer to points is proved

30 I follow Zeller in marking a lacuna here. Zeno must have gone on 
to prove that the subtraction of a point would not make a thing less, as 
is shown by the resumption of the argument which follows.

31 This is Tannery's rendering ; it seems to me to be more satisfactory 
than those of Zeller and Diels (R. P. 105c/).

Digitized by Google

330

EARLY fJREEK THILOSOPHY.

by an instructive passage from Aristotle's Metaphysics** 
AVe read there —

If the unit is indivisible, it will, according to the proposition 
of Zeno, be nothing. That which neither makes anything 
larger by its addition to it, nor smaller by its subtraction from 
it, is not, he says, a real thing at all ; for clearly what is real 
must be a magnitude. And, if it is a magnitude, it is corporeal ; 
for that is corporeal which is in every dimension. The other 
things (;>. surfaces and lines) if added in one way will make 
things larger, added in another they will produce no effect ; but 
the point and the unit cannot make things larger in any way.

seems to be directed against the Pythagorean doctrine 
of space —

If there is space, it will be in something; for all that is is in 
something, and to be in something is to be in space. This goes 
on wl infinitum, therefore there is no space. K. P. 10G.If there is space, it will be in something; for all that is is in 
something, and to be in something is to be in space. This goes 
on wl infinitum, therefore there is no space. K. P. 10G.

That this argument has been handed down in an 
unauthentic form is obvious, though Aristotle already 
interpreted it as a refutation of the reality of space. 33 
Put Zeno cannot possibly have wished to deny the 
spatial extension of the world. What he is really 
arguiug against is the Pythagorean attempt to dis- 
tinguish space from the body that occupies it (§ 119). 
If we insist that body must be in space, then we must 
go on to ask what space itself is in. The argument is 
simply a "reinforcement" of the Parmenidean denial of 
the void. No doubt the argument that everything must 
be " in " something, or must have something beyond it, 
had already been used against the Parmenidean theory 
of a finite sphere with nothing outside it.

:i * Mtt. B, 4. 1001A, 7 pq<[. Surely <r«»r»t must be translated as I have 
done, on the analogy of the common phrase r«»r ? 3,«,#it«» and the like. 
33 Phy*. ±, 1 and" 3 {R. I\ 10Ca).

135. Simplicius has preserved an argument which

Digitized by Google

ZENO

331

136. Zeno's arguments on the subject of motion have Motion, 
been preserved by Aristotle himself. The scope of these 
is nearly always misunderstood. The system of Par- 
menides made all motion impossible, and his successors 
had been driven to abandon the monistic hypothesis in 
order to avoid this very consequence. Zeno does not 
bring any fresh proofs, as is commonly supposed, of the 
impossibility of motion ; all he does is to show that a 
pluralist theory, such as the Pythagorean, is just as 
unable to explain it as was that of Parmenides. Looked 
at in this way, Zeno's arguments are no mere quibbles, 
but important contributions to the subject. They are as 
follows : —(1.) You cannot traverse an infinite number of points in a 
finite time. You must traverse the half of any given distance 
before you traverse the whole, and the half of that again before 
you can traverse it. This goes on ad infinitum, so that (if 
fijteire is made up of points) there are an infinite number in any 
given space, and it cannot be traversed in a finite time. 34

(2.) The second is the famous puzzle of Achilles and the 
tortoise. Achilles must first reach the place from which the 
tortoise started. By that time the tortoise will have got on a 
little way. Achilles must then tra verso that, and still the 
tortoise will be ahead. He is always coming nearer, but he 
never makes up to it. 35

The " hypothesis " in the second argument is the same 
as that in the first, but the reasoning is complicated by 
the introduction of another moving object. Zeno is here 
insisting rather upon the fact that, however slowly the 
tortoise may move, it will always keep ahead, than upon 
the other side of the case, namely, that Achilles will 
never make up to it. The first argument showed that

3 » Phy*. Z, 9. 2396, 11 (R. 1\ 107 A, a). 
3i Phys. ib. 14 (I!. I\ 107 H, b).

Digitized by Google

332 , EARLY (I REEK PHILOSOPHY.

no moving object can ever traverse any distance at all, 
however fast it may move ; the second emphasises the 
fact that, however slowly it moves, it will traverse a 
practically infinite distance, since, if it moves at all, it 
must pass through an infinite number of points, if spare 
is made up of points.

(3.) The third argument against the possibility of motion 
through a *pare made up of points is that, on this hypothesis, 
an arrow in any given moment of its flight must be at rest in 
some particular point. Aristotle observes quite rightly that this 
argument depends upon the assumption that time is made up «>f 
" nows," that is, of indivisible instants. 31 *' This, no doubt, was

«

the Pythagorean view.«

the Pythagorean view.

The last of these arguments is the most difficult of all, 
and has been most misunderstood. Eudemos said it was 
" silly," since the paralogism in it was obvious. But the 
explanation given by M. Tannery w puts it quite on a 
level with the other three, and makes it the natural con- 
sequence of them. According to this view, the argument 
was directed against a possible answer to the preceding 
one, namely, that in each indivisible instant the arrow is 
passing from one point to the next. If so, answered 
Zeno, motion must always have an equal velocity ; for all 
instauts, being infinitely small, are equal.

(4.) Suppose three parallel rows of points 38 in juxtaposition —

M Phy*. Z, 2396, 30 (U. P. 107 C) ; cf. ib. 5 (R. P. 107r). In the latter 
passage Emminger proposes to keep « »mr<r«u, which Zeller omits, and to 
insert after it $i> nnurm it. The words «V«» f x«ri ri "r»» moan, " when 
it occupies a space equal to itself." See, however, Z. s p. 593, n. '3, Jin.

37 Science hdttnt, p. 257.

35 They must he points if the argument is sound, though they are

Fig. 1.

rig. 2.

A

B

A 
B 
C

Digitized by Googl

MELISSOS. 333

(hie of these (1$) is immovable, while A and C move in 
opposite directions with equal velocity so as to come into the 
position represented in fig. 2. The movement of C relatively 
to A will he double its movement relatively to II, or, in other 
words, any given point in C has passed twice jus many points 
in A as it has in B. It cannot, therefore, be the case that an 
instant of time corresi>onds to the passage from one point to 
;in< »ther.Ze.no has not here confused absolute and relative 
motion ; lie has simply shown that the Pythagorean view 
of space does not admit of any distinction between them. 
Nor does he ever, as is usually said, confuse continuous 
with discrete quantity ; on the contrary, his only concern 
is to show that the view of space as made up of discrete 
quanta leads to as many absurdities as the theory that it 
is wholly continuous.

II. MELISSOS OK SAMOS.

137. In his Life of IVriJctrx, Plutarch tells us, upon Life, 
the authority of Aristotle, that the philosopher Melissos, 
son of Ithagenes, was the Samian general who defeated 
the Athenian fleet in 440 n.<:.; 39 and it was, no doubt, for 
this reason that Apollodoros fixed his " floruit " in 01. 
LXXX1V. 40 Beyond this, wo really know nothing about 
him. He is said, of course, to have been, like Zeno, a 
disciple of Parmenides ; 41 but this is most unlikely. The 
fact that he was a native of Samoa makes it more 
probable that he was originally a member of the Ionic

called Hyx»i. This term represents very well the Pythagorean confusion 
■ •n the suhject of point*. Of. what is said of Herakleidcs and Askle- 
piades l,y Ps.-Oalen, Hint. Phi!. IS (Dox. 010, 22). See, however, Z. 5 
p. 602, m. 1.

™ Plut. Per. 2* (K. P. 109A), alter Aristotle's W*. *»X,ni*. 
*> Ap. D. I, ix. 21 (R. P. ion). <i l). J,, fa. dt.

Digitized by Google

I

334 EARLY liRKEK PHILOSOPHY.

rather than of the Eleatic School, and we shall see that 
certain features of his doctrine fully bear out this view. 
On the other hand, he was certainly convinced by the 
Eleatic dialectic, and renounced the Ionic doctrine in so 
far as it was inconsistent with this. We note here the 
effect of the increased facility of intercourse between 
East and West, which was secured by the supremacy 
of Athens.

The first five 138. Before we go on to examine the fragments, we

fragments.The first five 138. Before we go on to examine the fragments, we

fragments.

must discuss the genuineness of some of them. 42 The 
first five in all the collections are taken from a single 
passage of Simplicius. 43 This passage is introduced by 
the words " He opens his work thus," and we shall see 
that there is a reason for this. But there are a good 
many curious tilings about the supposed quotation. First 
of all, it is not written in the Ionian dialect, though the 
editors have been careful to conceal the fact by intro- 
ducing Ionic forms throughout. 44 Now, in all Siin- 
plicius' other quotations these Ionic forms are very

42 I have thought it best to leave this paragraph exactly as I wrote it 
iu September 1890, before hearing of A. Pabst's dissertation, Dc Mr lis.* i 
Samii Fraymenti*. The complete agreement in the results of two hide- 
pendent investigations is a strong continuation of their truth. On the 
other hand, I willingly admit that the proof given by Pabst is slightly 
more cogent than I was able to make it. These views have now l>eeii 
endorsed by Diets {A rch, iv. p. 116) and Zeller (Z. 5 60t>, n. 1), so they may 
be taken as established. It is perhaps worth noting that Schopenhauer, 
with his usual insight, had singled out the live fragmcuts we are about to 
discuss for special condemnation on purely internal grounds.

43 Phyn. 103, 13 D sqq. (Ii. P. 110-113). Pabst notes (p. 17) that 
when Simplicius quotes fr. 11-14 (p. Ill, 11 D) he makes a great point 
of quoting etlrk ri ipx*7* yfappar*, which would be pointless if he had 
done so before.

** In R. P. the Ionising process is completely carried out. The only 
Ionic form to be found in Diels' Sim/Jicttu is, however, ^ir«s^i M r« 
(p. 104, 1), and this is in a verbal quotation from fr. 12, elsewhere pre- 
served. It is characteristic of Theophrastos to retain an isolated dialectic 
form here ami there {Dox. p. 219).

Digitized by Google

MELISSOS. 335Digitized by Google

MELISSOS. 335

fairly preserved. In the second place, this passage goes 
over ground which is covered by the other fragments ; the 
form alone is different, the substance is the same. In 
particular, fr. 5 is word for word the same as fr. 14, 
except that it has no Ionic forms. 45 Brandis explana- 
tion of this curious fact, namely, that Melissos first 
sketched his arguments in outline and then went on to 
discuss them in detail, seems to be generally accepted ; 
but it cannot really be maintained in the face of the 
actual remains. 46

We notice, in the next place, that the phraseology of 
fr. 1-5 is not at all that of Melissos in his other frag- 
ments. More modern terms are substituted throughout. 47 
Lastly, these fragments are in regular syllogistic form, 
which would be strange if they had been written in the fifth 
century B.C. ; the Aristotelian expression to «7rXw9 oV 8

**'' For fr. f» see R. 1'. 11:5. The Ionic forms should all be removed, and 
the concluding words (tlx »V< . . . /*n •») deleted. Fr. 11 (not in It. F.) is 
given as follows in Simpl. Phyn. 112, 6 sqq. D: Oilt «ivi«v \er» tiV\*' ri 
yip Kiue* tlVt* Urn' tl* *» tl* un ri yt fir}t*. tlVt mturm' ivty^mp^an yap 
ti* i^u tl%*un, iXXat <rX\»* irrl*. tl pit yip *t*ti* n*, ixt%*fu £* tl; ri 
«!»«»• *t*tv it ph ii*r»f, tl* tx u **? l**X."p**u. <Tf*»»* *«< etfttii* ti* £* 
t'tt' rt yap ttptut* ti* «mrr»» <rXi»/v u*a.i i/xtlon rZ Tv**Z t a. XX iftr, rs afxtit yt 
«ifi»rif«> yUtrttt rtv xt/**tv. *elr,t h rairr,* x?* -rnr\rxrt*i rtv tX\u **i rtu 
un xXtv' tl fit* tl* X"? 1 ' T ' * *'*^'^' T *'» °i xXt**' 1/ <Si fi*\rt X**P 1 ' A*" TI 
iiV3i^iT«/, xXt**. tt*eey*n rol*v* xXttt* u*eci, tl *!»«» pit) tm*. tl rtt*t* xXtt** 
trrl*, tl *>ftir*i. It is worth while to compare the two carefully. It will 
then seem hardly conceivable that the two passages should occur in one 
work.49 As M. Tannery observes : " Malheureusement les citations ulti'rieurc* 
ne donnent guere plus que le resume lui-meme " (.Sc. hell. p. 266). Pahst 
shows the truth of this in detail.

47 For instance, xXnpit for xx'ttt* (xx'ttt), «3J>«r»» for tl* *\vrrt*.

49 Or, as the editors quaintly write, ri ixxZ; lit (fr. 1). This implies 
that Melissos, of all ]>eople in the world, anticipated Aristotle's discovery 
that ri 1* *tXX*x"f xiytrxi. The true reference of the words is to 
Simpl. Phy*. 108, 27 D. They are so far from being the words of 
Melissos that they do not even belong to the paraphrase, but are an 
essential part of Simplicity' polemic against Alexander.

Digitized by Google

336*

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

occurs in them, and Melissos is made to speak of <f>vai/col 
as if he were not one himself. 40

Now this is a matter of the greatest importance ; for 
most of the difficulties which have been raised as to 
the philosophy of Melissos turn upon these first five 
fragments. If we can show that these are nothing more, 
and do not even pretend to be anything more, than a 
paraphrase of fr. 6-1 4, we may practically dismiss all the 
controversies about the last of the Eleatics, and confine 
ourselves to an exposition of the perfectly simple philo- 
sophy of the other fragments, which is just as naive as all 
other pre-Sokratic philosophy, and exhibits no trace of the 
somewhat turgid idealism which Simplicius succeeded in 
reading into it.

In the riii/itics 50 Aristotle had criticised the theories of 
Melissos, and, in order to do so in his own way, he first 
reduced them into syllogistic form. He analyses his 
arguments as follows : —

I. If what is came into being, it must have arisen 
either from nothing or from something. 
Neither is possible. 
.'. Tt never came into being.

*' The \Vmi< Is are rvy^vpunti yap *«i ravTa vTo t<w» Qvffixui (fr. 1 ; K. P.*' The \Vmi< Is are rvy^vpunti yap *«i ravTa vTo t<w» Qvffixui (fr. 1 ; K. P.

110). We can understand this in the mouth of a Peripatetic who 
was anxious to show that Melissos arrived at his theory by starting 
from the postulates of the (cf. Simpl. Pht/s. 103, 13 D ; R. P.

110). But the theory that Melissos was eipvnxtt is purely Aris- 
totelian {Phy*. A, 2. 184ft, 25). He himself, who entitled his work 
ll> ft ipbVi*,-, would not have appreciated the distinction. To prove 
that Melissos might have talked iti this way, Brandis quoted Diogenes 
of Apollonia, up. Simpl. Phy*. 151, 24 D; hut see R. P. 160a, and 
Chap. IX. «. 36.

v " Phy.*. A, 3. 186a, 10 sq.j. (It. P. 111a). I can make nothing of 
186a, 13-16 ; niftier (Arch. iv. 27) deletes the words as a gloss.

Digitized by Google

MELIS80S

337

II. Everything which has come into being has a

beginning; and end. 
. '. What has not come into being has no beginning 
or end (sic).

III. What has not come into being has no beginning

or end (II.). 
What is has not come into being (I.). 
.'. What is has no beginning or end.

IV. What has neither beginning or end is infinite. 
What is has neither beginning or end (III.).

.*. What is, is infinite.

Aristotle points out quite rightly that the second of 
these arguments is a false conversion ; and, as a matter 
of fact, we do find some such conversion as this implied 
in fr. 7 and 8, so we have enough to account for 
Aristotle's judgment, without supposing fr. 1-5 to be 
genuine.In commenting upon thi3 judgment, Simplicius does 
what any commentator would naturally do. He gives a 
paraphrase of the opening fragments of Melissos reduced 
to correct Peripatetic form, in order that the criticisms of 
Aristotle might be more readily understood. Did Sim- 
plicius compose this paraphrase himself ? I think this 
is not in accordance with what we know of his procedure 
elsewhere. And it is a striking fact that, just a little 
before, the faulty conversion of Melissos is quoted along 
with the syllogistic version of the argument of Farmenides, 
which undoubtedly comes from the Opinions of Theo- 
phrastos. 51 It seems, then, most probable that here, as

51 Cf. Thcophr. Phys. Op. fr. 7 (Dox. p. 483). My view is perhaps 
confirmed l>y the fact that Philoponos too {Phys. p. 51, 20, Vitelli)

22

338 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

elsewhere, Simplieius had recourse to the extracts of 
Theophrastos preserved by Alexander, and that fr. 1-5 
should be removed from editions of Melissos and inserted 
in the Doxographi Grrrci. 
The genuine 139. We may now go on with a good conscience to 
the genuine fragments. For convenience of reference I 
preserve the numbering of Brandis —

(1.) If nothing is, what tan be said of it a* of something 
real? R. P. 110."

(2.) What was was ever, and ever shall be. For, if it had 
come into being, there needs must have been nothing before it 
came into being. Now, if nothing were to exist, in no wise 
could anything have arisen out of nothing. R, P. 110a.(7.) Since, then, it has not come into being, and since it is, 
it was ever and ever shall l>e, and has no beginning or end, but 
is infinite. 1,3 For, if it had come into being, it would have had 
a beginning (for it would have begun to come, into being at 
some time or other) and an end (for it would have ceased to 
come into being at some time or other) ; but, if it neither began 
nor ended, it ever was and ever shall be, and has no beginning 
or end ; for it is not possible for anything to be ever without 
being all. 11. P. llla,#7*.

(8.) Further, just as it ever is, so it must ever be infinite in 
magnitude (for if it had bounds, it would be bounded by 
empty space). 54 K. P. 111a, in it.

(9.) But nothing which has a beginning or end is either 
eternal or infinite.

(10.) For if it is (infinite), it must be one; for if it were

speaks of ri *rxZ{ in giving the argument of Melius. Pabst assumes 
that Simplieius himself wrote the paraphrase.

M Though these words occur at the beginning of the paraphrase we 
have been discussing, I believe them to be genuine. They seem to be 
attested by M. X. G. init.

:>3 That is, temporally infinite ; see below, § 140. I hike the last words 
of the fragment to mean "a thing cannot be temporally infinite (eternal) 
without being all " (and therefore without beginuing, according to the 
usual Eleatie argument).

54 I have inserted the last part of this fragment from Arist. Gen. Corr. 
A, 8. 325a, 13.

Digitized by Google

MELISSOS. 339

two, it could not bo infinite ; for then it would be bounded by 
another" 11. P. 112a.

(10a.) (And, since it is one, it is alike throughout; for if it 
were unlike, it would be many and not one.) 56two, it could not bo infinite ; for then it would be bounded by 
another" 11. P. 112a.

(10a.) (And, since it is one, it is alike throughout; for if it 
were unlike, it would be many and not one.) 56

(11.) So then it is eternal and infinite and one and all alike. 
And it cannot perish nor become greater, nor does it suffer pain 
or grief. For, if any of these things happened to it, it would 
no longer be one. For if it is altered, then the real must needs 
not be all alike, but what was before must pass away, and what 
was not must come into being. Now, if the all had changed 
by so much as a single hair, in thirty thousand years, it would 
all perish in the whole of time. R. P. 113a.

(12.) Further, it is not possible either that its order should be 
changed ; for the order which it had before does not perish, 
nor does that which was not come into being. But, since 
nothing is cither added to it or passes away or is altered, how 
can any real thing have had its order changed ? fror if anything 
became different, that would amount to a change in its order. 
K. P. ib. ' ' .

(13.) Nor does it suffer pain ; for the All cannot be in pain. 
For a thing in pain could not be ever, nor could it have the 
same power as what is whole. It is only from the addition 
or subtraction of something that it could feel pain, and then it 
would no longer be like itself. Nor could what is whole 
possibly begin to feel pain ; for then what was whole and what 
was real would pass away, and what was not would come into 
being. And the same argument applies to grief as to pain. 
K. P. ib.

(14.) Nor is anything empty. For what is empty is nothing. 
. . . What is nothing, then, cannot be.

Nor does it move ; for it has nowhere to betake itself to, but 
is full. For if there were empty space, it would betake itselfNor does it move ; for it has nowhere to betake itself to, but 
is full. For if there were empty space, it would betake itself

M This fragment is quoted by Simpl. Dc Ccelo {Schol. Br. p. 5096, 1). 
See Pabst, p. 27. Tlic argument requires the insertion of the word 
«n V «, which is confirmed by the paraphrase, fr. 3 (R. P. 112), by Simpl. 
/'fly,. 110, 5 D (R. P. 112a), and by M. X. G. 974a, 11.

* The actual words of this fragment are nowhere quoted ; but it is 
attested by the summary at the beginning of fr. 11. It is represented 
in the paraphrase, fr. 4 (R. P. 113), nud in M. X. G. 974a, 13 (R. P. 
112a).

Digitized by Google

340

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

to empty space. But, since there is no empty space, it has no 
place to betake itself to.

And it cannot be dense and rare ; for it is not possible for 
what is rarefied to bo as full as what is dense, but what is rare 
is ipso fado emptier than what is dense.

This is the way in which we must distinguish between what 
is full and what is not full. If a thing has room for anything 
else, and takes it in, it is not full ; but if it has no room for 
anything and does not take it in, it is full.

Now, it must needs be full if there is no empty space, and if 
it is full, it does not move (n. 45).

(If).) If what is real is divided, it moves ; but if it moves, it 
cannot be all at once. R. P. 112a.

(16.) Now, if it were to exist, 57 it must needs be one ; but 
if it is one, it cannot have body ; for, if it had body it would 
have parts, and would no longer be one. R. P. 114.(16.) Now, if it were to exist, 57 it must needs be one ; but 
if it is one, it cannot have body ; for, if it had body it would 
have parts, and would no longer be one. R. P. 114.

(17.) This argument, then, is the greatest proof that it is one 
alone ; but the following are proofs of it also. If it were a 
many, these would have to be of the same kind as I say that 
the one is. For if there is earth and water, and air and iron, 
and gold and fire, and if one thing is living and another dead, 
and if things are black and white and all that men say they 
really are, — if that is so, and if we see and hear aright, each 
one of these must be such as we at first concluded that reality 
was, and they cannot be changed or altered. "Whereas we say 
that we see and hear and understand aright, and yet we believe 
that what is warm becomes cold, and what is cold warm ; that 
what is hard turns soft, and what is soft hard ; that what is 
living dies, and that things are born from what lives not ; and 
that all those things are changed. "We think that iron, which 
is hard, is rubbed away with the finger, passing away in rust; 5 * 
and so with gold and stone and everything which we fancy to 
be strong, so that it turns out that we neither see nor know 
realities. Earth, too, and stone are formed out of water. Now 
these things do not agree with one another. We said that

67 The MSS. of Simpl. Phys. 110, 1 D, have un not i'r/v, which is a 
more conjecture of Brand U ; see below, § 143. Further, K F read u 
el* it*, which is, no doubt, correct.

M Reading v* l»Z pi** with Z.* 613, n. 1.

Digitized by Google

MELISSOS. 341M Reading v* l»Z pi** with Z.* 613, n. 1.

Digitized by Google

MELISSOS. 341

there were many things that were eternal and had forms and 
.strength of their own, and yet we fancy that they all sutler 
alteration, and that they change with each perception. It is clear, 
then, that we did not see aright after all, nor are we right in be- 
lieving that all these things are many. They would not change 
if they were real, but each thing would be just what we believed 
it to be ; for nothing is stronger than true reality. But if it has 
• hanged, what was has passed away, and what was not is come 
into being. So then, if there were many things, they would 
have to be just of the same nature as the one. K. P. 115.

140. It has been pointed out that, in all probability, Theory of 
Melissos was not originally a member of the Eleatic School; 
but he certainly adopted all the views of Pannenides as to 
the true nature of reality with one remarkable exception. 
He appears to have opened his treatise with a reassertion 
of the Parmenidean "Nothing is not" (fr. 1), and the 
arguments by which he supported this view are those 
with which we are already familiar (fr. G). Reality, as 
with Parmenides, is eternal, an attribute which Melissos 
expressed in a way of his own (fr. V). He does not say 
with the founder of Eleaticism (v. 96) that time is a 
mere figment ; his relations with the Ionic School perhaps 
made this seem unnatural to him. As we shall see, he 
believed reality to be spatially infinite, and it was there- 
fore natural for him to regard it as temporally infinite 
also. This way of putting the matter has led, however, 
to many serious misunderstandings ; and Melissos has been 
charged, on the strength of some wrongly interpreted 
sayings of Aristotle, with confusing spatial and temporal 
infinity. The argument of fr. 7 has actually been sup- 
posed to be, that since reality has no beginning in time 
it must be infinite in space. 59 But surely the human30 So Zellcr, p. 555 (Eng. trans, p. 631), and practically all other writers 
on the subject. This view goes back to Theiuistios, p. 115 Spcngel,

Digitized by Google

342

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

mind is not capable of such an astounding confusion of 
thought, and least of all so in an age when men operated, 
not with abstract concepts, but with vivid perceptions. 
We have seen above 60 what the logical fallacy detected 
by Aristotle in the reasoning of Melissos really was, ami 
we must certainly understand the argument of fr. 7 as 
referring entirely to time. Temporal infinity has taken 
the place of eternity. 61 
Reality njiati- 141. Melissos differed from Parmenides in holding 
that reality was spatially as well as temporally infinite. 
His reason for this was not the imaginary argument just 
discussed, but the excellent one that, if it is limited, it must 
be limited by something else (fr. 8). Perhaps this was 
borne in upon him by such arguments as that attributed

Simplicius in Phys. A, 3, and perhaps still earlier to M. X. G. (974a, 
9-11). See, however. Apelt in N. Jahrb. 1886, p. 729. The true 
account of the matter has, I think, l>een given by Offncr, Zur BcutihcUung 
de.s Mdix*os % Arch. iv. p. 12 sqq. Zeller (p. 554, n. 3, Eng. trans, p. 630, 
v. 1) supposed that Aristotle was misled by a false construction of fr. 2 ; 
but this theory must now disappear with fr. 2 itself.60 That the fallacy pointed out by Aristotle was really the illegitimate 
conversion noted on p. 337, is obvious from Soph. El. 5. 167ft, 13 sqq., 
where it is quoted and compared to the argument, " If a man in a fever 
is hot, then a man who is hot must have a fever." The Greek commenta- 
tors say nothing of the alleged confusion of time and sp:iee either here <>r 
in their commentary on the passage from the Phytic* {n. 50). Ma. A, 
5. 986ft, 25 (R. P. 84), is quite general, but rather implies formal inaccuracy 
of reasoning than confusion of concepts ; for the iy^ixtf is the opposite of 
the TiT«/5if,«i»«f who knows the rules of correct reasoning. I cannot see 
the difficulty which Otl'ner himself admits in Soph. El. 28. 1S1«, 27. 
" For, if what has come into being has a beginning, he lays down that 
what has not come into being has no beginning, so that, according t<» 
him, if the world had no origin it is (temporally) infinite. That is not 
so; for this is a simple conversion of a universal affirmative" (BoniU. 
lnd. s.v. a*rtfr f i$u*, 2). If I am right, this strongly confirms OITner's 
view.

61 The possibility of the word &xut*t being used at this date in a 
temporal seusc cannot be doubted. Anaxagoras already found it neces- 
sary to add restrictive accusatives to define the sense in which ho wished 
it to be understood. So fr. 1, 4, 6.

Digitized by Google

MELISSOS.

343Digitized by Google

MELISSOS.

343

to Archytas (§ 12G); no doubt, too, he was influenced by 
his Ionic predecessors, who had all regarded the primary 
substance as boundless. Parmenides had thought it 
possible to regard reality as a finite sphere, but it would 
have been difficult for him to work out this view in 
detail. He would have had to sav there was nothing out- 
side the sphere ; but no one knew better than he did that 
there is no such thing as nothing. And this is no mere 
verbal quibble ; for nothing was identified with empty 
space. Melissos saw that you cannot imagine a finite 
sphere without imagining it as surrounded by an infinite 
empty space ; 02 and as, in common with the rest of the 
school, he denied the void altogether (fr. 14), he was 
forced to say reality was spatially infinite (fr. 8).

From the infinity of reality, it follows that it must be 
one ; for, if it were not one, it would be bounded by 
something else (fr. 10). And, being one, it must be 
homogeneous throughout (fr. 10«), for that is what we 
mean by one. Ideality, then, is a single, homogeneous, 
corporeal plenum, stretching out to infinity in space, and 
going backwards and forwards to infinity in time.

142. Eleaticism was always critical, and we are not opposition to 
without indications of the attitude taken up by Melissos 
towards contemporary systems. The flaw which he 
found in the Ionian theories was that they all assumed 
some want of homogeneity in the One, which is a real 
inconsistency. Further, they all allowed the possibility 
of change ; but, if all things are one, change must be a 
form of coming into being and passing away. If you 
admit that a thing can change, you cannot maintain that 
it is eternal (fr. 11). Nor can the arrangement of the 
parts of reality alter (fr. 12), as Anaximander, for

w Note the disagreement with Zcno (§ 135).

Digitized by Google

344

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.w Note the disagreement with Zcno (§ 135).

Digitized by Google

344

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

instance, had held ; any such change necessarily involves 
a coming into being and passing away.

The next point made by Melissos (fr. 13) is some- 
what peculiar. Keality, he says, cannot feel sorrow or 
pain ; for that is always due to the addition or sub- 
traction of something, which is impossible. It is not 
easy to be sure what this refers to. Perhaps it is to the 
theory of Herakleitos with its Want and Satiety, perhaps 
to something of which no record has been preserved.

Motion in general m and rarefaction and condensation 
in particular are impossible ; for both imply the existence 
of empty space (fr. 14). Divisibility, too, is excluded 
for the same reason (fr. 15). These are the same argu- 
ments which Parraenides had employed already (§ 74). 
Opponition to 143. In nearly all accounts of the system of Melissos,

Pythagoreans.

with the exception of Ban inker's, 04 we find it stated 
that he denied the corporeality of what is real, — an 
opinion which is supported by a reference to fr. lu, 
which is certainly quoted by Simplicius to prove this 
very point. If, however, our general view as to the 
character of early Greek Philosophy is correct, this 
statement must seem quite incredible. And it will 
seem even more surprising when we find that iu the 
Metaphysics** Aristotle says that, while the unity of 
Parmenides seemed to be ideal, that of Melissos was 
material. Nor is the explanation of Zeller, 60 namely,63 P»«iumker (N. Jahrb.f. Phil. 1886, p. Ml sq.) held that Melissos, like 
Pluto and Descartes, admitted the doctrine of ivTt*iplr<ra*i{ or motion in 
piano (so Das Problem der Mattrie, p. 59). lie relies, of course, upon 
the concluding words of "fr. 5" (R. P. 113). But these words are not 
only not a fragment of Melissos, the context shows conclusively that they 
are not even a paraphrase of him, hut merely part of Simplicius' own 
argument against Alexander. See Pabst, p. 10 sqq.

" Das Probl. d. Mat. p. 57 sqq. * Met. A, 5. 9S66, 13 (R. P. S4>.

w Zeller, p. 556 (Eng. trans, p. 631).

Digitized by Google

MELISSOS.

345

that " matter " with Aristotle is different from " body," 
satisfactory ; for it does not make it clear how, at this 
date, any one could suppose anything but body to be 
spatially infinite.

Now. it has already been pointed out, in the note to 
fr. 16, that a considerable liberty has been taken with 
the text by Brandis and all subsequent commentators. 
As it stands in the MSS. of Simplicius, the fragment puts 
a purely hypothetical case, while Brandis turns it into an 
exposition of the writer's own views. As it stands, it 
would most naturally be understood as a disproof of the 
existence of something on the ground that, if it existed, 
it would have to be both corporeal and one. This argu- 
ment cannot, then, refer to the Eleatic One, in which 
Melissos himself believed. So far Biiumker has seen; 07 
but it has not yet, I think, been pointed out that the 
view which this argument would refute is simply the 
Pythagorean theory of the spatial unit ; and the argu- 
ment is, in fact, almost verbally the same as one of 
Zeno's. 68 We conclude, then, Melissos did not, any more 
than any other pre-Platonic philosopher, regard reality as 
incorporeal, aud that, like Zeno, he argued against the 
Pythagorean theory of corporeal points.The only possible objection to this view is that Sim- 
plicius, who twice quotes the fragment, 09 certainly took it 
in the sense usually given to it. But it was very natural 
for him to make this mistake. "The One" was an 
expression that had two senses in the middle of the fifth 
century B.C. ; it meant either the whole of reality or the

* Dan PrM. d. Mat. p. :>9, «. 6. So, too, Z.» p. 611, w. 2.

* See above, § 134 (R. 1\ 10.V), especially the words: u h Un*, 
"tKxrrt* piyifts n ?,^i<» xeit -rix^'

* Phy*. pp. b7, 6 aud 110, 1 D.

Digitized by Google

346

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

point as a spatial unit. To maintain it in the first sense, 
the Eleatics were obliged to disprove it in the second ; 
and so it sometimes seemed that they were speaking of 
their own "One" when they really meant the other. 
We know from Simplicius himself 70 that this very mis- 
take had actually been made by some of his predecessors 
with regard to Zeno, and he has simply made the same 
error himself in the present case, 
opposition to 144. The most remarkable fragment of Melissos is, 
Anaxagonu.. p er ] ia p g> t j ie i ast (f r . 17). It seems to be directed against

Anaxagoras ; at least the language used seems more 
applicable to him than to any one else. Anaxagoras 
had admitted (§ 113, Jin.) that, so far as our perceptions 
go, they do not entirely agree with his theory, though he 
holds that this is due solely to their weakness. Melissos, 
taking advantage of this admission, urges that, if we give 
up the senses as the ultimate test of reality, we are not 
entitled to reject the Eleatic theory. With wonderful 
penetration he points out that if we are to say, with 
Anaxagoras, that things are a many, we are bound also 
to say that each one of them is such as the Eleatics 
declared the One to be. In other words, the only con- 
sistent pluralism is the atomic theory.Melissos has long been unduly depreciated owing to 
the sneers of Aristotle ; but these, we have seen, are 
based upon nothing more than a somewhat pedantic 
objection to the false conversion in the early part of the 
argument. Melissos knew nothing about the rules of 
conversion, and if he had, he could easily have made his 
reasoning formally correct without modifying his system. 
His greatness consisted in this, that not only was he the 
real " systematiser " of Eleaticism, as Biiumker justly calls

70 PhyK. p. 138, 29 D sq«i.

Digitized by Google

MELISSOS.

347

him, 71 but he was also able to see, before the pluralists 
saw it themselves, the only way in which the theory that 
things are a many could be consistently worked out. 
We shall see in the next chapter how this was done ; at 
present we have only to call attention to the penetration 
displayed by Melissos in his estimate alike of the past 
history of philosophy and of its future development, and 
to protest against the unjust estimate of him which has 
so long prevailed. 7 * 2

71 Da* ProUvm d?r Matt t ic, p. 57.

Ti Baumker, op. at. p. 58, m. 3: "That Melissos was a weakling is a 
fable conrexHf that people repeat after Aristotle, who was unable to 
appreciate the Eleat'cs in general, and in particular misunderstood Melistoa 
not inconsiderably."

Digitized by Google

CHAPTEli IX.

THE REVIVAL OF PHILOSOPHY IN IONIA.Digitized by Google

CHAPTEli IX.

THE REVIVAL OF PHILOSOPHY IN IONIA.

The revival 14"). The victories of Kimon as general of the mari- 
acter l . ta C,, ' l! time confederacy headed by Athens had delivered the 
Ionians from the fear of Persia, and one result of this 
was a great renewal of scientific activity in the cities of 
Asia Minor. The revival took several forms. It was 
not unnatural that philosophy should seek at first to run 
in its old channels, and we hear once more of men who 
maintained the early Milesian theories. Xo doubt the 
school had gone on existing in an obscure way ever since 
the time of Anaximenes (§ 98), though perhaps its seat 
had been shifted to the neighbouring Samos. Hippon 
was probably a native of that island, and so was 
Melissos, who may well have been a member of the 
society in his youth (§ 137). We note also that the 
views of Anaxagoras had been widely disseminated at 
this time, probably by the school at Lampsakos (§ 100), 
and we shall have to study a remarkable attempt to fuse 
them with the system of Anaximenes. Imt it was 
Miletos that produced Leukippos, the man who virtually 
brought the first period in the history of Greek philo- 
sophy to a close by putting forward the most complete 
explanation of the world that could be given on the 
hypothesis then prevalent. It was with Miletos we 
began, and with Miletos we shall end ; for the subse-

348

Digitized by Google

HIPPON

349

quent activity of the school at Abdera, so far as it was 
original, belongs to the next period in the development 
of science.

I. Hippon of Sanws.348

Digitized by Google

HIPPON

349

quent activity of the school at Abdera, so far as it was 
original, belongs to the next period in the development 
of science.

I. Hippon of Sanws.

140. We know very little indeed of Hippon, except 
that he was a contemporary of Perikles. From the 
scholiast on Aristophanes 1 we learn that Kratinos 
satirised him in his Pnnoptai, and Aristotle mentions 
him in the enumeration of early philosophers given in 
the First Book of the Mdajihyam? though only to say 
that the inferiority of his intellect deprives him of all 
claim to be reckoned among them.

With regard to his views, the most precise statement Moisture, 
is that of Alexander, who doubtless follows Theophrastos/* 
It is to the effect that he held the primary substance to 
be Moisture, without deciding whether it was Water or 
Air.* We have the authority of Aristotle 5 and Theo- 
phrastos, represented by Hippolytos, 0 for saying that this 
theory was supported by physiological arguments of the 
kind common at the time.

Till quite recently no fragment of Hippon was known 
to exist, but a single one has just been recovered from 
the Geneva Scholia on Homer. 7 It is directed against

1 Schol. on Cloud*, 96. See Heitfk, fMiqttitt Com. Alt. pp. 164-185.

2 Met. A, 3. 984a, 3(K. P. 172«).

3 That Theophrastos did say something about Hippon is proved by the 
fart that HippolytoH has preserved an extmet relating to him ; cf. n. 6.

•Alex, in Met. 21. 17, lion. (K. P. 172).

* I)e An. A, 2. 405/i, 2 (R. P. 173 A).

* Ref. i. 16 (R. P. 173 B).

7 Schol. Oen, i. 198, 10. Cf. Duds in Arch. iv. 6f.3. The extract, like 
the lines from Xenophancs, fr. 11, comes from the Homeric commentary 
by Krates of Mallos (c. 167 B.C.), the chief opponent of Aristarchos.

Digitized by Google

350 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

the old assumption that the "waters under the earth " 
are an independent source of moisture, 8 and runs thus :Digitized by Google

350 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

the old assumption that the "waters under the earth " 
are an independent source of moisture, 8 and runs thus :

The waters we drink are all from the sea ; for if wells were 
deeper than the sea, then it would not, doubtless, be from the 
sea that we drink, but from some other source. But as it is, 
the sea is deeper than the waters, so all the waters that are 
above the sea come from it.

We observe here the universal assumption that water 
tends to rise from the earth, not to sink into it.

Along with Hippon, Idaios of Himera 9 may just be 
mentioned. We know nothing of him except that lie 
held air to be the primary substance.

II. Leukippos of M ile to*.

14 7. The very existence of Leukippos has been called 
in question by E. Kohde on the ground of a character- 
istic statement by Epicurus, that there never was such a 
philosopher at all. 10 This question is intimately bound 
up with that as to the date of Demokritos. If we hold 
with Diels that Demokritos cannot have been born before 
400 B.C., 11 we can hardly admit that he was the real 
originator of the atomic theory ; for there are undeniable 
traces of atomism at a time when, on this view, he would 
have been too young to work out a theory of reality.

8 Chap. I. § 9. 9 Sext. Math. ix. 360.

10 For the literature of this controversy see It. P. 1436,/n. The remark 
of Epicurus is quoted in D. L. x. 13 (It. P. 1436). It apparently occurred 
in the course of a tirade, intended to show that Epicurus was not indebted 
to any predecessor. On other occasions, however, he apj>ears to have 
argued against Leukippos, and distinguished him from Demokritos. See 
Usener, Epicurea, Index JXominnm, h.v.

11 Rh. Mus. xxxi. 29. Demokritos said himself that he wrote the Mtxfii 
^AXf'ju*; 730 years after the fall of Troy. If ho used the same era as 
Ephoros, 1150 n,c, this would give 420 B.C. as the date of that work.

Digitized by Google

LEUKIPPOS.

351Digitized by Google

LEUKIPPOS.

351

It is certain, too, as we sball see, that Aristotle attri- 
buted the discovery of the atomic theory to Leukippos, 
and that Theophrastos u ascribed to him a work that 
usually went by the name of Demokritos. 13

Kohde makes much of the way in which Leukippos 
is slurred over by every one except Aristotle and Theo- 
phrastos. If, he argues, Demokritos was to Leukippos 
merely what Theophrastos was to Aristotle, or Eeinhold 
to Kant, how is it that we find every one ascribing to 
him the chief share in the glory of inventing the atomic 
theory ? To this question liohde has himself supplied 
the answer in a footnote to one of his articles. 14 lie 
points out there, quite correctly, that the common view 
implies the existence of a regular atomistic school at 
Abdera. So it undoubtedly does ; the treatises which 
were collected in the " works " of Demokritos must have 
bee due to the co-operation of a whole society, so that it 
became impossible to say who in particular was the real 
originator of any theory set forth in them. But this, as 
we know now (§ XII.), is very far indeed from being an 
objection. It is much more likely than not that the 
working out of the atomic theory was not, properly 
speaking, due to any one man. Later antiquity studied 
it in the more elaborate form which it attained under 
Demokritos, and this sufficiently accounts for the way in 
which Leukippos is ignored. We shall therefore, with

> 2 Ap. D. L. ix. 40 (K. P. 1436).

13 The Mi 7 *f h*x,rfft (11. P. 143//). In Stob. Eli. i. 160, a sentence is 
u noted which pur[>orts to come from a work by Leukippos ou Nout. 
Zeller is inclined to aj^ree with Hceron that there is some confusion here 
with Demokritos. The remark in R. P. 1436, that the quotation goes 
hack to Theophrastos, is inaccurate. It is very doubtful whether it comes 
even from the VetmUi Plarita (box. p. 21M. In M. X. 0. 9S0a, 8, wo 
have the phrase i* <™*V Aiwirrti/ **kovfn*»,i Xiy»,f."Jahrb.f. Kl. Phil. u. Pad. vol. cxxiii. p. 742.

-

Digitized by Google

I

352

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

Diels, follow Aristotle and Theophrastos in regarding liim

as the real originator of the system. 15

The latter authority further tells us that Leukippos 
was a member of the Eleatic School, and perhaps, though 
this is more than doubtful, that he had been a disciple 
of Zeno. 16 It is certainly more likely that he had 
" heard " Melissos, who lived so near his own home, and 
who had actually uttered the formula of atomism, though 
he did not adopt it (§ 144). , j

The theory ..f 148. Theophrastos, in the First Book of his Opinions,

wrote of Leukippos somewhat as follows : —The theory ..f 148. Theophrastos, in the First Book of his Opinions,

wrote of Leukippos somewhat as follows : —

15 The argument of Diels is briefly as follows :— According to Theo- 
phrastos, Diogenes of Apollonia borrowed some of his theories from 
Anaxagoras and some from leukippos (K. P. 159«). Diogenes, as Rolnb 
has admitted (Jahrtt. f. Kl. Phil, cxxiii. p. 146), is parodied in the CloiuU 
<»f Aristophanes, which was produced in 423 h.c. Now Demokritos. 
aecording to A]>ollodoros, did not " flourish" till 420 B.C., a date founded 
on that of the ytixpet 1ittx»rfi*s {n. 11) ; and if this is right, any traces of 
atomism to be found in Diogenes must be due to an earlier thinker. And 
Diels holds that Apollodoros must be nearly right (of. also Busolt, Or. 
Ocsch. ii. p. 307, »,); for his calculation is confirmed by the remark of 
Demokritos himself (R. P. 144 B), that he was a young man in the obi 
age of Anaxagoras. This seems to imply that Anaxagoras was already 
dead, and we know that he survived his expulsion from Athens. If, as 
seems probable, Demokritos when a young man " heard " Anaxagoras at 
Ix-impsakos after 430 n.<\, he can hardly have founded his own school at 
Abdera before 420 ; and the fact that Diogenes had published before that 
year a work bearing traces of the atomic theory, proves that theory to ln- 
earlier than Demokritos. On the other hand, Zeller (pp. 8f»2, 020 ; Eng. 
trans, ii. pp. 30'j, 3S1) surely goes too far in holding that there are traces 
of the atomic theory even in Anaxagoras and Melissos.18 Dox. p. 483 (R. P. 143). The won Is a«>«»nV*f n«^i,^ r t?, 
rttplaf do not, of course, imply personal intercourse with Parmenides any 
more than the precisely similar statement as to the relation between 
Anaxagoras and Anaximcnes (Chap. VI. § 08). They mean nothing more 
than that L. had been an Kleatic. The relationship to Zeno is mentioned 
both by Hippolytos (/&/. i. 12. 1) and D. L. ix. 30 (R. P. 143a). Diels 
is accordingly inclined to believe that Zeno's name has dropped out of 
the Thcophrastean extract preserved by Simplicius (Dox. p. 483, n. a, 11). 
Put the view in question would arise at once from the belief that L. was a 
native of Elea (n. 17), and the relatiou to Melissos suggested in the text 
seems far more probable.

Leukippo*.

Digitized by Google

I.EI-KIPPOS. 353

L< ukij»|>c;s of Kb-a or Miletus (for both accounts are given of 
Mm ,r ) had been an adherent of the Parmenidean philosophy ; 
he did not, however, follow the same path in his explanation 
<>f things as Parmenides and X»Mi«»phanes did, but, to all appear- 
ances, the very opposite (H. P. 143). They made the All on««, 
immovable, unen-at<-d, and finite, and did not even permit us 
to search for irhat w not; he assumed innumerable and ever- 
moving elements, namely, the atoms. And he made their 
forms infinite in number, since there was no reason why they 
should of one kind rather tlian another, and because lie saw 
that there was unceasing becoming and change in things, lie 
h' ld, furtlier, that irhat in in no more real than what is not, and 
that both are alike causes of the things that come into being; 
for lie laid down that the substance of the atoms was compact 
and full, and he called them irhat /s, while they moved in the 
void which he called irhat i* not, but affirmed to be just as real 
as what f* (R. P. 1 I S li).

149. It will be observed that Theophrastos, while Leukippo* and

the Klcatics.149. It will be observed that Theophrastos, while Leukippo* and

the Klcatics.

noting the affiliation of Leukippos to the Eleatic School, 
points out that his theory is, prima facie™ just the 
opposite of that maintained by Parmenides. Many 
historians of philosophy have been led by this appear- 
ance to discredit the Eleaticisiu of Leukippos altogether ;

'* It is easy to see how Leukippos mi^ht i'hiiip to be regarded as n native 
of Elea, but it is hard to understand why he should be called a Milesian 
unless he really was so. Tin; stat< nu n t of l>. L. i\. Mi (It. p. 143a), that 
In- whs a Melian, is, no doubt, due to a simple clerical error, helped by a 
reminiscence of Diatoms the atheist. The opposite mistake is to be 
: .;;!,•! in \<-'.i<>^ :. 7. 1 , wh-iv I>..i-'>m- i> .-.dl- •! a Mi!* Man in the t v% . . 
l»-st MSS. of tlie J'larita, an error repeated by Kaisebios and Theodoret. 
The Ps.-dalen and tin- inferior Parisian .MS. (C) have alone preserved 
the true reading (Dor. p. 11). The; certainly erroneous tradition that 
l>eniokritos was a Milesian, preserved by D. L. ix. .'J4 (K. I'. 1-1 in), con- 
linns our view as to Leukippos. Pemokritos has been called a Milesian 
from precisely the same confusion of ideas that made Leukippos an Eleate. 
On the other hand, Leukippos appears as an Abderitc in I's. (Jalcn, 
Phil. fr. 3 [Dux. p. 001, »).

1H The words l**u do not imply assent to the view introduced by 
'. !:• :n.

23

Digitized by Google

354 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.1H The words l**u do not imply assent to the view introduced by 
'. !:• :n.

23

Digitized by Google

354 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

but nothing can be more superficial than such a doubt, 
and we must not suppose Theophrastos himself believed 
the two theories to be so far apart as they seem. As 
this is really one of the most important points in tlie 
whole history of early Greek philosophy ; and as, rightly 
understood, it furnishes the key to the whole develop- 
ment, it will be worth while to transcribe at length a. 
passage of Aristotle 19 in which the connection between 
Eleaticisra and Atomism is explained in a way that 
leaves nothing to be desired.Leukippos and Demokritos have decided about all things 
practically by the same method and on the same theory, taking 
as their starting-point what naturally comes first. Some of the 
ancients had held that the real must necessarily be one and 
immovable; for, said they, empty space is not real, and motion 
would be impossible without empty space separated from 
matter; nor, further, could reality l>e a many, if there were 
nothing to separate things. And it makes no difference if any 
one holds that the All is not continuous, but discrete, with its 
parts in contact (Pt/fhrt'jonan view), instead of holding that 
reality is many, not one, and that there is empty space. Fur, 
if it is divisible at every point there is no one, and therefore no 
many, and the Whole is empty (Zeno) ; while, if we say it is 
divisible in one place and not in another, this looks like an 
arbitrary fiction ; for up to what point and for what reason will 
part of the Whole be in this state and be full, while the rest is 
discrete? And, on the same grounds, they further say that 
there can be no motion. In consequence of these reasonings, 
then, going beyond perception and overlooking it in the belief 
that we ought to follow the argument, they say that the All is 
one and immovable, and some of them that it is infinite 
(Afelwfios), for any limit would be bounded by empty space. 
Tliir=, then, is the opinion they expressed about the truth, and 
these are the reasons which led them to do so. ^Now, so far as 
arguments go, this conclusion does seem to follow ; but, if we 
appeal to facts, to hold such a view looks like madness. Xo 
19 Gen. Corr. A, 8. 321*, 35 # n . (K. P. 148 A}.

Digitized by Google |

LET'KIPPOS.

355

one who is mad is so far out of his senses that fire and ice 
appear to him to be one ; it is only things that are right, and 
things that appear right from habit, in which madness makes 
some people see no difference.Leukippos, however, thought he had a theory which was in 
harmony with sense - perception, and did not do away with 
coming into being and passing away, nor motion, nor the multi- 
plicity of things. He made this concession to experience, while 
he conceded, on the other hand, to those who invented the One 
that motion was impossible without the void, that the void wns 
not real, and that nothing of what was real was not real. 
" For," said he, " that which is, strictly speaking, real is an abso- 
lute plenum; but the plenum is not one. On the contrary, 
there are an infinite number of them, and they are invisible 
'•wing to the smallness of their bulk. They move in the void 
(for there is a void) ; and by their coining together they effect 
coming into being; by their separation, passing away."

It is true that in this passage Melissos is not named, 
but the reference to him is quite unmistakable. He 
was the only Eleatic who made reality infinite, and this 
is distinctly mentioned here. We are therefore justified 
by the passage in explaining the genesis of Atomism and 
its relation to Eleaticisin as follows. Zeno had shown 
that all pluralist systems yet known, and especially 
Pythagoreanism, were unable to stand before the argu- 
ments from infinite divisibility which he adduced 
Melissos had reiterated this, and had added, by way 
of mluctio ad ahaurdum, that, if there were many things, 
eac h one of them must be such as the Eleatics held the 
One to be. To this Leukippos answers, " Why not ? " 
He admitted the force of Zeno's arguments by setting 
a limit to divisibility, and to each of the atoms which 
he thus arrived at he ascribed all the predicates of the 
Eleatic One ; for Farmenides had shown that if it is, it 
must have these predicates somehow. The same view

Digitized by Google

356

KAKLY HRKEK PHILOSOPHY.Digitized by Google

356

KAKLY HRKEK PHILOSOPHY.

is implied in a passage of Aristotle's Phi/sirs} 0 " Some," 
we are there told, " surrendered to both arguments; to the 
first, the argument that all things arc one, if the word 
is is used in one sense only (l\ir»» ni<I<s), by aftirming 
the reality of what is not ; to the second, that based on 
dichotomy (Zaw), by introducing indivisible magnitudes." 
Atom*. 150. We must observe that the atom is not mathe- 
matically indivisible, for it has magnitude ; it is, however, 
physically indivisible, because, like the One of Parmenides, 
it contains in it no empty space. 21 Each atom has ex- 
tension, and is not, as in some modern theories,- reduced 
to a mathematical point, which is a centre of force. Matter 
and energy were still undistinguished; body was the form 
in which both were imagined, and the history of physical 
theories as to the constitution of the sensible world is 
little more than an account of the way in which energy 
gradually took its place alongside of matter as an equally- 
real thing, tending more and more to replace it altogether.

All the atoms were exactly alike in quality, 23 and there- 
fore all differences in things must be accounted for either 
by the shape of the atoms or by their arrangement. 
It is not quite certain whether the three ways in which 
dillerences arise, namely, shape, position, and arrange- 
ment,- 4 were already clearly distinguished by Leukippos,

20 Phy*. A. 3. lS7(i, 1 <K. P. 1 <»).

The Kpieureans iiiisuml.rstui.il or misrepn stntetl tin's point. Sty 
Zeller, 778, n. 1 (Knjj. trans, ii. 22."», ». 2), and in general tin* <loxographir.aI 
tradition as to tin Atouiists lias been seriously perverted l>\ Kpieuivan 
ignorance of history. (Dux. p. 21 P.)

~ Modern Atomism really dates from Dalton ; that .if Cassendi was 
mi n i-' ill AtomNm iv\iv. !. t >:i tl ; . n !,.,;, ■ ,nl»v < t . >(•<■ S;a:i... '/'/,>■ /•„,„> 
of Modern Phyxir*.~ Modern Atomism really dates from Dalton ; that .if Cassendi was 
mi n i-' ill AtomNm iv\iv. !. t >:i tl ; . n !,.,;, ■ ,nl»v < t . >(•<■ S;a:i... '/'/,>■ /•„,„> 
of Modern Phyxir*.

- ;t Ih> Colo, A, 7. 27.U, 13-'. they have all one fC, ; Phy*. V, 4. 203.,, 
34, that which is common to them all ns simply body.

-* For these see Arist. M<t. A, t. VK,h, 13-22 (K. P. 147). Theophr. 
Phys. O r . fr. 8 (K. P. 118 Hi.

Digitized by Google

LEUKIPPOS.

357

or whether they belong rather to the later elaboration 
of the theory by Deinokritos. It seems most likely that 
these more precise determinations of the doctrine were 
rendered necessary by the epistemological difficulties 
which Protagoras raised explicitly for the first time, and 
they therefore fall outside the scope of the present 
work. 25

151. Leukippos affirmed the existence both of the The void. 
Full and the Empty, terms which he doubtless borrowed 
from Melissos. 20 As we have seen, he had to assume the 
existence of empty space in order to make his explana- 
tion of the nature of body possible. Space had been 
denied by the Eleatics on the ground that it was not 
corporeal, and therefore could not exist (§ 72). The 
Pythagoreans had, indeed, asserted its reality, but they 
had not been able to grasp the idea of abstract space, of 
an absolute void ; they identified it with the unlimited 
Air (§ 119). Leukippos was the first to reach clear 
views on the subject. He admitted, indeed, that space 
was not real, that is to say, corporeal ; but he maintained 
that it existed all the same. He hardly, it is true, had 
words to express his discovery in : for the verb " to be " 
had hitherto been used by philosophers only of body. 
But he did his best to make his meaning clear by saying 
that " what is not " (in the old corporealist sense) " is " 
(in another sense) just as much as " what is." The void 
is as real as body.It is a curious fact that the Atomists, who are com- 
monly regarded as the great materialists of antiquity, 
were actually the first to say distinctly that a thing 
might be real without being a body.

25 Cf. Introflurtion, § I. ». 1.

* Arist. Mtt. A, 4. 9SD/>, 4 (R. P. 147). Cf. Melissos, fr. 14.

Digitized by Google

358 EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

cosmology. 152. Most of the statements that have been handed 
down with regard to the cosmology of Leukippos are 
rendered useless by their confusion with the later views 
of Demokritos. There can be no doubt, however, that 
Theophrastos treated Leukippos separately, and Diels has 
noted some cases where quite different theories are 
attributed to the two philosophers. 27 Hippolytos ~ 8 gives 
the following account of Leukippos' theory with regard 
to the origin of the worlds : —

He says that the worlds arise when many bodies are collected 
together into the mighty void from the surrounding space and 
rush together. They come into collision, and those which are 
of similar shape and like form become entangled, and from their 
entanglement the heavenly bodies arise.

It was natural for Leukippos to revert once more to 
the old theory of "innumerable worlds," for there was 
nothing in his system to render it impossible. We may 
note, too, that his view as to the way in which these 
worlds come into being is based on that of Anaxagoras. 
But it is not safe to go further in the discussion of 
details ; for these have been for the most part handed 
down in the form they assumed in the next generation. 2 > 
Greatness of 153. With the theory of Leukippos, our story should 
Leukij>poH. properly come to an end ; for he answered the question 
that Thales had been the first to ask. He had dis- 
covered how body must be regarded if we consider it to 
be the ultimate reality. Or at least he had given the27 See, for instance, Aet. iii. 3. 10 and 11, where Leukippos is credited 
with an explanation of thunder resembling the old Ionic one, while that 
of Demokritos is more intimately connected with the atomic theory.

28 Uff. i. 12. 2.

10 In particular, we must not ascribe to Leukippos the Demokritean 
explanation of the "secondary qualities of matter" as subjective impres- 
sions. That view depends on the Protagorean doctrine that "Man is 
the measure of all things."

Digitized by Google

DIOGENES.

359

most satisfactory account of the matter : for the system 
of Anaxagoras, though it equally took account of Zeuo's 
criticisms, was wanting in that simplicity which forms 
the chief attraction of Atomism. But the full import- 
ance of the new view was not at once seen, and we must 
therefore turn now to the consideration of an attempt to 
maintain the older monistic theory in the face of it.

III. Diogenes of Apollonia,

1 54. After discussing the three great representatives of Date 
the Milesian School, Theophrastos 30 went on to say: —

And Diogenes of Apollonia, too, who was almost the latest 
of those who gave themselves up to these studies, wrote most 
of his work in an eclectic fashion, agreeing in some points with 
Anaxagoras and in others with Leukippos. He, too, says that 
the primary substance of the universe is Air infinite and eternal, 
from which by condensation, rarefaction, and change of state, 
the form of everything else arises (R. P. 159a).

This passage shows that the Apolloniate was somewhat 
later in date than the statement in Diogenes 31 that he 
was contemporary with Anaxagoras would lead us to 
suppose, and the fact that he is satirised in the Clouds of 
Aristophanes points in the same direction. 32 Schleicr-3,3 I agree with Diels {Lmkipjto* uiul Diogenes ton Apollonia, Hh. 
Mi a. xlii. 1 sij.j.) in attributing this whole passage to Theophrastos. 
There seems to he very little to he said in favour of Natorp's view, that 
the words are merely those of Simplicius (Diogrnrs ron Apollonia, </>. xli. 
:.MD sqq.), and his reply to Diels {Xvchmah Diognuo and Lndippoe) 
adds nothing new to the argument.

:tl D. L. ix. 57 (11. P. lf»r<). The statement of Autisthenes, that he had 
" heard " Anaximenes, is due to the common confusion. He was, doubt- 
less, like Anaxagoras, "an associate of the philosophy of Anaximenes." 
Cf. Chap. VI. § !>8.

Clouih, 227 sqq., where Sokrates talks of " mixing his subtle thought 
with the kindred air," etc. The word Uf**t was used by Diogenes, 
Theophr. Dt Sen*. 44 : x»xiu* yk P t1» ixpdi* rh

Digitized by Google

3G0 KAMA* <;IIKEK 1'HII.msoI'HY.

macher hell, indee«i, that Anaxagoras was younger than 
Diogenes, to whom he accordingly gave the priority as to 
those doctrines in which they agreed ; but this can no 
longer he maintained. Diogenes was not an innovator 
who prepared the way for the Anaxagorean theory of 
Nous, hut a reactionary who strove to restore the attribute 
of intelligence to the primary substance of the Milesian 
School. Of the life of Diogenes we know next lo no- 
thing. He was the son of Apollothemis, and c une from 
Apollonia in Crete.*' The Ionic dialect in which he 
wrote is no objection to this ; it was the regular dialect 
for cosmological works.

The fact that Diogenes was parodied in the Clowts, 
suggests that he had found his way to Athens ; and we 
have the excellent authority of Demetrios Phalereus " 4 
for saying that the Athenians treated him in the usual 
way. He excited so great dislike as nearly to imperil his 
life.Writing!*. 155. Simplicius affirms that Diogenes wrote several 
works, though he allows that only one survived till his 
own day, namely, the Tlepi fyvaem? 3 This statement is 
based upon references in the surviving work itself, and 
is not to be lightly rejected. In particular, it is very 
credible that he wrote a tract Ayaind the Sophist a, 
that is to say, the pluralist cosmologists of the day. 36 
That he wrote a book called The Nature of Man is also 
probable. This would be a physiological or medical 
treatise, and perhaps the famous fragment about the 
veins comes from it. 3:

M I). L. ix. f,7 (K. V. 159 and 159a).

4 Ap. I). L. ix. 57. 35 Phi/.*. 151, 2i D (It. P. K'.Oa).

>; Simplicius (lor. rit.) Gills them Qv*i»\iyn, but adds that Diogenes 
liiuisflf iisih! the older tor in, r«fi*r«;.

* Quoted in a free manner by Ari.st. Hist. Ah. V, 2. 5116, 30

Digitized by Google

I

DKXiENES.

3G1

156. The work of Diogenes seems to have been long The frag-

inents.

preserved ; practically all the fairly extensive fragments 
which we still have are derived from Simplicius. I give 
them as they are arranged by Schorn —

(1.) In beginning any discourse, it seems to me that one 
should make one's starting-point something undisputed, and 
one's expression simple and dignified. R. P. 1G0.(1.) In beginning any discourse, it seems to me that one 
should make one's starting-point something undisputed, and 
one's expression simple and dignified. R. P. 1G0.

(2.) My view is, to sum it up briefly, that all things are differ- 
entiations of the same tiling, and are the same thing. And this 
is obvious ; for, if the things which are now in this world — earth, 
and water, and air and lire, and the other things which we see 
existing in this world — if any one of these things, I say, were 
different from any other, different, that is, by having a substance 
peculiar to itself ; and if it were not the same thing that is often 
changed and differentiated, then tilings could not in any way 
mix with one another, nor could they do one another good or 
harm. Neither could a plant grow out of the earth, nor any 
plant or animal come into being unless things were composed in 
such a way as to be the same. But all these things arise from the 
same thing; they are differentiated and take different forms at 
different times, and return again to the same thing. R. P. 1C1.

(3.) But this, too, appears to me to be obvious, that it is both 
great, and mighty, and eternal, and undying, and of great 
knowledge. R P. 1G2.

(4.) For it would not be possible for it to be divided as it is 
without intelligence, so as to keep the measures of all things, of 
winter and summer, of day and night, of rains and winds and 
fair weather. And any one who cares to reflect will find that 
everything else is disposed in the best possible manner. R. P. 
1G3.

(5.) And, further, there are still the following great proofs. 
Men and all other animals live upon air by breathing it^ and 
this is their soul and their intelligence, as will be clearly shown 
in this work ; while, when this is taken away, they die, and their 
intelligence fails. R. P. 163.(6.) And my view is, that that which has intelligence is what 
men call air, and that all things have their course steered by it, 
and that it lias power over all things. For this very thing I

Digitized by Google

3G2

EARLY (;REEK PHILOSOPHY.

IKft

hold to be a god, :;8 and to reach everywhere, and to dispose 
everything, and to be in everything ; and there is not anything 
which does not partake in it. Yet no single thing partakes in 
it just in the same way as another ; but there are many modes 
both of air and of intelligence. For it undergoes many trans- 
formations, warmer and colder, drier and moister, more stable

*

and in swifter motion, and it has many other differentiations in 
it, and an infinite number of colours and savours. And the 
soul of all living things is the same, namely, air warmer than 
that outside us and in which we are, but much colder than that 
near the sun. And this warmth is not alike in any two kinds 
of living creatures, nor, for the matter of that, in any two men ; 
but it does not differ much, only so far as is compatible with 
their being alike. At the same time, it is not possible for any 
of the things which are differentiated to be exactly liko one 
another till they all once more Income the same.

Since, then, differentiation is multiform, living creatures 
are multiform and many, and they are like one another neither 
in appearance nor in intelligence, because of the multitude of 
differentiations. At the same time, they all live, and see, and 
hoar by the same thing, and they all have their intelligence from 
the same source (K. 1\ 1G4).

(7.) And this itself is an eternal and undying body, but of 
those things 39 some come into being and some pass away.(7.) And this itself is an eternal and undying body, but of 
those things 39 some come into being and some pass away.

The iticiiicui 157. We have had occasion to note more than once 
the growing influence of medicine upon philosophy. 40 
It was far from being an entirely good influence ; for 
while, as we have seen, all progress at this time was 
necessarily in the direction of pluralism, medical tlieorisers

:iS The MSS. of Siniplidus have iht, not fiit ; but I adopt Usenet's 
certain correction printed in R. 1\ It is confirmed by the statement of 
Theophrastos, that the air within us is "a small portion of the god " {De 
iSV /w. 42), and by Philodeuios (Dox. p. M»'>\ where we read that Diogenes

praises Homer, rai ccipa yap auret A<a »flu<£i/» Qr.rln, ixuin •*"«» ull**i rit a/«

liyu (cf. Cic. iV. D. i. 12. 29).

39 The MSS. of Simplicius have t* 3i, but surely the Aldine r*r Vt is 
right.

* See above, Chap. V. w. 17 ; Chap. VI. § 10G.

Digitized by Google

DIOGENES.

363

required, or thought they required, a monistic foundation 
for their systems. That the chief interest of Diogenes 
was a physiological one, is clear from his elaborate 
account of the veins, preserved by Aristotle. 41 It is 
noticeable, too, that one of his arguments for the under- 
lying unity of all substances is that without this it would 
be impossible to understand how one thing could do good 
or harm to another (fr. 2). In fact, the writing of 
Diogenes is essentially of the same character as a good 
deal of the pseudo-Hi ppokratean literature, 42 and there is 
much to be said for the view that the writers of these 
curious tracts made use of him very much as they did of 
Anaxagoras and Herakleitos. 43158. Like Anaximenes, Diogenes regarded Air as the Cosmology, 
primary substance ; but we see from his arguments that 
he lived at a time when other views had become prevalent. 
He speaks clearly of the four Empedoklean elements 
(fr. 2), and he is careful to attribute to Air the attributes 
of Nous as taught by Anaxagoras (fr. 4). The doxo- 
graphical tradition as to his cosmological views is fairly 
preserved —

Diogenes of Aj>ollonia makes air the element, and holds that 
all things are in motion, and that there are innumerable worlds. 
And lie describes the origin of the world thus. When the All 
moves and becomes rare in one place and dense in another, 
where the dense nwt together it formed a mass, and then the

41 See n. 37.

* On which see II berg. Stialia P^u(li/>pocralm.

43 See WeygoUlt, Zu DiwjmcH von A],o!louut t in Arch. i. p. 161 s*pi. 
Ilippokrates himself represented just the opposite tendency to that of 
those writers. His great achievement was the separation of medicine 
from philosophy, a sejmration most beneficial to both (Cclsus, i. pr.). 
This is why the Hippokratean corpus contains some works in which the 
" sophists " are denounced and others in which their writings are pillaged. 
To the latter class belong the rift h* t T*t and the vtfi fvrZ* ; to the former, 
especially the xif t aif^a'ir.s <'*t^*m.

Digitized by Google

3G4 EARLY < J REEK PHILOSOPHY.

other tilings arose in the same way, the lightest parts occupying 
the highest position ami producing the sun. Plut. Strom. 
fr. 12 (R. P. 1G8 A).

Nothing arises from what is not nor passes away into what is 
not. The earth is round, poised in the middle, having received 
its shape through the revolution proceeding from the warm and 
its solidification from the cold. 1). L. ix. f>7 (K. P. 168 P>).

The heavenly bodies were like pumice-stone. He thinks 
they are the breathing-holes of the world, and that they are red- 
hot. Aet. iL 13. 5 (II P. 168 D).The heavenly bodies were like pumice-stone. He thinks 
they are the breathing-holes of the world, and that they are red- 
hot. Aet. iL 13. 5 (II P. 168 D).

The sun was like pumice-stone, ami into it the rays from the 
aether fix themselves. Aet. ii. 20. 10. The moon was a 
pumice-like conflagration. It', ii- 2f>. 10.

Along with the visible heavenly bodies revolve invisible stones, 
which for that very reason are nameless ; but they often fall to 
earth and are extinguished like the stone star which fell down 
flaming at Aigospotamos. Ib. ii. 13. 9.

We have here nothing more than the old Ionian doctrine 
with a few additions from more recent sources. Iiare- 
faction and condensation still hold their place in the 
explanation of the opposite*, warm and cold, dry and 
moist, stable and mobile (fr. G). The differentiations 
into opposite* which Air may undergo are, as Anaxagoras 
had taught, infinite in number (fr. G); but all may be 
reduced to the primary opposition of rare and dense. 
We may gather, too, from Censorinus 44 that Diogenes 
did not, like Anaximenes, speak of earth and water as 
arising from Air by condensation, but rather of blood, 
flesh, and bones. In this he followed Anaxagoras 
(§ 10G), as it was natural that he should. That portion 
of Air, on the other hand, which was rarefied became 
fiery, and produced the sun and heavenly bodies. The 
circular motion of the world is due to the intelligence 
of the Air, as is also the division of all things into

** Df die natali, 6. 1 (Dor. p. 190).

Digitized by Google

DIOGKXES.

305

different forms of body and the observance of the 
" measures " by these forms. 45** Df die natali, 6. 1 (Dor. p. 190).

Digitized by Google

DIOGKXES.

305

different forms of body and the observance of the 
" measures " by these forms. 45

Like Anaximander (§ ly), Diogenes regarded the sea 
as the remainder of the original moist state, which had 
been partially evaporated by the sun, so as to separate 
out the remaining earth. 40 The earth itself is round, 
that is to say, it is a disc: for the language of the 
doxographers does not point to the spherical form. 47 Its 
solidification by the cold is due to the fact that cold 
is a form of condensation.

Diogenes did not hold with the earlier cosmologists 
that the heavenly bodies were made of air or lire, nor 
yet with Anaxagoras, that they were stones. They were, 
he said, pumice - like, a view which seems to be an 
attempt to reconcile the other two. They were earthy, 
indeed, but not solid, and the celestial lire permeated 
their pores. And this explains why we do not see the 
dark bodies which, in common with Anaxagoras, he held 
to revolve along with the stars. They really are solid 
stones, and therefore cannot be penetrated by the lire. 
It was one of these that fell into the Aigospotamos. 
Like Anaxagoras, Diogenes affirmed that the inclination 
of the world happened subsequently to the rise of 
animals from the earth. 48

We are prepared to rind that Diogenes held the 
doctrine of innumerable worlds ; for it was the old 
Milesian belief, and had just been revived by Anaxagoras. 
He is mentioned with the rest in the Placita ; and if 
Simplieius classes him and Anaximenes with llerakleitos

46 On the "measures" see Chap. III. § M*.

^Theophr. ap. Ahx. in Me.ttor. I!, 2. 355<i, :!! [Vox. p. 4dl).

47 D. L. ix. 57 (R. 1*. ItiS U). 
** Act. ii. 8. 1 (K. 1\ 1GS C).

Digitized by Google

366

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.^Theophr. ap. Ahx. in Me.ttor. I!, 2. 355<i, :!! [Vox. p. 4dl).

47 D. L. ix. 57 (R. 1*. ItiS U). 
** Act. ii. 8. 1 (K. 1\ 1GS C).

Digitized by Google

366

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

as holding the Stoic doctrine of successive formations 
and destructions of a single world, he has merely been 
misled by the " accommodators." 40 
Animals ami 158. Living creatures arose from the earth, doubtless

plants.

under the influence of heat. Their souls, of course, 
were air, and their differences were due to the various 
degrees in which it was rarefied or condensed (fr. G). 
The views of Diogenes as to generation, respiration, and 
the blood, belong to the history of medicine ; M his theory 
of sensation, too, as it is described by Theophrastos/' 1 
need only be mentioned in passing. Briefly stated, it 
amounts to this, that all sensation is due to the action 
of air upon the brain and other organs, while pleasure 
is simply aeration of the blood. But the details of the 
theory can only be studied properly in connexion with 
the Hippokratean writings ; for Diogenes does not really 
represent the old cosmological tradition, but a fresh 
development of reactionary philosophical views combined 
with an entirelv new enthusiasm for detailed investiga- 
tion and accumulation of facts.

IV. A rein has.

Anaxagoreans. 159. The last of the early cosmologists was Archelaos 
of Athens, who was a disciple of Anaxagoras. 5 - He is 
also said to have been the teacher of Sokrates, a state- 
ment by no means so improbable as is sometimes 
supposed. 5 * There is no reason to doubt the tradition

* Sirapl. Phjs.f. 257 r. See Chap. I. ». 124.

50 For thf.'se see Ccnsorinus, quoted in Dox. p. 101.

51 Thcophr. S<m. 39 sqq. [Dox. p. 510 .sqq.). 
VJ D. L. ii. 16 (K. P. 169).

M On the question of Sokrates' relation to the cosmologUta, see A. 
Chiapelli in Arch. iv. '309 sqq.

Digitized by Google

ARCHELAOS.

367M On the question of Sokrates' relation to the cosmologUta, see A. 
Chiapelli in Arch. iv. '309 sqq.

Digitized by Google

ARCHELAOS.

367

that Archelaos succeeded Anaxagoras in the school at 
Lampsakos. M We certainly hear a good deal about 
Anaxagoreans/' 5 though their fame was soon obscured by 
the rise of the Sophists, as we call them.

160. On the cosmology of Archelaos, Hippolytos M Cosmology, 
writes as follows : —160. On the cosmology of Archelaos, Hippolytos M Cosmology, 
writes as follows : —

Archelaos was by birth an Athenian, and the sun of Apollo- 
doros. He spoke of tin* mixture of matter in a .similar way to 
Anaxagoras, ami of the first principles likewise. lie held, 
however, that there was a certain mixture immanent even in 
Nous. And ho held that there were two efficient causes which 
were separated off 57 from one another, namely, the warm ami 
the cold. The former was in motion, the latter at rest. When 
the water was liquefied it flowed to the centre, and there being 
burnt up it turned to earth and air, the latter of which was 
borne upwards, while the former took up its position below. 
These, then, are the reasons why the earth is at rest, and why 
it came into being. It lies in the centre, being practically no 
appreciable part of the universe. (But the air surrounds and 
rules over all things)/' 8 being produced by the burning of the 
tire, and from its original combustion conies the substance of 
the heavenly bodies. Of these the sun is the largest, and the 
moon second : the rest are of various sizes. He savs that the 
heavens were inclined, and that then the sun made light upon 
the earth, made the air transparent, and the earth dry ; for it 
was originally a pond, being high at the circumference and 
hollow in the centre. He adduces as a proof of this hollow- 
ness that the sun does not rise and set at the same time for all 
peoples, as it ought to do if the earth were level. As to animals, 
he says that when the earth was first being warmed in the lower 
part where the warm and the cold were mingled together, manv 
living creatures appeared, and especially men, all having the

:A Knseb. /*. E. x. 1-1, p. .10*.

*' Anaxagorean* are mentioned by I'lato, Knit. 409 A, ami often by 
tin* Aristotelian commentators.

"* H-f. i. 9 (R. P. 171). Adopting the collection of Diels.

M Adopting Ilocpcr's sanplemcui.

Digitized by Google

3 (J 8"* H-f. i. 9 (R. P. 171). Adopting the collection of Diels.

M Adopting Ilocpcr's sanplemcui.

Digitized by Google

3 (J 8

EARLY GREEK PHILOSOPHY.

same ma inter of life, and deriving their sustenance from tin* 
slime ; they did not live long, and later on generation from 
one another began. And men were distinguished from the rest, 
and set up leaders, and laws, and arts, and eities, and so forth. 
And he says that Nous is implanted in all animals alike ; for 
each of the animals, as well as man, makes use of N«>us, hut 
some quicker and some slower.

It is not necessary to say much with regard to this 
theory, which in many respects contrasts unfavourably 
with its predecessors. It is clear that, just as Diogenes 
had tried to introduce certain Auaxagorean ideas into th<3 
philosophy of Anaximenes, so Archelaos sought to bring; 
Anaxagoreanism nearer to the old Ionic views by supple- 
menting it with the opposition of warm and cold, rani 
and dense, and by stripping Nous of that simplicity 
which had marked it off from the other "things" in his 
master's system. For this reason, too, Nous was no 
longer regarded as the maker of the world. V) It may be 
added that this twofold relation of Archelaos to his 
predecessors makes it very credible that, as Actios tells 
us, ,w he believed in innumerable worlds ; botli Anaxagorus 
and the older Ionians upheld that doctrine. 
c. in .•iu»i y n. 1G1. The cosmology of Archelaos, like that of 
Diogenes, has all the characteristics of the age to 
which it belonged — an age of reaction, eclecticism, 
and investigation of detail.*' 1 Hippon of Samos ami 
Idaios of Himera represent nothing more than the feel- 
ing that philosophy had run into a blind alley, from 
which it could only escape by trying back. The 
llerakleiteans at Ephesos, impenetrably wrapped up as 
they were in their own system, did little but exaggerate

w Art. i. 7. M (K. P. 170«). * Act. ii. 1. 3.

" Wimlelbaml, p. 170.

Digitized by Google

CONCLUSION.

3G9w Art. i. 7. M (K. P. 170«). * Act. ii. 1. 3.

" Wimlelbaml, p. 170.

Digitized by Google

CONCLUSION.

3G9

its paradoxes and develop its more fanciful side. 62 It 
was not enough for Kratylos to say with Herakleitos 
(fr. 84) that you cannot step twice into the same river ; 
you could not do so even once. 63 But in nothing was 
the total bankruptcy of the early cosmology so clearly 
shown as in the work of Gorgias, entitled Substance or 
the Non-existent, in which an absolute nihilism was set 
forth and based upon the Eleatic dialectic. 04 The fact 
is that philosophy, so long as it clung to its old pre- 
suppositions, had nothing more to say ; for the answer 
of Leukippos to the question of Thales was really final. 
Fresh life must be given to the speculative impulse by 
the raising of new problems, those of knowledge and 
conduct, before any further progress was possible ; and 
this was done by the " Sophists " and Sokrates. Then, 
in the hands of Demokritos and Plato, philosophy took 
a new form, and started on a fresh course of develop- 
ment.

** For an amusing picture of the Herakleiteans, s.-e Plato, Thtait. 
179 E. The new ink-rest in language, which the study of rhetoric had 
called into life, took with them the form of fantastic and arbitrary 
etymologising, such as is satirised in Plato's Kratylos.

43 Arist. Mit. r, 5. 1010a, 12. He refused even to speak, we are told, 
and simply pointed with his linger.

64 Scxt. Math. vii. 65 (R. P. 184).

24

Digitized by Google

NOTE ON THE SOURCES.

♦ —

A. — PHILOSOPHERS.64 Scxt. Math. vii. 65 (R. P. 184).

24

Digitized by Google

NOTE ON THE SOURCES.

♦ —

A. — PHILOSOPHERS.

Plato. 1. It is not often that Plato allows himself to dwell upon 
the history of philosophy as it was before the rise of ethical 
and epistemological inquiry ; but when he does, his guidance is 
simply invaluable. His artistic gift and his power of entering 
into the thoughts of other men enabled him to describe the 
views of early philosophers in a thoroughly objective manner, 
and he never, except in a playful and ironical way, sought to 
read unthought-of meanings into the words of his predecessors. 
Of special value for our purpose are his contrast between 
Empedokles and Herakleitos (Soph. 242 D), and his account of 
the relation between Zeno and Parmenides (Farm. 128 A).

See Zeller, Plato's Mittheilungen uber friihere und gleich- 
zcitige Philosophen (Arch. v. 165 sqq.), and Index, s.v. Plato.

Aristotle. 2. As a rule, Aristotle's statements about early philosophers 
are far less historical than Plato's. Not that he failed to under- 
stand the facts, but he nearly always discusses them from the 
point of view of his own system. He is convinced that his 
own philosophy accomplishes what all previous philosophers 
had aimed at, and their systems are therefore regarded as 
" lisping " attempts to formulate it (Met. A, 10. 993a, 15). It is 
not difficult, however, to make allowance for this ; and if we do 
so, the testimony of Aristotle is of the greatest possible value.

See Emmingcr, Die Vornokratischen Philosophen nach den 
Berichten des Aristoteles, 1878. Index, s.v. Aristotle.

Stoics. 3. The Stoics, and especially Chrysippos, paid great attention 
to early philosophy, but their way of regarding it was simply 
an exaggeration of Aristotle's. They did not content themselves

Digitized by Google

DOXOGRAPITERS.

371Digitized by Google

DOXOGRAPITERS.

371

with criticising their predecessors from their own point of 
view ; they seem to have really believed that the early thinkers 
actually held views hardly distinguishable from theirs. The 
The word owoikuovv, which Cicero renders by accomnuxJare 
(Chap. III. n. 43), was used by Philodemos to denote this 
method of interpretation. See Index, s.v. Stoics.

4. The same remarks apply mutatis mutandis to the Skeptics, skeptics. 
The interest of such a writer as Sextus Empiricus in early 
philosophy is to show that skepticism went back to an early

date, as far as Xenophanes, in fact But what he tells us is 
often of value ; for he frequently quotes early views as to 
knowledge and sensation in support of his thesis.

5. Under this head we have chiefly to consider the com- NeoplatonUts. 
mentators on Aristotle in so far as they are independent of the 
Theophrastean tradition. Their chief characteristic is what 
Simplicius calls tvyvtu^oavvyj, that is, a liberal spirit of inter- 
pretation, which makes all early philosophers agree with one

another in upholding the doctrine of a Sensible and an Intel- 
ligible World.

B. — DOXOGR APHERS.

6. The Doxograplii grmci of Professor Hermann Diels hasThe"Dox<>- 
thrown an entirely new light upon the filiation of the later 8™P l11 gi*«. 
sources ; and we can only estimate justly the value of state- 
ments derived from these if we bear constantly in mind the

results of this investigation. Here it will only be possible to 
give an outline which may help the reader to find his way in 
the Doxograplii grxci itself.

7. By the term doxographers we understand all those writers The7. By the term doxographers we understand all those writers The

who relate the opinions of the Greek philosophers, and who TtaopTriw\os° 
derive their material, directly or indirectly, from the great 
work of Theophrastos, Qvuikw oo$C>v itf (D. L. v. 46). Of this 
work, one considerable chapter, that entitled n*p£ aur0ij<rca>i', 
has been preserved {Dox. pp. 499-527). And Usener, follow- 
iug Brandis, further showed that there were important frag- 
ments of it contained in the commentary of Simplicius (sixth

Digitized by Google

372 NOTE ON THE SOURCES.

cent, a.d.) on the First Book of Aristotle's Qvo-inr) anpoao-is 
(Usener, Analerta Theophra$tea y p. 25 sqq.). These extracts 
Siiuplieius seems to have borrowed in turn from Alexander of 
Aphrodisias (c. 200 a.d.) ; cf. Dox. p. 112 sqq. We thus 
possess a very considerable portion of the First Book, which dealt 
with the a-px<u, as well as practically the whole of the last Book.

From these remains it clearly appears that the method of 
Theophrastos was to discuss in separate books the leading 
topics which had engaged the attention of philosophers from 
Thales to Plato. The chronological order was not observed ; 
the philosophers were grouped according to the affinity of their 
doctrine, the differences between those who appeared to agree 
most closely being carefully noted. The First Book, however, 
was in some degree exceptional ; for in it the order was that of 
the successive schools, and short historical and chronological 
notices were inserted.Doxograi.her*. 8. A work of this kind was, of course, a godsend to the epito- 
mators and compilers of handbooks, who flourished more and 
more as the Greek genius declined. These either followed Theo- 
phrastos in arranging the subject-matter under heads, or else 
they broke up his work, and rearranged his statements under 
the names of the various philosophers to whom they applied. 
This latter class form the natural transition between the doxo- 
graphers proper and the biographers, so I have ventured to 
distinguish them by the name of bUj<jruphical duxogr ciphers.

I. DOXOGRAPHERS PROPER.

The "Placita" 9. These are now represented by two works, viz. the Placita 
ami stobaios. phtfosophorum, included among the writings ascribed to Plu- 
tarch, and the Eclogm Physicae of John Stobaios (<\ 470 a.d.). 
The latter originally formed one. work with the Florilegium of 
the same author, and contains, with a good deal of other matter, 
a transcript of some epitome substantially identical with the 
pseudo-Plutarchean Plrwita. Tt is, however, demonstrable that 
neither the Placita nor the Evlogte is the original of the other. 
The latter is usually the fuller of the two, and yet the former 
must bo earlier ; for it was used by Athenagoras for his defence 
of the Christians in 177 a.d. (Dox. p. 4). It was also the

Digitized by Google

DOXOGRAPHERS.

373

source of the notices in Eusebios and Cyril, and of the History 
of Philosophy ascribed to Galen. From these writers many 
important corrections of the text have been derived (Dox. 
p. 5 sqq.).

Another writer who made use of the Placita is Achilles (not 
Achilles Tatius). Extracts from his Euraywyrj to the Pluxii')- 
mena of Aratos are included in the Uranologion of Petavius, pp. 
121-164. His date is uncertain, but probably he belongs to 
the third century a.d. (Dox, p. 18).10. "What, then, was the common source of the Placita and Actio*, 
the Eclogx ? Diels has shown that Theodoret (c. 445 a.d) had 
access to it ; for in some cases he gives a fuller form of state- 
ments made in these two works. Not only so, but he also 
names that source; for ho refers us (Gr. aff. cur. iv. 31) to 
AcTtov ti)v irtpi apuTKovTiov (rvvaywyrjv. Diels has, accordingly, 
printed the Placita in parallel columns with the relevant parts

of the Eclogue, under the title of Aetii Placita. The quotations 
from " Plutarch " by later writers, and the extracts of Theodoret 
from Actios, are also given at the foot of each page.

11. Diels has shown further, however, that Actios did not The " Vetusta 
draw directly from Theophrastos, but from an intermediate 1>lllclU -" 
epitome which he calls the Vetusta Placita, traces of which

may be found in Cicero (infra, § 12) and in Ccnsorinus (De die 
natali), who follows Varro. It is quite possible, by discounting 
the somewhat unintelligent additions which Aetios made from 
Epicurean and other sources, to form a pretty accurate table of 
the contents of the Vetusta Placita (Dox. p. 181 sqq.), and this 
gives us a fair idea of the arrangement of the original work by 
Theophrastos.

12. So far as what ho tells us of the earliest Greek philo- Cicero, 
sophy goes, Cicero must be classed with the doxographers, and

not with the philosophers ; for he gives us nothing but extracts 
at second or third hand from the work of Theophrastos. Two 
passages in his writings fall to be considered under this head, 
namely, Lucidlus (Acad, il), 118, and De Natura Deorum, 
i. 25-41.

(a) Doxography of the Lucullus. — This contains a meagre 
and inaccurately-rendered summary of the various opinions held

Digitized by Google

374

NOTE ON THE SOURCES.(a) Doxography of the Lucullus. — This contains a meagre 
and inaccurately-rendered summary of the various opinions held

Digitized by Google

374

NOTE ON THE SOURCES.

by philosophers with regard to the dpxn (Dox. p. 119 sqq.), and 
would be quite useless if it did not in one case enable us to 
verify the exact words of Theophrastos (Chap. I. n. 45). The 
doxography has come through the hands of Kleitomachos, who 
succeeded Karneades in the headship of the Academy (129 B.C.).

(b) Doxography of the De Natura Deorum. — A fresh light 
was thrown upon this important passage by the discovery at 
Herculaneum of a roll containing fragments of an Epicurean 
treatise, so like it as to be at once assumed as its original. This 
treatise was at first ascribed to Phaidros, on the ground of the 
reference in Ej>p. ad Att. xiii. 39. 2, but the real title, ^iXoSijfiov 
Trcpl cr<rc/?ei'a?, was afterwards restored (Dox. p. 530). Dicls, how- 
ever, has shown (Dox. p. 122 sqq.) that there is much to be said 
for the view that Cicero did not copy Philodemos, but that both 
drew from a common source (no doubt Phaidros, Utpl Ow), 
which itself went back to a Stoic epitome of Theophrastos. 
The passage of Cicero and the relevant fragments of Philo- 
demos are edited in parallel columns by Diels (Dox. p. 531 sqq.).

II. r>IOGRAriIICAL DOXOGRATHEKS.II. r>IOGRAriIICAL DOXOGRATHEKS.

Hippolytot. 13. Of the " biographical doxographies " the most important 
is Book I. of the Refutation of all HereMes by Hippolytos. 
This had long been known as the Philotophoumena of Origen ; 
but the discovery of the remaining books, which were first 
published at Oxford in 1854, showed finally that it could not 
belong to him. It is drawn mainly from some good epitome of 
Theophrastos, in which the matter was already rearranged 
under the names of the various philosophers. We must note, 
however, that the sections dealing with Thales, Pythagoras, 
Herakleitos, and Empedokles come from an inferior source, 
some merely biographical compendium full of apocryphal anec- 
dotes and doubtful statements.

n> f "stro 14. The fragments of the pseudo-Plutarchean Stromatew, 
matew." quoted by Eusebios in his Praeparatio Evangelica, come from 
a source similar to that of the best portions of the Philoso- 
phoumena. So far as we can judge, they differ chiefly in two 
points. In the first place, they are mostly taken from the 
earliest sections of the work, and therefore most of them deal

Digitized by Google

BIOGRAPHERS.

375

with the primary substance, the heavenly bodies and the earth. 
In the second place, the language is a much less faithful 
transcript of the original.

1 5. The scrap-book which goes by the name of Diogenes " Diogene* 
Laertios (cf. Uscner, Epicurea, p. 1 sqq.) contains large frag- Lacrtl0s - n 
ments of two distinct doxographies. One is of the merely 
biographical, anecdotic, and apophthegniatic kind used by Hip- 
polytos in his first four chapters ; the other is of a better

class, more like the source of Ilippolytos' remaining chapters.

16. Short doxographical summaries are to bo found in Tatristic doxo- 
Eusebios (/'. E. x., xiv., xv.), Theodoret (Gr. off. cur. ii. 9-11), grai,hiea - 
Irenaeus (C. lurr. ii. 14), Arnobius (Talia prorfit adv. mit.ii. 9), Augustine (Civ. Dei, viii. 2). These depend mainly 
upon the writers of "Successions," whom we shall have to 
consider in the next section.

C— BIOGRAPHERS.

17. The first to write a work entitled "Successions of the Succession*. 
Philosophers" was Sotion (I). L. ii. 12; R. P. 4a), about

200 B.C. The arrangement of his work is explained in Dox. 
p. 147. It was cjutomised by Heraklcides Lembos. Other 
writers of AiaSo^ai were Antisthenes, Sosikrates, and Alex- 
ander. All these compositions were accompanied by a very 
meagre doxography, and made interesting by the addition of 
unauthentic apophthegms and apocryphal anecdotes.

18. The peripatetic, llermippos of Smyrna, known as KaAAi- Hermippos. 
patios (r. 200 B.c), wrote several biographical works which are 
frequently quoted. The biographical details are very untrust- 
worthy indeed, but sometimes bibliographical information is

added, which doubtless rests upon the Finale* of Kalli- 
machos.

19. Another peripatetic, Satyros, the pupil of Aristarchos, Satyros. 
wrote (c. 160 b.c.) " Lives of Famous Men." The same remarks 
apply to him as to Hermippos. His work was epitomised by 
Herakleides Lembos.

Digitized by Google

376

NOTE OX THE SOURCES.

41 Diogenes 20. The work which goes by the name of Laertios Diogenes 
Lacrtios." j g a mere patchwork of all earlier learning. It has not been 
digested or composed by any single mind at all. It is little 
more than a collection of extracts made at haphazard, probably 
by more than one successive possessor of the MS. But, of 
course, it contains much that is of the greatest value,

J).— CHRONOLOGISTS.

20. The founder of ancient chronology was Eratosthenes of 
Kyrene (275-194 b.c.) ; but his work was soon supplanted by 
the metrical version of Apollodoros (r. 140 B.C.), from which 
most of our information as to the dates of early philosophers is 
derived. See Diels' paper on the Xporuca of Apollodoros in 
Itheiii. Mum. xxxi.The method adopted is as follows : — If the date of some 
striking event in a philosopher's life is known, that is taken as 
his u floruit " (dx/xtj), and he is assumed to have been forty years 
old at that date. In default of this, some historical era is taken 
as the " floruit." Of these the chief are the archonship of 
Damasias, *585 u.c., the taking of Sardeis in 546 B.C., the 
accession of Polykrates in 532 b.c, and the foundation of 
Thourioi in 444 B.C. Further details will be easily found by 
reference to the Index, s.v. Apollodoros.

Kratostheneg 
ami Apollo- 
iluroa.

DjfljliZPfl hy G

INDEX

♦-

Aahmes, IS.

Achilles [Tatius] {Note on Source*, 
§ 9), 7_L

-Vt 78^ 108a 200, 240, 2M.

Aigospotamos, meteoric stone of, 274, 
295.

«;*■>, 240, 294.

uxtCruecra., 103 sq.

Akousmaties, 93^ 101.

Akron, 212, 215.

A lk it lamas, 215.

Alkmaion, 98, 205, 267.

Amlron of Ephesos, 9£l

Animism, 3, 10, 45,

Antichthon, 319.

Antonius Diogenes, SJL

krrupoi x«r/*«<. £ee Worlds, innumer- 
able.

«fiV», r«, 52 sqq., 108.

Apollodoroa (Ao<e o?t Source*, D), 
38, 41 sq., 7_5 sq., 9L HO, 129, 
1£0_ sq., 209, 272, 323, 333.

Apollonios of Tyana, 88 sq.

Archytaa, 301_, 320.

Aristotle, 41 sqq., 45, 50. sq., 5.3 sqq., 
72, 90, 98, 292, 2M sqq., 321, 
LiiLU sqq., sqq., 344, 354 sq.

Aristoxenos, 90, lQQsq., 304, 320.

i^ri2«»«TT«<, 2LL

Astronomy. *S , e^ Babylon, Meteor- 
ology. 
Athens, 216 sq., 3jKL 
Atlas, VL

Babylon, astronomy in, 21,35 sq., 48, 
Bacon, 28,

Baiiniker, 190, 326, 3A4.

Bernays, 102. sqq., lv>."».

Biological interest of fifth century

B.c, 44, 206, 24Jk 287, 290. 
Breath of the World, 79, 107, 320. 
By water, L32 sqq., 302 sqq.

Chaos, Z. 
Chiapelli, 79, 10JL

Chronos, 7, see Time.

Cicero (Note, on Sources, § 12), 45 sq.,

62 sq., 82. 
Cosmogonies, L

Damasias, 3JL

Demctrios Phalereus, 37, 212. 
Demokritos, 1, 20, 350 sqq. 
Dikaiarchos, 90. 
Drama, 86. 
Dualism, 106^ 198,

Egypt, geometry in, 15, 17, 112, 35, 
42.

Kn-Tvprnftf, 160 sqq.Damasias, 3JL

Demctrios Phalereus, 37, 212. 
Demokritos, 1, 20, 350 sqq. 
Dikaiarchos, 90. 
Drama, 86. 
Dualism, 106^ 198,

Egypt, geometry in, 15, 17, 112, 35, 
42.

Kn-Tvprnftf, 160 sqq.

Elea, 112^ ISO,

Elements, 59^ 240 sqq.

Eleusinia, SlL

Epimenides, 7, 85,

Eratosthenes (Note on Sources, D)

ai.

Erinyes, 155. 
Esotericisin, 93, 1M sqq. 
Eudenios, 35, 40, 
Euripides, 27JL 
Eurytos, ail. 
Euthymcncs, 39. 
Exarayes, 33.

Fetishism, 3,

Fossils, 24.

Frazer, J. G., 10, Sfi,

Glaukos of Rhegion, 209. 
Gnomon, 48, 311. 
Gorgias, 215, 3!i9_. 
Gruppc, O, 5.

Harmony, 10fi sq., liS sq. 
Hegel, 27, 147, LiiL 
Hekataios, 39, 41, IS, 
Herakleides of Tontos, 103, 214, 
Hermodoros, 129, 141. 
Herodotos, 4, 15, 19, 22, 31^ 33^ 37^

9_L 92, 106. 
Hcsiod, 5 sq., 130.

378

INDEX.

Hestia, 204, 319. 
Hippasos, 10^ 143, 2QL 
]Iip|H)kratean writings, 138, 155,

152 sq., afiJL 
Homer, 4, 14, 186, 14L 
Hylozoisni, 13, 4JL

Iamblichor, 8JL 
Idaios of Hiraera, 3ik£L 
Indian philosophy, 2Z* 
Iniinitc. Ste Zxup$*. 
Innumerable Worlds. See Worlds. 
l*T6 f '.n, 22, 10JL

.Jim [it, 73. 147.

Karianh, 3JL 
Kern, O., 2» 
Klepsydra, 23JL 
Knatz, Fr., 242. 
*^r, 24, 107, 135, 162. 
Kratinos, 349. 
Kratylos, 131, SiilL 
Krische, 196.

La no, Andrew, 2, £L

Lassalle, 133, 147, 160, 1G2,

165. 
Linos, 10. 
Ix>bcck, 7, 16, §6^

133, HO, lfik 
Liitze, 54. 
Lydia, 3JL 
Lysis,

Martin, 3.4.

Ma.fr.fjLa. Tin. el, 93.

Matter, 9, 55, 250. sq. 
Medicine, 215, 362 sq. 
Metempsychosis, 92, 1QQ sqq., 27_0 sq. 
Meteoric stone. Sec Aigospotumos. 
Meteorology, 25, 44, 7_L 
ftirpa, L35,"l54, 16_L 
Meyer, Ed., UL 
Miletos, 3_0_.

Monism, 192. See Pluralism. 
Monolatry, (L 
popfn, 223.

Mysteries, 86, 141, UL 
Mythology, fisq., UL

NeuhXuser, 56. sq. 
Nikomachos of Gorasa, 8JL 
Nile, 38. sq.

OLYMros, 202. 
ifjiHoutf,^ 28J1 sq.

Orgia, 84, 8JL

Orphics, 7, 86, 182, 213 sqq. 
12, 24, fiLNeuhXuser, 56. sq. 
Nikomachos of Gorasa, 8JL 
Nile, 38. sq.

OLYMros, 202. 
ifjiHoutf,^ 28J1 sq.

Orgia, 84, 8JL

Orphics, 7, 86, 182, 213 sqq. 
12, 24, fiL

Pabst, A., 334 sqq. 
Patin, A., 130, 144. 
Pausanias of Gcla, 21iL 
Periklcs, 2ZL. 
Prleiderer, E., ILL 
Pherekydes, "L 
funi, 10, 52. 
vtXnttf, 77. 
Piremus, UL

Plato, UK, 148, 150, 180, 202, 277,

L'92. ii2J sq.

Pluralism, 207, 322.

Political activity of philosophers, 40,

24 sqq., 183i 210 st]., 223, 
Polytheism, 6, 10, 8JL 
Pores, 242 sq. 
Porphyry, 89, 102, 
Potamilla, 233 .

71. 135, 15JL

Rarefaction and condensation, 77, 
150.

Religion, Greek, 6, £4 sqq., 96,

109 sq. 
Rhetoric, 84, 215. 
Rhiud papyrus, L7_. 
Robertson Smith, 84. 
Rohde, E., SJi sqq., 250 sqq.

Saros, 3JL 
Savce, 2L

Schlcierrnacher, 55, 131, 35JL 
Schools of philosophy, 28, 47, 75,

274 sqq. 
Schuster, 149, 16JL 
Seqt, HL

Sokmtes, 180, 3M.

Stoic "accommodation," 46, 140. 143.

160-166. 
Symbols. See ixiutfAara.

Tannery, 34, 70, 74. 107, 171, 288, 
32JL

Teichmullcr, 12, 63, 71, 133, UL 
Tetraktys, 31&

Theogony (Hesiod's), 5 sq., (Orphic) 
L>

fU**,, 29, 8JL 
Timaios, 110, 211 sqq. 
Time, 19JL

World, 24.

Worlds, innumerable, 6J sqq., 82, 
295, 358, 36JL

MORKI80X AND Ollin. PIUVTKHS, EDINBURGH.

»

THE

ENCYCLOPEDIA BRITANNICA

A DICTIONARY OF ARTS, SCIENCE, AND 
GENERAL LITERATURE.

ARRANGED IN ALPHABETICAL ORDER.

In Twenty-four 4to Volumes and separate Index, Illustrated with Plates, 
Coloured Maps, and Wood Engravings.

Price in cloth, gilt top, £37. 
Half-Russia or half-morocco, ^45, 6s.

A Detailed Prospectus, giving a selection of the principal contents 
of the volumes and other particulars, with specimen pages, 
may be obtained from any Bookseller or from the Publishers.

ADAM AND CHARLES BLACK, 
LONDON AND EDINBURGH.

Digitized by Google

THE

Waverley Novels.

AUTHOR'S EDITIONS.

Complete Sets

x. Price £i t is. Sixpenny Edition. In 4 vols., 8vo, half-French

morocco.Digitized by Google

THE

Waverley Novels.

AUTHOR'S EDITIONS.

Complete Sets

x. Price £i t is. Sixpenny Edition. In 4 vols., 8vo, half-French

morocco.

2. Price £1, 17s. Pocket Edition. Illustrated with 125 Wood

Engravings. In 25 vols., 121110, cloth. The same in limp Cape 
morocco, price ^3, 3s.

3. Price £2, 8s. Twelve Volume Edition. Printed from the plates

of the Centenary Edition. Illustrated with Steel Frontispieces and 
Woodcuts. Crown 8vo, cloth.

4. Price £2, ios. Two Shilling- Edition. Printed from the plates of

the Centenary Edition. Illustrated with Frontispieces and Vignettes. 
25 vols., crown 8vo, cloth.

5. Price j£3, 3s. Half-crown Edition. Printed from the plates of

the Centenary Edition. Illustrated with Steel Frontispieces and 
Vignettes. 25 vols., crown 8vo. cloth, gilt top. The same may Ix.* 
had in half-ruby Persian calf, or in half-blue morocco.

6. Price £4, 4s. Centenary Edition. With Additional Notes. Illus-

trated with 158 Steel Plates. In 25 vols., crown 8vo, cloth. The 
same may be had in half calf.

7. Price £6. Roxburghe Edition. Illustrated with 1600 Woodcuts

and 96 Steel Plates. In 48 vols., fcap. 8vo, cloth, paper label ; or in 
half- French morocco, price £S t 8s.

ADAM AND CHARLES BLACK, 
LONDON AND EDINBURGH.

Digitized by Google

THE COLLECTED WRITINGS

OF

THOMAS DE QUINCEY,

"THE ENGLISH OPIUM-EATER." 
NEW AND ENLARGED EDITION. 
Edited by DAVID MASSON, M.A., LL.IX,

PROFESSOR OF RHETOK1C AND ENGLISH LITER ATL'RK IN THE 
UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH.

OiiTiilj ^Jortroits 011ft otljrr UltxstrntLons.

(. omplcte with General Index, by H. R Wheatley, in Fourteen Volumes.

Crown 8vo, cloth, price 50s. 
Or in separate Volumes, price 3s. 6d each.

"Professor Masson's edition is the model of what an edition should be." 
— AthetHTum.

THE COMPLETE WORKS

Edgar Allan Poe.

Edited by JOHN H. INGRAM. 
(Wlitlj iJtrntoir, ^portrntt, 8tt0 otijer Sllustrntiotts.THE COMPLETE WORKS

Edgar Allan Poe.

Edited by JOHN H. INGRAM. 
(Wlitlj iJtrntoir, ^portrntt, 8tt0 otijer Sllustrntiotts.

In Four Volumes, crown 8vo, cloth, price 14s. 
Or in separate Volumes, price 3s. 6d. each.

I. TALES GROTESQUE. 
II. TALES ARABESQUE.

III. POEMS AND ESSAYS.

IV. AUTOGRAPHY AND CRITICISMS.

ADAM AND CHARLES BLACK, 
LONDON AND EDINBURGH.

Digitized by Google

In extra crown Svo, cloth, 366 pages, Illustrated, price Js. 6d.,

Our life

IN

the Swiss highlands.

BY

JOHN ADPINGTON SYMONDS,

AND HIS DAUGHTER MARGARET.

CONTENTS.

novas in Winter.

Daivi m the Ulden Days.

Snow, Frost. Storm, and Avalanche

—Notts. 
Chiavenna in April. 
C a tihinx a Marmot. 
Vignettes in Prose and I'ersc. 
Summer in tk? Pr.ittigau. 
Among the Orchards of Tyrol.

Melchior Ragetli ; or, The Life of a

Swiss Porter. 
Swiss Athletic Sports. 
Tobogganing on a Glacier. 
Hay Hauling on tlu: Alpine Snow. 
A Pour Days' Sleigh-Drive. 
A Page of my Life. 
Bacchus in Grauhiinden. 
Winter Nights at Davos. 
Ppili>:;ue.

ADAM AND CHARLES BLACK, 
LO N DO N A ND EDI NB URGH.

THE REMAINS

OF

Ancient Rome.

liY

SLADB

J. HENRY MIDDLETON,

>F FINK ART, DIRECTOR OF THE FITZWIL 
FBLLOW OF KING'S COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

CONTENTS.

CHAP.

I., II. .Si/*? <y Rom*, and Roman 
Methods of Construction

IV,

III. Prehistoric

of the Kings, 
, v. 7'A<r Palatine Hill. 
VI., VII. 7^ Forum Roman um and 
its adjacent Buildings. 
viil. 7"A<- Capitoline Hill. 
IX. 7^ Architectural iirvwth 
of Rome.

VOL. II.

I. 7"Ar Imperial Fora. 
II. 7^ On:/ J?<w.

roz.. //.-

CHAP.

III. Theatres in Rome.

IV. 7*A^ Amphitheatres of Rome. 
v. Roman Baths.

VI. 7^ Forum Boarium and tin- 
Campus Marti us.

VII. Various Temples and other 
Buildings.

VIII. 7*Wj an</ Honorary Monu- 
ments.

IX. Triumphal Arches.

X. 7V4r H'rfArr Supply of Rome.

XI. Roads and Bridges of Rome.

XII. 7"/r<r Walls of Aurelianus. 
General Index.

ADAM AND CHARLES BLACK 
LONDON AND EDINBURGH.

Digitized by Google

MANUALS OFX. 7V4r H'rfArr Supply of Rome.

XI. Roads and Bridges of Rome.

XII. 7"/r<r Walls of Aurelianus. 
General Index.

ADAM AND CHARLES BLACK 
LONDON AND EDINBURGH.

Digitized by Google

MANUALS OF

Practical Law

In crown 8vo, price 5s.

The Volumes new published in this

It is better for a layman to go to a law-book than to go to law."—

PRESS NOTICES.

" Well arranged."— St. James's Gazette.

"The series as a whole must prove of 
immense service to the clauses mentioned, 
as well as to accountants, trustees, factors, 
and others. "-Cleugatv Herald.

BANKING AND NEGOTIABLE 
INSTRUMENTS. 
By Frank Tillyard.

BANKRUPTCY.

By Charles F. Morrell.

COPYRIGHT AND PATENTS.

By Wyndham Anstis 
Bewes, LL.B.

PARTNERSHIP AND COM- 
PANIES.

By Tercy F. Wheeler.

WILLS AND INTESTATE 
SUCCESSION. 
By James Williams, B.C.L., 
M. A.

INSURANCE.

By Charles F. Morrell.

EDUCATION.

By James Williams, B.C.L., 
M. A.

" Deservedly popular.' 
ing A V

Excellent."— Observer.

" Admirable five-shilling series.'

"A well-arranged series at a uniform 
certain distinct ad-

vantages in regard to method of tre 
and style."— Liverpool Mercury.

"We wish Messrs. Black's 
little series weU."-Z*w Notes.

"A series whose issues so far arc un- 
doubtedly of great value to the financial, 
commercial, and trading communities." — 
Liverpool Post.

"The manuals, if used as they are in- 
tended to be, ought certainly to be found 
of great assistance."— Whitehall Revietv.

ADAM AND CHARLES BLACK, 
LONDON AND EDINBURGH.

-

Digitized by Google

CATALOGUE

OK

Theological Works

PUBLISHED BY

ADAM & CHARLES BLACK

Xondott BMnburgb

4 SOHO SQUARE, W. 22 HANOVER STREET

I 892

Digiti zed

In 2 Vols. Demy 8vo, pp. 1582, price 24s.

THE

LIVES OF THE FATHERS

Shetcbcs of Cburcb Distort In JSictirapbs.

FREDERIC W. FARRAR, D.D., F.R.S.

Archdeacon of Westminster and Chaplain to the House of Commons.

BIOGRAPHIES.

1. St. Ignatius of Antioch, Bishop

and Martyr.

2. St. Polycari* ok Smyrna, Bishop

and Martyr.Archdeacon of Westminster and Chaplain to the House of Commons.

BIOGRAPHIES.

1. St. Ignatius of Antioch, Bishop

and Martyr.

2. St. Polycari* ok Smyrna, Bishop

and Martyr.

3. St. Iren/Kls. 
St. Justin the Martyr. 
Tertullian. 
St. Cyfrian.

Clement of Alexandria. 
Origen.

4-

5- 
6.

7-

8.

9. St. Athanasius.

10. St. Hilary of Poictikks.

11. St. Martin of Tours.

13. St. Gregory of Nazianzas.

13. St. Basil.

14. St. Gregory of Nyssa.

15. St. Ambrose, Bishop of Milan.

16. St. Jerome.

17. St. Augustine.

18. St. Chrysostom.

"Archdeacon Farrar has been successful in accomplishing the aims which he set 
before him. The book is the most readable production on the history of Christianity 
during the first four centuries that we have in English. It abounds in brilliant 
pictures of the great men of those times, it details their mode of life and their 
opinions in clear, vigorous language, and it pronounces decided judgments on their 
merits and demerits. Every page bear traces that the author has gone to the 
original sources, and has consulted the ablest modern works on patristic literature. "

Athenceum.

" It will be enjoyed by multitudes. Dr. Farrar has real knowledge of his subject. 
We gaze with admiration on his vast industry and his powers of assimilation ; and 
perhaps no work that he has written gives an impress of greater learning thim do the 
present volumes."— Anglican Church Magaxine.

2

Digitized by Google

In 1 Vol. Demy Svo, Cloth, Price IPs. Od.

<&0> Cestament Cijeologg;

OR

THE HISTORY OF HEBREW RELIGION 
FROM THE YEAR 800 B.C.

by

ARCHIBALD DUFF, M.A., LL.D.

Professor of Old Testament Theology in the Yorkshire 
United Independent College, Bradford.

"The book is alive from beginning to end." — The Independent.

"Written from a scientific standpoint by an expert and enthusiastic scholar."

'* Thorough and masterly."— Religious Rex'iew of Revinvs. [ The Speaker."Written from a scientific standpoint by an expert and enthusiastic scholar."

'* Thorough and masterly."— Religious Rex'iew of Revinvs. [ The Speaker.

" I have found it to be an education to read this book, an education for the 
pulpit."— Dr. Joskph I'arkkr in the Urittsk Weekly.

" Marked by accurate scholarship in every page." — Expository Times.

" Much thought has gone to make this book, and large toil and long experience 
in teaching."— The Independent (and notice).

" It is an able and luminous piece of constructive work, recognising fully the i 
order of things ; a book that no wise student can afford to ignore."

" Of great merit. "— Aberdeen Free Press. [Review of the Churches.

"A singularly fresh and able book." -Glasgow Mail.

"Thorough and masterly."— Glasgow Herald.

" It is a valuable addition to the discussion on the greates 
of the day. "—Review of Rev iews.

" There are many things much to be admired in this book."

Prof. A. B. Davidson in

"This stimulating volume." — Sheffield Independent.

" He has certainly put both power and eloquence into his book."

The Modern Church.

" We have no hesitation in heartily recommending Dr. Dufl s book."

The Literary World. 
" This is a timely and altogether able study of a subject which has an undying 
interest for thoughtful folk."— Eastern Morning News.

" In its scholarly grasp and analytical insight is an important contribution from 
the historical school of scriptural exposition." — Newcastle Chronicle.

"This exceedingly able and comprehensive work."— Bradford Ohsenvr.

" One of the few recent works in theology to which the term fascinating may be 
applied." — Scottish leader.

"It is distinctly positive and scholarly, while none the less readable and devo- 
tional. "—Liverpool Mercury.

" It is written in a clear and animated manner, and is pervaded by a glow of 
earnest, kindly, and hopeful feeling, which excites the interest of the reader, and 
carries him sympathetically along." — The Scotsman.Digitized by Google

In 1 Vol. Crown 8vo, Price 3s. 6d.

NATURAL THEOLOGY.

Zbc (Siffort) lectures

DELIVERED BEFORE THE UNIVERSITY OF 
EDINBURGH IN 1891.

BY

Professor Sir G. G. STOKES, Bart., M.P.

" The Gitford lectures .ire an important contribution to the controversy between 
belief and unbelief. '— The Times.

"The tone of the whole is eminently candid, charitable, and Christian."

British Weekly.

" Will command and must receive the most respectful attention." — Anti-Jacobin. 
" As useful as it is interesting.'— O^nvr.

" A valuable contribution to the literature of their subject."— The Scotsman.

" Valuable as well as interesting to all classes of readers." — Manchester Courier.

" Its treatment is simple and scholarly." — Bradford Observer.

"The subject is dealt with in a comprehensive and masterly way."

Northern Whig.

" He has addressed himself to a highly difficult task with breadth and care."

Newcastle Leader. 
" Practical, substantial, and fresh, and has an unfailing common sense."

Aberdeen Journal.

"We welcome with delight this volume of Gifford Lectures." — Dundee Courier.

"Dogmatism is absent, and the lectures deserve to be widely read."

Evening News and Post.

"The book will supply a complete answer to many questions which thoughtful 
men are asking themselves to day, and it should be in the hands of all who wish to 
meet some of the scientific objections to the Christian faith." — Yorkshire Post.

"The spirit of the book, as of the man, is beautiful." — The Speaker.

"Thoughtful and suggestive." — Manchester Guardian.

"A few of the lectures are splendid.' -A berdeen Free Press.

" These lectures are replete with ingenuity and governed by scientific caution."

The Chronicle.

' ' A clear and finely reasoned review of the basis and growth of natural religion."

Glasgow Citizen.

"The book will have a circle of admiring readers, and deals simply with many

fe*\r\\r*C * * ii I-//T Mi' f / i*J* f~*flte 9*t+* #*Glasgow Citizen.

"The book will have a circle of admiring readers, and deals simply with many

fe*\r\\r*C * * ii I-//T Mi' f / i*J* f~*flte 9*t+* #*

"To all interested in the relations of religion and science, Prof. Stokes' book 
may be confidently recommended." — The Presbyterian.

"The style of the composition is easy, colloquial, and simple ; and the lectures 
ntiy readable, varied, and interesting."

are eminent

Prof. A. Macai.istf.R in The Critical Per it 
" Is a work displaying vast erudition and immense profundity of thought. "

Liverpool Post.

"The style is admirahly clear, avoiding as a rule purely scientific terminology, 
w hile the similes which are employed as illustrations are always simple and straight- 
forward."-/^/-^ Opinion.

4

Digitized by Googl I

In 1 Vol Crown 8vo, Price 8s.

SKETCH OF THE HISTORY

OF

ISRAEL AND JUDAH.

BY

j. WELLHAUSEN,

Professor at Marburg.

THIRD EDITION.

" The sketch is in every way admirable." — The Scotsman. 
" This work exhibits the vigorous, cautious writing of* an earnest scholarly 
thinker. '— Liverpool Mercury.

"A useful contribution to a subject of ever-increasing interest."

XaocastU Uader.

'• This learned and able work."' — Newcastle Chronicle.

" It admirably epitomises the subject, and exhibits on almost every page 
•evidences of Professor Wcllhausen's profound study. "—Publishers Circular.

" A carefully prepared and comprehensive history of gieat value to students."

M \:n Chester Courier. 
"This work is one of the chief formative influences in the attitude which 
scholars are assuming with regard to the Old Testament." — Dundee Advertiser. 
" It is invaluable as a guide to the secular history of the people of the Old

"It will be instructive alike to the biblical scholar and the general reader. "

Glasgow Citizen.

" Will be warmly welcomed by many readers." — Manchester Guardian. 
" It is an admirable hand-book."— The Modern Church. 
" It is a masterly sketch/ — Westminster Kevinv.Glasgow Citizen.

" Will be warmly welcomed by many readers." — Manchester Guardian. 
" It is an admirable hand-book."— The Modern Church. 
" It is a masterly sketch/ — Westminster Kevinv.

" It is already well known, and now it is easily accessible will probably be 
widely read." — Bradford Observer.

" Biblical students will be pleased to have the historical sketch in independent 
book torm. ' -Liverpcvl Post.

" No one will question the supreme ability of the sketch. '— Aberdeen Pi ce Press.

" We know it to be the most concise, and the ablest statement of what criticism 
finds the history of Israel to be that has yet been done into English."

Expository Times.

" Hft treatment of the status and influence of the prophets shows profound 
research by the latest lights,"— Morning Advertiser.

" The book is popularly written by an acknowledged master of the subject, and 
is one that no scholar can afford to neglect ; whilst at the same' time the general 
reader will find a rich treat in the rapid and vivid narrative, and in the stores of new 
and valuable knowledge in which he is here invited to share."— Sheffield Independent.

5

Digitized by Google

In Crown 8vo, Cloth. Price 6s.

PAGANISM

AND

CHRISTIANITY.

by

J. A. FARRER.

■

" Mr. Farrer has brought together many passages of great worth and beauty 
from the pages of the ancient philosophers.' — Scotsman.

" This is a remarkaWle book." — The Presbyterian.

" Mr. Farrer' s book will be found highly attractive."— Publishers' Circular,

" Will surprise many a reader by the curious evidence presented."

Liverpool Mercury.

" It contains much for whi we can thank the author."

The Modern Church.

" The reader who would know what Paganism really was, and what it really 
means, cannot do bettf-r than make a careful study of this most interesting 
book."— Dundee Advertiser.

" Mr. Farrer has a vigorous pen as well as a robust understanding .... his 
book will clear away some cobwebs of historical misconception."" Mr. Farrer has a vigorous pen as well as a robust understanding .... his 
book will clear away some cobwebs of historical misconception."

Expository Times.

m

" It is a painstaking essay, written by one who is versed in ancient and modern 
ph ilosophy . ' '— Observer.

" Is a noteworthy book, both for its matter and its style He has certainly

put the case with force and backed up his arguments with learning."

Ma n Chester Gua rdian.

"This most interesting and in many respects able book."— Glasgow Herald.

" There is much interesting matter in 1 Paganism and Christianity.' "

7 he Scottish Pulpit.

"The book is both well informed and interesting."— Review of Reviews.

"The author of this work has set himself a bold task, which he has grappled 
with successfully."— Morning Advertiser.

' ' The fruit of extensive reading. '—Birmingham Post.

" An original and delightful book."— Westminster Review.

" This singularly able book."- Yorkshire Herald.

6

Digitized by Google

■

In 1 Vol. Crown 8vo, Price 3s. 6d.

THE

Cfcurc j) of ^>cotlan&.

A SKETCH OF ITS HISTORY.

BY

The Rev. PEARSON M'ADAM MUIR,

Minister of MorningsLlc, Edinburgh.

NEW EDITION, WITH NOTES AND INDEX.

" Likely to be of permanent value.' — Scotsman.

" It cannot fail to be welcomed in its new form, for it is a most conscientious 
work in itself, and the publishers have done everything for it that paper and type 
and binding can do. "—Expository Times.

"We have rarely had Church History presented to us in so attractive a 
manner." — The Afodern Church.

" It is a book that every one who is interested in the history of Christianity in 
his country should have." — The Scottish Pulpit.

"This charming little history." — Review of the Churches.

" Many will be glad to have it in this form, and we can recommend it as suitable 
for a Christmas present or for a gift-book at any time."

Church of Scotland Mission Record." Many will be glad to have it in this form, and we can recommend it as suitable 
for a Christmas present or for a gift-book at any time."

Church of Scotland Mission Record.

"It is written in admirable stylf, and gives a very interesting sketch of the story 
of the Scottish Church." — The Critical Review.

"A work which has already won its way with the public."— National Church.

"The best historical primer possessed by any church. "—Scottish Standard.

" A very readable book."— Scottish Standard Bearer.

"The history of the Church of Scotland is a deeply interesting one — we might 
almost say romantic. However it might be told, it would be sure to enlist the 
attention of readers; but when, in addition to that, we have the history presented 
by so able and interesting a writer as the Rev. Mr. Muir, we can confidently expect 
a wide circulation for this edition. "—Scottish Church.

7

Digitized by Google

In 1 Vol. Demy 8vo, Cloth, Price lOs. 6d.

THE

OLD TESTAMENT

IN

THE JEWISH CHURCH.

BY

W. ROBERTSON SMITH, M.A., LL.D.

Fellow of Christ's College and Professor of Arabic in the 
University of Cambridge.

NEW AND ENLARGED EDITION.

Digitized by Google

In 1 Vol. Crown 8vo, Cloth, Price 5s.

A MANUAL

OF

THEOLOGY.

BY

THOMAS B. STRONG, M.A.

Student and Theological Tutor in Christ Church, 
Oxford ; Examining Chaplain to the 
Lord Bishop of Durham.

<£utltj anu Bible Class Cert^Boofcs.

EDITED BY

A. H. CHARTERIS, D.D.

Professor of Biblical Criticism in the University of Edinburgh, and one of 
Her Majesty's Chaplains for Scotland; and

Rev. J. A. M'CLYMONT, B.D.

Aberdeen. 
Price Sixpence each.

THE CHURCH OF SCOTLAND.

A SKETCH OF ITS HISTORY.

By the Rev. Pearson M'Adam Muir,

HANDBOOK OF CHRISTIAN EVIDENCES.

By Professor Stewart, D.D.

U nivenity of A berdeen. [Ready.

AN OUTLINE OF OLD TESTAMENT 
INTRODUCTION.

By Professor ROBERTSON, D.D.

University of Giasgcnv. {In preparation.

AN OUTLINE OF NEW TESTAMENT 
INTRODUCTION.U nivenity of A berdeen. [Ready.

AN OUTLINE OF OLD TESTAMENT 
INTRODUCTION.

By Professor ROBERTSON, D.D.

University of Giasgcnv. {In preparation.

AN OUTLINE OF NEW TESTAMENT 
INTRODUCTION.

By Rev. J. A. M'Clymont, B.D.

LANDMARKS OF CHURCH HISTORY.

By Professor Cowan, D.D.

University of A berdeen, [In prepa ration .

OTHER VOLUMES ARE IN CONTEMPLATION.

IO

Digitized by Google

In 1 Vol. Demy 8vo, Cloth.

Oriental t* 
<*§ Studies.

■

»

BY

PROFESSOR THEODOR NOLDEKE,

University of Strassburg.

TRANSLATED BY

JOHN SUTHERLAND BLACK, M.A.

IN PREPARATION.

■ • 
II

Digitized by Google

In 1 Vol. Crown 8vo, Cloth.

THE JOHANNINE

MEMORABILIA OF JESUS.

BY

The Rev. W. W. PEYTON,

Minister of Broughty Ferry.

IN PREPARATION.

12

Digitized by Google

WORKS BY THE LATE

ALEXANDER RALEIGH, D.D.

QUIET RESTING PLACES,

AND OTHER SERMONS. 
Twelfth Edition. Crown 8vo, 5j.

FROM DAWN TO THE PERFECT DAY.

Crown 8vo, $ s -

THE LITTLE SANCTUARY.

Third Edition. Crown 8vo, 4s. 6d.

1

THE BOOK OF ESTHER.

ITS PRACTICAL LESSONS AND DRAMATIC SCENES.

Fcap. 8vo, 4s. bd.

THE WAY TO THE CITY,

AND OTHER SERMONS. 
Second Edition. Crown 8vo, 5-r.

REST FROM CARE AND SORROW.

Fcap. 8vo, 3J. td.

THOUGHTS FOR THE WEARY AND

SORROWFUL.

Second Edition. 3s dd.

THE STORY OF JONAH.

Fcap. 8vo, 4J. 6d.

*

Digitized by Google

WORKS BY MRS. RALEIGH.

RECORDS OF THE 
LIFE OF THE LATE DR. RALEIGH.

Fcap. 8vo, 3s. 6d.

STUDIES IN THE UNSEEN.

Second Edition. Fcap. 8vo, 3s. 6d.

14

Digitized by Google

In 1 Vol. Demy 8vo, Cloth, Price lOs. 6d.

UNBELIEF

IN THE

EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

AS CONTRASTED WITH ITS EARLIER AND 
LATER HISTORY.

BY THE LATE

JOHN CAIRNS, D.D.

Principal and Professor of Systematic Theology and Apologetics in the 
United Presbyterian College, Edinburgh.

In 1 Vol. 24mo, Paper, Price 6d.

HANDBOOK

OF

CHRISTIAN EVIDENCES.

BY

ALEXANDER STEWART, D.D.

Professor of Systematic Theology in the University of Aberdeen.

1 S

Digitized by Google

THEIn 1 Vol. 24mo, Paper, Price 6d.

HANDBOOK

OF

CHRISTIAN EVIDENCES.

BY

ALEXANDER STEWART, D.D.

Professor of Systematic Theology in the University of Aberdeen.

1 S

Digitized by Google

THE

Encyclopedia 
Britannica.

A Dictionary of Arts, Science, and

*

General Literature.

ARRANGED IN ALPHABETICAL ORDER.

In 24 quarto volumes and separate Index, illustrated 
with Plates, Coloured Maps and Wood

Engravings.

PRICE IN CLOTH, GILT TOP, £37. 
HALF-RUSSIA OR HALF-MOROCCO, £45 6s.

A DctaiUd Prospectus, giving a selection of the principal contents of the 
volumes and other particulars, with specimen pages, may be obtained 
from any Bookseller or from the Publishers.

16

Digitized by Google

Digitized by Google

Digitized by Google

)

?

i

1

;