Corpus Hermeticum: Eight Tractates (G. R. S. Mead translation, 1906)
====================================================================
G. R. S. Mead’s 1906 public-domain translation of eight tractates of the Corpus Hermeticum (I, III, IV, VI, VIII, XI, XII, XIII), from Thrice-Greatest Hermes Vol. II. The core Hermetic sermons; source: Internet Archive.

===== TRACTATE I: Pœmandres, the Shepherd of Men =====

COEPUS HEEMETICUM I. 

PCEMANDRES, THE SHEPHERD 
OF MEN 

(Text: E. 328-338; P. 1-18; Pat. 5b-8.)i 

1. It chanced once on a time my mind was 
meditating on the things that are,2 my thought 
was raised to a great height, the senses of my 
body being held back — just as men are who are 
weighed down with sleep after a fill of food, or 
from fatigue of body. 

Methought a Being more than vast, in size 
beyond all bounds, called out my name and 
saith : What wouldst thou hear and see, and 
what hast thou in mind to learn and know ? 

2. And I do say : Who art thou ? 

He saith : I am Man-Shepherd,3 Mind of all- 

1 P. = Parthey (G.), Hermetis Trismegisti Poemander (Berlin; 
1854). Pat. = Patrizzi (F.), Nova de Universis Philosophia (Venice ; 
1593). 

2 7T€/>1 T&V 6vTU)V. 

8 UoiudvUpTjs. 

4 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

masterhood 1 ; I know what thou desirest and 
I’m with thee everywhere. 

3. [And] I reply : I long to learn the things 
that are, and comprehend their nature, and 
know God. This is, I said, what I desire to 
hear. 

He answered back to me : Hold in thy mind 
all thou wouldst know, and I will teach thee. 

4. E’en with these words His aspect changed,2 
and straightway, in the twinkling of an eye, all 
things were opened to me, and I see a Vision 
limitless, all things turned into Light, — sweet, 
joyous [Light]. And I became transported as I 
gazed. 

But in a little while Darkness came, settling 
down on part [of it], awesome and gloomy, 
coiling in sinuous folds,3 so that methought it 
like unto a snake.4 

And then the Darkness changed into some 
sort of a Moist Nature, tossed about beyond all 
power of words, belching out smoke as from a 

1 6 rrjs abdivrias vovs. The abOwria was the summa potestas of 
all things ; see R. 8, n. 1 ; and § 30 below. Cf also C. H ., xiii. 
(xiv.) 15. 

2 7]\\dyTJ TT} tSccu 

8 ctko\iu>s iaireipaficvoy. The sense is by no means certain. 
Menard translates “ de forme sinueuse ” ; Everard, “ coming down 
obliquely ” ; Chambers, “ sinuously terminated.” But cf in the 
Sethian system “the sinuous Water” — that is, Darkness (see 
Hipp., Philos ., v. 19). 

4 Cf Hipp., Philos ., v. 9 (S. 170, 71) : “They say the Serpent 
is the Moist Essence.” 

* 

fire, and groaning forth a wailing sound that 
beggars all description. 

[And] after that an outcry inarticulate came 
forth from it, as though it were a Voice of Fire. 

5. [Thereon] out of the Light ... 1 a Holy 
Word (Logos)2 descended on that Nature. And 
upwards to the height from the Moist Nature 
leaped forth pure Fire ; light was it, swift and 
active too. 

The Air, too, being light, followed after the 
Fire ; from out the Earth-and-Water rising up 
to Fire so that it seemed to hang therefrom. 

But Earth-and-Water stayed so mingled each 
with other, that Earth from Water no one could 
discern.3 Yet were they moved to hear by reason 
of the Spirit- Word (Logos) pervading them. 

6. Then saith to me Man-Shepherd : Didst 
understand this Vision what it means ? 

Nay ; that shall I know, I said. 

That Light, He said, am I, thy God, Mind, 
prior to Moist Nature which appeared from Dark- 
ness ; the Light- Word (Logos) [that appeared] 
from Mind is Son of God. 

1 A lacuna of six letters in the text. 

2 The idea of the Logos was the central concept of Hellenistic 
theology ; it was thus a word of many meanings, signifying 
chiefly Reason and Word, but also much else. I have accordingly 
throughout added the term Logos after the English equivalent 
most suitable to the context. 

3 Gf. II, vii. 99, as quoted by Apion in the chapter “ Concerning 
the jEon ” as Comment, on C. H,, xi. (xii.). 

What then ? — say I. 

Know that what sees in thee 1 and hears is the 
Lord’s Word {Logos) ; but Mind is Father-God. 
Not separate are they the one from other ; just 
in their union [rather] is it Life consists. 

Thanks be to Thee, I said. 

So, understand the Light [He answered], and 
make friends with it. 

7. And speaking thus He gazed for long into 
my eyes,2 so that I trembled at the look of Him. 

But when He raised His head, I see in Mind 
the Light, [but] now in Powers no man could 
number, and Cosmos 3 grown beyond all bounds, 
and that the Fire was compassed round about 
by a most mighty Power, and [now] subdued 
had come unto a stand. 

And when I saw these things I understood by 
reason of Man- Shepherd’s Word (Logos). 

8. But as I was in great astonishment, He 
saith to me again : Thou didst behold in Mind 
the Archetypal Form whose being is before 
beginning without end. Thus spake to me 
Man-Shepherd. 

And I say : Whence then have Nature’s 
elements their being? 

To this He answer gives : From Will of God. 

1 That is, in vision. 2 q jj., xj g. 

3 k6<thov. The word kosmos (world-order) means either “ order ” 
or “ world ” ; and in the original there is frequently a play upon 
the two meanings, as in the case of logos. 

[Nature1] received the Word (Logos), and gazing 
on the Cosmos Beautiful2 did copy it, making 
herself into a cosmos, by means of her own 
elements and by the births of souls. 

9. And God-the-Mind, being male and female / 
both, as Light' and Life subsisting, brought 
forth another Mind to give things form, who, 
God as he was of Fire and Spirit,3 formed Seven 
Rulers who enclose the cosmos that the sense 
perceives.4 Men call their ruling Fate.5 

10. Straightway from out the downward 
elements God’s Reason (Logos)6 leaped up to 
Nature’s pure formation, and was at-oned with 
the Formative Mind ; for it was co-essential 
with it.7 And Nature’s downward elements 
were thus left reason-less, so as to be pure matter. 

11. Then the Formative Mind ([at-oned] with 
Reason), he who surrounds the spheres and spins 
them with his whirl, set turning his formations, 
and let them turn from a beginning boundless 
unto an endless end. For that the circulation 

1 Nature and God’s Will are identical. 

2 That is, the ideal world-order in the realms of reality. 

3 Presumably the Pure Air of § 3. 

4 rbv alffdrjTbtf k6(tixov. The sensible or manifested world, our 
present universe, as distinguished from the ideal eternal universe, 
the type of all universes. 

6 €tnapfx4vr j. 

6 The Logos which had previously descended into Nature. 

7 Sfioova-ios , usually translated “ consubstantial ” ; but ovaia is 
“essence” and “being” rather than “substance.” 

THRIOE-GREATEST HERMES 

of these [spheres] begins where it doth end, as 
Mind doth will. 

And from the downward elements Nature 
brought forth lives reason-less ; for He did not 
extend the Season [Logos) [to them]. The 
Air brought forth things winged ; the Water 
things that swim, and Earth-and- Water one 
from another parted, as Mind willed. And 
from her bosom Earth produced what lives she 
had, four-footed things and reptiles, beasts wild 
and tame. 

12. But All-Father Mind, being Life and 
Light, did bring forth Man 1 co-equal to Himself, 
with whom He fell in love, as being His own 
child ; for he was beautiful beyond compare, 
the Image of his Sire. In very truth, God fell 
in love with His own Form * ; and on him did 
bestow all of His own formations. 

13. And when he gazed upon what the 
Enformer had created in the Father, [Man] too 
wished to enform ; and [so] assent was given 
him by the Father.3 

Changing his state to the formative sphere,4 
in that he was to have his whole authority,5 he 

1 The Prototype, Cosmic, Ideal or Perfect Man. 

1 Or Beauty (fiopfrjs). 

3 Gf. The Gospel of Mary in the Akhnnin Codex : “ He nodded, 
and when He had thus nodded assent . . . ” (F. F. F 586). 

4 The Eighth Sphere bounding the Seven. 

6 For note on i£ov<rla, see R. in loc . and 48, n. 3. 

PCEMANDRES, THE SHEPHERD OP MEN 

gazed upon his Brother’s creatures.1 They fell 
in love with him, and gave him each a share 
of his own ordering.2 

And after that he had well-learned their 
essence and had become a sharer in their nature, 
he had a mind to break right through the 
Boundary of their spheres, and to subdue 3 the 
might of that which pressed upon the Fire.4 

14. So he who hath the whole authority o’er 
[all] the mortals in the cosmos and o’er its lives 
irrational, bent his face downwards through 5 the 
Harmony,6 breaking right through its strength, 
and showed to downward Nature God’s fair Form. 

And when she saw that Form of beauty which 
can never satiate, and him who [now] possessed 
within himself each single energy of [all seven] 
Rulers as well as God’s [own] Form, she smiled 
with love ; for ’twas as though she’d seen the 
image of Man’s fairest form upon her Water, his 
shadow on her Earth. 

1 That is the Seven Spheres fashioned by his Brother. 

2 Tclftj, rank or order. 

3 Or “ wear down ” (KaTairovrj<Tai). The reading KaravoTjcrai, 
however, may be more correct ; “ he had a mind to come to 
knowledge of” this Boundary or Ring Pass not. See R. 49, n. 1. 

4 Sc. the Mighty Power of § 9. 

5 irap€Kv\l/€y. Cf. Cyril, C. J ., i. 33 (Frag, xiii.) ; R. 50 : “ bevgt 
sich . . . nieder.” But compare especially Plato, Phcedrus, 249, c. , 
where he speaks of the soul “ raising up her face (<W/citya<ra) to That 
which is.” Cf. also Apion in Clement. Horn ., vi. 4, in Comment. 
C. H.y xi. (xii.) 

6 That is, the harmonious interplay, concord or system of the 
spheres ruled by the Rulers ; in other words, the cosmos of Fate. 

He in his turn beholding the form like to 
himself, existing in her, in her Water, loved it 
and willed to live in it ; and with the will came 
act,1 and [so] he vivified the form devoid of 
reason. 

And Nature took the object of her love and 
wound herself completely round him, and they 
were intermingled, for they were lovers. 

15. And this is why beyond all creatures on 
the earth man is twofold ; mortal because of 
body, but because of the essential Man immortal. 

Though deathless and possessed of sway o’er 
all, yet doth he suffer as a mortal doth, subject 
to Fate. 

Thus though above the Harmony, within the 
Harmony he hath become a slave. Though 
male-female,2 as from a Father male-female, and 
though he’s sleepless from a sleepless [Sire], yet 
is he overcome [by sleep]. 

16. Thereon [I say : Teach on],3 0 Mind of 
me, for I myself as well4 am amorous of the 
Word (Logos). 

The Shepherd said : This is the mystery kept 
hid until this day. 

1 ivepyua, energy, and realization. 

2 That is “ a-sexual ” but having the potentiality of both sexes. 

3 For the various suggestions for filling up this lacuna, see R. 
in loc. ; and for that of Keil, see R. 367. 

4 Sc. as well as Nature. 

/ 

PffiMANDRES, THE SHEPHERD OF MEN 11 

Nature embraced by Man brought forth a 
wonder, oh so wonderful. For as he had the 
nature of the Concord 1 of the Seven, who, as I 
said to thee, [were made] of Fire and Spirit2 — 
Nature delayed not, but immediately brought 
forth seven “ men,” in correspondence with the 
natures of the Seven, male-female and moving 
in the air.3 

Thereon [I said] : 0 Shepherd, . . . 4 5 ; for 
now I’m filled with great desire and long to hear ; 
do not run off.6 

The Shepherd said : Keep silence, for not as yet 
have I unrolled for thee the first discourse (logos). 

Lo ! I am still, I said. 

17. In such wise then, as I have said, the J 
generation of these seven came to pass. Earth 
was as woman, her Water filled with longing ; 
ripeness she took from Fire, spirit from iEther. 
Nature thus brought forth frames to suit the 
form of Man. 

And Man from Life and Light changed into 
• - ° ° 

soul and mind, — from Life to soul, from Light 
to mind. 

And thus continued all the sense-world’s 

1 Harmony. 2 See § 9. 

3 /z€T apcrlovs. A term that must have a more definite meaning 

than the vague “sublime” by which it is generally translated. 

4 For Keil’s completion of the lacuna, see R. 368. 

5 e/cTptx*, perhaps meaning diverge from the subject, or go 

too fast ; lit., it means “ do not run away.” 

parts1 until the period of their end and new 
beginnings. 

18. Now listen to the rest of the discourse 
{logos) which thou dost long to hear. 

The period being ended, the bond that bound 
them all was loosened by God’s Will. For all 
the animals being male-female, at the same time 
with man were loosed apart ; some became partly 
male, some in like fashion [partly] female. And 
straightway God spake by His Holy Word 
{Logos) : 

“ Increase ye in increasing, and multiply in 
multitude, ye creatures and creations all ; and 
man that hath Mind in him, let him learn to 
know that he himself is deathless, and that the 
cause of death is love,2 though Love is all.”3 

19. When He said this, His Forethought4 did 
by means of Fate and Harmony effect their 
couplings and their generations founded. And 
so all things were multiplied according to their 
kind. 

And he who thus hath learned to know himself, 
hath reached that Good which doth transcend 
abundance; but he who through a love that 
leads astray, expends his love upon his body, — 

1 That is, the parts of what Hermes elsewhere calls the “ cosmic 
\ man.” 

2 Gf. C. H xvi. 16. 3 Omitting the r& before 6yra. 

* ir p6uoia> that is Nature as Sophia or Providence or Will. 

he stays in Darkness wandering,1 and suffering 
through his senses things of Death. 

20. What is the so great fault, said I, the 
ignorant commit, that they should be deprived of 
deathlessness ? 

Thou seem’st, he said, 0 thou, not to have 
given heed to what thou heardest. Did not I 
bid thee think ? 

Yea do I think, and I remember, and therefore 
give Thee thanks. 

If thou didst think [thereon], [said He], tell 
me : Why do they merit death who are in Death ? 

It is because the gloomy Darkness is the root 
and base of the material frame ; from it 2 came 
the Moist Nature; from this3 the body in the 
sense-world was composed ; and from this [body] 
Death doth the Water drain. 

21. Right was thy thought, 0 thou ! But how 
doth “he who knows himself, go unto Him,” as 
God’s Word {Logos) hath declared ? 

And I reply : the Father of the universals doth 
consist of Light and Life, and from Him Man 
was born. 

Thou sayest well, [thus] speaking. Light and 
Life is Father-God, and from Him Man was 
born. 

If then thou learnest that thou art thyself of 

1 There is a word-play between tcX&vtis and tr\ avdfievos. 

2 Sc, Darkness. 3 Sc. The Moist Nature. 

14 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

Life and Light, and that thou [only] happen’st 
to be out of them, thou shalt return again to Life. 
Thus did Man- Shepherd speak. 

But tell me further, Mind of me, I cried, how 
shall I come to Life again .... for God doth 
say : “ The man who hath Mind in him, let him 
learn to know that he himself [is deathless].” 

22. Have not all men then Mind ? 

Thou sayest well, 0 thou, thus speaking. I, 
Mind, myself am present with holy men and good, 
the pure and merciful, men who live piously. 

[To such] my presence doth become an aid, 
and straightway they gain gnosis of all things, 
and win the Father’s love by their pure lives, 
and give Him thanks, invoking on Him blessings, 
and chanting hymns, intent on Him with ardent 
love. 

And ere they give the body up unto its proper 
death, they turn them with disgust from its 
sensations, from knowledge of what things they 
operate.1 Nay, it is I, the Mind, that will not 
let the operations which befall the body, work to 
their [natural] end. For being door-keeper I'll 
close up [all] the entrances, and cut the mental 
actions off which base and evil energies induce. 

23. But to the Mind-less ones, the wicked and 
depraved, the envious and covetous, and those 
who murder do and love impiety, I am far off’, 

1 elSdres avTUv TCt ii/cpy/mara* 

yielding my place to the Avenging Daimon, 
who sharpening the fire, tormenteth him and 
addeth fire to fire upon him, and rusheth on him 
through his senses, thus rendering him the readier 
for transgressions of the law, so that he meets with 
greater torment ; nor doth he ever cease to have 
desire for appetites inordinate, insatiately striving 
in the dark.1 

24. Well hast thou taught me all, as I desired, 
0 Mind. And now, pray, tell me further of the 
nature of the Way Above. as now it is [for me].* 

To this Man-Shepherd said : When thy material 
body is to be dissolved, first thou surrenderest 
the body by itself unto the work of change, and 
thus the form thou hadst doth vanish, and thou 
surrenderest thy way of life,3 void of its energy, 
unto the Daimon.4 The body’s senses next pass 
back into their sources, becoming separate, and 
resurrect as energies ; and passion and desire 6 
withdraw unto that nature which is void of 
reason. 

25. And thus it is that man doth speed his 
way thereafter upwards through the Harmony. 

1 The text of this paragraph is hopelessly confused in the MSS. 

2 7T€pt TT )s av6Hov rrjs ytvo/xfyTjs. 

3 rb fidos, the “ habitual ” part of man, presumably way of life 
impressed by habit on the body ; or it may be “ class ” of life 
as in the Vision of Er. 

4 C/. a H., x. (xi.) 16. 

6 & Ovfxbs ical t) i Tndvflia , — the masculine and feminine as positive 
and negative aspects of the “ animal soul.” 

16 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

To the first zone he gives the Energy of 
Growth and Waning ; unto the second [zone], 
Device of Evils [now] de-energized 1 ; unto the 
third, the Guile of the Desires de-energized; 
unto the fourth, his Domineering Arrogance, 
[also] de-energized ; unto the fifth, unholy 
Daring and the Rashness of Audacity, de- 
energized; unto the sixth, Striving for Wealth 
by evil means, deprived of its aggrandisement ; 
and to the seventh zone, Ensnaring Falsehood, 
de-energized.2 

26. And then, with all the energizings of the 
Harmony stript from him, clothed in his proper 
Power, he cometh to that Nature which belongs 
unto the Eighth,3 and there with those-that-are 
hymneth the Father. 

They who are there welcome his coming there 
with joy; and he, made like to them that 
sojourn there, doth further hear the Powers who 
are above the Nature that belongs unto the 
Eighth, singing their songs of praise to God in 
language of their own. 

And then they, in a band,4 go to the Father 
home ; of their own selves they make surrender 
of themselves to Powers, and [thus] becoming 
Powers they are in God. This the good end for 

1 irtvepyriTov. 2 Cf. C. If, xiii. (xiv.) 7. 

3 Cf. C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 15. 

4 rc£|€i, order, group, sc. of the Nine ; — the Father being the 
Ten, or consummation. 

P(EM ANDRES, THE SHEPHERD OF MEN 17 

those who have gained Gnosis — to be made one 
with God. 

Why shouldst thou then delay ? Must it 
not be, since thou hast all received, that thou 
shouldst to the worthy point the way, in order 
that through thee the race of mortal kind may 
by [thy] God be saved ? 

27. This when He’d said, Man-Shepherd 
mingled with the Powers.1 

But I, with thanks and blessings unto the 
Father of the universal [Powers], was freed, full 
of the power He had poured into me, and full of 
what He’d taught me of the nature of the All and 
of the loftiest Vision. 

And I began to preach to men the Beauty of 
Devotion and of Gnosis : 

0 ye people, earth-born folk, ye who have 
given yourselves to drunkenness and sleep and 
ignorance of God, be sober now, cease from your 
surfeit, cease to be glamoured by irrational 
sleep 2 ! 

28. And when they heard, they came with 
one accord. Whereon I say : 

1 Cf. K. K., 25 : “ Thus speaking God became Imperishable 
Mind.” 

2 Cf. the logos, “ Jesus saith, I stood in the midst of the world, 
and in the flesh was I seen of them, and I found all men drunken, 
and none found I athirst among them, and my soul grieveth over 
the sons of men, because they are blind in heart.” Sayings of Our 
Lord from an Early Greek Papyrus , Grenfell & Hunt (London ; 
1897). 

VOL. II. 2 

7S i 

Ye earth-born folk, why have ye given up 
yourselves to Death, while yet ye have the power 
of sharing Deathlessness ? Repent, 0 ye, who 
walk with Error arm in arm and make of Ignor- 
ance the sharer of your board ; get ye from out 
the light of Darkness, and take your part in 
Deathlessness, forsake Destruction ! 

29. And some of them with jests upon their 
lips 1 departed [from me], abandoning themselves 
unto the Way of Death ; others entreated to be 
taught, casting themselves before my feet. 

But I made them arise, and I became a leader 
of the Race 2 towards home, teaching the words 
(logoi), how and in what way they shall be saved. 
I sowed in them the words (logoi) of wisdom 3 ; of 
Deathless Water were they given to drink.4 

And when even was come and all sun’s beams 
began to set, I bade them all give thanks to 
God. And when they had brought to an end 
the giving of their thanks, each man returned to 
his own resting place. 

30. But I recorded in my heart Man -Shepherd’s 
benefaction, and with my every hope fulfilled 
more than rejoiced. For body’s sleep became 

1 Of. P .8. A., xii, 2. 

2 The Race of the Logos, of all who were conscious of the Logos 
in their hearts, who had repented and were thus logoi. 

3 Of. Mark iv. 4 : “ He who soweth soweth the Word (Logos)” 

4 Cf. K. K 1 — the drink given by Isis to Horus. 

. 

the soul’s awakening,1 and closing of the eyes — 
true vision, pregnant with Good my silence, and 
the utterance of my word (logos) begetting of 
good things. 

All this befell me from my Mind, that is Man- 
Shepherd, Word (Logos) of all masterhood,2 by 
whom being God-inspired I came unto the Plain 
of Truth.3 Wherefore with all my soul and 
strength thanksgiving 4 give I unto Father-God. 

31. Holy art Thou, 0 God, the universals’ 
Father. 

Holy art Thou, 0 God, whose Will perfects 
itself by means of its own Powers. 

Holy art Thou, 0 God, who willeth to be 
known and art known by Thine own. 

Holy art Thou, who didst by Word (Logos) 
make to consist the things that are. 

Holy art Thou, of whom All-nature hath been 
made an Image. 

Holy art Thou, whose Form Nature hath never 
made. 

Holy art Thou, more powerful than all power. 

Holy art Thou, transcending all pre-eminence. 

Holy Thou art, Thou better than all praise. 

1 vytyisy lit. soberness, watchfulness, lucidity. 

2 See § 2 above. 

3 Gf. K. K. (Stob., Ec.y i. 49 ; p. 459, 20, W.), and Damascius, 
in Phot., Bibl.y p. 337b, 23. 

4 ev\oy( aVy — a play on \6yos . 

20 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

Accept my reason’s 1 offerings pure, from soul 
and heart for aye stretched up to Thee, 0 Thou 
unutterable, unspeakable, Whose Name naught 
but the Silence can express. 

32. Give ear to me who pray that I may ne’er 
of Gnosis fail, [Gnosis] which is our common 
being’s nature 2 ; and fill me with Thy Power, and 
with this Grace [of Thine], that I may give the 
Light to those in ignorance of the Race, my 
Brethren, and Thy Sons. 

For this cause I believe, and I bear witness ; I 
go to Life and Light. Blessed art Thou, 0 
Father. Thy Man 3 would holy be as Thou art 
holy, e’en as Thou gavest him Thy full authority 4 
[to be].

===== TRACTATE III: The Sacred Sermon =====

CORPUS HERMETICUM III. (IV.) 

Of Hermes 

(Text: P. 31-33; Pat. 8b-9.) 

1. The Glory of all things is God, Godhead and 
Godly Nature. Source of the things that are is 
God, who is both Mind and Nature, — yea Matter, 
the Wisdom that reveals all things. Source 
[too] is Godhead, — yea Nature, Energy, Neces- 
sity, and End, and Making-new-again.1 

Darkness that knew no bounds was in Abyss, 
and Water [too] and subtle Breath intelligent ; 
these were by Power of God in Chaos. 

Then Holy Light arose ; and there collected 
’neath Dry Space2 from out Moist Essence 

1 Of. P. S. A., xxvi. 2. 

2 Lit. “ Sand ” ; this presumably refers to the Light, and would 
thus mean “ within the area or sphere of Light ” — that is to say, 
manifestation. The “ Moist Essence ” is apparently the Water of 
Chaos, or primal substance. 

Elements ; and all the Gods do separate things 
out from fecund Nature. 

2. All things being undefined and yet un- 
wrought, the light things were assigned unto the 
height, the heavy ones had their foundations laid 
down underneath the moist part of Dry Space,1 
the universal things being bounded off by Fire 
and hanged in Breath to keep them up. 

And 2 Heaven was seen in seven circles ; its 
Gods were visible in forms of stars with all their 
signs ; while Nature had her members made 
articulate together with the Gods in her. And 
[Heaven’s] periphery revolved in cyclic course, 
borne on by Breath of God. 

3. And every God by his own proper power 
brought forth what was appointed him. Thus 
there arose four-footed beasts, and creeping things, 
and those that in the water dwell, and things 
with wings, and everything that beareth seed, 
and grass, and shoot of every flower, all having 
in themselves seed of again-becoming.3 

And they selected out 4 the births 6 of men for 
gnosis of the works of God and attestation of the 
energy of Nature ; the multitude of men for 

1 u<p’ pa ip. fx<p; presumably the “Water” of space. The 
heavy things are apparently primaeval or cosmic “ Earth.” 

2 The emended text from here to the end of the first sentence 
of § 3 is given by R. 47, n. 1. 

3 Or “reincarnation” (ira\iyy€v*<rias). 

* i(rirepfio\6yovy, 5 r&s ytveaus. 

lordship over all beneath the Heaven and gnosis 
of its blessings, that they might increase in 
increasing and multiply in multitude, and every 
soul infleshed by revolution of the Cyclic Gods, 
for observation of the marvels of the Heaven 
and Heaven’s Gods’ revolution, and of the works 
of God and energy of Nature, for tokens of its 
blessings, for gnosis of the power of God, that 
they might know the fates that follow good and 
evil [deeds] and learn the cunning work of all 
good arts. 

4. [Thus] there begins their living and their 
growing wise, according to the fate appointed by 
the revolution of the Cyclic Gods, and their 
deceasing for this end. 

And there shall be memorials mighty of their 
handiworks upon the earth, leaving dim trace 
behind when cycles are renewed. 

For every birth of flesh ensouled, and of the 
fruit of seed, and every handiwork, though it 
decay, shall of necessity renew itself, both by the 
renovation of the Gods and by the turning-round 
of Nature’s rhythmic wheel. 

For that whereas the Godhead is Nature’s ever- 
making-new-again the cosmic mixture, Nature 
herself is also co-established in that Godhead. 

===== TRACTATE IV: The Cup or Monad =====

CORPUS HERMETICUM IV. (V.) 

Of Hermes to Tat 
(Text : P. 34-40 ; Pat. 26b-27.) 

1. Hermes. With Reason (Logos), not with 
hands, did the World-maker1 make the universal 
World 2 ; so that thou thus shouldst think of Him 
as everywhere and ever-being, the Author of all 
things, and One and Only, who by His Will3 all 
beings hath created. 

This Body of Him is a thing no man can 
touch, or see, or measure, a Body inextensible, 
like to no other frame. ’Tis neither Fire nor 
Water, Air nor Breath 4 ; yet all of them come 
from it.5 Now being Good He willed to conse- 
crate this [Body] to Himself alone, and set its 
Earth in order and adorn it.® 

1 6 Zi]jxtovpy6s, 2 t by irivra k6(T/xov. 

3 0€\Tj(ns. 4 Perhaps meaning iEther. 

6 Gf. G. H., xiii. (xiv.) 6. 

6 Kofffxriffaiy — the whole is a play on the word k6(t^05 ( kosmos ), 
which means “ order,” “ ornament,” and “ world.” I have tried 

2. So down [to Earth] He sent the Cosmos 1 
of this Frame Divine,* — man, a life that cannot 
die, and yet a life that dies. And o’er [all 
other] lives and over Cosmos [too], did man 
excel by reason of the Reason (Logos) and the 
Mind. For contemplator of God’s works did 
man become; he marvelled and did strive to 
know their Author. 

3. Reason (Logos) indeed, 0 Tat, among all 
men hath He distributed, but Mind not yet ; not 
that He grudgeth any, for grudging cometh not 
from Him,3 but hath its place below, within the 
souls of men who have no Mind. 

Tat. Why then did God, 0 father, not on all 
bestow a sbare of Mind ? 

Her. He willed, my son, to have it set up 
in the midst for souls, just as it were a prize. 

4. Tat. And where hath He had it set up ? 

Her.* He filled a mighty Cup6 with it, and 

sent it down, joining a Herald [to it], to whom 
He gave command to make this proclamation 
to the hearts of men : 

to retain it in English by using both meanings. The three pre- 
ceding sentences, from “This Body” onwards, are quoted by 
Stobaeus, Phys ., I. ii. 30 ; G. i. 26 ; W. 38, 10 ff., under the head- 
ing “ Of Hermes.” 

1 That is, “ Order.” 

2 That is, the Body of God ; the One Element. 

3 Cf. G. H., v. (vi.) 2. 

4 A critical text of most of these two paragraphs is given, R. 
214, d. 1. 

6 Kparijpa, lit. a crater or mixing-bowl. 

Baptize 1 thyself with this Cup’s baptism, what 
heart can do so, thou that hast faith thou ' canst 
ascend to Him that hath sent down the Cup, 
thou that dost know for what thou didst come 
into being ! 

As many then as understood the Herald’s 
tidings and doused themselves in Mind, became 
partakers in the Gnosis ; and when they had 
“ received the Mind ” they were made “ perfect 
men.” 

But they who do not understand the tidings, 
these, since they possess the aid of Reason [only] 
and not Mind, are ignorant wherefor they have 
come into being and whereby. 

5. The senses of such men are like irrational 
creatures’ ; and as their [whole] make-up is in 
their feelings and their impulses,2 they fail in all 
appreciation of3 those things which really are 
worth contemplation. These centre all their 
thought upon the pleasures of the body and its 
appetites, in the belief that for its sake man hath 
come into being. 

But they who have received some portion 
of God’s gift,4 these, Tat, if we judge by their 
deeds, have from Death’s bonds won their release ; 
for they embrace in their own Mind all things, 

1 The meaning of this term is not to “sprinkle” with water, 
but to “ plunge the whole body ” into water. 

2 icdl 4v dvfjLcp teal 4v bpy§ Kpatriv €XoyTt*' 

3 Lit. “ they do not wonder at.” 

4 Sc. the Mind. 

things on the earth, things in the heaven, and 
things above the heaven, — if there be aught.1 
And having raised themselves so far they sight 
the Good ; and having sighted It, they look 
upon their sojourn here as a mischance ; and in 
disdain of all, both things in body and the 
bodiless, they speed their way unto that One 
and Only One. 

6. This is, 0 Tat, the Gnosis of the Mind, 
Vision of things Divine ; God-knowledge is it, 
for the Cup is God’s. 

Tat. Father, I, too, would be baptized. 

Her. Unless thou first shalt hate thy Body, 
son, thou canst not love thy Self. But if thou 
lov’st thy Self thou shalt have Mind, and having 
Mind thou shalt share in the Gnosis. 

Tat. Father, what dost thou mean ? 

Her. It is not possible, my son, to give 
thyself to both, — I mean to things that perish 
and to things divine. For seeing that existing 
things are twain, Body and Bodiless, in which 
the perishing and the divine are understood, the 
man who hath the will to choose is left the 
choice of one or other ; for it can never be the 
twain should meet. And in those souls to 
whom the choice is left, the waning of the one 
causes the other’s growth to show itself. 

1 Cf. C . H. xi. (xii.) 19 : “ And contemplate what is beyond— if 
there be aught beyond the Cosmos ” 

7. Now the choosing of the Better not only 
proves a lot most fair for him who makes the 
choice, seeing it makes the man a God, but 
also shows his piety to God. Whereas the 
[choosing] of the Worse, although it doth 
destroy the “ man,” it only doth disturb God’s 
harmony to this extent, that as processions pass 
by in the middle of the way, without being able 
to do anything but take the road from others, 
so do such men move in procession through the 
world led by their bodies’ pleasures.1 2 3 

8. This being so, 0 Tat, what comes from 
God hath been and will be ours ; but that which 
is dependent on ourselves, let this press onward 
and have no delay ; for ’tis not God, ’tis we 
who are the cause of evil things, preferring them 
to good. 

Thou see’st, son, how many are the bodies 
through which we have to pass, how many are 
the choirs of daimones, how vast the system of 
the star-courses * [through which our Path doth 
lie], to hasten to the One and Only God. 

For to the Good there is no other shore*; 
It hath no bounds ; It is without an end > and 

1 Critical text of simile is also given by R. 102, n. 2. Quoted 
by Zosimus in § “ On the Anthropos Doctrine.” 

2 teal o’wtxtiai' Ka\ tipSfxovs atrr epcvy, — the Septenary Spheres or 
“ Cyclic Gods” ; for the <rv ex€ia (lit. continuity) is evidently the 
same as the appovia, Harmony, Concord, System. 

3 aSid0aroy, — lit. not to be crossed, not to be forded. 

for Itself It is without beginning, too, though 
unto us it seemeth to have one — the Gnosis. 

9. Therefore to It Gnosis is no beginning ; 
rather is it [that Gnosis doth afford] to us the 
first beginning of Its being known. 

Let us lay hold, therefore, of the beginning, 
and quickly speed through all [we have to pass]. 

’Tis very hard, to leave the things we have 
grown used to, which meet our gaze on every 
side, and turn ourselves back to the Old Old 
[Path]. 

Appearances delight us, whereas things which 
appear not make their believing hard. 

Now evils are the more apparent things, 
whereas the Good can never show Itself unto 
the eyes, for It hath neither form nor figure. 

Therefore the Good is like Itself alone, and 
unlike all things else ; for ’tis impossible that 
That which hath no body should make Itself 
apparent to a body. 

10. The “ Like’s ” superiority to the “ Unlike ” 
and the “ Unlike’s ” 1 inferiority unto the “ Like ” 
consists in this : 

The Oneness 2 being Source 8 and Root of all, 
is in all things as Root and Source. Without 
[this] Source is naught; whereas the Source 
[Itself] is from naught but Itself, since It is 

1 Reading with B., rov toopolov. 

2 novds, — the Monad, that is the Good. 3 Or, Beginning. 

Source of all the rest. It is Itself Its Source, 
since It may have no other Source. 

The Oneness then being Source, containeth 
every number, but is contained by none ; engen- 
dered every number, but is engendered by no 
other one. 

11. Now all that is engendered is imperfect, 
it is divisible, to increase subject and to decrease ; 
but with the Perfect [One] none of these things 
doth hold. Now that which is increasable in- 
creases from the Oneness, but succumbs through 
its own feebleness when it no longer can contain 
the One. 

And now, 0 Tat, God’s Image 1 hath been 
sketched for thee, as far as it can be 2 ; and if 
thou wilt attentively dwell on it and observe it 
with thy heart’s eyes, believe me, son, thou’lt 
find the Path that leads above ; nay, that Image 
shall become thy Guide3 itself, because the Sight 
[Divine] hath this peculiar [charm], it holdeth 
fast and draweth unto it those who succeed in 
opening their eyes, just as, they say, the magnet 
[draweth] iron.4 

1 The Universal Cosmos or Monad. 

2 The above sentences, beginning with “ The Oneness,” second 
paragraph of § 10, are quoted by Stobseus, Phys ., I. x. 15 ; 
G. pp. 116, 117; W. 127, 6 IF.; under the heading, “Of 
Hermes.” 

3 Cf. G. if., vii. (viii.) 2 ; ix. (x.) 10 ; x. (xi.) 21 ; K. 23, n. 5. 

4 This simile is also used in the Naassene Document, and in 
Plutarch, On Isis and Osiris , where I have noticed it. 

===== TRACTATE VI: In God Alone is Good =====

CORPUS HERMETICUM VI. (VII.) 

ELSEWHERE NOWHERE 

(Text: P. 48-53; Pat. 14a-15a.) 

1. Good, 0 Asclepius, is in none else save God 
alone ; nay, rather, Good is God Himself 
eternally. 

If it be so, [Good] must be essence, from 
every kind of motion and becoming free (though 
naught is free from It), possessed of stable 
energy around Itself, never too little, nor too 
much, an ever-full supply. [Though] one, yet 
[is It] source of all ; for what supplieth all is 
Good. When I, moreover, say [supplieth] 
altogether [all], it is for ever Good. But this 
belongs to no one else save God alone. 

For He stands not in need of any thing, so 
that desiring it He should be bad ; nor can a 
single thing of things that are be lost to Him, 
on losing which He should be pained ; for pain 
is part of bad. 

no 

Nor is there aught superior to Him, that He 
should be subdued by it ; nor any peer to Him 
to do Him wrong, or [so that] He should fall 
in love on its account ; nor aught that gives 
no ear to Him, whereat He should grow angry ; 
nor wiser aught, for Him to envy. 

2. Now as all these are non-existent in His 
being, what is there left but Good alone 1 

For just as naught of bad is to be found in 
such transcendent Being, so too in no one of the 
rest will Good be found. 

For in them all are all the other things1 — 
both in the little and the great, both in each 
severally and in this living one2 that’s greater 
than them all and mightiest [of them]. 

For things subject to birth3 abound in passions, 
birth in itself being passible. But where there’s 
passion, nowhere is there Good ; and where is 
Good, nowhere a single passion. For where is 
day, nowhere is night ; and where is night, 
day is nowhere. 

Wherefore in genesis the Good can never be, 
but only be in the ingenerate. 

But seeing that the sharing in all things hath 
been bestowed on matter, so doth it share in 
Good. 

1 That is, things not Good. 

2 Or animal ; that is, cosmos as a single life or living creature, 

3 Or genesis. 

In this way is the Cosmos good ; that, in so 
far as it doth make all things, as far as making 
goes it’s Good, but in all other things it is not 
Good. For it’s both passible and subject unto 
motion, and maker of things passible. 

3. Whereas in man by greater or by less of 
bad is good determined. For what is not too 
bad down here, is good ; and good down here 
is the least part of bad. 

It cannot, therefore, be that good down here 
should be quite clean of bad, for down here 
good is fouled with bad ; and being fouled, it 
stays no longer good, and staying not it changes 
into bad. 

In God alone, is, therefore, Good, or rather 
Good is God Himself. 

So then, Asclepius, the name alone of Good 
is found in men, the thing itself nowhere [in 
them], for this can never be. 

For no material body doth contain It, — a 
thing1 bound on all sides by bad, by labours, 
pains, desires and passions, by error and by 
foolish thoughts. 

And greatest ill of all, Asclepius, is that each 
of these things that have been said above, is 
thought down here to be the greatest good. 

And what is still an even greater ill, is belly- 
lust, the error that doth lead the band of all 

1 Sc. the body. 

the other ills — the thing that makes us turn 
down here from Good. 

4. And I, for my own part, give thanks to 
God, that He hath cast it in my mind about 
the Gnosis of the Good, that it can never be 
It1 should be in the world.2 For that the 
world is “fullness”2 of the bad, but God of 
Good, and Good of God. 

The excellencies of the Beautiful are round the 
very essence [of the Good] ; nay, they do seem 
too pure, too unalloyed ; perchance ’tis they 
that are themselves Its essences. 

For one may dare to say, Asclepius, — if essence, 
sooth, He have — God’s essence is the Beautiful ; 
the Beautiful is further also Good. 

There is no Good that can be got from objects 
in the world. For all the things that fall 
beneath the eye are image-things and pictures 
as it were ; while those that do not meet [the 
eye are the realities4], especially the [essence] 
of the Beautiful and Good. 

Just as the eye cannot see God, so can it not 
behold the Beautiful and Good. For that they 
are integral parts of God, wedded to Him alone, 
inseparate familiars, most beloved, with whom 
God is Himself in love, or they with God. 

1 Sc. tie Good. 2 Cosmos. 

3 Or pleroma. The “world” is the pleroma of evil, but 
“God” the pleroma of good. 

4 A lacuna unfortunately occurs here in the text. 

VOL. II. 8 

.5. If thou canst God conceive, thou shalt 
conceive the Beautiful and Good, transcending 
Light, made lighter than the Light by God. 
That Beauty is beyond compare, inimitate that 
Good, e’en as God is Himself. 

As, then, thou dost conceive of God, conceive 
the Beautiful and Good. For they cannot be 
joined with aught of other things that live, since 
they can never be divorced from God. 

Seek’st thou for God, thou seekest for the 
Beautiful. One is the Path that leadeth unto 
It — Devotion joined with Gnosis. 

6. And thus it is that they who do not know 
and do not tread Devotion’s Path, do dare to 
call man beautiful and good, though he have 
ne’er e’en in his visions seen a whit that’s Good, 
but is enwrapped with every kind of bad, and 
thinks the bad is good, and thus doth make 
unceasing use of it, and even feareth that it 
should be ta’en from him, so straining every 
nerve not only to preserve but even to 
increase it. 

Such are the things that men call good and 
beautiful, Asclepius, — things which we cannot 
flee or hate ; for hardest thing of all is that 
we’ve need of them and cannot live without 
them. 

===== TRACTATE VIII: That No One of Existing Things Doth Perish =====

CORPUS HERMETICUM VIII. (IX.) 

THINGS DOTH PERISH, BUT 
MEN IN ERROR SPEAK OF 
THEIR CHANGES AS DESTRUC- 
TIONS AND AS DEATHS 

[Of Hermes to Tat] 

(Text: P. 56-59; Pat. 48a, 48b.) 

1. [ Hermes .] Concerning Soul and Body, son, 
we now must speak ; in what way Soul is death- 
less, and whence comes the activity1 in com- 
posing and dissolving Body. 

For there’s no death for aught of things [that 
are] ; the thought [this] word conveys, is either 
void of fact, or [simply] by the knocking off a 
syllable what is called “ death,” doth stand for 
“ deathless.” 2 

1 tvcpyeia* 

2 The text is obscure, and the translations without exception 
make nonsense of it. Some words seem to be missing. 

For death is of destruction, and nothing in 
the Cosmos is destroyed. For if Cosmos is 
second God, a life 1 that cannot die, it cannot be 
that any part of this immortal life should die. 
All things in Cosmos are parts of Cosmos, and 
most of all is man, the rational animal. 

2. For truly first of all, eternal and tran- 
scending birth, is God the universals’ Maker. 
Second is he “ after His image,” Cosmos, 
brought into being by Him, sustained and fed by 
Him, made deathless, as by his own Sire, living 
for aye, as ever free from death. 

Now that which ever-liveth, differs from the 
Eternal ; for He 2 hath not been brought to being 
by another, and even if He have been brought to 
being, He hath not been brought into being by 
Himself, but ever is brought into being. 

For the Eternal, in that It is eternal, is the all. 
The Father is Himself eternal of Himself, but 
Cosmos hath become eternal and immortal by 
the Father. 

3. And of the matter stored beneath it,3 the 
Father made of it a universal body, and packing 
it together made it spherical — wrapping it round 
the life 4 — [a sphere] which is immortal in itself, 
and that doth make materiality eternal. 

1 Living thing, “ animaL” 2 Sc. the Eternal. 

3 Sc. beneath the cosmos, world-order or universe. 

4 The text here seems to me to be very faulty ; for trot6vt woid, 
I read ($ovt ($a. In such unintelligible phrases as avry rb ttoi6v, 

126 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

But He, the Father, full-filled with His ideas, 
did sow the lives 1 into the sphere, and shut them 
in as in a cave, willing to order forth 2 the life 
with every kind of living. 

So He with deathlessness enclosed the uni- 
versal body, that matter might not wish to 
separate itself from body’s composition, and so 
dissolve into its own [original] unorder. 

For matter, son, when it was yet incorporate, 
was in unorder. And it doth still retain down 
here this [nature of unorder] enveloping the rest 
of the small lives3 — that increase-and-decrease 
which men call death. 

4. It is round earthly lives that this unorder 
doth exist. For that the bodies of the heavenly 
ones preserve one order allotted to them from 
the Father as their rule 4 ; and it is by the restora- 
tion® of each one [of them] this order is pre- 
served indissolute.6 

The “ restoration ” then of bodies on the earth 

and rb /ter’ avrov voi<5yf the writer is evidently dealing with the 
Cosmos as the one life, the aMfcov, from which all other lives 
are derived ; and if he did not write aMfyoy, he assuredly wrote 
($oy. He wrote sense and not the nonsense of the present text. 

1 Sc. the great lives or so-called heavenly “ bodies.” 

2 Or beautify. 

3 As distinguished from the great lives or animals, the so-called 
heavenly “ bodies.” 

4 rljy fyxfa — or source or principle. 

5 dLiroKardaraaiSy a term used of the cyclic return of stars to their 
original positions. 

6 If we may be permitted to coin a neologism. 

is [thus their] composition, whereas their dissolu- 
tion restores them to those bodies which can 
never be dissolved, that is to say, which know 
no death. Privation, thus, of sense is brought 
about, not loss of bodies. 

5. Now the third life — Man, after the image 
of the Cosmos made, [and] having mind, after 
the Father’s will, beyond all earthly lives — not 
only doth have feeling with the second God, but 
also hath conception of the first ; for of the one 
’tis sensible as of a body, while of the other it 
conceives as bodiless and the Good Mind. 

Tat. Doth then this life not perish ? 

Her. Hush, son ! and understand what God, 
what Cosmos [is], what is a life that cannot die, 
and what a life subject to dissolution. 

Yea, understand the Cosmos is by God and in 
God ; but Man by Cosmos and in Cosmos. 

The source and limit and the constitution of 
all things is God.

===== TRACTATE XI: Mind unto Hermes =====

COEPUS HERMETICUM XL (XII.) 

(Text : P. 85-99 ; Pat. 20b-23.) 

1. Mind. Master this sermon (logos),1 then, 
Thrice-greatest Hermes, and bear in mind the 
spoken words ; and as it hath come unto Me to 
speak, I will no more delay. 

Hermes. As many men say many things, 
and these diverse, about the All and Good, I 
have not learned the truth. Make it, then, clear 
to me, 0 Master mine ! For I can trust the 
explanation of these things, which comes from 
Thee alone. 

2. Mind. Hear [then], My son, how standeth 
God and All. 

God; iEon2; Cosmos; Time; Becoming.3 

God maketh iEon ; iEon, Cosmos ; Cosmos, 
Time ; and Time, Becoming. 

1 Or thy reason. 

2 Eternity ; the ideal world, beyond time. Cf. P. S. A., xxx., 
xxxi. 

3 Genesis. 

The Good, — the Beautiful, Wisdom, Blessed- 
ness,— is essence, as it were,1 of God ; of iEon, 
Sameness 2 ; of Cosmos, Order ; of Time, Change ; 
and of Becoming, Life and Death. 

The energies of God are Mind and Soul; of 
iEon, lastingness s and deathlessness ; of Cosmos, 
restoration and the opposite thereof 4 ; of Time, 
increase and decrease ; and of Becoming, quality. 

iEon is, then, in God ; Cosmos, in iEon ; in 
Cosmos, Time ; in Time, Becoming. 

iEon stands firm round God ; Cosmos is 
moved in iEon ; Time hath its limits 5 in the 
Cosmos ; Becoming doth become in Time. 

3. The source,6 therefore, of all is God ; their 
essence, iEon ; their matter, Cosmos. 

God’s power is iEon ; iEon’s work is Cosmos 
— which never hath become, yet ever doth 
become by iEon. 

Therefore will Cosmos never be destroyed, for 
iEon’s indestructible ; nor doth a whit of things 
in Cosmos perish, for Cosmos is enwrapped by 
iEon round on every side. 

Her. But God’s Wisdom — what is that ? 

Mind. The Good and Beautiful, and Blessed- 
ness, and Virtue’s all, and iEon. 

1 That is to say, the term “ ess-ence ” cannot really be applied 
to God, for He is beyond “ fo-ing.” 

2 Or identity. 3 Or duration. 

4 ayTairoKaT<£<TTa<rts. 5 Or is accomplished. 

6 rnirh' 

iEon, then, ordereth1 [Cosmos], imparting 
deathlessness and lastingness to matter. 

4. For its2 becoming doth depend on iEon, 
as iEon doth on God. 

Now Genesis3 and Time, in Heaven and on 
the Earth, are of two natures. 

In Heaven they are unchangeable and inde- 
structible, but on the Earth they’re subject unto 
change and to destruction. 

Further, the iEon’s soul is God ; the Cosmos’ 
soul is iEon ; the Earth’s soul, Heaven. 

And God’s in Mind ; and Mind, in Soul ; 
and Soul, in Matter ; and all of them through 
iEon. 

But all this Body,4 in which are all the bodies, 
is full of Soul ; and Soul is full of Mind, and 
[Mind] of God. 

It 6 fills it 6 from within, and from without 
encircles it, making the All to live. 

W ithout, this vast and perfect Life 7 [encircles] 
Cosmos ; within, it fills [it with] all lives 8 ; 
above, in Heaven, continuing in sameness ; be- 
low, on Earth, changing becoming. 

5. And iEon doth preserve this [Cosmos], 
or by Necessity, or by Foreknowledge, or by 

1 Or adometh. 2 Sc. Matter’s Becoming or Genesis. 

3 Or Becoming. 

4 Sc. Cosmos. 5 Sc. Soul. 

6 Sc. Body, of Universe or Cosmos. 

7 Or Animal ; that is, Soul. 

VOL. II. 

8 Or animals. 
Nature, or by whatever else a man supposes 
or shall suppose. And all is this, — God 
energizing. 

The Energy of God is Power that naught can 
e’er surpass, a Power with which no one can 
make comparison of any human thing at all, or 
any thing divine. 

Wherefore, 0 Hermes, never think that aught 
of things above or things below is like to God, 
for thou wilt fall from truth. For naught is like 
to That which hath no like, and is Alone and 
One. 

And do not ever think that any other can 
possibly possess His power ; for what apart from 
Him is there of life, and deathlessness and 
change of quality? For what else should He 
make 1 ? 

God’s not inactive,2 since all things [then] 
would lack activity ; for all are full of God. 

But neither in the Cosmos anywhere, nor in 
aught else, is there inaction. For that “in- 
action” is a name that cannot be applied to 
either what doth make or what is made.8 

6. But all things must be made ; both ever 

1 Sc. than those which are Himself. 

2 apy<fs. There is a word-play in the terms ipyov (work), 
ivtpyoov (working in, energizing), ipepyhs (active, energetic), 
ivepyaa (in- working, activity), and apy6s (not-working, inactive, 
idle), apyla (inactivity, idleness), which it is impossible to bring 
out fully in English. 

3 Or what becomes. 

made, and also in accordance with the influence 
of every space.1 

For He who makes, is in them all ; not 
stablished in some one of them, nor making one 
thing only, but making all. 

For being Power, He energiseth in the things 
He makes and is not independent of them, — 
although the things He makes are subject to Him. 

Now gaze through Me2 upon the Cosmos 
that’s now subject to thy sight ; regard its 
Beauty carefully — Body in pure perfection, 
though one than which there’s no more ancient 
one, ever in prime of life, and ever-young, nay, 
rather, in even fuller and yet fuller prime ! 

7. Behold, again, the seven subject Worlds3; 
ordered 4 by .dEon’s order,5 and with their varied 
course full-filling iEon ! 

[See how] all things [are] full of light, and 
nowhere [is there] fire ; for ’tis the love and 
blending of the contraries and the dissimilars 

1 This seems to mean, that all things in the world of gemesis 
(making, creating, or becoming) have their root-activity, first 
from the sameness of becoming of the one sphere or space, and 
then their differentiated activity from the seven spheres, spaces, 
or planes, which are the instruments of God in the differentiation 
of the Cosmos. 

2 Mind — i.e . with the mind’s eye, or spiritual sight, or by the 
help of the Master’s illuminating power. Of. G, H., i. 7 and 
xiii. (xiv.) 11. 

3 k6(t fiovsy cosmoi or world-orders. 

4 Or adorned, or made beautiful. 

6 The order of the iEon (Eternity, the Spiritual Space), 
seonian or everlasting order. 

that doth give birth to light down shining by 
the energy of God,1 the Father of all good, the 
Leader of all order, and Ruler of the seven 
world-orderings ! 

[Behold] the Moon, forerunner of them all, 
the instrument of nature, and the transmuter of 
its lower matter ! 

[Look at] the Earth set in the midst of All, 
foundation of the Cosmos Beautiful, feeder and 
nurse of things on Earth ! 

And contemplate the multitude of deathless 
lives, how great it is, and that of lives subject 
to death ; and midway, between both, immortal 
[lives] and mortal, [see thou] the circling 
Moon. 

8. And all are full of Soul, and all are moved 
by it, each in its proper way ; some round the 
Heaven, others around the Earth ; [see] how the 
right [move] not unto left, nor yet the left unto 
the right; nor the above below, nor the below 
above. 

And that all these are subject unto Genesis,2 
My dearest Hermes, thou hast no longer need 
to learn of Me. For that they bodies are, have 
souls, and they are moved. 

But ’tis impossible for them to come together 
into one without some one to bring them [all] 

1 The text from “ Now gaze 

n. 1. 

. ” to here is given in R. 36, 
2 Or becoming. 

together. It must, then, be that such a one as 
this must be some one who’s wholly One. 

9. For as the many motions of them [all] 
are different, and as their bodies are not like, yet 
has one speed been ordered for them all, it is 
impossible that there should be two or more 
makers for them. 

For that one single order is not kept among 
“the many”; but rivalry will follow of the 
weaker with the stronger, and they will strive. 

And if the maker of the lives that suffer 
change and death, should be another,1 he would 
desire to make the deathless ones as well ; just 
as the maker of the deathless ones, [to make the 
lives] that suffer death. 

But come ! if there be two,2 — if Matter’s one, 
and Soul is one, in whose hands would there be 
the distribution 3 for the making? Again, if 
both of them have some of it, in whose hands 
may there be the greater part ? 

10. But thus conceive it, then ; that every 
living body doth consist of soul and matter, 
whether [that body be] of an immortal, or a 
mortal, or an irrational [life]. 

For that all living bodies are ensouled ; 
whereas, upon the other hand, those that live 
not, are matter by itself. 

1 From the maker of the immortals. 2 Sc. makers. 

3 Sc. of matter and life. 

182 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES 

And, in like fashion, Soul when in its self is, 
after its own maker, cause of life ; but the cause 
of all life is He who makes the things that can- 
not die. 

Her. How, then, is it that, first, lives subject 
unto death are other than the deathless ones? 
And, next, how is it that that Life which knows 
no death, and maketh deathlessness, doth not 
make animals immortal? 

11. Mind. First, that there is some one who 
does these things, is clear ; and, next, that He 
is also One, is very manifest. For, also, Soul is 
one, and Life is one, and Matter one. 

Her. But who is He ? 

Mind. Who may it other be than the One 
God ? Whom else should it beseem to put Soul 
into lives but God alone ? One, then, is God. 

It would indeed be most ridiculous, if when 
thou dost confess the Cosmos to be one, Sun 
one, Moon one, and Godhead 1 one, thou shouldst 
wish God Himself to be some one or other of a 
number ! 

12. All things, therefore, He makes, in many 
[ways]. And what great thing is it for God to 
make life, soul, and deathlessness, and change, 
when thou [thyself] dost do 2 so many things ? 

For thou dost see, and speak, and hear, and 

1 Or Divinity. 

2 Or make ; a play on the double meaning of the Greek verb. 

smell, and taste, and touch, and walk, and think, 
and breathe. And it is not one man who smells, 
a second one who speaks, a third who touches, 
another one who smells, another one who walks, 
another one who thinks, and [yet] another one 
who breathes. But one is he who doth all these. 

And yet no one of these could be apart from 
God. For just as, shouldst thou cease from1 
these, thou wouldst no longer be a living thing, 
so also, should God cease from them (a thing 
not law to say), no longer is He God. 

13. For if it hath been shown that no thing can 
inactive2 be, how much less God ? For if there’s 
aught He doth not make (if it be law to say), 
He is imperfect. But if He is not only not 
inactive, but perfect [God], then He doth make 
all things. 

Give thou thyself to Me, My Hermes, for a 
little while,3 4 and thou shalt understand more 
easily how that God’s work is one, in order that 
all things may be — that are being made, or once 
have been, or that are going to be made. And 
this 4 is, My beloved, Life ; this is the Beautiful ; 
this is the Good ; this, God. 

1 Lit. become inactive of ( KarapyriO^s ). 

2 A word has here dropped out in the text, which I have 
supplied by apybv (inactive), and not by the usual conjecture 
“ apart from God.” 

3 Cf. P. S. A., iii. 1 : “ Now lend to me the whole of thee.” 

4 Sc. work, doing, making, or creating. 

14. And if thou wouldst in practice 1 under- 
stand [this work], behold what taketh place with 
thee desiring to beget. Yet this is not like unto 
that, for He doth not enjoy. 

For that indeed He hath no other one to share 
in what He works, for working by Himself, He 
ever is at work, Himself being what He doth.2 
For did He separate Himself from it,3 all things 
would [then] collapse, and all must die, Life 
ceasing. 

But if all things are lives, and also Life is 
one ; then, one is God. And, furthermore, if 
all are lives, both those in Heaven and those on 
Earth, and One Life in them all is made to be 
by God, and God is it * — then, all are made by 
God. 

Life is the making-one of Mind and Soul ; 
accordingly Death is not the destruction of those 
that are at-oned,6 but the dissolving of their 
union. 

15. iEon, moreover, is God’s image ; Cosmos 
[is] iEon’s ; the Sun, of Cosmos ; and Man, [the 
image] of the Sun. 

The people call change death, because the 
body is dissolved, and life, when it’s dissolved, 
withdraws to the unmanifest. But in this 

1 cpytp, in deed, in work. 2 Or makes. 

3 Sc. His work, or creation. 4 Viz., this Life. 

6 That is, Mind and Soul, sc. the Logos and World-Soul, or 
ego and animal soul. 

MIND UNTO HEEMES 

sermon (logos), Hermes, my beloved, as thou 
dost hear, I say the Cosmos also suffers change, 
— for that a part of it each day is made to 
be in the unmanifest, — yet it is ne’er dis- 
solved. 

These are the passions of the Cosmos — revolv- 
ings and concealments ; revolving is conversion 
and concealment renovation. 

16. The Cosmos is all-formed, — not having 
forms external to itself, but changing them 
itself within itself. Since, then, Cosmos is made 
to be all-formed, what may its maker be? For 
that, on the one hand, He should not be void of 
all form ; and, on the other hand, if He’s all- 
formed, He will be like the Cosmos. Whereas, 
again, has He a single form, He will thereby be 
less than Cosmos. 

What, then, say we He is? — that we may 
not bring round our sermon (logos) into doubt ; 
for naught that mind conceives of God is 
doubtful. 

He, then, hath one idea,1 which is His own 
alone, which doth not fall beneath the sight, 
being bodiless, and [yet] by means of bodies 
manifesteth all [ideas].2 And marvel not that 
there’s a bodiless idea. 

17. For it is like the form of reason (logos)8 

1 The root of form ; used also loosely in Greek to denote form. 

2 Or forms. 3 Or idea of the sermon. 

and mountain- tops in pictures.1 For they 
appear to stand out strongly from the rest, but 
really are quite smooth and flat. 

And now consider what is said more boldly, 
but more truly ! 

Just as man cannot live apart from Life, so 
neither can God live without [His] doing good.2 
For this is as it were the life and motion as it 
were of God — to move all things and make them 
live. 

18. Now some of the things said3 should bear 
a sense peculiar to themselves. So understand, 
for instance, what I’m going to say. 

AJ1 are in God, [but] not as lying in a place. 
For place is both a body and immovable, and 
things that lie do not have motion. 

Now things lie one way in the bodiless, 
another way in being made manifest. 

Think, [then,] of Him who doth contain them 
all ; and think, that than the bodiless naught is 
more comprehensive, or swifter, or more potent, 
but it is the most comprehensive, the swiftest, 
and most potent of them all. 

19. And, thus, think from thyself, and bid 

1 teal iv reus ypa<f>a?s iiKpdptiai. All the translators talk of 
“margins” in MSS., and make entire nonsense of the passage. 
I can find absolutely no authority for translating htKpdpuai 
margins. 

2 Or making the Good ; that is, Mon. 

3 Or points of the sermon. 

Digitized by Microsoft $ 

thy soul go unto any land ; and there more 
quickly than thy bidding will it be. And bid it 
journey oceanwards; and there, again, imme- 
diately ’twill be, not as if passing on from place 
to place, but as if being there. 

And bid it also mount to heaven ; and it will 
need no wings, nor will aught hinder it, nor fire 
of sun, nor aether, nor vortex-swirl,1 nor bodies 
of the other stars ; but, cutting through them 
all, it will soar up to the last Body [of them all].2 
And shouldst thou will to break through this as 
well, and contemplate what is beyond — if there 
be aught beyond the Cosmos3; it is permitted 
thee. 

20. Behold what power, what swiftness, thou 
dost have ! And canst thou do all of these 
things, and God not [do them] ? 

Then, in this way know 4 God ; as having all 
things in Himself as thoughts, the whole Cosmos 
itself. 

If, then, thou dost not make thyself like unto 
God, thou canst not know Him. For like is 
knowable to like [alone]. 

Make, [then,] thyself to grow to the same 
stature as the Greatness which transcends all 

1 7] Mvr\, presumably the vortex or “ whorl ” of the solar system 
(c/. “ Vision of Er”). 

2 Sc. the body or limit of the whole cosmos. 

3 Cf. C. H., iv. (v.) 5 : “And things above the heaven — if there 

be aught.” 4 Or think. 

measure ; leap forth from every body ; tran- 
scend all Time ; become Eternity 1 ; and [thus] 
shalt thou know God. 

Conceiving nothing is impossible unto thyself, 
think thyself deathless and able to know all, — 
all arts, all sciences, the way of every life.2 

Become more lofty than all height, and lower 
than all depth. Collect into thyself all senses 
of [all] creatures, — of fire, [and] water, dry and 
moist. Think that thou art at the same time in 
every place, — in earth, in sea, in sky ; not yet 
begotten, in the womb, young, old, [and] dead, 
in after-death conditions.8 

And if thou knowest all these things at once,4 
— times, places, doings, qualities, and quantities ; 
thou canst know God.6 

21. But if thou lockest up thy soul within thy 
body, and dost debase it, saying : I nothing 
know ; I nothing can ; I fear the sea ; I cannot 
scale the sky ; I know not who I was, who I shall 
be ; — what is there [then] between [thy] God 
and thee ? 

For thou canst know naught of things beauti- 
ful and good so long as thou dost love thy body 
and art bad. 

* 1 Lit. uEon. 2 tf avrbs (<?ov %do$, — or nature of every animal. 

3 Gf. G . JET., xiii. (xiv.) 11. 

4 Or art simultaneously conscious of. 

5 A critical text from “Make, then, thy self” to here is given 
by R., p. 238. 

MIND UNTO HEKMES 

The greatest bad there is, is not to know 
God’s Good1; but to be able to know [Good], 
and will, and hope, is a Straight Way, the 
Good’s own [Path], both leading there and 
easy.2 

If thou but sett’st thy foot thereon, ’twill 
meet thee everywhere, ’twill everywhere be seen, 
both where and when thou dost expect it not, — 
waking, sleeping, sailing, journeying, by night, 
by day, speaking, [and] saying naught. For 
there is naught that is not image of the Good. 

22. Her. Is God unseen ? 

Mind. Hush ! Who is more manifest than 
He ? For this one reason hath He made all 
things, that through them all thou mayest see 
Him. 

This is the Good of God, this [is] His Virtue, 
— that He may be made manifest through all.3 

For naught’s unseen, even of things that are 
without a body. Mind sees itself 4 in thinking, 
God in making.6 

So far these things have been made manifest 
to thee, Thrice- greatest one ! Reflect on all the 
rest in the same way within thyself, and thou 
shalt not be led astray. 

1 t b Qtiov — lit. the Godly, or Divine. 

2 Of. Ex. i. 4. 

3 The preceding question and answer is quoted with very slight 
verbal variants by Cyril, Contra Julianum , ii. 52. 

4 Or is seen. 

5 Or doing. 

) 

190 THRICE-GREATEST HERMES

===== TRACTATE XII: About the Common Mind =====

CORPUS HERMETICUM XII. (XIII.) 

Op Hermes to Tat 
(Text: P. 99-113; Pat. 23b-25b.) 

1 Hermes. The Mind, 0 Tat, is of God’s very 
essence — (if such a thing as essence of God 1 
there be) — and what that is, it and it only knows 
precisely. 

The Mind, then, is not separated off from 
God’s essentiality, but is united unto it, as light 
to sun. 

This Mind in men is God, and for this cause 
some of mankind are gods, and their humanity is 
nigh unto divinity. 

For the Good Daimon said : “ Gods are im- 
mortal men, and men are mortal gods.” 

2. But in irrational lives Mind is their nature. 
For where is Soul, there too is Mind ; just as 
where Life, there is there also Soul. 

1 That is, if we can use such a term with respect to God. 

But in irrational lives their soul is life devoid 
of mind 1 ; for Mind is the in- worker of the souls 
of men for good ; — He works on them for their 
own good. 

In lives irrational He doth co-operate with 
each one’s nature ; but in the souls of men He 
counteracteth them. 

For every soul, when it becomes embodied, 
is instantly depraved by pleasure and by 
pain. 

For in a compound body, just like juices, pain 
and pleasure seethe, and into them the soul, on 
entering in, is plunged.2 

3. O’er whatsoever souls the Mind doth, then, 
preside, to these it showeth its own light, by 
acting counter to their prepossessions, just as 
a good physician doth upon the body pre- 
possessed by sickness, pain inflict, burning or 
lancing it for sake of health. 

In just the selfsame way the Mind inflicteth 
pain upon the soul, to rescue it from pleasure, 
whence comes its every ill. 

The great ill of the soul is godlessness3 ; then 

1 That is, of the mind manifested in man as distinguished from 
the general Mind. 

2 fiairrlCtTai. 

3 a6e6rris . Of, C. H.f x. (xi.) 8, 9 : “ And the soul’s vice is ignor- 
ance ” ; and § 20 : " What greater chastisement of any human soul, 
can there be, son, than lack of piety?” The only way of 
salvation from the bonds of Fate is thus u piety ” or “ godliness.” 
See R. 102, 1, for references. 

followeth fancy 1 for all evil things and nothing 
good. 

So, then, Mind counteracting it doth work 
good on the soul, as the physician health upon 
the body. 

4. But whatsoever human souls have not the 
Mind as pilot, they share in the same fate as 
souls of lives irrational. 

For [Mind] becomes co-worker with them, 
giving full play to the desires towards which 
[such souls] are borne, — [desires] that from the 
rush of lust strain after the irrational ; [so that 
such human souls,] just like irrational animals, 
cease not irrationally to rage and lust, nor ever 
are they satiate of ills. 

For passions and irrational desires are ills ex- 
ceeding great; and over these God hath set up the 
Mind to play the part of judge and executioner. 

5. Tat. In that case, father mine, the teaching 
(logos) as to Fate,2 which previously thou didst 
explain to me, risks to be over-set. 

For that if it be absolutely fated for a man to 
fornicate, or commit sacrilege, or do some other 
evil deed, why is he punished, — when he hath 
done the deed from Fate’s necessity ? 

Her. All works, my son, are Fate’s; and 
without Fate naught of things corporal — or good, 
or ill — can come to pass. 

2 Heimarcnene. 

But it is fated too, that he who doeth ill, shall 
suffer. And for this cause he doth it — that he 
may suffer what he suffereth, because he did it. 

6. But for the moment, [Tat,] let be the 
teaching (logos) as to vice and Fate, for we have 
spoken of these things in other [of our sermons] ; 
but now our teaching (logos) is about the Mind : 
— what Mind can do, and how it is [so] different, 
— in men being such and such, and in irrational 
lives [so] changed ; and [then] again that in 
irrational lives it is not of a beneficial nature, 
while that in men it quencheth out the wrathful 
and the lustful elements. 

Of men, again, we must class some as led by 
reason, and others as unreasoning. 

7. But all men are subject to Fate, and 
genesis and change, for these1 are the begin- 
ning and the end of Fate. 

And though all men do suffer fated things, 
those led by reason (those whom we said the 
Mind doth guide) do not endure like suffering 
with the rest ; but, since they’ve freed them- 
selves from viciousness, not being bad, they do 
not suffer bad. 

Tat. How meanest thou again, my father? 
Is not the fornicator bad; the murderer bad; 
and [so with] all the rest ? 

Her. [I meant not that;] but that the 

1 Sc. genesis and change. 

Mind-led man, my son, though not a fornicator, 
will suffer just as though he had committed 
fornication, and though he be no murderer, as 
though he had committed murder. 

The quality of change he can no more escape 
than that of genesis. 

But it is possible for one who hath the Mind, 
to free himself from vice. 

8. Wherefore I’ve ever heard, my son, Good 
Daimon also say — (and had He set it down in 
written words, He would have greatly helped 
the race of men ; for He alone, my son, doth 
truly, as the First-born God, gazing upon all 
things, give voice to words {logoi) divine) — yea, 
once I heard Him say : 

“ All things are one, and most of all the 
bodies which the mind alone perceives. Our 
life is owing to [God’s] Energy and Power and 
iEon. His Mind is Good, so is His Soul as well. 
And this being so, intelligible things know 
naught of separation. So, then, Mind, being 
Ruler of all things, and being Soul of God, can 
do whate’er it wills.” 

9. So do thou understand, and carry back this 
word (logos) unto the question thou didst ask 
before, — I mean about Mind’s Fate. 

For if thou dost with accuracy, son, eliminate 
[all] captious arguments ( logoi ), thou wilt dis- 
cover that of very truth the Mind, the Soul 

of God, doth rule o’er all — o’er Fate, and Law, 
and all things else ; and nothing is impossible to 
it, — neither o’er Fate to set a human soul,1 nor 
under Fate to set [a soul] neglectful of what 
comes to pass. Let this so far suffice from the 
Good Daimon’s most good [words].2 

Tat. Yea, [words] divinely spoken, father 
mine, truly and helpfully. But further still 
explain me this. 

10. Thou said’st that Mind in lives irrational 
worked in them as [their] nature, co-working 
with their impulses. 

But impulses of lives irrational, as I do think, 
are passions. 

Now if the Mind co-worketh with [these] 
impulses, and if the impulses of [lives] irrational 
be passions, then is Mind also passion, taking its 
colour from the passions. 

Her. Well put, my son ! Thou questionest 
right nobly, and it is just that I as well should 
answer [nobly]. 

11. All things incorporal when in a body are 
subject unto passion, and in the proper sense 
they are [themselves] all passions. 

For every thing that moves [another] is in- 
corporal; while every thing that’s moved is 
body. 

• Of. Lact., D. I., ii. 16. 

* The critical text of this paragraph is given R. 78. 

Incorporals are further moved by Mind, and 
movement’s passion. 

Both, then, are subject unto passion — both 
mover and the moved, the former being ruler 
and the latter ruled. 

But when a man hath freed himself from 
body, then is he also freed from passion. 

But, more precisely, son, naught is impassible, 
but all are passible. 

Yet passion differeth from passibility; for 
that the one is active, while the other’s passive. 

Incorporals 1 moreover act upon themselves, for 
either they are motionless 2 or they are moved ; 
but whichsoe’er it be, it’s passion. 

But bodies are invariably acted on, and there- 
fore are they passible. 

Do not, then, let terms trouble thee ; action 
and passion are both the selfsame thing. To 
use the fairer sounding term, however, does no 
harm. 

12. Tat. Most clearly hast thou, father mine, 
set forth the teaching (logos). 

Her. Consider this as well, my son ; that 
these two things God hath bestowed on man 
beyond all mortal lives — both mind and speech 

1 Reading aadofiara for (T&iiaTa. 

2 The words I have translated by “ act,” “ active ” and " action,” 
may he more literally rendered by “energize,” “energic” and 
“ energy.” The “ motionless ” has “ energy ” because it is the cause 
of motion to that which it moves. 

(logos) equal to immortality. He hath the mind 
for knowing God and uttered speech (logos) for 
eulogy of Him.1 

And if one useth these for what he ought, 
he’ll differ not a whit from the immortals.2 
Nay, rather, on departing from the body, he 
will be guided by the twain unto the Choir of 
Gods and Blessed Ones. 

13. Tat. Why, father mine ! — do not the other 
lives make use of speech (logos) ? 

Her. Nay, son ; but use of voice ; speech is 
far different from voice. For speech is general 
among all men, while voice doth differ in each 
class of living thing. 

Tat. But with men also, father mine, according 
to each race, speech differs. 

Her. Yea, son, but man is one ; so also 
speech is one and is interpreted, and it is found 
the same in Egypt, and in Persia, and in Greece. 

Thou seemest, son, to be in ignorance of 
Reason’s (Logos) 3 worth and greatness. For 
that the Blessed God, Good Daimon, hath de- 
clared : 

“ Soul is in Body, Mind in Soul ; but Reason 
(Logos) is in Mind, and Mind in God ; and God 
is Father of [all] these.” 

1 Following the emendation of R. 

2 The critical text of the above paragraphs is given R. 156, n. 6. 

3 It is impossible to bring out the word-play of the original in 
English ; and so the double meaning is lost. 

14. The Reason, then, is the Mind’s image, 
and Mind God’s [image]; while Body is [the 
image] of the Form ; and Form [the image] of 
the Soul. 

The subtlest part of Matter is, then, Air ; of 
Air, Soul ; of Soul, Mind ; and of Mind, God.1 

And God surroundeth all and permeateth all 2 ; 
while Mind surroundeth Soul, Soul Air, Air 
Matter. 

Necessity3 and Providence and Nature are 
instruments of Cosmos and of Matter’s ordering ; 
while of intelligible things each is Essence, and 
Sameness is their Essence. 

But of the Bodies4 of the Cosmos each is 
many ; for through possessing Sameness, [these] 
composed Bodies, though they do change from 
one into another of themselves, do natheless ever 
keep the incorruption of their Sameness. 

15. Whereas in all the rest of composed 
bodies, of each there is a certain number ; for 
without number structure cannot be, or com- 
position, or decomposition. 

Now it is units that give birth to number and 
increase it, and, being decomposed, are taken 
back again into themselves. 

1 This sentence is tagged on to the end of 0. H., v. (vi.) by some 
scribe. 

2 Gf. § 20 below. 

3 Reading avdyicri for dvcfy/cj? ; see § 21 below. 

4 Sc. the elements. 

Matter is one; and this whole Cosmos — the 
mighty God and image of the mightier One, 
both with Him unified, and the conserver of 
the Will and Order of the Father — is filled full 
of Life.1 

Naught is there in it throughout the whole of 
iEon, the Father’s [everlasting] Re-establishment,2 
— nor of the whole, nor of its parts, — which doth 
not live. 

For not a single thing that’s dead, hath been, 
or is, or shall be in [this] Cosmos. 

For that the Father willed it should have 
Life as long as it should be. Wherefore it needs 
must be a God. 

16. How, then, 0 son, could there be in the 
God, the image of the Father,8 in the plenitude 4 
of Life — dead things 6 ? 

For that death is corruption, and corruption is 
destruction. 

How then could any part of that which knoweth 
no corruption be corrupted, or any whit of him 
the God destroyed ? 

Tat. Do they not, then, my father, die-— the 
lives in it, that are its parts ? 

Her. Hush, son ! — led into error by the term 
in use for what takes place. 

1 Lit, a Pleroma of Life. 2 diroKardcrratTis. 

3 Reading varphs for v avr6s. 4 Pleroma. 

6 A critical text of the last five paragraphs is given R. 25, n. 1. 

They do not die, my son, but are dissolved as 
compound bodies. 

Now dissolution is not death, but dissolution 
of a compound ; it is dissolved not so that it may 
be destroyed, but that it may become renewed. 

For what is the activity of life ? Is it not 
motion ? What then in Cosmos is there that 
hath no motion ? Naught is there, son ! 

17. Tat. Doth not Earth even, father, seem 
to thee to have no motion ? 

Her. Nay, son ; but rather that she is the 
only thing which, though in very rapid motion, 
is also stable. 

For how would it not be a thing to laugh at, 
that the Nurse of all should have no motion, 
when she engenders and brings forth all things ? 

For ’tis impossible that without motion one 
who doth engender, should do so. 

That thou shouldst ask if the fourth part 1 is 
not inert, is most ridiculous ; for that the body 
which doth have no motion, gives sign of nothing 
but inertia. 

18. Know, therefore, generally, my son, that 
all that is in Cosmos is being moved for decrease 
or for increase. 

Now that which is kept moving, also lives ; 
but there is no necessity that that which lives, 
should be all same. 

1 Sc. element. 

VOL. II. 

For being simultaneous, the Cosmos, as a 
whole, is not subject to change, my son, but all 
its parts are subject unto it ; yet naught [of it] 
is subject to corruption, or destroyed. 

It is the terms employed that confuse men. 
For ’tis not genesis that constituteth life, but ’tis 
sensation ; it is not change that constituteth 
death, but ’tis forgetfulness. 

Since, then, these things are so, they are im- 
mortal all, — Matter, [and] Life, [and] Spirit, 
Mind [and] Soul, of which whatever liveth, is 
composed. 

19. Whatever then doth live, oweth its im- 
mortality unto the Mind, and most of all doth 
man, he who is both recipient of God, and co- 
essential with Him. 

For with this life alone doth God consort ; by 
visions in the night, by tokens in the day, and 
by all things doth He foretell the future unto 
him, — by birds, by inward parts, by wind, 
by tree. 

Wherefore doth man lay claim to know things 
past, things present and to come. 

20. Observe this, too, my son ; that each one 
of the other lives inhabiteth one portion of the 
Cosmos, — aquatic creatures water, terrene earth, 
and aery creatures air ; while man doth use all 
these, — earth, water, air, [and] fire ; he seeth 
heaven, too, and doth contact it with [his] sense. 

But God surroundeth all, and permeateth all,1 
for He is energy and power ; and it is nothing 
difficult, my son, to conceive God. 

21. But if thou wouldst Him also contemplate, 
behold the ordering of the Cosmos, and [see] the 
orderly behaviour of its ordering ; behold thou 
the Necessity of things made manifest, and [see] 
the Providence of things become and things 
becoming ; behold how Matter is all-full of Life ; 
[behold] this so great God in movement, with all 
the good and noble [ones] — gods, daimones and 
men ! 

Tat. But these are purely energies, 0 father 
mine ! 

Her. If, then, they’re purely energies, my 
son, — by whom, then, are they energized except 
by God ? 

Or art thou ignorant, that just as Heaven, 
Earth, Water, Air, are parts of Cosmos, in 
just the selfsame way God’s parts are Life 
and Immortality, [and] Energy, and Spirit, and 
Necessity, and Providence, and Nature, Soul, 
and Mind, and the Duration* of all these that 
is called Good ? 

And there is naught of things that have be- 
come, or are becoming, in which God is not. 

22. Tat. Is He in Matter, father, then ? 

Her. Matter, my son, is separate from God, 

1 Cf. § 14 above. 2 Sc. iEon. 

in order that thou may’st attribute unto it 
the quality of space. But what thing else than 
mass 1 think’st thou it is, if it’s not energized ? 
Whereas if it be energized, by whom is it made 
so ? For energies, we said, are parts of God. 

By whom are, then, all lives enlivened ? By 
whom are things immortal made immortal ? By 
whom changed things made changeable ? 

And whether thou dost speak of Matter, or of 
Body, or of Essence, know that these too are 
energies of God ; and that materiality is Matter’s 
energy, that corporality is Bodies’ energy, and 
that essentiality doth constitute the energy of 
Essence ; and this is God — the All. 

23. And in the All is naught that is not God. 
Wherefore nor size, nor space, nor quality, nor 
form, nor time, surroundeth God ; for He is All, 
and All surroundeth all, and permeateth all. 

Unto this Reason (Logos), son, thy adoration 
and thy worship pay. There is one way alone 
to worship God ; [it is] not to be bad.2 

1 Probably in the sense of “quantity.” 

2 Lactantius, D. I., vi. 25, translates tbe last two sentences into 
Latin, with tbe strange remark that Hermes so spake in treating 
“About Justice.” See the following Commentary on § 6, and 
Ex. xi. 

ABOUT THE COMMON MIND===== TRACTATE XIII: The Secret Sermon on the Mountain =====

CORPUS HERMETICUM XIII. (XIV.) 

MOUNTAIN 

Concerning Rebirth and the Promise 
of Silence 

Of Thrice-greatest Hermes unto Tat 
his Son 

(Text: R. 339-348; P. 114-128; Pat. 15b-17b.) 

1. Tat. [Now] in the General Sermons,1 father, 
thou didst speak in riddles most unclear, con- 
versing on Divinity ; and when thou saidst no 
man could e’er be saved before Rebirth,2 thy 
meaning thou didst hide. 

Further, when I became thy Suppliant, in 
Wending up the Mount,3 after thou hadst con- 
versed with me, and when I longed to learn the 
Sermon (Logos) on Rebirth (for this beyond all 

1 eV to7s yepiKo7s. Of. C. If., x. (xi.) 1 and 7. 

2 *a\tyy ev€<ria. 

3 Reading 4*1 rrjs rod 6povs ncrafidtrews with. P., and not Kara- 
&d(rea>s with R. Of. 0. H.f x. (xi.) 15 ; Jamb., D. M viii. 6. 

other things is just the thing I know not), thou 
saidst, that thou wouldst give it me — “when 
thou shalt have become a stranger to the world.” 1 

Wherefore I got me ready and made the 
thought in me a stranger 2 to the world-illusion. 

And now do thou fill up the things that fall 
short 3 in me with what thou saidst would give 
me the tradition * of Kebirth, setting it forth in 
speech or in the secret way. 

I know not, 0 Thrice-greatest one, from out 
what matter and what womb Man comes to 
birth, or of what seed.6 

2. Hermes. Wisdom that understands6 in 
silence 7 [such is the matter and the womb from 
out which Man is born], and the True Good the 
seed. 

Tat. Who is the sower, father? For I am 
altogether at a loss. 

Her. It is the Will of God, my son. 

Tat. And of what kind is he that is begotten, 
father ? For I have no share of that essence in 

1 KOCT/bLOV. 

2 Beading itTrjWoTpiuxra with the majority of the editors, and 
not the inr^dptcra of It. 

3 t& i t(TT€p‘f)fiaTa avair Xripaxrov. 

4 irapaSovvaiy the word used for the giving of this lesson or inner 
instruction is the technical term for the “handing on” of a 
doctrine or being initiated into it. 

6 R.’s reading would make this refer to Hermes : “ I know not 
from what womb thou cornet to birth.” But the whole instruc- 
tion seems to favour the usually accepted reading. 

* <ro<t>ld voepeC. 7 Of . 0, H.J x. (xi.) 6. 

me, which doth transcend the senses.1 The one 
that is begot will be another one from God, 
God’s Son ? 

Her. All in all, out of all powers composed. 

Tat. Thou tellest me a riddle, father, and dost 
not speak as father unto son. 

Her. This Race,2 my son, is never taught; 
but when He willeth it, its memory is restored 
by God. 

3. Tat. Thou sayest things impossible, 0 
father, things that are forced. Hence answers 
would I have direct unto these things. Am I 
a son strange to my father’s race ? 

Keep it not, father, back from me. I am a 
true-born son ; explain to me the manner of 
Rebirth. 

Her. What may I say, my son ? I can but 
tell thee this. Whene’er I see within myself the 
Simple Vision3 brought to birth out of God’s 
mercy,4 I have passed through myself into a 
Body that can never die. And now I am not 
what I was before ; but I am born in Mind. 

The way to do this is not taught, and it can- 
not be seen by the compounded5 element by 
means of which thou seest. 

1 r rjs iu i/j-ol ovcrlas r rjs yorjrrjs. 2 Of, Ex. i. 3. 

3 &ir\a(rrovy that is to say, not made up, non-fictitious, not com- 
pounded ; that is, simple — the opposite of compounded. 

4 Of, below, § 7 : the man “ who hath been taken pity on by 

God ” ; and also § 10. 6 wA .aarrSy, 

Yea, I have had my former composed form 
dismembered for me. I am no longer touched, 
yet have I touch ; I have dimension too ; and 
[yet] am I a stranger to them now. 

Thou seest me with eyes, my son ; but what 
I am thou dost not understand [even] with 
fullest strain of body and of sight. 

4. Tat. Into fierce frenzy and mind-fury hast 
thou plunged me, father, for now no longer do 
I see myself. 

Her. I would, my son, that thou hadst e’en 
passed right through thyself, as they who dream 
in sleep yet sleepless. 

Tat. Tell me this too ! Who is the author 1 
of Rebirth ? 

Her. The Son of God, the One Man, by 
God’s Will. 

5. Tat. Now hast thou brought me, father, 
unto pure stupefaction. 

Arrested from the senses which I had before, 
.... 2 ; for [now] I see thy Greatness identical 
with thy distinctive form. 

Her. Even in this thou art untrue 3 ; the 
mortal form doth change with every day. ’Tis 
turned by time to growth and waning, as being 
an untrue thing.4 

6. Tat. What then is true, Thrice-greatest One ? 

1 yevc<riovpy6s. 2 A lacuna unfortunately follows. 

3 if/edSp. 4 a )5 tycutios. 

Her. That which is never troubled, son, 
which cannot be defined ; that which no colour 
hath, nor any figure, which is not turned, which 
hath no garment, which giveth light ; that which 
is comprehensible unto itself [alone], which doth 
not suffer change ; that which no body can 
contain.1 

Tat. In very truth I lose my reason, father. 
Just when I thought to be made wise by thee, I 
find the senses of this mind of mine blocked up. 

Her. Thus is it, son : That which is upward 
borne like fire, yet is borne down like earth, 
that which is moist like water, yet blows like 
air,2 how shalt thou this perceive with sense — 
the that which is not solid nor yet moist, which 
naught can bind or loose, of which in power 
and energy alone can man have any notion, — 
and even then it wants a man who can 3 perceive 
the Way of Birth in God *? 

7. Tat. I am incapable of this, 0 father, then ? 

Her. Nay, God forbid, my son ! Withdraw 
into thyself, and it will come ; will, and it 
comes to pass; throw out of work the body’s 
senses, and thy Divinity shall come to birth ; 
purge from thyself the brutish torments — things 
of matter. 

Tat. I have tormentors then in me, 0 father ? 

1 Cf. P. S. A., xxxi.,3. 2 Cf. C. H., iv. (v.) 1. 

3 Retaining the reading deSfAtvov rod hwa^tvov. 

4 rfyv tv ycvetriv — cf, § 10. 

Her. Ay, no few, my son ; nay, fearful ones 
and manifold. 

Tat. I do not know them, father. 

Her. Torment the first is this Not-knowing,1 
son ; the second one is Grief ; the third, In- 
temperance ; the fourth, Concupiscence ; the 
fifth, Unrighteousness ; the sixth is Avarice ; 
the seventh, Error 2 ; the eighth is Envy ; the 
ninth, Guile 3 ; the tenth is Anger ; eleventh, 
Rashness ; the twelfth is Malice. 

These are in number twelve ; but under them 
are many more, my son ; and creeping through 
the prison of the body 4 they force the man that’s 
placed within 5 to suffer in his senses. But they 
depart (although not all at once) from him who 
hath been taken pity on by God6; and this it 
is which constitutes the manner of Rebirth. And 
.... 7 the Reason (Logos). 

8. And now, my son, be still and solemn 
silence keep ! Thus shall the mercy that flows 
on us from God not cease. 

Henceforth rejoice, 0 son, for by the Powers 
of God thou art being purified for the articula- 
tion of the Reason (Logos). 

1 &yvoia, 2 dirdrij. 3 dd\os. 

4 Cf. C.H. , xvi. 15. 6 ivUtdOtrov. 

6 Cf. above, § 3 : “ brought to birth out of God’s mercy ” ; and 
also § 10. 

7 A lacuna in the text. 

Diqitized by Microsoft ® 

Gnosis of God hath come to us, and when 
this comes, my son, Not-knowing is cast out. 

Gnosis of Joy hath come to us, and on its 
coming, son, Sorrow will flee away to them 
who give it room. The Power that follows Joy 
do I invoke, thy Self-control. 0 Power most 
sweet ! Let us most gladly bid it welcome, 
son ! How with its coming doth it chase 
Intemperance away ! 

9. Now fourth, on Continence I call, the Power 
against Desire. 

.... 1 This step, my son, is Righteousness’ 
firm seat. For without judgment8 see how 
she hath chased Unrighteousness away. We 
are made righteous, son, by the departure of 
Unrighteousness. 

Power sixth I call to us, — that against Avarice, 
Sharing-with-all.8 

And now that Avarice is gone, I call on Truth. 
And Error flees, and Truth is with us. 

See how [the measure of] the Good is full, my 

1 Something has here evidently fallen out in the text. 

2 Kplcrtcos. If, however, we must read Krlaws with 
the majority of the editors, I cannot understand the various 
translations. Everard gives 44 without labour ” ; Parthey, “ nulla 
contentione” ; Menard, 44 sans combat” ; Chambers, “without 
contention.” I would, therefore, render it : 44 See how she hath 
chased out Unrighteousness without a home ” ; for it seems to 
me that in x«ph urio-tus we have the exact antithesis of eSpar^a. 
Righteousness has here her firm seat or abode, and Unrighteous- 
ness is thus naturally without a home. 

3 Koiviiivlav, 

VOL. II. 

son, upon Truth’s coming. For Envy hath gone 
from us ; and unto Truth is joined the Good as 
well, with Life and Light. 

And now no more doth any torment of the 
Darkness venture nigh, but vanquished [all] 
have fled with whirring wings. 

10. Thou knowest [now], my son, the manner 
of Rebirth. And when the Ten is come, my son, 
that driveth out the Twelve, the Birth in under- 
standing1 is complete, and by this Birth we are 
made into Gods. 

"Who then doth by His mercy gain this Birth 
in God, abandoning the body’s senses, knows 
himself [to be of Light and Life 2] and that he 
doth consist of these, and [thus] is filled with 
Bliss. 

11. Tat. By God made steadfast, father, no 
longer with the sight my eyes afford I look on 
things, but with the energy the Mind doth give 
me through the Powers.3 

In heaven am I, in earth, in water, air ; I am 
in animals, in plants ; I’m in the womb, before 
the womb, after the womb ; I’m everywhere ! 

But further tell me this : How are the 
torments of the Darkness, when they are twelve 
in number, driven out by the ten Powers? 
What is the way of it, Thrice-greatest one ? 

1 voipk 7 evens, lit., intellectual birth. 

2 Completed from G. H i. 22. 

3 tiivdfxeoov vorjTtKr) ivepyet^' 

12. Her. This dwelling-place1 through which 
we have just passed, my son, is constituted from 
the circle of the types-of-life, this being com- 
posed of elements, twelve in number, but of one 
nature, an omniform 2 idea. For man’s delusion 
there are disunions 3 in them, son, while in their 
action they are one. Not only can we never 
part Rashness from Wrath ; they cannot even 
be distinguished. 

According to right reason (logos), then, they 4 
naturally withdraw once and for all, in as much 
as they are chased out by no less than ten 
powers, that is, the Ten. 

For, son, the Ten is that which giveth birth 
to souls. And Life and Light are unified there, 
where the One hath being from the Spirit. 
According then to reason (logos) the One contains 
the Ten, the Ten the One. 

13. Tat. Father, I see the All, I see myself in 
Mind. 

Her. This is, my son, Rebirth — no more to 
look on things from body’s view-point (a thing 
three ways in space extended),5 . . .6 though this 
Sermon (Logos) on Rebirth, on which I did not 

1 < TKrjyosy — tent or tabernacle of the human soul. Cf. below, 
§ 15. 

2 Cf. commentary on C. H ., xi. (xii.) 1G. 

3 $ia(vya\ — the opposite of (Tv(vyicu. 

4 That is, the Twelve. 

6 As opposed to some other dimension, presumably. 

6 Some words are evidently missing. 

comment 1 ; — in order that we may not be 
calumniators 2 of the All unto the multitude, to 
whom indeed the God Himself doth will we 
should not. 

14. Tat. Tell me, 0 father : This Body which 
is made up of the Powers, is it at any time 
dissolved ? 

Her. Hush, [son] ! Speak not of things 
impossible, else wilt thou sin and thy Mind’s eye 
be quenched. 

The natural body which our sense perceives is 
far removed from this essential birth. 

The first must be dissolved, the last can never 
be ; the first must die, the last death cannot touch. 

Dost thou not know thou hast been born a 
God, Son of the One, even as I myself ? 

15. Tat. I would, 0 father, hear the Praise- 
giving with hymn which thou didst say thou 
heardest then when thou wert at the Eight [the 
Ogdoad] of Powers. 

Her. Just as the Shepherd did foretell [I 
should], my son, [when I came to] the Eight.3 

Well dost thou haste to “ strike thy tent,” 4 for 
thou hast been made pure. 

1 See § 1. 

2 WjSoAot, compare § 22. The lacuna probably contained some 
reference to keeping silence. 

3 Qf. C. H., i. 26. 

4 \v(Tai rb a-Krjvos. Of. above, § 12. The meaning is generally 
to free oneself from the trammels of the body. Compare the 
Pythian Oracle concerning Plotinus : “ But now since thou hast 

The Shepherd, Mind of all masterhood,1 hath 
not passed on to me more than hath been writ 
down, for full well did He know that I should of 
myself be able to learn all, and hear what I 
should wish, and see all things. 

He left to me the making of fair things 2 ; 
wherefore the Powers within me, e’en as they 
are in all,3 break into song. 

16. Tat. Father, I wish to hear; I long to 
know these things. 

Her. Be still, my son ; hear the Praise-giving 
now that keeps [the soul] in tune, Hymn of 
Be-birth — a hymn I would not have thought 
fit so readily to tell, had’st thou not reached 
the end of all. 

Wherefore this is not taught, but is kept hid 
in silence. 

Thus then, my son, stand in a place uncovered 
to the sky, facing the southern wind,4 about the 
sinking of the setting sun, and make thy worship ; 
so in like manner too when he doth rise, with 
face to the east wind. 

Now, son, be still ! 

struck thy tent and left the tomb of thy daimonic soul ” (yvv 8’ 
#T€ 8^ (rurjvos jx4v iAixrao, <n)/ia 5’ eAeiif/as if/uxvs SaifJtoylrjs). Porphyry, 
Plotini Vita , xxii. ; cf. Ex. vii. 3 ; Ex. iii. 1. 

1 Cf. C. H i. 2. 

2 Sc. psalms and praise-giving. 

3 Sc. prophets. 

4 Also used of the south-west quarter. The “ south wind ” is 
thought to have extended from SSE. to W. 

THRICE- GREATEST HERMES 

The Secret Hymnody 

17. Let every nature of the World receive the 
utterance of my hymn ! 

Open thou Earth ! Let every bolt of the 
Abyss be drawn for me. Stir not, ye Trees ! 

I am about to hymn creation’s Lord, both All 
and One. 

Ye Heavens open, and ye Winds stay still ; 
[and] let God’s deathless Sphere receive my 
word (logos) ! 

For I will sing the praise of Him who founded 
all; who fixed the Earth, and hung up Heaven, 
and gave command that Ocean should afford 
sweet water [to the Earth], to both those parts 
that are inhabited and those that are not, for 
the support and use of every man ; who made 
the Fire to shine for gods and men for every act. 

Let us together all give praise to Him, sublime 
above the Heavens, of every nature Lord ! 

’Tis He who is the Eye of Mind ; may He 
accept the praise of these my Powers ! 

18. Ye Powers that are within me, hymn the 
One and All ; sing with my Will, Powers all that 
are within me ! 

0 blessed Gnosis, by thee illumined, hymning 
through thee the Light that mind alone can see,1 
I joy in Joy of Mind. 

1 rb voijrby 

Digitized by Microsoft © 

Sing witli me praises all ye Powers ! 

Sing praise, my Self - control ; sing thou 
through me, my Righteousness, the praises of 
the Righteous ; sing thou, my Sharing-all, the 
praises of the All ; through me sing, Truth, 
Truth’s praises f 

Sing thou, 0 Good, the Good ! 0 Life and 

Light, from us to you our praises flow ! 

Father, I give Thee thanks, to Thee Thou 
Energy of all my Powers ; I give Thee thanks, 

0 God, Thou Power of all my Energies ! 

19. Thy Reason (Logos) sings through me Thy 
praises. Take back through me the All into 
[Thy] Reason — [my] reasonable oblation 1 ! 

Thus cry the Powers in me. They sing Thy 
praise, Thou All ; they do Thy Will. 

From Thee Thy Will2; to Thee the All. 
Receive from all their reasonable oblation. The 
All that is in us, 0 Life, preserve ; 0 Light 
illumine it ; 0 God in-spirit it.3 < 

It is Thy Mind that plays the Shepherd4 to 
Thy Word,6 0 Thou Creator, Bestower of the / 
Spirit [upon all].6 

1 Cf. below, § 21. 

2 Cf.P.S.A., Comment, and R. 39, n. 1. 

3 The Spirit being Light and Life. 

4 iroi/xaivu, acts as a shepherd or feeds ; Pcemandres is thus the 
Shepherd of men or the feeder of men, He who gives them the 
heavenly food. 

5 The Word or Reason or true Man in man. 

6 vytv/xaTo<p6pt tirmiovpy** 

20. [For] Thou art God ; Thy Man 1 thus 
cries to Thee through Fire, through Air, through 
Earth, through Water, [and] through Spirit, 
through Thy creatures. 

’Tis from Thy iEon I have found Praise-giving ; 
and in Thy Will,2 the object of my search, have 
I found rest. 

Tat. By thy good pleasure 3 have I seen this 
Praise-giving being sung* 0 father ; I have set 
it in my Cosmos too. 

Her. Say in the Cosmos that thy mind alone 
can see, my son. 

Tat. Yea, father, in the Cosmos that the mind 
alone can see ; for I have been made able by thy 
Hymn, and by thy Praise-giving my mind hath 
been illumined. But further I myself as well 
would from my natural mind send praise-giving 
to God. 

21. Her. But not unheedfully, my son. 

Tat. Ay. What I behold in mind, that do I 
say. 

To thee, thou Parent of my Bringing into 
Birth, as unto God I, Tat, send reasonable offer- 
ings.6 0 God and Father, thou art the Lord, 
thou art the Mind. Receive from me oblations 

1 Cf. C. j ET., i. 32. 2 f3ov\fi. 8 6e\j}fxa. 

4 Cf, for instance, The Ascension of Isaiah , i. 6 : “ In the 
twentieth year of the reign of Hezekiah, Isaiah had seen the 
words of this prophecy.” — Charles’ Trans. (London, 1900), p. 5. 

5 Cf. above, § 18. 

reasonable as thou would’st wish ; for by thy 
Will all things have been perfected. 

Her. Send thou oblation, son, acceptable to 
God, the Sire of all ; but add, my son, too, 
“through the Word” {Logos). 

Tat. I give thee, father, thanks for showing 
me to sing such hymns. 

22. Her. Happy am I, my son, that thou 
hast brought the good fruits forth of Truth, 
products that cannot die. 

And now that thou hast learnt this lesson 
from me, make promise to keep silence1 on thy 
virtue, and to no soul, my son, make known the 
handing on to thee the manner of Rebirth, that 
we may not be thought to be calumniators.2 

And now we both of us have given heed 
sufficiently, both I the speaker and the hearer 
thou. 

In Mind 3 hast thou become a Rnower of thy- 
self and of our [common] Sire. 

1 Of. P. S. A xxxii. 4. 

2 5i<£j8oAoi, slanderers, calumniators ; compare § 13 ; also Ex. 
i. 16. 

3 vocpcos. 

THRICE-GREATEST HERMES